NARRATIVEOF THELIFE OF DAVID CROCKETT,OF THE STATE OF TENNESSEE.I leave this rule for others when I'm dead,Be always sure you're right— then go ahead !The Author.WRITTEN BY HIMSELF1 > ) ) J ' ) ) t ■,PHILADELPHIA:E. L. CAREY AND A. HART.BOSTON :ALLEN & Tickler.\Entered according to the Act of Congress, in the year 1834,By David Crockett,In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the District of Columbia,< •• • • • > • •** » • • •»'" > > 11 ■• IrcpkosTsTjEr'.^v.fc.lioHNsoN,• • • • •^ « ^» » » . . •PREFACE.Fashion is a thing I care mighty littleabout, except when it happens to run justexactly according to my own notion ; andI was mighty nigh sending out my bookwithout any preface at all, until a notionstruck me, that perhaps it was necessary toexplain a little the reason why and whereforeI had written it.Most of authors seek fame, but I seek forjustice, — a holier impulse than ever enteredinto the ambitious struggles of the votariesoi \hdii fickle flirting goddess.A publication has been made to theworld, which has done me much injustice5 and the catch penny errors which it4 PREFACE.contains, have been already too long sanctionedby my silence. I don't know theauthor of the book — sand indeed I don'twant to know him ; for after he has takensuch a liberty with my name, and madesuch an effort to hold me up to publicridicule, he cannot calculate on any thingbut my displeasure. If he had been contentto have written his opinions about me,however contemptuous they might havebeen, I should have had less reason to complain.But when he professes to give mynarrative (as he often does) in my ownlanguage, and then puts into my mouthsuch language as would disgrace even anoutlandish African, he must himself besensible of the injustice he has done me,and the trick he has played off on the publick.I have met with hundreds, if not withthousands of people, who have formed theiropinions of my appearance, habits, Ian-preface.5gage, and every thing else from that deceptivework.They have almost in every instance expressedthe most profound astonishment atfinding me in human shape, and with thecountenance appearance and common feelingsof a human being. It is to correct allthese false notions, and to do justice to myself,that I have written.It is certain that the writer of the bookalluded to has gathered up many imperfectscraps of information concerning me, as inparts of his work there is some little semebalance of truth. But I ask him, if thisnotice should ever reach his eye, howwould he have liked it, if I had treated himso ? — if I had put together such a bundle ofridiculous stuff, and headed it with Msname, and sent it out upon the world withoutever even condescending to ask his permission? To these questions, all uprighta26 PREFACE.men must give the same answer. It waswrong; and the desire to make moneyby it, is no apology for such injustice to afellow man.But I let him pass ; as my wish is greatlymore to vindicate myself, than to condemnhim.In the following pages I have endeavouredto give the reader a plain, honest, homespunaccount of my state in life, and somefew of the difficulties which have attendedme along its journey, dovni to this time.I am perfectly aware, that I have relatedmany small and, as I fear, uninterestingcircumstances; but if so, my apology is,that it was rendered necessary by a desireto link the different periods of my life together,as they have passed, from my childhoodonward, and thereby to enable thereader to select such parts of it as he mayrelish most, if, indeed, there is any thing init which may suit his palate.PREFACE. 7I have also been operated on by anotherconsideration. It is this: — I know, thatobscure as I am, my name is making a considerabledeal of fuss in the world. I can'ttell why it is, nor in what it is to end. Gowhere I will, everybody seems anxious toget a peep at me ; and it would be hard totell which would have the advantage, ifI, and the " Government," and " BlackHawk," and a great eternal big caravan ofwild varments were all to be showed at thesame time in four different parts of any ofthe big cities in the nation. I am not sosure that I shouldn't get the most customof any of the crew. There must thereforebe something in me, or about me, that attractsattention, which is even mysteriousto myself. I can't understand it, and Itherefore put all the facts down, leavingthe reader free to take his choice ofthem.^ PREFACE.On the subject of my style, it is badenough, in all conscience, to please critics,if that is what they are after. They are asort of vermin, though, that I shan't evenso much as stop to brush off. If they wantto v^rork on my book, just let them goahead ; and after they are done, they hadbetter blot out all their criticisms, than toknow what opinion I would express ofthemis and by what sort of a curious nameI would call them if I was standing nearthem, and looking over their shoulders.They will, at most, have only their troublefor their pay. But I rather expect I shallhave them on my side.But I don't know of any thing in mybook to be criticised on by honourable men.Is it on my spelling ? — that's not my trade.Is it on my grammar ? — I hadn't time tolearn it, and make no pretensions to it. Isit on the order and arrangement of myPREFACE. 9book ? — I never wrote one before, and neverread very many; and, of course, knowmighty little about that. Will it be onthe authorship of the book ? — this I claim,and 1 11 hang on to it, like a wax plaster.The whole book is my own, and everysentiment and sentence in it. I would notbe such a fool, or knave either, as to denythat I have had it hastily run over by afriend or so, and that some little alterationshave been made in the spelling and grammar;and I am not so sure that it is notthe worse of even that, for I despise thisway of spelling contrary to nature. And asfor grammar, it's pretty much a thing ofnothing at last, after all the fuss that'smade about it. In some places, I wouldn'tsuffer either the spelling, or grammar, orany thing else to be touch'd; and thereforeit will be found in my own way.But if any body complains that I have20 ^ PREFACE.had it looked over, I can only say to him,her, or themes the case may he— that whilecritics were learning grammar, and learningto spell, I5 and "Doctor Jackson,L.L.D." sere fighting in the wars 5 andif our hooks, and messages, and proclamations,and cabinet writings, and so forth,and so on, should need a little lookingover, and a little correcting of the spellingand the grammar to make them fit foruse, its just nobody's business. Big menhave more important matters to attendto than crossing their fs — , and dottingtheir i's — , and such like small things.But the "Government's" name is to theproclamation, and my name's to the hook ;and if I didn't write the book, the " Government"didn't write the proclamation,which no man dares to deny !But just read for yourself, and my earsfor a heel tap, if before you get throughPREFACE. 1 1you don't say, with many a good-naturedsmile and hearty laugh, "This is trulythe very thing itself — the exact image ofits Author,DAVID CROCKETT."Washington City, '>February 1st, 1834. SNARRATIVEOF THELIFE OF DAVID CROCKETT.CHAPTER i.As the public seem to feel some interest in thehistory of an individual so humble as I am, andas that history can be so well known to no personliving as to myself, I have, after so long a time,and under many pressing solicitations from myfriends and acquaintances, at last determined toput my own hand to it, and lay before the worlda narrative on which they may at least rely asbeing true. And seeking no ornament or colouringfor a plain, simple tale of truth, I throw asideall hypocritical and fawning apologies, and, accordingto my own maxim, just 'ego ahead.^^Where I am not known, I might, perhaps, gainsome little credit by having thrown around thisvolume some of the flowers of learning ; butB 1314 THE LIFE OFwhere I am known, the vile cheatery would soonbe detected, and like the foolish jackdaw, thatwith a borrowed tail attempted to play the peacock,I should be justly robbed of my pilferedornaments, and sent forth to strut without a tailfor the balance of my time. I shall commencemy book with what little I have learned of thehistory of my father, as all great men rest many,if not most, of their hopes on their noble ancestry.Mine was poor, but I hope honest, and even thatis as much as many a man can say. But to mysubject. 'My father's name was John Crockett, and hewas of Irish descent. He was either born inIreland or on a passage from that country to Americaacross the Atlantic. He was by profession afarmer, and spent the early part of his life in thestate of Pennsylvania. The name of my motherwas Rebecca Hawkins. She was an Americanwoman, born in the state of Maryland, betweenYork and Baltimore. It is likely I may haveheard where they were married, but if so, I haveforgotten. It is, however, certain that they were,or else the public would never have been troubledwith the history of David Crockett, their son.I have an imperfect recollection of the partwhich \ have understood my father took in theDAVID CROCKETT. 15revolutionary war. I personally know nothingabout it, for it happened to be a little before myday ; but from himself, and many others whowere well acquainted with its troubles and afflictions,I have learned that he was a soldier in therevolutionary war, and took part in that bloodystruggle. He fought, according to my information,in the battle at Kings Mountain against the Britishand tories, and in some other engagements ofwhich my remembrance is too imperfect to enableme to speak with any certainty. At some time,though I cannot say certainly when, my father, asI have understood, lived in Lincoln county, in thestate of North Carolina. How long, I don't know.But when he removed from there, he settled inthat district of country which is now embraced inthe east division of Tennessee, though it was notthen erected into a state.He settled there under dangerous circumstances, 'both to himself and his family, as the countrywas full of Indians, who were at that time verytroublesome. By the Creeks, my grandfather andgrandmother Crockett were both murdered, intheir own house, and on the very spot of groundwhere Somerville, in Hawkins county, now stands.At the same time, the Indians wounded JosephCrockett, a brother to my father, by a ball, which16 THE LIFE OFbroke his arm ; and took James a prisoner, whowas still a younger brother than Joseph, and who,from natural defects, was less able to make his escape,as he was both deaf and dumb. He remainedwith them for seventeen years and nine months,when he was discovered and recollected by myfather and his eldest brother, William Crockett ;and was purchased by them from an Indiantrader, at a price which I do not now remember ;but so it was, that he was delivered up to them,and they returned him to his relatives. He nowlives in Cumberland county, in the state of Kentucky,though I have not seen him for manyyears.My father and mother had six sons and theedaughters. I was the fifth son. What a pity Ihadn't been the seventh ! For then I might havebeen, by common consent, called doctor, as aheap of people get to be great men. But, likemany of them, I stood no chance to become greatin any other way than by accident. As my fatherwas very poor, and living as he did far hack inthe back woods, he had neither the means nor theopportunity to give me, or any of the rest of hischildren, any learning.But before I get on the subject of my own troubles,and a great many very funny things thatDAVID CROCKETT. 17have happened to me, like all other historians andbiographers, I should not only inform the publicthat I was born, myself, as well as other folks, butthat this important event took place, according tothe best information I have received on the subject,on the 17th of August, in the year 1786;whether by day or night, I believe I never heard,but if I did I, have forgotten. I suppose, however,it is not very material to my present purpose, norto the world, as the more important fact is wellattested, that I was born ; and, indeed, it might beinferred, from my present size and appearance, thatI was pretty well born, though I have never yetattached myself to that numerous and worthysociety.At that time my father lived at the mouth ofLime Stone, on the Nola-chucky river ; and forthe purpose not only of showing what sort of aman I now am, but also to show how soon I beganto be a sort of a little man, I have endeavouredto take the back track of life, in order to fix onthe first thing that I can remember. But eventhen, as now, so many things were happening,that as Major Jack Downing would say, they are allin "a pretty considerable of a snarl," and I find itkinder hard" to fix on that thing, among themall, which really happened first. But I think itB 2iQ THE LIFE OFlikely, I have hit on the outside line of my recollection; as one thing happened at which I was sobadly scared, that it seems to me I could not haveforgotten it, if it had happened a little time onlyafter I was born. Therefore it furnishes me withno certain evidence of my age at the time ; but Iknow one thing very well, and that is, that whenit happened, I had no knowledge of the use ofbreeches, for I had never had any nor worn any.But the circumstance was this : My four elderbrothers, and a well-grown boy of about fifteenyears old, by the name of Campbell, and myself,were all playing on the river's side ; when all therest of them got into my father's canoe, and putout to amuse themselves on the water, leaving meon the shore alone.Just a little distance below them, there was afall in the river, which went slap-right straightdown. My brothers, though they were little fellows,had been used to paddling the canoe, andcould have carried it safely anywhere about there;but this fellow Campbell wouldn't let themhave the paddle, but, fool like, undertook to manageit himself. I reckon he had never seen awater craft before ; and it went just any way butthe way he wanted it. There he paddled, andpaddled, and paddled — all the while going wrong,Laid CROCKETT. 19until, in a short time, here they were all going,straight forward, stern foremost, right plump tothe falls ; and if they had only had a fair shake,they would have gone over as slick as a whistle.It assent this, though, that scared me ; for I wasso infernal mad that they had left me on the shore,that I had as soon have seen them all go over thefalls a bit, as any other way. But their dangerwas seen by a man by the name of Kendall, but I'llbe shot if it was Amos ; for I believe I wouldknow him yet if I was to see him. This manKendall was working in a field on the bank, andknowing there was no time to lose, he started fulltilt, and here he come like a cane brake afire ;and as he ran, he threw off his coat, and then hisjacket, and then his shirt, for I know when he gotto the water he had nothing on but his breeches.But seeing him in such a hurry, and tearing offhis clothes as he went, I had no doubt but that thedevil or something else was after him — and closeon him, too — as he was running within an inch ofhis life. This alarmed me, and I screamed outlike a young painter. But Kendall didn't stopfor this. He went ahead with all might, and asfull bent on saving the boys, as Amos was onmoving the deposits. When he came to the waterhe plunged in, and where it was too deep to20 THE LIFE OFwade he would swim, and where it was shallowenough he went bolting on ; and by such exertionas I never saw at any other time in my life,he reached the canoe, when it was within twentyor thirty feet of the falls ; and so great was thesuck, and so swift the current, that poor Kendallhad a hard time of it to stop them at last,as Amos will to stop the mouths of the peopleabout his stockjobbing. But he hung on to thecanoe, till he got it stop'd, and then drawer itout of danger. When they got out, I found theboys were more scared than I had been, and theonly thing that comforted me was, the beliefthat it was a punishment on them for leavingme on shore.Shortly after this, my father removed, andsettled in the same county, about ten miles aboveGreenville.There another circumstance happened, whichmade a lasting impression on my memory,though I was but a small child. Joseph Hawkins,who was a brother to my mother, wasin the woods hunting for deer. He was passingnear a thicket of brush, in which one of ourneighbours was gathering some grapes, as it wasin the fall of the year, and the grape season.The body of the man was hid by the brush,DAVID CROCKETT. 21and it was only as he would raise his hand topull the bunches, that any part of him could beseen. It was a likely place for deer ; and myuncle, having no suspicion that it was any humanbeing, but supposing the raising of the hand tobe the occasional twitch of a deer's ear, fired atthe lump, and as the devil would have it, unfortunatelyshot the man through the body. Isaw my father draw a silk handkerchief throughthe bullet hole, and entirely through his body ;yet after a while he got well, as little as any onewould have thought it. What become of him,or whether he is dead or alive, I don't know ;but I reckon he dissent fancy the business of gatheringgrapes in an out-of-the-way thicket soonagain.The next move my father made was to themouth of Cove creek, where he and a man by thename of Thomas Galbreath undertook to build amill in partnership. They went on very wellwith their work until it was nigh done, whenthere came the second epistle to Noah's fresh, andaway went their mill, shot, lock, and barrel. Iremember the water rose so high, that it got upinto the house we lived in, and my father movedus out of it, to keep us from being drowned. Iwas now about seven or eight years old, and have22 THE LIFE OFa pretty distinct recollection of every thing thatwas goinof on. From his bad luck in that business,and being ready to wash out from millbuilding, my father again removed, and this timesettled in Jefferson county, now in the state ofTennessee ; where he opened a tavern on the roadfrom Abingdon to Knoxville.His tavern was on a small scale, as he was poor ;and the principal accommodations which he kept,were for the Waggoners who travelled the road.Here I remained with him until I was twelveyears old ; and about that time, you may guess, ifyou belong to Yankee land, or reckon, if like meyou belong to the back-woods, that I began tomake up my acquaintance with hard times, and aplenty of them.An old Dutchman, by the name of Jacob Silver,who was moving from Knox county to Rock-bridge,in the state of Virginia, in passing, made astop at my father's house. He had a large stockof cattle, that he was carrying on with him ; and Isuppose made some proposition to my father tohire some one to assist him.Being hard run every way, and having nothought, as I believe, that I was cut out for aCongressman or the like, young as I was, and aslittle as I knew about travelling, or being fromDAVID CROCKETT 23home, he hired me to the old Dutchman, to gofour hundred miles on foot, with a perfect strangerthat I never had seen until the evening before. Iset out with a heavy heart, it is true, but I wentahead, until we arrived at the place, which wasthree miles from what is called the Natural Bridge,and made a stop at the house of a Mr. Hartley,who was father-in-law to Mr. Silver, who hadhired me. My Dutch master was very kind tome,and gave me five or six dollars, being pleased,as he said, with my services.This, however, I think was a bait for me, as hepersuaded me to stay with him, and not returnany more to my father. I had been taught somany lessons of obedience by my father, that Iat first supposed I was bound to obey this manorat least I was afraid openly to disobey him ; andI therefore staid with him, and tried to put on alook of perfect contentment until I got the familyall to believe I was fully satisfied. I had beenthere about four or five weeks, when one day myselfand two other boys were playing on the roadside,some distance from the house. There camealong three waggons. One belonged to an oldman by the name of Dunn, and the others to twoof his sons. They had each of them a good team,and were all bound for Knoxville. They had been24 THE LIFE OFin the habit of stopping at my father's as theypassed the road, and I knew them. I made myselfknown to the old gentleman, and informedhim of my situation ; I expressed a wish to getback to my father and mother, if they could fixany plan for me to do so. They told me thatthey would stay that night at a tavern sevenmiles from there, and that if I could get to thembefore day the next morning, they would take mehome ; and if I was pursued, they would protectme. This was a Sunday evening ; I went backto the good old Dutchman's house, and as goodfortune would have it, he and the family were outon a visit. I gathered my clothes, and what littlemoney I had, and put them all together under thehead of my bed. I went to bed early that night,but sleep seemed to be a stranger to me. Forthough I was a wild boy, yet I dearly loved myfather and mother, and their images appeared tobe so deeply fixed in my mind, that I could notsleep for thinking of them. And then the fearthat when I should attempt to go out, I should bediscovered and called to a halt, filled me withanxiety ; and between my childish love of home,on the one hand, and the fears of which I havespoken, on the other, I felt mighty queer.But so it was, about three hours before day inDAVID CROCKETT 25the morning I got up to make my start. When Igot out, I found it was snowing fast, and that thesnow was then on the ground about eight inchesdeep. I had not even the advantage of moonlight,and the whole sky was hid by the falling snow,so that I had to guess at my way to the big road,which was about a half mile from the house.I however pushed ahead and soon got to it, andthen pursued it, in the direction to the waggons.I could not have pursued the road if I had notguided myself by the opening it made betweenthe timber, as the snow was too deep to leave anypart of it to be known by either seeing or feeling.Before I overtook the waggons, the earth wascovered about as deep as my knees ; and mytracks filled so briskly after me, that by daylight,my Dutch master could have seen no trace whichI left.I got to the place about an hour before day. Ifound the waggoners already stirring, and engagedin feeding and preparing their horses for a start.Mr. Dunn took me in and treated me with greatkindness. My heart was more deeply impressedhy meeting with such a friend, and " at such atime," than by wading the snow-storm by night,or all the other sufferings which my mind hadendured. I warmed myself by the fire, for I wasC26 THE LIFE OFvery cold, and after an early breakfast, we set outon our journey. The thoughts of home now beganto take the entire possession of my mind, andI almost numbered the sluggish turns of thewheels, and much more certainly the miles of ourtravel, which appeared to me to count mightyslow. I continued with my kind protectors,until we got to the house of a Mr. John Cole, onRoanoke, when my impatience became so great,that I determined to set out on foot and go aheadby myself, as I could travel twice as fast in thatway as the waggons could.Mr. Dunn seemed very sorry to part with me,and used many arguments to prevent me fromleaving him. But home, poor as it was, againrushed on my memory, and it seemed ten timesas dear to me as it ever had before. The reasonwas, that my parents were there, and all that Ihad been accustomed to in the hours of childhoodand infancy was there ; and there my anxiouslittle heart panted also to be. We remained atMr. Coles that night, and early in the morning Ifelt that I couldn't stay ; so, taking leave of myfriends the waggoners, I went forward on foot, untilI was fortunately overtaken by a gentleman, whowas returning from market, to which he had beenwith a drove of horses. He had a led horse, withDAVID CROCKETT. 27a bridle and saddle on him, and he kindly offeredto let me get on his horse and ride him. I did so,and was glad of the chance, for I was tired, andwas, moreover, near the first crossing of Roanoke,which I would have been compelled to wade,cold as the water was, if I had not fortunately metthis good man. I travelled with him in this way,without any thing turning up worth recording,until we got within fifteen miles of my father'shouse. There we parted, and he went on toKentucky and I trudged on homeward, which placeI reached that evening. The name of this kindgentleman I have entirely forgotten, and I amsorry for it ; for it deserves a high place in mylittle book. A remembrance of his kindness to alittle straggling boy, and a stranger to him, hashowever a resting place in my heart, and there itwill remain as long as I live.29 )CHAPTER II.Having gotten home, as I have just related, Iremained with my father until the next fall, atwhich time he took it into his head to send meto a little country school, which was kept in theneighbourhood by a man whose name was BenjaminKitchen ; though I believe he was no wayconnected with the cabinet. I went four days,.and had just began to learn my letters a little,when I had an unfortunate falling out with oneof the scholars, — a boy much larger and olderthan myself. I knew well enough that thoughthe school-house might do for a still hunt, itwouldn't do for a drive, and so I concluded towait until I could get him out, and then I wasdetermined to give him salt and vinegar. I waitedtill in the evening, and when the larger scholarswere spelling, I slip'd out, and going some distancealong his road, I lay by the way-side in thebushes, waiting for him to come along. After awhile he and his company came on sure enough,c230 THE LIFE OFand 1 pitched out from the bushes and set onhim like a wild cat. I scratched his face all toa flitter jig, and soon made him cry out for quartersin good earnest. The fight being over. Iwent on home, and the next morning was startedagain to school ; but do you think I went ?No, indeed. I was very clear of it ; for I expectedthe master would lick me up, as bad as Ihad the boy. So, instead of going to the schoolhouse,I laid out in the woods all day until inthe evening the scholars were dismissed, and mybrothers, who were also going to school, camealong, returning home. I wanted to conceal thiswhole business from my father, and I thereforepersuaded them not to tell on me, which theyagreed to.Things went on in this way for several days ; Istarting with them to school in the morning, andreturning with them in the evening, but lying outin the woods all day. At last, however, the masterwrote a note to my father, inquiring why Iwas not sent to school. When he read this note,he called me up, and I knew very well that I wasin a devil of a hobble, for my father had beentaking a few horns, and was in a good condition tomake the fur fly. He called on me to know whyI had not been at school ? I told him I wasDAVID CROCKETT. 31afraid to go, and that the master would whip me ;for I knew quite well if I was turned over to thisold Kitchen, I should be cooked up to a crackling,in little or no time. But I soon found that I wasnot to expect a much better fate at home j formy father told me, in a very angry manner,that he would whip me an eternal sight worsethan the master, if I didn't start immediately tothe school. I tried again to beg off ; but nothingwould do, but to go to the school. Finding merather too slow about starting, he gathered about atwo year old hickory, and broke after me. I putout with all my might, and soon we were both uptothe top of our speed. We had a tolerable toughrace for about a mile ; but mind me, not on theschool-house road, for I was trying to get as farthe t'other way as possible. And I yet believe, ifmy father and the schoolmaster could both havelevied on me about that time, I should never havebeen called on to sit in the councils of the nation,for I think they would have used me up.But fortunately for me, about this time, I saw justbefore me a hill, over which I made headway,like a young steamboat. As soon as I had passedover it, I turned to one side, and hid myself in thebushes. Here I waited until the old gentlemanpassed by, puffing and blowing, as tho' his steam32 THE LIFE OFwas high enough to burst his boilers. I waiteduntil he gave up the hunt, and passed back again :I then cut out, and went to the house of an acquaintancea few miles off, who was just about tostart with a drove. His name was Jesse Cheek,and I hired myself to go with him, determiningnot to return home, as home and the school-househad both become too hot for me. I had an elderbrother, who also hired to go with the same drove.We set out and went on through Abingdon, andthe county seat of Withe county, in the state ofVirginia ; and then through Lynchburgh, byOrange court-house, and Charlottesville, passingthrough what was called Chester Gap, on to atown called Front Royal, where my employer soldout his drove to a man by the name of Vanmetre ;and I was started homeward again, in companywith a brother of the first owner of the drove,with one horse between us ; having left my brotherto come on with the balance of the company.I traveled on with my new comrade about threedays' journey ; but much to his discredit, as I thenthought, and still think, he took care all the timeto ride, but never to tie ; at last I told him to goahead, and I would come when I got ready. Hegave me four dollars to bear my expenses up-davidCROCKETT. 33wards of four hundred miles, and then cut out andleft me.I purchased some provisions, and went onslowly, until at length I fell in with a waggoner,with whom I was disposed to scrape up a hastyacquaintance. I inquired where he lived, andwhere he was going, and all about his affairs. Heinformed me that he lived in Greenville, Tennessee,and was on his way to a place called Gerardstown,fifteen miles below Winchester. He also said,that after he should make his journey to thatplace, he would immediately return to Tennessee.His name was Adam Myers, and a jolly good fellowhe seemed to be. On a little reflection, I determinedto turn back and go with him, which Idid ; and we journeyed on slowly as waggons commonlydo, but merrily enough. I often thoughtof home, and, indeed, wished bad enough to bethere ; but, when I thought of the school-house,and Kitchen, my master, and the race with myfather, and the big hickory he carried, and of thefierceness of the storm of wrath that I had lefthim in, I was afraid to venture back ; for I knewmy father's nature so well, that I was certain hisanger would hang on to him like a turtle does to afisherman's toe, and that, if I went back in a hurry,he would give me the devil in three or four ways34 THE LIFE OFBut I and the waggoner had traveled two days,when we met my brother, who, I before stated, Ihad left behind when the drove was sold out.He persuaded me to go home, but I refused. Hepressed me hard, and brought up a great manymighty strong arguments to induce me to turnback again. He pictured the pleasure of meetingmy mother, and my sisters, who all loved medearly, and told me what uneasiness they had alreadysuffered about me. I could not help sheddingtears, which I did not often do, and my affectionsall pointed back to those dearest friends, and as Ithought, nearly the only ones I had in the world ;but then the promised whipping — that was thething. It came right slap down on every thoughtof home ; and I finally determined that make orbreak, hit or miss, I would just hang on to myjourney, and go ahead with the waggoner. Mybrother was much grieved at our parting, but hewent his way, and so did I. We went on untilat last we got to Gerardstown, where the waggonertried to get a back load, but he could not withoutgoing to Alexandria. He engaged to go there,and I concluded that I would wait until he returned.I set in to work for a man by the nameof John Gray, at twenty-five cents per day. MyIpibour, however, was light, such as ploughing inDAVID CROCKETT. 35some small grain, in which I succeeded in pleasingthe old man very well. I continued workingfor him until the waggoner got back, and for agood long time afterwards, as he continued to runhis team back and forward, hauling to and fromBaltimore. In the next spring, from the proceedsof my daily labour, small as it was, I was able toget me some decent clothes, and concluded Iwould make a trip with the waggoner to Baltimore,and see what sort of a place that was, andwhat sort of folks lived there. I gave him thebalance of what money I had for safe keeping,which, as well as I recollect, was about seven dollars.We got on well enough until we came nearElliott's Mills. Our load consisted of flour, inbarrels. Here I got into the waggon for the purposeof changing my clothing, not thinking that Iwas in any danger ; but while I was in there wewere met by some wheel-barrow men, who wereworking on the road, and the horses took a scareand away they went, like they had seen a ghost.They made a sudden wheel around, and broke thewaggon tongue slap, short off, as a pipe-stem ; andsnap went both of the axletrees at the same time,and of all devilish flouncing about of flour barrelsthat ever was seen, I reckon this took the beat.Even a rat would have stood a bad chance in a36 THE LIFE OFstraight race among them, and not much betterin a crooked one ; for he would have been in agood way to be ground up as fine as ginger bytheir rolling over him. But this proved to me,that if a fellow is born to be hung, he will neverbe drowned ; and, further, that if he is born for aseat in Congress, even flour barrels can't make amash of him. All these dangers I escaped unhurt,though, like most of the office-holders of thesetimes, for a while I was afraid to say my soul wasmy own ; for I didn't know how soon I shouldbe knocked into a cocked hat, and get my walkingpapers for another country.We put our load into another waggon, and hauledours to a workman's shop in Baltimore, havingdelivered the flour, and there we intended to remaintwo or three days, which time was necessaryto repair the runaway waggon. While I wasthere, I went, one day, down to the wharf, andwas much delighted to see the big ships, and theirsails all flying; for I had never seen any suchthings before, and, indeed, I didn't believe therewere any such things in all nature. After a shorttime my curiosity induced me to step aboard ofone, where I was met by the captain, who askedme if I didn't wish to take a voyage to London ? Itold him I did, for by this time I had becomeDAVID CROCKETT. 37pretty well weaned from home and I cared butlittle where I was, or where I went, or what becomeof me. He said he wanted just such a boyas I was, which I was glad to hear. I told him 1would go and get my clothes, and go with him.He enquired about my parents, where they lived,and all about them. I let him know that theylived in Tennessee, many hundred miles off. Wesoon agreed about my intended voyage, and I wentback to my friend, the waggoner, and informedhim that I was going to London, and wanted mymoney and my clothes. He refused to let mehave either, and swore that he would confine me,and take me back to Tennessee. I took it to heartvery much, but he kept so close and constant awatch over me, that I found it impossible to escapefrom him, until he had started homeward,and made several days' journey on the road. Hewas, during this time, very ill to me, and threatenedme with his waggon whip on several occasions.At length I resolved to leave him at all hazards ;and so, before day, one morning, I got my clothesout of his waggon, and cut out, on foot, without afarthing of money to bear my expenses. For allother friends having failed, I determined then tothrow myself on Providence, and see how thatwould use me. I had gone, however, only a fewD38 THE LIFE OFmiles when 1 came up with another waggoner, andsuch was my situation, that I felt more than everthe necessity of endeavouring to find a friend. Itherefore concluded I would seek for one in him.He was going westwardly, and very kindly enquiredof me where I was travelling ? My youthfulresolution, which had brooked almost everythingelse, rather gave way at this enquiry ; for itbrought the loneliness of my situation, and everythingelse that was calculated to oppress me, directlyto view. My first answer to his questionwas in a sprinkle of tears, for if the world hadbeen given to me, I could not, at that moment,have helped crying. As soon as the storm offeeling was over, I told him how I had been treatedby the waggoner but a little before, who kept whatlittle money I had, and left me without a copperto buy even a morsel of food.He became exceedingly angry, and swore thathe would make the other waggoner give up mymoney, pronouncing him a scoundrel, and manyother hard names. I told him I was afraid to seehim, for he had threatened me with his waggonwhip, and I believed he would injure me. Butmy new friend was a very large, stout-lookingman, and as resolute as a tiger. He bid menot to be afraid, still swearing he would haveDAVID CROCKETT. 39my money, or whip it out of the wretch whohad it.We turned and went back about two miles,when we reached the place where he was. I wentreluctantly ; but I depended on my friend for protection.When we got there, I had but little tosay ; but approaching the waggoner, my friendsaid to him, " You damn'd rascal, you have treatedthis boy badly." To which he replied, it was myfault. He was then asked, if he did not getseven dollars of my money, which he confessed.It was then demanded of him ; but he declaredmost solemnly, that he had not that amount inthe world ; that he had spent my money, and intendedpaying it back to me when we got to Tennessee.I then felt reconciled, and persuaded myfriend to let him alone, and we returned to hiswaggon, geared up, and started. His name I shallnever forget while my memory lasts ; it wasHenry Myers. He lived in Pennsylvania, andI found him what he professed to be, a faithfulfriend and a clever fellow.We traveled together for several days, but atlength I concluded to endeavour to make my wayhomeward ; and for that purpose set out again onfoot, and alone. But one thing I must not omit.The last night I staid with Mr. Myers, was at a40 THE LIFE OFplace where several other waggoners also staid.He told them, before we parted, that I was a poorIHtle straggling boy, and how I had been treated ;•■nd that I was without money, though I had along journey before me, through a land of strangers,where it was not even a wilderness.They were good enough to contribute a sort ofmoney-purse, and presented me with three dollars.On this amount I travelled as far as Montgomerycourt-house, in the state of Virginia,where it gave out. I set in to work for a man bythe name of James Caldwell, a month, for fivedollars, which was about a shilling a day. Whenthis time was out, I bound myself to a man by thename of Elijah Griffith, by trade a hatter, agreeingto work for him four years. I remained withhim about eighteen months, when he found himselfso involved in debt, that he broke up, andleft the country. For this time I had receivednothing, and was, of course, left without money,and with but very few clothes, and them veryindifferent ones. I, however, set in again, andworked about as I could catch employment, untilI got a little money, and some clothing ; and oncemore cut out for home. When I reached NewRiver, at the mouth of a small stream, called LittleRiver, the white caps were flying so, that I couldn'tDAVID CROCKETT. 41get any body to attempt to put me across.I argued the case as well as I could, but theytold me there was great danger of being capsizedand drowned, if I attempted to cross. I told themisI could get a canoe I would venture, caps orocaps. They tried to persuade me out of it ;but finding they could not, they agreed I mighttake a canoe, and so I did, and put ofl'. I tiedmy clothes to the rope of the canoe, to have themsafe, whatever might happen. But I found it amighty ticklish business, I tell you. When I gotout fairly on the river, I would have given theworld, if it had belonged to me, to have beenback on shore. But there was no time to losenow, so I just determined to do the best I could,and the devil take the hindmost. I turned thecanoe across the saves, to do which, I had to turnit nearly up the river, as the wind came from thatway ; and I went about two miles before I couldland. When I struck land, my canoe was abouthalf full of water, and I was as wet as a drownedrat. But I was so much rejoiced, that I scarcelyfelt the cold, though my clothes were frozen onme ; and in this situation, I had to go above threemiles, before I could find any house, or fire towarm at. I, however, made out to get to one atlast, and then I thought I would warm the insided242 THE LIFE OFa little, as well as the outside, that there might beno grumbling.So I took "a beetle of the creator's that warmerof the cold, and cooler of the hot, — and it made mefeel so good that I concluded it was like the negro'srabbit, " good any way." I passed on until I arrivedin Sullivan county, in the state of Tennessee,and there I met with my brother, who had gonewith me when I started from home with the cattledrove.I staid with him a few weeks, and then went ontomy father's, which place I reached late in theevening. Several waggons were there for thenight, and considerable company about the house.I enquired if I could stay all night, for I did notintend to make myself known, until I saw whetherany of the family would find me out I was toldthat I could stay, and went in, but had mightylittle to say to any body. I had been gone solong, and had grown so much, that the family didnot at first know me. And another, and perhaps astronger reason was, they had no thought or expectationof me, for they all had long given me upfor finally lost.After a while, we were all called to supper. Iwent with the rest. We had sat down to the tableand begun to eat, when my eldest sister recollectedDAVID CROCKETT. 43me : she sprung up, ran and seized me around theneck, and exclaimed, " Here is my lost brother."My feelings at this time it would be vain andfoolish for me to attempt to describe. I had oftenthought I felt before, and I suppose I had, but sureI am, I never had felt as I then did. The joy ofmy sisters and my mother, and, indeed, of all thefamily, was such that it humbled me, and mademe sorry that I hadn't submitted to a hundredwhippings, sooner than cause so much affliction asthey had suffered on my account. I found thefamily had never heard a word of me from thetime my brother left me. I was now almost fifteenyears old ; and my increased age and size,together with the joy of my father, occasioned bymy unexpected return, I was sure would secure meagainst my long dreaded whipping ; and so theydid. But it will be a source of astonishment tomany, who reflect that I am now a member of theAmerican Congress, — the most enlightened bodyof men in the world, — that at so advanced an age,the age of fifteen, I did not know the first letter inthe book.45 )CHAPTER III.I HAD remained for some short time at homewith my father, when he informed me that heowed a man, whose name was Abraham Wilson,the sum of thirty-six colors, and that if I wouldset in and work out the note, so as to lift it forhim, he would discharge me from his service, andI might go free. I agreed to do this, and wentimmediately to the man who held my father'snote, and contracted with him to work six monthsfor it. I set in, and worked with all my might,not losing a single day in the six months. Whenmy time was out, I got my father's note, and thendeclined working with the man any longer, thoughhe wanted to hire me mighty bad. The reasonwas, it was a place where a heap of bad companymet to drink and gamble, and I wanted to getaway from them, for I know'd very well if I staidthere, I should get a bad name, as nobody couldbe respectable that would live there. I thereforereturned to my father, and gave him up his paper,46 THE LIFE OFwhich seemed to please him mightily, for thoughhe was poor, he was an honest man, and alwaystried mighty hard to pay off his debts.I next went to the house of an honest old Quaker,by the name of John Kennedy, who had removedfrom North Carolina, and proposed tohire myself to him, at two shillings a day. Heagreed to take me a week on trial ; at the end ofwhich he appeared pleased with my work, and informedme that he held a note on my father forforty dollars, and that he would give me that noteif I would work for him six months. I was certainenough that I should never get any part of thenote; but then I remembered it was my fatherthat owed it, and I concluded it was my duty asachild to help him along, and ease his lot as muchas I could. I told the Quaker I would take himup at his offer, and immediately went to work.I never visited my father's house during thewhole time of this engagement, though he livedonly fifteen miles off. But when it was finished,and I had got the note, I borrowed one of my employer'shorses, and, on a Sunday evening, went topay my parents a visit. Some time after I gotthere, I pulled out the note and handed it to myfather, who supposed Mr. Kennedy had sent it forcollection. The old man looked mighty sorry,DAVID CROCKETT. 47and said to me he had not the money to pay it,and didn't know what he should do. I then toldhim I had paid it for him, and it was then his own ;that it was not presented for collection, but as apresent from me. At this, he shed a heap oftears ; and as soon as he got a little over it, he saidhe was sorry he couldn't give me any thing, buthe was not able, he was too poor.The next day, I went back to my old friend,the Quaker, and set in to work for him for someclothes; for I had now worked a year withoutgetting any money at all, and my clothes werenearly all worn out, and what few I had leftwere mighty indifferent I worked in this wayfor about two months ; and in that time a youngwoman from North Carolina, who was the Quaker'sniece, came on a visit to his house. Andnow I am just getting on a part of my history thatI know I never can forget. For though I haveheard people talk about hard loving, yet I reckonno poor devil in this world was ever cursed withsuch hard love as mine has always been, when itcame on me. I soon found myself head overheels in love with this girl, whose name the publiccould make no use of ; and I thought that if allthe hills about there were pure chink, and all betsTHE LIFE OFlonged to me, I would give them if I could justtalk to her as I wanted to ; but I was afraid tobegin, for when I would think of saying any thingto her, my heart would begin to flutter like a duckin a puddle; and if I tried to outdo it and speak, itwould get right smack up in my throat, and choakme like a cold potatoes. It bore on my mind inthis way, till at last I concluded I must die if I didn'tbroach the subject; and so I determined to beginand hang on a trying to speak, till my heart wouldget out of my throat one way or t'other. And sooneday at it I went, and after several trials Icould say a little. I told her how well I lovedher ; that she was the darling object of my souland body ; and I must have her, or else I shouldpine down to nothing, and just die away with theconsumption.I found my talk was not disagreeable to her ;but she was an honest girl, and didn't want todeceive nobody. She told me she was engagedto her cousin, a son of the old Quaker. This newswas worse to me than war, pestilence, or famine ;but still I knowed I could not help myself. Isaw quick enough my cake was dough, and Itried to cool off as fast as possible ; but I hadhardly safety pipes enough, as my love was so hotDAVID CROCKETT. 49as mighty nigh to burst my boilers. But I didn'tpress my claims any more, seeing there was nochance to do any thing.I began now to think that all my misfortunesgrowed out of my want of learning. I had neverbeen to school but four days, as the reader hasalready seen, and did not yet know a letter.I thought I would try to go to school some ; andas the Quaker had a married son, who was livingabout a mile and a half from him, and keeping aschool, I proposed to him that I would go toschool four days in the week, and work for himthe other two, to pay my board and schooling.He agreed I might come on those terms ; and so atit I went, learning and working back and forwards,until I had been with him nigh on to six months.In this time I learned to read a little in my primer,to write my own name, and to cypher some inthe three first rules in figures. And this was allthe schooling I ever had in my life, up to thisday. I should have continued longer, if it hadn'tbeen that I concluded I couldn't do any longerwithout a wife ; and so I cut out to hunt me one.I found a family of very pretty little girls thatI had known when very young. They had livedin the same neighborhood with me, and I hadthought very well of them. I made an offer toE50 THE LIFE OFone of them, whose name is nobody's business,no more than the Quaker girl's was, and I foundshe took it very well. I still continued payingmy respects to her, until I got to love her as badas I had the Quaker's niece ; and I would haveagreed to fight a whole regiment of wild cats ifshe would only have said she would have me.Several months passed in this way, during all ofwhich time she continued very kind and friendly.At last, the son of the old Quaker and my firstgirl had concluded to bring their matter to aclose, and my little queen and myself were calledon to wait on them. We went on the day, andperformed our duty as attendants. This made meworse than ever ; and after it was over, I pressedmy claim very hard on her, but she would stillgive me a sort of an evasive answer. However, Igave her mighty little peace, till she told me atlast she would have me. I thought this was glorificationenough, even without spectacles. I wasthen about eighteen years old. We fixed the timeto be married ; and I thought if that day come, Ishould be the happiest man in the created world,or in the moon, or any where else.I had by this time got to be mighty fond ofthe rifle, and had bought a capital one. I mostgenerally carried her with me whereever I went,DAVID CROCKETT. 5Iand though I had got back to the old Quaker's tolive;, who was a very particular man, I wouldsometimes slip out and attend the shootingmatches, where they shot for beef; I alwaystried, though, to keep it a secret from him. Hehad at the same time a bound boy living withhim, who I had gotten into almost as great anotion of the girls as myself. He was about myown age, and was deeply smitten with the sisterto my intended wife. I know'd it was in vain totry to get the leave of the old man for my youngassociate to go with me on any of my courtingfrolics ; but I thought I could fix a plan to havehim along, which would not injure the Quaker, aswe had no notion that he should ever know it.We commonly slept up-stairs, and at the gableend of the house there was a window. So oneSunday, when the old man and his family wereall gone to meeting, we went out and cut a longpole, and, taking it to the house, we set it up onend in the corner, reaching up the chimney ashigh as the window. After this we would go upstairsto bed, and then putting on our Sundayclothes, would go out at the window, and climbdown the pole, take a horse apiece, and ride aboutten miles to where his sweetheart lived, and thegirl I claimed as my wife. I was always mighty52 THE LIFE OFcareful to be back before day, so as to escapebeing found out ; and in this way I continued myattentions very closely until a few days before Iwas to be married, or at least thought I was,for I had no fear that any thing was about to gowrong.Just now I heard of a shooting-match in theneighbourhood, right between where I lived andmy girls house; and I determined to kill two birdswith one stone, — to go to the shooting match first,and then to see her. I therefore made the Quakerbelieve I was going to hunt for deer, as they werepretty plenty about in those parts ; but, instead ofhunting them, I went straight on to the shooting-match,where I joined in with a partner, and weput in several shots for the beef. I was mightylucky, and when the match was over I had wonthe whole beef. This was on a Saturday, and mysuccess had put me in the finest humour in theworld. So I sold my part of the beef for fivedollars in the real grit, for I believe that wasbefore bank-notes was invented ; at least, I hadnever heard of any. I now started on to ask formy wife ; for, though the next Thursday was ourwedding day, I had never said a word to her parentsabout it. I had always dreaded the undertakingso bad, that I had put the evil hour ofi* asDAVID CROCKETT. 53long as possible ; and, indeed, I calculated theyknocked me so well, they wouldn't raise any objectionto having me for their son-in-law. I hada great deal better opinion of myself, I found,than other people had of me ; but I moved onwith a light heart, and my five dollars jinglingin my pocket, thinking all the time there wasbut few greater men in the world than myself.In this flow of good humour I went ahead, tillI got within about two miles of the place, when Iconcluded I would stop awhile at the house of thegirls uncle ; where I might enquire about thefamily, and so forth, and so on. I was indeedjust about ready to consider her uncle my uncle ;and her affairs, my affairs. When I went in, tho',I found her sister there. I asked how all was athome ? In a minute I found from her countenancesomething was wrong. She looked mortified, anddidn't answer as quick as I thought she ought,being it was her brother-in-law talking to her.However, I asked her again. She then burst intotears, and told me her sister was going to deceiveme ; and that she was to be married to anotherman the next day. This was as sudden to me asaclap of thunder of a bright sunshiny day. Itwas the cap-stone of all the afflictions I had everE 2THE LIFE OFmet with ; and it seemed to me, that it was morethan any human creature could endure. It struckme perfectly speechless for some time, and mademe feel so weak, that I thought I should sinkdown. I however recovered from my shock aftera little, and rose and started without any ceremony,or even bidding any body good-bye. Theyoung woman followed me out to the gate, andentreated me to go on to her father's, and said shewould go with me. She said the young man,who was going to marry her sister, had got hislicense, and had asked for her ; but she assuredme her father and mother both preferred me tohim ; and that she had no doubt but that, if Iwould go on, I could break off the match. But Ifound I could go no further. My heart wasbruised, and my spirits were broken down ; so Ibid her farewell, and turned my lonesome andmiserable steps back again homeward, concludingthat I was only born for hardships, misery, anddisappointment. I now began to think, that inmaking me, it was entirely forgotten to make mymate ; that I was born odd, and should alwaysremain so, and that nobody would have me. .But all these reflections did not satisfy mymind, for I had no peace day nor night for severalDAVID CROCKETT. 55weeks. My appetite failed me, and I grew dailyworse and worse. They all thought I was sick ;and so I was. And it was the worst kind of sickness,— a sickness of the heart, and all the tenderparts, produced by disappointed love.57 )CHAPTER IV.I CONTINUED in this down-spirited situationfor a good long time, until one day T took myrifle and started a hunting. While out, I made acall at the house of a Dutch widow, who had adaughter that was well enough as to smartness, butshe was as ugly as a stone fence. She was, however,quite talkative, and soon begun to laugh atme about my disappointment.She seemed disposed, though, to comfort me asmuch as she could ; and, for that purpose, toldme to keep in good heart, that " there was as goodfish in the sea as had ever been caught out of it."I doubted this very much ; but whether or not, Iwas certain that she was not one of them, for shewas so homely that it almost give me a pain inthe eyes to look at her.But I couldn't help thinking, that she had intendedwhat she had said as a banter for me tocourt her ! ! ! — the last thing in creation I could58 THE LIFE OFhave thought of doing. I felt little inclined totalk on the subject, it is true ; but, to pass off thetime, I told her I thought I was born odd, andthat no fellow to me could be found. She . protestedagainst this, and said if I would come totheir reaping, which was not far off, she wouldshow me one of the prettiest little girls there Ihad ever seen. She added that the one who haddeceived me was nothing to be compared withher. I didn't believe a word of all this, for Ihad thought that such a piece of flesh and bloodas she was had never been manufactured, and neverwould again. I agreed with her, though, that thelittle varment had treated me so bad, that I oughtto forget her, and yet I couldn't do it I concludedthe best way to accomplish it was to cutout again, and see if I could find any other thatwould answer me ; and so I told the Dutch girl Iwould be at the reaping, and would bring as manyas I could with me.I employed my time pretty generally in givinginformation of it, as far as I could, until the daycame ; and I then offered to work for my oldfriend, the Quaker, two days, if he would let hisbound boy go with me one to the reaping. Herefused, and reproved me pretty considerableroughly for my proposition ; and said, if he wasDAVID CROCKETT. 59in my place he wouldn't go ; that there wouldbe a great deal of bad company there ; and that Ihad been so good a boy, he would be sorry for meto get a bad name. But I knowed my promise tothe Dutch gu], and I was resolved to fulfil it ; soI shouldered my rifle, and started by myself.When I got to the place, I found a large companyof men and women, and among them an old Irishwoman,who had a great deal to say. I soon foundout from my Dutch girl, that this old lady was themother of the little girl she had promised me,though I had not yet seen her. She was in an outhousewith some other youngsters, and had notyet made her appearance. « Her mamma, however,was no way bashful. She came up to me, and.|{egan j to praise my red cheeks, and said she hada sweetheart for me. I had no doubt she hadbeen told what I come for, and all about it. Inthe evening I was introduced to her daughter, andI must confess, I was plaguy well pleased withher from the word go. She had a good countenance,and was very pretty, and I was full bentonmaking up an acquaintance with her.It was not long before the dancing commenced,and I asked her to join me in a reel. She veryreadily consented to do so ; and after we hadfinished our dance, I took a seat alongside of60 THE LIFE OFher, and entered into a talk. I found her veryinteresting ; while I was setting by her, makingas good a use of my time as I could, her mothercame to us, and very jocularly called me her son-in-law.This rather confused me, but I looked onit as a joke of the old lady, and tried to turn it offas well as I could ; but I took care to pay asmuch attention to her through the evening as Icould. I went on the old saying, of salting thecow to catch the calf. I soon become so muchpleased with this little girl, that I began to thinkthe Dutch girl had told me the truth, when shesaid there was still good fish in the sea.We continued our frolic till near day, whenwe joined in some plays, calculated to amuseyoungsters. I had not often spent a more agreeablenight. In the morning, however, we all had topart ; and I found my mind had become much betterreconciled than it had been for a long time.I went home to the Quaker's, and made a bargainto work with his son for a low-priced horse. Hewas the first one I had ever owned, and I was towork six months for him. I had been engagedvery closely five or six weeks, when this littlegirl run in my mind so, that I concluded I mustgo and see her, and find out what sort of peoplethey were at home. I mounted my horse andDAVID CROCKETT. gXaway I went to where she lived, and when I gotthere 1 found her father a very clever old man,and the old woman as talkative as ever. Shewanted badly to find out all about me, and as Ithought to see how I would do for her girl. 1 hadnot yet seen her about, and I began to feel someanxiety to know where she was.In a short time, however, my impatience wasrelieved, as she arrived at home from a meeting towhich she had been. There was a young manwith her, who I soon found was disposed to set upclaim to her, as he was so attentive to her that Icould hardly get to slip in a word edgeways. Ibegan to think I was barking up the wrong treeagain ; but I was determined to stand up to myrack, fodder or no fodder. And so, to know hermind a little on the subject, I began to talk aboutstarting, as I knowed she would then show somesign, from which I could understand which waythe wind blowed. It was then near night, andmy distance was fifteen miles home. At this mylittle girl soon began to indicate to the other gentlemanthat his room would be the better part ofhis company. At length she left him, and cameto me, and insisted mighty hard that I should notgo that evening ; and, indeed, from all her actionsand the attempts she made to get rid of him, I sawF62 THE LIFE OFthat she preferred me all holler. But it wasn'tlong before I found trouble enough in anotherquarter. Her mother was deeply enlisted for myrival, and I had to fight against her influence aswell as his. But the girl herself was the prize Iwas fighting for ; and as she welcomed me, I wasdetermined to lay siege to her, let what wouldhappen. I commenced a close courtship, havingcornered her from her old beau ; while he set off*,looking on, like a poor man at a country frolic,and all the time almost getting his teeth withpure disappointment. But he didn't dare to attemptany thing more, for now I had gotten astart, and I looked at him every once in a while asfierce as a wild-cat. I staid with her until Mondaymorning, and then I put out for home.It was about two weeks after this that I wassent for to engage in a wolf hunt, where a greatnumber of men were to meet, with their dogs andguns, and where the best sort of sport was expected.I went as large as life, but I had to hunt in strangewoods, and in a part of the country which was verythinly inhabited. While I was out it clouded up,and I began to get scared ; and in a little while Iwas so much so, that I didn't know which wayhome was, nor any thing about it. I set out theway I thought it was, but it turned out with me,DAVID CROCKETT. 63as it always does with a lost man, I was wrong,and took exactly the contrary direction from theright one. And for the information of younghunters, I will just say, in this place, that whenevera fellow gets bad lost, the way home is justthe way he don't think it is. This rule will hitnine times out of ten. I went ahead, though, aboutsix or seven miles, when I found night was comingon fast ; but at this distressing time I saw a littlewoman streaking it along through the woods like allwrath, and so I cut on too, for I was determinedI wouldn't lose sight of her that night any more.I run on till she saw me, and she stopped ; for shewas as glad to see me as I was to see her, as shewas lost as well as me. When I came up to her,who should she be but my little girl, that I hadbeen paying my respects to. She had been outhunting her father's horses, and had missed herway, and had no knowledge where she was, orhow far it was to any house, or what way wouldtake us there. She had been travelling all day,and was mighty tired ; and I would have takenher up, and toasted her, if it hadn't been that Iwanted her just where I could see her all thetime, for I thought she looked sweeter than sugar;and by this time I loved her almost well enoughto eat her.64 - THE LIFE OFAt last I came to a path, that I know'd must gosomewhere, and so we followed it, till we came toa house, at about dark. Here we staid all night. Iset up all night courting ; and in the morningwe parted. She went to her hope, from whichwe were distant about seven miles, and I to mine,which was ten miles off.I now turned in to work again ; and it wasabout four weeks before I went back to see her. Icontinued to go occasionally, until I had workedlong enough to pay for my horse, by putting inmy gun with my work, to the man I had purchasedfrom ; and then I began to count whetherI was to be deceived again or not. At our nextmeeting we set the day for our wedding ; and 1went to my father's, and made arrangements for anunfair, and returned to ask her parents for her.When I got there, the old lady appeared to bemighty wrath ; and when I broached the subject,she looked at me as savage as a meat axe. Theold man appeared quite willing, and treated mevery clever. But I hadn't been there long, beforethe old woman as good as ordered me out ofher house. I thought I would put her in mind ofold times, and see how that would go with her. Itold her she had called me her son-in-law before Ihad attempted to call her my mother-in-lawDAVID CROCKETT. 65and I thought she ought to cool off. But herIrish was up too high to do any thing with her,and so I quit trying. All I cared for was, to haveher daughter on my side, which I knowed wasthe case then ; but how soon some other fellowmight knock my nose out of joint again, I couldn'ttell. I however felt rather insulted at the oldlady, and I thought I wouldn't get married in herhouse. And so I told her girl, that I would comethe next Thursday, and bring a horse, bridle, andsaddle for her, and she must be ready to go. Hermother declared I shouldn't have her ; but Iknow'd I should, if somebody else didn't get herbefore Thursday. I then started, bidding themgood day, and went by the house of a justice of thepeace, who lived on the way to my father's, andmade a bargain with him to marry me.When Thursday came, all necessary arrangementswere made at my father's to receive mywife ; and so I took my eldest brother and hiswife, and another brother, and a single sisterthat I had, and two other young men with me,and cut out to her father's house to get her. Wewent on, until we got within two miles of theplace, where we met a large company that hadheard of the wedding, and were waiting. Someof that company went on with my brother and 66 " THE LIFE OFter, and the young man I had picked out to waiton me. When they got there, they found the oldlady as wrath as ever. However the old manfilled their bottle, and the young men returned inahurry. I then went on with my company, andwhen I arrived I never pretended to dismount frommy horse, but rode up to the door, and asked thegirl if she was ready ; and she said she was. Ithen told her to light on the horse I was leading ;and she did so. Her father, though, had gone outto the gate, and when I started he commencedpersuading me to stay and marry there ; that hewas entirely willing to the match, and that hiswife, like most women, had entirely too muchtongue ; but that I oughtn't to mind her. I toldhim if she would ask me to stay and marry at herhouse, I would do so. With that he sent for her,and after they had talked for some time out bythemselves, she came to me and looked at memighty good, and asked my pardon for what shehad said, and invited me stay. She said it was thefirst child she had ever had to marry ; and shecouldn't bear to see her go ofi* in that way ; thatif I would light, she would do the best she couldfor us. 1 couldn't stand every thing, and so Iagreed, and we got down, and went in. I sent offthen for my parson, and got married in a shortDAVID CROCKETT. gytime ; for I was afraid to wait long, for fear ofanother defeat. We had as good treatment ascould be expected ; and that night all went onwell. The next day we cut out for my father's,where we met a large company of people, that hadbeen waiting a day and a night for our arrival. Wepassed the time quite merrily, until the companybroke up ; and having gotten my wife, I thought Iwas completely made up, and needed nothingmore in the whole world. But I soon found thiswas all a mistake — for now having a wife, 1wanted every thing else ; and, worse than all, I hadnothing to give for it.I remained a few days at my father's, and thenwent back to my new father-in-law's ; where, tomy surprise, I found my old Irish mother in thefinest humour in the world.She gave us two likely cows and calves, which,though it was a small marriage-portion, was stillbetter than I had expected, and, indeed, it wasabout all I ever got. I rented a small farm andcabin, and went to work ; but I had much troubleto find out a plan to get any thing to put in myhouse. At this time, my good old friend theQuaker came forward to my assistance, and gaveme an order to a store for fifteen dollars' worth ofsuch things as my little wife might choose. With69 THE LIFE OFthis, we fixed up pretty grand, as we thought, andallowed to get on very well. My wife had a goodwheel, and knowed exactly how to use it. Shewas also a good weaver, as most of the Irish are,whether men or women ; and being very industriouswith her wheel, she had, in little or no time,a fine web of cloth, ready to make up ; and shewas good at that too, and at almost any thing elsethat a woman could do.We worked on for some years, renting ground,and paying high rent, until I found it wantthe thing it was cracked up to be ; and thatI couldn't make a fortune at it just at all. So Iconcluded to quit it, and cut out for some newcountry. In this time we had two sons, and Ifound I was better at increasing my family thanmy fortune. It was therefore the more necessarythat I should hunt some better place to get along ;and as I knowed I would have to move at sometime,I thought it was better to do it before myfamily got too large, that I might have less tocarry.The Duck and Elk river country was just beginningto settle, and I determined to try that.I had now one old horse, and a couple of twoyear old colts. They were both broke to thehalter, and my father-in-law proposed, that, if IDAVID CROCKETT. (39went, he would go with me, and take one horse tohelp me move. So we all fixed up, and I packed mytwo colts with as many of my things as they couldbear ; and away we went across the mountains.We got on well enough, and arrived safely inLincoln county, on the head of the Mulberry forkof Elk river. I found this a very rich country,and so new, that game, of different sorts, was veryplenty. It was here that I began to distinguishmyself as a hunter, and to lay the foundation forall my future greatness ; but mighty little did Iknow of what sort it was going to be. Of deerand smaller game I killed abundance ; but the bearhad been much hunted in those parts before, andwere not so plenty as I could have wished. Ilived here in the years 1809 and ^10, to the bestof my recollection, and then I moved to Franklincounty, and settled on Beans creek, where I remainedtill after the close of the last war.71 )CHAPTER V.I WAS living ten miles below Winchester whenthe Creek war commenced ; and as military menare making so much fuss in the world at this time,I must give an account of the part I took in thedefence of the country. If it should make mepresident, why I can't help it ; such things willsometimes happen ; and my pluck i$, never " toseek, nor decline office."It is true, I had a little rather not ; but yet, ifthe government can't get on without taking anotherpresident from Tennessee, to finish the work ofretrenchment and reform," why, then, ReckonI must go in for it. But I must begin about thewar, and leave the other matter for the people tobegin on.The Creek Indians had commenced their openhostilities by a most bloody butchery at FortMimms. There had been no war among us forso long, that but few, who were not too old tobear arms, knew any thing about the business. I,72 'the LIFE OFfor one, had often thought about war, and hadoften heard it described ; and I did verily believein my own mind, that I couldn't fight inthat way at all ; but my after experience convincedme that this was all a notion. For when Iheard of the mischief which was done at the fort,I instantly felt like going, and I had none of thedread of dying that I expected to feel. In a fewdays a general meeting of the militia was calledfor the purpose of raising volunteers ; and whenthe day arrived for that meeting, my wife, whohad heard me say I meant to go to the war, beganto beg me not to turn out. She. said she wasa stranger in the parts where we lived, had noconnexions living near her, and that she and ourlittle children would be left in a lonesome andunhappy situation if I went away. It was mightyhard to go against such arguments as these ; butmy countrymen had been murdered, and I knewthat the next thing would be, that the Indianswould be scalping the women and children allabout there, if we didn't put a stop to it. I reasonedthe case with her as well as I could, andtold her, that if every man would wait till hiswife got willing for him to go to war, there wouldbe no fighting done, until we would all be killedin our own houses ; that I was as able to go asDAVID CROCKETT. 73any man in the world ; and that I believed it wasa duty I owed to my country. Whether she wassatisfied with this reasoning or not, she did nottell me ; but seeing I was bent on it, all she didwas to cry a little, and turn about to her work.The truth is, my dander was up, and nothing butwar could bring it right again.I went to Winchester, where the muster was tobe, and a great many people had collected, forthere was as much fuss among the people aboutthe war as there is now about moving the deposited.When the men were paraded, a lawyerby the name of Jones addressed us, and closedby turning out himself, and enquiring, at the sametime, who among "us felt like we could fight Indians? This was the same Mr. Jones who afterwardsserved in Congress, from the state of Tennessee.He informed us he wished to raise acompany, and that then the men should meet andelect their own officers. I believe I was about thesecond or third man that step'd out ; but onmarching up and down the regiment a few times,we found we had a large company. We volunteeredfor sixty days, as it was supposed ourservices would not be longer wanted. A day ortwo after this we met and elected Mr. Jones ourcaptain, and also elected our other officers. WeG74 THE LIFE OFthen received orders to start on the next Mondayweek ; before which time, I had fixed as well as Icould to go, and my wife had equip'd me as wellas she was able for the camp. The time arrived ; II took a parting farewell of my wife and my littleboys, mounted my horse, and set sail, to joinmy company. Expecting to be gone only a shorttime, I took no more clothing with me than Isupposed would be necessary, so that if I got intoan Indian battle, I might not be pestered with anyunnecessary plunder, to prevent my having a fairshake with them. We all met and went ahead,till we passed Huntsville, and camped at a largespring called Beauty's spring. Here we staid forseveral days, in which time the troops began tocollect from all quarters. At last we musteredabout thirteen hundred strong, all mounted volunteers,and all determined to fight, judging frommyself, for I felt wolfish all over. I verily believethe whole army was of the real grit. Ourcaptain didn't want any other sort ; and to trythem he several times told his men, that if any ofthem wanted to go back home, they might do soat any time, before they were regularly musteredinto the service. But he had the honour to commandall his men from first to last, as not one ofthem left him.DAVID CROCKETT. 75Gen'l. Jackson had not yet left Nashville withhis old foot volunteers, that had gone with him toNatchez in 1S12, the year before. While we remainedat the spring, a Major Gibson came, andwanted some volunteers to go with him across theTennessee river and into the Creek nation, to findout the movements of the Indians. He came tomy captain, and asked for two of his best woodsmen,and such as were best with a rifle. The captainpointed me out to him, and said he would besecurity that I would go as far as the major wouldhimself, or any other man. I willingly engagedto go with him, and asked him to let me choosemy own mate to go with me, which he said I mightdo. I chose a young man by the name of GeorgeRussell, a son of old Major Russell, of Tennessee.I called him up, but Major Gibson said he thoughthe hadn't beard enough to please him, — he wantedmen, and not boys. I must confess I was a littlenettled at this ; for I know'd George Russell,and I know'd there was no mistake in him ; andI didn't think that courage ought to be measuredby the beard, for fear a goat would have the preferenceover a man. 1 told the major he was on thewrong scent ; that Russell could go as far as hecould, and I must have him along. He saw I wasa little wrath, and said I had the best chance of76 THE LITE OFknowing, and agreed that it should be as I wantedit. He told us to be ready early in the morningfor a start ; and so we were. We took our campequipage, mounted our horses, and, thirteen innumber, including the major, we cut out. Wewent on, and crossed the Tennessee river at aplace called Ditto's Landing ; and then traveledabout seven miles further, and took up camp forthe night. Here a man by the name of JohnHaynes overtook us. He had been an Indiantrader in that part of the nation, and was well acquaintedwith it. He went with us as a pilot. Thenext morning, however, Major Gibson and myselfconcluded we should separate and take differentdirections to see what discoveries we could make ;so he took seven of the men, and I five, makingthirteen in all, including myself. He was to go bythe house of a Cherokee Indian, named DickBrown, and I was to go by Dick's father's ; andgetting all the information we could, we were tomeet that evening where the roads came together,fifteen miles the other side of Brown's. At oldMr. Brown's I got a half blood Cherokee to agreeto go with me, whose name was Jack Thompson.He was not then ready to start, but was tofix that evening, and overtake us at the fork roadwhere I was to meet Major Gibson. I know'd itDAVID CROCKETT. 77wouldn't he safe to camp right at the road ;and so I told Jack, that when he got to thefork he must holler like an owl, and I wouldanswer him in the same way ; for I know'dit would be night before he got there. I andmy men then started, and went on to theplace of meeting, but Major Gibson was not there.We waited till almost dark, but still he didn'tcome. We then left the Indian trace a little distance,and turning into the head of a hollow, westruck up camp. It was about ten o'clock at night,when I heard my owl, and I answered him. Jacksoon found us, and we determined to rest thereduring the night. We staid also next morning tillafter breakfast : but in vain, for the major didn'tstill come.I told the men we had set out to hunt a fight,and I wouldn't go back in that way ; that wemust go ahead, and see what the red men were at.We started, and went to a Cherokee town abouttwenty miles off; and after a short stay there, wepushed on to the house of a man by the name ofRadcliffe. He was a white man, but had marrieda Creek woman, and lived just in the edge of theCreek nation. He had two sons, large likely fellows,and a great deal of potatoes and corn, and,indeed, almost every thing else to go on ; so weg278 THE LIFE OFfed our horses and got dinner with him, andseemed to be doing mighty well. But he wasbad scared all the time. He told us there hadbeen ten painted warriors at his house only anhour before, and if we were discovered there, theywould kill us, and his family with us. I repliedto him, that my business was to hunt for justsuch fellows as he had described, and I was determinednot to go back until I had done it. Ourdinner being over, we saddled up our horses, andmade ready to start. But some of my smallcompany I found were disposed to return. I toldthem, if we were to go back then, we shouldnever hear the last of it ; and I was determinedto go ahead. I knowed some of them would gowith me, and that the rest were afraid to go backby themselves ; and so we pushed on to the campof some of the friendly Creeks, which was distantabout eight miles. The moon was about thefull, and the night was clear ; we therefore hadthe benefit of her light from night to morning,and I knew if we were placed in such danger asto make a retreat necessary, we could travel bynight as well as in the day time.We had not gone very far, when we met twonegroes, well mounted on Indian ponies, and eachwith a good rifle. They had been taken fromDAVID CROCKETT. 79their owners by the Indians, and were runningaway from them, and trying to get back to theirmasters again. They were brothers, both verylarge and likely, and could talk Indian as well asEnglish. One of them I sent on to Ditto's Landing,the other I took back with me. It was afterdark when we got to the camp, where we foundabout forty men, women, and children.They had bows and arrows, and I turned in toshooting with their boys by a pine light. In thisway we amused ourselves very well for a while ;but at last the negro, who had been talking to theIndians, came to me and told me they were verymuch alarmed, for the "red sticks," as they calledthe war party of the Creeks, would come and findus there ; and, if so, we should all be killed. Idirected him to tell them that I would watch, andif one would come that night, I would carry theskin of his head home to make me a mockasin.When he made this communication, the Indianslaughed aloud. At about ten o'clock at night weall concluded to try to sleep a little ; but that ourhorses might be ready for use, as the treasurer saidof the drafts on the United States' bank, on certain" contingences," we tied them up with oursaddles on them, and every thing to our hand, ifin the night our quarters should get THE LIFE OFable. We lay down with our guns in our arms,and I had just gotten into a dose of sleep, when Iheard the sharpest scream that ever escaped thethroat of a human creature. It was more like awrath painter than any thing else. The negrounderstood it, and he sprang to me ; for tho' Iheard the noise well enough, yet I wasn't wideawake enough to get up. So the negro caughtme, and said the red sticks was coming. I rosequicker then, and asked what was the matter ?Our negro had gone and talked with the Indianwho had just fetched the scream, as he come intocamp, and learned from him, that the war partyhad been crossing the Coosa river all day at theTen islands ; and were going on to meet Jackson,and this Indian had come as a runner. Thisnews very much alarmed the friendly Indians incamp, and they were all off in a few minutes. Ifelt bound to make this intelligence known assoon as possible to the army we had left at thelanding ; and so we all mounted our horses, andput out in a long lope to make our way back tothat place. We were about sixty-five miles off.We went on to the same Cherokee town we hadvisited on our way out, having first called at Rad-cliffs,who was off with his family ; and at thethe town we found large fires burning, but not aDAVID CROCKETT. Qlsingle Indian was to be seen. They were all gone.These circumstances were calculated to lay ourdander a little, as it appeared we must be in greatdanger ; though we could easily have licked anyforce of not more than five to one. But we expectedthe whole nation would be on us, andagainst such fearful odds we were not so rampantfor a fight.We therefore staid only a short time in the lightof the fires about the town, preferring the light ofthe moon and the shade of the woods. We pushedon till we got again to old Mr. Brown's, whichwas still about thirty miles from where we hadleft the main army. When we got there, thechickens were just at the first crowing for day.We fed our horses, got a morsel to eat ourselves,and again cut out. About ten o'clock in themorning we reached the camp, and I reported toCol. Coffee the news. He didn't seem to mindmy report a bit, and this raised my dander higherthan ever ; but I knowed I had to be on my bestbehaviour, and so I kept it all to myself; thoughI was so mad that I was burning inside like a tar-kiln,and I wonder that the smoke hadn't beenpouring out of me at all points.Major Gibson hadn't yet returned, and we allbegan to think he was killed ; and that night they82 THE LIFE OF 'put out a cobble guard. The next day the majorgot in, and brought a worse tale than I had, thoughhe stated the same facts, so far as I went. Thisseemed to put our colonel all in a fidget; and itconvinced me, clearly, of one of the hateful waysof the world. When I made my report, it wasn'tbelieved, because I was no officer ; I was no greatman, but just a poor soldier. But when the samething was reported by Major Gibson ! ! why, then,it was all as true as preaching, and the colonel believedit every word.He, therefore, ordered breastworks to be thrownup, near a quarter of a mile long, and sent an expressto Fayetteville, where General Jackson andhis troops was, requesting them to push on like thevery mischief, for fear we should all be cooked uptoa crackling before they could get there. OldHickory-face made a forced march on getting thenews ; and on the next day, he and his men gotinto camp, with their feet all blistered from theeffects of their swift journey. The volunteers,therefore, stood guard altogether, to let them rest.DAVID CROCKETT. 33CHAPTER VI.About eight hundred of the volunteers, and ofthat number I was one, were now sent back, crossingthe Tennessee river, and on through Huntsville,so as to cross the river again at another place,and to get on the Indians in another direction.After we passed Huntsville, we struck on theriver at the Muscle Shoals, and at a place on themcalled Melton's Bluff. This river is here abouttwo miles wide, and a rough bottom ; so muchso, indeed, in many places, as to be dangerous;and in fording it this time, we left several of thehorses belonging to our men, with their feet fast inthe crevices of the rocks. The men, whose horseswere thus left, went ahead on foot. We pushedon till we got to what was called the Black Warrior'stown, which stood near the very spot whereTuscaloosa now stands, which is the seat of governmentfor the state of Alabama.This Indian town was a large one ; but whenwe arrived we found the Indians had all left it.84 THE LIFE OFThere was a large field of corn standing out, anda pretty good supply in some cribs. There wasalso a fine quantity of dried beans, which werevery acceptable to us ; and without delay we securedthem as well as the corn, and then burnedthe town to ashes ; after which we left the place.In the field where we gathered the corn wesaw plenty of fresh Indian tracks, and we had nodoubt they had been scared off by our arrival.We then went on to meet the main army at thefork road, where I was first to have met MajorGibson. We got that evening as far back as theencampment we had made the night before wereached the Black Warrior's town, which we hadjust destroyed. The next day we were entirelyout of meat. I went to Col. Coffee, who was thenin command of us, and asked his leave to hunt aswe marched. He gave me leave, but told meto take mighty good care of myself. I turnedaside to hunt, and had not gone far when I founda deer that had just been killed and skinned, andhis flesh was still warm and smoking. From thisI was sure that the Indian who had killed it hadbeen gone only a very few minutes ; and though I"was never much in favour of one hunter stealingfrom another, yet meat was so scarce in camp, thatI thought I must go in for it. So I just took upDAVID CROCKETT. 85the deer on my horse before me, and carried iton till night. I could have sold it for almost anyprice I would have asked ; but this wasn't myrule, neither in peace nor war. Whenever I hadany thing, and saw a fellow being suffering, I wasmore anxious to relieve him than to benefit myself.And this is one of the true secrets of mybeing a poor man to this day. But it is my way ;and while it has often left me with an empty jDurse,which is as near the devil as any thing else I haveseen, yet it has never left my heart empty of consolationswhich money couldn't buy, — the consolationsof having sometimes fed the hungry andcovered the naked.I gave all my deer away, except a small part Ikept for myself, and just sufficient to make a goodsupper for my mess ; for meat was getting to beararity to us all. We had to live mostly onparched corn. The next day we marched on, andat night took up camp near a large cane brake.While here, I told my mess I would again try forsome meat ; so I took my rifle and cut out,but hadn't gone far, when I discovered a largegang of hogs. I shot one of them down in histracks, and the rest broke directly towards thecamp. In a few minutes, the guns began to roar,as bad as if the whole army had been in an In-Hgg THE LIFE or*diaii battle ; and the hogs to squeal as bad as thepig did, when the devil turned barber. I shoulderedmy hog, and went on to the camp ; andwhen I got there I found they had killed a goodmany of the hogs, and a fine fat cow into thebargain, that had broke out of the cane brake.We did very well that night, and the next morningmarched on to a Cherokee town, where ourofficers stop'd, and gave the inhabitants an orderon Uncle Sam for their cow, and the hogs we hadkilled. The next day we met the main army,having had, as we thought, hard times, and aplenty of them, though we had yet seen hardlythe beginning of trouble.After our meeting we went on to Radcliffe's,where I had been before while out as a spy ; andwhen we got there, we found he had hid all hisprovisions. We also got into the secret, that hewas the very rascal who had sent the runner tothe Indian camp, with the news that the "redsticks" were crossing at the Ten Islands ; andthat his object was to scare me and my men away,and send us back with a false alarm.To make some atonement for this, we took theold scoundrel's two big sons with us, and madethem serve in the war.We then marched to a place, which we calledDAVID CROCKETT. g7Camp Wills ; and here it was that Captain CannonI was promoted to a colonel, and Colonel Coffee toa general. We then marched to the Ten Islands,on the Coosa river, where we established a fort ;and our spy conipaflies were sent out. They soonmade prisoners of Bob Cabala and his warriors,and, in a few days afterwards, we heard of someIndians in a town about eight miles off. So wemounted our horses, and put out for that town,under the direction of two friendly Creeks we hadtaken for pilots. We had also a Cherokee colonel,Dick Brown, and some of his men with us. Whenwe got near the town we divided ; one of ourpilots going with each division. And so wepassed on each side of the town, keeping nearto it, until our lines met-on the far side. Wethen closed up at both ends, so as to surroundit completely ; and then we sent Captain Hammond'scompany of rangers to bring on the affray.He had advanced near the town, when theIndians saw him, and they raised the yell, andsame running at him like so many red devils.The main army was now formed in a hollowsquare around the town, and they pursued Hammondtill they came in reach of us. We thengave them a fire, and they returned it, and thenran back into their town. We began to close ongg THE LIFE OFthe town by making our files closer and closer,and the Indians soon saw they were our property.So most of them wanted us to take themprisoners ; and their squaws and all would runand take hold of any of us they could, and givethemselves up. T saw seven squaws have holdof one man, which made me think of the Scriptures.So I hollered out the Scriptures was fulfilling; that there was seven women holding toone man's coat tail. But I believe it was a huntingdonshireall the time. We took them all prisonersthat came out to us in this way ; but I saw somewarriors run into a house, until I counted forty-sixof them. We pursued them until we got nearthe house, when we saw a squaw sitting in the door,and she placed her feet against the bow she had inher hand, and then took an arrow, and, raising herfeet, she drew with all her might, and let fly at us, andshe killed a man, whose name, I believe, was Moore.He was a lieutenant, and his death so enragedus all, that she was fired on, and had at leasttwenty balls blown through her. This was thefirst man I ever saw killed with a bow and arrow.We now shot them like dogs ; and thenset the house on fire, and burned it up with theforty-six warriors in it. I recollect seeing aboy who was shot down near the house. HisDAVID CROCKETT. ggarm and thigh was hrokcn, and he was so nearthe burning house that the grease was stewingout of him. In this situation he was still tryingto crawl along ; but not a murmur escaped him,though he was only about twelve years old. Sosullen is the Indian, when his dander is up, thathe had sooner die than make a noises or ask forquarters.The number that we took prisoners, beingadded to the number we killed, amounted to onehundred and eighty-six ; though I don't rememberthe exact number of either. We had fiveof our men killed. We then returned to ourcamp, at which our fort was erected, and knownby the name of Fort Strother. No provisionshad yet reached us, and we had now been forseveral days on half rations. However we wentback to our Indian town on the next day, whenmany of the carcasses of the Indians were still tobe seen. They looked very awful, for the burninghad not entirely consumed them, but giventhem a very terrible appearance, at least what remainedof them. It was, somehow or other,found out that the house had a potatoes cellar underit, and an immediate examination was made, forwe were all as hungry as wolves. We found afine chance of potatoes in it, and hunger compelsTHE J.lFE OFled us to eat them, though I had a little rather not,if I could have helped it, for the oil of the Indianswe had burned up on the day before had rundown on them, and they looked like they hadbeen stewed with fat meat. We then again returnedto the army, and remained there for severaldays almost starving, as all our beef was gone.We commenced eating the beef-hides, and continuedto eat every scrap we could lay our handson. At length an Indian came to our guard onenight, and hollered, and said he wanted to seeCaptain Jackson." He was conducted to thegeneral's marked, into which he entered, and inafew minutes we received orders to prepare formarching.In an hour we were all ready, and took up theline of march. We crossed the Coosa river, andwent on in the direction to Fort Talavera. Whenwe arrived near the place, we met eleven hundredpainted warriors, the very choice of the Creek nation.They had encamped near the fort, and hadinformed the friendly Indians who were in it, thatif they didn't come out, and fight with themagainst the whites, they would take their fort andall their ammunition and provision. The friendlyparty asked three days to consider of it, and agreedthat if on the third day they didn't come outDAVID CROCKETT. 91ready to fight with them, they might take theirfort. Thus they put them off. They then immediatelystarted their runner to General Jackson,and he and the army pushed over, as I have justbefore stated.The camp of warriors had their spies out, anddiscovered us coming, some time before we got tothe fort. They then went to the friendly Indians,and told them Captain Jackson was coming, andhad a great many fine horses, and blankets, andguns, and every thing else ; and if they wouldcome out and help to whip him, and to take hisplunder, it should all be divided with those in thefort. They promised that when Jackson came,they would then come out and help to whip him.It was about an hour by sun in the morning, whenwe got near the fort. We were piloted by friendlyIndians, and divided as we had done on a formeroccasion, so as to go to the right and left of thefort, and, consequently, of the warriors who werecamped near it. Our lines marched on, as before,till they met in front, and then closed in the rear,forming again into a hollow square. We thensent on old Major Russell, with his spy company,to bring on the battle ; Capt. Evans' companywent also. When they got near the fort, the topof it was lined with the friendly Indians, crying92 THE LIFE OPout as loud as they could roar, "How-dy-do,brother, how-dy-do ?" They kept this up till MajorRussel had passed by the fort, and was movingon towards the warriors. They were all paintedas red as scarlet, and were just as naked as theywere born. They had concealed themselves underthe bank of a branch, that ran partly around thefort, in the manner of a half moon. Russel wasgoing right into their circle, for he couldn't seethem, while the Indians on the top of the fort weretrying every plan to show him his danger. Buthe couldn't understand them. At last, two ofthem jumped from it, and ran, and took his horseby the bridle, and pointing to where they were,told him there were thousands of them lying underthe bank. This brought them to a halt, and aboutthis moment the Indians fired on them, and camerushing forth like a cloud of Egyptian locusts, andscreaming like all the young devils had beenturned loose, with the old devil of all at theirhead. Russel's company quit their horses, andtook into the fort, and their horses ran up to ourline, which was then in full view. The warriorsthen came yelling on, meeting us, and continuedtill they were within shot of us, when we firedand killed a considerable number of them. Theythen broke like a gang of steers, and ran across toDAVID CROCKETT. 93our other line, where they were again fired on ; andso we kcDt them running; from one line to theother, constantly under a heavy fire, until we hadkilled upwards of four hundred of them. Theyfought with guns, and also with their bows andarrows ; but at length they made their escapethrough a part of our line, which was made up ofdrafted militia, which broke ranks, and they passed.We lost fifteen of our men, as brave fellows asever lived or died. We buried them all in onegrave, and started back to our fort ; but before wegot there, two more of our men died of woundsthey had received ; making our total loss seventeengood fellows in that battle.We now remained at the fort a few days, butno provision came yet, and we were all likely toperish. The weather also began to get very cold ;and our clothes were nearly worn out, and horsesgetting very feeble and poor. Our officers proposedto Gen'l. Jackson to let us return home andget fresh horses, and fresh clothing, so as to bebetter prepared for another campaign ; for oursixty days had long been out, and that was thelime we entered for.But the general took " the responsibility" onhimself, and refused. We were, however, determinedto go, as I am to put back the deposits, if94 THE LIFE 0.I can. ^Vith this, the general issued his ordersagainst it, as he has against the bank. But webegan to fix for a start, as provisions were tooscarce ; just as Clay, and Webster, and myself arepreparing to fix bank matters, on account of thescarcity of money. The general went and placedhis cannon on a bridge we had to cross, and orderedout his regulars and drafted men to keepus from crossing ; just as he has planted his Globeand K. C. to alarm the bank men, while his regularsand militia in Congress are to act as artillerymen.But when the militia started to guard thebridge, they would holler back to us to bringtheir knapsacks along when we come, for theywanted to go as bad as we did ; just as many agood fellow now wants his political knapsackbrought along, that if, when we come to vote, hesees he has a fair shake to go, he may join inand help us to take back the deposits.We got ready and moved on till we came nearthe bridge, where the general's men were allstrung along on both sides, just like the office-holdersare now, to keep us from getting alongto the help of the country and the people. Butwe all had our flints ready picked, and our gunsready primed, that if we were fired on we mightfight our way through, or all die together; justDAVID CROCKETT. 95as we are now determined to save the countryfrom ready ruin, or to sink down with it.When we came still nearer the bridge we heardthe guards cocking their guns, and we did thesale ; just as we have had it in Congress, whilethe " government" regulars and the people's volunteershave all been setting their political triggers.But, after all, we marched boldly on, andnot a gun was fired, nor a life lost ; just as I hopeit will be again, that we shall not be afraid ofthe general's Globe, nor his K. C, nor his regulars,nor their trigger snapping ; but just marchboldly over the executive bridge, and take thedeposits back where the law placed them, andwhere they ought to be. When we had passed,no further attempt was made to stop us ; but thegeneral said, we were '^ the damned'st volunteershe had ever seen in his life ; that we would volunteerand go out and fight, and then at ourpleasure would volunteer and go home again, inspite of the devil." But we went on ; and nearHuntsville we met a reinforcement who weregoing on to join the army. It consisted of a re-I giant of volunteers, and was under the commandof some one whose name I can't remember.They were sixty-day volunteers.We got home pretty safely, and in a short time95 THE LIFE OFwe had procured fresh horses and a supply ofclothing better suited for the season ; and then wereturned to Fort Deposite, where our officers helda sort of a " national conventions on the subjectof a message they had received from GeneralJackson, — demanding that on our return weshould serve out six months. We had alreadyserved three months instead of two, which wasthe time \ve had volunteered for. On the nextmorning the officers reported to us the conclusionsthey had come to ; and told us, if any of us feltbound to go on and serve out the six months, wecould do so ; but that they intended to go backhome. I knowed if I went back home I couldn'trest, for I felt it my duty to be out ; and when outwas, somehow or other, always delighted to be inthe very thickest of the danger. A few of us,therefore, determined to push on and join thearmy. The number I do not recollect, but it wasvery small.When we got out there, I joined Major Russel'scompany of spies. Before we reached the place.General Jackson had started. We went on likewise,and overtook him at a place where we establisheda fort, called Fort Williams, and leavingmen to guard it, we went ahead ; intending to gotoa place called the Horse-shoe bend of the Tala-davidCROCKETT. gypoona river. When we came near that place, webegan to find Indian sign plenty, and we struckup camp for the night. About two hours beforeday, we heard our guard firing, and we were allup in little or no time. We mended up our campfires, and then fell back in the dark, expecting tosee the Indians pouring in ; and intending, whenthey should do so, to shoot them by the light ofour own fires. But it happened that they did notrush in as we had expected, but commenced a fire onusas we were. We were encamped in a hollowsquare, and we not only returned the fire, butcontinued to shoot as well as we could in thedark, till day broke, when the Indians disappeared.The only guide we had in shooting wasto notice the flash of their guns, and then shoot asdirectly at the place as we could guess.In this scrape we had four men killed, and severalwounded ; but whether we killed any ofthe Indians or not we never could tell, for it istheir custom always to carry off their dead, ifthey can possibly do so. We buried ours, andthen made a large log heap over them, and set iton fire, so that the place of their deposite mightnot be known to the savages, who, we knew,would seek for them, that they might scalp them.We made some horse litters for our wounded, andI98 THE LIFE OFtook up a retreat. We moved on till we came toa large creek which we had to cross ; and abouthalf of our men had crossed, when the Indianscommenced firing on our left wing, and theykept it up very warmly. We had left MajorRussel and his brother at the camp we had movedfrom that morning, to see what discovery theycould make as to the movements of the Indians ;and about this time, while a warm fire was keptup on our left, as I have just stated, the majorcame up in our rear, and was closely pursued bya large number of Indians, who immediatelycommenced a fire on our artillery men. Theyhid themselves behind a large log, and could killone of our men almost every shot, they being inopen ground and exposed. The worst of all was,two of our colonels just at this trying momentleft their men, and by a forced march, crossedthe creek out of the reach of the fire. Theirnames, at this late day, would do the world nogood, and my object is history alone, and not theslightest interference with character. An opportunitywas now afforded for Governor Carroll todistinguish himself, and on this occasion he didso, by greater bravery than I ever saw any otherman display. In truth, I believe, as firmly as Ido that General Jackson is president, that if itDAVID CROCKETT. 99hadn't been for Carroll, we should all have beengenteel licked that time, for we were in a devilof a fix ; part of our men on one side of thecreek, and part on the other, and the Indians allthe time pouring it on us, as hot as fresh mustardto a sore shin. I will not say exactly that the oldgeneral was whip'd ; but I will say, that if we escapedit at all, it was like old Henry Snider going toheaven, " mit a tam time squeeze.' ' I think he wouldconfess himself, that he was nearer whip'd thistime than he was at any other, for I know thatall the world couldn't make him acknowledge thathe was pointedly whip'd. I know I was mightyglad when it was over, and the savages quit us,for I had begun to think there was one behindevery tree in the woods.We buried our dead, the number of whom Ihave also forgotten ; and again made horse littersto carry our wounded, and so we put out, and returnedto Fort Williams, from which place we hadstarted. In the mean time, my horse had got crippled,and was unfit for service, and as another reinforcementhad arrived, I thought they could getalong without me for a short time; so I got a furloughand went home, for we had had hard times againon this hunt, and I began to feel as though I had100 THL LIFE OFdone Indian fighting enough for one time. I remainedat home until after the army had returnedto the Horse-shoe bend, and fought the battlethere. But not being with them at that time, otcourse no history of that fight can be expectedof me.IDAVID CROCKETT. JQlCHAPTER VII.Soon after this, an army was to be raised to gotoPensacola, and I determined to go again withthem, for I wanted a small taste of British fighting,and I supposed they would be there.Here again the entreaties of my wife werethrown in the way of my going, but all in vain;for I always had a way of just going ahead, atwhatever I had a mind to. One of my neighbours,hearing I had determined to go, came tome,and offered me a hundred dollars to go inhis place as a substitute, as he had been drafted.I told him I was better raised than to hire myselfout to be shot at ; but that I would go, and heshould go too, and in that way the governmentwould have the services of us both. But wedidn't call GeneralJackson "the government" inthose days, though we used to go and fight underhim in the war.I fixed up, and joined old Major Russel again ;but we couldn't start with the main army, butl2102 THE LIFE OFfollowed on, in a little time, after them. In aday or two, we had a hundred and thirty meninour company; and we went over and crossedthe Muscle Shoals at the same place where I hadcrossed when first out, and when we burned theBlack Warriors' town. We passed through theChoctaw and Chickesaw nations, on to Fort Stephens,and from thence to what is called theCut-off, at the junction of the Tom-Bigby withthe Alabama river. This place is near the oldFort Mimms, where the Indians committed thegreat butchery at the commencement of the war.We were here about two days behind the mainarmy, who had left their horses at the Cut-off,and taken it on foot ; and they did this becausethere was no chance for forage between thereand Pensacola. We did the same, leaving menenough to take care of our horses, and cut outon foot for that place. It was about eighty milesoff ; but in good heart we shouldered our guns,blankets, and provisions, and trudged merrily on.About twelve o'clock the second day, we reachedthe encampment of the main army, which wassituated on a hill, overlooking the city of Pensacola.My commander, Major Russel, was agreat favourite with Gen'l. Jackson, and our arrivalwas hailed with great applause, though weDAVID CROCKETT. 103were a little after the feast ; for they had takenthe town and fort before we got there. That eveningwe went down^nto the town, and could seetheBritish fleet lying in sight of the place. Wegot some liquor, and took a " horn" or so, andwent back to the camp. We remained there thatnight, and in the morning we marched back towardsthe Cut-off. We pursued this direction till wereached old Fort Mimms, where we remained twoor three days. It was here that Major Russel waspromoted from his command, which was only thatof a captain of spies, to the command of a majorin the line. He had been known long before athome as old Major Russel, and so we all continuedto call him in the army. A Major Child,from East Tennessee, also commanded a battalion,and his and the one Russel was now appointed tocommand, composed a regiment, which, by agreementwith General Jackson, was to quit his armyand go to the south, to kill up the Indians on theScamby river.General Jackson and the main army set outthe next morning for New Orleans, and a ColonelBlue took command of the regiment which Ihave before described. We remained, however,a few days after the general's departure, and thenstarted also on our route.104 THE LIFE OFAs it gave rise to so much war and bloodshed,it may not be improper here to give a littledescription of Fort Mimms, and the manner inwhich the Indian war commenced. The fort wasbuilt right in the middle of a large old field, andin it the people had been sorted so long and soquietly, that they didn't apprehend any danger atall, and had, therefore, become quite careless. Asmall negro boy, whose business it was to bringup the calves at milking time, had been out forthat purpose, and on coming back, he said he sawa great many Indians. At this the inhabitantstook the alarm, and closed their gates and placedout their guards, which they continued for a fewdays. But finding that no attack was made, theyconcluded the little negro had lied ; and againthrew their gates open, and set all their hands outto work their fields. The same boy was out againon the same errand, when, returning in greathaste and alarm, he informed them that he hadseen the Indians as thick as trees in the woods.He was not believed, but was tucked up to receivea flogging for the supposed lie ; and was actuallygetting badly licked at the very moment whenthe Indians came in a troop, loaded with rails,with which they stop'd all the port-holes of thefort on one side except the bastion ; and then theyDAVID CROCKETT. X05fell in to cutting down the picketing. Those insidethe fort had only the bastion to shoot from,as all the other holes were spiked up ; and theyshot several of the Indians, while engaged in cutting.But as fast as one would fall, another wouldseize up the axe and chop away, until they succeededin cutting down enough of the picketingto admit them to enter. They then began to rushthrough, and continued until they were all in.They immediately commenced scalping, withoutregard to age or sex ; having forced the inhabitantsup to one side of the fort, where they carriedon the work of death as a butcher would in aslaughter pen.The scene was particularly described to me bya 3^oung man who was in the fort when it happened,and subsequently went on with us to Pensacola.He said that he saw his father, and mother,his four sisters, and the same number of brothers,all butchered in the most shocking manner, andthat he made his escape by running over the headsof the crowd, who were against the fort wall, tothe top of the fort, and then jumping off, andtaking to the woods. He was closely pursued byseveral Indians, until he came to a small byo,across which there was a log. He knew the logwas hollow on the under side, so he slip'd under106 THE LIFE OFthe log and hid himself. He said he heard theIndians walk over him several times back andforward. He remained, nevertheless, still tillnight, when he came out, and finished his escape.The name of this young man has entirely escapedmy recollection, though his tale greatly excitedmy feelings. But to return to my subject. Theregiment marched from where Gen'l. Jackson hadleft us to Fort Montgomery, which was distantfrom Fort Mimms about a mile and a half, andthere we remained for some days.Here we supplied ourselves pretty well withbeef, by killing wild cattle which had formerlybelonged to the people who perished in the fort,but had gone wild after their massacre.When we marched from Fort Montgomery, wewent some distance back towards Pensacola j thenwe turned to the left, and passed through a poorpiny country, till we reached the Scamby river,near which we encamped. We had about onethousand men, and as a part of that number, onehundred and eighty-six Chickesaw and ChoctawIndians with us. That evening a boat landedfrom Pensacola, bringing many articles that wereboth good and necessary ; such as sugar and coffee,and liquors of all kinds. The same evening, theIndians we had along proposed to cross the river,DAVID CROCKETT. Kjjand the officers thinking it might be well for themto do so, consented ; and Major Russell wentwith them, taking sixteen white men, of whichnumber I was one. We camped on the oppositebank that night, and early in the morning we setout. We had not gone far before we came to aplace where the whole country was covered withwater, and looked like a sea. We didn't stop forthis, tho', but just put in like so many spaniels,and waded on, sometimes up to our armpits, untilwe reached the pine hills, which made our distancethrough the water about a mile and a half.Here we struck up a fire to warm ourselves, for itwas cold, and we were chilled through by beingso long in the water. We again moved on, keepingour spies out ; two to our left near the bank ofthe river, two straight before us, and two others onour right. We had gone in this way about six milesup the river, widen our spies on the left came tousleaping the brush like so many old bucks, andinformed us that they had discovered a camp ofCreek Indians, and that we must kill them. Herewe paused for a few minutes, and the prophetspow-sowed over their men awhile, and then gotout their paint, and painted them, all according totheir custom when going into battle. They thenbrought their paint to old Major Russell, and said108 THE LIFE OFto him, that as he was an officer, he must be paintedtoo. He agreed, and they painted him just asthey had done themselves. We let the Indiansunderstand that we white men would first fire onthe camp, and then fall back, so as to give the Indiansa chance to rush in and scalp them. TheChickasavvs marched on our left hand, and theChoctaws on our right, and we moved on till wegot in hearing of the camp, where the Indianswere employed in beating up what they calledchains briar root. ' On this they mostly subsisted.On a nearer approach we found they wereon an island, and that we could not get to them.While we where chatting about this matter, weheard some guns fired, and in a very short timeafter a keen whoop, which satisfied us, that whereeverit was, there was war on a small scale. Withthat we all broke, like quarter horses, for thefiring ; and when we got there we found it wasour two front spies, who related to us the followingstory : — As they were moving on, they had metwith two Creeks who were out hunting theirhorses ; as they approached each other, there was alarge cluster of green bay bushes exactly betweenthem, so that they were within a few feet of meetingbefore either was discovered. Our spieswalked up to them, and speaking in the ShawneeDAVID CROCKETT. 109tongue, informed them that General Jackson wasat Pensacola, and they were making their escape,and wanted to know where they could get somethingto eat. The Creeks told them that ninemiles up the Conaker, the river they were thenon, there was a large camp of Creeks, and theyhad cattle and plenty to eat ; and further, thattheir own camp was on an island about a mile off,and just below the mouth of the Conaker. Theyheld their conversation and struck up a fire, andsmoked together, and shook hands, and parted.One of the Creeks had a gun, the other had none ;and as soon as they had parted, our Choctaws turnedround and shot down the one that had the gun,and the other attempted to run oiT. They snappedseveral times at him, but the gun still missing fire,they took after him, and overtaking him, one ofthem struck him over the head with his gun, andfollowed up his blows till he killed him.The gun was broken in the combat, and theythen fired off the gun of the Creek they had killed,and raised the war-whoop. When we reachedthem, they had cut ofi' the heads of both the Indians; and each of those Indians with us wouldwalk up to one of the heads, and taking his warclub would strike on it. This was done by everyoneof them ; and when they had got done, I tookK110 THE LIFE OFone of their clubs, and walked up as they haddone, and struck it on the head also. At this theyall gathered round me, and patting me on theshoulder, would call me " Warrior — warrior."They scalped the heads, and then we moved ona short distance to where we found a trace leadingin towards the river. We took this trace andpursued it, till we came to where a Spaniard hadbeen killed and scalped, together with a woman,who we supposed to be his wife, and also fourchildren. I began to feel mighty ticklish alongabout this time, for I knowed if there was no dangerthen, there had been ; and I felt exactly likethere still was. We, however, went on till westruck the river, and then continued down it tillwe came opposite to the Indian camp, where wefound they were still beating their roots.It was now late in the evening, and they werein a thick cane brake. We had some few friendlyCreeks with us, who said they could decoy them.So we all hid behind trees and logs, while the attemptwas made. The Indians would not agreethat we should fire, but pick'd out some of theirbest gunners, and placed them near the river.Our Creeks went down to the river's side, andhailed the camp in the Creek language. We heardan answer, and an Indian man started down to-davidCROCKETT mwards the river, but didn't come in sight. Hewent back and again commenced beating his roots,and sent a squaw. She came down, and talkedwith our Creeks until dark came on. They toldher they wanted her to bring them a canoe. Towhich she replied, that their canoe was on ourside ; that two of their men had gone out to hunttheir horses and hadn't yet returned. They werethe same two we had killed. The canoe wasfound, and forty of our picked Indian warriorswere crossed over to take the camp. There wasat last only one man in it, and he escaped ; andthey took two squaws, and ten children, butkilled none of them, of course.We had run nearly out of provisions, and MajorRussell had determined to go up the Conakerto the camp we had heard of from the Indians wehad killed. I was one that he selected to go downthe river that night for provisions, with the canoe,to where we had left our regiment. I took withme a man by the name of John Guess, and oneof the friendly Creeks, and cut out. It was verydark, and the river was so full that it overflowedthe banks and the adjacent low bottoms. Thisrendered it very difficult to keep the channel, andparticularly as the river was very crooked. Atabout ten o'clock at night we reached the camp,X12 THE LIFE OFand were to return by morning to Major Russell,with provisions for his trip up the river ; but oninforming Colonel Blue of this arrangement, hevetoed it as quick as General Jackson did thebank bill ; and said, if Major Russell didn't comeback the next day, it would be bad times for him,I found we were not to go up the Conaker to theIndian camp, and a man of my company offered togo up in my place to inform Major Russell. I lethim go ; and they reached the major, as I was told,about sunrise in the morning, who immediatelyreturned with those who were with him to theregiment, and joined us where we crossed theriver, as hereafter stated.The next morning we all fixed up, and marcheddown the Scamby to a place called Miller's Landing,where we swam our horses across, and senton two companies down on the side of the bayopposite to Pensacola, where the Indians had fledwhen the main army first marched to that place.One was the company of Captain William Russell,a son of the old major, and the other was commandedby a Captain Trimble. They went on, andhad a little skirmish with the Indians. They killedsome, and took all the balance prisoners, thoughI don't remember the numbers. We again metthose companies in a day or two, and sent the prigCROCKETT. n^somers they had taken on to Fort Montgomery,in charge of some of our Indians.I did hear, that after they left us, the Indianskilled and scalped all the prisoners, and I neverheard the report contradicted. I cannot positivelysay it was true, but I think it entirely probable,for it is very much like the Indian character.k2THE LIFE OF DAVID CROCKETT. l]5CHAPTER VIII.When we made a move from the point wherewe met the companies, we set out for Chatahachy,the place for which we had started when we leftFort Montgomery. At the start we had takenonly twenty days' rations of flour, and eight days'rations of beef ; and it was now thirty-four daysbefore we reached that place. We were, therefore,in extreme suffering for want of something to eat,and exhausted with our exposure and the fatiguesof our journey. I remember well, that I had notmyself tasted bread but twice in nineteen days.I had bought a pretty good supply of coffee fromthe boat that had reached us from Pensacola, onthe Scamby, and on that we chiefly subsisted.At length, one night our spies came in, and informedus they had found Holm's village on theChatahachy river ; and we made an immediatepush for that place. We traveled all night, expectingto get something to eat when we gotthere. We arrived about sunrise, and near the116 THE LIFE OFplace prepared for battle. We were all so furious,that even the certainty of a pretty hard fightcould not have restrained us. We made a furiouscharge on the town, but to our great mortificationand surprise, there wasn't a human being in it.The Indians had all run ofi" and left it. Weburned the town, however ; but, melancholy totell, we found no provision whatever. We thenturned about, and went back to the camp we hadleft the night before, as nearly starved as any setof poor fellows ever were in the world.We staid there only a little while, when wedivided our regiment j and Major Child, withhis men, went back the way we had come for aconsiderable distance, and then turned to Baton-rouge,where they joined General Jackson andthe main army on their return from Orleans.Major Russell and his men struck for Fort Decatur,on the Talapoosa river. Some of our friendlyIndians, who knew the country, went on ahead ofus, as we had no trail except the one they madeto follow. With them we sent some of our ablesthorses and men, to get us some provisions, to preventus from absolutely starving to death. Asthe army marched, I hunted every day, and wouldkill every hawk, bird, and squirrel that I couldfind. Others did the same; and it was a ruleDAVID CROCKETT. 117with us, that when we stop'd at night, the hunterswould throw all they killed .in a pile, and thenwe would make a general division among all themen. One evening I came in, having killed nothingthat day. I had a very sick man in mymess, and I wanted something for him to eat, evenif I starved myself. So I went to the fire of aCaptain Owen, who commanded my companyafter the promotion of Major Russell, and informedhim that I was on the hunt of something for asick man to eat. I knowed the captain was asbad off as the rest of us, but I found him broilinga turkey's gizzard. He said he had divided theturkey out among the sick, that Major Smiley hadkilled it, and that nothing else had been killedthat day. I immediately went to Smiley's fire,where I found him broiling another gizzard. Itold him, that it was the first turkey I had everseen have two gizzards. But so it was, I gotnothing for my sick man. And now seeing thatevery fellow must shift for himself, I determinedthat in the morning, I would come up missing ;so I took my mess and cut out to go ahead of thearmy. We know'd that nothing more couldhappen to us if we went than if we staid, forit looked like it was to be starvation any way ;we therefore determined to go on the old saying,llg THE LIFE OFroot hog or die. We passed two camps, at whichour men, that had gone on before us, had killedIndians. At one they had killed nine, and atthe other three. About daylight we came to asmall river, which I thought was the Scamby ; butwe continued on for three days, killing little ornothing to eat ; till, at last, we all began to getnearly ready to give up the ghost, and lie downand die ; for we had no prospect of provision, andwe knew we couldn't go much further without it.We came to a large prairie, that was about sixmiles across it, and in this I saw a trail which Iknowed was made by bear, deer, and turkeys.We went on through it till we came to a largecreek, and the low grounds were all set over withwild rye, looking as green as a wheat field. Wehere made a halt, unsaddled our horses, and turnedthem loose to graze.One of my companions, a Mr. Vacant, and myself,then went up the low grounds to hunt. Wehad gone some distance, finding nothing ; whenat last, I found a squirrel ; which I shot, but hegot into a hole in the tree. The game, was small,but necessity is not very particular ; so I thoughtI must have him, and I climbed that tree thirtyfeet high, without a limb, and pulled him out ofhis hole. I shouldn't relate such small matters,DAVID CROCKETT. Hgonly to show what lengths a hungry man will goto,to get something to eat. I soon killed twoother squirrels, and fired at a large hawk. Atthis a large gang of turkeys rose from the canebrake, and flew across the creek to where myfriend was, who had just before crossed it. Hesoon fired on a large nobler, and I heard it fall.By this time my gun was loaded again, and I sawone sitting on my side of the creek, which hadflew over when he fired ; so I blazed away, anddown I brought him. I gathered him up, and afine turkey he was. I now began to think we hadstruck a breeze of luck, and almost forgot our pastsufferings, in the prospect of once more havingsomething to eat. I raised the shout, and mycomrade came to me, and we went on to ourcamp with the game we had killed. While wewere gone, two of our mess had been out, andeach of them had found a bee tree. We turnedinto cooking some of our game, but we had neithersalt nor bread. Just at this moment, onlooking down the creek, we saw our men, whohad gone on before us for provisions, coming tous.They came up, and measured out to eachman a cupfull of flower. With this, we thickenedour soup, when our turkey was cooked, and ourfriends took dinner with us, and then went on.120 THE LIFE OFWe now took our tomahawks, and went and cutour bee-trees, out of which we got a fine chanceof honey'' ; though we had been starving so longthat we feared to eat much at a time, till, like theIrish by hanging, we got used to it again. Werested that night without moving our camp ; andthe next morning myself and Vacant againturned out to hunt. We had not gone far, beforeI wounded a fine buck very badly ; and while pursuinghim, I was walking on a large tree that hadfallen down, when from the top of it, a large bearbroke out and ran off. I had no dogs, and I wassorry enough for it ; for of all the hunting I everdid, I have always delighted most in bear hunting.Soon after this, I killed a large buck ; and we hadjust gotten him to camp, when our poor starvedarmy came up. They told us, that to lessen theirsufferings as much as possible. Captain WilliamRussell had had his horse led up to be shot forthem to eat, just at the moment that they saw ourmen returning, who had carried on the flour.We were now about fourteen miles from FortDecatur, and we gave away all our meat, andhoney, and went on with the rest of the army.When we got there, they could give us only oneration of meat, but not a mouthful of bread. I immediatelygot a canoe, and taking my gun, crossedDAVID CROCKETT. 121over the river, and went to the Big Warriorstown. I had a large hat, and I offered an Indianasilver dollar for my hat full of corn. He toldme that his corn was all " shuestea^^ which inEnglish means, it was all gone. But he showedme where an Indian lived, who, he said, had corn.I went to him, and made the same offer. He couldtalk a little broken English, and said to me, " Yougot any powder ? You got bullet ?'^ I told him Ihad. He then said, " Me swap my corn, forpowder and bullet." I took out about ten bullets,and showed him ; and he proposed to give me ahat full of corn for them. I took him up, mightyquick. I then offered to give him ten charges ofpowder for another hat full of corn. To this heagreed very willingly. So I took off my hunting-shirt,and tied up my corn ; and though it hadcost me very little of my powder and lead, yet Iwouldn't have taken fifty silver dollars for it. I returnedto the camp, and the next morning we startedfor the Hickory Ground, which was thirty milesoff. It was here that General Jackson met the Indians,and made peace with the body of the nation.We got nothing to eat at this place, and we hadyet to go forty-nine miles, over a rough and wildernesscountry, to Fort Williams. Parched corn,and but little even of that, was our daily subsist122 THE LIFE OFonce. When we reached Fort Williams, we gotpne ration of pork and one of flour, which wasour only hope until we could reach Fort Strother.The horses were now giving out, and I rememberto have seen thirteen good horses left in oneday, the saddles and bridles being thrown away.It was thirty-nine miles to Fort Strother, and wehad to pass directly by Fort Talladego, where wefirst had the big Indian battle with the elevenhundred painted warriors. We went through theoj.d battle ground, and it looked like a great gourdpatch ; the sculls of the Indians who were killedstill lay scattered all about, and many of theirframes were still perfect, as the bones had notseparated. But about five miles before we got tothis battle ground, I struck a trail, which I followeduntil it led me to one of their towns. Here I shapedsome more of my powder and bullets fora little corn.I pursued on, by myself, till some time afternight, when I came up with the rest of the army.That night my company and myself did prettywell, as I divided out my corn among them. Thenext morning we met the East Tennessee troops,who were on their road to Mobile, and my youngestbrother was with them. They had plenty ofcorn and provisions, and they gave me what Iwanted for myself and my horSe. I remainedDAVID CROCKETT. 123with them that night, though my company wentacross the Coosa river to the fort, where they alsohad the good fortune to find plenty of provisions.Next morning, I took leave of my brother and allmy old neighbours, for there were a good many ofthem with him, and crossed over to my men atthe fort. Here I had enough to go on, and afterremaining a few days, cut out for home. Nothingmore, worthy of the reader's attention, transpiredtill I was safely landed at home once more withmy wife and children. I found them all well anddoing well ; and though I was only a roughsort of a backwoodsman, they seemed mighty gladto see me, however little the quality folks mightsuppose it. For I do reckon we love as hard inthe blackwood country, as any people in the whole.relation.But I had been home only a few days, when wereceived orders to start again, and go on to the,Black Warrior and Cahawba rivers, to see if therewas no Indians there. I know'd well enough therewas none, and I wasn't willing to trust my crawany more where there was neither any fighting todo,nor any thing to go on; and so I agreed to givea young man, who wanted to go, the balance of m}'-wages if he would serve out my time, which wasabout a month. He did so, and when they returned,124 'THE LIFE OFsure enough they hadn't seen an Indian any morethan if they had been all the time chopping woodin my clearing. This closed my career as a warrior,and I am glad of it, for I like life now a heap betterthan I did then ; and I am glad all over that Ilived to see these times, which I should nothave done if I had kept fooling along in war, andgot used up at it When I say I am glad, I justmean I am glad I am alive, for there is a confoundedheap of things I an't glad of at all. I an't glad,for example, that the " government" moved thedeposits, and if my military glory should takesuch a turn as to make me president after the general'stime, 1 '11 move them back ; yes, I, thegovernment," will " take the responsibility,"and move them back again. If I don't, I wish Imay be shot.But I am glad that I am now through war matters,and I reckon the reader is too, for they have nofun in them at all ; and less if he had had to passthrough them first and then to write them afterwards.But for the dullness of their narrative, I must make amends by relating some of the curiousthings that happened to me in private life, andwhen forced to become a public man, as I shallhave to be again, if ever I consent to take thepresidential chair.DAVID CROCKETT. 125CHAPTER IX.I CONTINUED at home now, working my farmfor two years, as the war finally closed soonafter I quit the service. The battle at NewOrleans had already been fought, and treatieswere made with the Indians which put a stop totheir hostilities.But in this time, I met with the hardest trialwhich ever falls to the lot of man. Death, thatcruel leveller of all distinctions, — to whom theprayers and tears of husbands, and of even helplessinfancy, are addressed in vain, — entered myhumble cottage, and tore from my children an affectionategood mother, and from me a tender andloving wife.It is a scene long gone by, and one which itwould be supposed I had almost forgotten ; yetwhen I turn my memory back on it, it seems as butthe work of yesterday. It was the doing of theAlmighty, whose ways are always right, thoughwe sometimes think they fall heavily on us ; andl2126 THE LIFE OFas painful as is even yet the remembrance of hersufferings, and the loss sustained by my little childrenand myself, yet I have no wish to lift up thevoice of complaint. I was left with three children; the two oldest were sons, the youngest adaughter, and, at that time, a mere infant. It appearedto me, at that moment, that my situationwas the worst in the world. I couldn't bear thethought of scattering my children, and so I gotmy youngest brother, who was also married, andhis family to live with me. They took as goodcare of my children as they well could, but yet itwasn't all like the care of a mother. And thoughtheir company was to me in every respect likethat of a brother and sister, yet it fell far short ofbeing like that of a wife. So I came to the conclusionit wouldn't do, but that I must have anotherwife.There lived in the neighbourhood, a widow ladywhose husband had been killed in the war. Shehad two children, a son and daughter, and bothquite small, like my own. I began to think, thatas we were both in the same situation, it might bethat we could do something for each other ; and Itherefore began to hint a little around the matter,as we were once and a while together. She was agood industrious woman, and owned a snug littleDAVID CROCKETT. 127farm, and lived quite comfortable. I soon beganto pay my respects to her in real good earnest ;but I was as sly about it as a fox when he is goingto rob a hen-roost. I found that my companywasn't at all disagreeable to her ; and I thought Icould treat her children with so much friendshipas to make her a good stepmother to mine, and inthis I want mistaken, as we soon bargained, andgot married, and then went ahead. In a greatdeal of peace we raised our first crop of children,and they are all married and doing well. Butwe had a second crop together ; and I shall noticethem as I go along, as my wife and myself bothhad a hand in them, and they therefore belong tothe history of my second marriage.The next fall after this marriage, three of myneighbours and myself determined to explore anew country. Their names were Robinson, Frazier,and Rich. We set out for the Creek country,crossing the Tennessee river ; and after havingmade a day's travel, we stop'd at the house of oneof my old acquaintances, who had settled thereafterthe war. Resting here a day, Frazier turnedout to hunt, being a great hunter ; but he gotbadly bit by a very poisonous snake, and so weleft him and went on. We passed through a largerich valley, called Jones's valley, where several1^9 THE LIFE OPother families had settled, and continued ourcourse till we came near to the place where Tuscaloosanow stands. Here we camped, as therewere no inhabitants, and hobbled out our horsesfor the night. About two hours before day, weheard the bells on our horses going back the waywe had come, as they had started to leave us.As soon as it was daylight, I started in pursuit ofthem on foot, and carrying my rifle, which was avery heavy one. I went ahead the whole day,wading creeks and swamps, and climbing mountains; but I couldn't overtake our horses, thoughI could hear of them at every house they passed.I at last found I couldn't catch up with them, andso I gave up the hunt, and turned back to the lasthouse I had passed, and staid there till morning.From the best calculation we could make, I hadwalked over fifty miles that day ; and the nextmorning I was so sore, and fatigued, that I feltlike I couldn't walk any more. But I was anxiousto get back to where I had left my company, andso I started and went on, but mighty slowly, tillafter the middle of the day. I now began tofeel mighty sick, and had a dreadful head-ache.My rifle was so heavy, and I felt so weak, that Ilay down by the side of the trace, in a perfectwilderness too, to see if I wouldn't get betterDAVID CROCKETT. X29In a short time some Indians came along. Theyhad some ripe melons, and wanted me to eatsome, but I was so sick I couldn't. They thensigned to me, that I would die, and be buried ;a thing I was confoundedly afraid of myself.But I asked them how near it was to any house ?By their signs, again, they made me understand itwas a mile and a half. I got up to go ; but whenI rose, I reeled about like a cow with the blindstaggers, or a fellow who had taken too manyhorns." One of the Indians proposed to gowith me, and carry my gun. I gave him half adollar, and accepted his offer. We got to thehouse, by which time I was pretty far gone, butwas kindly received, and got on to a bed. Thewoman did all she could for me with her warmteas, but I still continued bad enough, with a highfever, and generally out of my senses. The nextday two of my neighbours were passing the road,and heard of my situation, and came to where Iwas. They were going nearly the route I hadintended to go, to look at the country ; and sothey took me first on one of their horses, andthen on the other, till they got me back to whereI had left my company. I expected I would getbetter, and be able to go on with them, but, insteadof this, I got worse and worse ; and when we got130 THE LIFE OFthere, I want able to sit up at all. I thoughtnow the jig was mighty nigh up with me, but Idetermined to keep a stiff upper lip. They carriedme to a house, and each of my comradesbought him a horse, and they all set out together,leaving me behind. I knew but little that wasgoing on for about two weeks ; but the familytreated me with every possible kindness in theirpower, and I shall always feel thankful to them.The man's name was Jesse Jones. At the end of .two weeks I began to mend without the help of adoctor, or of any doctor's means. In this time,however, as they told me, I was speechless forfive days, and they had no thought that I wouldever speak again, — in Congress or any where else.And so the woman, who had a bottle of Bates-man'sdraps, thought if they killed me, I wouldonly die any how, and so she would try it withme. She gave me the whole bottle, whichthroned me into a sweat that continued on meall night ; when at last I seemed to make up, and]spoke, and asked her for a drink of water. Thisalmost alarmed her, for she was looking every]minute for me to die. She gave me the water,]and, from that time, I began slowly to mend, antiso kept on till I was able at last to walk about a1little. I might easily have been mistaken for]DAVID CROCKETT. 131one of the Kitchen Cabinet, I looked so muchlike a ghost. I have been particular in giving ahistory of this sickness, not because I believe itwill interest any body much now, nor, indeed,do I certainly know that it ever will. But if Ishould be forced to take the " white house," thenit will be good history ; and every one will lookon it as important. And 1 can't, for my life, helplaughing now, to think, that when all my folksget around me, wanting good fat offices, how somany of them will say, "What a good thing itwas that that kind woman had the bottle of draps,that saved President Crockett's life,— the secondgreatest and best"! ! ! ! ! Good, says I,my noble fellow ! You take the post office ; orthe navy ; or the war office ; or may-be thetreasury. But if I give him the treasury, there'sno devil if I don't make him agree first to fetchback them deposits. And if it's even the postoffice,I'll make him promise to keep his money'counts without any figuring, as that throws thewhole concern heels over head in debt, in littleor no time.But when I got so I could travel a little, I gota waggoner who was passing along to hall meto where he lived, which was about twenty milesfrom my house. I still mended as we went along,[32 "the L^^^ ^^and when we got to his stopping place, I hiredone of his horses, and went on home. I was sopale, and so much reduced, that my face lookedlike it had been half soled with brown paper.When I got there, it was to the utter astonishmentof my wife ; for she supposed I was dead.My neighbours who had started with me had returnedand took my horse home, which theyhad found with their's ; and they reported thatthey had seen men who had helped to bury me ;and who saw me draw my last breath. I know'dthis was a wrapper of a lie, as soon as I heard it.My wife had hired a man, and sent him out to seewhat had become of my money and other things ;but I had missed the man as I went in, and hedidn't return until some time after I got home,as he went all the way to where I lay sick, beforehe heard that I was still in the land of the livingand a-kicking.The place on which I lived was sickly, and Iwas determined to leave it. I therefore set outthe next fall to look at the country which hadbeen purchased of the Chickasaw tribe of Indians.I went on to a place called Shoal Creek, abouteighty miles from where I lived, and here againI got sick. I took the ague and fever, which Isupposed was brought on me by camping out. IDAVID CROCKETT 133remained here for some time, as I was unable togo farther ; and in that time, I became so wellpleased with the country about there, that T resolvedto settle in it. It was just only a little distancein the purchase, and no order had been establishedthere ; but I thought I could get alongwithout order as well as any body else. And so Imoved and settled myself down on the head ofShoal Creek. We remained here some two orthree years, without any law at all ; and so manybad characters began to flock in upon us, that wefound it necessary to set up a sort of temporarygovernment of our own. I don't mean that weH^ made any president, and called him the " government,"but we met and made what we called acorporation ; and I reckon we called it wrong,for it wa'n't a bank, and hadn't any deposits ;and now they call the bank a corporation. Butbe this as it may, we lived in the back-woods, anddidn't profess to know much, and no doubt usedmany wrong words. But we met, and appointedmagistrates and constables to keep order. Wedidn't fix any laws for them, tho' ; for we supposedthey would know law enough, whoeverthey might be ; and so we left it to themselves tofix the laws.I was appointed one of the magistrates ; andM134 THE LIFE OF ^when a man owed a debt, and wouldn't ,I and my constable ordered our warrant, andthen he would take the man, and bring him beforeme for trial. I would give judgment againsthim, and then an order of an execution wouldeasily scare the debt out of him. If any one wascharged with marking his neighbour's hogs, orwith stealing any thing, which happened prettyoften in those days, — I would have him taken, andif there was tolerable grounds for the charge, Iwould have him well whip'd and cleared. Wekept this up till our Legislature added us tothe white settlements in Giles county ; and appointedmagistrates by law, to organize matters inthe parts where I lived. They appointed nearlyevery man a magistrate who had belonged to ourcorporation. T was then, of course, made a squireaccording to law ; though now the honour restedmore heavily on me than before. For, at first,whenever I told my constable, says I — " Catch thatfellow, and bring him up for trial" — away he went,and the fellow must come, dead or alive ; for weconsidered this a good warrant, though it was onlyin verbal writings. But after I was appointedby the assembly, they told me, my warrants mustbe in real writing, and signed ; and that I mustkeep a book, and write my proceedings in it.DAVID CROCKETT. ][35This was a hard business on me, for I could mustbarely write my own name ; but to do this, andwrite the warrants too, was at least a huckleberryover my persimmon. I had a prettywell informed constable, however ; and he aidedme very much in this business. Indeed I had somuch confidence in him, that I told him, when weshould happen to be out anywhere, and see thata warrant was necessary, and would have a goodeffect, he needing take the trouble to come allthe way to me to get one, but he could just fillout one ; and then on the trial I could correct thewhole business if he had committed any error. Inthis way I got on pretty well, till by care and attentionI improved my handwriting in such manneras to be able to prepare my warrants, and keepmy record book, without much difficulty. Myjudgments were never appealed from, and if theyhad been they would have stuck like wax, as Igave my decisions on the principles of commonjustice and honesty between man and man, andrelied on natural born sense, and not on law,learning to guide me ; for I had never read apage in a law book in all my life.THE LIFE OF DAVID CROCKETT. 12>JCHAPTER X.About the time we were getting under goodheadway in our new government, a Capt. Matthewscame to me and told me he was a candidatefor the office of colonel of a regiment, and that Imust run for first major in the same regiment. Iobjected to this, telling him that I thought I haddone my share of fighting, and that I wanted nothingto do with military appointments.He still insisted, until at last I agreed, and ofcourse had every reason to calculate on his supportin my election. He was an early settler in thatcountry, and made rather more corn than the restof us ; and knowing it would afford him a goodopportunity to elections a little, he made a greatcorn husking, and a great frolic, and gave a generaltreat, asking every body over the whole country.Myself and my family were, of course, invited.When I got there, I found a very large collectionof people, and some friend of mine sooninformed me that the captain's son was going tom2138 THE LIFE OFoffer against me for the office of major, which hehad seemed so anxious for me to get. I carednothing about the office, but it put my dander uphigh enough to see, that after he had pressed meso hard to offer, he was countenancing, if not encouraging,a secret plan to beat me. I took theold gentleman out, and asked him about it. Hetold me it was true his son was going to runas a candidate, and that he hated worse to runagainst me than any man in the county. I toldhim his son need give himself no uneasiness aboutthat ; that I shouldn't run against him for major,but against his daddy for colonel. He took meby the hand, and we went into the company. Hethen made a speech, and informed the people thatI was his opponent. I mounted up for a speechtoo. I told the people the cause of my opposinghim, remarking that as I had the whole family torun against any way, I was determined to levy onthe head of the mess. When the time for the electioncame, his son was opposed by another man formajor ; and he and his daddy were both badlybeaten. I just now began to take a rise, as in alittle time I was asked to offer for the Legislaturein the counties of Lawrence and Heckman.I offered my name in the month of February,and started about the first of March with a droveDAVID CROCKETT. j[39of horses to the lower part of the state of NorthCarolina. This was in the year 1821, and I wasgone upwards of three months. I returned, andset out electioneering, which was a bran-fire newbusiness to me. It now became necessary that Ishould tell the people something about the government,and an eternal sight of other things that Iknowed nothing more about than I did about Latin,and law, and such things as that. I have said beforethat in those days none of us called Gen'l.Jackson the government, nor did he seem in asfair a way to become so as I do now ; but I knowedso little about it, that if any one had told me hewas " the government," I should have believed it,for I had never read even a newspaper in my life,or any thing else, on the subject. But over all mydifficulties, it seems to me I was born for luck,-though it would be hard for any one to guess whatsort. I will, however, explain that hereafter.I went first into Heckman county, to see what Icould do among the people as a candidate. Herethey told me that they wanted to move their townnearer to the centre of the county, and I mustcome out in favour of it. There's no devil if Iknowed what this meant, or how the town was tobe moved ; and so I kept dark, going on the identicalsame plan that I now find is called " THE LIFE OFcommittal .^^ About this time there was a greatsquirrel hunt on Duck river, which was among mypeople. They were to hunt two days : then iomeet and count the scalps, and have a big barbecue,and what might be called a tip-top countryfrolic. The dinner, and a general treat, was all tobe paid for by the party having taken the fewestscalps. I joined one side, taking the place of oneof the hunters, and got a gun ready for the hunt.I killed a great many squirrels, and when wecounted scalps, my party was victorious.The company had every thing to eat and drinkthat could be furnished in so new a country, andmuch fun and good humour prevailed. But beforethe regular frolic commenced, I mean thedancing, I was called on to make a speech as a candidate; which was a business I was as ignorant ofas an outlandish negro.A public document I had never seen, nor did Iknow there were such things ; and how to begin Icouldn't tell. I made many apologies, and tried toget off, for I know'd I had a man to run againstwho could speak prime, and I know'd, too, that Iwa'n't able to shuffle and cut with him. He wasthere, and knowing my ignorance as well as I didmyself, he also urged me to make a speech. Thetruth is, he thought my being a candidate was a*»DAVID CROCKETT. 14^mere matter of sport; and didn't think, for a moment,that he was in any danger from an ignorantback-woods bear hunter. But I found I couldn'tget off, and so I determined just to go ahead, andleave it to chance what I should say. I got upand told the people, I reckoned they know'd whatI come for, but if not, I could tell them. I hadcome for their votes, and if they didn't watchmighty close, I'd get them too. But the worstof all was, that I couldn't tell them any thing aboutgovernment. I tried to speak about something,and I cared very little what, until I choaked up asbad as if my mouth had been jam'd and cram'dchock full of dry mush. There the people stood,listening all the while, with their eyes, mouthsand years all open, to catch every word I wouldspeak.At last I told them I was like a fellow I hadheard of not long before. He was beating on thehead of an empty barrel near the road-side, whena traveler, who was passing along, asked him whathe was doing that for ? The fellow replied, thatthere was some cider in that barrel a few days before,and he was trying to see if there was any then,but if there was he couldn't get at it. I told themthat there had been a little bit of a speech in me awhile ago, but I believed I couldn't get it out.J 42 '^^E LIFE OFThey all roared out in a mighty laugh, and I toldsome other anecdotes, equally amusing to them,and believing I had them in a first-rate way, I quitand got down, thanking the people for their attention.But I took care to remark that I was as dryas a powder horn, and that I thought it was timefor us all to wet our whistles a little ; and so I putoff to the liquor stand, and was followed by thegreater part of the crowd.I felt certain this was necessary, for I knowedmy competitor could open government matters tothem as easy as he pleased. He had, however,mighty few left to hear him, as I continued withthe crowd, now and then taking a horn, and tellinggood humoured stories, till he was done speaking.I found I was good for the votes at the hunt, andwhen we broke up, I went on to the town of Vernon,which was the same they wanted me to move.Here they pressed me again on the subject, and Ifound I could get either party by agreeing withthem. But I told them I didn't know whether itwould be right or not, and so couldn't promiseeither way.Their court commenced on the next Monday, asthe barnacle was on a Saturday, and the candidatesfor governor and for Congress, as well as my ■competitor and myself, all attended.DAVID CROCKETT. 143The thought of having to make a speech mademy knees feel mighty weak, and set my heart tofluttering almost as bad as my first love scrape withthe Quaker's niece. But as good luck would haveit, these big candidates spoke nearly all day, andwhen they quit, the people were worn out withfatigue, which afforded me a good apology for notdiscussing the government. But I listened mightyclose to them, and was learning pretty fast aboutpolitical matters. When they were all done, I gotup and told some laughable story, and quit. Ifound I was safe in those parts, and so I wenthome, and didn't go back again till after theelection was over. But to cut this matter short,1 was elected, doubling my competitor, and ninevotes over.A short time after this, I was in Pulaski, whereI met with Colonel Polk, now a member of Congressfrom Tennessee, He was at that time amember elected to the Legislature, as well as myself; and in a large company he said to me,Well, colonel, I suppose we shall have a radicalchange of the judiciary at the next session of theLegislature." "Very likely, sir," says I, and Iput out quicker, for I was afraid some one wouldask me what the judiciary was ; and if I knowedI wish I may be shot. I don't indeed believe I had144 THE LIFE OFever before heard that there was any such thingin all nature ; but still I was not willing that thepeople there should know how ignorant I wasabout it.When the time for meeting of the Legislaturearrived, I went on, and before I had been therelong, I could have told what the judiciary was,and what the government was too ; and manyother things that I had known nothing about before.About this time I met with a very severe misfortune,which I may be pardoned for naming, asit made a great change in my circumstances, andkept me back very much in the world. I hadbuilt an extensive grist mill, and powder mill, allconnected together, and also a large distillery.They had cost me upwards of three thousanddollars, more than I was worth in the world.The first news that I heard after I got to theLegislature, was, that my mills were — not blownup sky high, as you would guess, by my powderestablishment, — but swept away all to smash by alarge fresh, that came soon after I left home. Ihad, of course, to stop my distillery, as my grindingwas broken up ; and, indeed, I may say, thatthe misfortune just made a complete mash of me.,T had some likely negroes, and a good stock of |DAVID CROCKETT. 145almost every thing about me, and, best of all, Ihad an honest wife. She didn't advise me, as istoo fashionable, to smuggle up this, and that, andt'other, to go on at home ; but she told me,says she, "Just pay up, as long as you have a bit'sworth in the world ; and then every body willbe satisfied, and we will scuffle for more." Thiswas just such talk as I wanted to hear, for aman's wife can hold him devilish uneasy, if shebegins to scold, and fret, and perplex him, at atime when he has a full load for a rail-road caron his mind already.And so, you see, I determined not to break fullhanded, but thought it better to keep a good consciencewith an empty purse, than to get a badopinion of myself, with a full one. I thereforegave up all I had, and took a bran-fire new start.srITHE LIFE OF DAVID CROCKETT. J 47CHAPTER XI.Having returned from the Legislature, I determinedto make another move, and so I took myeldest son with me, and a young man by the nameof Abram Henry, and cut out for the Obion. I selecteda spot when I got there, where I des;termined to settle ; and the nearest house to itwas seven miles, the next nearest was fifteen,and so on to twenty. It was a complete wilderness,and full of Indians who were hunting. Gamewas plenty of almost every kind, which suitedme exactly, as I was always fond of hunting.The house which was nearest me, and which, as Ihave already stated, was seven miles off, and onthe different side of the Obion river, belonged toa man by the name of Owens ; and I started togo there. I had taken one horse along, to packour provision, and when I got to the water I hobbledhim out to graze, until I got back ; as therewas no boat to cross the river in, and it was so148 THE LIFE OFhigh that it had overflowed all the bottoms andlow country near it.We now took water like so many beavers, notwithstandingit was mighty cold, and waded on.The water would sometimes be up to our necks,and at others not so deep ; but I went, of course,before, and carried a pole, with which I would feelalong before me, to see how deep it was, and toguard against falling into a slough, as there wasmany in our way. When I would come to one,I would take out my tomahawk and cut a smalltree across it, and then go ahead again. Frequentlymy little son would have to swim, evenwhere myself and the young man could wade ;but we worked on till at last we got to the channelof the river, which made it about half a milewe had waded from where we took water. Isaw a large tree that had fallen into the riverfrom the other side, but it didn't reach across.One stood on the same bank where we were, thatI thought I could fall, so as to reach the other ;and so at it we went with my tomahawk, cuttingaway till we got it down ; and, as good luckwould have it, it fell right, and made us a waythat we could pass.When we got over this, it was still a sea ofwater as far as our eyes could reach. We tookiDAVID CROCKETT. 149into It again, and went ahead, for about a mile,hardly ever seeing a single spot of land, andsometimes very deep. At last we come in sightof land, which was a very pleasing thing ; andwhen we got out, we went but a little way, beforewe came in sight of the house, which wasmore pleasing than ever ; for we were wet allover,and mighty cold. I felt mighty sorry whenI would look at my little boy, and see him shakinglike he had the worst sort of an ague, forr. there was no time for fever then. As we gotnear to the house, we saw Mr. Owens and severalmen that were with him, just starting away.They saw us, and stop'd, but looked much astonisheduntil we got up to them, and I made myselfknown. The men who were with himwere the owners of a boat which was the firstthat ever went that far up the Obion river ;and some hands he had hired to carry it abouta hundred miles still further up, by water, tho'it was only about thirty by land, as the river isvery crooked.They all turned back to the house with me,where I found Mrs. Owens, a fine, friendly oldwoman ; and her kindness to my little boy didme ten times as much good as any thing shecould have done for me, if she had tried hern2X50 THE LIFE OFbest. The old gentleman set out his bottle tous,and I concluded that if a horn wasn't goodthen, there was no use for its invention. So Iswig'd off about a half pint, and the young manwas by no means bashful in such a case ; he tooka strong pull at it too. I then gave my boy some,and in a little time we felt pretty well. We driedourselves by the fire, and were asked to go onboardof the boat that evening. I agreed to doso, but left my son with the old lady, and myselfand my young man went to the boat withMr. Owens and the others. The boat was loadedwith whiskey, flour, sugar, coffee, salt, castings,and other articles suitable for the country ;and they were to receive five hundred dollars tolandthe load at M^Lemore's Bluff, beside theprofit they could make on their load. This wasmerely to show that boats could get up to thatpoint. We staid all night with them, and had ahigh night of it, as I took steam enough to driveout all the cold that was in me, and about threetimes as much more. In the morning we concludedto go on with the boat to where a greathurricane had crossed the river, and blowed allthe timber down into it. When we got there,we found the river was falling fast, and concludedwe couldn't get through the timber with-davidCKOCKETT. 15Xout more rise ; so we drop'd down opposite Mr.Owens' again, where they determined to wait formore water.The next day it rained rip-seriously, and theriver rose pretty considerable, but not enough yet.And so I got the boatsmen all to go out with me towhere I was going to settle, and we shaped up acabin in little or no time. I got from the boatfour barrels of meal, and one of salt, and about tengallons of whiskey.To pay for these, I agreed to go with the boatup the river to their landing place. I got also alarge middling of bacon, and killed a fine deer,and left them for my young man and may littleboy, who were to stay at my cabin till I got back;which I expected would be in six or seven days.We cut out, and moved up to the hurricane, wherewe stop'd for the night. In the morning I startedabout daylight, intending to kill a deer, as I hadno thought they would get the boat through thetimber that day. I had gone but a little way beforeI killed a fine buck, and started to go back tothe boat ; but on the way I came on the tracks of alarge gang of elks, and so I took after them. I hadfollowed them only a little distance when I sawthem, and directly after I saw two large bucks. Ishot one down, and the other wouldn't leave him ;152 THE LIFE OPso I loaded my gun, and shot him down too. 1hung them up, and went ahead again after my elks.I pursued on till after the middle of the day beforeI saw them again ; but they took the hint beforeI got in shooting distance, and run off. I stillpushed on till late in the evening, when I found Iwas about four miles from where I had left the boat,and as hungry as a wolf, for I hadn't eaten a bitethat day.I started down the edge of the river low grounds,giving out the pursuit of my elks, and hadn't gonehardly any distance at all, before I saw two morebucks, very large fellows too. I took a blizzardat one of them, and up he tumbled. The otherran off a few jumps and stop'd ; and stood theretill I loaded again, and fired at him. I knock'dhis trotters from under him, and then I hungthem both up. I pushed on again ; and aboutsunset I saw three other bucks. I don't withone of them, and the other two ran off I hungthis one up also, having now killed six that day.I then pushed on till I got to the harry cane, andat the lower edge of it, about where I expectedthe boat was. Here I hollered as hard as I couldroar, but could get no answer. I fired off my gun,and the men on the boat fired one too ; but quite'contrary to my expectation, they had got throughDAVID CROCKETT. 153the timber, and were about two miles above me.It was now dark, and I had to crawl throughthe fallen timber the best way I could ; and ifthe reader don't know it was bad enough, I amsure I do. For the vines and briers had grownall through it, and so thick, that a good fat cooncouldn't much more than get along. I gotthrough at last, and went on near to where Ihad killed my last deer, and once more fired offmy gun, which was again answered from the boat,which was still a little above me. I moved on asfast as I could, but soon came to water, and notknowing how deep it was, I halted and holleredtill they came to me with a skiff. I now got to theboat, without further difficulty ; but the briers hadworked on me at such a rate, that 1 felt like Iwanted sewing up, all over. I took a pretty stiffhorn, which soon made me feel much better ; butI was so tired that I could hardly work my jawsto eat.In the morning, myself and a young man startedand brought in the first buck I had killed ; andafter breakfast we went and brought in the lastone. The boat then started, but we again wentand got the two I had killed just as I turneddown the river in the evening ; and we thenpushed on and o'ertook the boat, leaving the other154 THE LIFE OFtwo hanging in the woods, as we had now as muchas we wanted.We got up the river very well, but quiteslowly ; and we landed, on the eleventh day, atthe place the load was to be delivered at. Theyhere gave me their skiff, and myself and a youngman by the name of Flavour Harris, who had determinedto go and live with me, cut out downthe river for my cabin, which we reached safelyenough.We turned in and cleared a field, and plantedour corn ; but it was so late in the spring, we hadno time to make rails, and therefore we put nofence around our field. There was no stock, however,nor any thing else to disturb our corn, exceptthe wild varments, and the old serpent himself,with a fence to help him, couldn't keep themout. I made corn enough to do me, and duringthat spring I killed ten bears, and a great abundanceof deer. But in all this time, we saw theface of no white person in that country, exceptMr. Owens' family, and a very few passengers,who went out there, looking at the country. Indians,though, were still plenty enough. Havinglaid by my crap, I went home, which was a distanceof about a hundred and fifty miles ; andwhen I got there, I was met by an order to attendDAVID CROCKETT. 155a call-session of our Legislature. I attended it,and served out my time, and then returned, andtook my family and what little plunder I had,and moved to where I had built my cabin, andmade my crap.I gathered my corn, and then set out for myFall's hunt. This was in the last of October, 1822.I found bear very plenty, and, indeed, all sorts ofgame and wild varments, except buffalo. Therewas none of them. I hunted on till Christmas,having supplied my family very well all alongwith wild meat, at which time my powder gaveout; and I had none either to fire Christmas guns,which is very common in that country, or to huntwith. I had a brother-in-law who had now movedout and settled about six miles west of me, on theopposite side of Rutherford's fork of the Obionriver, and he had brought me a keg of powder,but I had never gotten it home. There had justbeen another of Noah's freshes, and the lowgrounds were flooded all over with water. Iknow'd the stream was at least a mile wide whichI would have to cross, as the water was from hillto hill, and yet I determined to go on over in somewayor other, so as to get my powder. I told thisto my wife, and she immediately opposed it withallher might. I still insisted, telling her we had156 THE LIFE OFno powder for Christmas and worse than all, wewere out of meat. She said, we had as well starveas for me to freeze to death or to get drowned, andone or the other was certain if I attempted to go.But I didn't believe the half of this ; and so Itook my woolen wrappers, and a pair of mockasins,and put them on, and tied up some dry clothes anda pair of shoes and stockings, and started. But Ididn't before know how much any body couldsuffer and not die. This, and some of my otherexperiments in water, learned me something aboutit, and I therefore relate them.The snow was about four inches deep when Istarted ; and when I got to the water, which wasonly about a quarter of a mile off, it look'd like anocean. I put in, and waded on till I come to thechannel, where I crossed that on a high log. I thentook water again, having my gun and all myhunting tools along, and waded till I came to adeep slough, that was wider than the river itself.I had crossed it often on a log ; but, behold, when Igot there, no log was to be seen. I knowed of anisland in the slough, and a sapling stood on itclose to the side of that log, which was now entirelyunder water. I knowed further, that thewater was about eight or ten feet deep under thelog, and I judged it to be about three feet deepDAVID CROCKETT. 157over it. After studying a little what I should do,I determined to cut a forked sapling, which stoodnear me, so as to lodge it against the one thatstood on the island, in which I succeeded verywell. I then cut me a pole, and crawled along onmy sapling till I got to the one it was lodgedagainst, which was about six feet above the water.I then felt about with my pole till I found the log,which was just about as deep under the water as Ihad judged. I then crawled back and got mygun, which I had left at the stump of the sapling Ihad cut, and again made my way to the place oflodgement, and then climb'd down the other saplingso as to get on the log. I then felt my wayalong with my feet, in the water, about waist deep,but it was a mighty ticklish business. However,I got over, and by this time I had very little feelingin my feet and legs, as I had been all the timein the water, except what time I was crossingthe high log over the river, and climbing my lodgedsapling.I went but a short distance before I came toanother slough, over which there was a log, butit was floating on the water. I thought I couldwalk it, and so I mounted on it ; but when I hadgot about the middle of the deep water, somehowor somehow else, it turned over, and in I158 THE LIFE OFwent up to my head. I waded out of this deepwater, and went ahead till I came to the high-land,where I stop'd to pull of my wet clothes, and puton the others, which I had held up with my gun,above the water, when I fell in. I got them on,but my flesh had no feeling in it, I was so cold.I tied up the wet ones, and hung them up in a bush.I now thought I would run, so as to warm myselfa little, but I couldn't raise a trot for some time ;indeed, I couldn't step more than half the lengthof my foot. After a while I got better, and wenton five miles to the house of my brother-in-law,having not even smelt fire from the time I started.I got there late in the evening, and he was muchastonished at seeing me at such a time. I staidall night, and the next morning was most piercingcold, and so they persuaded me not to gohome that day. I agreed, and turned out andkilled him two deer ; but the weather still gotworse and colder, instead of better. I staid thatnight, and in the morning they still insisted Icouldn't get home. I knowed the water wouldbe frozen over, but not hard enough to bear me,jand so I agreed to stay that day. I went out huntingagain, and pursued a big he-hear all day, bulldidn't kill him. The next morning was bittercold, but I knowed my family was without meatsDAVID CROCKETT. 159and I determined to get home to them, or diea-trying.I took my keg of powder, and all my huntingtools, and cut out. When I got to the water, itwas a sheet of ice as far as I could see. I put ontoit, but hadn't got far before it broke throughwith me ; and so I took out my tomahawk, andbroke my way along before me for a considerabledistance. At last I got to where the ice wouldbear me for a short distance, and I mounted on it,and went ahead ; but it soon broke in again, andI had to wade on till I came to my floating log.I found it so tight this time, that I know'd itcouldn't give me another fall, as it was frozen inwith the ice. I crossed over it without muchdifficulty, and worked along till I got to mylodged sapling, and my log under the water.The swiftness of the current prevented the waterfrom freezing over it, and so I had to wade, justas I did when I crossed it before. When I gotto my sapling, I left my gun and climbed out withmy powder keg first, and then went back and gotmy gun. By this time I was nearly frozen todeath, but I saw all along before me, where theice had been fresh broke, and I thought it mustbe a bear straggling about in the water. I, therefore,fresh primed my gun, and, cold as I was, I150 • 'THE LIFE OFwas determined to make war on him, if we met.But I followed the trail till it led me home, andI then found it had been made by my youngman that lived with me, who had been sent bymy distressed wife to see, if he could, what hadbecome of me, for they all believed that I was dead.When I got home I was'nt quite dead, but mightynigh it ; but I had my powder, and that was whatI went for.DAVIT) CROCKETT. jfj]^CHAPTER XII.That night there fell a heavy rain, and itturned to a sleet. In the morning; all handsturned out hunting. My young man, and abrother-in-law who had lately settled close byme, went down the river to hunt for turkeys ;but I was for larger game. I told them, I haddreamed the night before of having a hard fightwith a big black nigger, and I knowed it was asign that I was to have a battle with a bear ; forin a bear country, I never know'd such a dreamto fail. So 1 started to go up above the hurricane,determined to have a bear. I had two prettygood dogs, and an old hound, all of which I tookalong. I had gone about six miles up the river,and it was then about four miles across to themain Obion ; so I determined to strike across tothat, as I had found nothing yet to kill. I got ontothe river, and turned down it ; but the sleetwas still getting worse and worse. The busheswere all bent down, and locked together with ice,o 2Xg2 '''HE LIFE OFso that it was almost impossible to get along. Inalittle time my dogs started a large gang of oldturkey goblets, and I killed two of them, of thebiggest sort. I shouldered them up, and movedon, until I got through the hurricane, when I wasso tired that I laid my goblets down to rest, as theywere confounded heavy, and I was mighty tired.While I was resting, my old hound went to a log,and smelt it awhile, and then raised his eyes towardthe sky, and cried out. Away he went,and my other dogs with him, and I shouldered upmy turkeys again, and followed on as hard as Icould drive. They were soon out of sight, andin a very little time I heard them begin to bark.When I got to them, they were barking up a tree,but there was no game there. I concluded it hadbeen a turkey, and that it had flew away.When they saw me coming, away they wentagain ; and, after a little time, began to bark asbefore. When I got near them, I found theywere barking up the wrong tree again, as therewas no game there. They served me in this waythree or four times, until I was so infernal mad,that I determined, if I could get near enough, toshoot the old hound at least. With this intentionI pushed on the harder, till I came to the edge ofan open parara, and looking on before my dogs, IDAVID CROCKETT. ^53saw in and about the biggest bear that ever wasseen in America. He looked, at the distance hewas from me, like a large black bull. My dogswere afraid to attack him, and that was the reasonthey had stop'd so often, that I might overtakethem. They were now almost up with him, andI took my goblets from my back and hung themup in a sapling, and broke like a quarter horseafter my bear, for the sight of him had put newsprings in me. I soon got near to them, but theywere just getting into a roaring thicket, and so Icouldn't run through it, but had to pick my wayalong, and had close work even at that.In a little time I saw the bear climbing up alarge black oak-tree, and I crawled on till I gotwithin about eighty yards of him. He was settingwith his breast to me ; and so I put fresh primingin my gun, and fired at him. At this he raisedone of his paws and snorted loudly. I loadedagain as quick as I could, and fired as near thesame place in his breast as possible. At thecrack of my gun here he came tumbling down ;and the moment he touched the ground, I heardone of my best dogs cry out. I took my tomahawkin one hand, and my big butcher-knife inthe other, and run up within four or five paces ofhim, at which he let my dog go, and fixed his164 THE LIFE OFeyes on me. I got back in all sorts of a hurry,for I know'd if he got hold of me, he would hugme altogether too close for comfort. I went tomy gun and hastily loaded her again, and shothim the third time, which killed him good.I now began to think about getting him home,but I didn't know how far it was. So I left himand started ; and in order to find him again, Iwould blaze a sapling every little distance, whichwould show me the way back. I continued thistill I got within about a mile of home, for there Iknow'd very well where I was, and that I couldeasily find the way back to my blazes. When I gothome, I took my brother-in-law, and my youngman, and four horses, and went back. We gotthere just before dark, and struck up a fire, andcommenced butchering my bear. It was sometimein the night before we finished it ; and Ican assert, on my honour, that I believe he wouldhave weighed six hundred pounds. It was thesecond largest I ever saw. I killed one, a fewyears after, that weighed six hundred and seventeenpounds. I now felt fully compensated formy sufferings in going after my powder ; and wellsatisfied that a dog might sometimes be doing agood business, even when he seemed to be harkingup the ivrong tree. We got our meat home.DAVID CROCKETT. 1^5and I had the pleasure to know that we now hadplenty, and that of the best ; and I continuedthrough the winter to supply my family abundantlywith bear-meat and venison from thewoods.IQQ THE LIFE OFCHAPTER XIII.I HAD on hand a great many skins, and so, in themonth of February, I packed a horse with them,and taking my eldest son along with me, cut outfor a little town called Jackson, situated aboutforty miles off. We got there well enough, andI sold my skins, and bought me some coffee, andsugar, powder, lead, and salt. I packed them allup in readiness for a start, which I intended tomake early the next morning. Morning came,but I concluded, before I started, I would go andtake a horn with some of my old fellow-soldiersthat I had met with at Jackson.I did so ; and while we were engaged in this,I met with three candidates for the Legislature ;a Doctor Butler, who was, by marriage, a nephewto General Jackson, a Major Lynn, and aMr. McEver, all first-rate men. We all took ahorn together, and some person present said to me,Crockett, you must offer for the Legislature." Itold him I lived at least forty miles from anyDAVID CROCKETT. 167white settlement, and had no thought of becominga candidate at that time. So we all parted,and I and my little boy went on home.It was about a week or two after this, that aman came to my house, and told me I was a candidate.I told him not so. But he took out anewspaper from his pocket, and show mewhere I was announced. I said to my wife thatthis was all a burlesque on me, but I was determinedto make it cost the man who had putit there at least the value of the printing, and ofthe fun he wanted at my expense. So I hireda young man to work in my place on my farm,and turned out myself electioneering. I hadn'tbeen out long, before I found the people beganto talk very much about the bear hunter, theman from the cane ; and the three gentlemen,who I have already named, soon found it necessaryto enter into an agreement to have asort of caucus at their March court, to determinewhich of them was the strongest, andthe other two was to withdraw and supporthim. As the court came on, each one of themspread himself, to secure the nomination ; butit fell on Dr. Butler, and the rest backed out.The doctor was a clever fellow, and I haveoften said he was the most talented man I ever168 THE LIFE OFrun against for any office. His being related toGen'l. Jackson also helped him on very much butI was in for it, and I was determined to pushahead and go through, or stick. Their meetingwas held in Madison county, which was thestrongest in the representative district, which wascomposed of eleven counties, and they seemedbent on having the member from there.At this time Col. Alexander was a candidate forCongress, and attending one of his public meetingsone day, I walked to where he was treating thepeople, and he gave me an introduction to severalof his acquaintances, and informed them that I wasout electioneering. In a little time my competitor,Doctor Butler, came along ; he passed bywithout noticing me, and I suppose, indeed, he didnot recognise me. But I hailed him, as I was forall sorts of fun ; and when he turned to me, I saidto him, " Well, doctor, I suppose they have weighedyou out to me ; but I should like to know whythey fixed your election for March instead oiJlu-gust ? This is,'^ said I, " a bonfire new way of doingbusiness, if a caucus is to make a representativefor the people!" He now discovered who I was,and cried out, " D — n it, Crockett, is that you ?" —Be sure it is," said I, " but I don't want it understoodthat I have come electioneering. I have justDAVID CROCKETT. 169crept out of the cane, to see what discoveries I couldmake among the white folks." I told him thatwhen I set out electioneering, I would go preparedto put every man on as good footing when I lefthim as I found him on. I would therefore haveme a large buckskin huntingdonshire made, with acouple of pockets holding about a peck each ;and that in one I would carry a great bigtwist of tobacco, and in the other my bottle of liquor; for I knowed when 1 met a man and offeredhim a dram, he would throw out his quid of tobaccoto take one, and after he had taken his horn,I would out with my twist and give him anotherchaw. And in this way he would not be worseoff than when I found him ; and I would be sureto leave him in a first-rate good humour. He saidI could beat him electioneering all hollow. I toldhim I would give him better evidence of that beforeAugust, notwithstanding he had many advantagesover me, and particularly in the way of money; but I told him that I would go on the productsof the country; that I had industrious children,and the best of coon dogs, and they wouldhunt every night till midnight to support my election; and when the coon fur wa'n't good, I wouldmyself go a willing, and shoot down a wolf, andskin his head, and his scalp would be good to nieP■[70 THE LIFE OFfor three dollars, in our state treasury money ; andin this way I would get along on the big string.He stood like he was both amused and astonished,and the whole crowd was in a roar of laughter.From this place I returned home, leaving the peoplein a first-rate way ; and I was sure I woulddo a good business among them. At any rate, Iwas determined to stand up to my lick-log, salt orno salt.In a short time there came out two other candidates,a Mr. Shaw and a Mr. Brown. We all ranthe race through; and when the election was over,it turned out that I beat them all by a majority oftwo hundred and forty-seven votes, and was againreturned as a member of the Legislature from anew region of the country, without losing a session.This reminded me of the old saying — " Afool for luck, and a poor man for children."I now served two years in that body from mynew district, which was the years 1823 and '24.At the session of 1823, I had a small trial of myindependence, and whether I would forsake principlefor party, or for the purpose of followingafter big men.The term of Col. John Williams had expired, whowas a senator in Congress from the state of Tennessee.He was a candidate for another election,DAVID CROCKETT 17Xand was opposed by Pleasant M, Miller, Esq.,who, it was believed, would not be able to beatthe colonel. Some two or three others werespoken of, but it was at last concluded that the only-manwho could beat him was the present " government,"General Jackson, So, a few days beforethe election was to come on, he was sent forto come and run for the senate. He was then innomination for the presidency ; but sure enoughhe came, and did run as the opponent of ColonelWilliams, and beat him too, but not by my vote.The vote was, for Jackson, thirty-jive ; for Williams,twenty-Jive. I thought the colonel hadhonestly discharged his duty, and even the mightyname of Jackson couldn't make me vote againsthim.But voting against the old chief was found amighty up-hill business to all of them except myself.I never would, nor never did, acknowledgeI had voted wrong ; and I am more certain nowthat I was right than ever.I told the people it was the best vote I evergave ; that I had supported the public interest, andcleared my conscience in giving it, instead ofgratifying the private ambition of a man.I let the people know as early as then, that ITHE LIFE OFwouldn't take a collar around my neck with theletters engraved on it,MY DOG.Andrew Jackson.During these two sessions of the Legislature, nothingelse turned up which I think it worth whileto mention j and, indeed, I am fearful that I amtoo particular about many small matters; but if so,my apology is, that I want the world to understandmy true history, and how I worked alongto rise from a cane-brake to my present stationin life.Col. Alexander was the representative in Congressof the district I lived in, and his vote on thetariff law of 1824 gave a mighty heap of dissatisfactionto his people. They therefore began totalk pretty strong of running me for Congressagainst him. At last I was called on by a goodmany to be a candidate. I told the people that Icouldn't stand that; it was a step above my knowledge,and I know'd nothing about Congressmatters.However, I was obliged to agree to run, and myselfand two other gentlemen came out. But ProDAVID CROCKETT. Incidencewas a little against two of us this hunt, for itwas the year that cotton brought twenty-five dollarsa hundred ; and so Colonel Alexander would getupand tell the people, it was all the good effect ofthis tariff law ; that it had raised the price of theircotton, and that it would raise the price of everythingelse they made to sell. I might as well havesung salis over a dead horse, as to try to makethe people believe otherwise ; for they knowedtheir cotton had raised, sure enough, and if thecolonel hadnH done it, they didn't know whathad. So he rather made a mash of me this time,as he beat me exactly two votes, as they countedthe polls, though I have always believed that manyother things had been as fairly done as that samecount.He went on, and served out his term, and atthe end of it cotton was down to six or eightdollars a hundred again ; and I concluded I wouldtry him once more, and see how it would gowith cotton at the common price, and so T tacandidate.174 THE J.TFE OFCHAPTER XIV.But the reader, I expect, would have no objectionto know a little about my employment duringthe two years while my competitor was in Congress.In this space I had some pretty tuff times,and will relate some few things that happened tome.So here goes, as the boy said when he runby himself.In the fall of 1825, I concluded I would buildtwo large boats, and load them with pipe stavesfor market. So I went down to the lake, whichwas about twenty-five miles from where I lived,and hired some hands to assist me, and went towork 5 some at boat building, and others to gettingstaves. I worked on with my hands till thebears got fat, and then I turned out to hunting, tolay in a supply of meat. I soon killed and salteddown as many as were necessary for my family ;but about this time one of my old neighbours, whohad settled down on the lake about twenty-fivemiles from me, came to my house and told meDAVID CI^OCKETT. 175he wanted me to go clown and kill some bearsabout in his parts. He said they were extremelyfat, and very plenty. I know'd that when theywere fat, they were easily taken, for a fat bearcan't run fast or long. But I asked a bear no favours,no way, further than civility, for I nowhad eight large dogs, and as fierce as painters ;so that a bear stood no chance at all to get awayfrom them. So I went home with him, and thenwent on down towards the Mississippi, and commencedhunting.We were out two weeks, and in that time killedfifteen bears. Having now supplied my friendwith plenty of meat, I engaged occasionally againwith my hands in our boat building, and gettingstaves. But I at length couldn't stand it anylonger without another hunt. So I concluded totake my little son, and cross over the lake, andtake a hunt there. We got over, and that eveningturned out and killed three bears, in little or notime. The next morning we drove up four forks,and made a sort of scaffold, on which we saltedup our meat, so as to have it out of the reach ofthe wolves, for as soon as we would leave ourcamp, they would take possession. We had justeat our breakfast, when a company of hunterscame to our camp, who had fourteen dogs, but all176 ' THE LIFE OFSO poor, that when they would bark they wouldalmost have to lean up against a tree and takea rest. I told them their dogs couldn't run insmell of a bear, and they had better stay at mycamp, and feed them on the bones I had cut outof my meat. I left them there, and cut out ; butI hadn't gone far, when my dogs took a first-ratestart after a very large fat old he-bear, which runright plump towards my camp. I pursued on,but my other hunters had heard my dogs coming,and met them, and killed the bear before I got upwith him. I gave him to them, and cut out againfor a creek called Big Clover, which wa'n't veryfar off. Just as I got there, and was entering acane brake, my dogs all broke and vv^ent ahead,and, in a little time, they raised a fuss in the cane,and seemed to be going every way. I listened awhile, and found my dogs was in two companies,and that both was in a snorting fight. I sent mylittle son to one, and I broke for t'-other. I got tomine first, and found xn.y dogs had a two-year-oldbear dov/n, a-looking away on him ; so I justtook out my big butcher, and went up and shapedit into him, and killed him without shooting.There was five of the dogs in my company. Iia short time, I heard my little son fire at his bear „when I went to him he had killed it too. H(DAVID CROCKETT. I77had two dogs in his team. Just at this momentwe heard my other dog barking a short distanceoff, and all the rest immediately broke to him.We pushed on too, and when we got there, wefound he had still a larger bear than either of themwe had killed, treed by himself We killed thatone also, which made three we had killed in lessthan half an hour. We turned in and butcheredthem, and then started to hunt for water, and agood place to camp. But we had no soonerstarted, than our dogs took a start after anotherone, and away they went like a thunder-gust, andwas out of hearing in a minute. We followed theway they had gone for some time, but at length,we gave up the hope of finding them, and turnedback. As we were going back, I came to wherea poor fellow was grubbing, and he looked likethe very picture of hard times. I asked himwhat he was doing away there in the woods byhimself? He said he was grubbing for a man whointended to settle there ; and the reason why hedid it was, that he had no meat for his family,and he was working for a little.I was mighty sorry for the poor fellow, forit was not only a hard, but a very slow way toget meat for a hungry family ; so I told him if hewould go with me, I would give him more meat178 THE LIFE OFthan he could get by grubbing in a month. I intendedto supply him with meat, and also to gethim to assist my little boy in packing in and saltingup my bears. He had never seen a bear killedin his life. T told him I had six killed then,and my dogs were hard after another. He wentoff to his little cabin, which was a short distancein the brush, and his wife was very anxious heshould go with me. So we started and went towhere I had left my three bears, and made a camp.We then gathered my meat and salted, and scaffoldit, as I had done the other. Night now cameon, but no word from my dogs yet. I afterwardsfound they had treed the bear about five milesoff, near to a man's house, and had barked at itthe whole enduring night. Poor fellows ! manya time they looked for me, and wondered why Ididn't come, for they knowed there Was no mistakein me, and I know'd they were as good asever fluttered. In the morning, as soon as it waslight enough to see, the man took his gun andwent to them, and shot the bear, and killed it. Mydogs, however, wouldn't have any thing to say tothis stranger ; so they left him, and came early inthe morning back to me.We got our breakfast, and cut out again ; andwe killed four large and very fat bears that day.DAVID CROCKETT. I79We hunted out the week, and in that time wekilled seventeen, all of them first-rate. Whenwe closed our hunt, I gave the man over athousand weight of fine fat bear-meat, whichpleased him mightily, and made him feel asrich as a Jew. I saw him the next fall, and hetold me he had plenty of meat to do him thewhole year from his week's hunt. My son andme now went home. This was the week betweenChristmas and New-year that we made this hunt.When I got home, one of my neighbours wasout of meat, and wanted me to go back, andlet him go with me, to take another hunt. Icouldn't refuse ; but I told him I vas afraid thebear had taken to house by that time, for afterthey get very fat in the fall and early part of thewinter, they go into their holes, in large hollowtrees, or into hollow logs, or their cane-houses,or the hurricanes ; and lie there till spring, likefrozen snakes. And one thing about this willseem mighty strange to many people. Frontabout the first of January to about the last ofApril, these varments lie in their holes altogether.In all that time they have no food to eat j and yetwhen they come out, they are not an ounce lighter-than when they went to house. I don't know thecause of this, and still 1 know it is a fact ; and I180 THE LIFE OFleave it for others who have more learning thanmyself to account for it. They have not a particleof food with them, but they just lie and suck thebottom of their paw all the time. I have killedmany of them in their trees, which enables me tospeak positively on this subject. However, myneighbour, whose name was McDaniel, and mylittle son and me, went on down to the lake tomy second camp, where I had killed my seventeenbears the week before, and turned out to hunting.But we hunted hard all day without getting a singlestart. We had carried but little provisions withus, and the next morning was entirely out of meat.I sent my son about three miles off, to the houseof an old friend, to get some. The old gentlemanwas much pleased to hear I was hunting in thoseparts, for the year before the bears had killed agreat many of his hogs. He was that day killinghis bacon hogs, and so he gave my son some meat,and sent word to me that I must come in to hishouse that evening, that he would have plenty offeed for my dogs, and some accommodations forourselves ; but before my son got back, we hadgone out hunting, and in a large cane brake mydogs found a big bear in a cane-house, which hehad fixed for his winter-quarters, as they sometimesdo.DAVID CROCKETT. IglWhen my lead dog found him, and raisedthe yell, all the rest broke to him, but none ofthem entered his house until we got up. I encouragedmy dogs, and they knowed me so well,that I could have made them seize the old serpenthimself, with all his horns and heads, and clovenfoot and ugliness into the bargain, if he wouldonly have come to light, so that they could haveseen him. They bulged in, and in an instant thebear followed them out, and I told my friend toshoot him, as he was mighty wrath to kill a bear.He did so, and killed him prime. We carried himto our camp, by which time my son had returned ;and after we got our dinners we packed up, andcut for the house of my old friend, whose namewas Davidson.We got there, and staid with him that night ;and the next morning, having salted up our meat,we left it with him, and started to take a hunt betweenthe Obion lake and the Red-foot lake ; asthere had been a dreadful hurricane, which passedbetween them, and I was sure there must be aheap of bears in the fallen timber. We had goneabout five miles without seeing any sign at all ;but at length we got on some high can ridges,and, as we rode along, I saw a hole in a largeblack oak, and on examining more closely, I disc182 THE LIFE OFcovered that a bear had clomb the tree. I couldsee his tracks going up, but none coming down,and so I was sure he was in there. A person who isacquainted with bear-hunting, can tell easy enoughwhen the varment is in the hollow ; for as theygo up they don't slip a bit, but as they come downthey make long scratches with their nails.My friend was a little ahead of me, but I calledhim back, and told him there vas a bear in thattree, and I must have him out. So we lit fromour horses, and I found a small tree which Ithought I could fall so as to lodge against my beartree, and we fell to work chopping it with ourtomahawks. I intended, when we lodged the treeagainst the other, to let my little son go up, andlook into the hole, for he could climb like a squirrel.We had chop'd on a little time and stop'd torest, when I heard my dogs barking mighty sesvere at some distance from us, and I told my friendI knowed they had a bear ; for it is the natureof a dog, when he finds you are hunting bears,to hunt for nothing else ; he becomes fond of themeat, and considers other game as " not worth anotice," as old Johnson said of the devil.We concluded to leave our tree a bit, and wentto my dogs, and when we got there, sure enoughthey had an eternal great big fat bear up a tree,DAVID CROCKETT. 1Q3just ready for shooting. My friend again petitionedme for liberty to shoot this one also. I hada little rather not, as the bear was so big, but Icouldn't refuse ; and so he blazed away, and downcame the old fellow like some great log had fell.I now missed one of my dogs, the same that I beforespoke of as having treed the bear by himselfsometime before, when I had started the three inthe cane break. I told my friend that my missingdog had a bear somewhere, just as sure as fate ; soI left them to butcher the one we had just killed,and I went up on a piece of high ground to listenfor my dog. I heard him barking with all hismight some distance off, and I pushed ahead forhim. My other dogs hearing him broke to him,and when I got there, sure enough again he hadanother bear ready treed ; if he hadn't, I wishI may be shot. I fired on him, and broughthim down ; and then went back, and help'dfinish butchering the one at which I had leftmy friend. We then packed both to our treewhere we had left my boy. By this time, the littlefellow had cut the tree down that we intendedto lodge, but it fell the wrong way ; he had thenfeather'd in on the big tree, to cut that, and hadfound that it was nothing but a shell on the outside,and all doted in the middle, as too many of184 THE LIFE OFour big men are in these days, having only an outsideappearance. My friend and my son cut awayon it, and I went off about a hundred yards withmy dogs to keep them from running under thetree when it should fall. On looking back at thehole, I saw the bear's head out of it, looking downat them as they were cutting. I hollered to themto look up, and they did so ; and McDaniel catchedup his gun, but by this time the bear was out,and coming down the tree. He fired at it, and assoon as it touch'd ground the dogs were all roundit, and they had a roll-and-tumble fight to the footof the hill, where they stop'd him. I ran up, and jputting my gun against the bear, fired and killedhim. We now had three, and so we made ourscaffold and salted them up.DAVID CROCKETT. Ig5CHAPTER XV.In the morning I left my son at the camp, andwe started on towards the hurricane j and whenwe had went about a mile, we started a very largebear, but we got along mighty slow on account ofthe cracks in the earth occasioned by the earthquakes.We, however, made out to keep in hearingof the dogs for about three miles, and thenwe come to the hurricane. Here we had to quitour horses, as old Nick himself couldn't have gotthrough it without sneaking it along in the formthat he put on, to make a fool of our old grandmotherEve. By this time several of my dogshad got tired and come back ; but we went aheadon foot for some little time in the hurricane, whenwe met a bear coming straight to us, and notmore than twenty or thirty yards off. I startedmy tired dogs after him, and McDaniel pursuedthem, and I went on to where my other dogswere. I had seen the track of the bear they wereafter, and I knowed he was a screamer. I 186 'the LIFE OFlowed on to about the middle of the hurricane ;but my dogs pursued him so close, that they madehim climb an old stump about twenty feet high.I got in shooting distance of him and fired, butI was all over in such a flutter from fatigue andrunning, that I couldn't hold steady ; but, however,I broke his shoulder, and he fell. I run upand loaded my gun as quick as possible, and shothim again and killed him. When I went to takeout my knife to butcher him, I found I had lostit in coming through the hurricane. The vinesand briers was so thick that I would sometimeshave to get down and crawl like a varment to getthrough at all ; and a vine had, as I supposed,caught in the handle and pulled it out. While Iwas standing and studying what to do, my friendcame to me. He had followed my trail throughthe hurricane, and had found my knife, which wasmighty good news to me ; as a hunter hates theworst in the world to lose a good dog, or anypart of his hunting-tools. I now left McDanielto butcher the bear, and I vent after our horses,and brought them as near as the nature of casewould allow. I then took our bags, and went backto where he was ; and when we had shined thebear, we fleeced ofi* the fat and carried it to ourhorses at several loads. We then packed it upDAVID CROCKETT. Ig7on our horses, and had a heavy pack of it oneach one. We now started and went on till aboutsunset, when I concluded we must be near ourcamp ; so I hollered and my son answered me,and we moved on in the direction to the camp.We had gone but a little way when I heard mydogs make a warm start again ; and I jumpeddown from my horse and gave him up to myfriend, and told him I would follow them. Hewent on to the camp, and I went ahead after mydogs with all my might for a considerable distance,till at last night came on. The woods werevery rough and hilly, and all covered over withcane.I now was compend to move on more slowly ;and was frequently falling over logs, and into thecracks made by the earthquakes, so that I wasvery much afraid I would break my gun. HoweverI went on about three miles, when I came toa good big creek, which I waded. It was verycold, and the creek was about knee-deep ; but Ifelt no great inconvenience from it just then, as Iwas all over wxt with sweat from running, and Tfelt hot enough. After I got over this creek andout of the cane, which was very thick on all ourcreeks, I listened for my dogs. I found they hadeither treed or brought the bear to a stop, as they133 THE LIFE OFcontinued barking in the same place. I pushed onas near in the direction to the noise as I could, tillI found the hill was too steep for me to climb,and so I backed and went down the creek somedistance till I came to a hollow, and then took upthat, till I come to a place where I could climb upthe hill. It was mighty dark, and was difficult tosee my way or any thing else. When I got upthe hill, I found I had passed the dogs ; and so Iturned and went to them. I found, when I gotthere, they had treed the bear in a large forkedpoplar, and it was setting in the fork.I could see the lump, but not plain enough toshoot with any certainty, as there was no moonlight; and so I set in to hunting for some drybrush to make me a light ; but I could find none,though I could find that the ground was tornmightily to pieces by the cracks.At last I thought I could shoot by guess, and killhim ; so I pointed as near the lump as I could, andfired away. But the bear didn't come he onlyclomb up higher, and got out on a limb, whichhelped me to see him better. I now loaded upagain and fired, but this time he didn't move atall. I commenced loading for a third fire, but thefirst thing I knowed, the bear was down amongmy dogs, and they were fighting all around me.DAVID CROCKETT. piggI had my big butcher in my belt, and I had a pairof dressed buckskin breeches on. So I took outmy knife, and stood, determined, if he should gethold of me, to defend myself in the best way Icould. I stood there for some time, and couldnow and then see a white dog I had, but the restof them, and the bear, which were dark coloured,I couldn't see at all, it was so miserable dark.They still fought around me, and sometimeswithin three feet of me ; but, at last, the bear gotdown into one of the cracks, that the earthquakeshad made in the ground, about four feet deep, andI could tell the biting end of him by the holleringof my dogs. So I took my gun and pushed themuzzle of it about, till I thought I had it againstthe main part of his body, and fired ; but it happenedto be only the fleshy part of his foreleg.With this, he jumped out of the crack, and heand the dogs had another hard fight around measbefore. At last, however, they forced himback into the crack again, as he was when I hadshot.I had laid down my gun in the dark, and I nowbegan to hunt for it ; and, while hunting, I gothold of a pole, and I concluded I would punchhim awhile with that. I did so, and when Iwould punch him, the dogs would jump in on190 'the LIFE OFhim, when he would bite them badly, and theywould jump out again. I concluded, as he wouldtake punching so patiently, it might be that hewould lie still enough for me to get down in thecrack, and feel slowly along till I could find theright place to give him a dig with my butcher.So I got down, and my dogs got in before himand kept his head towards them, till I got alongeasily up to him ; and placing my hand on hisrump, felt for his shoulder, just behind whichI intended to stick him. I made a lounge withmy long knife, and fortunately stuck him rightthrough the heart ; at which he just sank down,and I crawled out in a hurry. In a little timemy dogs all come out too, and seemed satisfied,which was the way they always had of tellingme that they had finished him.I suffered very much that night with cold, asmy leather breeches, and every thing else I hadon, was wet and frozen. But I managed to getmy bear out of this crack after several hard trials,and so I butchered him, and laid down to try tosleep. But my fire was very bad, and I couldn'tfind any thing that would burn well to make itany better ; and I concluded I should freeze, if Ididn't warm myself in some way by exercise.So I got up, and hollered a while, and then IDAVID CROCKETT. X91would just jump up and down with all my might,and throw myself into all sorts of motions. Butall this wouldn't do ; for my blood was nowgetting cold, and the chills coming all over me.I was so tired, too, that I could hardly walk ; but Ithought I would do the best I could to save mylife, and then, if I died, nobody would be toblame. So 1 went to a tree about two feet through,and not a limb on it for thirty feet, and I wouldclimb up it to the lianhs, and then lock my armstogether around it, and slide down to the bottomagain. This would make the insides of my legsand arms feel mighty warm and good. I continuedthis till daylight in the morning, and how often Iclomb up my tree and slid down I don't know,but I reckon at least a hundred times.In the morning I got my bear hung up so as tobe safe, and then set out to hunt for my camp. Ifound it after a while, and McDaniel and my sonwere very much rejoiced to see me get back, forthey were about to give me up for lost. We gotour breakfasts, and then secured our meat bybuilding a high scaffold, and covering it over.We had no fear of its spoiling, for the weather wasso cold that it couldn't.We now started after my other bear, which hadcaused me so much trouble and suffering ; and THE LIFE OFfore we got him, we got a start after another, andtook him also. We went on to the creek I hadcrossed the night before and camped, and thenwent to where my bear was, that I had killed inthe crack. When we examined the place, Mcdanielsaid he wouldn't have gone into it, as I did,for all the bears in the woods.We took the meat down to our camp and saltedit, and also the last one we had killed ; intending,in the morning, to make a hunt in the hurricaneagain.• We prepared for resting that night, and I canassure the reader I was in need of it. We hadlaid down by our fire, and about ten o'clock therecame a most terrible earthquake, which shook theearth so, that we were rocked about like we hadbeen in a cradle. We were very much alarmed ;for though we were accustomed to feel earthquakes,we were now right in the region whichhad been torn to pieces by them in 1812, and wethought it might take a notion and swallow us up,like the big fish did Jonah.In the morning we packed up and moved to thehurricane, where we made another camp, andturned out that evening and killed a very largebear, which made eight we had now killed inthis hunt.DAVID CROCKETT. 193The next morning we entered the hurricaneagain, and in little or no time my dogs were infull cry. We pursued them, and soon came to. athick cane-brake, in which they had stop'd theirbear. We got up close to him, as the cane wasso thick that we couldn't see more than a fewfeet. Here I made my friend hold the cane alittle open with his gun till 1 shot the bear,which was a mighty large one. I killed himdead in his tracks. We got him out and butcheredhim, and in a little time started anotherand killed him, which now made ten we hadkilled ; and we know'd we couldn't pack anymorehome, as we had only five horses along ;therefore we returned to the camp and salted upall our meat, to be ready for a start homewardnext morning.The morning came, and we packed our horseswith the meat, and had as much as they could possiblycarry, and sure enough cut out for home. Itwas about thirty miles, and we reached home thesecond day. I had now accommodated my neighbourwith meat enough to do him, and had killedin all, up to that time, fifty-eight bears, during thefall and winter.As soon as the time come for them to quittheir houses and come out again in the spring,RTHE LIFE OFI took a notion to hunt a little more, and inabout one month I killed forty-seven more, whichmade one hundred and five bears I had killed inless than one year from that time.i■■1i,DAVID CROCKETT. 195CHAPTER XVI.Having now closed my hunting for that winter,I returned to my hands, who were engaged aboutmy boats and staves, and made ready for a tripdown the river. I had two boats and aboutthirty thousand staves, and so I loaded with them,and set out for New Orleans. I got out of theObion river, in which I had loaded my boats,very well ; but when I got into the Mississippi, Ifound all my hands were bad scared, and in fact I believeI was scared a little the worst of any ; forI had never been down the river, and I soon discoveredthat my pilot was as ignorant of the businessas myself. I hadn't gone far before I determined tolash the two boats together ; we did so, but it madethem so heavy and obstinate, that it was next akinto impossible to do any thing at all with them, orto guide them right in the river.That evening we fell in company with someOhio boats ; and about night we tried to land, butwe could not. The Ohio men hollered to us to196 THE LIFE OFgo on and run all night. Yfe took their advice,though we had a good deal rather not ; but wecouldn't do any other way. In a short distance wegot into what is called the '' Devils Elbow f^ andif any place in the wide creation has its own propername, I thought it was this. Here we had aboutthe hardest work that I ever was engaged in, inmy life, to keep out of danger ; and even thenwe were in it all the while. We twice attemptedto land at Wood-yards, which we could see, butcouldn't reach.The people would run out with lights, and tryto instruct us how to get to shore ; but all in vain.Our boats were so heavy that we couldn't takethem much any way, except the way they wantedto go, and just the way the current would carrythem. At last we quit trying to land, and concludedjust to go ahead as well as we could, forwe found we couldn't do any better. Some timein the night I was down in the cabin of one ofthe boats, sitting by the fire, thinking on what ahobble we had got into ; and how much betterbear-hunting was on hard land, than floating alongon the water, when a fellow had to go aheadwhether he was exactly willing or not.The hatchway into the cabin came slap downrightthrough the top of the boat ; and it was theDAVID CROCKETT. I97only way out except a small hole in the side,which we had used for putting our arms throughto dip up water before we lashed the boats together.We were now floating sideways, and the boat Iwas in was the hindmost as we went. All at onceI heard the hands begin to run over the top of theboat in great confusion, and pull with all theirmight : and the first thing I know'd after thiswe went broadside full tilt against the head of anisland where a large raft of drift timber had lodged.The nature of such a place would be, as everybodyknows, to suck the boats down, and turnthem right under this raft ; and the uppermostboat would, of course, be suck'd down and go underfirst. As soon as we struck, I bulged for myhatchway, as the boat was turning under sureenough. But when I got to it, the water was pouringthro' in a current as large as the hole wouldlet it, and as strong as the weight of the rivercould force it. I found I couldn't get out here,for the boat was now turned down in such a way,that it was steeper than a house-top. I nowthought of the hole in the side, and made myway in a hurry for that. With difficulty I got toit,and when I got there, I found it was too smallfor me to get out by my own dower, and I beganr2198 THE LIFE OFto think that I was in a worse box than ever.But I put my arms through and hollered as loudas I could roar, as the boat I was in hadn't yetquite filled with water up to my head, and thehands who were next to the raft, seeing my armsout, and hearing me holler, seized them, and beganto pull. I told them I was sinking, and topull my arms oj0f, or force me through, for now Iknow'd well enough it was neck or nothing, comeout or sink.By a violent effort they jerked me through -,but I was in a pretty pickle when I got through.I had been sitting without any clothing over myshirt : this was torn off, and I was literallyshined like a rabbit. I was, however, well pleasedto get out in any way, even without shirt orhide ; as before I could straighten myself on theboat next to the raft, the one they pull'd me outof went entirely under, and I have never seen itany more to this day. We all escaped on to theraft, where we were compelled to sit all night,about a mile from land on either side. Four ofmy company were bareheaded, and three barefooted; and of that number I was one. I reckon1 looked like a pretty crackling ever to get toCongress ! ! !We had now lost all our loading ; and everyDAVID CROCKETT. 199particle of our clothing, except what little we hadon ; but over all this, while I was setting thereinthe night, floating about on the drift, I felt happierand better off than I ever had in my life before,for I had just made such a marvellous escape,that I had forgot almost every thing else in that ;and so I felt prime.In the morning about sunrise, we saw a boatcoming down, and we hailed her. They sent alarge skiff, and took us all on board, and carried usdown as far as Memphis. Here I met with afriend, that I never can forget as long as I am ableto go ahead at any thing ; it was a Major Winchester,a merchant of that place : he let us allhave hats, and shoes, and some little money to goupon, and so we all parted.A young man and myself concluded to go ondown to Natchez, to see if we could hear any thingof our boats ; for we supposed they would floatout from the raft, and keep on down the river.We got on a boat at Memphis, that was goingdown, and so cut out. Our largest boat, we wereinformed, had been seen about fifty miles belowwhere we stove, and an attempt had been madeto land her, but without success, as she was as hardheadedas ever.This was the kst of my boats, and of my boats'the LIFE OFing ; for it went so badly with me, along at thefirst, that I hadn't much mind to try it anymore.I now returned home again, and as thenext August was the Congressional election, I beganto turn my attention a little to that matter, asit was beginning to be talked of a good deal amongthe people.DAVID CROCKETT. 201CHAPTER XVII.I HAVE, heretofore, informed the reader that Ihad determined to run this race to see what effectthe price of cotton could have again on it. I nowhad Col. Alexander to run against once more, andalso General William Arnold.I had difficulties enough to fight against thistime, as every one will suppose ; for I had nomoney, and a very bad prospect, so far as I know'd,of getting any to help me along. I had, however,a good friend, who sent for me to come and seehim. I went, and he was good enough to offerme some money to help me out. I borrowedas much as I thought I needed at the start, andwent ahead. My friend also had a good deal ofbusiness about over the district at the differentcourts ; and if he now and then slip'd in agood word for me, it is nobody's business.We frequently met at different places, and,as he thought I needed, he would occasionallyhand me a little more cash ; so I was able to buy202 THE LIFE OPa little of " the creature's to put my friends in agood humour, as well as the other gentlemen, forthey all treat in that country ; not to get elected,of course — for that would be against the law ; butjust, as I before said, to make themselves and theirfriends feel their keeping a little.Nobody ever did know how I got money toget along on, till after the election was over, andI had beat my competitors twenty-seven hundredand forty-eight votes. Even the price ofcotton couldn't save my friend Aleck this time.My rich friend, who had been so good to me inthe way of money, now sent for me, and loanedme a hundred dollars, and told me to go ahead ;that that amount would bear my expenses to Congress,and I must then shift for myself. I cameon to Washington, and drawer two hundred andfifty dollars, and purchased with it a check on thebank at Nashville, and enclosed it to mv friend ;and I may say, in truth, I sent this money with amighty good will, for I reckon nobody in thisworld loves a friend better than me, or remembersa kindness longer.I have now given the close of the election, butI have skip'd entirely over the canvass, of whichI will say a very few things in this place ; as Iknow very well how to tell the truth, but not muchDAVID CROCKETT. 203about placing them in book order, so as to pleasecritics.Col. Alexander was a very clever fellow, andprincipal surveyor at that time ; so much for one ofthe men I had to run against. My other competitorwas a major-general in the militia, and an at the law, and quite a smart, cleverman also ; and so it will be seen I had war workas well as law trick, to stand up under. Takingboth together, they make a pretty considerableof a load for any one man to carry. But forwar claims, I consider myself behind no manexcept " the government," and mighty little, ifany, behind him ; but this the people will haveto determine hereafter, as I reckon it won't doto quit the work of " reform and retrenchment"yet for a spell.But my two competitors seemed some littleafraid of the influence of each other, but not tothink me in their way at all. They, therefore,were generally working against each other, whileI was going ahead for myself, and mixing amongthe people in the best way I could. I was as cunningas a little red fox, and wouldn't risk my tailin a " committal" trap.I found the sign was good, almost everywhereI went. On one occasion, while we were in the204 THE LIFE OFeastern counts of the district, it happened thatwe all lead to make a speech, and it fell on nie tomake the first one. I did so after mv manner,and it turned pretty much on the old saying, " Ashort horse is soon curried' as I spoke not verylong. Colonel Alexander followed me, and thenGeneral Arnold come on.The general took much pains to reply to Alexander,but didn't so much as let on that there wasany such candidate as myself at all. He hadbeen speaking for a considerable time, when alarge flock of guinea-fowls came very near towhere he was, and set up the most unmercifulchattering that ever was heard, for they are a noisylittle brute any way. They so confused the general,that he made a stop, and requested that theymight be driven away. I let him finish his speech,and then walking up to him, said aloud, '^AVell,colonel, you are the first man I ever saw that understoodthe lamiuao-e of fowls." I told him thathe had not had the politeness to name me in hisspeech, and that when my little friends, the guinea-fowls,had come up and began to holler ''Crockett,Crockett, Crockett,"- he had been ungenerousenough to stop, and drive then all away. Thisraised a universal shout among the people for me,and the general seemed mighty bad plagued. ButDAVID CROCKETT. 205he got more plagued than this at the polls in August,as I have stated before.This election was in 1827, and I can say, onmy conscience, that I was, without disguise, thefriend and supporter of General Jackson, uponhis principles as he laid them down, and as "/understood them,^^ before his election as president.During my two first sessions in Congress,Mr. Adams was president, and I worked alongwith what was called the Jackson party prettywell. I was re-tilectcd to Congress, in 1829, byan overwhelming majority ; and soon after thecommencement of this second term, I saw, orthought I did, that it was expected of me that Iwas to bow to the name of Andrew Jackson, andfollow him in all his motions, and minding, andturnings, even at the expense of my conscienceand judgment. Such a thing was new to me, anda total stranger to my principles. I know'd wellenough, though, that if I didn't ^^ hurry'' for hisname, the hue and cry was to be raised againstme, and I was to be sacrificed, if possible. Hisfamous, or rather I should say his m-famoiis^ Indianbill was brought forward, and I opposed itfrom the purest motives in the world. Severalof my colleagues got around me, and told me howwell they loved me, and that I was ruining 206 'THE LIFE OFself. They said this was a favourite measure ofthe president, and I ought to go for it. I toldthem I believed it was a wicked, unjust measure,and that I should go against it, let the cost to myselfbe what it might ; that I was willing to gowith General Jackson in every thing that I believedwas honest and right; but, further thanthis, I wouldn't go for him, or any other man inthe whole creation ; that I would sooner be honestlyand politically d — nd, than hypocriticallyimmortalized. I had been elected by a majorityof three thousand five hundred and eighty-fivevotes, and I believed they were honest men, andwouldn't want me to vote for any unjust notion,to please Jackson or any one else ; at any rate,I was of age, and was determined to trust them.I voted against this Indian bill, and my conscienceyet tells me that I gave a good honest vote, andone that I believe will not make me ashamed inthe day of judgment. I served out my term, andthough many amusing things happened, I am notdisposed to swell my narrative by inserting them.When it closed, and I returned home, I foundthe storm had raised against me sure enough ;and it was echoed from side to side, and from endto end of my district, that I had turned againstJackson. This was considered the unpardonable\DAVID CROCKETT. 207sin. I was hunted down like a wild varment, andin this hunt every little newspaper in the district,and every little pin-hook lawyer was engaged.Indeed, they were ready to print any and everythingthat the ingenuity of man could inventagainst me. Each editor was furnished with thejournals of Congress from head-quarters; andhunted out every vote I had kissed in four sessions,whether from sickness or not, no matter ,and each one was charged against me at eightdollars. In all I had missed about seventy votes,which they made amount to five hundred andsixty dollars ; and they contended I had swindledthe government out of this sum, as I had receivedmy pay, as other members do. I was now againa candidate in 1S30, while all the attempts weremaking against me ; and every one of these littlepapers kept up a constant war on me, fightingwith every scurrilous report they could catch.Over all I should have been elected, if it hadn'tbeen, that but a few weeks before the election, thelittle four-pence-ha'penny limbs of the law fell ona plan to defeat me, which had the desired effect.They agreed to spread out over the district, andmake appointments for me to speak, almost everywhere,to clear up the Jackson question. Theywould give me no notice of these appointments,208 '^^^ i^^^E OFand the people would meet in great crowds tohear what excuse Crockett had to make for quittingJackson.But instead of Crockett's being there, thisshall-fry of lawyers would be there, with theirsaddle-bags full of the little newspapers and theirjournals of Congress ; and would get up andspeak, and read their scurrilous attacks on me,and would then tell the people that I was afraidto attend ; and in this way would turn manyagainst me. All this intrigue was kept a profoundsecret from me, till it was too late to counteractit ; and when the election came, I had a majorityin seventeen counties, putting all their votes together,but the eighteenth beat me ; and so I wasleft out of Congress during those two years. Thepeople of my distinct were induced, by these tricks,to take a stay on me for that time ; but they havesince found out that they were imposed on, andon re-considering my case, have reversed that decision; which, as the Dutchman said, " is as fair ading as ever was."When I last declared myself a candidate, Iknew that the district would be divided by theLegislature before the election would come on ;and I moreover knew, that from the geographicalsituation of the country, the county of Madison,Davis CROCKETT. 209which was very strong, and which was thecounty that had given the majority that had beatme in the former race, should be left off from mydistrict.But when the Legislature met, as I have beeninformed, and I have no doubt of the fact, Mr.Fitzgerald, my competitor, went up, and informedhis friends in that body, that if Madison countywas left off, he wouldn't run ; for " that Crockettcould beat Jackson himself in those parts, in anywaythey could fix it."The liberal Legislature you know, of course,gave him that county ; and it is too clear to admitof dispute, that it was done to make a mash of me.In order to make my district in this way, they hadto form the southern district of a string of countiesaround three sides of mine, or very nearly so.Had my old district been properly divided, itwould have made two nice ones, in convenient nice ^form. But as it is, they are certainly the mostunreasonably laid off of any in the state, or perhapsin the nation, or even in the te-total creation.However, when the election came on, the peopleof the district, and of Madison county amongthe rest, seemed disposed to prove to Mr. Fitzgeraldand the Jackson Legislature, that they were notto be transferred like hogs, and horses, and cattles2210 THE LIFE OFin the market; and they determined that I shouldn'tbe broke down, though I had to carry Jackson, andthe enemies of the bank, and the legislative worksall at once. I had Mr. Fitzgerald, it is true, formy open competitor, but he was helped along byall his little lawyers again, headed by old BlackHawk, as he is sometimes called, (alias) AdamHuntsman, with all his talents for writing " Chroniclesand such like foolish stuff.But one good thing was, and I must record it,the papers in the district were now beginning tosay "fair play a little," and they would publishon both sides of the question. The contest was awarm one, and the battle well-fought ; but I gainedthe day, and the Jackson horse was left a littlebehind. When the polls were compared, it turnedout I had beat Fits just two hundred and twovotes, having made a mash of all their intrigues.After all this, the reader will perceive that I amnow here in Congress, this 2Sth day of January,in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundredand thirty-four ; and that, what is moreagreeable to my feelings as a freeman, I am atliberty to vote as my conscience and judgmentdictates to be right, without the yoke of any partyon me, or the driver at my heels, with his whip inhand, commanding me to ge-wo-haw, just at hisDAVID CROCKETT. 211pleasure. Look at my arms, you will find noparty hand-cuff on them ! Look at my neck, youwill not find there any collar, with the engravingMY DOG.Andrew Jackson.But you will find me standing up to my rack,as the people's faithful representative, and the public'smost obedient, very humble servant,DAVID CROCKETT.THE END.V. V^-i»-^/vc. vU'^i.-k^-n.A , >. ,\t^2^"M'&^^:TSWUW ^IMXDJKIM'!^WT]COL. CROCKETT'SEXPLOITS AND ADVENTURESIN TEXAS:WHEREIN IS CONTAINEDA FULL ACCOUNT OF HIS JOURNEY FROM TENNESSEE TO THE REDRIVER AND NATCHITOCHES, AND THENCE ACROSSTEXAS TO SAN ANTONIO ;INCLUDINGHIS MANY HAIR-BREADTH ESCAPES ;TOGETHER WITHA TOPOGRAPHICAL, HISTORICAL, AND POLITICALVIEW OF TEXAS.Say, what can politicians do,When things in riot, plague, and vex us ?But shoulder Look, and start anew,Cut stick, and go ahead in Texas ! ! !The Author.WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.THE Irritative Brought DOWIf FROM THE DEATH OFCOX. CKOCKBTT TO THE BATTLE OF SAIT Jacent,BY AN ETE-WITNESS.SIXTH EDITION.PHILADELPHIA :T. K. AND P. G. COLLINS.18 37.■^■vv\.^v%v^^^.'»/wvH.v%^%'vvvv^^%^%^^wvv'w%%^s.^j»^v»^v^^.'vv%^%^x^%^^^.'vvvvv»%^^i»»Vv%i»^Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1S36, byT. K. & P, G. Collins,La the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the Eastern District ofPennsylvania.x\^^fc^/»^%^WV%^W%/W»WVWfcX%X»^^^»%W^^V%%W%'»%'%^Printed hyT. K. & P. G, COLLINS,No. 1 Lodge Alley, Philadelphia.PREFACE.Colonel Crockett, at the time of leavingTennessee for Texas, made a promise to hisfriends that he would keep notes of whatevermight occur to him of moment, withthe ulterior view of laying his adventuresbefore the public. He was encouraged inthis undertaking by the favourable mannerin which his previous publications hadbeen received : and if he had been sparedthroughout the Texian struggle, it cannotbe doubted that he would have produced awork replete with interest, and such aswould have been universally read. Hisplain and unpolished style may occasionallyoffend the taste of those who are sticklersfor classic refinement; while others• « •IV PREFACE.will value it for that frankness and sinceritywhich is the best voucher for the truth ofthe facts he relates. The manuscript hasnot been altered since it came into the possessionof the editor ; though it is but properto state that it had previously undergonea slight verbal revision ; andthe occasional interlineations were recognisedto be in the handwriting of the Beehunter, so frequently mentioned in theprogress of the narrative. These correctionswere doubtless made at the author'sown request, and received his approbation.This worthy and talented young manwas well known in New Orleans. Hisparents were wealthy, he had received aliberal education, was the pride and soulof the circle in which he moved, but hisdestiny was suddenly overshadowed by anact in which he had no agency, but hisproud father in a moment of anger turnedhis face upon him, and the romantic youth,with a wounded spirit, commenced thePREFACE. Vroving life which he had pursued with successfor four or five years. His father recentlyfound out the great injustice thathad been done his proud spirited son, recalledhim, and a reconciliation took place ;but the young man had become enamouredof Texas, and a young woman at Nacog-doches, and had already selected a plantationin Austin's colony, on which he intendedto have settled in the course of thecoming year. The following letter willexplain the manner in which the manuscriptwas preserved, and how it came intomy possession : —San Jacinto, May 3, 1836.My dear friend, —I write this from the town of Lynchburg,on the San Jacinto, to inform you that Iam laid up in ordinary at this place, havingbeen wounded in the right knee by a musketball, in the glorious battle of the 20thultimo. Having some friends residing here,I was anxious to get among them, for aninvalid has not much chance of receiving\l PREFACE.proper attention from the army surgeons inthe present state of affairs. I send you aliterary curiosity, which I doubt not youwill agree with me should be laid beforethe public. It is the journal of ColonelCrockett, from the time of his leaving Tennesseeup to the day preceding his untimelydeath at the Alamo. The manner of itspreservation was somewhat singular. TheColonel was among the six who were foundalive in the fort after the general massacrehad ceased. General Castrillon, as you havealready learned, was favourably impressedwith his manly and courageous deportment,and interceded for his life, but in vain.After the fort had been ransacked, thesepapers were found in the Colonel's baggage,by the servant of Castrillon, whoimmediately carried them to his master.After the battle of San Jacinto, they werefound in the baggage of Castrillon, and asI was by at the time, and recognised themanuscript, I secured it, and saved it frombeing cast away as worthless or torn up a^PREFACE. Vllcartridge paper. By way of beguiling thetedious hours of my illness, I have added achapter, and brought down a history of theevents to the present time. Most of thefacts I have recorded, I gathered fromCastrillon's servant, and other Mexicanprisoners. The manuscript is at yourservice to do with as you please, but Ishould advise its publication, and shouldit be deemed necessary, you are at libertyto publish this letter also, by way of explanation.With sincere esteem, your friend,Charles T. Beale.To Alex. J. Dumas Esq., New Orleans.The deep interest that has been taken?for several years past, in the sayings anddominoes of Colonel Crockett, has induced meto lay this last of his literary labours beforethe public, not doubting that it will be readwith as much avidity as his former publications,though in consequence of the deathof the author before he had revised theVm PREFACE.sheets for the press, it will necessarily beushered into the world with many imperfectionson its head, for which indulgenceis craved by the public's obedient servant,Alex. J. Dumas.New Orleans, June, 1836ADVENTURESINTEXAS,CHAPTER I.It is a true saying that no one knows the luckof a lousy calf, for though in a country where,according to the Declaration of Independence, thepeople are all horn free and equal, those who havea propensity to go ahead may aim at the highesthonours, and they may ultimately reach them too,though they start at the lowest row^el of the ladder,still it is a huckelberry above my persimmon tocipher out how it is with six months' schoolingonly, I, David Crockett, find myself the most popularbookmaker of the day; and such is the demandfor my works that I cannot write them half fastenough, no how I can fix it. This problem wouldbother even my friend Major Jack Downing's ruleof three, to bring out square after all his practice2 1314 COLONEL Crockett'son the Post Office accounts and the public lands toboot.I have been told that there was one Shakspearemore than two hundred years ago, who was broughtup a hostler, but finding it a dull business, took toWriting plays, and made as great a stir in his timeas I do at present; which will go to show, that oneounce of the genuine horse sense is worth a poundof your book learning any day, and if a man isonly determined to go ahead, the more kicks hereceives in his breech the faster he will get on hisjourney.Finding it necessary to write another book, thatthe whole world may be made acquainted with mymovements, and to save myself the trouble of answeringall the questions that are poked at me, asif my own private business was the business of thenation, I set about the work, and offer the peopleanother proof of my capacity to write my ownmessages and state papers, should I be pitchedupon to run against the Little Flying Dutchman,a thing not unlikely from present appearances ;but somehow I feel rather dubious that my learningmay not make against me, as " the greatest and thebest" has set the example of writing his long rigmarolesby proxy, which I rather reckon is theeasiest plan.ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 15I begin this book on the 8th day of July, 1835,at Home, Weakly county, Tennessee. I havejust returned from a two weeks' electioneeringcanvass, and I have spoken every day to largeconcourse of people with my competitor. I havehim badly plagued, for he does not know as muchabout "the Government," the deposits, and theLittle Flying Dutchman, whose life I wrote, as Ican tell the people; and at times he is as muchbothered as a fly in a tar pot to get out of the mess.A candidate is often stumped in making stump-speeches.His name is Adam Huntsman ; he losta leg in an Indian fight, they say, during the lastwar, and the Government run him on the score ofhis military services. I tell him in my speechthat I have great hopes of writing one more book,and that shall be the second fall of Adam, for he ison the Eve of an almighty thrashing. He relishesthe joke about as much as a doctor does his ownphysic. I handle the administration without gloves,and I do believe I will double my competitor, if Ihave a fair shake, and he does not work like amole in the dark. Jacksonism is dying here fasterthan it ever sprung up, and I predict that "theGovernment" will be the most unpopular man, inone year more, that ever had any pretensions to thehigh place he now fills. Four weeks from COLONEL Crockett'smorrow will end the dispute in our elections, andif old Adam is not beaten out of his hunting shirtmy name isn't Crockett.While on the subject of election matters, I willjust relate a little anecdote, about myself, whichwill show the people to the east, how we managethese things on the frontiers. It was when I firstrun for Congress; I was then in favour of the Hero,for he had chalked out his course so sleek in hisletter to the Tennessee legislature, that, like SamPatch, says I, " there can be no mistake in him,'^and so I went ahead. No one dreamt about themonster and the deposits at that time, and so, asI afterward found, many, like myself, were takenin by these fair promises, which were worth about"as much as a flash in the pan when you have a fairshot at a fat bear.But I am losing sight of my story. — swell, Istarted off to the Cross Roads, dressed in my huntingshirt, and my rifle on my shoulder. Many ofour constituents had assembled there to get a tasteof the quality of the candidates at grating. JobSnelling, a gander-shanked Yankee, who had beencaught somewhere about Plymouth Bay, and beenshipped to the west with a cargo of cod fish andrum, erected a large shantee, and set up shop forthe occasion. A large posse of the voters hadADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 17assembled before I arrived, and my opponent hadalready made considerable headway with hisspeechifying and his treating, when they spied meabout a rifle shot from the camp, sauntering alongas if I was not a party in the business. " Therecomes Crockett," cried one. " Let us hear thecolonel," cried another, and so I mounted thestump that had been cut down for the occasion,and began to bush whack in the most approved-style.I had not been up long before there was such anuproar in the crowd that I could not hear my ownvoice, and some of my constituents let me knows,that they could not listen to me on such a dry subjectas the welfare of the nation, until they hadsomething to drink, and that I must treat 'em.Accordingly I jumped down from the rostrum,and led the way to the shantee, followed by myconstituents, shouting, "Huzza for Crockett," and^* Crockett for ever !"When we entered the shantee. Job was busydealing out his rum in a style that showed he wasmaking a good day's work of it, and I called for aquart of the best, but the crooked critur returnedno other answer than by pointing at a board overthe bar, on which he had chalked in large letters,'fay to-day and trust to-morrow,''^ Now that2*18 COLONEL Crockett'sidea brought me all up standing ; it was a sort ofcornering in which there was no back out, forready money in the west, in those times, was theshyest thing in all nature, and it was most particularlyshy with me on that occasion.The voters, seeing my predicament, fell off tothe other side, and I was left deserted and alone,as the Government will be, when he no longer hasany offices to bestow. I saw, plain as day, thatthe tide of popular opinion was against me, andthat, unless I got some rum speedily, I should Iosqmy election as sure as there are snakes in Virgin,and it must be done soon, or even burnt brandywouldn't save me. So I walked away from theshantee, but in another guess sort from the way Ientered it, for on this occasion I had no train afterme, and not a voice shouted "Huzza for Crockett."Popularity sometimes depends on a very smallmatter indeed ; in this particular it was worth aquart of New England rum, and no more.Well, knowing that a crisis was at hand, I struckinto the woods with my rifle on my shoulder, mybest friend in time of need, and as good fortunewould have it, I had not been out more than aquarter of an hour before I treed a fat coon, and inthe pulling of a trigger he lay dead at the root ofthe tree. I soon whipped his hairy jacket off hisADVENTURES IN TEXAS. , 19back, and again bent my way towards the shantee,and walked up to the bar, but not alone, for thistime I had half a dozen of my constituents at myheels. I threw down the coon skin upon thecounter, and called for a quart, and Job, thoughbusy in dealing out rum, forgot to point at hischalked rules and regulations, for he knew that acoon was as good a legal tender for a quart, in thewest, as a New York shilling, any day in the year.My constituents now flocked about me, and criedHuzza for Crockett," " Crockett for ever," andfinding that the tide had taken a turn, I told themseveral yarns, to get them in a good humour, andhaving soon despatched the value of the coon, Iwent out and mounted the stump, without opposition,and a clear majority of the voters followed meto hear what I had to offer for the good of the nation.Before I was half through, one of my constituentsmoved that they would hear the balanceof my speech, after they had washed down the firstpart with some more of Job Snelling's extract ofcornstalk and molasses, and the question being put,it was carried unanimously. It wasn't considerednecessary to call the yeas and nays, so we adjournedto the shantee, and on the way I began to reckonthat the fate of the nation pretty much dependedupon my shooting another coon.20 COLONEL CROCKETT SWhile standing at the bar, feeling sort of bashfulwhile Job's rules and regulations stared me in theface, I cast down my eyes, and discovered one endof the coon skin sticking; between the logs thatsupported the bar. Job had slung it there in thehurry of business. I gave it a sort of quick jerk,and it followed my hand as natural as if I had beenthe rightful owner. I slapped it on the counter,and Job, little dreaming that he was barking up thewrong tree, shoved along another bottle, which myconstituents quickly disposed of with great goodhumour, for some of them saw the trick, and thenwe withdrew to the rostrum to discuss the affairsof the nation.I don't know how it was, but the voters soonbecame dry again, and nothing would do, but wemust adjourn to the shantee, and as luck wouldhave it, the coon skin was still sticking betweenthe logs, as if Job had flung it there on purpose totempt me. I was not slow in raising it to thecounter, the rum followed of course, and I wish Imay be shot, if I didn't, before the day was over,get ten quarts for the same identical skin, and froma fellow too, who in those parts was considered assharp as a steel trap, and as bright as a pewterbutton.This joke secured me my election, for it soonADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 21circulated like smoke among my constituents, andthey allowed, with one accord, that the man whocould get the whip hand of Job Snelling in fairtrade, could outwit Old Nick himself, and was thereal grit for them in Congress. Job was by nomeans popular; he boasted of always being wideawake, and that any one who could take him inwas free to do so, for he came from a stock thatsleeping or waking had always one eye open, andthe other not more than half closed. The wholefamily were geniuses. His father was the inventorof wooden nutmegs, by which Job said he mighthave made a fortune, if he had only taken out apatent and kept the business in his own hands; hismother Patience manufactured the first white oakpumpkin seeds of the mammoth kind, and turneda pretty penny the first season; and his aunt Prudencewas the first to discover that corn husks,steeped in tobacco water, would make as handsomeSpanish wrappers as ever came from Havana, andthat oak leaves would answer all the purposes ofLing, for no one would discover the differenceexcept the man who smoked them, and then itwould be too late to make a stir about it. Jobhimself bragged of having made some useful discoveries;the most profitable of which was the artof conversing mahogany sawdust into cayenne22 COLONEL Crockett'spepper, which he said was a profitable and safebusiness ; for the people have been so long accustomedto having dust thrown in their eyes,that there wasn't much danger of being found out.The way I got to the blind side of the Yankeemerchant was pretty generally known before theelection day, and the result was, that my opponentmight as well have whistled jigs to a milestone asattempt to beat up for votes in that district. Ibeat him out and out, quite back into the old year,and there was scarce enough left of him, after thecanvass was over, to make a small grease spot. Hedisappeared without even leaving as much as amark behind ; and such will be the fate of AdamHuntsman, if there is a fair fight and no gouging.After the election was over, I sent Snelling theprice of the rum, but took good care to keep thefact from the knowledge of my constituents. Jobrefused the money, and sent me word, that it didhim good to be taken in occasionally, as it servedto brighten his ideas; but I afterwards learnt thatwhen he found out the trick that had been playedupon him, he put all the rum I had ordered in hisbill against my opponent, who, being elated withthe speeches he had made on the affairs of the nation,could not descend to examine into the particularsof the bill of a vender of rum in the small way.ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 23CHAPTER II.August 11,1835. I AM now at home in Weaklycounty. My canvass is over, and the result isknown. Contrary to all expectation, I am beatentwo hundred and thirty votes, from the best informationI can get; and in this instance, I may say,bad is the best. My mantle has fallen upon theshoulders of Adam, and I hope he may wear itwith becoming dignity, and never lose sight of thewelfare of the nation, for the purpose of elevatinga few designing politicians to the head of the heap.The rotten policy pursued by " the Government"cannot last long; it will either work its own downfall,or the downfall of the republic, soon, unlessthe people tear the seal from their eyes, and beholdtheir danger time enough to avert the ruin.I wish to inform the people of these UnitedStates what I had to contend against, trusting thatthe expose I shall make will be a caution to thepeople not to repose too much power in the handsof a single man, though he should be " the greatestand the best." — I had, as I have already said, Mr.24 COLONEL Crockett'sAdam Huntsman for my competitor, aided by thepopularity of both Andrew Jackson and governorCarroll and the whole strength of the Union Bankat Jackson. I have been told by good men, thatsome of the managers of the bank on the days ofthe election were heard say, that they would givetwenty-five dollars a vote for votes enough to electMr. Huntsman. This is a pretty good price for avote, and in ordinary times a round dozen mightbe got for the money.I have always believed, since Jackson removedthe deposits, that his whole object was to placethe treasury where he could use it to influenceelections; and I do believe he is determined tosacrifice every dollar of the treasury to make theLittle Flying Dutchman his successor. If this isnot my creed I wish I may be shot. For fourteenyears since I have been a candidate I never sawsuch means used to defeat any candidate, as wereput in practice against me on this occasion. Therewas a disciplined band of judges and officers tohold the elections at almost every poll. Of lateyears they begin to find out that there's an advantagein this, even in the west. Some officers heldthe election, and at the same time had nearly allthey were worth bet on the election. Such judgesI should take it are like the handle of a jug, all onADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 25I one side; and I am told it doesn't require muchI schooling to make the tally list correspond to aI notch with the ballot box, provided they who makeupthe returns have enough loose tickets in theirbreeches pockets. I have no doubt that I wascompletely recalled out of my election, and I doregret that duty to myself and to my countrycompels me to expose such villany.Well might Governor Poindexter exclaim —Ah ! my country, what degradation thou hastfallen into !" Andrew Jackson was, during myelection canvass, franking the extra Globe with aprospectus in it to every post office in this district,and upon one occasion he had my mileage and payas a member drawn up and sent to this district, toone of his minions, to have it published just a fewdays before the election. This is what I call smallpotatoes and few of a hill. He stated that I hadcharged mileage for one thousand miles and thatit was but seven hundred and fifty miles, and heldout the idea that I had taken pay for the samemileage that Mr. Fitzgerald had taken, when itwas well known that he charged thirteen hundredmiles from here to Washington, and he and myselfboth live in the same county. It is somewhatremarkable how this fact should have escaped thekeen eye of " the Government."26 COLONEL CricketsThe General's pet, Mr. Grundy, charged for onethousand miles from Nashville to Washington, andit was sanctioned by the legislature, I suppose becausehe would huzza! for Jackson; and because Ithink proper to refrain from buzzing until he goesout of office, when I shall give a screamer, that willbe heard from the Mississippi to the Atlantic, ormy name's not Crockett — for this reason he cameout openly to elections against me. I now say,that the oldest man living never heard of the Presidentof a great nation to come down to open electioneeringfor his successor. It is treating thenation as if it was the property of a single individual,and he had the right to bequeath it to whomhe pleased — the same as a patch of land for whichhe had the patent. It is plain to be seen that thepoor superannuated old man is surrounded by a setof horse leeches, who will stick to him while thereis a drop of blood to be got, and their maws are socapacious that they will never get full enough todrop off. The Land office, the Post office, and theTreasury itself, may all be drained, and we shallstill find them craving for more. They use him topromote their own private interest, and for all hissharp sight, he remains as blind as a dead lion tothe jackals who are tearing him to pieces. In fact,I do believe he is a perfect tool in their hands,ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 27ready to be used to answer any purpose to promoteeither their interest or gratify their ambition.I come within two hundred and thirty votes ofbeing elected, notwithstanding I had to contendagainst "the greatest and the best," with the wholepower of the Treasury against me. The LittleFlying Dutchman will no doubt calculate uponhaving a true game cock in Mr. Huntsman, but ifhe doesn't show them the White feather before the.first session is over, I agree never to be set downfor a prophet, that's all. I am gratified that Ihave spoken the truth to the people of my districtregardless of consequences. I would not becompelled to bow down to the idol for a seat inCongress during life. I have never known whatit was to sacrifice my own judgment to gratifyany party, and I have no doubt of the time beingclose at hand when I will be rewarded for lettingmy tongue speak what my heart thinks. I havesuffered myself to be politically sacrificed to savemy country from ruin and disgrace, and if I amnever again elected, I will have the gratification toknow that I have done my duty. — Thus much Isay in relation to the manner in which my downfallwas effected, and in laying it before the public,I take the responsibility." I may add in thewords of the man in the play, " Crockett's occupation'sgone."28 , COLONEL "CROCKETT STwo weeks and more have elapsed since I wrotethe foregoing account of my defeat, and I confessthe thorn still rankles, not so much on my ownaccount as the nation's, for I had set my heart onfollowing up the travelling deposits until theyshould be fairly gathered to their proper nest,like young chickens, for I am aware of the verminthat are on the constant look-out to pounce uponthem, like a cock at a blackberry, which they wouldhave done long since, if it had not been for a fewsuch men as Webster, Clay, and myself. It is myparting advice, that this matter be attended to withoutdelay, for before long the little chickens, willtake wing, and even the powerful wand of themagician of Undertook will be unable to pointout the course they have flown.As my country no longer requires my services,I have made up my mind to go to Texas. Mylife has been one of danger, toil, and privation, butthese difficulties I had to encounter at a time whenI considered it nothing more than right good sportto surmount them ; but now I start anew upon rayown hook, and God only grant that it may bestrong enough to support the weight that may behung upon it. I have a new row to hoe, a longand a rough one, but come what will I'll go ahead.A few days ago I went to a meeting of my con-adventuresIN TEXAS. 29stituents. My appetite for politics was at one timejust about as sharp set as a saw mill, but late eventshas given me something of a surfeit, — more than Icould well digest ; still habit they say is secondnature, and so I went, and gave them a piece of mymind touching " the Government" and the succession,by way of a codicil to what I have often saidbefore.I told them to keep a sharp look-out for the deposited,for it requires an eye as insinuating as adissecting knife to see what safety there is inplacing one million of the public funds in somelittle country shaving shop with no more than onehundred thousand dollars capital. This bank, wewill just suppose, without being too particular, isin the neighbourhood of some of the public lands,where speculators, who have every thing to gainand nothing to lose, swarm like crows about carrion.They buy the United States' land upon alarge scale, get discounts from the aforesaid shavingshop, which are made upon a large scale also, uponthe United States' funds ; they pay the whole purchasemoney with these discounts, and get a cleartitle to the land, so that when the shaving shopcomes to make a Flemish account of her transactions," the Government" will discover that he hasnot only lost the original deposite, but a large body3*30 COLONEL Crockett'sof the public lands to boot. So much for takingthe responsibility.I told them that they were hurrying along abroad M^Adamized road to make the Little FlyingDutchman the successor, but they would no sooneraccomplish that end, than they would be obliged tobuckle to, and drag the Juggernaut through manynarrow and winding and out-of-the-way paths, andhub deep in the mire. That they reminded meof the Hibernian, who bet a glass of grog with ahod carrier, that he could not carry him in his hodup a ladder to the third story of a new building.He seated himself in the hod, and the other mountedthe ladder with his load upon his shoulder.He ascended to the second story pretty steadily,but as he approached the third his strength failedhim, he began to totter, and Pat was so delightedat the prospect of winning his bet, that he clappedhis hands and shouted, " By the powers the grog'smine," and he made such a stir in the hod, that Iwish I may be shot if he didn't win it, but hebroke his neck in the fall. And so I told my constituentsthat they might possibly gain the victory,but in doing so, they would ruin their country.I told them moreover of my services, prettystraight up and down, for a man may be allowedto speak on such subjects when others are about toADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 31forget them ; and I also told them of the mannerin which I had been knocked down and draggedout, and that I did not consider it a fair fight anyhowthey could fix it. I put the ingredients inthe cup pretty strong I tell you, and I concludedmy speech by telling them that 1 was done withpolitics for the present, and that they might all gotohell, and I would go to Texas.When I returned home I felt a sort of castdown at the change that had taken place in myfortunes, and sorrow, it is said, will make even anoyster feel poetical. I never tried my hand at thatsort of writing, but on this particular occasion suchwas my state of feeling, that I began to fancy myselfinspired ; so I took pen in hand, and as usual Iwent ahead. When I had got fairly through, mypoetry looked as zigzag as a worm fence ; the lineswouldn't tally, no how ; so I showed them to PelegLongfellow, who has a first-rate reputation with usfor that sort of writing, having some years agomade a carrier's address for the Nashville Banner,and Peleg lopped off some lines, and stretched outothers ; but I wish I may be shot if I don't rather•think he has made it worse than it was when Iplaced it in his hands. It being my first, and nodoubt last piece of poetry, I will print it in thisplace, as it will serve to express my feelings on32 COLONEL Crockett'sleaving my home, my neighbours, and friends and ^|country, for a strange land, as fully as I could inplain prose.Farewell to the mountains whose mazes to meWere more beautiful far than Eden could be ;No fruit was forbidden, but Nature had spreadHer bountiful board, and her children were fed. .The hills were our garners — our herds wildly grew,And Nature was shepherd and husbandman too.I felt like a monarch, yet thought like a man,As I thank'd the Great Giver, and worshipp'd his plan.The home I forsake where my offspring arose :The graves I forsake where my children repose.The home I redeem'd from the savage and wild ;The home I have loved as a father his child ; ^The corn that I planted, the fields that I clear'd,The flocks that I raised, and the cabin I rear'd ;The wife of my bosom — Farewell to ye all !In the land of the stranger I rise — or I fall.Farewell to my country ! — I fought for thee well,When the savage rush'd forth like the demons from hell.In peace or in war I have stood by thy side — ■My country, for thee I have lived — would have died !But I am cast ofl^ — my career now is run.And I wander abroad like the prodigal son —Where the wild savage roves, and the broad prairiesspread.The fallen — despised — will again go ahead !ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 33CHAPTER HI.In my last chapter I made mention of my determinationto cut and quit the States until such timeas honest and independent men should again worktheir way to the head of the heap ; and as I shouldprobably have some idle time on hand before thatstate of affairs shall be brought about, I promisedto give the Texians a helping hand, on the highroadto freedom. — Well, I was always fond of havingmy spoon in a mess of that kind, for if there isany thing in this world particularly worth livingfor, it is freedom ; any thing that would renderdeath to a brave man particularly pleasant, it isfreedom.I am now on my journey, and have alreadytoothed along as far as Little Rock on the Arkansas,about one hundred and twenty-five miles from themouth. I had promised to write another book,expecting, when I made that promise, to write aboutpolitics, and use up " the Governments his successor,the removal of the deposits, and so on,matters and things that come as natural to me as34 COLONEL Crockett'sbear hunting ; but being recalled out of my election,I am taken all aback, and I must now strikeinto a new path altogether. Still I will redeem mypromise, and make a book, and it shall be aboutmy adventures in Texas, hoping that my friends,Messrs. Webster and Clay and Biddle, will keep asharp look-out upon ^'' the Governments duringmy absence. — I am told that every author ofdistinction writes a book of travels now-a-days.My thermometer stood somewhat below thefreezing point as I left my wife and children ; stillthere was some thawing about the eyelids, a thingthat had not taken place since I first ran away frommy father's house when a thoughtless vagabondboy. I dressed myself in a clean hunting shirt,put on a new fox skin cap with the tail hangingbehind, took hold of my rifle Betsey, which all theworld knows was presented to me by the patrioticcitizens of Philadelphia, as a compliment for myunflinching opposition to the tyrannic measures ofthe Government," and thus equipped I started off,with a heavy heart, for Mill's Point, to take steamboatdown the Mississippi, and go ahead in a newworld.While walking along, and thinking whether itwas altogether the right grit to leave my poorcountry at a time she most needed my services, 1ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 35came to a clearing, and I was slowly rising a slope,when I was startled by loud, profane, and boisterousvoices, (as loud and profane as have been heardin the White House of late years,) which seemedto proceed from a thick covert of undergrowth,about two hundred yards in advance of me, andabout one hundred to the right of my road.You kin, kin you ?"Yes, I kin, and am able to do it ! Boo-oo-oo! —0! wake snakes, and walk your chalks! Brimstoneand-fire! Don't hold me, Nick Stoval!The fight's made up, and let's go at it. mysoul if I don't jump down his throat and gallopevery chattering out of him, before you can say'quit'"Now, Nick, don't hold him ! List let the wildcatcome, and I'll tame him. Ned '11 see me afair fight — won't you, Ned ?"'" ! yes, I'll see you a fair fight; blast my oldshoes if I don't."That's sufficient, as Tom Haynes said, whenhe saw the elephant. Now let him come."Thus they went on, with countless oaths interspersed,which I dare not even hint at, and withmuch that I could not distinctly hear.In mercy's name ! thought I, what a band ofruffians is at work here. I quickened my gait, and36 COLONEL CROCKETT Shad come nearly opposite to the thick grovewhence the noise proceeded, when my eye caughtindistinctly, through the foliage of the dwarf oaksand hickories that intervened, glimpses of a manormen, who seemed to be in a violent struggle ;and I could occasionally catch those deep drawnemphatic oaths, which men in conflict utter, whenthey deal blows. I hurried to the spot, but beforeI reached it, I saw the combatants come to theground, and after a short struggle, I saw the uppermostone (for I could not see the other) makea heavy plunge with both his thumbs, and at thesame instant I heard a cry in the accent of keenesttorture, "Enough ! my eye is out VI stood completely horror-struck for a moment.The accomplices in the brutal deed had all fled atmy approach, at least I supposed so, for they werenot to be seen.*' Now blast your corn-shocking soul," said thevictor, a lad about eighteen, as he rose from theground, " come cutter your shines about me again,next time I come to the Court House, will you! —Get your owl-eye in again if you can."At this moment he saw me for the first time.He looked as though he couldn't help it, and wasfor making himself particularly scarce, when Icalled to him, " Come back, you brute, and assist meADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 37in relieving the poor oritur you have ruined forever.'^Upon this rough salutation, he sort of collectedhimself, and with a taunting curl of the nose hereplied, " You needn't kick before you're spurr'd.There an't nobody there, nor can't been other.I was just seen' how I could a' fout." So sayinghe bounded to his plough, which stood in the cornerof the fence about fifty yards from the battleground.Now would any man in his senses believe that'a rational being could make such a darned fool ofhimself? but I wish I may be shot, if his reportwas not as true as the last Post office report, everyword, and a little more satisfactory. All that Ihad heard and seen was nothing more nor less thanwhat is called a rehearsal of a knock-down anddrag-out fight, in which the young man hadplayed all the parts for his own amusement, andby way of keeping his hand in. I went to theground from which he had risen, and there was theprints of his two thumbs, plunged up to the ballsin the mellow earth, about the distance of a man'seyes apart, and the ground around was broken upasif two stags had been engaged upon it.As I resumed my journey I laughed outright atthis adventure, for it reminded me of Andrew38 COLONEL Crockett'sJackson's attack upon the United States Bank.He had magnified it into a monster, and then begunto rip and tear and swear and gouge, until hethought he had the monster on its back; and whenthe fight was over, and he got up to look about forhis enemy, he could find none for the soul of him,for his enemy was altogether in his heated imagination.These fighting characters are never atpeace, unless they have something to quarrel with,and rather than have no fight at all they willtrample on their own shadows.The day I arrived at Little Rock, I no soonerquit the steamer than I streaked it straight aheadfor the principal tavern, which is nothing to boastof, nohow, unless a man happens to be like themember of Congress from the south, who was convertedto Jacksonism, and then made a speech aslong as the longitude about his political honesty.Some, men it seems, take a pride in saying a greatdeal about nothing — like windmills, their tonguesmust be going whether they have any grist to grindor not. This is all very well in Congress, whereevery member is expected to make a speech to lethis constituents know that some things can be doneas well as others ; but I set it down as being ratheran imposition upon good nature to be compelled tolisten, without receiving: the consideration of ei.shtADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 39dollars per day, besides mileage, as we do in Congress.Many members will do nothing else fortheir pay but listen, day in and day out, and I wishI may be shot, if they do not earn every penny ofit, provided they don't sleep, and Benton or littleIsaac Hill will spin their yarns but once in a week.No man who has not tried it can imagine whatdreadful hard work it is to listen. Splitting gumlogs in the dog days is child's play to it. I'vetried both, and give the preference to the gumlogs.Well, as I said, I made straight for the tavern,and as I drew nigh, I saw a considerable crowdassembled before the door. So, thought I, theyhave heard that Colonel Crockett intended to paya visit to their settlement, and they have alreadygot together to receive him in due form. I confessI felt a little elated at the idea, and commenced ransackingthe lumber room of my brain, to find someoneof my speeches that I might furbish up for theoccasion; and then I shouldered my Betsey, straightenedmyself, and walked up to the door, chargedto the muzzle, and ready to let fly.But strange as it may seem, no one took anymorenotice of me, than if I had been Martin VanBuren,orDick Johnson, the celebrated wool grower.This took me somewhat aback, and I inquired what40 COLONEL Crockett'swas the meaning of the gathering; and I learnt thata travelling showman had just arrived, and wasabout to exhibit for the first time the wonderfulfeats of Harlequin, and Punch and Judy, to theimpatient natives. It was drawing towards nightfall,and expectation was on tiptoe ; the childrenwere clinging to their mother's aprons, with theirchubby faces dimpled with delight, and asking'^ What is it like ? when will it begin ?" and similarquestions, while the women, as all good wives arein duty bound to do, appealed to their husbandsfor information; but the call for information wasnot responded to in this instance, as is sometimesthe case in Congress ; — their husbands understoodthe matter about as well as " the Government" didthe Post office accounts.The showman at length made his appearance,with a countenance as wo-begone as that of " theGovernment" when he found his batch of dirtynominations rejected by the Senate, and mentionedthe impossibility that any performance should takeplace that evening, as the lame fiddler had overchargedhis head, and having but one leg at best, itdid not require much to destroy his equilibrium.And as all the world knows, a puppet show withouta fiddle is like roast pork and no apple sauce.This piece of intelligence was received with a gene-adventuresIN TEXAS. 41oral murmur of dissatisfaction; and such was the indianation of his majesty, the sovereign people, at beingthwarted in his rational amusements, that, accordingto the established custom in such cases madeand provided, there were some symptoms of a dispositionto kick up a row, break the show, andfinish the amusements of the day by putting Lynch'slaw in practice upon the poor showman. There isnothing like upholding the dignity of the people,and so Lieut. Randolph thought, when with hiscowardly and sacrilegious hand he dared to profanethe anointed nose of " the Government," andbring the whole nation into contempt. If I hadbeen present, may disgrace follow my career inTexas, if I wouldn't have become a whole hogJackson man upon the spot, for the time being, forthe nose of " the Government" should be held^ more sacred than any other member, that it maybekept in good order to smell out all the corruptionthat is going forward — not a very pleasantoffice, and by no means a sinecure. ~The indignant people, as I have already said,were about to exercise their reserved rights uponthe unlucky showman, and Punch and Judy too,when, as good fortune would have it, an old gentlemandrove up to the tavern door in a sulky,with a box of books and pamphlets of his4*42 COLONEL Crockett'scomposition — (for he was an author like myselfbeing able to vouch for the moral tendency ofevery page he disposed of. Very few booksellerscan do the same, I take it. His linen and flannels,which he had washed in the brooks by the wayside,were hanging over the back of the crazyvehicle to dry, while his own snuffy countenancehad long bid defiance to sun, wind, and water tobleach it.His jaded beast stopped instinctively upon seeinga crowd, while the old man remained seated forsome moments before he could recall his thoughtsfrom the world of imagination, where they wheregleaning for the benefit of mankind. He looked,it must be confessed, more like a lunatic than amoral lecturer; but being conscious of his own rectitude,he could not conceive how his outwardAdam could make him ridiculous in the eyesof another ; but a fair outside is every thing to theworld. The tulip flower is highly prized, althoughindebted for its beauty to the corruption engenderedat the root : and so it is with man.We occasionally meet with one possessing sufficientphilosophy to look upon life as a pilgrimage,and not as a mere round of pleasure : who, treatingthis world as a place of probation, is ready to encountersuffering, and not expecting the sunshineADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 4Sof prosperity, escapes being overclouded by disappointment.Such is the character of the oldpreacher, whose ridiculous appearance in the eyesof the thoughtless and ignorant is only exceededby the respect and veneration of those who arecapable of estimating his real worth. I learnt thathe Ws^s educated for the church, but not being ableto obtain a living, he looked upon the whole earthas his altar, and all mankind as his flock. He waspenniless, and therefore had no predilection forthis or that section of the globe, for wherever hemight be, his journey of probation still continued,and in every spot he found that human nature wasthe same. His life was literally that of pilgrim. Hewas an isolated being, though his heart overflowedwith the milk of human kindness ; for being indiscriminatein his affection, very few valued it. Hewho commences the world with a general love formankind, and suffers his feelings to dictate to hisreason, runs a great hazard of reaping a plentifulharvest of ingratitude, and of closing a tedious existencein misanthropy. But it was not so withthe aged preacher.Being unable to earn his bread as an itinerantlecturer, — for in those cases it is mostly poor preachand worse pay — he turned author, and wrote historieswhich contained but little information, and44 COLONEL Crockett'ssermons which, like many others, had nothing toboast of, beyond being strictly orthodox. He succeededin obtaining a sulky, and a horse to drag it,by a plea of mercy, which deprived the hounds oftheir food, and with these he travelled over thewestern states, to dispose of the product of hisbrain ; and when poverty was deprived of thebenefit of his labour, in the benevolence of hisheart he would deliver a moral lecture, which hadthe usual weight of homilies on this subject. Alecture is the cheapest thing that a man can bestowin charity, and many of our universal philanthropistshave made the discovery.The landlord now made his appearance, and gavea hearty welcome to the reverend traveller, andshaking him by the hand, added, that he nevercame more opportunely in all his life.*^ Opportunely !" exclaimed the philosopher.Yes," rejoined the other ; " you have a heartand head that labour for the benefit of us poormortals''! true, an excellent market for my pamphlets,"replied the other, at the same time beginningto open the trunk that lay before him.You misunderstand me," added the landlord."A poor showman, with a sick wife and fivechildren, has arrived from New Orleans—JADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 45"I will sell my pamphlets to relieve their wants,and endeavour to teach them resignation."He exhibits to-night in my large room : youknow the room, sir — I let him have it gratis."'' You are an honest fellow. I will witness hisshow, and add my mite to his assistance."But," replied the innkeeper, " the lame fiddleris fond of the bottle, and is now snoring in thehayloft."Degrading vice !" exclaimed the old man, andtaking " God's Revenge against Drunkenness"from the trunk, and standing erect in the sulky,commenced reading to his astonished audience.The innkeeper interrupted him by observing thatthe homily would not fill the empty purse of thepoor showman, and unless a fiddler could be obtained,he must depend on charity, or go supperlessto bed. And moreover, the people, irritated attheir disappointment, had threatened to tear theshow to pieces.But what's to be done ?" demanded the parson.Your reverence shakes an excellent bow,"added the innkeeper, in an insinuating tone.I ! " exclaimed the parson ; " I fiddle for apuppet show !"Not for the puppet show, but for the sick wifeand five hungry children."46 COLONEL Crockett'sA tear started into the eyes of the old man, asheadded in an undertone, " If I could be concealedfrom the audience ~"Nothing easier," cried the other ; " we willplace you behind the scenes, and no one will everdream that you fiddled at a puppet show."The matter being thus settled, they entered thehouse, and shortly afterward the sound of a fiddlesqueaking like a giggling girl, tickled into ecstacies,restored mirth and good humour to the disappointedassemblage, who rushed in, helter-skelter, toenjoy the exhibition.All being seated, and silence restored, theywaited in breathless expectation for the rising ofshe curtain. At length Harlequin made his appearance,and performed astonishing feats of activityon the slack rope ; turning somerset backwardand forward, first on this side, and then on that,with as much ease as if he had been a politician allhis life, — the parson sawing vigorously on hisfiddle all the time. Punch followed, and set theaudience in a roar with his antic tricks and jests ;but when Judy entered with her broomstick, theburst of applause was as great as ever I heard bestowedupon one of Benton's slang-whang speechesin Congress, .and I rather think quite as w^Umerited.ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 47As the plot thickened, the music of the parsonbecame more animated ; but unluckily in the warmthof his zeal to do justice to his station, his elbowtouched the side scene, which fell to the floor, andexposed him, working away in all the ecstacies oflittle Isaac Hill, while reading one of his long orationsabout things in general to empty benches.No ways disconcerted by the accident, the parsonseized upon it as a fine opportunity of conveyinga lesson to those around him, at the same time thathe might benefit a fellow mortal. He immediatelymounted the chair upon which he was seated, andaddressed the audience to the following effect : —^' Many of you have come here for amusement,and others no doubt to assist the poor man, who isthus struggling to obtain a subsistence for his sickwife and children. — Lo ! the moral of a puppetshow ! — But is this all ; has he not rendered untoyou your money's worth ? This is not charity.If you are charitably inclined, here is an objectfully deserving of it." He preached upon this textfor full half an hour, and concluded with takinghis hat to collect assistance from his hearers forthe friendless showman and his family.The next morning, when his sulky was broughtto the door, the showman and his wife came out48 COLONEL CROCEETT^Sto thank their benefactor. The old man placedhis trunk of pamphlets before him; and proceededon his pilgrimage, the little children followinghim through the village with bursts of gratitude.ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 49CHAPTER IV.The public mind having been quieted by theexhibition of the puppet show, and allowed to returnto its usual channel, it was not long before thegood people of Little Rock began to inquire whatdistinguished stranger had come among them ; andlearning that it was neither more nor less than theI identical Colonel Crockett, the champion of thefugitive deposits, than straight they went aheadat getting up another tempest in a teapot j and Iwish I may be shot, if I wasn't looked upon asalmost as great a sight as Punch and Judy.Nothing would answer but I must accept of aninvitation to a public dinner. Now as public dinnershave become so common, that it is enough totake away the appetite of any man, who has a propersense of his own importance, to sit down andplay his part in the humbug business, I had madeup my mind to write a letter declining the honour,expressing my regret, and winding up with aflourish of trumpets about the patriotism of thecitizens of Little Rock, and all that sort of thing,50 COLONEL Crockett'swhen the landlord came in, and says he, " Colonel,just oblige me by stepping into the back yard amoment'sI followed the landlord in silence, twisting andturning over in my brain, all the while, what Ishould say in my letter to the patriotic citizens ofLittle Rock, who were bent on eating a dinner forthe good of their country ; when he conducted meto a shed in the yard, where I beheld, hanging up,a fine fat cub bear, several haunches of venison, awild turkey as big as a young ostrich, and smallgame too tedious to mention. " Well, Colonel,what do you think of my larder?" says he. "Fine!"says I ; "let us liquor." We walked back to thebar, I took a horn, and without loss of time I wroteto the committee, that I accepted of the invitationto a public dinner with pleasure, — that I wouldalways be found ready to serve my country eitherby eating or fasting ; and that the honour the patrioticcitizens of Little Rock had conferred uponme rendered it the proudest moment of my eventfullife. The chairman of the committee wasstanding by while I wrote the letter, which 1handed to him ; and so this important businesswas soon settled.As there was considerable time to be killed, orgot rid of in some way, before the dinner couldAdventures IN TEXAS. 51be cooked, it was proposed that we should go beyondthe village, and shoot at a mark, for they hadheard that I was a first-rate shot, and they wantedto see for themselves whether fame had not blownher trumpet a little too strong in my favour ; forsince she had represented " the Government" asbeing a first-rate statesman, and Colonel Benton asafirst-rate orator, they could not receive such reportswithout proper allowance, as Congress thoughtof the Post office report.Well, I shouldered my Betsey, and she is justabout as beautiful a piece as ever came out of Philadelphia,and I went out to the shooting ground,followed by all the leading men in Little Rock,and that was a clear majority of the town, for it isremarkable that there are always more leadingmen in small villages than there are followers.I was in prime order. My eye was as keen asalizard, and my nerves were as steady and unshakenas the political course of Henry Clay; so atit we went, the distance one hundred yards. Theprincipal marksmen, and such as had never beenbeat, led the way, and there was some pretty fairshooting, I tell you. At length it came to my turn.I squared myself, raised my beautiful Betsey to myshoulder, took deliberate aim, and smack I sent thebullet right into the centre of the bull's eye.52 COLONEL Crockett'sThere's no mistake in Betsey said I, in a sorof careless way, as they were all looking at thetarget, sort of amazed, and not at all over pleased."That's a chance shot. Colonel's said one whohad the reputation of being the best marksman inthose parts."Not as much chance as there was,'^ said I,when Dick Johnson took his carrie for betterfor worse. I can do it five times out of six anyday in the week." This I said in as confident atone as " the Government" did when he protestedthat he forgave Colonel Benton for shooting him,and he was now the best friend he had in theworld. I knew it was not altogether as correct asit might be, but when a man sets about going thebig figure, halfway measures won't answer no how;and " the greatest and the best" had set me theexample, that swaggering will answer a good purposeat times.They now proposed that we should have a secondtrial ; but knowing that I had nothing to gain, andevery thing to lose, I was for backing out andfighting shy; but there was no let-off, for the cockof the village, though whipped, determined not tostay whipped ; so to it again we went. They werenow put upon their mettle, and they fired muchbetter than the first time ; and it was what mightADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 53be called pretty sharp shooting. When it came tomy turn, I squared myself, and turning to theprime shot, I gave him a knowing nod, by v^^ay ofshowing my confidence ; and says I, " Look-out forthe bull's eye, stranger." I blazed away, and Iwish I may be shot if I didn't miss the target.They examined it all over, and could fid neitherhair nor hide of my bullet, and pronounced it adead miss ; when says I, " Stand aside and let melook, and I parent you I get on the right trail ofthe critter." They stood aside, and I examinedthe bull's eye pretty particular, and at length criedout, " Here it is ; there is no snakes if it hasn'tfollowed the very track of the other." They saidit was utterly impossible, but I insisted on theirsearching the hole, and I agreed to be stuck up asamark myself, if they did not find two bulletsthere. They searched for my satisfaction, and sureenough it all came out just as I had told them ; forI had picked up a bullet that had been fired, andstuck it deep into the hole, without any one perceivingit. They were all perfectly satisfied, thatfame had not made too great a flourish of trumpetswhen speaking of me as a marksman ; and they allsaid they had enough of shooting for that day, andthey moved, that we adjourn to the tavern andliquor.5*54 COLONEL Crockett'sWe had scarcely taken drinks round before thelandlord announced that dinner was ready, and Iwas escorted into the dining room by the com-mittens to the tune of " See the conquering herocomes' played upon a drum, which had beenbeaten until it got a fit of the sullen, and refused tosend forth any sound ; and it was accompanied bythe wearing of a fife that was sadly troubled witha spell of the asthma. I was escorted into thedining room, I say, somewhat after the same fashionthat "the Government" was escorted into the differentcities when he made his northern tour ; theonly difference was, that I had no sycophants aboutme, but true hearted hospitable friends, for it waspretty well known that I had, for the present, abandonedall intention of running for the Presidencyagainst the Little Flying Dutchman.The dinner was first-rate. The bear meat, thevenison, and wild turkey would have tempted aman who had given over the business of eatingaltogether ; and every thing was cooked to thenotch precisely. The enterprising landlord didhimself immortal honour on this momentous occasion; and the committee, thinking that he meritedpublic thanks for his patriotic services, handed hisname to posterity to look at in the lasting columnsof the Little Rock Gazette ; and when our child-adventuresIN TEXAS. 55ren's children behold it, they will think of thepure patriots who sat down in good fellowship tofeast on the bear meat and venison ; and the enthusiasmthe occasion is calculated to awaken willinduce them to bless the patriot who, in a cause soglorious, spared no pains in cooking the dinner,and serving it in a becoming manner. — And thisis fame !The fragments of the meats being cleared off,we went through the customary evolution of drinkingthirteen regular toasts, after every one of whichour drum with the loose skin grumbled like an oldhorse with an empty stomach ; and our asthmaticfife squeaked like a stuck pig, a spirit-stirring tune,which we put off christening until we should cometo prepare our proceedings for posterity. The fifeappeared to have but one tune in it ; possibly itmought have had more, but the poor fifer, with allhis puffing and blowing, his too-tattooing, andshaking his head and elbow, could not, for the bodyand soul of him, get more than one out of it. Ifthe fife had had an extra tune to its name, martin itwouldn't have been quite so hide bound on suchan occasion, but have let us have it, good, bad orindifferent. We wasn't particular by no means.Having gone through with the regular toasts,the president of the day drank, " Our distinguished56 COLONEL Crockett'sguest, Col. Crockett' which called forth a prodigiousclattering all around the table, and I soonsaw that nothing would do, but I must get up andmake them a speech. I had no sooner elongatedmy outward Adam, than they at it again, with renewedvigour, which made me sort of feel that Iwas still somebody, though no longer a memberof Congress.In my speech I went over the whole history ofthe present administration ; took a long shot at theflying deposits, and gave an outline, a sort ofcharcoal sketch, of the political life of "the Government's"heir presumptive. I also let them knowhow I had been recalled out of my election, becauseI refused to bow down to the idol ; and as Isaw a number of young politicians around the table,I told them, that I would lay down a few rules fortheir guidance, which, if properly attended to, couldnot fail to lead them on the highway to distinctionand public honour. I told them, that I was an oldhand at the business, and as I was about to retirefor a time, I would give them a little instructiongratis, for I was up to all the tricks of the trade,though I had practised but few."Attend all public meetings," says I, "and getsome friend to move that you take the chair ; ifyou fail in this attempt, make a push to be appoint-adventuresIN TEXAS. 57cd secretary ; the proceedings of course will bepublished, and your name is introduced to thepublic. But should you fail in both undertakings,get two or three acquaintances, over a bottle ofwhisky, to pass some resolutions, no matter onwhat subject ; publish them even if you pay theprinter — it will answer the purpose of breakingI the ice, which is the main point in these matters.I Intrigue until you are elected an officer of the^ militia; this is the second step toward promotion,and can be accomplished with ease, as I know aninstance of an election being advertised, and no oneattending, the innkeeper at whose house it was tobe held, having a military turn, elected himselfcolonel of his regiment." Says I, "You may notaccomplish your ends with as little difficulty, butdo not be discouraged — Rome wasn't built in aday.If your ambition or circumstances compel youto serve your country, and earn three dollars a day,by becoming a member of the legislature, you mustfirst publicly avow that the constitution of thestate is a shackle upon free and liberal legislation ;and is, therefore, of as little use in the present enlightenedage, as an old almanac of the year inwhich the instrument was framed. There is policyin this measure, for by making the constitution a58 COLONEL Crockett'smere dead letter, your headlong proceedings willbe attributed to a bold and unshackled mind ;whereas, it might otherwise be thought they arosefrom sheer mulish ignorance. ' The Government'has set the example in his attack upon the constitutionof the United States, and who should fear tofollow where ' the Government' leads ?"When the day of election approaches, visit yourconstituents far and wide. Treat liberally, anddrink freely, in order to rise in their estimation,though you fall in your own. True, you may becalled a drunken dog by some of the clean shirt andsilk stocking gentry, but the real rough necks willstyle you a jovial fellow, — their votes are certain,and frequently count double. Do all you can toappear to advantage in the e3^es of the women.That's easily done — you have but to kiss and slabbertheir children, wipe their noses, and pat themon the head; this cannot fail to please their mothers,and you may rely on your business being done inthat quarter."Promise all that is asked," said I, "and more ifyou can think of any thing. Offer to build a bridgeor a church, to divide a country, create a batch ofnew offices, make a turnpike, or any thing theylike. Promises cost nothing, therefore deny nobodywho has a vote or sufficient influence to obtain one.ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 5!)Get up on all occasions, and sometimes on nooccasion at all, and make long-winded speeches,though composed of nothing else than wind — talkof your devotion to your country, your modestyand disinterestedness, or on any such fanciful subject.Rail against taxes of all kinds, office holders.,and bad harvest weather ; and wind up with aflourish about the heroes who fought and bled forour liberties in the times that tried men's souls.To be sure you run the risk of being considered abladder of wind, or an empty barrel ; but nevermind that, you will find enough of the samefraternity to keep you in countenance.If any charity be going forward, be at the topof it, provided it is to be advertised publicly ; ifnot, it isn't worth your while. None but a foolwould place his candle under a bushel on such anoccasion.These few directions," said I, " if properlyattended to, will do your business ; and when onceelected, why a fig for the dirty children, the promises,the bridges, the churches, the taxes, theoffices, and the subscriptions, for it is absolutelynecessary to forget all these before you can becomea thorough-going politician, and a patriot of thefirst water."My speech was received with three times three,60 COLONEL Crockett'sand all that; and we continued speechifying anddrinking until nightfall, when it was put to vote,that we would have the puppet show over again,which was carried nem. con. The showman set hiswires to work, just as "the Government" does themachinery in his big puppet show ; and we spenta delightful and rational evening. We raised asubscription for the poor showman; and I went tobed, pleased and gratified with the hospitality andkindness of the citizens of Little Rock. Thereare some first-rate men there, of the real half horsehalf alligator breed, with a sprinkling of the steamboat,and such as grow nowhere on the face of theuniversal earth, but just about the back bone ofNorth America.iADVENTURES IN TEXAS. GlCHAPTER V.The (lay after our public dinner I determined toleave my hospitable friends at Little Rock, andcross Arkansas to Fulton on the Red River, adistance of about one hundred and twenty miles.They wanted me to stay longer ; and the gentlemanwho had the reputation of being the best marksmanin those parts was most particularly anxious thatwe should have another trial of skill ; but says I tomyself, " Crockett, you've had just about gloryenough for one day, so take my advice, and leavewell enough alone." I declined shooting, for therewas nothing at all to be gained by it, and I mightpossibly lose some little of the reputation I hadacquired. I have always found that it is a very importantthing for a man who is fairly going ahead,to know exactly how far to go, and when to stop.Had "the Government" stopped before he meddledwith the constitution, the deposits, and " takingthe responsibility," he would have retired fromoffice with almost as much credit as he enteredupon it, which is as much as any public man can62 COLONEL Crockett'sreasonably expect. But the General is a wholeteam, and when fairly started, will be going ahead ;and one might as well attempt to twist a streak oflightning into a true lover's knot as to stop him.Finding that I was bent on going, for I becameimpatient to get into Texas, my kind friends atLittle Rock procured me a good horse to carry meacross to Red River. There are no bounds to thegood feeling of the pioneers of the west ; they considernothing a trouble that will confer a favourupon a stranger that they chance to take a fancyto : true, we are something like chestnut burs onthe outside, rather prickly if touched roughly, butthere's good fruit within.My horse was brought to the door of the tavern,around which many of the villagers were assembled.The drum and fife were playing what was intendedfor a lively tune, but .the skin of the drum stilLhung as loose as the hide of a fat man far gone in a^consumption ; and the fife had not yet recoveredfrom the asthma. The music sounded somethinglike a fellow singing, "Away with melancholia onthe way to the gallows. I took my leave of thelandlord, shook hands with the showman, who haddone more than an average business, kissed hiswife, who had recovered, and bidding farewell toall my kind-hearted friends, I mounted my horse,ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 63and left the village, accompanied by four or fiveF gentlemen. The drum and fife now appeared toexert themselves and made more noise than usual,p while the crowd sent forth three cheers to encourageme on my way.I tried to raise some recruits for Texas amongmy companions, but they said they had their ownaffairs to attend to, which would keep them athome for the present, but no doubt they wouldcome over and see us as soon as the disturbancesshould be settled. They looked upon Texas asbeing part of the United States, though the Mexicansdid claim it ; and they had no doubt the timewas not very distant when it would be receivedinto the glorious Union.My companions did not intend seeing me fartheron my way than the Washita river, near fiftymiles. Conversation was pretty brisk, for wetalked about the affairs of the nation and Texas ;subjects that are by no means to be exhausted, ifone may judge by the long speeches made in Congress,where they talk year in and year out ; andit would seem that as much still remains to be saidas ever. As we drew nigh to the Washita, thesilence was broken alone by our own talk and theclattering of our horses' hoofs ; and we imaginedourselves pretty much the only travellers, when64 COLONEL Crockett'swe were suddenly somewhat startled by the soundof music. We checked our horses, and listened,and the music continued. " What can all thatmean }'' says I. " Blast my old shoes if I know,Colonel," says one of the party. We listenedagain, and we now heard, " Hail, Columbia, happyland !" played in first-rate style. " That's fine,"says I. "Fine as silk. Colonel, and beetle finer,"says the other ; " but hark, the tune's changed."We took another spell of listening, and now themusician struck up, in a brisk and lively manner,Over the water to Charley." " That's mightymysterious," says one ; " Can't cipher it out nohow,"says another ; " A notch bryant my measure,"says a third. " Then let us go ahead," saysI, and ofi" we dashed at a pretty rapid gait, I tellyou — by no means slow.As we approached the river we saw to the rightof the road a new clearing on a hill, where severalmen were at work, and they running down thehill like wild Indians, or rather like the officeholders in pursuit of the deposits. There appearedto be no time to be lost, so they ran, and wecut ahead for the crossing. The music continuedall this time stronger and stronger, and the verynotes appeared to speak distinctly, " Over thewater to Charley."ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 65When we reached the crossing we were struckall of a heap, at beholding a man seated in a sulkyin the middle of the river, and playing for life ona fiddle. The horse was up to his middle in thewater ; and it seemed as if the flimsy vehicle wasready to be swept away by the current. Still thefiddler fiddled on composedly, as if his life hadbeen insured, and he was nothing more than apassenger. We thought he was mad, and shoutedto him. He heard us, and stopped his music.^^ You have missed the crossings shouted one ofthe men from the clearing. "I know I have,"returned the fiddler. " If you go ten feet fartheryou will be drowned." "I know I shall," returnedthe fiddler. " Turn back," said the man."I can't," said the other. "Then how the devilwill you get out .?" « Pm sure I don't know :come you and help me."The men from the clearing, who understood theriver, took our horses and rode up to the sulky,and after some difficulty, succeeded in bringing thetraveller safe to shore, when we recognised theworthy parson who had fiddled for us at the puppetshow at Little Rock. They told him that he hadhad a narrow escape, and he replied, that he hadfound that out an hour ago. He said he had beenfiddling to the fishes for a full hour, and had6*66 COLONEL Crockett'sexhausted all the tunes that he could play withoutnotes. We then asked him what could have inducedhim to think of fiddling at a time of suchperil ; and he replied, that he had remarked in hisprogress through life, that there was nothing inuniversal nature so well calculated to draw peopletogether as the sound of a fiddle ; and he knew,that he might bawl until he was hoarse for assistance,and no one would stir a peg ; but they wouldno sooner hear the scraping of his catgut, thanthey would quit all other business, and come to thespot in flocks. We laughed heartily at the knowledgethe parson showed of human nature. — And hewas right.Having fixed up the old gentleman's sulky rightand tight, and after rubbing down his poor jadedanimal, the company insisted on having a dancebefore we separated. We all had our flasks ofwhisky ; we took a drink all round, and thoughthe parson said he had had about enough fiddlingfor one day, he struck up with great good humoursat it we went, and danced straight fours for anhour and better. We all enjoyed ourselves verymuch, but came to the conclusion, that dancingwasn't altogether the thing without a few petticoatsto give it variety.The dance being over, our new friends pointedADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 67out the right fording, and assistftd^.tlia.parson acrossthe river. We took another drink all round, andafter shaking each other cordially by the hand, weseparated, wishing each other all the good fortunethat the rugged lot that has been assigned us willafford. My friends retraced the road to LittleRock, and I pursued my journey; and as I thoughtof their disinterested kindness to an entire stranger,I felt that the world is not quite as heartless andselfish as some grumblers would have us think.The Arkansas is a pretty fine territory, beingabout five hundred and Mty miles in length fromeast to west, with a mean width of near two hundred,extending over an area of about one hundred thousandsquare miles. The face of the country from itsgreat extent is very much diversified. It is prettywell watered, being intersected by the Arkansasriver and branches of the Red, Washita, and Whiterivers. The Salerne mountains, which rise inMissouri, traverse Arkansas and extend into Texas.That part of the territory to the south-east of theMiseries is for the most part low, and in manyplaces liable to be overlooked annually. To thenorth-west of the mountains the country presentsgenerally an open expanse of prairie without wood,except near the borders of the streams. The seasonsof the year partake of those extremes of heat68 COLONEL Crockett'sand cold; which might be expected in so great anextent, and in a country which affords so muchdifference of level. The summers are as remarkableas is the winters for extremes of temperature.The soil exhibits every variety, from the mostproductive to the most sterile. The forest treesare numerous and large; such as oak, hickory, sycamore,cotton-wood, locust, and pine. The cultivatedfruit trees are the apple, pear, peach, plum,nectarine, cherry, and quince ; and the variouskinds of grain, such as wheat, rye, oats, barley, andIndian corn, succeed amazing well. Cotton, Indiancorn, flour, peltry, salted provisions, and lumber,are the staples of this territory. Arkansaswas among the most ancient settlements of the 1French in Louisiana. That nation had a huntingand trading post on the Arkansas river as early asthe beginning of the eighteenth century. Arkansas,I rather reckon, will be admitted as a state intothe Union during the next session of Congress ;and if the citizens of Little Rock are a fair sampleof her children, she cannot fail to go ahead.I kept in company with the parson until we arrivedat Greenville, and I do say, he was just aboutas pleasant an old gentleman to travel with, as anyman who wasn't too darned particular could askfor We talked about politics, religion, and nature,ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 69farming and bear hunting, and the many blessingsthat an all bountiful Providence has bestowed uponour happy country. He continued to talk uponthis subject, travelling over the whole ground as itwere, until his imagination glowed, and his soulbecame full to overflowing ; and he checked hishorse, and I stopped mine also, and a stream ofeloquence burst forth from his aged lips, such as Ihave seldom listened to : it came from the overflowingfountain of a pure and grateful heart. Wewere alone in the wilderness, but ks he proceededit seemed to me as if the tall trees bent their topsto listen ; that the mountain stream laughed outjoyfully as it bounded on like some living thing ;that the fading flowers of autumn smiled, and sentforth fresher fragrance, as if conscious that theywould revive in spring ; and even the sterile rocksseemed to be endued with some mysterious influence.We were alone in the wilderness, but allthings told me that God was there. That thoughtrenewed my strength and courage. I had left mycountry, felt somewhat like an outcast, believedthat I had been neglected and lost sight of : but Iwas now conscious that there was still one watchfulEye over me ; no matter whether I dwelt inthe populous cities, or threaded the pathless forestalone; no matter whether I stood in the high70 COLONEL Crockett'splaces among men, or made my solitary lair in theuntrodden wild, that Eye was still upon me. Myvery soul leaped joyfully at the thought ; I neverfelt so grateful in all my life ; I never loved myGod so sincerely in all my life. I felt that I stillhad a friend.When the old man finished I found that myeyes were wet with tears. 1 approached and pressedhis hand, and thanked him, and says I, "Now letus take a drink." I set him the example, and hefollowed it, and in a style too that satisfied me,that if he had ever belonged to the Temperancesociety, he had either renounced membership orobtained a dispensation. Having liquor, we proceededon our journey, keeping a sharp look-outfor mill seats and plantations as we rode along.I left the worthy old man at Greenville, andsorry enough I was to part with him, for he talkeda great deal, and he seemed to know a little aboutevery thing. He knew all about the history ofthe country; was well acquainted with all the leadingmen ; knew where all the good lands lay inmostof the western states, as well as the cutestclerk in the Land office ; and had traced most ofthe rivers to their sources. He was very cheerfuland happy, though to all appearances very poor,I thought that he would make a first-rate agent forADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 71taking up lands, and mentioned it to him ; hesmiled and pointing above, said, "My wealth liesnot in this worldsI mounted my horse, and pushed forward on myroad to Fulton. When I reached Washington, avillage a few miles from the Red river, I rode uptothe Black Bear tavern, when the following conversationtook place between me and the landlord,which is a pretty fair sample of the curiosity ofsome folks : —Good morning, mister — I don't exactly recollectyour name now,'^ said the landlord as Ialighted.It's of no consequence," said I.I'm pretty sure I've seen ye somewhere."Very likely you may, I've been there frequently."I was sure 'twas so; but strange I should forgetyour name," says he.It is indeed somewhat strange that you shouldforget what you never knew," says I.It is unaccountable strange. It's what I'm notoften in the habit of, I assure you. I have, for themost part, a remarkably retentive memory. Inthe power of people that pass along this way, I'vescarce ever made, as the doctors say, a elapsesslinking of this kind afore,"72 COLONEL Crockett's"Eh hell'' I shouted, while the critter continued.Travelling to the western country, I presume,mister ?"Presume any thing you please, sir," says I,but don't trouble me with your presumptions.""0 Lord, no, sir — I won't do that — I've no deerof that — not the least deer in the world," says he;I suppose you've been to the westward aforenow ?"Well, suppose I have ?"Why, on that supposition, I was going to sayyou must be pretty well — that is to say, you mustknow something about the place.""Eh heh!" I ejaculated, looking sort of mazedfull in his face. The darnel critter still went ahead.I take it you're a married man, mister ?"Take it as you will, that is no affair of mine,"says I."Well, after all, a married life is the most happiestway of living ; don't you think so, mister ?"Very possible," says I.I conclude you have a family of children, sir?"I don't know what reason you have to concludeso.""0, no reason in the world, mister, not the least,"says he ; " but I thought I might just take theADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 73liberty to make the presumption, you know, that's all,sir. I take it, mister, you're a man about my age ?""Ehheh!"How old do you call yourself, if I may be sobold V"You're bold enough, the devil knows," says I;and as I spoke rather sharp, the varment seemedrather staggered, but he soon recovered himself,and came up to the chalk again."No offence, I hope — I — I — I — wouldn't bethoughtuncivil by any means ; I always calculateto treat everybody with civility''You have a very strange way of showing it."True, as you say, I generally take my ownway in these ere matters.— Do you practise law,mister, or farming, or mechanicals ?"Perhaps so," says I.Ah, I judge so ; I was pretty certain it mustbe the case. Well, it's as good business as anythere is followed now-a-days.""Eh heh!" I shouted, and my lower jaw fell inamazement at his perseverance.I take it you've money at interest, mister ?"continued the varment, without allowing himselftime to take breath.Would it be of any particular Interest to youto find out ?" says I.74 COLONEL Crockett'sOj not at all, not the least in the world, sir.I'm not at all inquisitive about other people's matters; I mind's my own business — that's my way."'^ And a very odd way you have of doing it too."I've been thinking what persuasion you're of —whether you're a Unitarian or Baptist, or whetheryou belong to the Methodists."Well, what's the conclusion ?"Why, I have concluded that I'm pretty nearright in my conjectures. Well, after all, Pm inclinedto think they're the nearest right of anypersuasion — though some folks think differently.""Eh heh!" I shouted again.As to politics, I take it, you — that is to say,I suppose you "Very likely.""Ah! I could have sworn it was so from themoment I saw you. I have a back at finding outa man's sentiments. I dare say, mister, you're ajustice in your own country ?""And if I may return the compliment, I shouldsay you're a just ass everywhere." By this timeI began to get weary of his impertinence, and ledmy horse to the trough to water, but the darnedcritter followed me up.Why, yes," said he, " I'm in the commissionof the peace, to be sure — and an officer in theADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 75militia — though between you and I, I wouldn'twish to boast of it."My horse having finished drinking, I put onefoot in the stirrup, and was preparing to mount —'^ Any more inquiries to make ?'' said I."Why, no, nothing to speak on' said he."When do you return, mister ?"About the time I come back," said I ; andleaping into the saddle galloped off. The pestiferousvarment bawled after me, at the top of hisvoice, —Well, I shall look for ye then. I hope youwon't fail to call."Now, who in all nature do you reckon the ritterwas, who afforded so fine a sample of the impertinentcuriosity that some people have to pry intoother people's affairs ? I knew him well enoughat first sight, though he seemed to have forgottenme. It was no other than Job Snelling, the manufacturerof cayenne pepper out of mahogany sawdust,and upon whom I played the trick with thecoon skin. I pursued my journey to Fulton, andlaughed heartily to think what a swither I had leftpoor Job in, at not gratifying his curiosity ; for Iknew he was one of those fellows who would peepI down your throat just to ascertain what you hadeaten for dinner.76 COLONEL Crockett'sWhen I arrived at Fulton, I inquired for a gentlemanto whom my friends at Little Rock hadgiven me a letter of introduction. I was receivedin the most hospitable manner ; and as the steamboatdid not start for Natchitoches until the nextday, I spent the afternoon in seeing all that was tobe seen. I left my horse with the gentleman, whopromised to have him safely returned to the owner;and I took the steamboat, and started on my waydown the Red river, right well pleased with myreception at Fulton.ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 77CHAPTER VI.There was a considerable number of passengersson board the boat, and our assortment was somewhatlike the Yankee merchant's cargo of notions,)pretty particularly miscellaneous, I tell you. Imoved through the crowd from stem to stern, tosee if I could discover any face that was not altogetherstrange to me ; but after a general survey,concluded that I had never seen one of them)before. There were merchants and emigrants andgamblers, but none who seemed to have embarkedin the particular business that for the time being)occupied my mind — I could find none who weregoing to Texas. All seemed to have their hands"full enough of their own affairs, without meddlingwith the cause of freedom. The greater share ofglory will be mine, thought I, so go ahead, Crockett.I saw a small cluster of passengers at one end ofthe boat, and hearing an occasional burst of laughter,thinks I, there's some sport started in that quarter,and having nothing better to do, I'll go in for myshare of it. Accordingly I drew nigh to the78 COLONEL Cricketscluster, and seated on a chest was a tall lank seaserpent looking blacken, who had crawled overfrom Natchez under the hill, and was amusing thepassengers with his skill at thimbles ; at thesame time he was picking up their shillings justabout as expeditiously as a hungry gobble woulda pint of corn. He was doing what might be calledan average business in a small way, and lost notime in gathering up the fragments.I watched the whole process for some time, andfound that he had adopted the example set by the oldtempter himself, to get the weatherglass of us poorweak mortals. He made it a point to let his victimswin always the first stake, that they might betempted to go ahead ; and then, when they leastsuspected it, he would come down upon them likea hurricane in a cornfield, sweeping all before it.I stood looking on, seeing him pick up thechicken feed from the green horns, and thought ifmen are such darned fools as to be cheated out oftheir hard earnings by a fellow who had just brainsenough to pass a pea from one thimble to another,with such slight of hand, that you could not tellunder which he had deposited it; it is not astonishingthat the magician of Undertook should play thimblesupon the big figure, and attempt to cheat thewhole nation. I thought that " the Government"ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 79was playing the same game with the deposits, andwith such address too, that before long it will beahard matter to find them under any of Ie thimbleswhere it is supposed they have been originallyplaced.The thimble conjurer saw me looking on, andeyeing me as if he thought I would be a good subject,said carelessly, " Come, stranger, won't youtake a chance V^ the whole time passing the peafrom one thimble to the other, by way of throwingout a bait for the gudgeons to bite at. " I nevergamble, stranger'' says I, " principled against it ;think it a slippery way of getting through theworld at best." "• Them are my sentiments to anotch," says he ; " but this is not gambling by nomeans. A little innocent pastime, nothing more.Better take a hack by way of trying your luck atguessing." All this time he continued workingwith his thimbles ; first putting the pea under one,which was plain to be seen, and then uncoveringit, would show that the pea was there ; he wouldthen put it under the second thimble, and do thesame, and then under the third ; all of which hedid to show how easy it would be to guess wherethe pea was deposited, if one would only keep asharp look-out."Come, stranger," says he to me again, "you80 COLONEL Crockett'shad better take a chance. Stake a trifle, I don'tcare how small, just for the fun of the thing'*I am principled against betting money' says I,"but I don't mind going in for drinks for thepresent company, for I'm as dry as one of littleIsaac Hill's regular set speeches.""I admire your principles," says he, "and to showthat I play with these here thimbles just for the sakeof pastime, I will take that bet, though I'm a wholehog temperance man. Just say when, stranger."He continued all the time slipping the pea fromone thimble to another ; my eye was as keen as alizard's, and when he stopped, I cried out, "Now;the pea is under the middle thimble." He wasgoing to raise it to show that it wasn't there, whenI interfered, and said, " Stop, if you please," andraised it myself, and sure enough the pea wasthere ; but it mought have been otherwise if he hadhad the uncovering of it.Sure enough you've won the bet," says he.You've a sharp eye, but I don't care if I giveyou another chance. Let us go fifty cents thisbout ; I'm sure you'll win.'^Then you're a darned fool to bet, stranger,"says I ; " and since that is the case, it would belittlebetter than picking your pocket to bet withyou ; so I'll let it alone."IADVENTURES IN TEXAS. . 81*' I don't mind running the risk' said he.But I do," says I ; " and since I always let wellenough alone, and I have had just about glory-enoughfor one day, let us all go to the bar andliquor."This called forth a loud laugh at the thimbleconjurer's expense ; and he tried hard to induce meto take just one chance more, but he mought justas well have sung psalms to a dead horse, for mymind was made up ; and I told him, that I lookedupon gambling as about the dirtiest way that aman could adopt to get through this dirty world ;and that I would never bet any thing beyond aquart of whisky upon a rifle shot, which I considereda legal bet, and gentlemanly and rationalamusement. "But all this cackling," says I,makes me very thirsty, so let us adjourn to thebar and liquor."He gathered up his thimbles, and the wholecompany followed us to the bar, laughing heartilyat the conjurer ; for, as he had won some of theirmoney, they were sort of delighted to see himbeaten with his own cudgel. He tried to laughtoo, but his laugh wasn't at all pleasant, and ratherforced. The barkeeper placed a big-bellied bottlebefore us -, and after mixing our liquor, I was calledon for a toast, by one of the company, a chap justS2 COLONEL Hackett'sabout as rough hewn as if he had been cut out of agum log with a broad axe, and sent into the marketwithout even being smoothed off with a jack plane,one of them chaps who, in their journey throughlife, are always ready for a fight or a frolic, anddon't care the toss of a copper which.Well, gentlemen'' says I, " being called uponfor a toast, and being in a slave-holding state, inorder to avoid^giving offence, and running the riskof being Lynched, it may be necessary to premisethat I am neither an abolitionist nor a colonialbut simply Colonel Crockett, of Tennessee,now bound for Texas." When they heard myname they gave three cheers for Colonel Crockett ;and silence being restored, I continued, "Now,gentlemen, I will offer you a toast, hoping, afterwhat I have stated, that it will give offence to noone present; but should I be mistaken, I mustimitate the * old Roman,' and take the responsibility.I offer, gentlemen. The abolition of slavery:Let the work first begin in the two houses of Congress.There are no slaves in the country moreservile than the party slaves in Congress. Thewink or the nod of their masters is all sufficient forthe accomplishment of the most dirty work."They drank the toast in a style that satisfied me,that the Little Magician might as well go to a pig-adventuresIN TEXAS. 83sty for wool, as to beat round in that part forvoters ; they were all either for Judge White orOld Tippecanoe. The thimble * conjurer havingasked the barkeeper how much was to pay, wastold there were sixteen smaller, which amountedto one dollar. He was about to lay down the blunt,but not in Benton's metallic currency, which I findhas already become as shy as honesty with an officeholder, but he planked down one of Biddle's notes,when I interfered, and told him that the barkeeperhad made a mistake."How so ?" demanded the barkeeper.How much do you charge," says I, " whenyou retail your liquor ?'^A sip a glass."Well, then," says I, " as Thimblerig here, whobelongs to the temperance society, took it inwholesale, I reckon you can afford to let him haveit at half price ?"Now, as they had all noticed that the conjurerwent what is called the heavy wet, they laughedoutright, and we heard no more about temperancefrom that quarter. When we returned to the deckthe blacken set to work with his thimbles again,and bantered me to bet ; but I told him that it wasagainst my principle, and as I had already reapedglory enough for one day, T would just let well84 COLONEL Cricketsenough alone for the present. If the " old Roman'had done the same in relation to the deposits andthe monster' we should have escaped more difficultiesthan all the cunning of the Little FlyingDutchman and Dick Johnson to boot, will be ableto repair. I shouldn't be astonished if the newVice President's head should get wool gathering,before they have half unravelled the knotted andtwisted thread of perplexities that the old Generalhas spun, — in which case his charming spouse willno doubt be delighted, for then they will be all inthe family way. What a handsome display theywill make in the White House. No doubt thefirst act of Congress will be to repeal the dutieson Cologne and Lavender waters, for they willbe in great demand about the Palace, particularlyin the dog days.One of the passengers, hearing that I was onboardof the boat, came up to me, and began to talkabout the affairs of the nation, and said a good dealin favour of '^ the Magician," and wished to hearwhat I had to say against him. He talked loud,which is the way with all politicians educated inthe Jackson school ; and by his slang-hanging,drew a considerable crowd around us. Now, thiswas the very thing I wanted, as I knew I shouldnot soon have another opportunity of making aADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 85political speech ; he no sooner asked to hear whatI had to say against his candidate, than I let himhave it, strong and hot as he could take, I tellyou.What have I to say against Martin Van Buren ?He is an artful, cunning, intriguing, selfish, speculatinglawyer, who, by holding lucrative offices formore than half his life, has contrived to amass aprincely fortune, and is now seeking the presidency,principally for sordid gain, and to gratify the mostselfish ambition. His fame is unknown to the historyof our country, except as a most adroit politicalmanager and successful office hunter. He nevertook up arms in defence of his country, in her daysof darkness and peril. He never contributed a'dollar of his surplus wealth to assist her in herhours of greatest v/ant and weakness. Office andMONEY have been the gods of his idolatry ; and attheir shrines has the ardent worship of his heartbeen devoted, from the. earliest days of his manhoodto the present moment. He can lay no claim topre-eminent services as a statesman; nor has heever given any evidences of superior talent, exceptas a political electioneering and intriguer. As apolitician he is ' all things to all men.' He is forinternal improvement, and against it ; for the tariff,and against it ; for the bank monopoly, and against86 COLONEL CROCi:ETT^git J for abolition of slavery, and against it ; and forany thing else, and against any thing else ; just ashecan best promote his popularity and subservehis own private interest. He is so totally destituteof moral courage, that he never dares to give anopinion upon any important question until he firstfinds out whether it will be popular, or not. He iscelebrated as the ^ Little Non Committal Magician,'because he enlists on no side of any question untilhe discovers which is the strongest party ; and thenalways moves in so cautious, sly, and secret a manner,that he can change sides at any time, as easilyas a juggler or a magician can play off* his arts oflegerdemain.Who is Martin Van Buren } He is the candidateof the office holders and office expectants,who nominated him for the presidency, at a conventionassembled in the city of Baltimore, in Maylast. The first account we have of his political lifeis while he was a member of the Senate of NewYork, at the time when Mr. Clinton was nominatedas the federal candidate for the presidency, in oppositionto Mr. Madison. The support he thengave Mr. Clinton afforded abundant evidence ofthat spirit of opposition to the institutions of hiscountry which was prominently developed in theconduct of those with whom he was united. ShortlyADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 87after the success of Mr. Madison, and during theprosecution of the war, Rufus King, of New York,(for whom Mr. Van Buren voted,) was elected tothe Senate of the United States, avowedly opposedto the administration. Upon his entrance into thatbody, instead of devoting his energies to maintainthe war, he commenced a tirade of abuse againstthe administration for having attempted relief toI the oppressed seamen of our gallant navy, who hadbeen compelled by British violence to arm themselves against their country, their firesides, andtheir friends. Thus Martin Van Buren countenanced,by his vote in the Senate of New York, anopposition to that war, which, a second time, convincedGreat Britain that Americans could not beawed into bondage and subjection.Subsequent to this time Mr. Van Buren becamehimself a member of the United States Senate, and,^ while there, opposed every proposition to improvethe west or to add to her numerical strength.He voted against the continuance of the nationalroad through Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, andagainst appropriations for its preservation.He voted against the graduation of the priceof the public lands.He voted against ceding the refuse lands tothe states in which they lie.88 COLONEL Crockett'sHe voted against making donations of thelands to actual settlers."He again voted against ceding the refuse lands,not worth twenty-five cents per acre, to the newstates for purposes of education and internal improvement.He voted against the bill providing ^ settlementand pre-emption rights' to those who hadassisted in opening and improving the westerncountry, and thus deprived many an honest poorman of a home.He voted against donations of land to Ohio,to prosecute the Miami Canal ; and, although amember of the Senate, he was not present whenthe vote was taken upon the engrossment of thebill giving land to Indiana for her Wabash andErie Canal, and was known to have opposed it inall its stages.He voted in favour of erecting toll gates onthe national road ; thus demanding a tribute fromthe west for the right to pass upon her own highways,constructed out of her own money — a thingnever heard of before.After his term of service had expired in theSenate, he was elected Governor of New York, bya plurality of votes. He was afterward sent toEngland as minister plenipotentiary, and upon hisADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 89return was elected Vice President of the UnitedStates, which office he now holds, and from whichthe office holders are seeking to transfer him to thepresidency."My speech was received with great applause,and the politician, finding that I was better acquaintedwith his candidate than he was himself,for I wrote his life shut his fly trap, and turnedon his heel without saying a word. He found thathe had barked up the wrong tree. I afterwardlearnt that he was a mail contractor in those parts,and that he also had large dealings in the Landoffice, and therefore thought it necessary to chimein with his penny whistle, in the universal chorus.There's a large band of the same description, butI'm thinking Uncle Sam will some day find outthat he has paid too much for the piper.8*90 COLONEL Crockett'sCHAPTER VII.After my speech, and setting my face againstgambling, poor Thimblerig was obliged to breakoff conjuring for want of customers, and call it halfa day. He came and entered into conversationwith me, and I found him a good-natured intelligentfellow, with a keen eye for the main chance.He belonged to that numerous class, that it is perfectlysafe to trust as far as a tailor can sling a bullby the tail — but no farther. He told me that hehad been brought up a gentleman ; that is to say,he was not instructed in any useful pursuit bywhich he could obtain a livelihood, so that whenhe found he had to depend upon himself for thenecessaries of life, he began to suspect, that damenature would have conferred a particular favourif she had consigned him to the care of any oneelse. She had made a very injudicious choicewhen she selected him to sustain the dignity of agentleman.The first bright idea that occurred to him as aspeedy means of bettering his fortune, would be toADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 91marry an heiress. Accordingly he looked abouthimself pretty sharp, and after glancing from onefair object to another, finally his hawk's eye restedupon the young and pretty daughter of a wealthyplanter. Thimblerig run his brazen face with histailor for a new suit, for he abounded more in thatmetallic currency than he did in either Benton'smint drops or in Biddle's notes ; and having thegentility of his outward Adam thus endorsed byhis tailor — an important endorsement, by-the-way,as times go — he managed to obtain an introductionto the planter's daughter.Our worthy had the principle of going aheadstrongly developed. He was possessed of considerableaddress, and had brass enough in his face tomake a wash-kettle; and having once got access tothe planter's house, it was no easy matter to dislodgehim. In this he resembled those politicianswho commence life as office holders; they willhang on tooth and nail, and even when deathI shakes them off, you'll find a commission of somekind crumpled up in their clenched fingers. Little[-Van appears to belong to this class — there's nobeating his snout from the public crib. He'll feedthere while there's a grain of corn left, and eventhen, from long habit, he'll set to work and gnawat the manger.9;3 COLONEL CricketsThimblerig got the blind side of the planter,and every thing to outward appearances went onswimmingly. Our worthy boasted to his croniesthat the business was settled, and that in a few weekshe should occupy the elevated station in societythat nature had designed him to adorn. He swelledlike the frog in the fable, or rather like Johnson'swife, of Kentucky, when the idea occurred to herof figuring away at Washington. But there's manya slip 'twixt the cup and the lip, says the proverb,and suddenly Thimblerig discontinued his visits atthe planter's house. His friends inquired of him themeaning of this abrupt termination of his devotions.I have been treated with disrespect," repliedthe worthy, indignantly.Disrespect ! in what way ?"My visits, it seems, are not altogether agreeable.""But how have you ascertained that ?"I received a hint to that effect ; and I can takea hint as soon as another."A hint! — and have you allowed a hint to driveyou from the pursuit? For shame. Go back again.""No, no, never! a hint is sufficient for a manof my gentlemanly feelings. I asked the old manfor his daughter." *•Well, what followed ? what did he say ?"ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 93Didn't say a word''Silence gives consent all the world over."So I thought. I then told nim to fix the day."Well, what then ?"Why, then he kicked me down stairs, andordered his slaves to pump upon me. That's hintenough for me, that my visits are not properlyappreciated j and blast my old shoes if I condescendto renew the acquaintance, or notice them in anywayuntil they send for me."As Thimblerig's new coat became rather tooseedy to play the part of a gentleman much longerin real life, he determined to sustain that characterupon the stage, and accordingly joined a companyof players. He began, according to custom, at thetop of the ladder, and was regularly hissed andpelted through every gradation until he foundhimself at the lowest rowel. " This," said he, " wasa dreadful check to proud ambition;" but he consoledhimself with the idea of peace and quiet inhis present obscure walk ; and though he had noprospect of being elated by the applause of admiringmultitudes, he no longer trod the scene of mimicglory in constant dread of becoming a target forrotten eggs and oranges. — "And there was muchin that," said Thimblerig. But this calm couldnot continue for ever.94 COLONEL Crockett'sThe manager, who, like all managers who pay salariesregularly, was as absolute behind the scenes asthe "old Roman" isti the White House, had fixedupon getting up an eastern spectacle, called theCataract of the Ganges. He intended to introducea fine procession, in which an elephant was to betheprincipal feature. Here a difficulty occurred.What was to be done for an elephant ? Alligatorswere plenty in those parts, but an elephant wasnot to be had for love or money. But an alligatorwould not answer the purpose, so he determinedto make a pasteboard elephant as large as life, andtwice as natural. The next difficulty was to findmembers of the company of suitable dimensions toperform the several members of the pasteboardstar. The manager cast his eye upon the longgaunt figure of the unfortunate Thimblerig, andcast him for the hinder legs, the rump, and part ofthe back of the elephant. The poor player expostulated,and the manager replied, that he wouldappear as a star on the occasion, and would nodoubt receive more applause than he had duringhis whole career. " But I shall not be seen," saidthe player. " All the better," replied the manager,^'^ as in that case you will have nothing to apprehendfrom eggs and oranges."Thimblerig, finding that mild expostulation avail-adventuresIN TEXAS. 95ed nothing, swore that he would not study the part,and accordingly threw it up in dignified disgust.He said that it was an outrage upon the feelings ofthe proud representative of Shakspeare's heroes, tobe compelled to play pantomime in the hinder partsof the noblest animal that ever trod the stage. If ithad been the fore quarters of the elephant, it mightpossibly have been made a speaking part ; at anyrate he might have snorted through the trunk, ifnothing more ; but from the position he was tooccupy, damned the word could he utter, or evenroar with propriety. He therefore positively refusedto act, as he considered it an insult to hisreputation to tread the stage in such a character ;and he looked upon the whole affair as a profanationof the legitimate drama. The result was, ourworthy was discharged from the company, andcompelled to commence hoeing another row.He drifted to New Orleans, and hired himselfas marker to a gambling table. Here he remainedbut a few months, for his ideas of arithmetic differedwidely from those of his employer, and accordinglythey had some difficulty in balancing thecash account ; for when his employer, in adding upthe receipts, made it nought and carry two, Thimblesinsisted that it should be nought and carryone ; and in order to prove that he was correct,96 COLONEL Crockett'she carried himself off, and left nothing behindhim.He now commenced professional blacken on hisown hook, and took up his quarters in Natchezunder the hill. Here he remained, doing businessin a small way, until Judge Lynch commenced hispractice in that quarter, and made the place toojiotfor his comfort. He shifted his habitation, but nothaving sufficient capital to go the big figure, hepractised the game of thimbles until he acquiredconsiderable skill, and then commenced passing upand down the river in the steamboats; and managed,by close attention to business, to pick up a decentlivelihood in the small way, from such as had morepence in their pockets than sense in their noddles.I found Thimblerig to be a pleasant talkative ^fellow. He communicated the foregoing facts withas much indifference as if there had been nothingdisgraceful in his career ; and at times he wouldchuckle with an air of triumph at the adroitness hehad displayed in some of the knavish tricks he hadpractised. He looked upon this world as one vaststage, crowded with empiric and jugglers ; andthat he who could practise his deceptions with thegreatest skill was entitled to the greatest applause.I asked him to give me an account of Natchezand his adventures there, and I would put it in thewADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 97book I intended to write, when he gave me thefollowing, which betrays that his feelings werestill somewhat irritated at being obliged to givethem leg bail when Judge Lynch made his appearance.I give it in his own words.Natchez is a land of fevers, alligators, niggers,and cotton bales : where the sun shines with forcesufficient to melt the diamond, and the word iceis expunged from the dictionary, for its definitioncannot be comprehended by the natives : wheretorefuse grog before breakfast would degrade youbelow the brute creation ; and where a good dinneris looked upon as an angel's visit, and voted amiracle : where the evergreen and majestic magnoliatree, with its superb flower, unknown to thenorthern climes, and its fragrance unsurpassed, callsforth the admiration of every beholder ; and thedark moss hangs in festoons from the forest treeslike the drapery of a funeral pall : where bears,the size of young jackass, are fondled in lieu ofpet dogs; and knives, the length of a barber's pole,usurp the place of toothpick : where the filthof the town is carried off by buzzards, and the inhabitantsare carried off by fevers : where niggerwomen are knocked down by the auctioneer, andknocked up by the purchaser : where the poorestslave has plenty of yellow boys, but not of Benton's98 COLONEL Crockett'smintage ; and indeed the shades of colour are sovaried and mixed, that a nigger is frequently seenblack and blue at the same time. And such isNatchez.The town is divided into two parts, as distinctin character as they are in appearance. Natchezon the hill, situated upon a high bluff overlookingthe Mississippi, is a pretty little town with streetsregularly laid out, and ornamented with divershandsome public buildings. Natchez under thehill, — where, 0! where, shall I find words suitableto describe the peculiarities of that unholy spot ?'Tis, in fact, the jumping off place. Satan looks onit with glee, and chuckles as he beholds the orgiesof his votaries. The buildings are for the mostdart brothels, taverns, or gambling houses, and frequentlythe whole three may be found under thesame roof. Obscene songs are sung at the top ofthe voice in all quarters. I have repeatedly seenthe strumpets tear a man's clothes from his back,and leave his body beautified with all the coloursof the rainbow."One of the most popular tricks is called theSpanish burial.' When a greenhorn makes hisappearance among them, one who is in the plotannounces the death of a resident, and that allstrangers must subscribe to the custom of the placeADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 99I upon such an occasion. They forthwith arrange aprocession; each person, as he passes the departed,kneels down and pretends to kiss the treacherouscorpse. When the unsophisticated attempts thisceremony the dead man clinches him, and the„ mourners beat the fellow so entrapped until heconsents to treat all hands ; but should he be penniless,his life will be endangered by the severityof the castigation. And such is Natchez underthe hill.An odd affair occurred while I was last there,"continued Thimblerig. " A steamboat stopped atf the landing, and one of the hands went ashore underthe hill to purchase provisions, and the adroit citiesens of that delectable retreat contrived to rob him^of all his money. The captain of the boat, a determinedfellow, went ashore in the hope of persuade -^ ing them to refund, — but that cock wouldn't fight.without farther ceremony, assisted by his brevisrand passengers, some three or four hundred hiaj number, he made fast an immense cable to the frame[tenement where the theft had been perpetrated, andfollowed fifteen minutes for the money to be forthcoming; vowing, if it was not produced withi?iithat time, to put steam to his boat, and drag theahouse into the river. The money was instantlyProducedi100 COLONEL Crockett's"I witnessed a sight during my stay there'continued the thimble conjurer, " that almost frozemy blood with horror, and will serve as a specimenof the customs of the far south. A planter, ofthe name of Foster, connected with the best familiesof the state, unprovoked, in cold blood, murderedhis young and beautiful wife, a few monthsafter marriage. He beat her deliberately to deathin a walk adjoining his dwelling, carried the bodyto the hut of one of his slaves, washed the dirt fromher person, and, assisted by his negroes, buried herupon his plantation. Suspicion was awakened, thebody disinterred, and the villain's guilt established.He fled, was overtaken, and secured in prison. Histrial was, by some device of the law, delayed untilthe third term of the court. At length it came on,and so clear and indisputable was the evidence, thatI'lot a doubt was entertained of the result ; when,hy an oversight on the part of the sheriff, whoneglected swearing into office his deputy who summonedthe jurors, the trial was abruptly discontinued,and all proceedings against Foster weresuspended, or rather ended.i "There exists, throughout the extreme south,bodies of men who style themselves Benchers."*vVhen an individual escapes punishment by sometechnicality of the law, or perpetrates an offenceADVENTURES IN TEXAS. lOlnot recognised in courts of justice, they seize him,and inflict such chastisement as they conceive adequateto the offence. They usually act at night,and disguise their persons. This society at Natchezembraces all the lawyers, physicians, andprincipal merchants of the place. Foster, whomall good men loathed as a monster unfit to live,was called into court, and formally dismissed.But the Lynchers were at hand. The momenthe stept from the court-house he was knockeddown, his arms bound behind him, his eyes bandaged,and in this condition was marched to therear of the town, where a deep ravine afforded alit place for his punishment. His clothes weretorn from his back, his head partially scalped, theynext bound him to a tree ; each Lynch was suppliedwith a cowskin, and they took turns at theflogging until the flesh hung in ribands from hisbody. A quantity of heated tar was then pouredover his head, and made to cover every part of hisperson ; they finally showered a sack of featherson him, and in this horrid guise, with no otherapparel than a miserable pair of breeches, with adrummer at his heels, he was paraded through theprincipal streets at midday. No disguise wasassumed by the Lynchers ; the very lawyers employedupon his trial took part in his punishment.9*103 COLONEL Crockett'sOwing to long confinement his gait had becomecramped, and his movements were very faltering.By the time the procession reached themost public part of the town, Foster fell downfrom exhaustion, and was allowed to lie there foratime, without exciting the sympathies of anyone,— an object of universal detestation. Theblood oozing from his stripes had become mixedwith the feathers and tar, and rendered his aspectstill more horrible and loathsome. Finding himunable to proceed further, a common dray wasbrought, and with his back to the horse's tail, thedrummer standing over him playing the rogue'smarch, he was conducted to prison, the onlyplace at which he would be received.A guard was placed outside of the jail to givenotice to the body of Lynchers when Foster mightattempt to escape, for they had determined onbranding him on the forehead and cutting his earsoff. At two o'clock in the morning of the secondsubsequent day, two horsemen with a led horsestopped at the prison, and Foster was with difficultyplaced astride. The Lynchers wished tosecure him ; he put spurs to his beast, and passedthem. As he rode by they fired at him ; a ballstruck his hat, which was thrown to the ground,and he escaped ; but if ever found within the limitsADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 103of the state, will be shot down as if a price was setonhis head.Sights of this kind," continued Thimblerig,are by no means unfrequent. I once saw agambler, a sort of friend of mine, by-the-way,detected cheating at faro, at a time when the betswere running pretty high. They flogged him almostto death, added the tar and feathers, and placedhim aboard a dug-out, a sort of canoe, at twelve atnight ; and with no other instruments of navigationthan a bottle of whisky and a paddle, set him adriftin the Mississippi. He has never been heard ofsince, and the presumption is, that he either diedof his wounds or was run down in the night by asteamer. And this is what we call Lynching inNatchez."Thimblerig had also been at Vicksburg in histime, and entertained as little liking for that placeas he did for Natchez. He had luckily made hisescape a short time before the recent clearing-outof the slight-of-hand gentry; and he reckoned sometimewould elapse before he would pay them anothervisit. He said they must become morecivilized first. All the time he was talking to mehe was seated on a chest, and playing mechanicallywith his pea and thimbles, as if he was afraid thathe would lose the slight unless he kept his hand104 COLONEL CKOCKETt'sin constant practice. Nothing of any consequenceoccurred in our passage down the river, and Iarrived at Natchitoches in perfect health, and ingood spirits.ADVENTURES IN TEXAS.CHAPTER VIII.Natchitoches is a post town and seat of justicefor the parish of Natchitoches, Louisiana, and issituated on the right bank of the Red river. Thehouses are chiefly contained in one street, runningparallel to the river ; and the population I shouldI reckon at about eight hundred. The soil in thisI parish is generally sterile, and covered with pinetimber, except near the margin of Red river, whereI the greatest part of the inhabitants are settled onthe alluvial banks. Some other, though comparativelysmall, tracts of productive soil skirt thestreams. An extensive body of low ground, subjectto annual submersion, extends along the Redriver, which, it is said, will produce forty bushelsof frogs to the acre, and alligators enough to fence it.I stayed two days at Natchitoches, during whichtime I procured a horse to carry me across Texasto the seat of war. Thimblerig remained with me,and I found his conversation very amusing ; for heis possessed of humour and observation, and hasseen something of the world. Between whiles he106 COLONEL Crockett'swould amuse himself with his thimbles, to whichhe appeared greatly attached, and occasionally hewould pick up a few shillings from the tavernloungers. He no longer asked me to play withhim, for he felt somewhat ashamed to do so, andhe knew it would be no go.I took him to task in a friendly manner, andtried to shame him out of his evil practices. I toldhim that it was a burlesque on human nature, thatan able bodied man, possessed of his full share ofgood sense, should voluntarily debase himself, andbe indebted for subsistence to such pitiful artifice.But what's to be done. Colonel ?" says he.*i'm in the slough of despond, up to the verychin. A miry and slippery path to travel."Then hold your head up," says I, " before theslough reaches your lips."But what's the use ?" says he ; " it's utterlyimpossible for me to wade through ; and even if Icould, I should be in such a dirty plight, that itwould defy all the waters in the Mississippi to washme clean again. No," he added, in a despondingtone, " I should be like a live eel in a frying pan,Colonel, sort of out of my element, if I attemptedto live like an honest man at this time o' day."^* That I deny. It is never too late to becomehonest," said I. " But even admit what you say1^ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 107to be true — that you cannot live like an honestman, you have at least the next best thing in yourpower, and no one can say nay to it.'^And what is that ?"Die like a brave one. And I know not whether,in the eyes of the world, a brilliant death is notpreferred to an obscure life-of rectitude. Mostmen are remembered as they died, and not as theylived. We gaze with admiration upon the gloriesof the setting sun, yet scarcely bestow a passingglance upon its noonday splendour."You are right ; but how is this to be done VAccompany me to Texas. Cut aloof fromyour degrading habits and associates here, and infighting for their freedom, regain your own.'^He started from the table, and hastily gatheringup the thimbles with which he had been playingall the time I was talking to him, he thrust theminto his pocket, and after striding two or threetimes across the room, suddenly stopped, his leadeneye kindled, and grasping me by the hand violently,he exclaimed with an oath, "By I'll be a managain. Live honestly, or die bravely. I go withyou to Texas."I said what I could to confirm him in his resolution,and finding that the idea had taken fast holdof his mind, I asked him to liquor, which he did10^ COLONEL Crockett'snot decline, notwithstanding the temperance habitsthat he boasted of j we then took a walk on thebanks of the river.The evening preceding my departure from Nat-churches,a gentleman, with a good horse and alight wagon, drove up to the tavern where I lodged.He was accompanied by a lady who carried aninfant in her arms. As they alighted I recognisedthe gentleman to be the politician at whom I haddischarged my last political speech, on board theboat coming down the Red river. We had let himout in our passage down, as he said he had somebusiness to transact some distance above NatchezHe entered the tavern, and seemed to berather shy of me, so I let him go, as I had no ideaof firing two shots at such small game.The gentleman had a private room, and calledfor supper ; but the lady, who used every precautionto keep the child concealed from the view ofany one, refused to eat supper, saying she was unwell.However, the gentleman made a heartymeal, and excused the woman, saying " My wifeis subject to a pain in the stomach, which has deprivedher of her food'' Soon after supper thegentleman desired a bed to be prepared, whichbeing done, they immediately retired to rest.About an hour before daybreak, next morning,ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 109the repose of the whole inn was disturbed by thescreams of the child. This continued for sometime,and at length the landlady got up to see whatit was ailed the noisy bantling. She entered thechamber without a light, and discovered the gentlemanseated in the bed alone, rocking the infant inhis arms, and endeavouring to quiet it by saying,"Hush, my dear — mamma will soon return again."However the child still squalled on, and the longabsence of the mother rendered it necessary thatsomething should be done to quiet it.The landlady proposed taking up the child, tosee what was the reason of its incessant cries. Sheapproached the bed, and requested the man to giveher the infant, and tell her whether it was a son oradaughter ; but this question redoubled his consternation,for he was entirely ignorant which sexthe child belonged to ; however, with some difficulty,he made the discovery, and informed thelandlady it was a son.She immediately called for a light, which wasno sooner brought than the landlady began to unfoldthe wrapper from the child, and exclaim, " 0,what a fine big son you have got!" But on a moreminute examination they found, to their greatastonishment, and to the mortification and vexationof the supposed father, that the child was a mulatto,110 COLONEL Crockett'sThe wretched man, having no excuse to offer,immediately divulged the whole matter withoutreserve. He stated, that he had fell in with her onthe road to Natchitoches the day before, and hadoffered her a seat in his vehicle. Soon perceivingthat she possessed an uncommon degree of assurance,induced him to propose that they shouldpass as man and wife, to which she readily assented.No doubt she had left her own home in order torid herself of the stigma which she had brought onherself by her lewd conduct j and at midnight shehad eloped from the bed, leaving the infant to thepaternal care of her pretended husband.Immediate search was made for the mother ofthe child, but in vain. And, as the song says,"Single misfortunes ne'er come alone," to his greatconsternation and grief, she had taken his horse,and left the poor politician destitute of every thingexcept a fine yellow hoy, but of a widely differentdescription from those which Benton put in circulation.By this time all the lodgers in the tavern hadgot up and dressed themselves, from curiosity toknow the occasion of the disturbance. I descendedto the street in front of the inn. The stars werefaintly glimmering in the heavens, and the firstbeams of the morning sun were struggling throughADVENTURES IN TEXAS. Illthe dim clouds that skirted the eastern horizon. Ithought myself alone in the street, when the hushof morning was suddenly broken by a clear, joyful,and musical voice, which sang, as near as I couldcatch it, the following scrap of a song : •O, what is the time of the merry round yearThat is fittest and sweetest for love 1Ere sucks the bee, ere buds the tree;And primroses by two, by three.Faintly shine in the path of the lonely deer,Like the few stars of twilight above."I turned towards the spot whence the soundsproceeded, and discovered a tall figure leaningagainst the sign post. His eyes were fixed on thestreaks of light in the east ; his mind was absorbed,and he was clearly unconscious of any one beingnear him. He continued his song in so full andI clear a tone, that the street re-echoed —When the blackbird and thrush, at early dawn,Prelude from leafy spray —Amid dewy scents and blandishments.Like a choir attuning their instruments,Ere the curtain of nature aside be drawnFor the concert the livelong day."I now drew nigh enough to see him distinctly.[He was a young man, not more than twenty-two.[His figure was light and graceful, at the same time[that it indicated strength and activity. He wasdressed in a hunting shirt, which was made with'^.112 COLONEL CROCKETT Suncommon neatness and ornamented tastily withfringe. He held a highly finished rifle in his righthand, and a hunting pouch, covered with Indianornaments, was slung across his shoulders. Hisclean shirt collar was open, secured only by a blackriband around his neck. His boots were polished,without a soil upon them ; and on his head wasa neat fur cap, tossed on in a manner which said,*^'I don't care a d ~n," just as plainly as any capcould speak it. I thought it must be some popinjayof a lark, until I took a look at his countenance.It was handsome, bright, and manly. There wasno mistake in that face. From the eyes down tohis breast he was sunburnt as dark as mahogany,while the upper part of his high forehead was aswhite and polished as marble. Thick clusters ofblack hair curled from under his cap. I passedon, unperceived, and he continued his song :— -In the green spring-tide, all tender and bright,When the sun sheds a kindlier gleamO'er velvet bank, that sweet flowers prank,That have fresh dews and sunbeams drank —Softest, and most chaste, as enchanted lightIn the visions of maiden's dream."The poor politician, whose misfortunes had rousedup the inmates of the tavern at such an unusualhour, now returned from the stable, where he hadbeen in search of his horse and his woman ; butADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 113they were both among the missing. He held awhip in his hand, and about a dozen men followedhim, some from curiosity to see the result of theadventure, and others from better feelings. As hedrew nigh to the front of the tavern, charing withmortification at both his shame and his loss, hisrage increasing to a flame as his windy exclamationsbecame louder and louder, he chanced to espythe fantastic personage I have just described, stillleaning against the sign post, carelessly humminghis song, but in a lower tone, as he perceived hewas not alone.The irritated politician no sooner saw the strangeragainst the sign post, whose self satisfied airwas in striking contrast with the excited feelingsof the other, than he paused for a moment, appearedto recognise him ; then coming up in a blusteringmanner, and assuming a threatening attitude, heexclaimed fiercely —You're an infernal scoundrel — do you hear ? aninfernal scoundrel, sir!"I do, but it's news to me," replied the other,quietly.News, you scoundrel ! do you call it news ?"Entirely so."You needn't think to carry it ofi" so quietly. Isay, you're an infernal scoundrel, and I'll prove it."?^.114 COLONEL CROCKETT SI beg you will not ; I shouldn't like to beproved a scoundrel' replied the other, smilingwith most provoking indifference.No, I dare say you wouldn't. But answer medirectly — did you, or did you not say, in presenceof certain ladies of my acquaintance, that Iwas a mere "Calf ? — 0, no, sir ; the truth is not to be spokenat all times."The truth ! Do you presume to call me acalf, sir ?""0, no, sir; I call you nothing," repliedthe stranger, just as cool and as pleasant as a morningin spring.It's well you do ; for if you had presumed tocall me "A man, I should have been grossly mistaken."Do you mean to say, I am not a man, sir ?"That depends on circumstances."^'What circumstances?" demanded the other,fiercely.If I should be called as an evidence in a courtof justice, I should be bound to speak the truth."And you would say, I was not a man, hey ? —Do you see this cowskin ?"Yes ; and I have seen it with surprise eversince you came up," replied the stranger, calmly,ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 115at the same time handing me his rifle, to takecare of.^^ With surprise'' exclaimed the politician whosaw that his antagonist had voluntarily disarmedhimself; — "Why, did you suppose I was such acoward, that I dare not use the article when Ithought it was demanded ?"Shall I tell you what I thought ?"^' Do — if you dare."I thought to myself, what use has a calf for acowskin ?" He turned to me, and said, " I hadforgot, Colonel — shall I trouble you to take careof this also?" Saying which he drew a longhunting knife from his belt, and placed it in myhand. He then resumed his careless attitude againstthe sign post.^' You distinctly call me a calf, then ?"^' If you insist upon it, you may."You hear, gentlemen," said he, speaking to thebystanders — "Do you hear the insult? — Whatshall I do with the scoundrel ?""Dress him, dress him!" exclaimed twenty-voices,with shouts and laughter."That ril do at once !" Then turning to thestranger, he cried out fiercely, "Come one stepthis way, you rascal, and PU flog you within aninch of your life."116 COLONEL Crockett's"I've no occasion."You're a coward."Not on your word."I'll prove it by flogging you out of yourskin."I doubt it."I am a liar then — am I ?"Just as you please."Do you hear that, gentlemen ?"Ay, we hear," was the unanimous response.You can't avoid dressing him now."0, heavens ! grant me patience ! I shall flyout of my skin."It will be so much the better for your pocket ;calf skins are in good demand."I shall burst."Not here in the street, I beg of you. It wouldbe disgusting."Gentlemen, can I any longer avoid flogginghim ?"Not if you are able," was the reply. " Goathim."Thus provoked, thus stirred up, and enraged, thefierce politician went like lightning at his provokingantagonist. But before he could strike a blowhe found himself disarmed of his cowskin, andlying on his back under the spout of a neighbour-adventuresIN TEXAS. ' 117ing pump, whither the young man had carried himto cool his rage ; and before he could recover fromhis astonishment at such unexpected handling, hewas as wet as a thrice drowned rat, from the cataractsof water which his laughing antagonist hadliberally pumped upon him. His courage, by thistime, had fairly oozed out; and he declared, as hearose and went dripping away from the pump, thathe would never again trust to quiet appearances ;and that the devil himself might, the next timesundertake to cow^skin such a cucumber bloodedscoundrel for him. The bystanders laughed heartily.The politician now went in pursuit of hishorse and his woman, taking his yellow boy withhim ; and the landlady declared that he richly deservedwhat he had got, even if he had been guiltyof no other offence than the dirty imposition hehad practised on her.The stranger now came to me, and calling meby name, asked for his rifle and knife, which I returnedto him. I expressed some astonishment atbeing known to him, and he said that he had heardof my being in the village, and had sought me outfor the purpose of accompanying me to Texas. Hetold, me that he was a bee hunter ; that he hadtravelled pretty much over that country in theway of his business, and that I would find him of118 COLONEL Crockett'sconsiderable use in navigating through the oceanof prairies.He told me that honey trees are abundant inTexas, and that honey of an excellent quality, andin any quantity, may be obtained from them.There are persons who have a peculiar tact incoursing the bee, and thus discovering their depositedof the luscious food. This employment isnot a mere pastime, but is profitable. The waxalone, thus obtained, is a valuable article of commercein Mexico, and commands a high price. Itis much used in churches, where some of the candlesmade use of are as long as a man's arm. Itoften happens that the hunters throw away thehoney, and save only the wax.It is a curious fact," said the bee hunter, " inthe natural history of the bee, that it is never foundin a wild country, but always precedes civilization,forming a kin of advance guard between the whiteman and the savage. The Indians, at least, areperfectly convinced of this fact, for it is a commonremark among them, when they observe theseinsects — ^ there come the white men.' "Thimblerig came up, and the bee hunter spoketo him, calling him by name, for he had met withhim in New Orleans. I told him that the conjurerhad determined to accompany me also, at whichADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 119he seemed well pleased, and encouraged the poorfellow to adhere to that resolution ; for he wouldbe a man among men in Texas, and no one wouldbe very particular in inquiring about his fortunesin the states. If once there, he might boldly standup and feed out of the same rack with the best.I asked him what was his cause of quarrel withthe politician, and he told me that he had met hima few weeks before down at Baton Rouge, wherethe fellow was going the big figure ; and that hehad exposed him to some ladies, which completelycut his comb, and he took wing ; that this was thefirst time they had met since, and being determinedto have his revenge, he had attacked him withoutfirst calculating consequences.With the assistance of our new friend, who wasa generous, pleasant fellow, we procured a horseand rifle for Thimblerig ; and we started for Nacog-doches, which is about one hundred and twentymiles west of Natchitoches, under the guidance ofthe bee hunter.129 COLONEL Crockett"®CHAPTER IX,Our route, which lay along what is called theold Spanish road, I found to be much better defined©n the map, than upon the face of the country.We had, in many instances, no other guide to thepath than the blazes on the trees. The bee hunterwas a cheerful communicative companion, and byhis pleasant conversation rendered our journey anythingbut fatiguing. He knew all about the country; had undergone a variety of adventure, anddescribed what he had witnessed with such freshness,and so graphically, that if I could only rememberone-half he told me about the droves ofwild horses, buffalo, various birds, beautiful sceneryof the wide spreading and fertile prairies, and hisadventures with the roving tribes of Indians, Ishould fill my book, I am sure, much more agreeablythan I shall be able to do on my own hook.When heed get tired of talking, he'd commencesinging, and his list of songs seemed to be as longas a rainy Sunday. He had a fine clear voice, andthough I have heard the Woods sing at the ParkADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 121Theatre, In New York, I must give the Bee hunterthe preference over all I have ever heard, exceptmy friend Jim Crow, who, it must be allowed, is areal steamboat at the business, and goes a beetleahead of any thing that will come after him.He gave me, among other matters, the followingaccount of a rencounter between one of the earlysettlers and the Indians : —"Andrew Tumlinson," said he, "belonged to afamily which the colonists of De Witt will longremember as one of their chief stays in the dangersof settling those wilds, trod only by the childrenof the forest. This indefatigable champion of revengefor his father's death, who had fallen someyears before by Indian treachery, had vowed neverto rest until he had received satisfaction. In orderthe better to accomplish his end, he was one of theforemost, if possible, in every skirmish with theIndians; and that he might be enabled to do so withoutrestraint, he placed his wife under the care ofhis brother-in-law, shouldered his rifle, and headeda ranging party, who were resolved to secure peaceto those who followed them, though purchased bytheir own death.He had been frequently victorious, In the mostdesperate fights, where the odds were greatlyagainst him, and at last fell a victim to his own122 COLONEL Crockett'simprudence. A Caddy had been seized as a spy,and threatened with death, in order to compel himto deliver up his knife. The fellow never moveda muscle, or even winked, as he beheld the riflespointed at him. He had been found lurking in theyard attached to the house of a solitary and unprotectedfamily, and he knew that the whites wereexasperated at his tribe for injuries that they hadcommitted. When discovered he was accompaniedby his little son.Tumlinson spoke to him in Spanish, to learnwhat had brought him there at such a time, butinstead of giving any satisfaction, he sprung to hisfeet, from the log where he was seated, at the sametime seizing his rifle which was lying beside him.The owner of the house, with whom the Indianhad been on a friendly footing, expostulated withhim, and got him to surrender the gun, telling himthat the whites only wished to be satisfied of hisfriendly intentions, and had no desire to injureone who might be useful in conciliating his redbrethren.He appeared to acquiesce, and wrapping hisblanket more closely around his body, moved onin silence ahead of the whites. Tumlinson approachedhim, and though the rest of the partyprivately cautioned him not to go too nigh, as theyADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 123believed the Indian had a knife under his blanket,he disregarded the warning, twisting for safety tohis rifle and dexterity.He continued to interrogate the captive untilhe awakened his suspicions that his life was notsafe. The Indian returned no answer but a shortcaustic laugh at the end of every question. Tumlinsonat length beheld his countenance becomemore savage, which was followed by a suddenmovement of the right hand beneath his blanket.He fired, and the next instant the Caddy's knifewas in his heart, for the savage sprung with thequickness of the wild cat upon his prey. Therifle ball had passed through the Indian's body, yethis victim appeared to be no more in his graspthan a sparrow in the talons of an eagle, for he wasa man of gigantic frame, and he knew that not onlyhis own life, but that of his little son, would betakenon the spot. He called to the boy to fly,while he continued to plunge his knife into thebosom of his prostrate victim. The rest of theparty levelled their rifles, and the victor shouted,with an air of triumph, — ' Do your worst. I havesacrificed another pale face to the spirits of myfathers.' They fired, and he fell dead across the bodyof the unfortunate Tumlinson. The poor boy fellalso. He had sprung forward some distance, when124 COLONEL Crockett'shis father was shot and was running in a zig-zagmanner, taught them in their youth, to avoid theballs of their enemies, by rendering it difficult forthe best marksman to draw a sight upon them."In order to afford me some idea of the state ofsociety in the more thickly settled parts of Texas,the Bee hunter told me that he had set down tothe breakfast table, one morning at an inn, at SanFeline, and among the small party around theboard were eleven who had fled from the statescharged with having committed murder. So accustomedare the inhabitants to the appearance offugitives from justice that they are particularlycareful to make inquiries of the characters of newcomers,and generally obtain early and circumstantialinformation concerning strangers. "Indeed'*said he, " it is very common to hear the inquirymade, * What did he do that made him leave home ?*or, 'What have you come to Texas for?' intimatingalmost an assurance of one's being a criminal. Notwithstandingthis state of things, however, the goodof the public, and of each individual, is so evidentlydependent on the public morals, that all appearready to discountenance and punish crime. Evenmen who have been expatriated by fear of justice,are here among the last who would be disposed toshield a culprit guilty of a crime against life o?ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 125property." Thimblerig was delighted at this favourableaccount of the state of society, and saidthat it would be the very place for him to flourishin ; he liked their liberal way of thinking, for itdid not at all tally with his ideas of natural law,that a man who happened to give offence to thestraight laced rules of action established by a setof people contracted in their notions, should behunted out of all society, even though willing toconform to their regulations. He was lawyerenough, he said, to know that every offence shouldbe tried on the spot where it was committed ; andif he had stolen the pennies from his grandmother'seyes in Louisiana, the people in Texas would havenothing to do with that affair, nohow they couldfix it. The dejected conjurer pricked up his ears,and from that moment was as gay and cheerful asablue bird in spring.As we approached Nacogdoches, the first objectthat struck our vievr was a flag flying at the top ofa high liberty pole. Drums were beating, and fifesplaying, giving an indication, not to be misunderstood,of the spirit that had been awakened in acomparative desert. The people of the town nosooner saw us than many came out to meet us.The Bee hunter, who was known to them, introducedme ; and it seems that they had already re-11*126 COLONEL Crockett'scivet the news of my intended visit, and its object,and I met with a cordial and friendly reception.Nacogdoches is the capitol of the department ofthat name, and is situated about sixty miles westof the river Sabine, in a romantic dell, surroundedby woody bluffs of considerable eminence, withinwhose inner borders, in a semicircle embracing thetown, flow the two forks of the Nana, a branch ofthe Niches. It is a flourishing town, containingabout one thousand actual citizens, although itgenerally presents twice that number on accountof its extensive inland trade, one-half of which issupported by the friendly Indians. The healthinessof this town yields to none in the province, exceptBexar, and to none whatsoever south of the samelatitude, between the Sabine and the Mississippi.There was a fort established here, by the French,as far back as the year 1717, in order to overawethe wandering tribes of red men, between theirborders and the colonists of Great Britain. Thesoil around it is of an easy nature and well adaptedto cultivation.I passed the day at Nacogdoches in getting informationfrom the principal patriots as to thegrievances imposed upon them by the Mexicangovernment ; and I passed the time very pleasantly,but I rather reckon not quite as much so as myADVENTURES iN TEXAS. 127friend the Bee hunter. In the evening, as I hadmissed him for several hours while I was attendingto the affairs of the patriots, I inquired for mycompanion, and was directed, by the landlord, toan apartment appropriated to his family, and accordinglyI pushed ahead. Before I reached thedoor, I heard the joyous and musical voice of theyoung rover singing as usual.I'd like to have a little farm,And leave such scenes as these,Where I could live, without a care,Completely at my ease.I'd like to have a pleasant houseUpon my little farm,Airy and cool in summer timeIn winter close and warm."And is there nothing else you'd like to haveto make you happy, Edward?" demanded a gentlevoice, which sounded even more musical in myear than that of the Bee hunter.Yes, in good faith there is, my gentle Kate ;and I'll tell you what it is," he exclaimed, andresumed his song : —I'd like to have a little wife —I reckon I know who, ;I'd like to have a little son —A little daughter too ;And when they'd climb upon my knee,I'd like a little toyTo give my pretty little girl,Another for my boy."128 COLONEL Crockett's0, fie, for shame of you to talk so, Edward''exclaimed the same gentle voice.Well, my pretty Kate, if you'll only listen,now, I'll tell you what I wouldn't like."^^ Let me hear that, by all means."1 should not like my wife to shakeA broomstick at my head —For then I might beo^in to thinkShe did not love her Ned ;But I should always like to seeHer gentle as a dove ;I should not like to have her scold —But be all joy and love."And there is not much danger, Edward, of herever being otherwise."Bless your sweet lips, that I am certain of,"exclaimed the Bee hunter, and I heard somethingthat sounded marvellously like a kiss. But heresumed his song : —If I had these I would not askFor any thing beside ;I'd be content thus smoothly throughThe tedious world to glide.My little wife and I would thenNo earthly troubles see —Surrounded iby our little ones,How happy we would be."I have always endeavoured to act up to thegolden rule of doing as I would be done by, and asI never liked to be interrupted on such occasions,ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 129I returned to the bar-room, where I found Thimblesseated on a table practising with his thimbles,his large white Vicksburg hat stuck in a most independentand impudent manner on the side of hishead. About half a dozen men were looking: onwith amazement at his skill, but he got no bets.When he caught my eye his countenance becamesort of confused, and he hastily thrust the thimbles^ into his pocket, saying, as he jumped from the table,"Just amusing myself a little, Colonel, to kill time,and show the natives that some things can be doneas well as others. — Let us take an deer." So wewalked up to the bar, took a nip, and let the matterdrop.p My horse had become lame, and I found I wouldnot be able to proceed with him, so I concluded tosell him and get another. A gentleman offered togive me a mustang in exchange, and I gladlyaccepted of his kindness. The mustangs are thewild horses, that are to be seen in droves ofthousands pasturing on the prairies. They aretaken by means of a lao, a long rope with a noose,which is thrown around their neck, and they aredragged to the ground with violence, and thensecured. These horses, which are considerablysmaller than those in the states, are very cheap,and are in such numbers, that in times of scarcity130 COLONEL Crockett'sof game the settlers and the Indians have made useof them as food. Thousands have been destroyedfor this purpose.I saw nothing of the Bee hunter until bed-time,and then I said nothing to him about what I hadoverheard. The next morning, as we were preparingfor an early start, I went into the privateapartment where my companion was, but he didnot appear quite as cheerful as usual. Shortlyafterward a young woman, about eighteen, enteredthe room. She was as healthy and blooming asthe wild flowers of the prairie. My companionintroduced me, she courtesies modestly, and turningto the Bee hunter, said, "Edward, I have madeyou a new deer skin sack since you were last here.Will you take it with you ? Your old one is sosoiled."No, no, dear Kate, I shall not have leisure togather wax this time."I have not yet shown you the fine large gourdthat I have slung for you. It will hold near agallon of water." She went to a closet, and producingit, suspended it around his shoulders."My own kind Kate!" he exclaimed, andlooked as if he would devour her with hiseyes.Have I forgotten any thing ? — Ah ! yes, yourADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 131books." She ran to the closet, and brought outtwo small volumes."One is sufficient this time, Kate — my Bible.I will leave the poet with you." She placed it inhis hunting bag, saying,You will find here some biscuit and deersinews, in case you should get bewildered in theprairies. You know you lost your way the lasttime, and were nearly famished.""Kind and considerate Kate."y. I began to find out that I was a sort of fifthwheel to a wagon, so I went to the front of thetavern to see about starting. There was a considerablecrowd there, and I made them a shortaddress on the occasion. I told them, among otherthings, that " I will die with my Betsey in myarms. No, I will not die — 1^11 grin down thewalls of the Alamo, and the Americans will lickup the Mexicans like fine salt."I mounted my little mustang, and my legs nearlycached the ground. The thimble conjurer was"also ready ; at length the Bee hunter made his appearance,followed by his sweetheart, whose eyeslooked as though she had been weeping. He took acordial leave of all his friends, for he appeared tobe a general favourite ; he then approached Kate,132 COLONEL Crockett'skissed her, and leaped upon his horse. He triedto conceal his emotion by singing, carelessly,Saddled and bridled, and booted rode he,A plume in his helmet, a sword at his knee."The tremulous and plaintive voice of Kate tookup the next two lines of the song, which soundedlike a prophecy :But toom cam' the saddle, all bluidy to see.And hame cam' the steed, but hame never cam' he."We started off rapidly, and left Nacogdochesamid the cheering of true patriots and kind friends.ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 133CHAPTER X.An hour or two elapsed before the Bee hunterrecovered his usual spirits, after parting from hiskind little Kate of Nacogdoches. The conjurerrallied him good humoured, and had becomequite a different man from what he was on thewest side of the Sabine. He sat erect in his saddle,stuck his large white Vicksburgerer conceitedly onhis bushy head, carried his rifle with as much easeand grace as if he had been used to the weapon,and altogether he assumed an air of impudence andindependence which showed that he had now a soulabove thimbles. The Bee hunter at length recoveredhis spirits, and commenced talking very pleasantly,for the matters he related were for the mostpart new to me.My companions, by way of beguiling the tediousnessof our journey, repeatedly played tricks uponeach other, which were taken in good part. Oneof them I will relate. We had observed that theBee hunter always disappeared on stopping at ahouse, running in to talk with the inhabitants and1S4 COLONEL Crockett'singratiate himself with the women, leaving us totake care of the horses. On reaching our stoppingplace at night he left us as usual, and while wewere rubbing down our mustangs, and hobblingthem, a negro boy came out of the house with ordersfrom our companion within to see to his horse,Thimblerig, who possessed a good share of roguishingenuity, after some inquiries about the gentlemanin the house, how he looked and what he was doing,told the boy, in rather a low voice, that he hadbetter not come nearer to him than was necessary,for it was possible he might hurt him, though stillhe didn't think he would. The boy asked whyhe need be afraid of him. He replied, he did notcertainly know that there was any reason — hehoped there was none — but the man had beenbitten by a mad dog, and it was rather uncertainwhether he was not growing mad himself. Still,he would not alarm the boy, but cautioned him notto be afraid, for there might be no danger, thoughthere was something rather strange in the conductof his poor friend. This was enough for the boy ;he was almost afraid to touch the horse of such aman ; and when, a moment afterward, our companioncame out of the house, he slunk awaybehind the horse, and though he was in a greathurry to get him unsaddled, kept his eyes fixedADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 135steadily on the owner, closely watching his motions.Take off that bridle' exclaimed the impatientBee hunter, in a stern voice : and the black boysprung off, and darted away as fast as his feet couldcarry him, much to the vexation and surprise ofour companion, who ran after him a little distance,but could in no way account for his singular andprovoking conduct. When we entered the housethings appeared a great deal more strange ; for thenegro had rushed hastily into the midst of thefamily, and in his terrified state communicated thealarming tale, that the gentleman had been bittenby a mad dog. He, unconscious all the time of thetrick that was playing off, endeavoured, as usual, torender himself as agreeable as possible, especiallyto the females with whom he had already formeda partial acquaintance. We could see that theylooked on him with apprehension, and retreatedwhenever he approached them. One of them tookan opportunity to inquire of Thimblerig the truthof the charge ; and his answer confirmed theirfears, and redoubled their caution ; though, afterconfessing with apparent candour, that his friendhad been bitten, he stated that there was no certaintyof evil consequences, and it was a thing whichof course could not be mentioned to the sufferer. .136 COLONEL Crockett's«As bed time approached the mistress of thehouse expressed her fears, lest trouble should arisein the night ; for the house, according to custom,contained but two rooms, and was not built forsecurity. She therefore urged us to sleep betweenhim and the door, and by no means to let him passus.It so happened, however, that he chose tosleep next the door, and it was with great difficultythat we could keep their fears within bounds. Theill-disguised alarm of the whole family was not lessa source of merriment to him who had been thecause, than of surprise and wonder to the subjectof it. Whatever member of the household he approachedpromptly withdrew, and as for the negro,whenever he was spoken to by him, he wouldjump and roll his eyes. In the morning, whenwe were about to depart, we commissioned ourbelied companion to pay our bill ; but as he approachedthe hostess she fled from him, and shutthe door in his face. " I want to pay our bill,"said he. " ! if you will only leave the house,"cried she, in terror, ^^you are welcome to yourlodging."The jest, however, did not end here. The Beehunter found out the trick that had been playedupon him, and determined to retaliate. As we wereabout mounting, the conjurer's big white Vicks-ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 137burger was unaccountably missing, and nowhereto be found. He was not altogether pleased withthe liberty that had been taken with him, and aftersearching some time in vain, he tied a handkerchiefaround his head, sprung upon his horse, and rodeoff with more gravity than usual. We had rodeabout two miles, the Bee hunter bantering theother with a story of his hat lying in pawn at thehouse we had left, and urged upon him to returnand redeem it ; but finding Thimblerig out of humour,and resolved not to return, he began torepent of his jest, and offered to go back and bringit, on condition that the past should be forgotten,and there should be no more retaliation. Theother consented to the terms, so lighting a cigarwith his sun glass, he set off at a rapid rate on hisreturn. He had not been gone long before I presentedThimblerig with his hat, for I had seen theBee hunter conceal it, and had secretly brought italong with me. It was some time before our ab ■sent friend overtook us, having frightened all thefamily away by his sudden return, and searched thewhole house without success. When he perceivedthe object of his ride upon the head of the conjurer,rand recollected the promise by which he had boundhimself not to have any more jesting, he couldonly exclaim, "Well, it's hard, but it's fair." We12*138 COLONEL Crockett'sall laughed heartily, and good humour was onceagain restored.Cane brakes are common in some parts of Texas*Our way led us through one of considerable extent.The frequent passage of men and horses had keptopen a narrow path not wide enough for two mustangsto pass with convenience. The reeds, thesame as are used in the northern states as fishingrods, had grown to the height of about twenty feet,and were so slender, that having no support directlyover the path, they drooped a little inward, and intermingledtheir tops, forming a complete coveringoverhead. We rode about a quarter of a mile alongthis singular arched avenue with the view of thesky completely shut out. The Bee hunter toldme that the largest brake is that which lines thebanks of Cane Creek, and is seventy miles inlength, with scarcely a tree to be seen the wholedistance. The reeds are eaten by cattle and horsesin the winter when the prairies yield little or noother food.When we came out of the brake we saw threeblack wolves jogging like dogs ahead of us, but attoo great a distance to reach them with a rifle.Wild turkeys and deer repeatedly crossed our path,and we saw several droves of wild horses pasturingin the prairies. These sights awakened the rulingADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 139passion strong within me, and I longed to have ahunt upon a large scale ; for though I had killedmany bears and deers in my time, I had neverbrought down a buffalo in all my life, and so I toldmy friends ; but they tried to dissuade me from it,by telling me that I would certainly lose my way,and perhaps perish ; for though it appeared as acultivated garden to the eye, it was still a wilderness.I said little more on the subject until wecrossed the Trinidad river, but every mile wetravelled I found the temptation grow stronger andstronger.The night after we crossed the river we fortunatelyfound shelter in the house of a poor woman,who had little but the barest necessaries to offer us.While we were securing our horses for the nightwe beheld two men approaching the house on foot.They were both armed with rifles and huntingknives, and though I have been accustomed to thesight of men who have not stepped far over theline of civilization, I must say these were just aboutthe roughest samples I had seen anywhere. Onewas a man of about fifty years old, tall and raw-boned.He was dressed in a sailor's round jacket,with a tarpaulin on his head. His whiskers nearlycovered his face ; his hair was coal black and long,and there was a deep scar across his forehead, and140 COLONEL Crockett'sanother on the back of his right hand. His companion,who was considerably younger, was bareheaded,and clad in a deer skin dress made afterour fashion. Though he was not much darkerthan the old man, I perceived that he was an Indian.They spoke friendly to the Bee hunter, for theyboth knew him, and said they were on their wayto join the Texian forces, at that time near the SanAntonio river. Though they had started withouthorses, they reckoned they would come across acouple before they went much farther. The rightof ownership to horse flesh is not much regardedin Texas, for those that have been taken from thewild droves are soon after turned out to graze onthe prairies, the owner having first branded themwith his mark, and hobbled them by tying theirfore feet together, which will enable another tocapture them just as readily as himself.The old woman set about preparing our supper,and apologized for the homely fare, which consistedof bacon and fried onions, when the Indian wentto a bag and produced a number of eggs of wildfowls, and a brace of fat rabbits, which werespeedily dressed, and we made as good a meal as ahungry man need wish to set down to. The oldman spoke very little ; but the Indian, who hadlived much among the whites, was talkative, andADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 141manifested much impatience to arrive at the army.The first opportunity that occurred I inquired ofthe Bee hunter who our new friends were, and hetold me that the old man had been for many yearsa pirate with the famous Lafitte, and that theIndian was a hunter belonging to a settler nearGalveston Bay. I had seen enough of land ratsat Washington, but this vas the first time that Iwas ever in company with a water rat to myknowledge ; however, baiting that black spot onhis escutcheon, he was a well behaved and inoffensiveman. Vice does not appear so shocking whenwe are familiar with the perpetrator of it.Thimblerig was for taking airs upon himselfafter learning who our companions were, and protestedto me, that he would not sit down at thesame table with a man who had outraged the lawsin such a manner ; for it was due to society thathonest men should discountenance such unprincipledcharacters, and much more to the same effect;when the old man speedily dissipated the gambler'sindignant feelings by calmly saying, " Stranger,you had better take a seat at the table, I think,"at the same time drawing a long hunting knifefrom his belt, and laying it on the table. " I thinkyou had better take some supper with us'' headded, in a mild tone, but fixing his eye sternly142 COLONEL Crockett'supon Thimblerig. The conjurer first eyed the knife,and then the fierce whiskers of the pirate, and,unlike some politicians, he wasn't long in makingup his mind what course to pursue, but he determinedto vote as the pirate voted, and said, "Isecond that motion, stranger," at the same timeseating himself on the bench beside me. The oldman then commenced cutting up the meat, forwhich purpose he had drawn his hunting knife,though the gambler had thought it was for a differentpurpose ; and being relieved from his fears,every thing passed ofi" quite sociable.Early the following morning we compensatedthe old woman for the trouble she had been at,and we mounted our horses and pursued our journey,our new friends following on foot, but promisingto arrive at the Alamo as soon as we should.About noon we stopped to refresh our horses beneatha cluster of trees that stood in the open prairie,and I again spoke of my longing for a buffalohunt. We were all seated on the grass, and theystrived hard to dissuade me from the folly of allowinga ruling passion to lead me into such imminentdanger and difficulty as I must necessarily encounter.All this time, while they were running downmy weakness, as they called it, Thimblerig wasamusing himself with his eternal thimbles and peaADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 143upon the crown of his big white hat. I could notrefrain from laughing outright to see with whatgravity and apparent interest he slipped the peafrom one thimble to another while in the midst ofa desert. Man is a queer animal, and Colonel DickJohnson is disposed to make him even queererthan Dame Nature originally intended.The Bee hunter told me, that if I was determinedto leave them, he had in his bag a paper of groundcoffee, and biscuit, which little Kate of Nacog-doches had desired him to carry for my use, whichhe handed to me, and proposed drinking her health,saying that she was one of the kindest and purestof God's creatures. We drank her health, andwished him all happiness when she should be hisown, which time he looked forward to with impatience.He still continued to dissuade me fromleaving them, and all the time he was talking hiseyes were wandering above, when suddenly hestopped, sprang to his feet, looked around for amoment, then leaped on his mustang, and withoutsaying a word, started off like mad, and scouredalong the prairie. We watched him, graduallydiminishing in size, until he seemed no larger thanarat, and finally disappeared in the distance. Iwas amazed, and thought to be sure the man wascrazy ; and Thimblerig, who continued his game,144 COLONEL Crockett'sresponded that he was unquestionably out of hishead.Shortly after the Bee hunter had disappeared weheard a noise something like the rumbling of distantthunder. The sky was clear, there were nosigns of a storm, and we concluded it could notproceed from that cause. On turning to the westwe saw an immense cloud of dust in the distance,but could perceive no object distinctly, and stillthe roaring continued. " What can all this mean ?"said I. " Burn my old shoes if I know," said theconjurer, gathering up his thimbles, and at thesame time cocking his large Vicksburgerer fiercelyon his head. We continued looking in the directionwhence the sound proceeded, the cloud of dustbecame thicker and thicker, and the roaring moredistinct — much louder than was ever heard in theWhite House at Washington.We at first imagined that it was a tornado, butwhatever it was, it was coming directly towardthe spot where we stood. Our mustangs had ceasedto graze, and cocked up their ears in evident alarm.We ran and caught them, took ofi^ the hobbles, androde into the grove of trees ; still the noise grev/louder and louder. We had scarcely got underthe shelter of the grove before the object approachednear enough for us to ascertain what itADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 145was. It was a herd of buffalo, at least four or fivehundred in number, dashing along as swift as thewind, and roaring as if so many devils had brokeloose. They passed near the grove, and, if we hadnot taken shelter there, we should have been ingreat danger of being trampled to death. My poorlittle mustang shook worse than a politician aboutto be turned out of office, as the drove came sweepingby. At their head, apart from the rest, was ablack bull, who appeared to be their leader ; hecame roaring along, his tail straight an end, andat times tossing up the earth with his horns.I never felt such a desire to have a crack at anythingin all my life. He drew nigh the placewhere I was standing; I raised my beautiful Betseyto my shoulder, took deliberate aim, blazed away,and he roared, and suddenly stopped. Those thatwhere near him did so likewise, and the concussionoccasioned by the impetus of those in the rear wassuch, that it was a miracle that some of them didnot break their legs or necks. The black bullstood for a few moments pawing the ground afterhe was shot, then darted off around the cluster oftrees, and made for the uplands of the prairies.The whole herd followed, sweeping by like a tornado,and I do say, I never witnessed a more beautifulsight to the eye of a hunter in all my life.146 COLONEL Crockett'sBear hunting is no more to be compared to it thanColonel Benton is to Henry Clay. I watched themfor a few moments, then clapped spurs to my mustangand followed in their wake, leaving Thimble-rigbehind me.I followed on the trail of the herd for at leasttwo hours, by which time the moving mass appearedlike a small cloud in the distant horizon.Still, I followed, my whole mind absorbed by theexcitement of the chase, until the object was entirelylost in the distance. I now paused to allowmy m^ustang to breathe, who did not altogetherfancy the rapidity of my movements, and to considerwhich course I would have to take to regainthe path I had abandoned. I might have retracedmy steps by following the trail of the buffalos, butit has always been my principle to go ahead, andso I turned to the west and pushed forward.I had not rode more than an hour before I foundthat I was as completely bewildered as " the Government"was when he entered upon an examinationof the Post office accounts. I looked around,and there was, as far as the eye could reach, spreadbefore me a country apparently in the highest stateof cultivation. Extended fields, beautiful and productive,groves of trees cleared from the underwood,and whose margins were as regular as if theADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 147art and taste of man had been employed upon them.But there was no other evidence that the sound ofthe axe, or the voice of man, had ever here disturbedthe solitude of nature. My eyes wouldhave cheated my senses into the belief that I wasin an earthly paradise, but my fears told me that Iwas in a wilderness.I pushed along, following the sun, for I had nocompass to guide me, and there was no other paththan that which my mustang made. Indeed, if Ihad found a beaten track, I should have been almostafraid to have followed it ; for my friend the BeeP hunter had told me, that once, when he had beenlost in the prairies, he had accidentally struck intoH his own path, and had travelled around and aroundfor a whole day before he discovered his error.This I thought was a poor way of going ahead; soI determined to make for the first large stream, andfollow its course.I had travelled several hours without seeing thetrace of a human being, and even game was almostas scarce as Benton's mint drops, except just aboutelection time, and I began to wish that I had followedthe advice of my companions. I was a gooddeal bothered to account for the abrupt manner inwhich the Bee hunter had absconded ; and I feltconcerned for the poor thimble conjurer who was148 COLONEL Crockett'sleft alone, and altogether unaccustomed to the difficultiesthat he would have to encounter. Whilemy mind was occupied with these unpleasant reflections,!was suddenly startled by another noveltyquite as great as that I have just described.I had just emerged from a beautiful grove oftrees, and was entering upon an extended prairie,which looked like the luxuriant meadows of athrifty farmer ; and as if nothing should be wantingto complete the delusion, but a short distance beforeme, there was a drove of about one hundredbeautiful horses quietly pasturing. It required someeffort to convince my mind that man had no agencyin this. But when I looked around, and fully realizedit all, I thought of him who had preached tomein the wilds of the Arkansas, and involuntarilyexclaimed, "God, what hast thou not done for man,and yet how little he does for thee ! Not evenrepays thee with gratitude !"I entered upon the prairie. The mustangs nosooner espied me than they raised their heads,whinnied, and began coursing around me in anextended circle, which gradually became smallerand smaller, until they closely surrounded me.My little rascally mustang enjoyed the sport, andfelt disposed to renew his acquaintance with hiswild companions; first turning his head to one,ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 149then to another, playfully biting the neck of thisone, rubbing noses Vv^ith that one, and kicking uphis heels at a third. I began to feel rather uncomfortable,and plied the spur pretty briskly to getout of the mess, but he was as obstinate as theold Roman" himself, who will be neither led nordriven. I kicked, and he kicked, but fortunatelyhe became tired first, and he made one start, intendingto escape from the annoyance if possible. AsI had an annoyance to escape from likewise, I beatthe devil's tattoo on his ribs, that he might havesome music to dance to, and we went ahead rightmerrily, the whole drove following in our wake,head up, and tail and mane streaming. My littlecritter, who was both blood and bottom, seemeddelighted at being at the head of the heap ; andhaving once got fairly started, I wish I may beshot if I did not find it impossible to stop him.He kept along, tossing his head proudly, and occasionallyneighing, as much as to say, " Come on,my hearties, you see I hasn't forgot our old amusementyes And they did come on with a vengeance,clatter, clatter, clatter, as if so many fiendshad broke loose. The prairie lay extended beforeme as far as the eye could reach, and I began tothink that there would be no end to the race.My little animal was full of fire and mettle, and13^150 THE LIFE OFbest. The old gentleman set out his bottle tous,and I concluded that if a horn wasn't goodthen, there was no use for its invention. So Iswig'd off about a half pint, and the young manwas by no means bashful in such a case ; he tooka strong pull at it too. I then gave my boy some,and in a little time we felt pretty well. We driedourselves by the fire, and were asked to go onboardof the boat that evening. I agreed to doso, but left my son with the old lady, and myselfand my young man went to the boat withMr. Owens and the others. The boat was loadedwith whiskey, flour, sugar, coffee, salt, castings,and other articles suitable for the country ;and they were to receive five hundred dollars tolandthe load at M^Lemore's Bluff, beside theprofit they could make on their load. This wasmerely to show that boats could get up to thatpoint We staid all night with them, and had ahigh night of it, as I took steam enough to driveout all the cold that was in me, and about threetimes as much more. In the morning we concludedto go on with the boat to where a greathurricane had crossed the river, and blowed allthe timber down into it. When we got there,we found the river was falling fast, and concludedwe couldn't get through the timber with-davidCROCKETT spoutmore rise ; so we drop'd clown opposite Mr.Owens' again, where they determined to wait formore water.The next day it rained rip-seriously, and theriver rose pretty considerable, but not enough yet.And so I got the boatsmen all to go out with me towhere I was going to settle, and we shaped up acabin in little or no time. I got from the boatfour barrels of meal, and one of salt, and about tengallons of whiskey.To pay for these, I agreed to go with the boatup the river to their landing place. I got also alarge middling of bacon, and killed a fine deer,and left them for my young man and my littleboy, who were to stay at my cabin till I got back;which I expected would be in six or seven days.We cut out, and moved up to the hurricane, wherewe stop'd for the night. In the morning I startedabout daylight, intending to kill a deer, as I hadno thought they would get the boat through thetimber that day. I had gone but a little way beforeI killed a fine buck, and started to go back tothe boat ; but on the way I came on the tracks of alarge gang of elks, and so I took after them. I hadfollowed them only a little distance when I sawthem, and directly after I saw two large bucks. Ishot one down, and the other wouldn't leave him ;152 COLONEL Crockett'sCHAPTER XI.After toiling for more than an hour to get mymustang upon his feet again, I gave it up as abad job, as little Van did when he attempted toraise himself to the moon by the waistband of hisbreeches. Night was fast closing in, and as Ibegan to think that I had had just about sportenough for one day, I might as well look aroundfor a place of shelter for the night, and take a freshstart in the morning, by which time I was inhopes my horse would be recruited. Near themargin of the river a large tree had been blowndown, and I thought of making my lair in its top,and approached it for that purpose. While beatingamong the branches I heard a low growl, as muchas to say, " Stranger, the apartments are alreadytaken." Looking about to see what sort of a bedfellowI was likely to have, I discovered, not morethan five or six paces from me, an enormous^Mexi-can cougar eyeing me as an epicure surveys thetable before he selects his dish, for I have no doubtthe cougar looked upon me as the subject of aADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 153future supper. Rays of light darted from his largeeyes, he showed his teeth like a negro in hysterics,and he was crouching on his haunches, ready for aspring; all of which convinced me that unless Iwas pretty quick upon the trigger, posterity wouldknow little of the termination of my eventfulcareer, and it would be far less glorious and usefulthan I intend to make it.One glance satisfied me that there was no timeto be lost, as Pat thought when falling from achurch steeple, and exclaimed, " This would bemighty pleasant, now, if it would only last," — butthere was no retreat, either for me or the cougar,so I levelled my Betsey, and blazed away. Thereport was followed by a furious growl, (which issometimes the case in Congress,) and the nextmoment, when I expected to find the tarnal critterstruggling with death, I beheld him shaking hishead as if nothing more than a bee had stung him.The ball had struck him on the forehead, andglanced off, doing no other injury than stunninghim for an instant, and tearing off the skin, whichtended to infuriate him the more. The cougarwasn't long in making up his mind what to donorwas I neither; but he would have it all hisown way, and vetoed my motion to back out. Ihad not retreated three steps before he sprang at154 COLONEL Crockett'sme like a steamboat ; I stepped aside, and as he litupon the ground I struck him violently with thebarrel of my rifle, but he didn't mind that, butwheeled round and made at me again. The gunwas now of no use, so I threw it away, and drewmy hunting knife, for I knew we should come toclose quarters before the fight would be over.This time he succeeded in fastening on my leftarm, and was just beginning to amuse himself bytearing the flesh off with his fangs, when I rippedmy knife into his side, and he let go his hold muchto my satisfaction.He wheeled about and came at me with increasedfury, occasioned by the smarting of his wounds. Inow tried to blind him, knowing that if I succeededhe would become an easy prey ; so as he approachedme I watched my opportunity, and aimed a blowat his eyes with my knife, but unfortunately itstruck him on the nose, and he paid no other attentionto it than by a shake of the head and a lowgrowl. He pressed me close, and as I was steppingbackward my foot tripped in a vine, and I fell tothe ground. He was down upon me like a nighthawkupon a June bug. He seized hold of theouter part of my right thigh, which afforded himconsiderable amusement ; the hinder part of hisbody was toward my face ; I grasped his tail withAt)VENTURES IN TEXAS. 155my left hand, and tickled his ribs with my huntingknife, which I held in my right. Still, the critterwouldn't let go his hold ; and as I found that hewould lacerate my leg dreadfully unless he wasspeedily shaken off, I tried to hurl him down thebank into the river, for our scuffle had alreadybrought us to the edge of the bank. I stuck myknife into his side, and summoned all my strengthto throw him over. He resisted, was desperateheavy ; but at last I got him so far down thedeclivity that he lost his balance, and he rolled^ over and over until he landed on the margin ofthe river ; but in his fall he dragged me along withhim. Fortunately I fell uppermost, and his neckpresented a fair mark for my hunting knife. Withoutallowing myself time even to draw breath, Iaimed one desperate blow at his neck, and theknife entered his gullet up to the handle, andreached his heart. He struggled for a few moments,and died. I have had many fights withbears, but that was mere child's play ; this wasthe first fight ever I had with a cougar, and I hopeit may be the last.I now returned to the tree top to see if any oneelse would dispute my lodging; but now I couldtake peaceable and quiet possession. I partedsome of the branches, and cut away others to9,156 COLONEL CROCKETT Smake a bed in the opening; I then gathered aquantity of moss, which hung in festoons fromthe trees, which I spread on the litter, and overthis I spread my horse blanket ; and I had ascomfortable a bed as a weary man need ask for.I now took another look at my mustang, and fromall appearances he would not live until morning.I ate some of the cakes that little Late of Nacog-doches had made for me, and then carried mysaddle into my tree top, and threw myself downupon my bed, with no very pleasant rejections atthe prospect before me.I was weary, and soon fell asleep, and did notawake until daybreak the next day. I felt somewhatstiff and sore from the wounds I had receivedin the conflict with the cougar ; but I consideredmyself as having made a lucky escape. I leakedover the bank, and as I saw the carcass of thecougar lying there, I thought that it was an evenchance that we had not exchanged conditions ; andI felt grateful that the fight had ended as it did.I now went to look after my mustang, fully expectingto find him as dead as the cougar ; but whatwas my astonishment to find that he had disappearedwithout leaving trace of hair or hide ofhim. I first supposed that some beasts of preyhad consumed the poor critter ; but then theyADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 157wouldn't have eaten his hones ; and he had vanishedas effectually as the deposits, without leavingany mark of the course they had taken. Thisbothered me amazing; I couldn't figure it out byany rule that I had ever heard of, so I concludedto think no more about it.I felt a craving for something to eat, and lookingaround for some game, I saw a flock of geese onthe shore of the river. I shot a fine fat gander,and soon stripped him of his feathers; and gatheringsome light wood, I kindled a fire, run a longstick through my goose, for a spit, and put it downto roast, supported by two sticks with prongs. Ihad a desire for some coffee; and having a tin cupwith me, I poured the paper of ground coffee thatI had received from the Bee hunter into it, andmade a strong cup, which was very refreshing.Off of my goose and biscuit I made a hearty meal,and was preparing to depart, without clearing upthe breakfast things, or knowing which directionto pursue, when I was somewhat taken aback byanother of the wild scenes of the west. I heard asound like the trampling of many horses, and Ithought to be sure the mustangs or buffalos werecoming upon me again ; but on raising my head Ibeheld in the distance about fifty mounted Cuman-chest, with their spears glittering in the morning158 COLONEL Crockett'ssun, dashing toward the spot where I stood at fullspeed. As the column advanced it divided, accordingto their usual practice, into two semicircles,and in an instant I was surrounded. Quicker thanthought I sprang to my rifle, but as my hand graspedit, I felt that resistance against so many would beof as little use as pumping for thunder in dryweather.The chief was for making love to my beautifulBetsey, but I clung fast to her, and assuming anair of composure, I demanded whether their nationwas at war with the Americans. " No,'^ was thereply. " Do you like the Americans ?" " Yes,they are our friends." " Where do you get yourspear heads, your rifles, your blankets, and yourknives from ?" " Get them from our friends, theAmericans." "Well, do you think if you werepassing through their nation, as I am passingthrough yours, they would attempt to rob you ofyour property ?" " No, they would feed me, andprotect me; and the Cumanche will do the sameby his white brother."I now asked him what it was had directed himto the spot where I was, and he told me, thatthey had seen the smoke from a great distance,and had come to see the cause of it. He inquiredwhat had brought me there alone ; and I told himAdventures IN TEXAS. 159that T had come to hunt, and that my mustanghad become exhausted, and though I thought hewas about to die, that he had escaped from me ; atwhich the chief gave a low chucking laugh, andsaid it was all a trick of the mustang, which is themost wily and cunning of all animals. But heesaid that as I was a brave hunter he would furnishime with another; he gave orders, and a fine younghorse was immediately brought forward.When the party approached there were threeold squaws at their head, who made a noise withtheir mouths, and served as trumpeters. I nowtold the chief that, as I now had a horse, I wouldgo for my saddle, which was in the place whereI had slept. As I approached the spot I discoveredone of the squaws devouring the remains of myroasted goose, but my saddle and bridle were nowhereto be found. Almost in despair of seeingthem again, I observed, in a thicket at a little distance,one of the trumpeters kicking and belabouringher horse to make him move off, while thesagacious beast would not move a step from thetroop. I followed her, and, thanks to her restivemustang, secured my property, which the chiefmade her restore to me. Some of the warriorshad by this time discovered the body of the cougar,and had already commenced skinning it; and COLONEL Crockett'sing how many stabs were about it, I related to thechief the desperate struggle I had had ; he said,Brave hunter, brave man," and wished me to beadopted into his tribe, but I respectfully declinedthe honour. He then offered to see me on myway ; and I asked him to accompany me to theColorado river, if he was going in that direction,which he agreed to do. I put my saddle on myfresh horse, mounted, and we darted off, at a ratenot much slower than I had rode the day previouswith the wild herd, the old squaws at the head ofthe troop braying like young jackass the wholeway.About three hours after starting we saw a droveof mustangs quietly pasturing in the prairie at adistance. One of the Indians immediately got hislasso ready, which was a long rope made of hideplaited like whip cord, with an iron ring atoneend, through which the rope was passed so asto form a noose ; and thus prepared, he dartedahead of the troop to make a capture. Theyallowed him to approach pretty nigh, he all thetime flourishing his lasso ; but before he got withinreaching distance, they started off at a brisk canter,made two or three wide circuits around him, asif they would spy-out what he was after, thenabruptly changed their course, and disappeared.ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 161One mustang out of all the drove remained standingquietly ; the Indian made up to him, tl^evvthe lasso, but the mustang dodged his head betweenhis fore legs, and escaped the noose, but did notattempt to escape. The Indian then rode up tohim, and the horse very patiently submitted whilehe put a bridle on him, and secured him. WhenI approached, I immediately recognised in thecaptive the pestilent little animal that had shammedsickness and escaped from me the day before ; andwhen he caught my eye he cast down his headand looked rather sheepish, as if he were sensibleand ashamed of the dirty trick he had played me.I expressed my astonishment to the Indian chiefat the mustang's allowing himself to be capturedwithout an effort to escape ; and he told me, thatthey are generally hurled to the ground with suchviolence when first taken with the lasso, that theyremember it ever after, and that the sight of it willsubdue them to submission, though they may haverun wild for years. Just so with an office holder,who, being kicked out, turns patriot — shake acommission at him, and the fire of his patriotismusually escapes in smoke.We travelled all day, and toward evening wecame across a small drove of buffalos; and it was abeautiful sight to behold with what skill the Indians14*162 COLONEL Crockett'shunted down this noble game. There are nohorsemen who ride more gracefully than theCumanches ; and they sit so closely, and holdsuch absolute control over the horse, that heseems to be part of their own person. I had thegood fortune to bring down a young heifer, and asit was the only beef that we killed, the chief againcomplimented me as being a brave hunter ; andwhile they were preparing the heifer for our supperI related to him many of my hunting exploits, atwhich he manifested pleasure and much astonishmentfor an Indian. He again urged upon me tobecome one of the tribe.We made a hearty supper, hobbled our mustangs,which we turned into the prairie to graze,and then encamped for the night. I awoke abouttwo hours before daybreak, and looking over thetract of country through which we had travelled,the sky was as bright and clear as if the sun hadalready risen. I watched it for some time withoutbeing able to account for it, and asked my friend,the chief, to explain, who told me that the prairiewas on fire, and that it must have caught when wecooked our dinner. I have seen hundreds of acresof mountain timber on fire in my time, but this isthe first time that I ever saw a prairie burning.Nothing of interest occurred until we reachedADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 163the Colorado, and were following the giver to theplace where it crosses the road to Bexar, whichplace the Indians promised to conduct me to. Wesaw a light column of smoke ascending in the clearsky, and hastened toward it. It proceeded from asmall cluster of trees near the river. When wecame within five hundred yards of it, the warriorsextended their line around the object, and the chiefand myself cautiously approached it. When wecame within eyeshot, what was my astonishmentto discover a solitary man seated on the groundnear the fire, so intent upon some pursuit that hedid not perceive our approach. We drew nigh tohim, and still he was unconscious of our approach.It was poor Thimblerig practising his game ofthimbles upon the crown of his white Vicksburgerer.This is what I call the ruling passion most amazingstrong. The chief shouted the war whoop, andsuddenly the warriors came rushing in from allquarters, preceded by the old squaw trumpeterssqualling like mad. The conjurer sprang to hisfeet, and was ready to sink into the earth when hebeheld the ferocious looking fellows that surroundedhim. I stepped up, took him by the hand, andquieted his fears. I told the chief that he was afriend of mine, and I was very glad to have foundhim, for I was afraid that he had perished. I now164 COLONEL Crockett'sthanked him for his kindness in guiding me overthe prairies, and gave him a large Bowie knife,which he said he would keep for the sake of thebrave hunter. The whole squadron then wheeledoff, and I saw them no more. I have met withmany polite men in my time, but no one who possessedin a greater degree what may be called truespontaneous politeness than this Cumanche chief,always excepting Philip Hone, Esq., of New York,whom I look upon as the politest man I ever didsee ; for when he asked me to take a drink at hisown side-board he turned his back upon me, thatI oughtn't be ashamed to fill as much as I wanted.That was what I call doing the fair thing.Thimblerig was delighted at meeting me again,but it was some time before he recovered sufficientlyfrom the cold sweat into which the suddenappearance of the Indians had thrown him torecount his adventures to me. He said that he feltrather down-hearted when he found himself abandonedboth by the Bee hunter and myself, and heknew not which course to pursue ; but after thinkingabout the matter for two hours, he had madeup his mind to retrace the road we had travelledover, and had mounted his mustang for that purpose,when he spied the Bee hunter laden withhoney. The mystery of his abrupt departure wasADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 165now fully accounted for; he had spied a solitarybee shaping its course to its hive, and at the momenthe couldn't control the ruling passion, butfollowed the bee without reflecting for a momentupon the difficulties and dangers that his thoughtlessnessmight occasion his friends.I now asked him what had become of the Beehunter, and he said that he had gone out in pursuitof game for their supper, and he expected that hewould return shortly, as he had been absent atleast an hour. While we where still speaking ourfriend appeared, bending under the weight of awild turkey. He manifested great joy at meetingwith me so unexpectedly ; and desiring the con-^jurer to pluck the feathers off the bird, vrhich hecheerfully undertook, for he said he had beenaccustomed to plucking pigeons, we set aboutpreparing our supper.The position we occupied was directly on theroute leading to Bexar, and at the crossings of theColorado. We were about to commence our supper,for the turkey was done in beautiful style,when the sound of a horse neighing startled us.We looked over the prairie, and beheld two menapproaching on horseback, and both armed withrifles and knives. The Bee hunter said that itwas time for us to be on our guard, for we should166 COLONEL Crockett'smeet, perhaps, more enemies than friends as soonas we crossed the river, and the new-comers weremaking directly for the spot we occupied ; but, asthey were only two, it occasioned no uneasiness.As they drew nigh we recognised the strangers ;they turned out to be the old pirate and the Indianhunter who had lodged with us a few nights before.We hailed them, and on seeing us they alightedand asked permission to join our party, which wegladly agreed to, as our journey was becomingrather more perilous every mile we advanced.They partook of our turkey, and as they had somesmall cakes of bread, which they threw into thegeneral stock, we made a hearty supper ; and, aftera battle song from the Bee hunter, we prepared torest for the night.Early next morning we crossed the river, andpushed forward for the fortress of Alamo. Theold pirate was still as taciturn as ever, but hiscompanion was talkative and in good spirits. Iasked him where he had procured their mustangs,and he said that he had found them hobbled inBurnet's Grant just at a time that he felt very tired ;and as he believed that no one would lay claim tothem at Bexar, he couldn't resist mounting one,and persuading his friend to mount the other.Nothing of interest occurred until we cameAdventures IN TEXAS. 167within about twenty miles of San Antonio. Wewere in the open prairie, and beheld a band ofabout fifteen or twenty armed men approaching usat full speed. " Look out for squalls' said theold pirate, who had not spoken for an hour; "theyare a scouting party of Mexicans'' "And arethree or four times our number," said Thimblerig.No matter," replied the old man ; " they areconvicts, jail birds, and cowardly ruffians, no doubt,who would tremble at a loud word as much as amustang at the sight of the lasso. — Let us spreadourselves, dismount, and trust to our arms."We followed his orders, and stood beside ourhorses, which served to protect our persons, andwe awaited the approach of the enemy. Whenthey perceived this movement of ours, they checkedtheir speed, appeared to consult together for afew minutes, then spread their line, and camewithin rifle shot of us. The leader called out tousin Spanish, but as I did not understand him, Iasked the old man what it was, who said he calledupon us to surrender."There will be a brush with those blackguards,"continued the pirate. " Now each of you singleout your man for the first fire, and they are greaterfools than I take them for if they give us a chanceat a second. — Colonel; as you are a good shot, just168 COLONEL Crockett'ssettle the business for that talking fellow with thered feather ; he's worth any three of the party."Surrender, or we fire' shouted the fellowwith the red feather in Spanish.Fire, and be d d," returned the pirate, atthe top of his voice, in plain English.And sure enough they took his advice, for thenext minute we were saluted with a discharge ofmusketry, the report of which was so loud that wewere convinced they all had fired. Before thesmoke had cleared away we had each selected ourman, fired, and I never did see such a scatteringamong their ranks as followed. We beheld severalmustangs running wild without their riders overthe prairie, and the balance of the company werealready retreating at a more rapid gait than theyapproached. We hastily mounted, and commencedpursuit, which we kept up until we beheld the independentflag flying from the battlements of thefortress of Alamo, our place of destination. Thefugitives succeeded in evading our pursuit, and werode up to the gates of the fortress, announced tothe sentinel who we where, and the gates werethrown open ; and we entered amid shouts ofwelcome bestowed upon us by the patriots.ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 169CHAPTER XII.The fortress of Alamo is at the town of Bexar,on the San Antonio river, which flows through thetown. Bexar is about one hundred and forty milesfrom the coast, and contains upward of twelvehundred citizens, all native Mexicans, with theexception of a few American families who havesettled there. Besides these there is a garrisonof soldiers, and trading pedlars of every description,who resort to it from the borders of the RioGrande, as their nearest depot of American goods.A military outpost was established at this spot bythe Spanish government in 1718. In 1731 thetown was settled by emigrants sent out from theCanary Islands by the King of Spain. It becamea flourishing settlement, and so continued until therevolution in 1812, since which period the Cuman-che and other Indians have greatly harassed theinhabitants, producing much individual suffering,ll and totally destroying, for a season at least, theprospects of the town. Its site is one of the mostbeautiful in the western world. The air is salusCOLONEL Crockett'sbroils, the water delightful, especially when mixedwith a little of the ardent, and the health of thecitizens is proverbial. The soil around it is highlyfertile, and well calculated for cotton and grain.The gallant young Colonel Travis, who commandsthe Texitin forces in the fortress of Alamo,received me like a man ; and though he can barelymuster one hundred and fifty efficient men, shouldSanta Anna make an attack upon us, with the wholehost of ruffians that the Mexican prisons can disgorge,he will have snakes to eat before he getsover the wall, I tell you. But one spirit appearsto animate the little band of patriots — and that isliberty, or death. To worship God according tothe dictates of their own conscience, and governthemselves as freemen should be governed.All the world knows, by this time, that the townof Bexar, or, as some call it, San Antonio, wascaptured from the Mexicans by General Bullion,on the 10th day of December, 1835, after a severestruggle of five days and five nights, during whichhe sustained a loss of four men only, but the braveold Colonel Milan was among them. There wereseventeen hundred men in the town, and theTexian force consisted of but two hundred andsixteen. The Mexicans had walled up the streetsleading from the public square, intending to makeADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 171a desperate resistance: the Texians however madean entrance, and valiantly drove them from houseto house, until General Cos retreated to the castleof Alamo, without the city, and there hoisted thewhite flag, and sent out the terms of capitulation,which were as follows :*general Cos is to retire within six days, withhis officers, arms, and private property, on paroleof honour. He is not to oppose the re-establishmentof the constitution of 1824.The infantry, and the cavalry, the remnant ofMorale's battalion, and the convicts, to return,taking with them ten rounds of cartridge for safetyagainst the Indians.^ All public property, money, arms, and ammunition,to be delivered to General Bullion, of theTexian army's-with some other stipulations inrelation to the sick and wounded, private property,and prisoners of war. The Texians would nothave acceded to them, preferring to storm him inhis stronghold, but at this critical juncture theyhadn't a single round of ammunition left, havingfought from the 5th to the 9th of the month.General Ugartechea had arrived but the day beforewith three hundred troops, and the four hundredconvicts mentioned above, making a reinforcementof seven hundred men; but such rubbish was no172 COLONEL Crockett'sgreat obstacle to the march of freedom. TheMexicans lost about three hundred men duringthe siege, and the Texians had only four killed,and twenty wounded. The articles of capitulationbeing signed, we marched into the town, tookpossession of the fortress, hoisted the independentflag, and told the late proprietors to pack up theirmoveables and clear out in the snapping of atrigger, as we did not think our pockets quite safewith so many jail birds around us. And this isthe way the Alamo came into our possession ; butthe way we shall maintain our possession of it willbe a subject for the future historian to record, ormy name's not Crockett. — I wish I may be shotif I don't go ahead to the last.I found Colonel Bowie, of Louisiana, in thefortress, a man celebrated for having been in moredesperate personal conflicts than any other in thecountry, and whose name has been given to aknife of a peculiar construction, which is now ingeneral use in the south-west. I was introducedto him by Colonel Travis, and he gave me afriendly welcome, and appeared to be mightilypleased that I had arrived safe. While we wereconversing he had occasion to draw his famousknife to cut a strap, and I wish I may be shot ifthe bare sight of it wasn't enough to give a manADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 173of a squeamish stomach the cholic, specially beforebreakfast. He saw I was admiring it, and said he.Colonel, you might tickle a fellow's ribs a longtimewith this little instrument before you'd makehim laugh ; and many a time have I seen a manpuke at the idea of the point touching the pit ofhis stomacherMy companions, the Bee hunter and the conjurer,joined us, and the colonel appeared to knowthem both very well. He had a high opinion ofthe Bee hunter, for turning to me, he said, " Colonel,you could not have had a braver, better, ormore pleasant fellow for a companion than honestNed here. With fifteen hundred such men 1would undertake to march to the city of Mexico,and occupy the seat of Santa Anna myself beforethree months should elapse."The colonel's life has been marked by constantperil and deeds of daring. A few years ago hewent on a hunting excursion into the prairies ofTexas, with nine companions. They were attackedby a roving party of Cumanches, about two hundredstrong, and such was the science of the colonelin this sort of wild warfare, that after killinga considerable number of the enemy, he fairlyfrightened the remainder from the field of action,and they fled in utter dismay. The fight took15*174 COLONEL Crockett'splace among the high grass in the open prairie.He ordered his men to dismount from their horsesand scatter; to take deliberate aim before theyfired, but as soon as they had discharged theirrifles, to fall flat on the ground and crawl awayfrom the spot, and reload their pieces. By thisscheme they not only escaped the fire of the Indians,but by suddenly discharging their gunsfrom another quarter, they created the impressionthat their party was a numerous one ; and theIndians, finding that they were fighting against aninvisible enemy, after losing about thirty of theirmen, took to flight, believing themselves lucky inhaving escaped with no greater loss. But one ofthe colonel's party was slightly wounded, and thatwas owing to his remaining to reload his riflewithout having first shifted his position.Santa Anna, it is said, roars like an angry lionat the disgraceful defeat that his brother-in-law,General Cos, lately met with at this place. It isrumoured that he has recruited a large force, andcommenced his march to San Louis de Potash, andhe is determined to carry on a war of extermination.He is liberal in applying his epithets to ourcountrymen in Texas, and denounces them as aset of perfidious wretches, whom the compassionof the generous Mexicans has permitted to takeADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 175refuge in their country; and who, like the serpent inthe fable, no sooner warmed themselves than theystung their benefactors. This is a good joke. —By what title does Mexico lay claim to all theterritory which belonged to Spain in North America? Each province or state of New Spain contendedseparately or jointly, just as it happened,for their independence, as we did, and were notunited under a general government representingthe whole of the Spanish possessions, which wasonly done afterward by mutual agreement or federation.Let it be remembered that the Spanishauthorities were first expelled from Texas by theAmerican settlers, who, from the treachery of theirMexican associates, were unable to retain it ; butthe second time they were more successful. Theycertainly had as good a right to the soil thus conqueredby them, as the inhabitants of other provinceswho succeeded against Spain. The Mexicanstalk of the ingratitude of the Americans ; thetruth is, that the ingratitude has been on the otherside. What was the war of Texas, in 1813, whenthe revolutionary spark was almost extinguished inMexico ? What was the expedition of Mina, andhis three hundred American Spartans, who perishedheroically in the very heart of Mexico, in the vainattempt to resuscitate and keep alive the spark of176 COLONEL Crockett'sindependence which has at this time kindled suchan ungrateful blaze ? If a just estimate could bemade of the lives and the treasures contributed by-americanenterprise in that cause, it would appearincredible. How did the Mexicans obtain theirindependence at last ? Was it by their own virtueand courage ? No, it was by the treachery of oneof the king's generals, who established himself bysuccessful treason, and they have been in constantcommotion ever since, which proves they are unfitto govern themselves, much less a free and enlightenedpeople at a distance of twelve hundredmiles from them.The Mexican government, by its colonizationlaws, invited and induced the Anglo-Americanpopulation of Texas to colonize its wilderness,under the pledged faith of a written constitution,that they should continue to enjoy that constitutionalliberty and republican government to whichthey had been habituated in the land of their birth,the United States of America. In this expectationthey have been cruelly disappointed, as the Mexicannation has acquiesced in the late changes madein the government by Santa Anna ; who, havingoverturned the constitution of this country, nowosiers the settlers the cruel alternative, either toabandon their homes, acquired by so many priva-adventuresIN TEXAS. 177tons, or submit to the most intolerable of alltyranny, the combined despotism of the swordand the priesthood.But Santa Anna charges the Americans withingratitude! This is something like Satan revilingsin. I have gathered some particulars of the lifeof this moral personage from a gentleman at presentin the Alamo, and who is intimately acquaintedwith him, which I weill copy into my book exactlyas he wrote it.Santa Anna is about forty-two years of age, andwas born in the city of Vera Cruz. His fatherwas a Spaniard, of old Spain, of respectable standing,though poor ; his mother was a Mexican. Hereceived a common education, and at the age ofthirteen or fourteen was taken into the militaryfamily of the then Intendant of Vera Cruz, GeneralDavila, who took a great fancy to him, andbrought him up. He remained with General Da-vileuntil about the year 1820. While with Davilahe was made a major, and when installed he tookthe honours very coolly, and on some of his friendscongratulating him, he said, " If you were to makeme a god, I should desire to be something greater.'^This trait, developed at so early a period of his life,indicated the existence of that vaulting ambitionwhich has ever since characterized his life.178 COLONEL Crockett'sAfter serving the Spanish royal cause until 1821,he left Vera Cruz, turned against his old masterand benefactor, and placed himself at the head ofsome irregular troops which he raised on the seacoastnear Vera Cruz, and which are called Jaro-chios in their language, and which were denominatedby him his Cossacks, as they are all mounted andarmed with spears. With this rude cavalry hebesieged Vera Cruz, drove Davila into the castleof San Juan d'Ulloa, and after having been repulsedagain entered at a subsequent period, and got entirepossession of the city, expelling therefrom the oldSpanish troops, and reducing the power of themother country in Mexico to the walls of thecastle.Subsequent to this, Davila is said to have obtainedan interview with Santa Anna, and told himhe was destined to act a prominent part in thehistory of his country. 'sand now," says he, "Iwill give you some advice : always go with thestrongest party." He always acted up to thismotto until he raised the grit, (or cry,) in otherwords, took up the cudgels for the friars andchurch. He then overturned the federal government,and established a central despotism, of whichthe priests and the military were the two privilegedorders. His life has been, from the first, ofADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 179the most romantic kind ; constantly in revolutions,constantly victorious.His manners are extremely affable ; he is full ofanecdote and humour, and makes himself exceedinglyfascinating and agreeable to all who comeinto his company ; he is about five feet ten, ratherspare, has a moderately high forehead, with blackhair, short black whiskers, without mustachios, andan eye large, black, and expressive of a lurkingdevil in his look ; he is a man of genteel and dignifieddeportment, but of a disposition perfectlyheartless. He married a Spanish lady of property,a native of Alvarado, and through that marriageobtained the first part of his estate, called Mannade Clave, six leagues from Vera Cruz. He hasthree fine children, yet quite young.The following striking anecdote of Santa Annaillustrates his peculiar quickness and management:During the revolution of 1829, while he was shutup in Oxaca, and surrounded by the governmenttroops, and reduced to the utmost straits for thewant of money and provisions, having a very smallforce, there had been, in consequence of the siegeand firing every day through the streets, no massfor several weeks. He had no money, and hitupon the following expedient to get it: he tookpossession of one of the convents, got hold of the180 COLONEL Cricketswardrobe of the friars, dressed his officers andsome of his soldiers in it, and early in the morninghad the bells rung for the mass. The people, delightedat having again an opportunity of adoringthe Supreme Being, flocked to the church where hewas ; and after the house was pretty well filled, hisfriars showed their side-arms and bayonets frombeneath their cowls, and closed the doors upon theassembled multitude. At this unexpected denouementthere was a tremendous shrieking, when oneof his officers ascended the pulpit, and told the peoplethat he wanted ten thousand dollars, and musthave it. He finally succeeded in getting aboutthirty-six hundred dollars, when he dismissed thecongregation.As a sample of Santa Anna's pious whims werelate the folio wins; :In the same campaign of Oxaca, Santa Anna andhis officers were there besieged by Rincon, whocommanded the government troops. Santa Annawas in a convent surrounded by a small breastwork.Some of the officers one night, to amusethemselves, took the wooden saints out of thechurch and placed them as sentries, dressed in uniforms,on the breastwork. Rincon, alarmed onthe morning at this apparent boldness, began tofire away at the wooden images, supposing themiADVENTURES IN TEXAS. "- 181to be flesh and blood ; and it was not until someof the officers who were not in the secret hadimplored Santa Anna to prevent this desecrationthat the firing ceased.Many similar facts are related of him. He is,in fact, all things to all men ; and yet, after histreachery to Davila, he has the impudence to talkabout ingratitude. He never was out of Mexico.If I only live to tree him, and take him prisoner,I shall ask for no more glory in this life.132 COLONEL Crockett'sCHAPTER XIII.I WRITE this on the nineteenth of February,1836, at San Antonio. We are all in high spirits,though we are rather short of provisions, for menwho have appetites that could digest any thing butoppression ; but no matter, we have a prospect ofsoon getting our bellies full of fighting, and that isvictuals and drink to a true patriot any day. Wehad a little sort of convivial party last evening :just about a dozen of us set to work, most patriotically,to see whether v/e could not get rid ofthat curse of the land, whisky, and we made considerableprogress ; but my poor friend. Thimble-rig,got sewed up just about as tight as the eyelet-holein a lady's corset, and a little tighter too, Ireckon ; for when we went to bed he called for aboot-jack, which was brought to him, and he bentdown on his hands and knees, and very gravelypulled off his hat with it, for the darned critterwas so thoroughly swiped that he didn't know hishead from his heels. But this wasn't all the follyhe committed : he pulled off his coat and laid itADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 183on the bed, and then hung himself over the backof a chair ; and I wish I may be shot if he didn'tgo to sleep in that position, thinking every thinghad been done according to Gunter's late scale.Seeing the poor fellow completely used up, I carriedhim to bed, though he did belong to the Temperancesociety; and he knew nothing about whathad occurred until I told him next morning. TheBee hunter didnH join us in this blow-out. Indeed,he will seldom drink more than just enoughto prevent his being called a total abstinence man.But then he is the most jovial fellow for a waterdrinker I ever did see.This morning I saw a caravan of about fiftymules passing by Bexar, and bound for Santa Fe.They were loaded with different articles to such adegree that it was astonishing how they could travelat all, and they were nearly worn out by theirlabours. They were without bridle or halter, andyet proceeded with perfect regularity in a singleline; and the owners of the caravan rode theirmustangs with their enormous spurs, weighing atleast a pound a piece, with rowels an inch and ahalf in length, and lever bits of the harshest description,able to break the jaws of their animalsunder a very gentle pressure. The men were(Pressed in the costume of Mexicans. Colonel184 COLONEL Crockett'sTravis sent out a guard to see that they were notladen with munitions of war for the enemy. Iwent out with the party. The poor mules werebending under a burden of more than three hundredpounds, without including the panniers, whichwere bound so tight as almost to stop the breathof the poor animal. Each of the sorrowful linecame up, spontaneously, in turn to have his girthunbound and his load removed. They seemedscarcely able to keep upon their feet, and as theysuccessively obtained relief, one after anotherheaved a long and deep sigh, which it was painfulto hear, because it proved that the poor brutes hadbeen worked beyond their strength. What aworld of misery man inflicts upon the rest ofcreation in his brief passage through life !Finding that the caravan contained nothing intendedfor the enemy, we assisted the owners toreplace the heavy burdens on the backs of thepatient but dejected mules, and allowed them topursue their weary and lonely way. For full twohours we could see them slowly winding alongthe narrow path, a faint line that ran like a threadthrough the extended prairie ; and finally theywere whittled down to the little end of nothingin the distance, and were blotted out from thehorizon.ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 185The caravan had no sooner disappeared than oneof the hunters, who had been absent several days,came in. He was one of those gentlemen whodon't pride themselves much upon their costume,and reminded me of a covey who came into atavern in New York when I was last in that city.He was dressed in five jackets, all of which failedto conceal his raggedness, and as he bolted in, heexclaimed,Worse than I look, by . But no matter,I've let myself for fourteen dollars a month, andfind my own prog and lodging."To do what ?" demanded the barkeeper.To stand at the corner for a paper-mill sign —cash for rags' — that's all. I'm about to enterupon the stationery business, )sou see." He tossedofi'his grog, and bustled out to begin his day's work.But to return to the hunter. He stated that hehad met some Indians on the banks of the Rio Frio,who informed him that Santa Anna, with a largeforce, had already crossed the Neuces, and mightbe expected to arrive before San Antonio in a fewdays. We immediately set about preparing togive him a warm reception, for we are all wellaware, if our little band is overwhelmed by numbers,there is little mercy to be expected from thecowardly Mexicans — it is war to the knife.16*186 COLONEL Crockett'sI jocosely asked the ragged hunter, who was asmart, active young fellow, of the steamboat andalligator breed, whether he was a rhinoceros or ahyena, as he was so eager for a fight with the invaders." Neither the one, nor t'other, Colonel,"says he, " but a whole menagerie in myself. I'mshaggy as a bear, wolfish about the head, active asacougar, and can grin like a hyena, until the barkwill curl off a gum log. There's a sprinkling ofall sorts in me, from the lion down to the skunk ;and before the war is over you'll pronounce meanentire zoological institute, or I miss a figure inmy calculation. I promise to swallow Santa Annawithout gagging, if you will only skewer back hisears, and grease his head a little."He told me that he was one in the fatal expeditionfitted out from New Orleans, in Novemberlast, to join the contemplated attack upon Tampicoby Media and Peraza. They where, in all, aboutone hundred and thirty men, who embarked asemigrants to Texas; and the terms agreed uponwere, that it was optional whether the party tookup arms in defence of Texas, or not, on landing.They were at full liberty to act as they pleased.But the truth was, Tampico was their destination,and an attack on that city the covet design, whichwas not made known before land was in sight.ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 187The emigrants were landed, some fifty, who doubtlesshad a previous understanding, joined the standardof General Media, and the following day aformidable fort surrendered without an attack.The whole party were now tendered arms andammunition, which even those who had beendecoyed accepted ; and, the line being formed,they commenced the attack upon the city. Thehunter continued: ^' On the 15th of Novemberour little army, consisting of one hundred andfifty men, marched into Campion, garrisoned bytwo thousand Mexicans, who were drawn up inbattle array in the public square of the city. Wecharged them at the point of the bayonet, andalthough they so greatly outnumbered us, in twominutes we completely routed them ; and theyfled, taking refuge on the house tops, from whichthey poured a destructive fire upon our gallantlittle band. We fought them until daylight, whenwe found our number decreased to fifty or sixtybroken down and disheartened men. Withoutammunition, and deserted by the officers, twenty-eightimmediately surrendered. But a few of uscut our way through, and fortunately escaped tothe mouth of the river, where we got on board avessel and sailed for Texas.The twenty-eight prisoners wished to be contesCOLONEL Crockett'sordered as prisoners of war ; they made known themanner in which they had been deceived, but theywere tried by a court-martial of Mexican soldiers,and condemned to be shot on the 14th day of December,1835, which sentence was carried intoexecution."After receiving this account from my new friend,the old pirate and the Indian hunter came up, andthey went off to liquor together, and I went to seea wild Mexican hog, which one of the hunters hadbrought in. These animals have become scarce,which circumstance is not to be deplored, for theirflesh is of little value ; and there will still be hogsenough left in Mexico, from all I can learn, eventhough these should be extirpated.February 22. The Mexicans, about sixteenhundred strong, with their President Santa Annaat their head, aided by Generals Almost, Cos,Sesma, and Castrillon, are within two leagues ofBexar. General Cos, it seems, has already forgothis parole of honour, and has come back to retrievethe credit he lost in this place in December last.If he is captured a second time, I don't think hecan have the impudence to ask to go at large againwithout giving better bail than on the former occasion.Some of the scouts came in, and bring reportsthat Santa Anna has been endeavouring toADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 189excite the Indians to hostilities against the Texians,but so far without effect. The Cumanches, inparticular, entertain such hatred for the Mexicans,and at the same time hold them in such contempt,that they would rather turn their tomahawksagainst them, and drive them from the land, thanlend a helping hand. We are up and doing, andas lively as Dutch cheese in the dog-days. Thetwo hunters that I have already introduced to thereader left the town, this afternoon, for the purposeof reconnoitring.February 23. Early this morning the enemycame in sight, marching in regular order, and displayingtheir strength to the greatest advantageorder to strike us with terror. But that wasno go ; they'll find that they have to do with menwho will never lay down their arms as long as theycan stand on their legs. We held a short councilof war, and, finding that we should be completelysurrounded, and overwhelmed by numbers, if weremained in the town, we concluded to withdrawto the fortress of Alamo, and defend it to the lastextremity. We accordingly filed ofi", in good order,having some days before placed all the surplusprovisions, arms, and ammunition in the fortressWe have had a large national flag made ; it iscomposed of thirteen stripes, red and white, altersCOLONEL Crockett'slately, on a blue ground with a large white star,of five points, in the centre, and between thepoints the letters Texas. As soon as all our littleband, about one hundred and fifty in number, hadentered and secured the fortress in the best possiblemanner, we set about raising our flag on the battlements; on which occasion there was no one moreactive than my young friend, the Bee hunter. Hehad been all along sprightly, cheerful, and spirited,but now, notwithstanding the control that heusually maintained over himself, it was with difficultythat he kept his enthusiasm within bounds*As soon as we commenced raising the flag he burstforth, in a clear, full tone of voice, that made theblood tingle in the veins of all who heard him :—((Up with your banner, Freedom,Thy champions cling to thee ;They'll follow where'er yon lead 'em.To death, or victory ; —Up with your banner. Freedom.Tyrants and slaves are rushingTo tread thee in the dust ;Their blood will soon be gushing,And stain our knives with rust ;—But not thy banner. Freedom.While stars and stripes are flying.Our blood we'll freely shed ;No groan will 'scape the dying,Seeing thee o'er his head ;^Up with your banner, Freedom."ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 191This song was followed by three cheers fromall within the fortress, and the drums and trumpetscommenced playing. The enemy marched intoBexar, and took possession of the town, a bloodredflag flying at their head, to indicate that weneed not expect quarters if we should fall intotheir clutches. In the afternoon a messenger wassent from the enemy to Colonel Travis, demandingan unconditional and absolute surrender of thegarrison, threatening to put every man to thesword in case of refusal. The only answer hereceived was a cannon shot, so the messenger leftus with a flea in his ear, and the Mexicans commencedfiring grenades at us, but without doingany mischief. At night Colonel Travis sent anexpress to Colonel Fanning, at Goliad, about threeor four days' march from this place, to let himknow that v>^e are besieged. The old pirate volunteeredto go on this expedition, and accordinglyleft the fort after night fail.February 24. Very early this morning the enemycommenced a new battery on the banks of theriver, about three hundred and fifty yards from thefort, and by afternoon they amused themselves byfiring at us from that quarter. Our Indian scoutcame in this evening, and with him a reinforcementof thirty men from Gonzales, who are just in the nick192 COLONEL Crockett'sof time to reap a harvest of glory; but there is someprospect of sweating blood before we gather it in.An accident happened to my friend Thimblerig thisafternoon. He was intent on his eternal game ofthimbles, in a somewhat exposed position, whilethe enemy were bombarding us from the newredoubt. A three ounce ball glanced from theparapet and struck him on the breast, inflicting apainful but not dangerous wound. I extracted thebail, which was of lead, and recommended to himto drill a hole through it, and carry it for a watchseal. ^'' No," he replied, with energy, " may I beshot six times if I do ; that would be making abauble for an idle boast. No, Colonel, lead isgetting scarce, and I'll lend it out at compoundinterest. — Curse the thimbles !" he muttered, andwent his way, and I saw no more of him thatevening.February 25. The firing commenced earlythis morning, but the Mexicans are poor engineers,for we haven't lost a single man, and our outworkshave sustained no injury. Our sharp shooters havebrought down a considerable number of stragglersat a long shot. I got up before the peep of day,hearing an occasional discharge of a rifle just overthe place where I was sleeping, and I was somewhatamazed to see Thimblerig mounted alone onADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 193the battlement, no one being on duty at the timebut the sentries. "What are you doing there ?"says I. " Paying my debts," says he, " interestand all." "And how do you make out ?" says I.I've nearly got through," says he ; " stop amoment, Colonel, and I'll close the account." Heclapped his rifle to his shoulder, and blazed away,then jumped down from his perch, and said, "Thataccount's settled ; them chaps will let me play outmy game in quiet next time." I looked over thewall, and saw four Mexicans lying dead on theplain. I asked him to explain what he meant bypaying his debts, and he told me that he had runthe grape shot into four rifle balls, and that he hadtaken an early stand to have a chance of pickingoff stragglers. "Now, Colonel, let's go take ourbitters," said he; and so we did. The enemyhave been busy during the night, and have thrownup two batteries on the opposite side of the river,.The battalion of Matamoros is posted there, andcavalry occupy the hills to the east and on theroad to Gonzales. They are determined to surroundus, and cut us off from reinforcement, or thepossibility of escape by a sortie. — swell, there'sone thing they cannot prevent : we'll still goahead, and sell our lives at a high price.February 26. Colonel Bowie has been taken194 COLONEL Crockett'ssick from over exertion and exposure. He didnot leave his bed to-day until twelve o'clock. Heis worth a dozen common men in a situation likeours. The Bee hunter keeps the whole garrisonin good heart with his songs and his jests, and hisdaring and determined spirit. He is about thequickest on the trigger, and the best rifle shot wehave in the fort. I have already seen him bringdowneleven of the enemy, and at such a distancethat we all thought it would be waste of ammunitionto attempt it. His gun is first-rate, quite equalto my Betsey, though she has not quite as manytrinkets about her. This day a small party salliedout of the fort for wood and water, and had a slightskirmish with three times their number from thedivision under General Sesma. The Bee hunterheaded them, and beat the enemy off, after killingthree. On opening his Bible at night, of which healways reads a portion before going to rest, hefound a musket ball in the middle of it. *' Seehere. Colonels' said he, " how they have treatedthe valued present of my dear little Kate of .""It has saved your life," said I."True," replied he, more seriously than usual,'^ and I am not the first sinner whose life has beensaved by this book." He prepared for bed, andbefore retiring he prayed, and returned thanks forADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 195his providential escape ; and I heard the name ofCatherine mingled in his prayer.February 27. The cannonading began earlythis morning, and ten bombs were thrown intothe fort, but fortunately exploded without doingany mischief. So far it has been a sort of tempestin a teapot ; not unlike a pitched battle in the Hallof Congress, where the parties array their forces,make fearful demonstrations on both sides, then fireaway with loud sounding speeches, which containabout as much meaning as the report of a howitzercharged with a blank cartridge. Provisions arebecoming scarce, and the enemy are endeavouringto cut ois our water. If they attempt to stop ourgrog in that manner, let them look out, for we shallbecome too wrath for our shirts to hold us. Wearenot prepared to submit to an excise of thatnature, and they'll find it out. This discovery hascreated considerable excitement in the fort.February 28. Last night our hunters broughtin some corn and. hogs, and had a brush with ascout from the enemy beyond gun-shot of the fort.They put the scout to flight, and got in withoutinjury. They bring accounts that the settlers areflying in all quarters, in dismay, leaving their possessionsto the mercy of the ruthless invader, whois literally engaged in a war of extermination,196 COLONEL Crockett'smore brutal than the untutored savage of the desertcould be guilty of. Slaughter is indiscriminate,sparing neither sex, age, nor condition. Buildingshave been burnt down, farms laid waste, and SantaAnna appears determined to verify his threat, andconvert the blooming paradise into a howling wilderness.For just one fair crack at that rascal,even at a hundred yards distance, I would bargainto break my Betsey, and never pull trigger again.My name's not Crockett if I wouldn't get gloryenough to appease my stomach for the remainderof my life. The scouts report that a settler, bythe name of Johnson, flying with his wife andthree little children, when they reached the Colorado,left his family on the shore, and waded intothe river to see whether it would be safe to fordwith his wagon. When about the middle of theriver he was seized by an alligator, and, after astruggle, was dragged under the water, and perished.The helpless woman and her babes were discovered,gazing in agony on the spot, by otherfugitives who happily passed that way, and relievedthem. Those who fight the battles experience butasmall part of the privation, suffering, and anguishthat follow in the train of ruthless war. The cannonadingcontinued, at intervals, throughout theday, and all hands were kept up to their workADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 197The enemy, somewhat emboldened, draws nigherto the fort. So much the better. — There was amove in General Sesma's division toward evening.February 29. Before daybreak we saw GeneralSesma leave his camp with a large body ofcavalry and infantry, and move off in the directionof Goliad. We think that he must have receivednews of Colonel Fanning's coming to our relief.We are all in high spirits at the prospect of beingable to give the rascals a fair shake on the plain.This business of being shut up makes a meanwolfish. — I had a little sport this morning beforebreakfast. The enemy had planted a piece of ordinancewithin gun-shot of the fort during the night,and the first thing in the morning they commenceda brisk cannonade, point-blank, against the spotwhere I was snoring. I turned out pretty smart,and mounted the rampart. The gun was chargedagainst fellow stepped forth to touch her off, butbefore he could apply the match I let him have it,and he keeled over. A second stepped up, snatchedthe match from the hand of the dying man, butThimblerig, who had followed me, handed me hisrifle, and the next instant the Mexican was stretchedon the earth beside the first. A third came up tothe cannon, my companion handed me another gun,and I fixed him off in like manner. A fourth, then17*7^198 COLONEL CROCKETT Sa fifth, seized the match, who both met with thesame fate, and then the whole party gave it up asabad job, and hurried off to the camp, leaving thecannon ready charged where they had planted it.I came down, took my bitters, and went to breakfast.Thimblerig told me that the place fromwhich I had been firing was one of the snuggeststands in the whole fort, for he never failed pickingofi" two or three stragglers before breakfast, whenperched up there. And I recollect, now, havingseen him there, ever since he was wounded, thefirst thing in the morning, and the last at night, —and at times thoughtlessly playing at his eternalgame.March 1. The enemy's forces have been increasingin numbers daily, notwithstanding theyhave already lost about three hundred men in theseveral assaults they have made upon us. I neglectedto mention in the proper place, that whenthe enemy came in sight we had but three bushelsof corn in the garrison, but have since foundeighty bushels in a deserted house. ColonelBowie's illness still continues, but he manages tocrawl from his bed every day, that his comradesmay see him. His presence alone is a tower ofstrength. — The enemy becomes more daring as hisnumbers increase.ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 199March 2. This day the delegates meet ingeneral convention, at the town of Washington, toframe our Declaration of Independence. That thesacred instrument may never be trampled on bythe children of those who have freely shed theirblood to establish it, is the sincere wish of DavidCrockett. Universal independence is an almightyidea, far too extensive for some brains to comprehend.It is a beautiful seed that germinates rapidly,and brings forth a large and vigorous tree, butlike the deadly Upas, we sometimes find thesmaller plants wither and die in its shades. Itsblooming branches spread far and wide, offering aperch of safety to all alike, but even among itsprotecting branches we find the eagle, the kite,and the owl preying upon the helpless dove andsparrow. Beneath its shade myriads congregatein goodly fellowship, but the lamb and the fawnfind but frail security from the lion and the jackal,though the tree of independence waves over them.Some imagine independence to be a natural charter,to exercise without restraint, and to their fullestextent, all the energies, both physical and mental,with which they have been endowed ; and fortheir individual aggrandizement alone, withoutregard to the rights of others, provided theyextend to all the same privilege and freedom200 COLONEL Crockett'sof action. Such independence is the worst oftyranny.March 3. We have given over all hopes ofreceiving assistance from Goliad or Refuge. ColonelTravis harangued the garrison, and concludedby exhorting them, in case the enemy should carrythe fort, to fight to the last gasp, and render theirvictory even more serious to them than to us.This was followed by three cheers.March 4. Shells have been falling into the fortlike hail during the day, but without effect. Aboutdusk, in the evening, we observed a man runningtoward the fort, pursued by about a dozenMexican cavalry. The Bee hunter immediatelyknew him to be the old pirate who had gone toGoliad, and, calling to the two hunters, he salliedout of the fort to the relief of the old man, whowas hard pressed. I followed close after. Beforewe reached the spot the Mexicans were close onthe heel of the old man, who stopped suddenly,turned short upon his pursuers, discharged hisrifle, and one of the enemy fell from his horse.The chase was renewed, but finding that he wouldbe overtaken and cut to pieces, he now turnedagain, and, to the amazement of the enemy, becamethe assailant in his turn. He clubbed his gun, anddashed among them like a wounded tiger, andADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 201they fled like sparrows. By this time we reachedthe spot, and, in the ardour of the moment, followedsome distance before we saw that our retreat to thefort was cut off by another detachment of cavalry.Nothing was to be done but to fight our waythrough. We were all of the same mind. '^ Goahead!" cried I, and they shouted, "Go ahead,Colonel's We dashed among them, and a bloodyconflict ensued. They were about twenty in number,and they stood their ground. After the fighthad continued about five minutes, a detachmentwas seen issuing from the fort to our relief, andthe Mexicans scampered off, leaving eight of theircomrades dead upon the field. But we did notescape unscathed, for both the pirate and the Beehunter were mortally wounded, and I receiveda sabre cut across the forehead. The old mandied, without speaking, as soon as we entered thefort. We bore my young friend to his bed, dressedhis wounds, and I watched beside him. He lay,without complaint or manifesting pain, until aboutmidnight, when he spoke, and I asked him if hewanted any thing. "Nothing," he replied, butdrew a sigh that seemed to rend his heart, as headded, "Poor Kate of Nacogdoches!" His eyeswere filled with tears, as he continued, "Her wordswere prophetic, Colonel ;" and then he sang, in aS02 COLONEL CROCKETT Slow voice that resembled the sweet notes of hisown devoted Kate,But toom cam' the saddle, all bluidy to see,And hame cam' the steed, but hame never cam' he."He spoke no more, and, a few minutes after, died.Poor Kate, who will tell this to thee !March 5. Pop, pop, pop ! Bon, born, born !throughout the day. — No time for memorandumsnow. — Go ahead! — Liberty and independence forever!where ends Col. Crockett s Manuscript .1ADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 203ialeCHAPTER XIV.The hand is cold that wrote the foregoing pages,and it devolves upon another to record the subsequentevents. Before daybreak, on the 6th ofMarch, the Alamo was assaulted by the wholeforce of the Mexican army, commanded by SantaAnna in person. The battle was desperate untildaylight, when only six men belonging to theTexian garrison were found alive. They wereinstantly surrounded, and ordered, by GeneralCastrillon, to surrender, which they did, under apromise of his protection, finding that resistanceany longer would be madness. Colonel Crockettwas of the number. He stood alone in an angleof the fort, the barrel of his shattered rifle in hisright hand, in his left his huge bowie knife drippingblood. There was a frightful gash across his forehead,while around him there was a complete barrierof about twenty Mexicans, lying pell-mell,dead, and dying. At his feet lay the dead bodyof that well known character, designated in theColonel's narrative by the assumed name of ThisCOLONEL Crockett'sjj^jlerig, his knife driven to the haft in the throat ofMexican, and his left hand clenched in his hair,jr^oor fellow, I knew him well, at a time when hewas possessed of many virtues, but of late years theweeds had choked up the flowers ; however. ColonelCrockett had succeeded in awakening in hisbosom a sense of better things, and the poor fellowwas grateful to the last, and stood beside his friendthroughout the desperate havoc.General Castrillon was brave and not cruel, anddisposed to save the prisoners. He marched themup to that part of the fort where stood Santa Annaand his murderous crew. The steady, fearlessstep, and undaunted tread of Colonel Crockett onthis occasion, together with the bold demeanourof the hardy veteran, had a powerful effect on allpresent. Nothing daunted, he marched up boldlyin front of Santa Anna, and looked him sternly inthe face, while Castrillon addressed " his excellency,"— " Sir, here are six prisoners I have takenalive ; how shall I dispose of them ?" Santa Annalooked at Castrillon fiercely, flew into a violentrage, and replied, " Have I not told you beforehow to dispose of them ? Why do you bring themto me ?" At the same time his brave officersplunged their swords into the bosoms of their defencelessprisoners. Colonel Crockett, seeing theADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 205act of treachery, instantly sprang like a tiger atthe ruffian chief, but before he could reach him adozen swords were sheathed in his indomitableheart; and he fell, and died without a groan, afrown on his brow, and a smile of scorn and defianceon his lips. Castrillon rushed from the scene,apparently horror-struck, sought his quarters, anddid not leave them for several days, and hardlyspoke to Santa Anna after.The conduct of Colonel Bowie was characteristicto the last. When the fort was carried he was sickin bed. He had also one of the murderous butcherknives which bears his name. Lying in bed hedischarged his pistols and gun, and with each dischargebrought down an enemy. So intimidatedwere the Mexicans by this act of desperate andcool bravery, that they dared not approach him,but shot him from the door ; and as the cowardsapproached his bed, over the dead bodies of theircompanions, the dying Bowie, nerving himself foralast blow, plunged his knife into the heart of hisnearest foe at the same instant that he expired.The gallant Colonel Travis fought as if determinedto verify his prediction, that he would makea victory more serious than a defeat to the enemy.He fell from the rampart, mortally wounded, intothe fort ; and his musket fell forward among the206 COLONEL Crockett'sfoe, who were scaling the wall. After a fewminutes he recovered sufficiently to sit up, whenthe Mexican officer who led that party attemptedto cut his head off with his sabre. The dying hero,with a death grasp, drew his sword and plunged itinto the body of his antagonist, and both togethersank into the arms of death. General Cos, whohad commanded this fortress while in the possessionof the Mexicans, and from whom it was captured,on entering the fort after the battle, orderedthe servant of Colonel Travis to point out the bodyof his master; he did so, when Cos drew his sword,waved it triumphantly over the corpse, and thenmangled the face and limbs with the malignantfeelings of a Cumanche savage. One woman, Mrs.Dickinson, and a negro of Col. Travis, were theonly persons whose lives were spared. The bodiesof the slain were then thrown into a mass in thecentre of the Alamo, and burned. The loss of theMexicans in storming the place was not less thaneight hundred killed and mortally wounded, makingtheir losses since the first assault more than fifteenhundred. This immense slaughter, by so small anumber, can only be accounted for by the fact ofthe Texians having five or six guns to each manin the fort. Immediately after the capture SantaAnna sent Mrs. Dickinson and the servant toADVENTURES IN TEXAS. i207General Houston, accompanied by a Mexican witha flag, offering the Texians peace and generalamnesty, if they would lay down their arms, andsubmit to his government. General Houston'sreply was, " True, sir, you have succeeded in killingsome of our brave men, but the Texians arenot yet conquered." He sent him a copy of theDeclaration of Independence recently agreed on atNew Washington.After the capture of San Antonio, Santa Annahad made a feint on Gonzales, where GeneralHouston was with a very inferior force, which inducedthe latter to fall back on the Colorado, underthe belief that the whole Mexican army was marchingto attack him. A similar feint was also madeby the Mexican General on Castro, a town on theColorado, north-east of San Antonio. Gonzaleslies east of that place. Having, in both instances,effected his object, Santa Anna concentrated hisforces, and marched directly for La Bahia, or Go-lead,which is situated about ninety miles south-eastof San Antonio, on the Colorado. The fort atGoliad is of great strength, and was defended byColonel Fanning with a small force of volunteers.About the middle of March, orders were receivedfrom General Houston directing the blowing upand evacuation of the fort, and that Colonel Fanning208 COLONEL Crockett'sshould concentrate with him on the Colorado. Onthe 18th of March the Mexicans were discovered,in considerable force, in the neighbourhood of Go-lead,and through the day there was some skirmishingwith the advance parties. On the 19th thefort was set on fire, and its wooden defences destroyed; but the wall was left entire, and ColonelFanning took up his line of march. His force,at that time, was reduced to two hundred andsixty, rank and file. With this force and severalfield pieces he set out to cross an open country,and endeavour to effect a junction with GeneralHouston. On the evening of the first day of theirmarch, the enemy made their appearance in therear, about three miles distant. Colonel Fanninghalted, and opened his artillery on them, insteadof hastening forward to avail himself of the shelterof a wood, some distance ahead. The enemy manifestinga disposition to cut him off* from thewoods, he again put his forces in motion, but itwas now too late. He not only lost the shelter ofthe timber, which would have ensured his safetyagainst the enemy's horse, but the assistance of hisadvanced guard, which was cut off* from him bythis manoeuvre of the enemy. The absence of theadvanced guard reduced his forces to two hundred*and thirty-three, rank and file, to which the enemyADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 209Opposed five hundred cavalry and two hundredinfantry. The action commenced about fiveo'clock, and continued until nearly dark. Theenemy was repulsed with great loss in everycharge, and never was able to penetrate nearer toFanning's force than sixty-five or one hundredyards ; and finally, about dark, drew ofi* his forcesto a secure distance, leaving only a few to succourthe wounded, who were not molested. Fanning'sloss was five killed and twelve wounded, twomortally. The enemy acknowledged the loss ofone hundred and ninety-two killed, and a largenumber wounded. So soon as the Mexicans withdrew.Fanning commenced throwing up entrenchments,at which his men where employed duringthe whole night.About sunrise on the 20th, the enemy againadvanced on Fanning, and fired their cannon fourtimes over him ; a large reinforcement of Mexicanswas plainly to be seen, three miles distant.At this moment a white flag, attended by a smallparty, was seen advancing from the enemy, whichwas met by a similar one from Fanning, underMajor Wallace. The enemy demanded the surrenderof Fanning and his forces, and promised, inthe most sacred manner, that they should retain alltheir private property ; that they might return, by18^210 COLONEL Crockett'sthe first opportunity, as prisoners of war, to theUnited States, or remain until they were regularlyexchanged ; and that they should be treated in themost humane manner while retained in confinement.With these specious promises he was inducedto trust to the honour of the butchers of theAlamo, and accept of the terms of capitulation.As soon as the necessary arrangements could bemade the prisoners were marched, under a strongguard, to Goliad, and huddled together, officers andmen, into a church within the fort at Goliad. Theenemy having succeeded in capturing other smallparties, the number of prisoners amounted to fourhundred, and were all crowded together in thechurch, and compelled to sit or lie constantly.The only accommodation afforded was a fewbenches for the officers. They were retained inthis situation for three days, and during thisperiod received only a small ration of raw beef,not exceeding half a pound each. On the fourthday they were marched out into the open air, andlimits prescribed them, over which they were notto pass. For four days longer they were kept inthis situation, during which they were allowedonly two rations similar to the first ; and, but forthe pecan nuts purchased from the Mexican soldiers,and a small quantity of jerked beef procuredADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 211in the same manner, they must have suffered immensely.On the eighth day representations weremade to the prisoners, that it would be necessaryto remove them out of the fort, as they were aboutto drive in beeves to slaughter, in order to preparerations for their removal to Matagorda, where theywere to take shipping for New Orleans. Theywere accordingly marched out, in parties of onehundred each, and, in single file, were led along ahigh brush fence; when, at the distance of twohundred yards, they were ordered to face about,and the cocking of the guns gave the first interpretationof the fate thai awaited them. At the firstfire nearly all fell mortally wounded. A fewescaped by falling at the flash, and as soon as thefiring ceased, they leaped up, and sprung over thefence, and succeeded in reaching the woods, wherethey eluded their pursuers. The Mexicans proceededto despatch with their bayonets any whoshowed signs of life after the firing, and theythen stripped and burnt the bodies. The authoritiesof Texas bestowed solemn obsequies upontheir mutilated and blackened limbs, on the 4thof June, after their murderers had sank unto deathon the plains of San Jacinto, under the appallingwords, "Remember La Bahia!"But this succession of barbarities, so far from212 COLONEL Crockett'sintimidating, served to rouse the energies of theoppressed. The vainglorious Spaniard, elated withhis success, without adverting to the fact that hehad never been victorious without having at leastfrom five to ten of his mercenaries opposed to oneof his foes, now ventured to cross the Colorado,believing that victory was perched upon his standard,and would not leave it until Texas should besubdued.His track was marked by death and desolation.Fire, famine, and the sword were in his train, andeither sex nor age was received as a plea formercy. The hoary head of the grandsire, theflaxen curls of the babe, and the dishevelled tressesof the affrighted mother, were alike stained withgore. Farm houses were consumed by fire, thecrops destroyed in the ground ; and the settlersfled in dismay, feeling that the worst of scourgeshad been let loose upon them. The plains werestrewed with thousands of the unburied slaughtered; and the air was fetid with corruption anddecay. The merciless tyrant saw all this, and hisheart expanded with joy, as he moved on, likeAttila, and beheld the terror and wretchedness ofthose he came to annihilate, rather than to scourgeinto subjection. But his was a temporary triumph.He crossed the Colorado full of hope of carryingADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 213his demoniac intentions into execution, but shame,confusion, and defeat awaited his coming.About the 18th of April the tyrant, with onedivision of his troops, marched in the direction ofLynch's ferry, on the San Jacinto, burning Harris-burghas he passed down. The Texian forcesunder General Houston were ordered to be inreadiness, and on the morning of the 19th theytook up their line of march in pursuit of him, andfound him encamped on the banks of the SanJacinto. About nine o'clock on the morning ofthe 21st the Mexicans were reinforced by five hundredchoice troops, under command of General Cos,increasing their effective force to upward of fifteenhundred men, while the aggregate force of theTexians, for the field, numbered seven hundredand eighty-three. General Houston ordered thebridge on the only road communicating with theBrazos, distant from the encampment, to be destroyed,thus cutting ofi* all possibility of escape.The Texian army was ordered to parade theirrespective commands, which they did with alacrityand spirit, and were anxious for the conflict ; thedisparity in numbers only seemed to increase theirenthusiasm and confidence. Houston, having theenemy thus snugly hemmed in, and his little armydrawn up in order of battle, addressed them, in214 COLONEL Crockett'sperson, briefly, and concluded by saying, ^' Fellowsoldiers, there is the enemy before you ; do youwish to fight?" "We do!" was the universalresponse. " Well, then," he continued, " rememberit is for liberty, or death! — Remember theAlamo! Remember Goliad!" The soldiers shouted,"We shall remember"— " Then go ahead!"From General Houston's official account it appearsthat the war-cry was, "Remember the Alamo."The attack was furious, and lasted about eighteenminutes from the time of close action until theTexians were in possession of the enemy's camp.Our riflemen, not having the advantage of bayonets,used their pieces as clubs, breaking many of them atthe breach. The rout commenced at half-past fouro'clock, and continued until twilight. In the battleour loss was two killed and twenty-three wounded,six of whom mortally. The enemy's loss was sixhundred and thirty killed, and seven hundred andthirty were taken prisoners, among whom wereGenerals Santa Anna and Cos, who were captureda day or two after the battle. About six hundredmuskets and three hundred sabres were collected ;several hundred mules and horses were taken, andnear twelve hundred dollars in specie.We learn, from other sources, that General Cos,when taken, was pale and greatly agitated ; butADVENTURES IN TEXAS. 215Almost displayed, as he had during the fight,great coolness and courage. Santa Anna fledamong the earliest who retreated. His horsebogged down in the prairie, near the Brassestimber; he then made for the timber on foot.His pursuers, in the eagerness of the chase, dashedinto the same bog, and continued the pursuit onfoot, following the trail of the fugitive, which wasvery plain on account of the recent rains, tmtilthey reached the timber, where it was lost. Thepursuers then spread themselves, and searched thewoods for a long time in vain, when it occurred toArnold Hunter that the chase might, like a hardpressed bear, have taken a tree. The tree topswere then examined, when, lo! the game was discoveredsnugly ensconced in the forks of a largelive oak. The captors did not know who theprisoner was until they reached the camp, whenthe Mexican soldiers exclaimed, " El General, ElGeneral Santa Anna!" When conducted to GeneralHouston he offered to evacuate Texas, andacknowledge its independence, on condition thathis life and liberty should be granted to him, anda safe escort to Mexico.The enemy passed LaBahia and Bexar, blowingup the Alamo; spiking, and throwing the cannon inthe river, in his retreat. The Cumanche Indians216 ADVENTURES IN TEXAS.commenced depredating in the rear of the Mexicanarmy, as they advanced from Bexar upon thesettlements. All their horses and mules, of whichthey had many, as well as much baggage, weretaken by the Indians. At every step they metwith trouble, and are hurrying with all possibledespatch toward the interior.The fate of poor Fanning, who was not killedin the indiscriminate massacre of his troops, hassince been ascertained. He was condemned to beshot. When he found that was determined on,and was ordered out for execution, he handed hiswatch to an officer, as compensation to have himburied, deliberately tied a handkerchief over hiseyes, begged them not to shoot him in the head,bared his breast, and requested to be shot there.He was shot in the head, and never buried!Such are the monsters that freemen have had tocontend with, to maintain their freedom "5, thestruggle is not yet over, but nothing can i- .pedeiLa onward march, and Texas must take her standSduOi ^jibj^iendent nations.THE END.Original Letter of David Croelcett*At a late meeting of the Tennessee HistoricalSociety, Mr. F. N. M. Breton presented thisoriginal of a letter from David Crockett to Wm.Rodgers, of Caledonia, Henry County, Tennessee.It is written on unruled foolscap paper, and-is avery characteristic and interesting letter of theveteran pioneer and patriot. It is Tell worthy ofbeing given in full. It runs as follows :Washington City, 8th January, 1834.Dear Sir : — Your favour, relative to the arraignmentof your mail, was rec'd on yesterday and Itook it immediately to the P. M. G., and left it