POPULAR SONGSOFIRELAND.COLLECTED AND EDITED, WITH INTRODUCTIONSAND NOTES,BVT. Croton CHOKER, ESQ.ILONDON:HENRY Colour, PUBLISHER,GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.M.DCCC. XXXIX.LONDON:FEINTED BY JAMES MOVES, CASTLE STREET,LEICESTER SQUARE.TOTHOMAS BAYLIS, ESQ. F.S.A.ANDW. LECHMERE WHITMORE, ESQ. F.S.A.OF THE PRIOR S BANK. FULHAM,IN MEMORY OF MANY PLEASANT HOURS PASSED WITH THEMAT THEIR ENCHANTING RESIDENCE,THIS VOLUME IS INSCRIBED,BYTHE AUTHOR.PREFACE.So many collections of what are called Irishpopular songs are before the public, undervarious fanciful names, such as " The Shamrock,"" The Harp of Erin " The HibernianMinstrel," &c., that some apology appearsnecessary for adding another to the number.And here it may be proper to reply to aquestion which has been asked, In what particularsIrish and English song differ ? Ritsonstates, that " The distinction between Scottishand English songs, it is conceived, arises, notfrom the language in which they are written,for that may be common to both ; but, fromthe country to which they respectively belong,and of which their authors are natives. Thisdiscrimination," continues Ritson, " does notso necessarily or properly apply to Ireland,great part of which was colonised from thiskingdom ; and the descendants of the settlers(the only civilised and cultivated inhabitants)VI PREFACE.have consequently been, ever since, lookedupon as English ; the native Irish being, tothis day, a very different people. Every onehas heard of the English pale."Ritson, however, probably after this passagewas written (1783), may have read thecomplaint, that the Anglo-Irish settlers degeneratedand became mere Irish ; in fact,that they were " more Irish than the Irishthemselves;" for, in 1789, he appears to havevisited Dublin, " chiefly," to use his own words,with a view to pick up songs, either single orcollected, the native production of the country ;but I met," he adds, " with little or nothingexcept disappointment. And yet I have goodreason to think that some such collections musteither exist or have existed."That Irish songs may be found in abundance,there can be no doubt, although Ritson sinquiries after them were unsuccessful ; but thequestion which he has raised is ; In what particularsthey differ from English songs, beingcomposed in the same language, and by Englishsettlers or their descendants ? That thereis, however, a distinct feeling and character,that there is a certain humour, a quaint mannerof expression, an exquisite simplicity, andPREFACE. VJ1that there are other peculiarities, which leaveno difficulty in discriminating between eventhe English imitation and the genuine lyric ofIreland, I think, will readily be conceded afterthe perusal of this volume. These traits ofAnglo-Irish song may be accounted for invarious ways ; among others, as copies after,or translations from, the national language.Spenser, " the prince of poets," distinctlyreplies to the inquiry, Whether the Irish bardshave any art in their compositions, or bethey any thing witty or well-savoured as poemsshould be?"Yea, truly, I have caused divers of themto be translated unto me, that I might understandthem ; and surely they savoured of sweetwit and good invention, but skilled not of thegoodly ornaments of poetry ; yet were theysprinkled with some pretty flowers of theirnatural device, which gave good grace andcomeliness unto them."My intention was to submit to the Englishreader a series of songs, which would havetold the history of Ireland from the battle ofthe Boyne to the present time, in a novel,impartial, and, according to my view, interestingand instructive form. From the genuineVlll PREFACE.contemporary evidences of popular feeling, Iam satisfied that many curious and some importantdeductions might have been derived.For what has been said of French songs, appliesperfectly to those of Ireland. " TheFrenchman " (and so does the Irishman) " singshis conquests, his prosperity, his defeats, evenhis miseries and misfortunes. Conquering orconquered, in plenty or want, happy or unhappy,sorrowful or gay, he always sings ; andone would say that the song is his natural expression.In fine, in all situations in whichwe would speak of the French" (or the Irish),we might always ask, as the late King of Sardiniadid, Well! how goes the little song? "The chronological series which I had originallyproposed (notwithstanding the utmostcompression), would have extended to threeor four volumes ; a work which, for a merecollection of Irish songs, alarmed my publisher.In compliance, therefore, with hiswishes, rather than in accordance with myown opinion as to the interest likely to attachto the undertaking, I now submit to the publicaselection, not of the historical, but of thepopular songs of Ireland.Several of these songs, although they havePREFACE. IXbeen extensively sung, are now printed forthe first time ; and all the songs in the presentvolume will be found, not mere Englishimitations of Irish peculiarities, as in mostformer collections, but the real productionsof Ireland : not whimsical caricatures, butgenuine specimens of national feelings, prejudices,poetry, and humour. An attempt hasalso been made to assign to these fugitivelyrics their proper parentage ; and slight biographicalnotices of Dr. Brenan, Mr. Callant,Mr. W. P. Carey, Mr. Andrew Cherry, Mr.Lysaght, Mr. Millikin, the Right Hon. GeorgeOgle, Mr. Patrick O Kelly, and other writersof popular songs, occur in the introductionsprefixed. In these introductions, my view isto explain distinctly to the English readervarious circumstances of local and temporaryinterest, evidences of originality that cannotbe doubted.The features I have mentioned, give thepresent collection of Irish popular songs adistinct character from any hitherto published.With regard to the principles which haveguided me in the selection, I may state thatmy object was to steer a middle course betweenthe lower class of vulgar ballad andX PREFACE.the exquisite compositions of Moore andLover. The former gentleman, indeed, hasbeen thus humorously assailed for the wantof Irish feeling and character which has beencharged against his national work: " It hasoften struck me with astonishment, that thepeople of Ireland should have so tamely submittedto Mr. Thomas Moore s audacity inprefixing the title of Irish to his Melodies.That the tunes are Irish, I admit ; but as forthe songs, they in general have as much to dowith Ireland, as with Nova Scotia. What anIrish affair, for example, Go where Glory waitsthee ! &c. Might not it have been sung by acheesemonger s daughter of High Lowborn,when her master s apprentice was going, in afit of valour, to list himself in the Third Buffs,or by any other amatory person, as well as aHibernian Virgin ? And if so, where is theIrishism of the thing at all ? Again,When in death I shall calm recline,O bear my heart to my mistress dear ;Tell her it lived upon smiles and wineTell her it lived upon fiddlestick ! pretty foodfor an Irishman s heart for the ladies. Notaman of us, from Cawnpore Point to BloodyForeland, would give a penny a pound forPREFACE. XIsmiles ; and as for wine, in the name of Decencyis thai a Milesian beverage ? Far fromit, indeed ; it is not to be imagined that Ishould give five or six shillings for a bottleof grape-juice, which would not be within fivequarts of relieving me from the horrors ofsobriety ; when, for the self-same sum, I couldstow under my belt a full gallon of Roscoe,drink beyond comparison superior. The ideais, in fact, absurd ; but there would be no endwere I to point out all the un-Irish points ofMoore s poetry. Allusions to our localities,it is true, we sometimes meet with, as thinlyscattered as plums in the holyday puddingsof a Yorkshire boarding-school, and scatteredfor the same reason just to save appearances,and give a title to the assumed name. There sThe Vale of Avoca/ for instance, a songupon a valley in Wicklow, but which wouldsuit any other valley in the world, providedalways it had three syllables, and the middleone of due length."But, to return to my own collection. Ihave, in the first instance, taken as a fit subjectfor the inspiration of the National Muse, St.Patrick, the guardian Saint of Ireland. Fromhim I have proceeded to the national emblem,Xll PREFACE.the Shamrock; then to an Irishman s food,the potato ; subsequently to his drinkwhisky ; and, finally, to his favourite playthinga sprig of Shillelah."These matters are followed by a collectionof local songs, in my choice of which variousconsiderations have guided me. First, I deemedit very desirable to exhibit as rarities, and alsoto prove how much historical matter respectingIreland lies buried in the libraries of England,three specimens of ancient local song. Ihave therefore given a very remarkable balladon the entrenchment of New Ross, whichwas unquestionably composed so early as theyear 1265, and to the cheerful sound of whichthe walls of that town arose, nearly six hundredyears ago. The other two ballads are connectedwith the history of the city of Waterford,and were composed in the reigns ofHenry VII. and Henry VIII.; the former ofthese examples of" rhyme royal" is now forthe first time printed. And here I cannotrefrain from expressing my deep and heart-feltregret that the translation of the ballad respectingNew Ross, which was made by the lateMrs. George Maclean the lamented L. E. L.should be a posthumous publication.PREFACE. XlllMy next object was to introduce someexamples of the convivial songs of the middleof the last century; such as " The KilrudderyHunt," " The County of Limerick Buck-huntsThe Praises of Limerick," " Garryowen," andThe Rakes of Mallow."Thirdly, to contrast with them the pastoralstyle, which became fashionable about the closeof the last century, and is fairly representedby " Shannon s Flowery Banks," and Ogle sAnna s Banks," and " Hermit of Killarney."Fourthly, to treat of the Anglo-Irish burlesquea style which, in a national point ofview, may be referred to as eminently characteristic,and which the passage copied at page143, from Stanihurst, shews to be at least asold as the time of Elizabeth. It appears tohave been revived by Millikin s far-famedGroves of Blarney," the imitation of which,in "O Blarney Castle, my Darling!" "TheTown of Passage," and other songs, is obvious.In lyrics of this nature it may be remarked,that the sportiveness with which rhymes arestrung together sometimes accidentally produceswhimsical combinations; such asTis there is handyBoth beer and brandy,With sugar-candy, &c."PREFACE,Occasionally poetical images are to be attributedto the same cause. Thus a chinney-sweeper of Nenagh I think, Brian Tier-neyby name whose practice it was to makesongs upon the various houses, the chimneysof which he swept, celebrates the bounty ofa family residing at Uskean in the followingmanner:The thread of hopeBecomes a rope,Within the scopeOf Uskean s shades."Fifthly. It has been my purpose to give,in the least offensive manner, a specimen ofan Irish slang song, which will be found inDe Groves of de Pool." The most popularsong of this class is, perhaps, " De Night beforeLarry was stretched ; " but as there is muchthat is objectionable in it, as well as in " LordWaltham s Bull," I have considered that a singleillustration will be sufficient to satisfy thecuriosity of the English reader, who, it is probablewould not readily enter into the fun ofsuch compositions.Sixthly, to exemplify the Irish jocular style,I have selected Lysaght s view of " Dublinafter the Union ;" also the controversyPREFACE. XVbetween the towns of Kindle and Mallow;and the song upon the Court of Consciencein Cork. The national fondness for rhyme,and for the display of mastery over it, is illustratedby the songs entitled "Cork s Good-humouredFaces," "The Doneraile Litany,"and " The Carrigaline Coalers defeated."But while I have endeavoured thus toplace characteristic samples of Irish song beforethe English reader, I trust that I havenot been insensible to the strong feeling andfine bursts of poetry occasionally to be foundin the minstrelsy of my country. Of the badtaste with which true poetry is often associatedwith indifferent prose of the manner in whichgold and lead are sometimes amalgamated, Ihave not avoided giving a specimen in thesong entitled " The Court of Cuirass." However,that some unexceptionable lyric poetryexists will, I think, be conceded by the readersof " Sweet Avondu," " Gougane Barra andThe River Lee by Moonlight."It would scarcely escape the reader snotice, even if I had failed to point it out,that so many of the songs in the present collectionare of southern origin. But Munster,it has been remarked, " produces annually aXVI PREFACE.far greater crop of poets and potatoes thanthe rest of Ireland." And Cork is said toafford the Muses " the Parnassian hill, and theTcmpean vale ; while, for founts of Heliconand Castle, there flow streams of mountaindew rarely adulterated by the cooler watersof earth or sky."As an Editor of the Songs of Irelandwhich it has been my amusement for manyyears to collect, I trust the reader will notconsider my observations very trifling, or,what is far worse, very tedious ; although Icannot help fearing that I have sometimessubjected myself to both these grave charges.It only remains for me to explain, that it wasthe wish of my publisher that I should makenot merely a collection of songs which hadbeen popular, but of Irish songs which shouldbe popular ; and I hope that, in my executionof the task, I may not have disappointed him.T. C. C.ROSAMOND S Bower, FULHAM,28th February, 1839.CONTENTS.PAGESr. Patrick Introductory Observations 1I. St. Patrick s Arrival (explanatory of the origin of theword Punch) 11II. St. Patrick was a Gentleman 19III. St. Patrick of Ireland, my dear ! 24IV. St. Patrick s Day in Paris 30THE SHAMROCK. Introductory Observations 32V. The Shamrock Cockade 39VI. The green little Shamrock of Ireland 44THE POTATO. Introductory Observations 48VII. The land of Potatoes, O ! 56VIII. The smiling Potatoes 60WHISKY. Introductory Observations 65IX. An Irishman s Christening 70X. Love and Whisky 72XI. The Powers of Whisky 74XII. Erin s Whisky 76XIII. Rock s Poteen 77XIV. The Glass of Whisky 79XV. A Sup of good Whisky 82XVI. " Bounce upon Bess " 86XVII. Had I the Tun which Bacchus used 89XVIII. TheNightcap 03XIX. Bumpers, Bumpers, flowing Bumpers ! 95XX. I ll never get Drunk any more 97XXI. Barry of Maroon 99XV1HCONTENTS.PA OSXXII. The Merry Man 102THE IRISH OAK. Introductory Observations 108XXIII. The Sprig of Shillelah 112XXIV. Hail to the Oak, the Irish Tree 118XXV. Oh ! an Irishman s Heart is as stout as Shipleah 120LOCAL SONGS. Introductory Observations 122XXVI. Provincial Characteristics 128XXVII. Sweet Avondu 130XXVIII. Anna s Banks 137XXIX. The Groves of Blarney 141XXX. O Blarney Castle, my Darling ! 149XXXI. The Victorious Coalers of Carrigaline and Kil-money154XXXII. The Carrigaline Coalers defeated 161XXXIII. Cork s own Town 165[XXXIII.* Judy MacCarthy of Fiahamble Lane, 166.]XXXIV. Cork s good-humoured Faces 172XXXV. The Court of Conscience in Cork 174XXXVI. The Groves of Blackpool (descriptive of the returnof the city of Cork Militia) 175XXXVII. The Court of Cuirass 181XXXVIII. The Doneraile Litany 184XXXIX. Dublin after tire Union 191XL. The Humours of Donnybrook Fair 1 93XLI. Glashen-Glora 198XLII. Gougane Barra 200XLIII. Young Kate of Kilcummer 205XLI V. The Boys of Kilkenny 206XLV. The Hermit of Killarney 209XLVI. The Kilruddery Hunt 214XLVII. The Praise of Kindle 227XLVIII. Kindle versus Mallow 229XLIX. The River Lee 232L. The Bells of Shandon 234LI. The Silvery Lee 239LI I. The Praises of Limerick . . 240CONTENTS. XIXPACKLIII. Garryowen 243LI V. The County of Limerick Buck-hunt 251LV. Dear Mallow, adieu 256LVI. The Rakes of Mallow 263LVII. Darling Neddeen 264LVIII. The Town of Passage 268LIX. The Fair Maid of Passage 275LX. The Entrenchment of Ross 277LXI. Shandrum Boggoon 304LXII. Shannon s flowery Banks 307LXIII. The Mayor of Waterford s Letter 310LXIV. The Praise of Waterford .331THE WOOD-CUTS INTRODUCED INTO THISVOLUME ARE:PageA St. Patrick s cross, as manufactured of coloured papers 8Ditto, as made by school-boys 9Ditto, two specimens, as now printed and published10Button of the Irish Volunteers 42Specimens of Whisky bottles and glasses 107Viz. Deoch an Durrus glass. t^Poteen bottle.Modern whisky bottle.Poteen glass.Modern whisky glass.Substitutes for ditto ; viz. a clusheen shell and an eggshell.A Topographical Sketch of the Kilruddery Hunt, 1744 221THEPOPULAR SONGSIRELAND.THEPOPULAR SONGSOFIRELAND.ST. PATRICK.OF a personage so celebrated as the National Saintof Ireland, it is here only necessary to state that theanniversary of his death,* namely, the 17th ofMarch, has been long carefully observed by allgood and pious Irishmen ; not, indeed, with painfulabstinence or melancholy seclusion, but with gloriousfeasting and uproarious jollification.Harris recommends, in consequence, the publication,of a Life of St. Patrick, as " the means ofQuaere, that of his birth ! It is very difficult, in the lives of thesaints, to ascertain one from the other ; as the same word is commonlyused by their biographers to express both events. " A nativity, ornatal day," that is, the day on which a saint is released from mortalityhere, and born to eternal life.THE POPULAR Songs OF IRELAND.rectifying our deluded countrymen, who spend thefestival of this most abstemious and mortified manin riot and excess, as if they looked upon him onlyin the light of a jolly companion."Justly has this anniversary been characterised inthe " Irish Hudibras," as richWith rhine, cronaans,* and many a gay trick,-.!" adoration of St. Patrick.";W{ieii-:the Jibo^le of Ireland, in their veneratedsaint sname, make holiday,When all the Monaghans f shall play ;Ordain a statute to be drunk,And burn tobacco free as spunkAnd (what shall never be forgot),In usquebaugh, St. Patrick s pot ;To last for ever in the nation,On pain of excommunication."It is a day on which all true-born sons of Erinfeel peculiarly happy, and are inclined to viewevery occurrence in a favourable and mellow light.This was remarked more than two centuries asjo,as a reference to " Stafford s State Letters," vol. ii.p. 57, will prove; where Mr. Gerard informs theLord Deputy of Ireland, that, " on Friday morning,the 17th of this month (March 1636), St. Patrick sSongs.t Clowns ; inhabitants of the county of Monaghan.Tinder.ST. PATRICK. Oday, was the queen brought to hed of a daughter :which," he adds, " will please the Irish well."The day, in fact, is nationally regarded asauspicious. Major Mitchell, whose recent work onAustralia is an important addition to our knowledgeof that interesting country, thus notes the startingof his expedition for the Darling and Murray riversprecisely two hundred years afterwards (1836).Dr. Johnson s Ohidah was not more freefrom care on the morning of his journey, than Ithen was on this the first morning of mine, whichwas also St. Patrick s day ; and, in riding throughthe bush, I had again leisure to recall past scenesand times connected with this anniversary. I rememberedthat, exactly on that morning, twenty-fouryears before, I had marched down the glacis ofElves, to the tune of St. Patrick s day in theMorning, as the sun rose over the beleagueredtowers of Badajoz. Now, without any of the pride,pomp, and circumstances of glorious war, I wasproceeding on a service not very likely to be peaceful,"&c.Merry-making in honour of St. Patrick is, byno means, confined to Ireland. Wherever Irishmenhave penetrated and where is the quarter ofthe globe in which they are not to be found? orwhere is the nation in which they are not distinguished?the fame of St. Patrick cannot beunknown. For instance, it is recorded in theAnnual Register," that " on the 17th March6 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.1766, His Excellency Count Mahony, ambassadorfrom Spain to the court of Vienna, gave a grandentertainment in honour of St. Patrick, to whichwere invited all persons of condition who were ofIrish descent; being himself a descendant of anillustrious family of that kingdom. Among manyothers present were Count Lacy, president of thecouncil of war, the Generals O Donnellll, M Guide,O Kelly, Browne, Plunder, and M Eliot, four chiefsof the grand cross, two governors, several knightsmilitary, six staff officers, four privy counsellors,with the principal officers of state, who, to shew theirrespect to the Irish nation, wore crosses in honour ofthe day, as did the whole court."The melancholy feelings of a patriot unable tocelebrate St. Patrick s day with becoming propriety,may be estimated by the following extract, full ofsober sadness, from the Journal of Theobald WolfeTone, under date the 16th March, 1796, when inParis negotiating for the invasion of Ireland :I live," he writes, " very soberly at present,having retrenched my quantity of wine one half; Ifear, however, that if I had the pleasure of P. P scompany tomorrow, being St. Patrick s day wewould indeed take a sprig of water cresses withour bread. Yes! we should make a pretty sobermeal of it. Oh, Lord ! Oh, Lord !17. St. Patrick s day. Dined alone in theChamps Elysees. Sad! sad!"Holt, the Irish rebel general, thus records, in hisST. PATRICK.Autobiography," the commemoration of St. Patrick sday at Liverpool in 1814, after his return fromNew South Wales. " The 17th of March, theIrishmen all assembled and walked in procession,dressed with ornaments that are due to the memoryof St. Patrick, a band playing St. Patrick s dayin the Morning, going before them. I broughtmy son with me to shew him his countrymen. Idrank at Peter Ryan s, near the Packet House,and / got a cold; which so much affected me,that I was confined to my bed on the 18th ofMarch," &c.To multiply quotations, however, is trifling work,especially upon a point that admits of much lessdiscussion than the absolute existence of the Saintin memory of whom the orgies in question continueto be zealously performed. But a few words maybepermitted on the subject of the crosses worn inhonour of St. Patrick, and respecting what Holtcalls the " ornaments that are due to his memory."Lawrence White, a " lover of the Muses and mathematics,"as he styles himself on the title-page ofa volume of poems, which he published nearly ahundred years ago (1742) in Dublin, describing theprogress of a love affair, says,He gained the affections of the maid,Who did with curious work embossFor him a fine St. Patrick s cross."It appears from this, that these crosses were madeTHE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.of silk and embroidery; but, as in modern times,tapestry became superseded by paper, so the embroideredSt. Patrick s cross was imitated in colouredpapers, of which the annexed is a faithful representation,one fourth of the original size, with thecolours herald ically tricked. The popular demandfor decorations of this saintly order being very generalin Ireland, and especially an object of ambitionamong juvenile patriots, the state of whose financesdid not warrant the outlay of one penny; an inferiorkind of decoration, or cross, was devised by rusticingenuity to gratify the humbler votaries of St.Patrick. This badge was formed by arcs intersectingeach other within a circle, by which somethinglike the figure of two shamrock leaves united at thestalks was produced ; but any resemblance thatfancy might have traced in the outline, was destroyedby the colourist, who, according to hisST. PATRICK.own taste, introduced red, yellow, and green, intothe various sections : the red colouring matter beinggenerally procured from a puncture made in theartist s finger for the purpose ; the yellow, from theyolk of an egg ; and the green, from the vegetablesap of a plant commonly called pennywort. Theinstrument with which the outline was traced, wasno less primitive than the colours. This substitutefor the mathematician s compass was called agoulloge (5AbAi6s), ie. fork. It was an angularbranch of a tree or shrub, in one end of which wasfixed a pin, and on the other a pen.The circular manufacture of national decorationshas, however, within the last five or six years, completelydisappeared before the work of that mightyengine, the press ; by means of which various representationsof St. Patrick, and of fanciful crosses, arenow produced. Two examples of these wood-cuts,one fourth of the original size, are here given,u210 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.which the reader will please to imagine bedaubedwith pink, green, and yellow, and glittering withthe tinsel of Dutch metal. It should be observed,that the cross of St. Patrick was worn pinned onthe left arm, or attached to the cap or hat, a practicenow confined to children; while men, thosechildren of a larger growth," substitute for theST. PATRICK. 11badge anciently used on the anniversary of Ireland sSaint, a bunch of shamrock or trefoil, by the sizeof which an estimate may be formed of the amountof the patriotic zeal of the wearer. The shamrock,however, appears to have been formerly consideredonly as an apology for any less splendid decoration.Nay, not as much has Bryan doge,To put in s head as one shamroge."Irish Hudibras, 1689.And, as " ornaments in honour of St. Patrick,"bunches of shamrock covered with tinsel regularlymake their appearance, as marketable articles, inCovent Garden, on the 16th and 17th of March.In 1783, the Order of the Knights of St. Patrickwas instituted by King George III., " of which hismajesty, his heirs and successors, were ordainedperpetual sovereigns, and to which several of themost eminent characters under the united monarchyof Great Britain and Ireland, have been electedknights companions."ST. PATRICK S ARRIVAL.(Explanatory of the Origin of the lord Punch.)Dr. Johnson, who explains the word punch accuratelyenough as " a liquor made by mixing spirit with water,12 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.sugar, and the juice of lemons," is nevertheless at a lossfor the derivation of the name, and he therefore slurs thematter over by calling it " a cant word." Little > indeed,did the learned doctor dream of the light which minuteresearches into Irish antiquities are likely to throw uponphilology. Witness the wonderful discoveries of SirWilliam Bentham, and the ingenious theory so satisfactorilydeveloped in the concluding verse of the followingsong.Deeply, however, is it to be lamented for the cause oftruth, that this clever and convincing lyric should commencewith an erroneous statement respecting the arrivalin the Green Island of the inventor of a chemical mixtureof universal celebrity the P. P. of all Ireland ; thatis, the Patron of Punch, as St. Patrick may justly bestyled.Mr. Moore has decided (" Hist, of Ireland," i. 214), thatSt. Patrick landed, not in Bantry, but in Dublin Bay.However, what possibly has created some confusion aboutthis matter, may be the Saint s embarkation ; which, accordingto the same authority, took place from " thesouth-western coast of Ireland," from whence St. Patrick,after a voyage of three days, was landed on the coast ofGaul. The association also in Irish history betweenBantry Bay and France, as a point of debarkation, maybeanother reason for the lyrist falling into this slightmistake ; but which as little invalidates the general accuracyof the account of St. Patrick s conduct, subsequentto his arrival, as the description given of his attitude orhis mode of transport. In fact, these little traditionaryembellishments of the narrative are, perhaps, judiciouslyST. PATRICK S ARRIVAL. 13preserved ; the first, as exhibiting a characteristic specimenof that amusing national peculiarity called a bull ;the second, as presenting a magnificent allegory, to depreciatethe grandeur of which has been most unfairlyattempted in the phrase of " mighty like a whale."Sir Charles Conte, in his " Statistical Survey ofCavan," thus explains the meaning of the term spalpeen,which is applied to the astonished natives:In the Irish language, seal is the site or thesickle. The native husbandman was thence named thescalp, which signified the harvest-cutter ; and this manwas considered to have acquired the whole art of husbandry,and held a sort of distinction over the otherlabourers. When the press of harvest season arrived, andfrom the uncertainty of the weather they found it necessaryto call in assistants, or other scalps, they suffered theyounger or less experienced farmer to handle the sickle,at whose first introduction a particular and pious ceremonywas performed, and before its celebration he darednot to presume to handle the sickle ; and he was termedthe spalpeen, or the young and unexperienced harvest-cutter.Een, in the Irish language, at the final of a word,always signifies small, or rather contemptible ; and, to thisday, the spalpeen has that signification, even with thosewho do not understand the language. The workinghusbandmen of Ireland are universally distinguished asthe courtier, or the spalpeen : the wages and privileges ofthe former fully double those of the latter ; and it is wellknown that herds of men, called spalpeens, regularly comeevery harvest from the counties of Cork and Kerry, andpart of Connaught, into the corn counties of Leinster, to14 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.reap the harvest, and the farmers entirely depend onthem."It must be admitted, that the mention in this and thefollowing songs of wigs, potatoes, steamboats, and othermatters which are generally supposed to be modern introductions,may startle the reader in illustrations of thehistory of St. Patrick and his times ; but the words of awise man of yore should be remembered, who said thatthere is nothing new under the sun."This song is given from a manuscript copy. Theeditor has been told that the author is a gentleman namedWood, an officer of the army ; and that, some years since,the song was printed in the " Cork Southern Reporter"newspaper with the signature " Lanner de Waltham"Tune " Patrick s day in the Mwnhtg."St. Patrick, they say,Came up sweet Bantry Bay,Riding cross-legged astride on the back of a whale,Which gave him a bobInto Ballydehob,Saying, " Phadrig, you re welcome to green Innisfail."*The spalpeens were scared,As their saucer-eyes staredAt the Saint, with his mitre, and crosier, and book ;One of the many names for Ireland. It has been explained asthe island of fate or destiny, from the Lis-full or stone now under thecoronation chair in Westminster Abbey. But why not as the generousisland ? Vide the adjective Fp&ll in " O Reilly s Irish Dictionary," andthe above passage.ST. PATRICK S ARRIVAL. 15Says one great boston,*It s the man in the moon !And I ll speak to the creature,Just out of good nature,And scrape an acquaintance by hook or by crook.I hope he can t eat usAll up like potatoes:"It was Patrick s day in the morning !Your wig, white as flax,Makes me bold for to axIt s who are you, what are you, and from whence you came?"Then the other replied,I came in the last tide ;I m a saint come to serve you, and Patrick s my name.With the crook in my handI ll roam over this land,And I ll draw yees together like mountainy sheep ;I ll card off the sinsThat stick close in your skins :You ll see what the fun is,While I beat the Dunnis,\A beast with long horns, and black as a sweep.Go, lie down in clover:Till the skrimmage is over,For it s Patrick s day in the morning !A shirtless fellow.t Here evidently put for the devil. Jonas and Points is translatedby O Brien as " distress, misery, misfortune, calamity." " Playing thedennis in the country," is an Anglo-Irish phrase, equivalent to " playingthe devil."| That is, among the shamrocks. See subsequent notice of this plant.16 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.With a thundering polthogue,*And the toe of his brogue,Soon the Saint kicked the Dennis beyond the Black sea.Then he spoke to the nationMy sweet congregation,You ve spirits remaining that s stronger than he ;Sure ye knows what I meansThey bewilder your brainsThey re as clear as the streamlet that flows through thegreen.But stronger than Sampson,Who pulled post and lamps onHis enemies head,Till he kilt them stone-dead ;And the name of the spirit I mean is poteen, fI exhort ye, don t stick, sirs,To those Devil s elixirs,Of a Patrick s day in the morning!"The Saint fell asleep,And the FirbolgsJ all creepThump.t Illicit whisky, called poteen, from being manufactured in small(quantities, and, consequently, in a little pot. Een, the Irish diminutive,has something endearing in it, like the Italian vino.J The third colony, according to Beating, that came into Irelandbefore the Milesian. " Fir Iwlg," says O Brien, " means viri Bolgce,or Bolgi, which seems to be a proof that the Belgians had originallytheir national name from Belg [a bag, or budget, supposed to be aquiver of arrows] ; and the Irish historians remark that they werecalled Fir bold, from being noted to carry leather bags about them."The Firbolgs no doubt invented the bagpipe.ST. PATRICK S ARRIVAL. 17For some cruisers of water* unholy, but taste.With this essence of sinsSoon they filled up their skins :When the Saint he awoke, they were beastlyAs fuddled they lay,Says the Saint, " there s a wayTo wean them : I ll mawkish stuff put in each bottle ;And when they awake,If a swig they should take,Oh, dear ! twill disgust them.I think I may trust them,They ll vow that no more shall pass down through theirthrottle.Something sweet I ll here poursAnd here something sour,On Patrick s day in the morning ! "He went off they awoke,Each " hot copper" did smokeLike the flue of a steamer each pounced on his drink ;Their shewing grimaces,Their making of faces,Beat Buck all to nothing: but, what do you think?a " small pot, or pitcher." O BRIEN. U|f5, orinEnglish pronounced " whisky," means in Irish, " water."t Swift philosophically observes, that " no brute can endure thetaste of strong liquor, and, consequently, it is against all the rules ofhieroglyph to assign those animals as patrons of punch." The editorhas heard an Irishman declare, that he never would " make a beast ofhimself" by drinking water.Pronounced in Ireland, power.A celebrated miniature-painter in Cork, about whose rapidity ofexecution many curious stories are told.18 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.With features awry,In a hogshead hard by.Each emptied his bottle, though dying of thirst ;Till one, dry as a spunge,At the tub made a plunge,Where the sour, and the sweet,And the whisky did meet :And he swigged off this physic, till ready to burst,By the side of this mixtureEach man grew a fixture,On St. Patrick s day in the morning !When St. Patrick came back,Och I" says he, " ye vile packOf the spawn of the Druids ye villanous bunch !"But a noise, as from Babel,Here made him unableTo hear his own voice, though he said, " Is the PUNCH"EON, he d have added,But the Firbolgs were madded,Their bowls cut short question, remark or reply.Ay, PUNCH," they roared out,With an earth-shaking shout,Is the name of this thingThat is drink for a king,Or the mouth of a Druid, if ever he s dry ;It would coax pipe-shank d DeathFor to let one take breathOn St. Patrick s day in the morning !ST. PATRICK WAS A GENTLEMAN. 19ST. PATRICK WAS A GENTLEMAN.THE purgation of Ireland from noxious animals has beenthe subject of the old alliteration " Ubi nulla venenalenient, nee serpens serpit in herba;" and this, the mostfamous of the miracles of St. Patrick, is celebrated in thefollowing song. The introductory verse assures us thatSt. Patrick was a gentleman. Moore, in the " History ofIreland," vol. i. p. 211, speaking of St. Patrick, merelysays, " His family was, he informs us, respectable." Thisis mere modesty ; and, as every Irish gentleman shouldhave a pedigree, that of our Saint has been judiciously introducedby the lyrists to prevent any question about thegentility of one who has performed a noble act.Jocelyn, indeed though all that the monk of Furnessasserts must not be received as gospel would have usbelieve that St. Patrick s father, whose name he assertswas Calphurnius, married his servant-maid, a Frenchdamsel, who became the mother of our Saint. And wefind the various biographers of St. Patrick claiming himas an Armorica Gaul, a Welshman, a Cornishman, a ScotchHighlander, and a Lowlander. But this is all nonsense.St. Patrick was an Irish gentleman. The Villagers werea family of consideration in Donegal ; the Brady werethe same in Cavan ; the O Shaughnessy, ditto in Galway ;and the O Grades " possessed that part of Clare which isnow called the Barony of Bunratty." Vide " Irish StatePapers," 1515, vol. ii. p. 3. This " respectable" pedigreesettles the matter.Nor are authorities wanted to support the assertionthat St. Patrick was an Irishman. Dempster, in his20 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Ecclesiastical History," states that the Irish contendedfor having St. Patrick as their countryman, and born inIreland. Both Possevinus and Baronies, who, by interestedparties, are represented to have been misled by theannals of Matthew of Westminster that "flower-cullingmonk," make our saint an Irishman ; so do Mariana andothers. But, in short, it is quite clear, from the fifthverse, that the story about the French damsel is altogetheran invention; as Miss Brady St. Patrick s mother, uponher marriage with Mr. O Gallagher, was anxious that herhusband should remove from the * black north " to hernative county, Cavan. He, unwilling to quit his paternalinheritance, Donegal, objected ; and the matter wasamicably compromised, by both parties agreeing to gohalf way to meet the other, whereupon the town of Enniskillenwas selected as the future residence of the happypair. And here, it appears, Mr. O Gallagher (much to hiscredit must the fact be stated), disdaining to eat the breadof idleness, opened a spirit store, or whisky shop ; andtherefore it seems, most probably, that St. Patrick wasborn in Enniskillen.Of the elevation of the various hills mentioned in connexionwith that on which " St. Patrick preached hissaint," an accurate idea cannot be formed from thewords of the song. The fact is, that Lugnaquilla, thehighest of the Wicklow hills, exceeds Croagh Patrick by500 feet; whereas, the words of the lyrist would lead usto believe that Croagh Patrick was far loftier than anyof the Wicklow hills, even with the Hill of Howth, whichmeasures upwards of 500 feet more, piled upon the summit,like Pelion and Ossa of old. Poets, however, areST. PATRICK WAS A GENTLEMAN. 21privileged persons, and due allowance should be madefor them when they endeavour to exalt their subject. Theelevation of Croagh Patrick is stated to be 2530 feet.Mr. John Barrow, who ascended it in 1835, describesthe top as oval in shape, flat, and, perhaps, containingabout an acre of level ground, although, when viewedfrom the bottom, it appears to come quite to a peak. Thecone itself is composed of loose stones, on which little orno heath or grass seems to grow. On the summit, heapsof stones have been piled up in different places ; to serve,probably, the double purpose of altars and sheltering spotsfrom the wind : they are of three sides, open at the top,and in front. This mountain," continues our lively traveller," is held in great veneration, perhaps more so than anyother in all Ireland. I was duly assured that St. Patrickgave himself the trouble to ascend the reek, ever sincewhich it has taken the name of Croagh Patrick thatfrom this elevation, stretching out his hand, he blessed thesurrounding country ; and, it is added, that it was in thisspot the Saint bestowed his curses on all venomous reptiles,so that from thenceforth they should never more infest theEmerald Isle. On noticing this to our guide in a mannerthat implied a doubt on the subject, he replied, And, sure,your honour believes that St. Patrick could asibj do allthis, and a mighty dale more ! To be sure, as is confirmedby the songTwas on the top of this high hill St. Patrick preach d hissaint,That drove the frogs into the bogs, and bother d all the varmint. "The editor has only to add, that this song consisted22 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.originally of three verses (the 1st, 2d, and 5th), which werethe impromptu joint production of the late Mr. HenryBennett and Mr. Toleken, of Cork, and were sung bythem in alternate lines at a masquerade in that city, wherethey appeared as ballad-singers in the winter of 1814 or1815. The song becoming a favourite, the 6th verse,as now printed, was added by Mr. Toleken, at the requestof Webbed the comedian, then the popular representative ofIrish characters on the stage, who usually said that thesong was written for him. The 3d and 4th verses weresubsequent additions by other hands, and the consequenceof the encore with which this admirable national lyric hasbeen generally received.Oh ! St. Patrick was a gentleman,Who came of decent people ;He built a church in Dublin town,And on it put a steeple.His father was a Gallagher,His mother was a Brady ;His aunt was an O Shaughnessy,His uncle an O Grady.So, success attend St. Patrick s fist,For he s a saint so clever ;Oh ! he gave the snakes and toads a twist,He bothered them for ever !The Wicklow hills are very high,And so s the Hill of Howth, sir;But there s a hill, much bigger still,Much higher nor them both, sir.ST. PATRICK WAS A GENTLEMAN. 23Twos on the top of this high hillSt. Patrick preached his saint,That drove the frogs into the bogs,And banished all the varmint.Oh, success, &c.There s not a mile in Ireland s isleWhere dirty vermin musters,But there he put his dear fore-foot,And murdered them in clusters.The toads went pop, the frogs went hop,Slap dash into the water,And the snakes committed suicideTo save themselves from slaughter.Oh, success, &c.Nine hundred thousand reptiles blueHe charmed with sweet discourses,And dined on them at KillaloeIn soups and second courses.Where blind worms crawling in the grassDisgusted all the nation,He gave them a rise, which opened their eyesTo a sense of their situation.Oh, success, &c.No wonder that those Irish ladsShould be so gay and frisky,For sure St. Pat, he taught them that,As well as making whisky ;No wonder that the Saint himselfShould understand distilling,24 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Since his mother kept a sheebeen shopIn the town of Enniskillen.Oh, success, &c.Oh ! was I but so fortunateAs to be back in Munster,Tis I d be bound, that from that groundI never more would once stir.For there St. Patrick planted turf,And plenty of the praties ;With pigs galore,* ma agra, ma store, f-And cabbages and ladies IThen my blessing on St. Patrick s fist,For he s the darling Saint, O IOh, he gave the snakes and toads a twist,He s a beauty without paint, O !ST. PATRICK OF IRELAND, MY DEAR!This song," observes Dr. Maginn, its facetiousauthor, " is theological, containing the principal acts ofour national Saint his coming to Ireland on a stonehis never-emptying can, commonly called St. Patrick spot his changing a leg of mutton into a salmon in Lenttime and his banishment of the snakes. Consult Joce-lyn, or his translator, E. L. Swift, Esq."Although the learned doctor s account of the per-In abundance. f My love, my darling.ST. PATRICK OF IRELAND, MY DEAR! 25formancc of the buoyant " lump of a paving-stone," doesnot exactly accord with Jocelyn s version of the transaction,it is near enough, so far as the miracula us powers ofSt. Patrick are in question. According to Jocelyn(chap, xxvii), our Saint, speeding on hw journey towardIreland, when about to embark with his disciples, wasaccosted by a leper, who craved to accompany him. Thesailors objected, upon which St. Patrick " cast into thesea an altar of stone, that had been consecrated and givento him by the Pope, and on which he had been wont tocelebrate the holy mysteries, and caused the leper to sitthereon. But the pen trembles to relate what, throughthe Divine power, happened. The stone, thus loaded,was borne upon the waters, guided by Him, the head-stoneof the corner, and, diverse from its nature, floating alongwith the ship, held therewith an equal course, and, at thesame moment, touched at the same shore. All, then,happily landed, and the altar being found, with its freight,the voice of praise and thanksgiving filled the lips of theholy prelate, and he reproved his disciples and the sailorsfor their unbelief and hardness of heart, endeavouring tosoften their stony hearts into hearts of flesh, even to theexercising the works of charity."Jocelyn also records (chap. Lxxvii), how 14,000men, who were collected by St. Patrick in his progressfrom Ammonia (Munster) to the north of Ireland, werecomfortably entertained by the Saint at supper on a cow,the property of his friend, Bishop Trials, two stags, andtwo boars; which latter animals "most politely" presentedthemselves to be feasted upon. " And all thepeople ate," says Jocelyn, " and were abundantly filled;c26 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.and the remnants, that nothing might be lost, weregathered up ; thus, with the flesh of five animals, didPatrick most plenteously feed 14,000 men." The miracleof the Saint s " never-emptying can, commonly calledSt. Patrick s pot," appears a suitable accompanimentto this feast, which Jocelyn has omitted to chronicle;for it can scarcely be credited, that any popular man inIreland would attempt (especially at the house of afriend) to entertain a thirsty multitude upon beef, venison,and pork, without the addition of something to wash downthese viands.The Lyrist and Father Jocelyn, however, perfectlyaccord in their respective accounts of the transformationof flesh into fish by St. Patrick ; the former, indeed, israther more lucid than the monkish biographer, as hespecifies the kind offish. Jocelyn (chap, xxiii.) merelyrelates how " the flesh-meat changed into fishes." Itappears that, after Patrick had become a monk, " a desireof eating meat came on him, until, being ensnared andcarried away by his desire, he obtained swine s flesh, andconcealed it, thinking, rightly, that he might thus satisfyhis appetite privily, which, should he openly do, he wouldbecome to his brethren a stone of offence and a stumbling-blockof reproach." However, the embryo Saint wassaved from this heinous sin by an apparition, whichwarned him against backsliding. " Then," says Jocelyn,St. Patrick, rising from the earth, utterly renounced andabjured the eating of flesh-meat, even through the rest ofhis life ; and he humbly besought the Lord, that he wouldmanifest unto him his pardon by some evident sign.Then the angel bade Patrick to bring forth the hiddenST. PATRICK OF IRELAND, MY DEAR ! 27meats, and put them into water ; and he did as the angelbade ; and the flesh-meats being plunged into the water, andtaken thereout, immediately became fishes. This miracledid St. Patrick often relate to his disciples, that theymight restrain the desire of their appetites. But many ofthe Irish, wrongfully understanding this miracle, are wontonSt. Patrick s day, which always falls in the time ofLent, to plunge flesh-meats into water ; when plunged intotake out ; when taken out, to dress ; when dressed, toeat, and call them fishes of St. Patrick."What has been already said respecting St. Patrick smost famous miracle, the banishment of the snakes, isprobably quite sufficient to satisfy the reader s curiosityon this point; and it is, therefore, only necessary to add,that the following song, which is adapted to the tune ofThe night before Larry was stretched," originally appearedin " Blackwood s Magazine" for December 1821.A fig for St. Denis of FranceHe s a trumpery fellow to brag on ;A fig for St. George and his lance,Which spitted a heathenish dragon ;And the Saints of the Welshman or ScotAre a couple of pitiful pipers ;Both of whom may just travel to pot,Compared with that patron of slippers,St. Patrick of Ireland, my dear !He came to the Emerald IsleOn a lump of a paving-stone mounted ;The steam-boat he beat by a mile,Which mighty good sailing was counted.28 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Says he, " The salt water. I think,Has made me most bloodily thirsty ;So bring me a flagon of drinkTo keep down the mulligrubs, burst yeOf drink that is fit for a saint !He preached, then, with wonderful force,The ignorant natives a-teaching ;With a pint he washed down his discourse,For," says he, " I detest your dry preaching."The people, with wonderment struck,At a pastor so pious and civil,Exclaimed " We re for you, my old buck !And we pitch our blind gods to the devil,Who dwells in hot water below !This ended, our worshipful spoonWent to visit an elegant fellow,Whose practice, each cool afternoon,Was to get most delightfully mellow.That day, with a black-jack of beer,It chanced he was treating a party ;Says the Saint " This good day, do you hear,I drank nothing to speak of, my hearty !So give me a pull at the pot ! "The pewter he lifted in sport(Believe me, I tell you no fable),A gallon he drank from the quart,And then placed it full on the table.A miracle ! " every one said,And they all took a haul at the stingo ;ST. PATRICK OF IRELAND, MY DEAR ! 29They were capital hands at the trade,And drank till they fell : yet, by jingo,The pot still frothed over the brim !Next day, quoth his host, " Tis a fast,And I ve naught in my larder but mutton ;And on Fridays, who d make such repast,Except an unchristian-like glutton ? "Says Pat, " Cease your nonsense, I beg,What you tell me is nothing but gammon ;Take my compliments down to the leg,And bid it come hither a salmon ! "And the leg most politely complied !You ve heard, I suppose, long ago,How the snakes, in a manner most antic,He marched to the County Mayo,And trundled them into th Atlantic.Hence, not to use water for drink,The people of Ireland determine :With mighty good reason, I think,Since St. Patrick has filled it with vermin,And vipers, and such other stuff!Oh I he was an elegant bladeAs you d meet from Fairhead to Kilcrumper;*And though under the sod he is laid,Yet here goes his health in a bumper !Fairhead is the north-east cape of Ireland ; Kilcrumper is aruined church, and ancient burial ground, between Fermoy and Kil-worth,in the county of Cork, the southern county of Ireland.30 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.I wish he was here, that my glassHe might by art magic replenish ;But since he is not why, alas !My ditty must come to a finish,Because all the liquor is out !ST. PATRICK S DAY IN PARIS.From a manuscript copy in the autograph of Sir JonahBarrington, indorsed, " Sung with great applause at ameeting which assembled in the City of Paris, to celebratethe anniversary of the Saint of Hibernia." Thiswas, probably, the 17th March, 1816.Tune " Patrick s day in the morning."While peace spreads her wings o er the different nations,And a thirst for improvement invites us to roam ;Let us seek for those virtues that grace other stations,And the good of all countries import to our home.Let the bustle of war, and roar of the cannon,In the loud song of mirth be never forgot:On the banks of the Seine, and the banks of the Shannon,Let each Irishman singTo his country and king ;And let each honest heart, whether Irish or not,Religiously thinkTis his duty to drinkOn St. Patrick s day in the morning !ST. PATRICK S DAY IN PARIS. 31In this hour of OUT pride let s do justice to merit,And grant to each nation its title to fame ;Nor e er let a grow ling, illiberal spirit,Obscure our bright laurels or sully our name.Let the bustle of war, and the roar of the cannon,In the loud song of mirth be for ever forgot :On the banks of the Seine, &c.When the hardy old Gaul, long accustomed to danger,Shall fight o er his fields by the cheerful wood fire ;And shall tell to his children the feats of the stranger,Our name shall be first in the list of the sire.For, have not all heard the dread roar of our cannon ?Can Wellington s glory be ever forgotOn the banks of the Seine, or the banks of the Shannon ?Then let us all singTo our country and king ;And each honest heart, whether Irish or not,Religiously thinkTis his duty to drinkThis good Patrick s day in the morning !32 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.THE SHAMROCK.THE popular notion respecting the shamrock, ortrefoil, is, that St. Patrick, by its means, satisfactorilyexplained to the early converts of Christianityin Ireland, the Trinity in Unity; exhibitingthe three leaves attached to one stalk as an illustration.Miss Beaufort remarks,* that it is "a curiouscoincidence, the trefoil plant (sharon and shamrakhin Arabic) having been held sacred in Iran, andconsidered emblematical of the Persian Triad." (Collect,v. 118.)The botanical name of the shamrock, like thatof the Scotch thistle, is a matter of dispute. Mr.Bicheno, in an amusing paper read before theLinnaean Society, has, with great ingenuity, endeavouredto shew that the wood-sorrel (oxalisacetosella) is the true shamrock ; while Dr. Witheringand Professor Jennie point out the white clover(trifolium repens) ; and Mr. London marks theblack medick (medical lupulina) as the genuinenational emblem of Ireland."" Transactions of the Royal Academy," vol. xv.THE SHAMROCK. 33That the shamrock was formerly eaten in Irelandas a salad, there appears no reason to doubt.Fines Morton, the secretary of Queen Elizabeth slord-deputy, Mountjoy, treating of the diet andcustoms of the " wild Irish," says, " they willinglyeat the herb shamrock, being of a sharp taste,which, as they run and are chased to and fro, theysnatch like beasts out of the ditches." Spenser,also, in his " View of the State of Ireland," describingthe misery consequent upon the Desmondrebellion, of which he was an eye-witness, speakingof the wretched and famishing Irish, tells us thatif they found a plot of watercresses or shamrocks,there they flocked as to a feast for the time, yetnot able long to continue there withal." But thesepassages, as referring to a period of national distressand famine consequent upon civil warfare, when,according to the authorities quoted, horse-flesh wasa luxury, and even dead bodies were taken out ofthe graves and eaten, do not prove the use of theshamrock as a salad so satisfactorily as the followingextract from the humorous poem of" Hesperi-neso-graphic," descriptive of national manners, whereinthe account of an Irish banquet, it is mentionedthat,Besides all this, vast bundles cameOf sorrel, more than I can name.And many sheaves I hear there wasOf shamrocks, and of water-grass,Which there for curious sallads pass."c234 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.In that whimsical poem, the " Irish Hudibras,"printed in 1689, we findSprings, happy springs, adorned with sallets,Which nature purpose d for their palate ;Shamrogs and water cress he shews,Which was both meat, and drink, and clothes."Again the Irish are there represented asWithout a rag, trousers, or brogues,Picking of sorrel and sham-rogues."These passages, as well as the preceding quotationfrom " Hesperi-noso-graphia," in which the sorreland the shamrock are distinctly mentioned as differentplants, seem to dispose of the question oftheir identity.A facetious essayist in the " Dublin PennyJournal" observes, thatOther countries may boast of their trefoil as wellas we ; but nowhere on the broad earth, on continentor in isle, is there such an abundance of thissucculent material for making fat mutton. In winter aswell as in summer, it is found to spread its green carpetover our limestone hills, drawing its verdure from themists that sweep from the Atlantic. The seed of it isevery where. Cast lime or limestone gravel on the topof a mountain, or on the centre of a bog, and up startsthe shamrock. St. Patrick, when he drove all living tidingsthat had venom (save man) from the top of CroaghPatrick, had his foot planted on a shamrock ; and if theTHE SHAMROCK. 35readers of your journal will go on a pilgrimage to thatmost beautiful of Irish hills, they will see the shamrockstill flourishing there, and expanding its fragrant honeysucklesto the western wind. I confess I have no patiencewith that impudent Englishman, who wants to make usbelieve that our darling plant, associated as it is with ourreligious and convivial partialities, was not the favouriteof St. Patrick, and who would substitute in the place ofthat badge of our faith and our nationality, a little, sour,puny plant of wood-sorrel ! This is actually attemptedto be done by that stiff, sturdy Saxon, Mister Bicheno.Though Keogh, Threlkeld, and other Irish botanists,assert that the Scamar oge, or Sharon, is indeed thetrifolium repens ; and Threlkeld expressly says, that thetrefoil is worn by the people in their hats upon the 17thof March, which is called St. Patrick s day, it being thecurrent tradition, that by this three-leaved GRASS he emblematicallyset forth the Holy Trinity. However thatbe, when they wet their Scamar oge, they often commitexcess in liquor, which is not a right keeping a day tothe Lord ! The proof the Englishman adduces, is thetestimony of one Spenser, another Saxon, who, in hisView of Ireland, describes the people, in a great famine,creeping forth and flocking to a plot of shamrocks, orwatercresses, to feed on them for the time; and he alsoquotes an English satirist, one Wytthe, who scoffinglysays of thoseWho, for their clothing, in mantle goe,And feed on sham roots as the Irish doe.But we are not so easily led, Mr. Saxon ; we, Irishmen,are not quite disposed to give up our favourite plant36 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.at your bidding. In time of famine, the Irish might haveattempted to satisfy hunger with trefoil, as well as theydid two years ago, when such a thing as sea-weedwas eaten, for hunger will break through a stone wall.But do not the Welsh put leeks into their bonnets on St.David s day ? and now and then they may eat their leek,as Shakspere has it, as a relish either for an affront orfor other sort of food ; and small blame to an Irishman,if, when he feels that queer sensation called hunger, hechews a plant of clover I I, for one, when going intogood company, would rather have my breath redolent ofthe honeysuckle plant, than spiced with the haut gout ofgarlic ! Yet no Welshman would like to live upon leeks,no more than a poor Irishman would upon grass or trefoil ;for there is, doubtless, as little nourishment for man in theone as the other. But, to do Mr. Bicheno justice, he hasanother argument in favour of the wood-sorrel being thefavourite plant of our country, which is far more to anIrishman s mind. He says that wood-sorrel, when steepedin punch, makes a better substitute for lemon than trefoil.This has something very specious in it: if any thing woulddo, this would ; but let the Saxon do his best. Even onhis own ground even in London he would find it veryhard to convince our countrymen, settled in St. Giles s,that the oxalis acetosella, the sour, puny, crabbed wood-sorrel,is the proper emblem for Ireland. No ; theshamrock the green shamrock, for me I "Shamrogueshire is a name so commonly appliedto Ireland, that it does not require illustration ;and wearing the plant as a badge, has always beenTHE SHAMROCK. 37considered a national compliment. In a satiricallament .upon the departure of George IV. fromDublin, the king is thus spoken of:It s you, it s you, that s not afraid,Oh, wira sthrue ! oh, wira sthrue !To wear the shamrock green cockade,Oh, wira sthrue ! oh, wira sthrue ! " &c.It is impossible to pass without notice the superstitionattached to that lusus natures, a four-leavedshamrock, which is popularly believed in Ireland,and indeed in Lancashire and other parts of Englandalso, to be a sure omen of wealth, and toendue the lucky finder with supernatural powers.Mr. Lover has made this notion the subject of abeautiful ballad, but he is in error when he assertsthat a four-leaved shamrock " does not exist," asno less than three were found in the Editor s gardenduring the summer of the present year. From theIrish Hudibras," however, it would seem that theperformance of some spells were necessary uponfinding one of those magic leaves, to developed itspowers. The hero of that poem is represented, whenabout to descend into the infernal regions, as seekingadvice from a nun, which is thus given to him :Nay, bird, if thou art so hot setTo throw thyself into the net;So mad (said she) to visit hell,And cannot see when thou art well ;38 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.If thou cst be damn d before thy day,Take a fool s counsel first, I say.Within this wood, near to this place,There grows a bunch of three-leaved grass,Called by the hollanders* shamrogues,A present for the Queen of Shoges,fWhich thou must first be after fetching,But all the cunning s in the catching."Soon after, Nees, the hero,seeing such a mighty throngOf trees, bethought him of the nun.Dear joy I if this sham rogue should proveBy chance to grow in this same grove ;Should Nees so luckily succeed,Twould be luck in a bag, indeed.And fait, fy man t it prove so too ?All is not false dat she says true."The splendid allegory which Moore has associatedwith the origin of this " triple grass,"A type that blendsThree godlike friendsLove, Valour, Wit, for ever,"so completely throws into the shade the numerouslyrics upon the shamrock, that the Editor has onlyventured to select two, which, although possessedof little merit, have some interest from the circum-clowns.t Spirits.THE SHAMROCK COCKADE. 39stances connected with them, and stated in the introductoryremarks. Long may the Shamrock,The plant that blooms for ever,With the Rose combined,And the Thistle twined,Defy the strength of foes to sever.Firm be the triple league they form,Despite all change of weather ;In sunshine, darkness, calm or storm,Still may they fondly grow together."THE SHAMROCK COCKADE.Bring me a bunch of luggage ropes,Of sbamroges and potato tops,To make a lawrel "So says the " Irish Hudibras." The Loyal Volunteersof Cork appear to have contented themselves by merelywearing the shamrock as a national decoration, on theoccasion of their public appearance in honour of St.Patrick. Fitzgerald thus chronicles the matter in hisCork Remembrancer:" " 1780, March 17. The armedsocieties of this city paraded on the Mall with shamrockcockades, and fired three volleys in honour of the day.A noble train, most gorgeously array dTo bail St. Patrick, and a new free trade."A dinner, with a liberal allowance of whisky-punch andpatriotic speeches, of course followed upon this occasion,40 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.when the song now printed from a manuscript copy, inthe autograph of Mr. John Shears,* was sung.The era of the Volunteers is an important one in Irishhistory. The origin of these armed associations may betraced to the declaration of Sir Richard Heron, thesecretary to Lord Buckinghamshire, who, in answer toapplications from the inhabitants of Cork and Belfast formilitary protection, candidly stated " that Governmentcould afford them none," and " that they must arm anddefend themselves." In Cork, the first Volunteer Associationswere formed ; and the local chronicle, beforequoted from, informs us that on the 4th November, 1777,the Boyne Society was first reviewed by Colonel Boswellin White s bowling-green ; and that, in consequence ofsome outrages committed by a mob in Cork on the 12thMarch following, the Boyne Society, for the first time,mounted guard at the Market-house, on Friday the 13th,in order to preserve peace and suppress the riots." The26th of March, 1778, is recorded by Fitzgerald to havebeen the anniversary of the Cork Union ; and on the 12thof April, he tells us, " the True Blues, Boyne, Aughrim,Union, and Culloden Societies, walked in procession toChrist Church, according to seniority, being the firstgeneral public appearance made by these Sons ofLiberty ."fOn the Sunday fortnight, the following not very pro-executedin Dublin, for high treason, in 1798.t Fitzgerald s volume was published in 1783, and in the slang ofthe day thus concludes : " The first dawn of Irish liberty broke outin 1779. Ireland obtained her legislative INDEPENDENCE (with theconsent of the British Senate) the 16th day of April, 1783. HAIL!GLORIOUS VOLUNTEERS !"THE SHAMROCK COCKADE. 41poetic entry occurs, in the journal of the celebrated JohnWesley: " At Peter s Church (Cork) I saw a pleasingsight, the Independent Companies raised by private personsassociating together, without any expense to the Government.They exercised every day, and if they answer noother end, at least keep the Papists in order, who wereexceedingly alert ever since the army was removed toAmerica."The ensuing Sunday, Wesley, about whom there thenwas considerable curiosity in Cork, writes " I was a littlesurprised at a message from the gentlemen of the AughrimSociety (a company of Volunteers so called), that if Ihad no objection, they would attend at the New Room inthe evening. They did so, with another independentcompany who were just raised the True Blues. A bodyof so personable men I never saw together before. Thegentlemen in scarlet filled the side gallery ; those in blue,the front gallery ; but both galleries would not containthem all ; some were constrained to stand below. Allbehaved admirably well, though I spoke exceeding plainon We preach Christ crucified. No laughing, no talking,all seemed to hear as for life. Surely this is tokenof good." September 7, 1778, was the first general field-dayof all the armed societies belonging to the city ofCork. " They were drawn up in Ballyphehane field, wherethey went through the manual exercise, and performedthe different evolutions with a facility and precision that,"according to Fitzgerald, " would do honour to an armyof veterans. In short, these Volunteers (or Sons ofLiberty) formed one of the most pleasing and agreeablesights that ever presented itself to public view in this city,to the great satisfaction of several thousand spectators."42 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.It is remarked by Mr. Hardy, in his life of LordClaremont, that " the year 1778 furnishes not onlyample, but splendid materials for the historian of Ireland."This is an unhappy assertion ; for the ample materials arethe personal feelings of ambitious and interested individuals,and the period derives its splendour from the fearfullightning-flash which reveals a host of armed men in thedarkness of a political storm. In 1780, the Volunteerarmy of Ireland amounted to 42,000 men ; and to theirproceedings in pursuit of the ignis fatuus, Liberty, may betraced the origin of the melancholy Rebellion of 1798.A copy of the button worn by the Irish Volunteers is,perhaps, worth preserving as a national relic. The mottoin the Irish character signifies " God save the King."Tune " Ally Croaker."St. Patrick he is Ireland s Saint,And we re his Volunteers, sir ;The hearts that treason cannot taintTheir fire with joy he hears, sir.THE SHAMROCK COCKADE. 43None need be toldOur Saint so boldWill think that dog a damn d rogue,Who on his dayWould keep away,And does not mount his shamrock.O rally, O rally, O rally round, then :Who on this dayHas kept away,Be sure they are not sound men.Should French invaders dare to comeIn ruffles full of starch, sir ;A ruffle beat upon our drum,Like Patrick s month tis March, sir.Mong Union* men,And CullodenThere s not one man a damn d rogue ;True Blue: and BoyneWith Aughrim || join,To mount a verdant shamrock.O rally, O rally, &c.And then, in memory of this dayOur Saint has made so glorious,Each man will seventeen men slay,And Ireland make victorious.Henry Hickman, Esq., captain commandant.t Benjamin Bousfield, Esq., colonel.J Cavalry and Infantry ; the Earl of Shannon, colonel.John Parnell, Esq., colonel.|| Richard Longfield, Esq., colonel.44 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.TheEnniskillen*Boys are willing,There s not one man a darn d rogue ;Blackpool will joinTrue Blue and Boyne,And mount the verdant shamrock.O rally, O rally, &c.THE GREEN LITTLE SHAMROCK OF IRELAND.The words by Andrew Cherry, the music by Shield,and sung by Mrs. Mountain in her entertainmentcalled " Travellers at Spa," at the little Opera House,Capell Street, Dublin, 1806. " This entertainment," observesMrs. Mountain, in a most obliging communicationto the Editor, " was entirely recited and sung by me, andattracted crowded houses in defiance of the denouncementof Mr. Jones, the manager of the Crow Street Theatre,who threatened and did in part proceed against me. Iam," continues Mrs. Mountain, " extremely proud of thisera in my life, because talent (however humble) triumphedover oppression."Cherry, the author of this song, was the son of a printerand bookseller in Limerick. He was born in 1762, andThe original manuscript of the " Rules of the EnniskillenArmed Society of Cork," with the signatures of the members, is inthe possession of Mr. Bennett of that city. It is without dale ; andis in the autograph of the Colonel, John Bennett, afterwards Recorderof the city of Cork, and Judge.t Horse j John Harding, Esq., colonel.THE GREEN LITTLE SHAMROCK OF IRELAND. 45apprenticed in Dublin to his father s trade ; but, becomingstage-struck," joined a company of strollers at Nags,where, at the age of seventeen, Cherry appeared as ColonelFeignwell in Mrs. Centlivre s Comedy of " A BoldStroke for a Wife," on which occasion his exertions wererewarded by the sum of ten pence half-penny. Afterenduring, for some time, all the wretched vicissitudes of astroller s life, he " returned to reason and the shop," andremained as his father s assistant for three or four years,when he again determined to follow the stage as a profession; and he joined the provincial company of Mr.Knife, whose widow he subsequently married. In 1787,Cherry succeeded Mr. Ryder on the Dublin stage, wherehe continued a favourite comic actor till 1793 ; aboutwhich time he was engaged by Tate Wilkinson for theYorkshire circuit, to fill the parts which had becomevacant by Facets s engagement at Covent Garden. In1796, Cherry returned to Dublin ; there he performed fortwo years, and then, through the theatres of Manchesterand Bath, obtained an engagement in 1802 at DruryLane, where he was received with much applause. Heafterwards became manager of the Swansea and Monmouththeatres, and died at the latter place of dropsy onthe brain, on the 12th February, 1812.The titles of ten theatrical pieces, written by Cherry,are to be found in the " Biographia Dramatic;" of whichthe most popular was a comedy called " The Soldier sDaughter."That Andrew Cherry was a humorist, is evidentfrom the laconic note which he addressed to the managerof the Dublin Theatre, whose breach of faith had occa-46 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.signed Cherry s leaving the Irish stage, in answer to anapplication, after his success at Drury Lane, to enter intoan engagement.SIR, I am not so great a fool as you take me for.I have been bitten once by you, and I will never give youan opportunity of making two bites ofA. CHERRY."The meaning of the last verse of the following song,which now appears obscure, and indeed the line " ourselvesby ourselves be befriended," which is rathernonsensical, probably had considerable point, under thecircumstances stated by Mrs. Mountain respecting themonopolylogue in which this lyric was introduced.There s a dear little plant that grows in our isle,Twas St. Patrick himself, sure, that set it ;And the sun of his labour with pleasure did smile,And with dew from his eye often wet it.It thrives through the bog, through the brake, through theireland ;And he called it the dear little shamrock of Ireland,The sweet little shamrock, the dear little shamrock,The sweet little, green little, shamrock of Ireland.This dear little plant still grows in our land,Fresh and fair as the daughters of Erin,Whose smiles can bewitch, whose eyes can command,In each climate that they may appear in ;THE GREEN LITTLE SHAMROCK OF IRELAND. 47And shine through the bog, through the brake, throughthe ireland,Just like their own dear little shamrock of Ireland.The sweet little shamrock, &c.This dear little plant that springs from our soil,When its three little leaves are extended,Denotes from one stalk we together should toil,And ourselves by ourselves be befriended :And still through the bog, through the brake, throughthe ireland,From one root should branch, like the shamrock of Ireland.The sweet little shamrock, &c.48 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.THE POTATO.Sublime potatoes ! that, from Antrim s shoreTo famous Kerry, form the poor man s store ;Agreeing well with every place and stateThe peasant s noggin, or the rich man s plate.Much prized when smoking from the teeming pot,Or in turf-embers roasted crisp and hot.Welcome, although you be our only dish ;Welcome, companion to flesh, fowl, or fish ;But to the real gourmands, the learned few,Most welcome, steaming in an Irish stew."THIS extract from " A Grand National Poem,"which the Editor fears must remain in manuscript,as no enterprising publisher will undertake the riskof printing it, places clearly before the reader themerits ofErin s unrivalled potato,Pride of the land of the great O I "It is well known that " sublime potatoes" formthe principal food of the larger portion of theinhabitants of " the green island,"From Fairhead to Kilcrumper."THE POTATO. 49The fya%ifoa of Theophrastus, and the TUXVOXW/AOV ofDioscorides, are said to be identical with the potatoof Ireland. Be this as it may, it is quite clear thatthe popular potato of Shakspere and of the Elizabethanage,* is not the same root as that now commonlyknown by the name. Holinshed, Cousins,Gerard, Pauline, Gomara, Josephus Costa, anda score of authorities, may be quoted from, andargued upon, to shew how admirably George Colemanhas described the Solanum tuberosum of Linnaeus.Crest of the O Shaughnashane !That s a potato-plain.Long may your root every Irishman know !Pats long have stuck to it,Long bid good luck to it ;Whack for O Shaughnashane ! Tooley whagg ho !" Luxury, with her potato finger." Troilus and Cressida, v. 2.Let the sky rain potatoes." Merry Wives of Windsor, v. 5. " surprisingwaters aud potato roots." He and She Coney Catchers, 1592.Larks, sparrows, and potato pies." Every Man out of his Humour,ii. 3. " Some artichokes and potato roots." Menechmi of Plautus,translated 1594. " If any person wishes for more illustration," saysNares, who merely quotes of the above passages that from theMerry Wives of Windsor," and does not question the identity ofthe root with the one at present used as food, " they may consultBeaumont aud Fletcher s Elder Brother, iv. 4 ; Ben Jonson sCynthia s Revels ii. 2. Massinger s New \Vay to Pay OldDebts, ii. 2; Old Plays, iii. 323; iv. 427, &c. The medicalwriters of the times," adds Dr. Nares, " countenanced the fancy" ofthe potato having a stimulating effect upon the constitution. " See,also, Harrington s Epigrams, b. iii. 33."D50 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Ours is an esculent lusty and lasting,No turnip or other weak babe of the ground ;Waxy or mealy, it hinders from fastingHalf Erin s inhabitants, all the year round.Wants the soil where tis flung,Hogs, cows, or horse s dung,Still does the crest of O Shaughnessy grow.Shout for it, Munster men,*Till the bogs quake again,Whack for O Shaughnashane ! Tooley whagg ho !"It is useless to detain the reader by entering intoan inquiry about the lost treatise on this inestimablevegetable alluded to in the " Irish Hudibras,"Who can forget the learned Cato,That writ so much on the potato ?"The illustrious author is merely mentioned in a noteas " Crack Mac Art, styled the Cato of Ireland.He writ a treatise of the virtues of a potato, beyondthe wisdom of Solomon, the knowledge of Aristotle,the rhetoric of Cicero, Con Clerenaugh, and Mure-armaghO Collegian."The opinion of Sir Joseph Banks, who took considerablepains to investigate the matter, is, thatthe root now called the potato was introducedinto the British islands in July 1586, by the returnexpedition of Sir Walter Raleigh, for which thepatent passed the great seal in 1584. Herriot, aThe Editor has here corrected the error young Mr. Coleman sprinter, according to whom this passage would read " Ulster men."THE POTATO. 51scientific man who accompanied the expedition,describes under the head of roots a plant called inVirginia openawk, which perfectly agrees with ourpotato. " These plants," he says, " are round,some as large as a walnut, others much larger ; theygrow in damp soil, many hanging together as iffixed on ropes : they are good food, either boiledor roasted." Cuvier, notwithstanding, denies thatEurope has derived the potato from Virginia; butwhen its introduction into the British isles is thuscircumstantially connected with the return of Raleighs expedition in 1586, and it is recorded thatSir Walter Raleigh was mayor of Youghall in 1588,the anecdote related in Smith s " History of Cork,"speaking of Youghall, appears extremely probable.It was in this town that the first potatoes werelanded in Ireland by Sir Walter Raleigh. Theperson who planted them, imagining that the applewhich grows on the stalk was the part to be used,gathered them ; but, not liking their taste, neglectedthe roots, till the ground, being dug afterwards tosow some other grain, the potatoes were discoveredtherein ; and, to the great surprise of the planter,vastly increased. From these few this country wasfurnished with seed."According to a popular song upon the potato,<; By Raleigh twas planted at Youghall so gay,And Munster potatoes are famed to this day,Ballinamona ora,A laughing red apple for me."52 THE POPULAR SONGS OF Ire AND.In 1662, a letter was read in the Royal Societyrecommending the culture of potatoes, and rootswere distributed to the members for this purpose inthe spring of the following year. Evelyn inculcatedthe project in his " Sylva," and from this period theplant became common in England. Sir RobertSouthwell, the president of the Royal Society, informedthe fellows on the 3d December, 1693, thathis grandfather introduced the potato into Ireland,and that he had the root from Sir Walter Raleigh.This evidence proves, not unsatisfactorily," accordingto Sir Joseph Banks, " that the potato wasfirst brought into England, either in the year 1586,or very soon after ; and sent from thence to Irelandwithout delay by Sir Robert Southwell s ancestor,where it was cherished and cultivated for food beforethe good people of England knew its^value ;for Gerard, who had the plant in his garden in1597, recommends the roots to be eaten as a delicatedish, not as common food." That Sir Robert Southwell s ancestor may have received the potato fromSir Walter Raleigh, will not be disputed ; but SirJoseph Banks, in arriving at the conclusion thatRaleigh was not the introducer of the root intoIreland, seems to have overlooked his intimate connexionwith the south of Ireland, already pointedout, at the precise period when the potato of ourtimes made its appearance.What renders this question an object of morethan ordinary interest to the Editor is, that in aTHE POTATO. 53manuscript among the " Southwell Papers," unfortunatelywithout date, but, from the contents,believed to have been written about 1640, potato-rootsare called " Brokers," from having been firstplanted in Croker s field at Youghall. Possiblythe spot mentioned by Lord Castlehaven, who, inhis * Memoirs," states, that when he encamped withthe Irish army before that town in 1645, he causedMajor-general Butler to take up a position " towardsthe sea near Croker s Works."Tradition also says, " that the potato-root, besidesbeing planted on Sir Walter Raleigh s groundat Youghall, was likewise planted on some land inthe diocess of Team, which Sir Walter afterwardslet to endow a school."About the year 1633 the potato is supposed tohave been introduced into Lancashire by a vesselfrom Ireland, which was wrecked in the NorthModels. In Scotland it does not appear to have beenpopularly cultivated until 1728, although it wasknown there many years previously ; as Sutherlandnotices it in 1683, in his " Hortus Medicis Edin-burgesses."It is observed by Mr. Samuel M Skimin, theingenious author of the " History of Carrickfergus,"that in Ireland it is likely potatoes had long beenintroduced before they attracted the attention of thefarmer for the purpose of cultivation. In a manuscript,of which he is the possessor, written between1670 and 1679, which treats largely of the prices of54 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.every kind of agricultural produce, potatoes are onlyonce mentioned, and that in 1676, when they weresold at the high rate of Is. Sd. per bushel. Thismust refer to the north of Ireland ; and Mr.M Skimin speaks of the same district, when heremarks, " very old people informed me, that fewpotatoes were formerly used after harvest, except asmall quantity preserved as a treat for their Halloweensupper, which were eaten with butter. If,however, does appear that they were coming intogeneral circulation before their time."The south of Ireland, there can he no doubt, wasthe cradle of the potato. In the " Irish Hudibras"(1689), numerous passages occur to prove that thisroot was extensively cultivated, and commonly used.Thus, we are told ofThat monstrous giant, Finn MacIIeuyle,Whose carcass, buried in the meadows,Took up nine acres of potatoes."And, in " Hesperi-neso-graphia," swine are describedas good as e erturned the earth of garden, whereBeloved potatoes growing were."Again, in the " Irish Hudibras," the hero isrepresented as havingNo cannons, nor wide-mouth d grandees ;Nees s fire-balls were boiled pottados."THE POTATO. 55And the arrival of King William III. does notallow himTo enjoy his land, or any part,His banniclabber* and potatoes,Without these French and Dutch grandees."Among the amusements of the Irish at this period,it is mentioned that some of a partyplayed at bondman s buff,Some roast pottados, some grind snuff."That potatoes were ordinary food in the southof Ireland before the time of the Commonwealth,is shewn by " An Account of an Irish Quarter,"printed in 1654, in a volume entitled " Songsand Poems of Love and Drollery, by T. W." Thewriter and his friend, two cavaliers, visit Coffin,in the county of Waterford, the seat of Mr. Power,or Power, the high-sheriff, where their entertainmentis thus described :And now for supper, the round board being spread;The van a dish of coddled onions led ;I th body was a salted tail of salmon,And in the rear some rank potatoes came on."Buttermilk.55 THE POPULAR SONGS OP IRELAND.THE LAND OF POTATOES, O !To the honour of Ireland must it be stated, that thepotato, that " admirable vegetable," experienced a verydifferent reception there as a stranger, than in othernations ; of which treatment more hereafter. " TheIrish," observes Cuvier, " seem to have taken advantageof this root first, for, at an early period, we find the plantdistinguished by the name of Irish potato." However,long before this event for so may the introduction of thepotato be styled the hospitality of Ireland to strangerswas proverbial. An anecdote, for example, is told as theorigin of the name of Sullivan, that is, the one-eyed,*Who gave his bright eye as a proverb to shine."So great was the reputation of this old gentleman forhospitality, that it was asserted he would refuse to hisguest no request, however unreasonable. This wastested by a stranger whom he entertained, asking his hostto put out his eye, into which he immediately thrust hisfinger; and, from thenceforward, was distinguished asO Sullivan, while the fame of the act passed into theproverb ofNulla manus,Tarn liberals,Atque generalis,Atque universals,Quam Sullivan! "The subsequent song, in which the hospitality of theland of potatoes has been commended, is ascribed to" Sul means the sun ; hence mil, the eye, because it is thelight of the body." O BRIEN.THE LAND OF POTATOES, O ! 57Mr. Owenson, the father of Lady Morgan ; who is alsosaid to have been " the author of various lyrical compositions,which were sung on the Dublin stage, and areremarkable for broad wit and genuine humour."Mr. Owenson, by an imprudent connexion with aonce beautiful and celebrated actress, was, early in life,infected with the theatrical mania, and, on his marriageafterwards with a respectable English woman, he purchaseda share in one of the Dublin theatres, and became joint-proprietorwith the celebrated Mr. Ryder. On Mr. Dalyobtaining an exclusive patent for a metropolitan theatre,Mr. Owenson resigned. He afterwards embarked in mercantileconcerns, became a wine-merchant, and built someprovincial theatres ; among others, that beautiful edifice atKilkenny."Sir Jonah Harrington, in the " Personal Sketches of hisown Times," thus describes Mr. Owenson :He was," says Sir Jonah, " highly celebrated in theline of Irish characters ; and never did an actor exist soperfectly calculated, in my opinion, to personify thatsingular class of people. Considerably above six feet inheight, remarkably handsome and brave-looking, vigorous,and well-shaped, he was not vulgar enough to disgust,nor was he genteel enough to be out of character; neverdid I see an actor so entirely identify himself with thepeculiarities of those parts he assumed. In the higherclass of Irish characters (old officers, &c.) he lookedwell, but did not exhibit sufficient dignity ; and, in thelowest, his humour was scarcely quaint and originalenough : but in what might be termed the middle class ofPaddies, no man ever combined the look and the mannerD 258 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.with such felicity as Owenson. Scientific singing is notan Irish quality ; and he sang well enough. I have heardJack Johnston warble so very skilfully, and act someparts so very like a man of first-rate education, that Ialmost forgot the nation he was mimicking : that was notthe case with Owenson ; he acted as if he had not receivedtoo much schooling, and sang like a man whom nobodyinstructed. He was, like most of his profession, carelessof his concerns, and grew old without growing rich. Hislast friend was old Fontaine, a very celebrated Irishdancing - master, many years domiciliated and highlyesteemed in Dublin. He aided Owenson and his familywhilst he had the means to do so ; and they both died nearlyat the same time, instances of talent and improvidenceTune " Morgan Rattler."Had I in the clearBut five hundred a-year,Tis myself would not fear,Though not adding one farthing to t.Faith, if such was my lot,Little Ireland s the spotWhere I d build a snug cot,With a bit of a garden to t.As for Italy s dales,With their Alps and high vales,Where with fine squalling gales,Their signora so treat us, O !I d ne er unto them come,Nor abroad ever roam,But enjoy my sweet homeIn the land of potatoes, O !THE LAND OF POTATOES, O ! 59Hospitality,No formality,All reality,There you ever see ;The free and the easyWould so amaze ye,You d think us all crazy,For dull we never be IIf my friend, honest Jack,Would but take a small hack,So just get on his back,Arid of joy ride o er full to us ;He, throughout the whole year,Then should have the best cheer,For, faith, none so dearAs our brother, John Bull, to us !And we d teach him, when there,Both to blunder and stare,And our brogue with him share,Which both genteel and neat is, O !And we d make him so drin.l$,By St. Patrick, I think,That he d ne er wish to shrinkFrom the land of potatoes, O !Hospitality, &c.Though I freely agreeI should more happy beIf some lovely sheFrom Old England would favour me j60 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.For no spot on earthCan more merit bring forth,If with beauty and worthYou embellished would have her beGood breeding, good nature,You find in each feature,That naught you ve to teach herSo sweet and complete she s, O IThen if Fate would but sendUnto me such a friend,What a life I would spendIn the land of potatoes, O IHospitality, &c.THE SMILING POTATOES.Cobbett terms the potato " Ireland s lazy root," and"Ireland s accursed root;" but Cobbett, against whomthis song about the " sweet roots of Erin " is levelled,stands by no means alone in his opposition to the cultureof the potato.In France potatoes were at first proscribed. Paulinestates, that in his time the use of them had been prohibitedin Burgundy, because it was supposed that theyproduced leprosy.It is difficult to believe," says Cuvier, " that aplant so innocent, so agreeable, so productive, which requiresso little trouble to be rendered fit for food ; that aroot so well defended against the intemperance of theTHE SMILING POTATOES. 61seasons ; that a plant which, by a singular privilege, unitesin itself every advantage, without any other inconveniencethan that of not lasting all the year, but which even owesto this circumstance the additional advantage that it cannotbe hoarded up by monopolists; that such a plantshould have required two centuries in order to overcomethe most puerile prejudices !Yet we ourselves," continues the enlightened Cuvier,have been witnesses of the fact. The English broughtthe potato into Flanders during the wars of Louis XIV.It was thence spread, but very sparingly, over some partsof France. Switzerland had put a higher value on it, andhad found it very good. Several of our southern provinceshad planted it in imitation of that country, at theperiod of the scarcities, which were several times repeatedduring the last years of Louis XV. Turgot, in particular,rendered it common in the Limousin and Angoumois,over which he was intendant ; and it was to be expectedthat, in a short time, this new branch of subsistence wouldbe spread over the kingdom, when some old physiciansrenewed against it the prejudices of the 16th century.It was no longer accused of producing leprosy, butfever. The scarcities had produced in the south certainepidemics, which they thought proper to ascribe to thesole means which existed to prevent them. The ComptrollerGeneral was obliged, in 1771, to request the opinionof the faculty of medicine, in order to put an end to thesefalse notions.Parmentier, who had learned to appreciate thepotato in the prisons of Germany, where he had beenoften confined to that food, seconded the views of the62 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.minister by a chemical examination of this root, in whichhe demonstrated that none of its constituents are hurtful.He did better still. To give the people a relish for them,he cultivated them in the open fields, in places very muchfrequented. He guarded them carefully during the dayonly, and was happy when he had excited as much curiosityas to induce people to .steal some of them during thenight. He would have wished that the king, as we readof the emperors of China, had traced the first furrow ofhis field. His majesty thought proper, at least, to wear abunch of potato flowers at his button-hole in the midst ofthe court on a festival day. Nothing more was wantingto induce several great lords to plant this root.Parmentier wished likewise to engage the cooks ofthe great in the service of the poor, by inducing them topractise their skill on the potato ; for he was aware thatthe poor could not obtain potatoes in abundance, unlessthey could furnish the rich with an agreeable article offood. He informs us that he one day gave a dinner composedentirely of potatoes, with twenty different sauces,all of which gratified the palates of his guests.But the enemies of the potato, though refuted intheir attempts to prove it injurious to the health, did notconsider themselves vanquished. They pretended that itinjured the fields, and rendered them barren. It wasnecessary, however, to answer this objection, and to considerthe potato in an agricultural point of view. Parmentieraccordingly published, in different forms, everythingregarding its cultivation and uses, even in fertilizingthe soil. He introduced the subject into philosophicalworks, into popular instructions, into journals, into die-theSMILING POTATOES. 63tionaries, into works of all kinds. During forty years, helet slip no opportunity of recommending it. Every badyear was a kind of auxiliary, of which he profited withcare to draw the attention of mankind to his favouriteplant.Hence," continues Cuvier, " the name of this salutaryvegetable and the name of Parmentier have becomeinseparable in the memory of the friends of humanity.Even the common people united them, and not alwayswith gratitude. At a certain period of the Revolution, itwas proposed to give Parmentier some municipal place.One of the voters opposed this proposal with fury. * Hewill make us eat potatoes said he. * It was he whoinvented them. "In the following song, which is copied from a volumeof " Poems, chiefly historical, by the Rev. John Graham,Mea. Rector of Tamlaghtard in the Diocess of Derry"(Belfast, 1829), the merits of the potato are morebriefly, though not less zealously advocated, than byParmentier.Tune " Dear creatures, ice caa t do without them. 1While we fatten and feast on the smiling potatoesOf Erin s green valleys, so friendly to man,Oh 1 there s not in the wide world a race that can beat us,From Canada s cold hills to sultry Japan.*The Editor has taken the liberty of transposing the third andfourth lines of the author to be the first and second, and vice versa.64 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.It is not an abundance that Pat calls a plenty,Of plain simple fare the potato supplies ;But milk, beef, and butter, and bacon so dainty,Hens, ducks, geese, and turkeys, and fat mutton-pies.Sweet roots of Erin ! we can t do without them ;No tongue can express their importance to man.Poor Corporal Cobbett knows nothing about them ;We ll boil them and eat them as long as we can.In the skirts of our bogs, that are covered with rushes,In dales, that^we till with the sweat of our brow,On the wild mountain side, cleared of heath, rocks, andbushes,We plant the kind root with the spade or the plough.Then come the south breezes, with soft vernal showers,To finish the process that man has begun,And orange, and purple, and lily-white flowers,Reflect in bright lustre the rays of the sun.Sweet roots of Erin, &c.The ground, too, thus broke and brought in by potatoes,Produces the cream of our northern cheerIn crops of rich barley, that comfort and treat usTo Innishone whisky, and Maghera beer.Then here s to the brave boys that plant them and raisethem,To fatten their pigs, and their weans, and their wives :May none of the corporal s principles seize them,To shorten their days, or embitter their lives.Sweet roots of Erin, &c.WHISKY. 65WHISKY.c BLESSINGS on the man, says Sancho Panza,< who invented sleep ! it covers one all over aswith a blanket. Blessings on the man, says Pat,who invented poteen ! it brings one s heart into themouth ; it s better than an outside coat ; it makesone spake out, and care not a fig for the pope, thepriest, or the devil."Thus does Mr. John Barrow apostrophise thenational spirit of Ireland, about which a superabundanceof twaddle has been published of lateby political economists, and Temperance Societyspeechifiers ; the former being in general men whoare unable prudently to conduct their own affairs,and the latter notorious drunkards.In 1835, when John Barrow visitedThe houseless wilds of Connemara,"he paid his respects to the chief of the gigantic raceof Joyce, distinguished as " Big Jack Joyce," bywhom this adventurous traveller amongst the rudeIrish was most hospitably received and entertained.66 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.On the poteen," says Barrow, " being produced,I hoped he (the aforesaid Big Jack Joyce ) wouldnot oblige me to drink alone ; but it was not withoutmuch entreaty I could prevail upon him to take asingle glass, which he did only, he said, to welcomemy arrival. Tempora mutantur, thought I, andsome of us are changed with them ; for it was scarcelya twelvemonth since Inglis visited him, when l roomwas found on the table for a double-sized flagon ofwhisky, and water appeared to be a beverage notmuch in repute. The mystery was soon unriddledby his telling me that he Joyce, of all men in theworld had become a member of a TemperanceSociety ! and had taken a vow (on three monthstrial) not to drink spirits, save and except on suchan occasion as the present, and when necessary todoso medicinally. He, however, gave me to understandthat he had taken his fair share of poteen inhis day, and was nothing the worse of it.It is to be hoped," adds Barrow, " that thishonest fellow will not endeavour to prevail on hispoor neighbours to forego entirely this necessarybeverage ; absolutely necessary, as I am assured bya medical gentleman of great eminence, to preventscorbutic habits in those whose chief or sole food isthe potato, which Cobbett not improperly calls * theroot of poverty. Rice has not much more nutritionin it than potatoes, and yet the millions of India andChina feed upon little else ; but they never eat italone ; it is either dressed in the shape of curries,WHISKY. 67or highly seasoned with pepper and other hot spices,which answers the purpose of whisky."The Editor is inclined to assign the introductionof the manufacture of whisky into the Green Islandto the fourteenth century, although the preciseperiod has not been satisfactorily determined byantiquaries. Before the progress of whisky, leper-houses,which, as Dr. Lerwick observes, " wereevery where to be found" in Ireland, rapidly disappeared; and hence this healing spirit was termedthe water of life, or aqua vitae, which words renderedinto Irish, are UifTje beach, or usquebaugh, emphaticallycalled uisge ; or, to use the expression of SirWalter Scott, " by way of eminence termed thewater" and from uisge is our common word whiskyderived.By the old physicians this charming cordial wasrecommended as a means of prolonging life, andit was, consequently, eagerly and universally soughtafter. Fennel-seeds, saffron, and other pungentmatters, were mingled with it ; but these were soonfound to be only whimsical adulteration of thesublime purity of an inestimable extract. FinesMorton, although little inclined to admit the excellenceof any thing Irish, says, " The Irish aquavitae, vulgarly called usquebaugh, is held the best inthe world of that kind ; which is also made in England,but nothing so good as that which is broughtout of Ireland." As something to be proud of, thesuperiority of this manufacture may be traced in the68 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.national character. Between both there is a certaindegree of similitude. In both the same volatileproperties exist, when fresh, wild, and fiery ; whenmellowed by time and travel, the delight of allcircles. It is admitted that there are few betterthings in company than an Irish gentleman and abottle of old whisky ; most welcome are they bothin society : good humour and cheerfulness are theirassociates. Dr. Madden evidently saw the parallel,and what an exquisite relish they produce, when hesaid, " We have got the character of bearing ournational miseries with the best grace ; nay, of beingthe most boon companions, and the fairest drinkersof Europe."To understand the merits either of the Irishcharacter or of whisky-punch, which does so muchfor it, requires a certain experience of both. Withrespect to the latter, Dr. Campbell, in " A PhilosophicalSurvey of the South of Ireland," made byhim in 1775, recording his visit to Spring House,near Tipperary, says, " After supper I, for the firsttime, drank whisky-punch, the taste of which isharsh and austere, and the smell worse than thetaste. The drinkers of it say it becomes so palatablethat they can relish no other ; which may very possiblybe the case, for I suppose that claret is notrelished by any palate at first.The spirit was very fierce and wild, requiringnot less than seven times its own quantity of waterto tame and subdue it." He then speaks of usque-whisky.69|bags, and this, he says, " is the liquor which theczar Peter the Great was so fond of, that he usedto say, Of all wines, Irish wine was the best! 5But not the czar alone lauded Erin s whisky ;even the King of England is said highly to haveapproved thereof. In February 1821, when an addressto George IV. was under consideration by theCourt of D Oyer hundred of Cork, the question of hismajesty s partiality for whisky-punch was seriouslyentertained. The mover of this grave matter prefacedhis question to the mayor, who presided, byobserving that the tendency of the inquiry he wasabout to make would be the more to endear theking to his Irish subjects. He then requested ofSir Anthony Perrier (the mayor) to state the correctnessof the public rumour, that when his worshipwas enjoying the pleasure of a cool bottle at thePavilion at Brighton, the king was pleased to pronouncea high panegyric upon the merits of whisky-punch? The late Mr. Connell, who was Recorderof Kindle, solemnly protested against the mayoranswering this question. His majesty s Irish subjects,he observed, were, for the sake of the peaceof the country, already sufficiently partial to whisky-punch; and, no doubt, they would become moreso, if a recommendation of the national beverage,coming from so high a quarter, were to be thuspublicly promulgated by the highest civic authority.The mayor having good-hurnouredly declined makingany reply to the question put to him, in consTHE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.sequence of the legal opinion expressed by hisworthy and learned friend, the Recorder of Kindle,the querist closed the debate by observing, that hewould take his worship s silence as assent to thecorrectness of the report, and would therefore consider" the native" to be especially in royal favour.AN IRISHMAN S CHRISTENINGMay be fairly supposed, from the national character forblunders, to be like many other serious matters, not freefrom mistakes. Coleman makes an Irishman sing,The day I was christened, my poor mother sawnmy face our dog Dennis was putting his paw ;4 What s his name? axed the clergy Down, Dennis!says she,So Dennis Bulgruddery they christened me."In the present instance we find an unlucky Irishmanbaptised with whisky instead of water, the melancholyeffect of which is evident in his havingnever forgotHis f erst taste of whisky."Indeed the pathetic exclamation of hillaloo is sufficient toshew the unhappy state of his existence. Yet such is thefascination of whisky, that he declares, if such a thingwas possible, he wouldCall out from his grave to be christened again,"and, no doubt, in the same manner.It is no uncommon assertion by an Irishman that, " IfAN IRISHMAN S CHRISTENING. 71his mother had reared him upon whisky, he d have beena sucking babe to the day of his death."Of myself, my dear joy, if you wish to be toldThe first day I was born, I was not a night old,Hillaloo IThe parson was sent for to christen the child ;He looked at the water, he grinned and he smiled,Hillaloo !He looked at the water, he grinned and he smiled ;Says he, " Tis with whisky I ve christened the child ;Oh, what a blunder, dear joy !"So the day I was christened, I ve never forgotMy first taste of whisky, it made me a sot ;And could that be a wonder, my boy ?So, you see, I loved whisky while yet but a boy,And I loved it still better, a hobbledehoy,Hillaloo IWhen I went to be married, they asked for the ring ;Says I, " Wait a minute, I ll give you that thing,"Hillaloo !Says I, "Wait a minute, I ll give you that thing,"But I pulled out the whisky instead of the ring ;Oh, what a blunder, dear joy!So," says I, " as it s here, we ll just taste it, I think,To the bride s happy wedding we ll all of us drink ; "And could that be a wonder, my boy ?I drank to her health, and drank on to her death,For Natty, sweet soul, soon gave up her breath,Hillaloo !72 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.One day I must follow her to the cold ground,Where, to moisten the throat, no whisky is found,Hillaloo IWhere, to moisten the throat, no whisky is found,Though the nights are so long, and so cold is the ground ;Oh, what a blunder, dear joy !Then should a dead man of his christening dream,And call out from his grave to be christened again ;Oh ! could that be a wonder, my boy ?LOVE AND WHISKY.The most popular song of the heyday of Irish Volunteers(see pp. 39-42), and which song continued ageneral favourite until the dissolution of the Irish YeomanryCorps, when, notwithstanding that both Love andWhisky, as there is every reason to believe, continued aspotent as ever in Ireland, this excellent lyric, in which thesimilarity of their influence is explained, fell most unaccountablyinto disuse ; arid a copy of it has been, withsome difficulty, procured by the Editor.The allusion to invasion, so skilfully introduced in thelast verse, probably originally referred to Thurot s captureof Carrickfergus, in 1760, although from that period,until 1805, Ireland was in a constant state of excitementrespecting a French descent upon her coasts.Air Bobbin Joan.Love and whisky both,Rejoice an honest fellow;LOVE AND WHISKY. 73Unripe joys of lifeLove and whisky mellow.Both the head and heartSet in palpitation ;From both I ve often foundA mighty sweet sensation.Love and whisky s joys,Let us gaily twist em,In the thread of life,Faith, we can t resist em.But love s jealous pang,In heart-ache oft we find it ;Whisky, in its turn,A head-ache leaves behind it.Thus, of love or drink,We curse th enchanted cup, sir ;All its charms forswear,Then take another sup, sir.Love and whisky s joys,Let us gaily twist em,In the thread of life,Faith, we can t resist em.Love and whisky canTo any thing persuade us ;No other power we fearThat ever can invade us.Should others dare intrude,They ll find our lads so frisky,By none can be subdued,Excepting love and whisky.74 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.May the smiles of loveCheer our lads so clever;And, with whisky, boys,We ll drink King George for ever.THE POWERS OF WHISKY.Bernard, in his " Retrospection of the Stage," tells usthat, when in company with some of the Sligo corpsdramatifjue, he visited a house of entertainment " for manand horse," at no great distance from that town, and " askedthe landlord what he had to eat? He said, Whisky I Whathe had to drink ? Whisky! What they could contriveto stay their stomachs on ? His answer was still, * Whisky !There was nothing to be had at this place but the onecommodity."This is no bad illustration of the opinion entertainedof the powers of whisky, which has been described notmerely as " meat and drink," but as " food and clothes," toan Irishman ; who, as long as he has the price of " a glass"in his pocket, is as light-hearted as a feather. Even whenthat is not the case, he is far from feeling despondent,trusting that some lucky chance will aid him in his emergency." Hunger," it has been observed, " sharpens thewit;" the same thing may be said of whisky. M. deLatocnaye, an amusing French traveller, gives the followinginstance of this in his " Promenade en Island."Le jeune homme qui etait mon compagnon de voyageparaissait bon enfant, et m explicit le pays cheminTHE POWERS OF WHISKY. 75t disant. Je suis bien sache, monsieur, me dit-il; <je suisbien sache. Eh bien I mon garden, lui dis-je, quel estle sujet de votre chagrin? * Ah ! monsieur, je suis biensache de n avoir point d argent pour vous offrir un verrede whisky. Je trouvai cette maniere de demander assezoriginal ; et je lui responds que cela ne devait pas1 affliger, parce que je serais bien aise de le regale moi-meme."Air." The Kinnegad Slashers. 1Oh ! merry am I, ever jocund and gay,If for whisky in plenty my pocket can pay ;If we feel melancholy, and cannot tell why,Whisky lightens the heart, though it deadens the eye.If sorrow should vex us,Or care should perplex us,Get tipsy enough, every pang will depart ;Oh ! there s nothing like whiskyMakes Irishmen frisky,It bothers their sorrows, and gladdens their heart.If in love with a maid, who your flame would deride,Drink enough, you ll find charms in a dozen beside ;Drink more, and your victory, then, is complete,For you ll think you re in love with each girl that you meet.If a girl s sick, poor creature ,Let no doctor treat her,But a plentiful drop of the native impart;For there s nothing like whiskyTo make the girls frisky,To make them good-natured, and soften their heart.76 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Oh ! whisky, dear whisky, it charms and cajoles,And it lies at the heart like a friend, and consoles :No grief, be it ever so great, can subdue,While I have, my dear whisky, a flask full of you.Then let it, ye powers,Rain whisky in showers ;Let each of the other be a full counterpart ;For there s nothing like whiskyMakes Irishmen frisky ;It bothers their sorrows, and gladdens their heart.ERIN S WHISKY.Copied from " Captain Rock in London," No. 42, aweekly publication of the year 1825, price twopence.Gamble, in his " Views of Society and Manners inthe North of Ireland," philosophically remarks, thatThere seems a natural and instinctive fondness in theinhabitants of damp and mountainous places for ardentspirits; and, perhaps, every where, in vacant and unemployedminds, there is similar fondness ; for a love ofsensation seems the strongest appetite or passion of ournature. For the purpose of speedy intoxication whisky issuperlative; and when, to physical and other generalcauses, are added the more powerful moral ones of hiscondition, it is little wonderful that the Irish peasant shouldseek, in the Lethe draught, oblivious happiness; andregard the inventor of his beloved liquor as a greaterbenefactor than Ceres and Triptolemus put together."ROCK S POTEEN. 77Whilst others sing the joys of wine,Arid high their voices raise ;For ever shall the theme be mineTo chant old whisky s praise.Oh ! the charming whisky,Erin s famous whisky ;Midst all our grief,It gives relief,To know we have good whisky !What is it makes our hearts so bold ;What makes us love so true ?Oh ! if in faith, the truth be told,Dear whisky, agra , tis you.Oh ! the charming whisky,Erin s famous whisky ;Then bumpers bring,And let us singThe joys of Erin s whisky !ROCK S POTEEN.The word poteen has been already explained as illicitwhisky. " Whisky from illicit stills," according to Wakefield," is sold as openly (in Ireland) as if it had beengauged by the excise officer; it has a peculiar smokytaste, different from that which has been regularly andcarefully distilled, and which the people imagine to haveacquired its white colour from vitriol. Were one to findfault with the whisky in the northern counties, the immenseTHE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.date reply would be, * It s as good poteen as any inUlster, for it never paid a happy eth of duty. " From 1802to June 1806, a space of four years and a half, no lessthan 13,439 unlicensed whisky-stills, 11,098 heads, and9732 worms, were seized in Ireland. Some idea, therefore,of the magnitude of the traffic in poteen may beformed by this official return.This song, in praise of poteen, is copied from " CaptainRock in London," No. 2.Begone, ye dark obtruding cares,And ne er again come near me ;My soul for every ill prepares,Whilst I ve poteen to cheer me.Oh, poteen,The nice poteen,The mellow, mild, and rich poteen !The chosen toastRound Erin s coast,The pink of spirits, Rock s poteen.Fathom d by the exciseman s rule,Our native shines in bottles green ;And where s the drink so mild and coolAs barley juice? our smoked poteen.Oh, &c.Let Britons boast their ale and beer,For whisky agra ! they ve never seen ;Or else another tune we d hearIn praise of Rock-glen s prime poteen.Oh, &c.THE GLASS OF WHISKY. 79Let stupid sots, while tippling wine,The virtues of the grape make known ;But those who wit and worth combineMust pledge themselves in Innishone.*Oh, &c.Then fill your glass of sparkling juiceThat never met a ganger s nose ;For where s the man who could refuseTo drink the land where poteen flows?Oh, &c.THE GLASS OF WHISKYWas originally printed in " The Sentimental andMasonic Magazine," vol. iii. for December 1793, a Dublinperiodical, remarkable from the first productions ofthe Muse of Moore having appeared therein.This song bears the signature W. P. C y, and wasillustrated in that publication by an engraving, executedby W. P. Carey, probably the author, which represents anold man with clasped hands, uplifting a glass of whisky.See the last verse.William Pallet Carey is known to have been thewriter, in 1789, of a political squib against the Marquess" This district (the barony of Innishone, county of Tyrone)has long been famous for its whisky, and has even become a name forthe liquor itself; real Innishone is its highest praise, and nothingin the way of panegyric can be added to this." Views of Society andManners in the North of Ireland, by John Gamble, Esq., 1819.80 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.of Buckingham, entitled " The Nettle, an Irish Bouquetto tickle the Nose of an English Viceroy." Carey was theprinter and publisher of " The National Evening StaraDublin newspaper, and acquired considerable and anunenviable notoriety in June 1794, as the principal witnesson the trial of Dr. Duenna for the publication of aseditious libel. It appeared that Carey had been a zealousmember of the Society of United Irishmen ; but, conceivinghimself aggrieved by the conduct of that body towardshim, and being himself under prosecution for a libelagainst Government, he came forward as an evidence forthe Crown. Carey was closely cross-examined by Curran,who commented so severely upon his admissions andstatements, that the acquittal of Dr. Duenna followed.Considering the political apostasy of the author acrime seldom forgotten or forgiven in Ireland it is singularthat any song known to have been of his writing shouldhave become popular, which Murrough O Monaghan saspiration respecting a glass of whisky certainly did ; andit has continued to be so to the present time, upwards offorty years. This, however, has been accounted for tothe Editor, by the statement that the character of MurroughO Monaghan was a sketch from life of a well-knowncripple and mendicant, who frequented the locality mentioned,and retailed whisky from a huge black bottle. Heis further said to have been a faithful emissary of theUnited Irishmen, and an active agent in procuring informationfor them, and in extending the influence of theassociation by means of " a glass of north country " judiciouslyadministered.It is not easy to arrive at the approved standard of aTHE GLASS OF WHISKY. 81glass for whisky. Irishmen are sometimes fastidious aboutthe matter. On one occasion a hospitable lady, who hadrewarded a labourer for his exertions with some admirablewhisky, administered in a claret glass, was both shockedand astonished at the impiety and ingratitude of his exclamation," May the devil blow the man that blew thisglass ! "What is that you say?" inquired the lady. Whatdo I hear?"I m much obliged to you, honourable madam, andtis no harm I mean ; only bad luck to the blackguardglass-blower, whoever he was, since, with the least bit ofbreath in life more, he could have made the glass twiceas big."Air V When I was a young man in sweet Tipperary."At the side of the road, near the bridge of Drummond,*Was Murrough O Monaghan stationed to beg :He brought from the wars, as his share of the plunder,A crack on the crown, and the loss of a leg.Oath, Murrough!" he d cry " mush nothing mayharm ye,What made you go fight for a soldier on sea ?You fool, had you been a marine in the army,You d now have a pinched and live on full pay.But now I m a cripple what signifies thinking?The past I can never bring round to the fore ;The heart that with old age and weakness is sinking,Will ever find strength in good whisky galore.A village in the vicinity of Dublin, vulgarly called Drummond,E282 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Oath, whisky, ma vurneen, my joy, and my jewel,What signifies talking of doctors and pills ;In sorrow, misfortune, and sickness so cruel,A glass of north country can cure all our ills.When cold in the winter, it warms you so hearty ;When hot in the summer, it cools you like ice ;In trouble false friends, without grief I can part ye ;Good whisky s my friend, and I take its advice.When hungry and thirsty, tis meat and drink to me ;It finds me a lodging wherever I lie:Neither frost, snow, nor rain, any harm can do me,The hedge is my pillow, my blanket the sky.Now merry be the Christmas I success to good neighbours !Here s a happy new year, and a great many too IWith a plenty of whisky to lighten their labours,May sweet luck attend every heart that is true ! "Poor Murrough, then joining his old hands together,High held up the glass, while he vented this prayer:u May whisky, by sea or by land in all weather,Be never denied to the children of care ! "A SUP OF GOOD WHISKY.Whisky has been styled "the universal favourite fromthe prince to the peasant;" and this assertion is fullysupported by the following song, which chronicles itsinfluence over various sects and parties. Mr. Gamble,A SUP OF GOOD WHISKY. 83discussing the origin of the name of some high groundcalled Whisky Hill, in the north of Ireland, conjecturesthat " Perhaps whisky is made in greater quantities herethan elsewhere ; for on all hills, and I believe I may addin all valleys, people drink as much as they can."This writer elsewhere adds, describing an acquaintanceat Strabane : " Though an Englishman and a Methodist,he is not averse to the beverage of the country ; for time,as he well remarked, does reconcile us to many things :and I never met in this country with an Englishman, ofhis condition in life, that it did not reconcile to whisky.So universal, indeed, is the perception of misery, and thenothingness of this world, that the people of all countriesare pleased to have a cheap opportunity of drowningthought in intoxication, and creating a little happy worldof their own. Even the nations which the strong motiveof superstition induces to abandon the use of strong liquorhere, look to it with longing hereafter : and perpetualinebriation is the Mahometan s heaven."A sup of good whisky will make you glad ;Too much of the creature * will make you mad;If you take it in reason, twill make you wise ;If you drink to excess, it will close up your eyes : fYet father and mother,And sister and brother,They all take a sup in their turn." C est le nom aimable que Ton donne au Whisky." M. DELATOCNAYE, Promenade en Island.t Shakspere observes " One draught above heat makes him afool, the second mats him, and a third drowns him." Tu-elfthXight,i. 5.84 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Some preachers will tell you that whisky s bad ;I think so too, if there s none to be had :The saddler* will bid you drink none at all;But, while I can get it, a fig for them all.Both layman and brother,In spite of this pother,Will all take a sup in their turn.Some doctors will tell you, twill hurt your health ;The justice will say, twill reduce your wealth ;Physicians and lawyers both do agree,When your money s all gone, they can get no fee.Yet surgeon and doctor,And lawyer and proctor,Will all take a sup in their turn.If a soldier is drunk on his duty found,He to the three-legged horse is bound,In the face of his regiment obliged to strip ;But a noggin will soften the nine-tailed whip.The Irish term for the followers of John Wesley. It arose fromone of the early Methodists in Dublin, named Fenwick, taking, onChristmas day, the text of his discourse from St. Luke s Gospel, ii. 12 :And this shall he a sign unto you ; ye shall find the babe wrapped inswaddling clothes, lying iu a manger." One of his auditors, who wasignorant of the text, " thought this," says Southey, " so ludicrous,that he called the preacher a saddler in derision; and this unmeaningword became a nickname of the Methodists, and had all the effectof the most opprobrious appellation." ]n John Wesley s journal hementions that, during the riots which occurred in Cork during themonths of May and June 1749, " The mob paraded the streets, armedwith swords, staves, and pistols, crying out Five pounds for asaddler head! "A SUP OF GOOD WHISKY. 85For serjeant and drummer,And likewise his honour,Will all take a sup in their turn.The Turks who arrived from the Porte sublime,All told us that drinking was held a great crime ;Yet, after their dinner away they slunk,And tippled whisky till they got quite drunk.*The Sultan and Commit,And even Mahomet,They all take a sup in their turn.The Quakers will bid you from drink abstain,By yea, and by nay, they will make it plain ;But some of the broad-brims will get the stuff,And tipple away till they ve tippled enough.For Stiff-back and Steady,And Solomon s lady,Will all take a sup in their turn.The Germans do say they can drink the most,The French and Italians also do boast :This is no stretch of fancy. The Editor recently met someTurks at dinner, who refused wine ; he facetiously assured them thatthe law of the Prophet did not extend to Irish whisky, which wordhe could expound to them in English as literally meaning water. Theconsequence of this translation is faithfully given above. Anotherparty of Turks, of whom the Editor has heard, consumed, on their passagein an English man-of-war, no inconsiderable quantity of champagne,which they called for and drank under the name of soda-water :observing, that English soda-water was a most refreshing beverage.86 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Hibernia s the country (for all their noise)For generous drinking and hearty boys.There each jovial fellowWill drink till he s mellow,And take off his glass in his turn."BOUNCE UPON BESS"Seems to have been a cant term for strong whisky,which, the Editor has been informed, w r as caused by theevidence given in a Court of law respecting one of thefair sex, who was delicately and mysteriously representedto have been " overtaken."What do you mean by being overtaken ? " inquiredthe examining counsel. " Overtaken by whom?"By no one, yo r honour. Oh ! indeed, no oneovertook her: it would be well for her if any decentChristian had done so."You said she was overtaken ; by whom, or what,was she overtaken ?"Oh, then, indeed she was overtaken by the liquor."How overtaken ? did she drink too much ?"Lord love yo r honour s innocent heart, I see yeknow all about the matter. It overtook the poor girl sureenough ; it came, for all the world, bounce upon Bess ; itwas so very strong it knocked her down so flat, shecould t stand after it."Pray what liquor did she drink?"BOUNCE UPON BESS. 87It was Walker s best whisky, yo r honour."In the " land of song," so fair an opportunity forrecommending the potent effects of its national manufacturecould scarcely have escaped without notice ; and accordingly,in the following lyric, the merits of " Bounceupon Bess" are set forth.The song is given from a manuscript copy, which hasbeen in the Editor s possession upwards of twenty years.Mr. Walker was an eminent distiller in Cork.Air " The Priest and his Boots."Come all you good fellows who love to be gay,Who spend every night what you earn each day ;Drink deep of that liquor which Irishmen bless,For you ll find no such cordial as " Bounce upon Bess."Compared with this balsam, all drink is small beer;What raises the spirits can never be dear :The inside it warms, and it cheers up the heart,And puts life in a man from a gill to a quart.Sing, fall de ral, &c.Let Englishmen talk of their porter and ale,Which grow very bad as they grow very stale ;But give Paddy the liquor to fuddle his nose,Which improves still the more as the older it grows.In a glass it so clear and transparent appears,Tis as bright as the eye of your sweetheart in tears ;And, next to a smack of her lips, by my soul,There is nothing like Walker s best " Bounce " in a bowl.Sing, fall de ral, &c.88 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.When in winter, the frost of a morning feels raw,Were the ice in your stomach, good Bounce would it thaw;And for heat in the summer you ll care not a fig,If of " Bounce upon Bess" you but take a full swig.Oh ! tis good in all weather, in each time and place,To all ranks and professions it shews a bright face ;And if you had enough of it, neighbours, in store,Oh, the devil a grief would come inside your door!With, fall de ral, &c.If at fair or at patron * your sweetheart you meet,To a tent you invite her to drink and to eat ;Let her eat what she will, but you can do no lessThan to mix for her tipple some " Bounce upon Bess ! "Though hard as a flint she looked on you before,Her heart will grow soft, oh ! twould melt on the floor ;And her eyes will so wink, that I d venture to guessShe would pledge her best cloak for good " Bounce uponBess ! "Sing, fall de ral, &c.All join, then, in chorus, may Bounce never fail ;And the man who produced it, may naught ever ail,Who keeps up our spirits, and raises our land,Should the good will of Irishmen always command.May his still ever prosper, and prosper it will,Whilst the fields supply barley, and he supplies skill ;And as for consumption, my hearties I tis said,Oh, the devil our fellows lift hands to their head !Sing, fall de ral, &c.A meeting dedicated to the honour of a Patron Saint.HAD I THE TUN WHICH BACCHUS USED. 89HAD I THE TUN WHICH BACCHUS USED.To the lover of Irish song, considerable interest willattach to this trifle, now first printed from the author smanuscript, when the name of the writer is stated to behonest Dick Millikin," who has rendered " the Grovesof Blarney " classic ground.Richard Alfred Millikin was born, in 1767, at CastleMartyr, a small town in the county of Cork ; and wasplaced in the office of a country attorney, where he hadthe reputation of devoting more attention to painting,poetry, and music, than to the niceties of law. Havingcompleted his apprenticeship, when he claimed to be admittedas a member of the legal profession, the gentlemanby whom he was to be examined " thought proper todeclare his having received information by letter thatMr. Millikin, then present in Court, and claiming a rightto be sworn a member of it, so far from being regularlyinitiated in the profession of an attorney, was bred apainter, and consequently was wholly unqualified foradmission. This statement (so grossly false," saysMillikin s biographer, " was promptly corroborated bya Cork attorney, who asserted that he could himself pointout a person in Cork, for whom the young man in questionhad actually painted a sign. Such an attack, in such aplace, was in itself sufficient to abash an inexperiencedyoung man ; but, when a recollection flashed on his mindof having really painted a board, at the request of a poorwidow (she was that attorney s nurse), to place over thewindow of her son s shop, his embarrassment became so90 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.great that he was unable to utter a word ; and, had nothis limbs refused their office, he would have quitted thecourt never to return. But, just at that distressing moment,an acquaintance of happier times, the good-natured,kind-hearted Counsellor Fitzgerald (as remarkable for hisurbanity of disposition as corpulence of person) happeningto be present, and taking fire at the malicious falsehood,rose, and, in a very eloquent address to the court, fullydisproved the illiberal and unmanly charge ; asserting, inhis turn, that Mr. Millikin his school-fellow and earlyfriend, who was designed for a higher walk in life thanthat he was now about to enter on had not only receivedthe education of a gentleman, but was possessed of thoseaccomplishments generally attached to the character ; oneof which was drawing, in which he excelled, and which,till now, he had never heard attributed to any man as afault, or considered as a barrier to professional pursuits.The consequence of this kind and seasonable explanationwas his being admitted and sworn an attorney,and a member of the King s Inns : after which he returnedto Cork to commence business. Young and unpatronised,however, he had little employment, being mostly appliedto for the recovery of debts, a branch of the professionparticularly disagreeable to him, his heart revolting fromthe idea of depriving a fellow-being of liberty, or distressingthose who were already distressed ; and a circumstanceor two which occurred in the course of his short practice,effectually confirmed his dislike to the business altogether.Being employed by a clergyman to recover some debts,due by his parishioners for tithe, he proceeded for thepurpose to a town where a quarter session was holding,HAD I THE TUN WHICH BACCHUS USED. 91and where the process-server who had been employed wasappointed to meet him. This person, however, not appearing,he waited, but waited in vain, until the conclusionof the session : for he never saw him more, the unfortunateman s body being found some time after, where he hadbeen murdered while on his journey to the appointedplace."As professional employment, for which there are manycandidates, must be courted rather than shunned as irksome,Mr. Millikin was left with ample leisure to indulgehis taste for literature and the fine arts; and, in 1795,several poetical contributions from his pen were printed inthe " Monthly Miscellany," a Cork magazine. In April1797, he published, jointly with his sister a lady whohad distinguished herself by some historical novelsThe Casket, or Hesperian Magazine," which appearedmonthly until February 1798, when the political circumstancesof Ireland terminated its existence.On the breaking out of the rebellion, Mr. Millikinzealously joined the Royal Cork Volunteers, and soonbecame a conspicuous member of that corps. He wassubsequently, by the exertions of his pen and pencil, anactive promoter of various benevolent objects in Cork.In 1807, he published " The Riverside," a poem, in blankverse; and, in 1810, a little tale called " The Slave ofSurinam." During the spring of 1815, the foundationwas laid by him of a Society for the Promotion of the FineArts in Cork, which followed an exhibition of his drawings,combined with the works of a few amateur friends andartists of that city. Mr. Millikin s death was. caused bywater on the chest, and occurred, after a short illness, on92 THE POPULAR Sots 7 GS OF IRELAND.the 16th December, 1815. He was buried with a publicfuneral at Douglas, near Cork, and his loss deplored as ageneral calamity.A little volume, entitled " Poetical Fragments of thelate Richard Alfred Millikin, with an authentic Memoir ofhis Life," was printed by subscription in 1823 ; and prefixedto it is a portrait, which was a good likeness of whatthe author must have been in the prime of life. Previousto this publication, all Mr. Millikin s papers were given byhis widow, now no more, to the Editor, with the requestthat nothing unworthy of the memory of her husbandshould be published.The Editor has only to add to this sacred trust, that,to the best of his judgment, if every line of the manuscriptsthus placed in his hands were printed, nothingwould appear injurious to the reputation of the witty headand warm heart of " honest Dick Millikin."Had I the tun which Bacchus used,I d sit on it all day ;For, while a can it ne er refused,He nothing had to pay.I d turn the cock from morn to eve,Nor think it toil or trouble ;But I d contrive, you may believe,To make it carry double.My friend should sit as well as I,And take a jovial pot;For he who drinks although he s dryAlone, is sure a sot.THE NIGHTCAP. 93But since the tun which Bacchus usedWe have not here what then?Since god-like toping is refused,Let s drink like honest men.And let that churl, old Bacchus, sit,Who envies him his wine ?While mortal fellowship and witMakes whisky more divine.THE NIGHTCAP.A true Irishman says of his whisky as Boniface doesof his " Anno Domini," " I have ate my ale, drank myale, and I always sleep upon ale." So an Irishman,after the eating and drinking of his whisky is over, alwayssleeps upon it, which " parting glass," as it has been affectionatelytermed, is distinguished as " the nightcap."With a nightcap of this manufacture, it has beenalready asserted (p. 82), thatNeither frost, snow, nor rain, any barm can do me ;The hedge is my pillow, my blanket the sky."The burlesque, classical, little jeu d esprit here given,appeared in a Dublin newspaper or magazine, about theyear 1820, and was recited to the Editor by a friend,who informed him that the author was Mr. Thomas hamlinPorter, elected a Scholar of Trinity College, Dublin,in 1817.The Bog of Allen, from whence the nectar, patronised94 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.by Apollo, was derived, is a tract famous formerly forTories and Rapparies, and of more recent times for themanufacture of poteen. It extended for a considerabledistance through part of the counties of Dublin, Carlow,Kildare, Kilkenny, and Meath. " The Bog of Allen"was, in short, a vague term for any matter about whichan awkward question was likely to be asked. TheEditor remembers that a gentleman was once robbed nearCork of a valuable watch, which, a day or two afterwards,was bought by a silversmith in Cork from a man whoasserted, with the utmost simplicity, that he had found itin the Bog of Allen !Jolly Phoebus his car to the coach-house had driven,And unharnessed his high-mettled horses of light;He gave them a feed from the manger of heaven,And rubbed them, and littered them up for the night.Then down to the kitchen he leisurely strode,Where Thetis, the housemaid, was sipping her tea ;He swore he was tired with that damn d up-hill road,He d have none of her slops nor hot water, not he.So she took from the corner a little cruiskeenWell filled with nectar Apollo loves best ;(From the neat Bog of Allen, some pretty poteen),And he tippled his quantum and staggered to rest.His many-caped box-coat around him he threw,For his bed, faith twas dampish, and none of the best ;All above him the clouds their bright fringed curtains drew,And the tuft of his nightcap lay red in the west.BUMPERS, BUMPERS, FLOWING BUMPERS. 95BUMPERS, BUMPERS, FLOWING BUMPERS.This convivial lyric, in which the inspiration of whiskyis set forth, appeared in " Blackwood s Magazine" forDecember 1821, associated with the song of" St. Patrickof Ireland, my Dear." The author has entitled it " A realIrish * Fly not yet" and informs us that it was an impromptu,chanted " on the spur of the occasion," at thetime noted, viz. " Four o clock in the morning, or thereabouts."Tune" Lillibullero."Hark ! hark ! from below,The rascally rowOf watchmen, in chorus, bawling " Four!"But spite of this noise,My rollicking boys,We ll stay till we ve emptied one bottle more.*ChorusBumpers bumpers flowing bumpers !Bumper your glasses high up to the brim !And he who is talkingA word about walking,Out of the window at once with him !Of whisky, viz., about thirteen tumblers. Author s Note.t We pronounce the word generally in Ireland as we sound thech in church chorus. I think it is the prettier way. Author s Note.96 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Our whisky is goodAs ever yet stoodSteaming on table, in glass or pot :It came from a still,Snug under a hill,Where the eye of the ganger saw it not.Bumpers, &c.Then why should we runAway from the Sun ?Here s to his health, my own elegant men !We drank to his restLast night in the west,And we ll welcome him, now that he wakes again.Bumpers, &c.And here we shall stop,Until every dropThat charges our bottles is gone, clean gone ;And then, sallying out,We ll leather the rout*Who ve dared to remind us how time has run.Bumpers, &c.Beating the watch is a pleasant and usual finale to a social partyin the metropolis (Dublin). I am compelled myself, now and then, tocastigate them, merely for the impertinent clamour they make at nightabout the hours. Our ancestors must have been in the depths ofbarbarity when they established this gentlemanlike custom.Auth s Note.I LL NEVER GET DRUNK ANY MORE! 97I LL NEVER GET DRUNK ANY MORE!In contrast to the preceding song, so full of action,may be placed one in which the reaction of " Bumpers,bumpers, flowing bumpers," is exhibited. The Editor hasbeen informed that it was sung with much effect by a mannamed Pagan at the early meetings of a TemperanceSociety in the south of Ireland, upon which occasions thelines referring to the suicidal proceeding of hard drinkingFor your own brains out you re dashing :Don t you feel your bead quite sore?"were always received with marked approbation.Tune " Mall Brook."One night when I got friskyOver some poteen whisky,Like waves in the Bay of Biscay,I began to tumble and roar.My face was red as a lobster,I fell and I broke my nob, sir,My watch was picked from my fob, sirOh, I ll never get drunk any more !Now I m resolved to try it,I ll live upon moderate diet ;I ll not drink, but will deny it,And shun each alehouse-door ;For that s the place, they tell us,We meet with all jovial good fellows ;But I swear by the poker and bellowsI ll never get drunk any more.F98 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.The landlady is unwillingTo credit you for a shilling ;She straightway sends her bill in,And asks you to pay your score.And if with money you re stocked,She ll not stop till she s emptied your pocket ;Then the cellar-door is locked,And you cannot get drunk any more.So by me now take caution,Put drinking out of fashion,For your own brains out you re dashing :Don t you feel your head quite sore ?For when all night you ve tarriedDrinking of punch and claret,In the morning home you re carried,(Saying) " I ll never get drunk any more.A man that s fond of boozing,His cash goes daily oozing ;His character he s loosing,And it s loss he will deplore.His wife is unprotected,His business is neglected,Himself is efts-respected,So, do not get drunk any more.BARRY OF MACROOM. 99BARRY OF MACROOM.Who the hero of the following song may be, the Editoris unable satisfactorily to determine ; although Mr. DanielMacCarthy, whom he is represented to have excelled intoping, is recorded in Dr. Smith s " History of Kerry " tohave died in 1751, as is asserted, at the age of 112 years.He drank," says Smith, " for many of the last years ofhis life, great quantities of rum and brandy, which hecalled naked truth; and if, in compliance to othergentlemen, he drank claret or punch, he always took anequal quantity of spirits to qualify these liquors : this hecalled < a wedge. " Old Jem Nash was, no doubt, anequally distinguished individual belonging to that " persecutedand hard-drinking country," Ireland.It is difficult to form a correct estimate of the quantityof whisky-punch which may be comfortably discussed at asitting. In the case of a gentleman whose life had beeninsured for a large sum of money, the payment at hisdeath was resisted by the Insurance Company, upon theplea that he had caused his death by excessive drinking.The matter came to a legal trial, and among other witnessesexamined was one who swore that, for the lasteighteen years of his life, he had been in the habit oftaking every night four and twenty tumblers of whisky-punch." Recollect yourself, sir," said the examiningcounsel. " Four and twenty 1 you swear to that ; did youever drink five and twenty?" " I am on my oath,"replied the witness ; " and I will swear no further, for Inever keep count beyond the two dozen, though there s100 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.no saying how many beyond it I might drink to makemyself comfortable : but that s my stint."The Editor believes that he is not wrong in assigningthis lyric to the pen of Mr. Richard Ryan, the author ofa national biographical dictionary, entitled " The Worthiesof Ireland," 2 vols. 8vo. 1819 and 1821, and of otherworks. The town of Maroon, upon which the fame of"bold Barry" has bestowed celebrity, is about eighteenmiles west of the city of Cork. Upwards of eighty yearsago, Smith, in his " History of Cork," observes that, " inthis town are some whisky distillers ; a liquor and manufactureso pernicious to the poor, that it renders everyother employment useless to them." But it is to behoped that Mr. Barry s example may have had its influencein diffusing a civilized taste for whisky-punchamong them, and thus, by inducing the drinkers of " nakedtruth" to dilute their liquor, effect an important moralimprovement.Oh! what is Dan MacCarty, or what is old Jem Nash?Or all who e er in punch-drinking, by luck, have cut a dash,Compared to that choice hero, whose praise my rhymesperfumeI mean the boast of Erin s Isle, bold Barry of Maroon ?Twas on a summer s morning bright that Barry shonemost gay,He had of friends a chosen few, to dine with him that day;And to himself he coolly said (joy did his eyes illume)I ll shew my guests there s few can match bold Barryof Maroon ! "BARRY OF MACROOM. 101The dinner was despatched, and they brought six gallon-jugs*Of whisky-punch ; and after them, eight huge big-belliedmugs ;And soon all neath the table lay, swept clean as with abroomExcept the boast of Erin s Isle, bold Barry of Maroon !Now Barry rose, and proudly cried " ByMudy, Fll godown,And call into each whisky-shop that decorates 6irr lo\vo ;For lots of whisky-punch is here for master and for groom,If they ll come up and drink it with bold Barry of Maroon IThus Barry soon he brought with him a choice hard-drinkingset,As ever at a punch-table, on Patrick s day, had met ;Yet soon upon the floor they lay a low, disgracefuldoom ;While, like a giant fresh and strong,rose Barry of Maroon !Then Barry went unto his wife, and to his turtle saidMy dear, I now have had enough, therefore I ll go tobed;" The custom of making punch in jugs seems a better one thanthat of each person making for himself. Jt mingles the spirits andwater more intimately, and gives more mellowness to the liquor, fromthe practice of pouring it several times out of one jug into another. Itis long since punch has been drunk out of bowls, but the large chinabowl still holds its place in closets, in memory of past times, and as anarticle of show." Views of Society and Manners in the North of Ireland,6v John Gamble, Esq., 1819.102 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.But, as I may be thirsty soon, just mix it in the room,A gallon-jug of punch, quite weak, for Barry of Maroon!Brave Barry, he got very ill, his malady was such,It sprung from drinking whisky-punch, too little or toomuch;And sickness, night and morning did, like canker in thebloom,Attack and M aston the carcass of bold Barry of Maroon !The, doctors \he.y declared all, that punch he must give o er,And less two gallons drink each day, or soon he d drinkno more ;Then would the wild flowers, fair and gay, spring uparound his tomb,Above the turf that sepulchred bold Barry of Maroon !Now Barry thought such talk as this was mighty hard tobear,And grumbled as each day he quaff d his hermit-kind offare;But Barry lived for many years, old whisky to consume,And, proved the prince of punch-drinkers, died Barry ofMaroon ITHE MERRY MAN.There is something extremely melancholy in the pictureof reckless conviviality here exhibited ; but it is,nevertheless, eminently characteristic of Irish good fellowship.The hero of this song, to use an American phrase,THE MERRY MAN. 103{ goes the whole hog;" for, not content with expressingan utter contempt for the ordinary decencies of the table,such as filling his glass from the decanter, bottle, jug, orpitcher, which may be at hand, he absolutely inculcatesthe adoption of gymnastic exercise while drinking, byfulling the can." And subsequently, when he is nolonger able to be the bugle-man, a match at single-stickwith blackthorn cudgels is recommended, as a convenientinterlude between the disappearance of a cruiskeen ofwhisky and the introduction of afull flowing bowl."This is evidently here done in the spirit of kindness,and without any malicious motive ; unlike the directionsgiven in the will of one of Cromwell s followers in Ireland.My body shall be put upon the oak-table in my coffinin the brown room, and fifty Irishmen shall be invited tomy wake, and every one shall have two quarts of the bestaqua vitae, and each a skein, dirk, or knife, laid beforehim ; and, when their liquor is out, nail up my coffin, andcommit me to earth, from whence I came. This is mywill. Witness my hand, this 3d of March, 1674.JOHN LANGLEY."Some of his friends asked him why he would be atsuch charge to treat the Irish at his funeral, a peoplewhom he never loved ? Why for that reason, repliedLangley ; * for they will get so drunk at my wake that theywill kill one another, and so we shall get rid of some of thebreed ; and if every one would follow my example in theirwills, in time we should get rid of them all ! "The fifth verse of the song is levelled against anancient practice, now rapidly falling into disuse, of hiring104 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.professional mourners, called keepers (from CAojne, afuneral elegy), to lament over the dead. The chorus bywhich the effusions of Erin s elegiac muse are supported istermed, by Mr. Swiss, " the Irish howl."I am a young fellowWho loves to be mellow,To drink and be merry is all my delight ;I often get frisky,By tippling good whisky,With jovial companions from morning to night.I never took pleasureIn hoarding up treasure ;The sight of a miser I cannot endure,Who always is griping,And sharping, and biting,And laying out schemes for to plunder the poor.Ri fal-da-riddle lah, &c.Of the beggarly minorI am a despiser ;The fruit of his labour he never enjoys ;His heirs for his money,Impatient of honey,Are waiting and hate him, while with it he toys.His frame is complaining,For want of sustaining ;His limbs are decrepit, from hunger and cold ;Instead of good liquorTo make his pulse quicker,He s gloating and doating on that idol called gold.Ri fal, &c.THE MERRY MAN. 105As for me, while I m able,At the head of a table,Set me down of good whisky a full water stand,Where each clever toperMay drink like the pope, orMay toast to his friends with a bumper in hand.By the side of that jorum,Like a Justice of Quorum,I ll preside full of state in my holyday clothes ;In winter or summer,With a rollicking rummer,A pipe for to smoke, and a jug at my nose.Ri fal, &c.Come, drawer, this spiritOf yours has some merit.Sweet piper, come squeeze up your leather and play ;And hand him the pitcher,It makes music richer,"Thus we ll drink and carouse to the dawning of day.I hold them but assesWho wait to fill glasses,Such muddling and fuddling g unworthy of man ;It only is wastingThe time that is hasting,Commend me to those that will bugle the can.Ri fal, &c.When stopped in my toddyBy death seizing my body,F2106 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.No crocodile tears shall be shed at my wake ;While there I am lyingNo counterfeit crying,No moans, I desire, shall be made for my sake.I ve no taste for squalling,Or old women s bawling,Who string nonsense together and call it a keen ;Who only are sellingTheir yelping and yellingFor some one, perhaps, that they never have seen.But of whisky a cruiskeenTo fill up each loose skin,Let all have to toast to my journey up hill ;And three jolly pipersTo tune up for the slippers,While each boy honestly swallows his fill.Then a blackthorn cudgelFor each, should they grudge ill,To anoint one another, and none to control.Nor let them be down-heartedFor him that s departed,But end their disputes in a full flowing bowl.The next morning early,When daylight tis fairly,My trunk shall be nailed quite close to my back ;Four stout lads so civilWill bear it up level,Whilst I ride on their shoulders instead of a sack.THE MERRY MAN.Now let them all sing,And the valleys will ring,Raising up a fine chorus, both gallant and brave ;Then lay me down flat,Like a sieve-woman s hat,And away goes the merry man into his grave.1. Deoch an Durrus glass.2. Poteen bottle.3. Modern whisky bottle.4. Poteen glass.5. Modern whisky glass.6 and 7. Substitutes for ditto ; viz. a clusheen shell and an egg shell.We ll teach you to drink deep ere you depart."Hamlet, i. 2.108 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.THE IRISH OAK,FIGURATIVELY termed " a sprig of Shillelah," is socalled from Shillelah, a district in the county ofWicklow, formerly celebrated for its oak woods.And who has not heard of Irish oak?" vehementlyinquires the amusing essayist upon national emblems,in " The Dublin Penny Journal."And who has not heard of Irish oak ? For, thoughour hills and plains are now so bare of trees that theyexcite the admiration of all timber-hating Yankees as theysail along our improved shores, yet formerly it was notso. No ! It is said that Westminster Hall is roofed withoak, brought from the wood of Shillelah ; and a greatmany of our common names are significant of oak woods.As Kildare, the wood of oak ; Londonderry, the oak-woodplanted by Londoners ; Ballinderry, the town inthe oak-wood. At the bottom of all our bogs, and onthe tops of our highest hills, roots of oak of immense sizeare found ; and we may fairly conclude, that though Irelandis now a denuded country, it was once the mostumbrageous of the British isles. The customs of ourcountry shew that our people once dwelt under the greenwoodtree ; for an Irishman cannot walk or wander, sportor fight, buy or sell, comfortably, without an oak stick inTHE IRISH OAK. 109his fist. If he travels, he will beg, borrow, or steal ashillelah ; if he goes to play, he hurls with a crooked oak-stick; if he goes to a fair, it is delightful to hear thesound of his clothes-peen on the cattle horns ; if he fights,as fight he must, at market or at fair, the cudgel is brandishedon high ; and, as Fin Ma Could of old smiled grimlyin the joy of battle, so his descendants shout lustily in thejoy of the cudgels Bello patentes prcelio ridentes /In ruxion delighting,Laughing while fighting !* Leather away with your oak sticks ! is still theprivilege, the glory, and the practice of Irishmen. Nay,more, while living, their meal, their meat, and theirvaluables (if they have any, of course), are kept in oakchests ; and when dying, Paddy dies quietly, if assuredthat he shall have a decent berlin, be buried in an oakencoffin, and attended to the grave by a powerful faction,well provided with oak saplings ! "It has been observed to the Editor by an ingeniousfriend, that when Shakspere made Hamletswear by St. Patrick, it was with the view of shewingthe ancient connexion which existed betweenDenmark and Ireland. But that Hamlet had noMilesian blood in his veins, is clear from his notcarrying a shillelah, which he might then have usedwith so much effect to illustrate his doctrine of suiting" the word to the action."Horatio. There s no offence, my lord.Hamlet. Yes, by St. Patrick, but there is, Horatio ;And much offence, too."110 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.The superiority of the Shillelah oak will be hereafterspoken of. From " A practical Treatise on Planting,"published in Dublin in 1794, by Mr. Hayesof Avoidable, the following particulars have beencollected respecting the disappearance of trees " ofancient birth," from this renowned wood. " It isgenerally understood, that a sale was made of someof the finest timber of Shillelah, which remained inCharles the Second s time, into Holland for theuse of the Storehouse, and other buildings constructedon piles driven close together, to thenumber of several thousand. In 1669, William,earl of Strafford, furnished Lawrence Wood of Londonwith such pipe-staves, to a great amount, at10/. per thousand, as are now sold for 50/., andare only to be had from America. The year 1692introduced into Shillelah that bane of all our timber,iron forges and furnaces; and, as the partieswere allowed to fell for themselves several thousandcord of wood yearly, and were only confined to aparticular district, they cut whatever was mostconvenient to them for the purpose, and it is inconceivablewhat destruction they must have madein the course of twenty years, which was the termof their contract."From a paper in the handwriting of Thomas,marquess of Rockingham, it appears that, in 1731,there were standing in that part of Shillelah calledthe Deer Park, 2150 oak trees; of these, in 1737,there remained 1540 trees. In 1780, thirty-eightTHE IRISH OAK. Illonly of the old reserves were in existence. " Theevident symptoms of decay which from that timethey began to exhibit, owing to wind shakes andother disorders incidental to all old trees which havelost a mass of shelter on every side, made itexpedient to cut them nearly all down from timeto time. The last I remember to have been felled,"adds Mr. Hayes, " produced, at three shillings perfoot, 27Z. Is. Sd. ; another, about the same time, waspurchased for the arm of a fire-engine at DonneColliery, and with the rough end sawed off afterthe axe, for which two guineas was given, produced26/. 4s. 3d. There still remains one entire tree,about ten feet round at five feet from the ground,straight as a pine for sixty feet, and about six feetround at that height ; there is also in a little islandin the Forge Pool, a short trunk, which measurestwenty-one feet round."Mr. Hayes also mentions an oak in the domainof Ballybeg, " which measures round the forkedtrunk upwards of twenty-seven feet ; round one ofthe stems, twenty feet, and round the other twelve,and is gross timber for more than forty feet inheight. This last," he continues, " has the honourof being one of the few remaining trees of thosewoods which rendered the barony of Shillelah, inthe county of Wicklow, proverbially famous for itstimber, and gave the denomination of FirewoodPark, to that district in which the great, but unfortunateEarl of Strafford, built his hunting-lodge.112 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.His descendant, Earl Fitzwilliam, now possesses thisestate, from whose liberal attention to whatever mayin any way promote the benefit of the country, andfrom the excellent system adopted by the gentlemenwho have the present management of his lordship swoods, I flatter myself that posterity may see Shil-leah as remarkable for timber in the next centuryas in the last, when its oak (if we may judge fromthe specimens which still remain) was as superiorto most others in the firmness of its texture, as inits stately height and great dimensions."THE SPRIG OF SHILLELAH.The fair of Donnybrook, near Dublin," observesSir Jonah Barrington, * has been long identified with thename and character of the lower classes of Irish people ;and, so far as the population of its metropolis may fairlystand for that of a whole country, the identification isjust. This remark applies, it is true, to several yearsback ; as that entire revolution in the natural Irish character,which has taken place within my time, must haveextended to all their sports and places of amusement ; andDonnybrook fair, of course, has had its full share in themetamorphosis.The old Donnybrook fair, however, is on record ;and so long as the name exists, will be duly appreciated.Mr. Lysaght s popular song of * The Sprig of Shillelahand Shamrock so green, gives a most lively sketch ofTHE SPRIG OF SHILLELAU. 113that celebrated meeting, some of the varieties and peculiaritiesof which may be amusing, and will certainlygive a tolerable idea of the Dublin commonalty in theeighteenth century." Sir Jonah s description of thehumours of Donuybrook fair, although very laughablytold in the third volume of " Personal Sketches of hisown Times," is too lengthy for transcript beyond thefollowing passage, which completely illustrates the song.There " Love reigned in all his glory, and Cupid expendedevery arrow his mother could make for him ; butwith this difference, that Love is in general representedas discharging his shafts into people s hearts, whereas atDonnybrook, he always aimed at their heads ; and, beforeit became very dusk, he never failed to be very successfulin his archery. It was after sunset, indeed, that sweetheartsmade up their matches ; and a priest (FatherKearney of Liffey Street, a good clergy) told me that moremarriages were celebrated in Dublin the week after Donnybrookfair, than in any two months during the rest ofthe year ; the month of June being warm and sung (ashetermed it) smiled on every thing that was good, andhelped the liquor in making the arrangements ; and withgreat animation he added, that it was a gratifying sightto see his young parishioners, who had made up theirmatches at Donnybrook, coming there in a couple of yearsagain to buy whistles for their children."Edward Lysaght, the author of this humorous anddescriptive song, generally known as " pleasant Ned Lysight," was the son of John Lysaght, Esq. of Brickhill, inthe county of Clare. He was born on the 21st December,1763, and educated at the school of the Reverend Patrick114 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Hare, of Castel. In 1779,* young Lysaght enteredTrinity College, Dublin, through which he passed withmuch credit, and was particularly distinguished as amember of the Historical Society. "In 1784, lie becamea student of the Inner Temple, and took his degree ofMaster of Arts at St. Edmund Hall, Oxford. He wascalled to the English bar at the term of 1788, and to thatof Ireland in the following term. His professional dutiescommenced with his being counsel for Lord Hood in thelong-contested election for Westminster, between thatnobleman and Mr. Fox."Sir Jonah Barrington says, " Lysaght, a gentleman bybirth, was left, as to fortune, little else than his brains andpedigree. The latter, however, was of no sort of use tohim, and he seldom employed the former to any lucrativepurpose. He considered law as his trade, and conviviality(to the cultivation whereof no man could apply moresedulously) his profession. Full of point and repartee,every humorist and bon vivant was his patron. He had afull proportion of animal courage ; and even the fire-eatersof Tipperary never courted his animosity. Songs, epigrams,and lampoons, which, from other pens, would haveterminated in mortal combat, being considered inherent inhis nature, were universally tolerated.Some of Lysaght s sonnets," adds Sir Jonah, " hadgreat merit, and many of his national stanzas wereThe editor of a volume of " Poems, by the late Edward Lysaght,Esq," 8vo., Dublin, 1811, from whose preface the above particulars arecopied, adds to the date 1779, Mr. Lysaght " being then about eighteenyears of age." If this statement of age be correct, the date ofMr. Lysaght s entrance into Trinity College should be 1781.THE SPRIG OF SUILLELAH. 115singularly characteristic. His Sprig of Shillelah andShamrock so green, is admirably and truly descriptive ofthe low Irish character, and never was that class so welldepicted in so few words."Lysaght was, perhaps, not a poet, in the strictacceptation of the term ; but he wrote a great number ofmiscellaneous verses ; some of them, in general estimation,excellent, some delicate, some gross. I scarce ever sawtwo of these productions of the same metre, and very fewwere of the same character. Several of the best poeticaltrifles in Carnally s Sherwood Forest, were penned byLysaght. Having no fixed politics, or, in truth, decidedprinciples respecting any thing, he was one day a patriot,the next a courtier, and wrote squibs both for governmentand against it. The stanzas relatively commencingGreen were the fields that our forefathers dwelt on &c.,Where the loud cannons rattle, to battle we ll go, &c.,and,Some few years ago, though now she says no, &c.,were three of the best of his patriotic effusions; theywere certainly very exciting, and he sang them with greateffect."Sir Jonah Barrington gives a whimsical account ofLysaght s marriage. Shortly after his death, a few of hispoems were hastily collected, and published in a volume,by subscription ; to which a portrait, from recollection, ofhis " mild, pale, and penetrating" countenance, is prefixed.The brilliant wit, the rich vein of humour, and irresistiblemimicry, the extraordinary readiness of reply, and highsocial qualities of Mr. Lysaght, gave a certain reputation116 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.to every trifle which came from his pen. However, it isunfair critically to estimate by the contents of the volumejust mentioned, Mr. Lysaght s powers of mind, or the effectwhich his lyrics on elections, or other occasions of popularexcitement, produced. It cannot be doubted, from theirfugitive nature, that many of his happiest effusions haveperished; indeed the volume of his poems contains neitherthe following song, nor any of those mentioned by SirJonah Harrington ; and all the verses there to be foundare evidently written to answer some temporary purpose,and bear obvious marks of that haste which did not permita second perusal. Some literary interest attaches toMr. Lysaght s memory, as the godfather of Miss Owenson(the present Lady Morgan), whom he subsequently addressedin some sportive lines, of which only a fragmentis preserved.The Muses met me once, not very sober.But full of frolic, at your merry christening ;And now, this twenty-third day of October,As they foretold, to your sweet lays I m listening," &c.It only remains for the Editor to state, that Donnybrookfair no longer exists. Mr. D Alton, in his " Historyof the County of Dublin" (1838), speaking of Donnybrook,says, " This place was long celebrated for itsannual August fair the Bartholomew of Dublin ; butwhich, in consequence of several riotous and disgracefulres ults, ithas been found necessary to suppress."Oh ! love is the soul of a neat Irishman,He loves all that is lovely, loves all that he can,With his sprig of Shillelah and shamrock so green !THE SPRIG OF SHILLELAH. 117His heart is good-humoured, tis honest and sound,No envy or malice is there to be found ;He courts and he marries, he drinks and he fights ;For love, all for love, for in that he delights,With his sprig of Shillelah and shamrock so green !Who has e er had the luck to see Donnybrook Fair ?An Irishman, all in his glory, is there,With his sprig of Shillelah and shamrock so green !His clothes spick and span new, without e er a speck,A neat Barcelona tied round his neat neck ;He goes to a tent, and he spends half-a-crown,He meets with a friend, and for love knocks him downWith his sprig of Shillelah, and shamrock so green !At evening returning, as homeward he goes,His heart soft with whisky, his head soft with blowsFrom a sprig of Shillelah, and shamrock so green !He meets with his Sheelah, who, blushing a smile,Cries, " Get ye gone, Pat," yet consents all the while.To the priest soon they go ; and nine months after that,A fine baby cries, " How d ye do, father Pat,With your sprig of Shillelah and shamrock so green?"Bless the country, say I, that gave Patrick his birth,Bless the land of the oak, and its neighbouring earth,Where grow the Shillelah and shamrock so green !May the sons of the Thames, the Tweed, and the Shannon,Drub the French, who dare plant at our confines a cannon ;United and happy, at Loyalty s shrine,May the Rose and the Thistle long flourish and twineRound a sprig of Shillelah and shamrock so green !118 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.HAIL TO THE OAK, THE IRISH TREE !Speaking of the magnitude and value of trees in Ireland,Mr. Hayes observes, " In the small survey whichmy time permitted me to make, the district of Shillelah, inthe county of Wicklow, first claimed my attention. Thoughthe name, with little variation in the spelling, may beliterally translated fair wood, there are few now remainingof those celebrated oaks which authorised that denomination; but those few are sufficient to support what has beenhanded down to us concerning them. Tradition gives theShillelah oak the honour of roofing Westminster Hall, andother buildings of that age ; the timbers which support theleads of the magnificent chapel of King s College, Cambridge,which was built in 1444 ; as also the roof of Henrythe Seventh s Chapel, in Westminster Abbey, are said tobe of oak, brought from these woods;* and I think it byno means improbable," continues Mr. Hayes, " that thesuperior density and closeness of grain, which is thecharacter of the Irish oak, particularly in high situationsand a dry soil, as may appear by comparing its specificgravity with that of other oak, added to the inattention ofthe Irish at that time to the article of bark, which permittedtheir oak to be felled in winter when free from sap, mighthave induced the English architects to give it the preferencein such national works ; and, it must be allowed, that thepresent unimpaired state of these roofs, after so manycenturies, seems very well to warrant this conjecture."Charles V. of France founded the Royal Library at Paris in 1365,and, it is said, Lad the chambers wainscoted with Irish oak. ED.HAIL TO THE OAK, THE IRISH TREE ! 119So late as the close of the seventeenth century, commissionerswere sent over to Waterford and Wexford bythe English government. " Nigh which places, in thecounty of Wicklow," Dean Story tells us, " there is goodstore of suitable timber, and other advantages for buildingships, at easier rates than in England."This lyric is to be found in several recent collectionsof songs, with the signature, "W. Portland," attachedto it.When, from the new-formed pregnant earth,Sprang vegetation s progeny,The Irish oak, of ancient birth,Arose the kingly forest tree.Hail to the oak, the Irish tree,And Irish hearts, with three times three !Its verdure sickens where the slave,To power despotic, homage gives ;But real Shillelah, with the brave,True to the soil, luxuriant lives.Hail to the oak, the Irish tree,And hearts of oak, with three times three !Our Druid rites have spread its fame ;Our bards have sung the noble tree ;Our sailors gain a deathless name,Borne, on its planks, to victory.Hail to the oak, the Irish tree,And British tars, with three times three !120 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Still may its circling arms extend,To guard our isles from foreign foes ;Its branching green head long defendThe Shamrock, Thistle, and the Rose.Hail to the oak, the Irish tree,And British hearts, with three times three IOH! AN IRISHMAN S HEART.The comparison of an Irishman s heart to a sprig ofShillelah is an exceedingly happy one. When Pat s heartgoes " thump" within his breast, a " whack" from thetwig, which he can so skilfully handle, is sure to follow.There is a mysterious sympathy between his hand whileit poises a Shillelah, and his heart while it swells forOld Ireland, his king, and his friend."And then so sensitive is that heart of his, like a well-greasedand seasoned " bit of stick," it lights up, astouchwood, beneath that burning glass the dark eye ofa pretty girl.To pursue the simile further is unnecessary. Thefearless way in which Jack Johnston used to sing thefollowing song, and the dexterous manner in which heaccompanied it by flourishes of his Shillelah, will long beremembered by those who have witnessed his personificationof the Irish character:on! AN IRISHMAN S HEART. 121Air " The Kinnegad Slashers."Oh ! an Irishman s heart is as stout as Shillelah,It beats with delight to chase sorrow and wo ;When the piper plays up, then it dances so gaily,And thumps with a whack for to leather a foe.But by beauty lit up, faith, in less than a liffey,So warm is the stuff, it soon blazes and burns ;Then so wild is each heart of us, lads of the Liffey,It dances and beats altogether by turns.Then away with dull care, let s be merry and frisky,Our motto is this, may it widely extendGive poor Pat but fair freedom, his sweetheart and whisky,And he ll die for old Ireland, his king, and his friend.Should ruffian invaders e er menace our shore,Though the foes of dear Erin may strut and look big ;Yet, na bogh-a-lish,* my lad, they shall have it galore,Fc*r Patrick s the boy that can handle a twig.But the battle once over, no rage fills his breast,Mild mercy still softens the heart of the brave ;For of valour, of love, and of friendship possessed,The soldier of Erin still conquers to save.Then away with dull care, whilst swigging so frisky,Our toast shall be this, may it widely extendThus blest with fair freedom, our sweethearts and whisky,Here s success to dear Ireland, our king, and our friend.Equivalent to Never mind it."122 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.LOCAL SONGS.THERE is scarcely a city, town, village, seat, grove,river, lake, or glen in Ireland, the charms of which,or of some fair damsel thereunto appertaining orbelonging, do not, as Pope says of the groves ofEden,Live in description, and look green in song."That Irish local songs should be so abundant isreadily accounted for, not merely by the generalfondness for such compositions, but by a curiouscustom, in compliance with which every travellerin Ireland made verses in praise of certain placesthrough or by which he passed. Dr. Smith, in hisHistory of Kerry," thus notices this whimsicalpractice: " The road from the other parts of Kerryinto this barony (Average) runs over very high andsteep hills, that stand in this parish (Glanbehy),called Drunk and Cahircanawy ; which road hangsin a tremendous manner over that part of the seathat forms the Bay of Castlemain, and is not unlikethe mountain of Penmenmaure in North Wales, ex-localSONGS. 123kept that the road here is more stony and less securefor the traveller. There is a custom among thecountry people to enjoin every one that passes thismountain to make some verses to its honour, otherwise,they affirm, that whoever attempts to pass itwithout versifying, must meet with some mischance ;the origin of which notion seems to be, that it willrequire a person s whole circumspection to preservehimself from falling off his horse. They repeatedto me," adds Smith, " several performances, both inIrish and English, made on this occasion ; but thismountain is not like that of Helicon, consecratedto the Muses, for all the verses that I heard werealmost as rugged and uncouth as the road on whichthey were made, for which reason I shall not troublethe reader with them, although I had several copiesgiven me for that purpose."This remarkable custom is also mentioned inA Pastoral, in imitation of the First Eclogue ofVirgil," published at Dublin in 1719.Crag Can a Wee,Full often have I made a song for thee ;Lest some disaster should attend my life,My tender children, or my loving wife."A writer, under the nom de guerre of Dr. MacSlate, presumed to be Mr. Kindle of Cork, says,l( The sound or strait between Clear and Wherein(in the county of Cork), is called Gascanan, and is124 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.singular for a usage which requires that all whocross it for the first time should improvise, at least,a couplet, otherwise some mischance may be theconsequence. A similar exercise of the little ofpoetry within us, is required on passing the ruggedpathway of Cahircanawy, overhanging the dizzycliffs of Castlemain ; and, I doubt not but a collectionof these effusions would afford a rare picture ofthe mind of the gentry who frequent these passagesof song."There are few things that sink more deeply intothe memory than local songs. A lover at onceimmortalizes the memory of his mistress by associatingher name, even under the mask of Chloe,Phillips, or Pastoral, with a romantic scene. Fromthenceforward the ground is consecrated to her; shebecomes the presiding goddess of the place, andher praise is echoed by every admirer of the lovelinessof nature. In the songs of England, the samefondness for local association is of parasitical growth."The pretty Maid of Derby, O!" "The Lass ofRichmond Hill," and similar songs, are known tobe the productions of Irishmen ; all the particularsrespecting the composition of the latter, by Mr.Carnally, may be found recorded by Sir JonahBarrington .As to the influence of local songs, an old proverbof " Give a dog a bad name," &c., is not inapplicable.We find, for instance, after upwards of threeLOCAL SONGS. 125hundred years, " these bald verses," as Sir RichardCox calls them, respecting the miserable state ofArmagh, quoted against that city.Civitas Ardmachana,Civitas van,Absque bonis morbus :Moliere nuda,Games crude,Paupers in tedious."Which have been renderedArmagh tis a pityIs now a vain city,Deprived of all common morality ;The women go nude,The meat s taken crude,And poverty there has locality.Who, if " the beautiful city" is mentioned, doesnot immediately appropriate the phrase to Cork ?And why? because Cork was introduced as a rhymein a ridiculous song called, " I was the Boy forbewitching them which was a favourite some thirtyyears ago.My father he married a Quaker,My aunt, she made hay with a fork ;And my uncle s a great grand brogue-makerIn the beautiful city called Cork."THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Among the remarkable particulars connectedwith local song, may be mentioned the practicewhich exists in Cork of publishing, on ShroveTuesday, a certain species of song or ballad, calledSkellig Lists;" of which, in the course of a fewdays, no less than 30,000 copies are printed andsold.* These lists contain a rhyming catalogue ofunmarried women and bachelors, whom the poetasterhas undertaken to pair together, as suitable companionsfor what is termed a pilgrimage to the Swellings,which are dangerous rocks in the Atlantic,distant about twelve miles from the south - westA ballad-publisher in Cork told the Editor, that, in 1836, heprinted thirteen different Skellig lists. His average press-work was300 impressions a-day, and his press was fully occupied for twelvedays; this gives 3600 impressions. But as, in ballad printing,four or five copies are worked off together, the produce of this presswas about 15,000 Skellig lists : and, as no less than twenty-ninevarieties were collected by the Editor in that year, he believes thatthe above estimate of the number circulated is not an unfair one.The following are the titles :The Aristocratic List.The Blackpool and Skellig List.The City Skellig List.The Comet Skellig List.The Corkscrew Skellig List.The Flash and Blue Bell Skellig List.Grand Route of the Northern to Skel-Ii 8 .The Hours of Idleness* Skellig List.Jack Robinson s Skellig List.The Lads of the Whip List.The Looker-on Skellig List.The Morning Herald Skellig List.The Morning Star Skellig List.The Pic Nic Skellig List.The Paul Pry Skellig List.The real Cheese List.No. 2. Repeal Skellig List.The Revenge.The Royal Hottentot Skellig List for1836.The Sentimental Grand Match to Swellings.Shrove Tuesday and Spiflicator List, orcut and come again.The Simple Paddy Skellig List.The Spyglass Skellig List.No. 3. Skellig List.The Tatters List.Thwacker s Skellig List.The Try Again.The Virgins of the Sun.And a Skellig list without title, a woodcut being substituted.LOCAL SONGS. 127point of the coast of Ireland, and which were formerlymuch frequented as places suitable for prayerand penance. On pilgrimages of this kind manymatrimonial matches were made up. The fun, ifit may be so called, of the Skellig lists, consistsin associating the most probable and improbablepersons.11 The pilgrims," observes a learned critic uponthe Munster Melodies, " are paired as whim orfancy dictates, making as motley an assortment, touse the simile of the melancholy Jacques, as wentwith Noah into the ark. Some of these are veryamusing, but the humour is too local to be generallyunderstood, and we must add, that the personalitiestoo frequently border on ill-nature."In 1832, the Editor received the following notefrom a friend at Cork, inclosing one of these lists :Do you remember the local custom of sending allour maids, young and old, accompanied by bachelors ofall ages, upon a pilgrimage to Skellig ? I have been toldthat the custom of these lists arose when some Kerryregiment was here. The tumult in the streets, lastTuesday night, was extreme. Bodies of five hundredmen and boys paraded the town, blowing horns, firing,ringing the bells of houses, breaking lamps, &c., ; and allon the occasion of the Skellig lists."Appended to one of these lists, published in 1834,which lists are invariably without the printer sname, this notice occurs :128 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.TO Selling LIST WRITERS.The following very polite letter has been sent to theprinter, of which it is hoped the Skellig List writers willplease to notice, and comply with its contents :1 SIR, You are requested to take notice, that I willhold you responsible for any liberties taken with the namesof Mary Ellen Harris, Sarah Harris, and Eliza Driscoll,they being members of my family, and having receivedintelligence of some person or persons wishing to exposethem in the Skellig Lists which are to come to andthrough your press. I am, therefore, fully determined toindict all persons concerned, if there is any thing prejudicialto their person, interest, or character, in any manner.Most respectfully, &c.*HUGH DRISCOLL.Jan. 28, 1834."In making a selection from the popular localsongs of Ireland, the Editor has considerable difficulty,in consequence of the quantity before him.He is, therefore, necessarily guided by space ; andhis object is, as far as possible, to obtain an agreeablevariety in a subject apparently circumscribedby amatory or descriptive effusions.PROVINCIAL CHARACTERISTICS.From " The Milesian Magazine, or Irish MonthlyGleaner," edited, and, it is believed, entirely written byDr. John Brenan of Dublin, who has been termed "TheHudibras of Medicine." Nine numbers of this periodicalPROVINCIAL CHARACTERISTICS. 129were published between 1812 and 1825. " Its very appearancewas as eccentric as the articles it contained. Ithad a lofty contempt for all periodical punctuality ; and,although it styled itself < Monthly, not only monthly intervalselapsed between its publications, but sometimeseven years themselves were disregarded as trifles light asair* in its kalendar." The members of his own professionwere the chief subject of Dr. Brenan s satire ; andseveral of his allusions to the Dublin practitioners areremembered, to the present day, for their bitterness andbrilliancy.A Connaught manGets all that he can,His impudence never has mist-all ;He ll seldom flatter,But bully and batter ;And his talk s of his kin and his pistol.A Munster manIs civil by plan,Again and again he ll entreat you ;Though you ten times refuse,He Ins object pursues,Which is, nine out often times, to cheat you.An Ulster manEver means to trepan,He watches your eye and opinion ;He ll ne er disagreeTill his interest it be,And insolence marks his dominion.G2130 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.A Leinster manIs with all cup and can ;He calls t other provinces knaves ;Yet each of them see,When he starts with the three,That his distance he frequently saves.SWEET AVONDU.This song is copied from a volume entitled " The Recluseof Inchidony, and other Poems," by J. J. Callant,published in 1830.James Joseph Callanan, the author, was of humbleparentage. His father was the confidential servant of aneminent physician in Cork of the same name, and, possibly,some relative. By his father young Callanan wasdestined for the Catholic priesthood, and entered at May-north,where he remained two years; but, feeling littlesympathy for the clerical vocation, he wilfully quitted thatestablishment about the year 1816, and, consequently,incurred the displeasure of parents and friends anxious toprovide creditably for him. He, however, had made,sufficient progress in the classics to enable him to accept asituation as tutor, which was offered to him in 1818.Callanan subsequently entered Trinity College, Dublin,and gained some credit by two clever poems, which werewritten for college prizes.After a residence of two years in Dublin, his slenderpecuniary resources failed him, and, in a fit of despair, heenlisted as a private soldier in the 18th Regiment of Foot,SWEET AVONDU. 131then on the point of embarkation for Malta. " Its name,of the { Royal Irish, had, for his enthusiastic and patrioticmind, an attraction which, he declared, he was unable toresist." He proceeded to the depot of this regiment inthe Isle of Wight, and, with some difficulty, was tracedthere from Dublin. When the imprudent step which hehad taken was discovered, his friends, by exertion, succeededin purchasing his discharge, and he returned toCork after an inglorious fortnight of military service.He soon obtained a tutorship in the family of a gentlemannamed MacCarthy, who resided in the neighbourhoodof Millstone, in the west of the county of Cork, and,during his stay there, his poetical temperament wasnourished by the wild scenery which surrounded him,and the vicinity of the Killarney and Muskerry mountains,which were visible from the windows of the house.In 1822, Mr. Callanan went back to reside in Cork,chiefly with the view of printing, by subscription, a collectionof his poems, and translations from the Irish. Butnot receiving sufficient encouragement, he forwarded severalof the translations to " Blackwood s Magazine," andin the number of that publication for February 1823,they were inserted.Dr. Maginn was then an active contributor to Blackwood,and, by him, Callanan was patronised and engagedas an assistant in his school. Here, however, he did notlong remain, for Callanan s mind was haunted by a visionaryspirit of poetical fame, and he took up his residence atBantry, that he might be at liberty to rove and museamong the mountains, from whence seemed to flow forhim the springs of inspiration. The failure of his finance*.132 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.and the hopelessness of aid from friends, who had alreadydone much for him, and were unable to understandhis romantic views and feelings, obliged Mr. Callananagain* to undertake the task of tuition, and he availedhimself of an opportunity to do so in the family ofMr. Alexander O Driscoll, of Clover Hill ; but no soonerhad he become the possessor of a few pounds, than herevisited Cork, and made another effort to print, by subscription,his poems.This intention, which might have been accomplished,"says Callanan s biographer, " was soon abandoned,from the absurd idea that his publishing bysubscription would have the effect of rendering his productionsless respectable in the eyes of the public, andhe determined to make an effort to dispose of the copyrightto a London publisher. Procrastination, that sourceof many evils, was a favourite and cherished weakness ofCallanan s, and it did not fail him here, as a year elapsedbefore he made an effort even to do this.From this period forward, his life was one of muchdisappointment ; and every day, every hour, broughtprivation and embarrassment. The kindness of friends,and they were numerous and sincere, perhaps fosteredthat tendency to a habitual indolence which was his bane ;was he less certain of their assistance, he might have madethose exertions which, with his powerful talents, wouldhave assured to him a respectable independence, andplaced his name beside the proudest and the brightest.He felt the necessity for the effort, but he possessed notthe power to make it ; whatever were his aspirationsand they were not those of the mean or grovelling, orSWEET AVONDU. 133the sordid his resolution or power of doing never receivedthe impulse. His social habits, too, his local andpersonal attachments, kept him in fetters which he seldomsought to break ; and as his society was sought after witheagerness, he was too unresisting to tear himself from thepleasures or enjoyments into which he suffered himself tobe plunged."In 1825, Mr. Callanan accepted a situation at EvertonSchool, near Carlow ; but in 1826 he returned to Bantryand his beloved haunts in the mountainous west of thecounty of Cork, as will be more particularly noticedhereafter. Here he continued dreaming away existence,and dependent upon the hospitality, to use his own words,of " priests and doctors, police-officers and bourgeois,"until the summer of the following year, when theurgent representations of his friends stimulated him toaccept the offer of Mr. Hickey, an Irish gentleman engagedin commercial pursuits at Lisbon, to go out there astutor to his children. Callanan left Ireland in September1827, in a bad state of health, which his residence inPortugal did not improve ; and, as his case became hopeless,he determined on returning to draw his last breathin his native land. After he had embarked in a vesselabout to sail for Cork, symptoms of speedy dissolutionbeing observed, Mr. Callanan was put on shore at Lisbon,where he died on the 19th September, 1829, in the thirty-fourthyear of his age.the pealing roarOf the deep thunder, and the tempest s sweepThat call d his spirit up so oft before,May shout to him in vain ! the minstrel wakes no more !"134 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Immediately after his death, the volume of poems, inwhich the following song appeared, was published by Mr.Bolster in Cork, to whom Callanan had disposed of thecopyright upon his departure for Lisbon.In person, Mr. Callanan was not remarkable. Afinely formed head, a forehead high, ample, and beautifullyfair, and an intellectual cast of countenance, gavehim an air of dignity that was peculiarly impressive. Hisvoice was gentle and bland ; and though its tones werelow and soft, he recited poetry with great effect. Hisacquirements were considerable ; his reading having extended,not only through the Greek and Roman classics,but also over the wide and ample field of French, Spanish,Portuguese, and Irish literature. His patriotism wassincere, and his disposition and manners kind and conciliating."Avondu," says the author, means " the BlackwaterAvunduff of Spenser). There are several rivers of thisname in the counties of Cork and Kerry, but the one herementioned is by far the most considerable. It rises in aboggy mountain called Meenganine in the latter county,and discharges itself into the sea at Youghall. For thelength of its course and the beauty and variety of scenerythrough which it flows, it is superior, I believe, to anyriver in Munster. It is subject to very high floods ; andfrom its great rapidity, and the havoc which it commitson those occasions, sweeping before it corn, cattle, andsometimes even cottages, one may, not inaptly, apply to itwhat Virgil says of a more celebrated river,Profit insane contortions vortices silvasRex fluviorum Eridanus.SWEET AVONDU. 135Spenser thus beautifully characterises some of our principalIrish rivers, though he has made a mistake withregard to the All; it is the Blackwater that passesthrough Sliav-logher :There was the Liffie rolling down the lea,The sandy Slane, the stony Au-brian,The spacious Siena, spreading like a sea ;The pleasant Boyne, the fishy, fruitful Ban ;Shift Awnidujf, which of the EnglishmanIs called Blackwater, and the Liffar deep.Sad Trois, that once his people over ran ;Strong All tumbling from Slew-higher steep,And Multa mine whose waves I whilom taught to weep."Edmund Burke wrote some " Lines on the RiverBlackwater," in 1745. See Prior s " Life of Burke."Mr. Prior informs the Editor that he was never able toprocure a copy of these lines, or to ascertain any thingmore than the fact that Burke wrote such verses.On Cicada s* hill the moon is bright,Dark Avondu still rolls in light ;All changeless is that mountain s head,That river still seeks ocean s bed.The calm blue waters of Loch LenefStill kiss their own sweet isles of green ;But where s the heart, as firm and true,As hill, or lake, or Avondu ?" Cloaca and Cahir-bearna (the hill of the four gaps) form partof the chain of mountains which stretches westward from Millstoneto Killarney." Author s Note.t Killarney.136 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.It may not be, the firmest heartFrom all it loves must often part ;A look, a word, will quench the flameThat time or fate could never tame ;And there are feelings, proud and highThat through all changes cannot die ;That strive with love, and conquer tooI knew them all by Avondu.How cross and wayward still is fate ;I ve learn d at last, but learn d too late ;I never spoke of love twere vain ;I knew it, still I dragged my chain.I had not, never had a hope :But who with passion s tide can cope ?Headlong it swept this bosom through,And left it waste by Avondu.Oh, Avondu, I wish I wereAs once upon that mountain bare,Where thy young waters laugh and shineOn the wild breast of Meenganine.I wish I were on Cicada s hill,Or by Glenluachra s rushy rill ;But, no ! I never more shall viewThose scenes I loved by Avondu.Farewell, ye soft and purple streaksOf evening on the beauteous Reeks ;*" Macgillacuddy s Reeks, in the neighbourhood of Killarney,are the highest mountains in Munster ; for a description of these, andof the celebrated lakes of that place, see Weld s Killarney, by farthe best and most correct work on the subject." Author s Note.BANNA S BANKS. 137Farewell the mists that love to rideOn Cahir-bearna s stormy side ;Farewell November s moaning breeze,Wild minstrel of the dying trees.Clara I a fond farewell to you,No more we meet by Avondu.No more but thou, O glorious hill,Lift to the moon thy forehead still ;Flow on, flow on, thou dark swift river.Upon thy free wild course for ever ;Exult, young hearts, in lifetime s spring,And taste the joys pure love can bring :But, wanderer, go they re not for you ;Farewell, farewell, sweet Avondu IBANNA S BANKS.Near Caroline (in the county of Wexford) is thevillage of Rosmenogue. Here," says Mr. Brewer, in1 The Beauties of Ireland, " the late Right HonourableGeorge Ogle, of Bellevue, distinguished for brilliancy ofwit, and exuberance of social qualities, passed some of hisearly years, under the tuition of the Rev. Mr. Miller,rector of the parish. It was at this place, and whilsthe was very young, that Mr. Ogle wrote his admiredsong, beginningShepherds, I have lost my love,Have you seen my Anna?Pride of every shady grove,On the banks of Anna !138 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Here, likewise, at a less youthful age, he composed hisstill more celebrated song of Molly Asthore, in whichthe banks of his favourite Anna are still the scene ofhis poetical wanderings." A note adds " The first ofthese juvenile effusions is said to have been inspired bythe charms of Miss Stephen, of Burrow House, Queen sCounty, afterwards Mrs. Burton Done of Wells, one ofthe most admired beauties of her day. It is believed thatthe lovely Molly Asthore was Miss Moore, the ladywhom Mr. Ogle afterwards married.The Anna is a beautiful stream that waters thechief part of the Barony of Grey."Mr. Hay, in his " History of the Insurrection of theCounty of Wexford," evidently sneers at the popularity ofMr. Ogle s songs when he says, " Duncannon fort is amilitary station on the shore, commanding the entranceof the Barrow, of which and the Shandy there is sufficientmention and observation made already ; and, surely, ofAnna s Banks we have heard enough"In a work entitled " Sketches of Irish Political Characters,"published in 1799, Mr. Ogle, the author ofAnna s Banks," who then represented the city ofDublin, is thus noticed : " This gentleman was for manyyears one of the most popular characters of the kingdom.Despising the allurements of a court, every publicmeasure of acknowledged utility had his decided support; and his spirit was as conspicuous as his resolutionwas inflexible. He has lately accepted a place, and hassince aided administration with his vote, though seldomwith his oratory.His sources of information are not very copious, butBANNA S BANKS. 139he has a lively imagination, a good understanding, and afine person ; his arguments are more shewy than solid,and have more surface than depth.His voice is clear, distinct, and well toned, and hisaction graceful ; his language abounds with figurativediction, while the spirit and energy of his manner correspondwith the warmth of his expressions. He is alwaysheard with deference and attention, and even pleases whenhe fails to convince. He is distinguished for all the elegantaccomplishments which form the finished gentleman."Mr. Ogle voted against the union of the two countries.He was born in 1739, and died in 1814.As down by Anna s banks I stray d, one evening in May,The little birds with blithest notes made vocal every spray ;They sung their little notes of love, they sung them o erand o er.Ah, gra-ma-chree, ma colleen oge, ma Molly Asthore !*The daisies py d, and all the sweets the dawn of natureyields,The primrose pale, and vi let blue, lay scatter d o er thefields:Such fragrance in the bosom lies of her whom I adore.Ah, gra-ma-chree, &c.I laid me down upon a bank, bewailing my sad fate,That doom d me thus the slave of love and cruel Molly shate ;This line, which is a compound of several Irish phrases, literallytranslated means " O love of my heart, my dear young girl, mydarling Molly ! "140 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.How can she break the honest heart that wears her in itscore?Ah, gra-ma-chree, &c.You said you loved me, Molly dear ; ah, why did I believe?Yet who could think such tender words were meant butto deceive ?That love was all I asked on earth nay, Heaven couldgive no more.Ah, gra-ma-chree, &c.Oh I had I all the flocks that graze on yonder yellow hill,Or low d for me the numerous herds that yon greenpasture fill ;With her I love I d gladly share my kine and fleecy store.Ah, gra-ma-chree, &c.Two turtle doves above my head sat courting on a bough,I envied them their happiness, to see them bill and coo :Such fondness once for me she shew d ; but now, alas !tis o er.Ah, gra-ma-chree, &c.Then fare thee well, my Molly dear ! thy loss I e er shallmourn ;While life remains in Stephen s heart, twill beat for theealone :Though thou art false, may Heaven on thee its choicestblessings pour.Ah, gra-ma-chree, &c.THE GROVES OF BLARNEY. 141THE GROVES OF BLARNEY.The memoir prefixed to the little volume entitledPoetical Fragments of the late Richard Alfred Millikin "(see p. 92), contains the following passage :Amongst his poetical effusions were innumerablesongs, tender, classical, and comic. Of the latter, thatentitled The Groves of Blarney is frequently advertedto of late (with a degree of consequence* attached toit,quite astonishing to those who know the foolish thing),requires to be particularised, and had its origin asfollows : An itinerant poet, with the view of being paidfor his trouble, composed a song in praise (as he doubtlessintended it) of Castle Hyde, the beautiful seat of theHyde family on the river Blackwater ; but, instead of theexpected remuneration, the poor poet was driven fromthe gate by order of the then proprietor, who, from theabsurdity of the thing, conceived that it could be onlymeant as mockery : and, in fact, a more nonsensical compositioncould scarcely escape the pen of a maniac. Theauthor, however, well satisfied of its merits, and stung withindignation and disappointment, vented his rage in anadditional verse against the owner, and sung it whereverhe had an opportunity of raising his angry voice. Assatire, however gross, is but too generally well received,the song first became a favourite with the lower orders ;" Called, in a London print, The National Irish Poem. "Note in the Memoir on this passage. Attributed by Mr. Lockhart, inhis " Life of Sir Walter Scott," vi. 75, to " the poetical Dean ofCork." Quoted by Lord Brougham in one of his speeches, &c.142 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.then found its way into ballads, and at length into theconvivial meetings of gentlemen. It was in one of thosethat Mr. Millikin undertook, in the gaiety of the moment,to produce a song that, if not superior, should be at leastequal in absurdity to Castle Hyde; and accordinglyadopting the tune, and taking Blarney* for his subject, hesoon made good his promise.< The Groves of Blarney which was received by thecompany with a burst of applause, soon rivalled its predecessorCastle Hyde, and continued long the favouriteof every laughter-loving party. Of late it has been introducedon the stage by Mathews, the comedian, and is verywell received by the London audience. During therebellion, several verses were, in the heat of party, addedto this song, particularly those alluding to the meandescent of a certain noble lord ; but they were not theproduction of the original author, who, incapable ofscurrility or personal enmity to those with whom he differedin opinion, scorned such puerile malice."Millikin s intention was to ridicule the songs whichignorant Irish village bards with a vast fondness forrhyme, an imperfect knowledge of the English language,and a pedantic ambition to display the full extent of theirclassical knowledge were, and still are, in the habit ofcomposing : and in Ireland, rhyme, or even the approachto it, is often far more effective than reason. f" A fine old domain and castle, within three miles of Cork."t The village schoolmaster having remonstrated with a worthy ofthis class respecting the grammatical construction of a sentence, wasanswered with, and silenced byWho is Grammar?I say, damn her."THE GROVES OF BLARNEY. 143Upwards of two hundred years before Millikin ssatirical effusion, Stanihurst published an imitation of theAnglo-Irish style, attached to his translation of " TheFirst Four Books of Virgil s veneris," 1583 ; whichburlesque he called " An Epitaph, entitled CommuneDefunctorum, such as our unlearned Rithmours accustom-ablymake upon the death of everie Tom Tyler, as if itwere a last for every one his foote, in which the quantitiesof syllables are not to be heeded."Come to me, you Muses, and thou most chiefly Minerva,And ye that are dwellers in dens of darkened Averna !Help my pen in writing a death most soarie reciting,Of the good old Tops ; soon too thee, mightie syr Atlas.For gravity, the Cato; for wit, Mars, Bacchus, Apollo ;Scipio, for warfare ; for gentil curtsies, Caesar;A great Alexander, with a long white neck like a gander."&c. &c.Little did Millikin foresee the extended celebrity ofhis " Groves of Blarney;" and it would seem that heeven felt some regret at having written this song, from thefollowing lines which were found, after his death, amonghis papers, and were probably composed by him with theidea of introducing them as an apology into his poem ofThe River-side :"-O ! Blarney, in my rude unseemly rhymes,Albeit abused, lo ! to thy bowers I comeI come a pilgrim to your shades again,And woo thy solemn scenes with votive pipe.Shut not your glades, nymphs of the hollow rock,Gainst one who, conscious of the ill he did,Comes back repentant ! Lead me to your dens,Ye fays and sylvan beings lead me still144 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Through all your wildly tangled grots and groves,With nature and her genuine beauties full;And on another stop, a stop thine own,I ll sound thy praise, if praise of mine can please,A truant long to Nature, and to thee ! "The Editor is in possession of several various readingsof " The Groves of Blarney," which he declines noticing,as the following, with the exception of the fifth verse, iscopied from the author s manuscript (in pencil, upon theback of a letter addressed to him) ; although, in manyinstances, especially in the version of Father Prout, itmust be admitted that there are some improvements.The fifth verse, which has been already particularlynoticed as " alluding to the mean descent of a certainnoble lord," was an impromptu addition at an electioneeringdinner in the south of Ireland, and is attributed, butprobably incorrectly, to Mr. John Lander. It is said tohave been intended as an insult to Lord Donoughmore,who happened to be present. His lordship s readiness,however, completely turned the tables : he applauded theverse, and when the song was ended arose, and, in a veryhumorous speech, acknowledged the relationship, thankedthe author for his mention of it, and requested leave totoast the Murphy, Clears, and Heals, with all otherswho in the recent political contest had ventured life andlimb in support of the Hutchinson cause, and had thusmade their blood relationship with him unquestionable.The late Lord Donoughmore (then Lord Hutchinson)always laughed heartily at this verse, which has becomeso completely identified with Millikin s song, that it wouldbe scarcely recognized as perfect without it.THE GROVES OF BLARNEY. 145In that remarkable combination of humour and erudition," The Reliques of Father Prout," translations ofThe Groves of Blarney " into Latin, Greek, and French,may be found : " a polyglot edition " of this far-famedsong (vol. i. pp. 90-95); in which, however, the versecommencing " Tis there s the kitchen " is omitted, andthe following verse appended :There is the stone there, that whoever kisses,Oh ! he never misses to grow eloquent ;Tis he may clamber to a lady s chamber,Or become a member of parliament ;A clever spouter he ll sure turn out, orAn out-and outer to be let alone.Don t hope to hinder him, or to bewilder him,Sure he s a pilgrim from the Blarney stone."Among the pilgrims to the Blarney stone was SirWalter Scott. The Editor remembers observing to SirWalter, that the good people of Cork were not half pleasedwith him for going to see an old and neglected ruin suchas Blarney, in preference to their noble harbour; of whichthe citizens are so justly proud, that they have adoptedStatio benefit crisis " as the motto to the civic arms.Sir Walter Scott s reply was highly characteristic of histemper. " If I had known," said he, " what you tell methat any one had a wish on the subject of my proceedings,I would have gone any where, or have done any thing, inmy power to please the good citizens of Cork ; althoughit would have cost me a pang not to have visited (hereSir Walter hummed)The Groves of Blarney, that are so charming,All by the purling of sweet silent streams. "H146 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Millikin probably wrote " The Groves of Blarney "in the year 1798 or 1799. Mr. Richard Jones (the accomplishedcomedian) told the Editor, that he obtaineda copy of this song at Cork in the summer of 1800, whichcity he visited in company with the late Mr. Mathews ;by both of whom it was sung in private parties, with thealteration of the linesBesides the leeches, and the groves of beeches,All standing in order for to guard the flood,"intoThe trout and salmon play at backgammon,And groves of beeches guard the sportive flood."The supposed pummelling of Blarney by Oliver Cromwellwill be particularly noticed hereafter. The castle,however, continued in the possession of the MacCarthyfamily until forfeited, in 1689, by Lord Clancarty, whenit was purchased by an ancestor of Mr. Jeffreys, thepresent possessor of this celebrated but now dilapidatedand neglected place.Oh ! the Muse shed a tearWhen the cruel auctioneer,With a hammer in his hand, to sweet Blarney came ! "So sings the venerable Father Prout; at a carousal givenby whom, it was observed, that, that day was " a day tobe blotted out of the annals of Innisfail a day of calamityand downfall. The nightingale never sang so plaintivelyin the groves; the dove or the gentle plover werenot heard in the afternoon ; the fishes wept in thedeepest recesses of the lake ; and strange sounds were saidto issue from the cave where no daylight enters. LetTHE GROVES OF BLARNEY. 147me have a squeeze of lemon " is the conclusion of thispathetic picture.The groves of Blarney they are so charming,All by the purling of sweet silent streams ;Being banked with posies that spontaneous grow there,Planted in order by the sweet rock close.Tis there s the daisy, and the sweet carnation,The blooming pink, and the rose so fair ;The daffodowndilly, besides the lily,Flowers that scent the sweet fragrant air.Oh, ullagoane, &c.Tis Lady Jeffreys that owns this station,Like Alexander, or Queen Helen fair ;There s no commander throughout the nationFor emulation can with her compare.She has castles round her, that no nine-pounderCould dare to plunder her place of strength ;But Oliver Cromwell he did her pummel,And made a breach in her battlement.Oh, ullagoane, &c.There s gravel walks there for speculation,And conversation in sweet solitude ;Tis there the lover may hear the dove, orThe gentle plover, in the afternoon.And if a young lady should be so engagingAs to walk alone in those shady bowers,Tis there her courtier he may transport herIn some dark fort, or under ground.Oh, ullagoane, &c.148 THE POPULAR SONGS OF Ireland 7 D.For tis there s the cave where no daylight enters,But bats and badgers are for ever bred;Being moss d by nature , that makes it sweeterThan a coach and six, or a feather bed.Tis there s the lake that is stored with perches,And comely eels in the verdant mud ;Besides the leeches, and the groves of beeches,All standing in order for to guard the flood.Oh, ullagoane, &c.Tis there s the kitchen hangs many a flitch in,With the maids a stitching upon the stair ;The bread and fiske , the beer and whisky,Would make you frisky if you were there.Tis there you d see Peg Murphy s daughterA washing praties forefeet the door,With Roger Clear, and Father Healy,All blood relations to my Lord Donoughmore.Oh, ullagoane, &c.There s statues gracing this noble place in,All heathen goddesses so fair,Bold Neptune, Plutarch, and Nicodemus,All standing naked in the open air.*Alas! these statues were knocked down, by the magical touch ofthe auctioneer s hammer, to Sir Thomas Deane,Who bought the castle, furniture, and fixtures, O !And took off in a cartTwas enough to break one s heart)All the statues made of lead, and the pictures, O !"Vide " Reliques of Father Prout," i. 140.Q! BLARNEY CASTLE, MY DARLING. 149So now to finish this brave narration,Which my poor gen could not entwine ;But were I Homer, or Nebuchadnezzar,Tis in every feature I would make it shine.Oh, ullagoane, &c.O ! BLARNEY CASTLE, MY DARLING,Originally appeared in the "Cork Southern Reporter"newspaper, about April 1827, where it is entitled, " AnOld Ballad, giving a full and true Account of the Stormingand Taking of Blarney Castle by Oliver Cromwell ; togetherwith some Particulars not generally known."The Editor has no doubt that this song, and that onSt. Patrick s arrival, explanatory of the origin of the wordPunch, come from the same pen. " O ! Blarney Castle,my Darling," has been as unceremoniously appropriatedby Father Prout (vide " Reliques," i. 158), as, accordingto that reverend gentleman, Moore has availed himself ofsundry obscure Greek, Latin, and French lyrics.Upon the allusion made to Oliver Cromwell in thesecond and sixth verses, it is necessary to remark that,according to the popular belief of the Irish peasant,Cromwell was endowed with supernatural powers ; andthat the fraternity of Freemasons, which was said to befounded by him, were supposed, from the secrecy andceremonies observed by them, to be dabblers in the blackart. Among the pieces of magical skill that Cromwell isasserted to have acquired, was the knowledge of a powder150 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.for throwing balls from cannon without making any report; and hence termed " dumb-powder," in distinctionto gunpowder.It is also traditionally asserted, that a spell, of whichCromwell was master, could make his opponents becomepowerless as statues; or, in the words of the songThough the eyes of the people stood open, they found themselves allfast asleep."In a curious French work, entitled " L Ordre desFrancs-masons Trahi," printed at Amsterdam in 1745, itis stated that " Cromwell was the first who gave the nameof the order of Freemasons. Willing to reform mankind,and exterminate princes and kings, he proposed tohis party the re-establishment of the Temple of Solomon."Whether this account be true or false, the coincidencebetween it and the tradition current in Ireland is remarkable.The name of Cromwell, although associated both in songand story with the taking of Blarney Castle, is obviouslyused for that of his partisan, Lord Broghill (afterwards theEarl of Orrery). Cromwell, if indeed he ever was at Blarney,could only have paid it a short and peaceable visit. Inthe early part of the year 1646, Lord Broghill became masterof this castle, and it was held by the Parliamentary partyfrom that period to the termination of the Commonwealthwar. The published letter from Lord Broghill to Lenthall,the Speaker, giving an account of his lordship s victory overLord Muskerry and the Irish forces, at Knocknaclashy,on the 26th July, 1651, which was followed by the surrenderof Limerick to Ireton, is prefaced by a communicate!BLARNEY CASTLE, MY DARLING. 151tion, dated " Blarney, 1st August," which states, thatTomorrow the Lord Broghill goeth hence into the fieldto hinder the Irish from gathering in a body again."Tune " 0, hold your Tongue, dear Sally!"O ! Blarney Castle, my darling, you re nothing at all butcold stone !With a small little taste of old ivy, that up your side ha*grown.Och, it s you that was once strong and ancient, and youkept all the Sassenachs down :And you sheltered the Lord of Clancarty, who then livedin Dublin town.*Bad cess to that robber, old Cromwell, and to all hislong battering train,Who rolled over here like a porpoise, in two or threehookers from Spain ISpecimen of Father Prompt s version :! Blarney Castle, my darling,Sure you re nothing at all but a stone,Wrapt in ivy, a nest for all varmint,Since the mild Lord Clancarty is gone.Och ! tis you that was once strong and ancient,And ye kept all the Sassenachs down,While fighting them battles, that aunt yetForgotten by martial renown."t A common malediction in Ireland, originally importing " heavytaxation."A description of fishing or pilot boat peculiar to the south-westcoast of Ireland.152 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.And because that he was a Freemason, he mounted abattering-ram,And he loaded it up of dumb-powder, which in at itsmouth he did cram.It was now the poor boys of the Castle looked over thebattlement wall,And they there saw that ruffian, old Cromwell, a-feedingon powder and ball ;And the fellow that married his daughter, with a great biggrape-shot in his jaw,Twas bold I-ER-TON they called him, and he was hisbrother-in-law.So they fired the bullet like thunder, and it flew throughthe air like a snake ;And they hit the high walls of the Castle, which, like ayoung curlew, did shake ;While the Irish had nothing to fire, but their bows andtheir arrows " the sowlsf"Poor tools for shooting the Sassenachs,* though mightygood for wild fowls.Now one of the boys in the Castle, he took up a Sassenachs shot,And he covered it up in turf ashes, and he watched it tillit was red-hot.Then he carried it up in his fingers, and he threw it rightover the wall ;He d have burned their tents all to tinder, if on them ithappened to fall.Saxons.G! BLARNEY CASTLE, MY DARLING. 153The old castle, it trembled all over, as you d see a horse doin July,When just near the tail in his crupper, he s teased by apestering fly.Black Cromwell, he made a dark signal, for in the blackart he was deep ;So, though the eyes in the people stood open, they foundthemselves all fast asleep.With his jack-boots he stepped on the water, and hemarched right over the lake ;And his soldiers they all followed after, as dry as a duckor a drake ;And he gave Squire Jeffreys the castle, and the loch andthe rock close, they say ;Who both died there, and lived there in quiet, as hisancestors do to this day.*Father Prout s version runs thus :Then the gates he burned down to a cinder,And the roof he demolished likewise ;O ! the rafters, they flamed out like tinder,And the building flared up to the skies.And he gave the estate to the Jesters,With the dairy, the cows, and the hay;And they lived there in clover, like heifers,As their ancestors do to this day."B 2154 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.THE VICTORIOUS Corners OF CARRIGALINE ANDKILMONEY.Hurling, or goal, a favourite Irish game, which hasbeen called by Mr. Arthur Young " the cricket of savages,"resembles the Scotch game of golf; but the ball is muchlarger, being in general four inches in diameter ; the instrumentsused are larger also, and not turned angularlyat the bottom, but curved.The number of goalers may be twenty, or even ahundred, or more. It is usually played in a large levelfield, by two parties of nearly balanced powers, either asto number or dexterity; and the object of each is to strikethe ball over one of two opposite hedges, assigned respectivelybefore the game begins. JBdire comartais, signifies,according to an expression quite Irish, * two sides of acountry (that is, a certain number of the youth of each),who meet to goal against one another, generally on aSunday, or holiday, after prayers. On these occasions,instead of the hedges of a field, two conspicuous landmarks(a road, and a wood, for instance) are assigned,and the game is contested in the space between them, witha heat and vigour which often lead to a serious and bloodyconflict, especially if one of those clannish feuds, so prevalentamong the peasantry of Ireland, should exist betweenthe opposing parties : the hurley, or hurled, being aneffective and desperate weapon. The game derives oneof its names from the instrument employed; the other,goal, is evidently taken from the boundary, or winning-theVICTORIOUS Gales, &C. 155mark, which must be passed by the ball before the gamecan be won."Goal is played in Ireland " with intense zeal, byparish against parish, barony against barony, countyagainst county, and even province against province."Mr. Wakefield states it as his opinion, " that the vigourand activity of the peasantry in the South are, in a greatmeasure, to be ascribed to their attachment to this play,which, by the exercise it affords, strengthens the wholeframe, and contributes to health. Children," he says,as soon as they are able to follow each other, run about,in bands of a dozen, or more, with balls and hurls, eagerlycontending for victory." General Vallancey has illustratedan essay on the language, manners, and customs of anAnglo-norman colony, settled in the baronies of Forth andBarge, in the county of Wexford, in the twelfth century,by " an old song, in the language of these baronies, whichhas been handed down, by tradition, from the arrival ofthe colony in Ireland." The subject of this song is " thegame at ball, called camden or hurley ; the scene, thecommons in the barony of Forth; the time, a churchholiday. In this curious lyric, Walter relates how hisson Thomas lost the game, by aiming a strong blow atthe ball, and missing it, broke his bat against anemmet-hill."The following song commemorates a goal ing-match-,which, it appears, was played in Cope s Field, on thebank of the River Onnabuoy, by a party of nineteen ortwenty, whose names are given, belonging to a small districtof the barony of Kirricurihy, of which Carrigaline isthe principal village, against (it is presumed) an equal156 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.number from the neighbouring baronies of Barrymoreand Muskerry, in the county of Cork.The name of Mr. Conner, in the seventh verse, andthe mention ofBallybricken s rover, the leader of them all,"in the last verse, induced the Editor to apply to Mr. Crawfordof Cork for information respecting this gosling-match,as he remembered to have had the pleasure of meeting at hishouse Miss Conner of Ballybricken. Mr. Crawford, in hisvery kind reply to so trivial an inquiry, says, " I have beenby no means idle in the investigation of the matter, and onlyregret that my information is confined, after all, to thefollowing paragraph of a note from Miss Conner, sister tothe hero of the ballad. * Gosling-matches have been alwaysfrequent in this country, and William has been umpire,and sometimes goaler, in many. The famed contests ofOnnabuoy occurred in December 1828, and the secondin April 1829. Mr. William Conner, whom you probablyknow," adds Mr. Crawford, " is a lieutenant in the navy,and was on board the Bellerophon when Bonaparte surrenderedto Captain Maitland. He is brother to DanielConner of Ballybricken ; which era in his history was themost glorious, it is for you to decide."The song is given from a manuscript copy. An inferiorversion is in the Editor s possession, printed on a broadside.The phrase of " picked the well-sewed leather,"which occurs in the sixth verse, may be explained asstruck forcibly the well-sewed leather ball." " Puckthe ball," and " now for the goat s puck," are commongoaling expressions, the former meaning strike, the latter,THE VICTORIOUS Corners, &C. 157butt the ball. The Irish word boc, or poc, pronouncedpuck, signifies a forcible blow, and also a goat, fromthat animal butting, or striking forcibly with the head.After this explanation, it will not be difficult to understandthe compound word puck-fist, used by old Englishwriters, as a heavy-handed, coarse, fighting fellow ; andwhich Dr. Nares labours so unsatisfactorily to explain, inhis glossary, as a fungus, or upstart. " Ariosto a puck-fistto me." Ford s Loves Sacrifice, ii. 1 ; see, also, Beaumontand Fletcher s Oust of Country, i. 2.Notwithstanding all that commentators have written onthe subject, it would not be difficult to identify with thePuck of Shakspere, the Irish goblin, Shook, or Phuca.Thus, in the " Sad Shepherd" of Ben Jonson, this spiritappears, under the title of " Puck-hairy;" and, in theninth book of Golding s translation of " Ovid s Metamorphoses,"edit. 1587, we findAnd the countries where Chimaera, that same Poole,Hath goatish bodie," &c.Air " Fourteen gal ma three."There s joy throughout the nation, and great congratulation,With wont rous acclamation, from the Liffey to theLee.Without exaggeration, our goalers take their station,For the highest approbation they have won the victory ;Twas in no combination, or field association,But in rural relaxation, on the plains of Onnabuoy.*Pronounced Onnabouie ; and sometimes called Annabuoy, andAvonbuee. It signifies the yellow water, and its mouth forms a creekon the west side of Cork harbour, named Cross Haven.158 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.There was Finn,* the chief of heroes, who high the ball inplay rose,Though long he s gone to repose, and will never playagain.There s Don and Conf the peerless, and Barry Oge J thefearless,Since whom we are left cheerless, could they have seenour men ;They d join the acclamation, and add their approbation,With my congratulation to the boys of Onnabuoy.Were Homer the narrator, and Virgil a spectator,No praises could be greater, than were due this gallantcorps ;For never did the Grecians, nor the Romans called Patricians,Exceed the stout Milesian that defeated Barrymore.Twas in no combination, or field association,But in rural relaxation, on the plains of Onnabuoy.All men will long remember the seventeenth of December,For good and bad each member, came from far andnear to see ;Finn MacCumhal, the Fingal of Macpherson s Ossian.t Don, in Irish, as in Spanish, means a lord or chief, and was ageneral complimentary name for any leader who was pre-eminentlyStyled Don, or the lord. Who the above Don or Con may have been,the Editor cannot determine.The tract called Kinalea, which lies between Kerricurihy andthe Brandon River, nearly due south of the city of Cork, " was," saysSmith, " named Insovenagh, and was formerly granted to RobertFitzmartin, but it belonged to Barry Oge until the Rebellion of 1641."THE VICTORIOUS Corners, &C. 159Not a cabin had a soul in, all flocked to view the goaling,And unremitted bowling of Kilmouey s chivalry ;Undaunted sons of Beaver,* no hearts were ever braverUpon your bounding wave, or the plains of Onnabuoy.Five times our men were turned, by rivals whom theyspurned,With shame their cheeks they burned, but the ball wasin the field ;Then, with redoubled spirit, they shewed the strength andmeritThat they did all inherit, and made their foes to yield ;While Barrymore they doubted, and Muskerry theyshouted,When both of them were routed on the plains ofOnnabuoy.The south by meanings bounded, at first our boysconfounded,Upon the wind they rounded, then tried their utmostspeed ;An old name for Carrigaline, and still appended to it as an aliasin law writings.t Certain boundaries within which the game is to be decided arelaid down at goal ; these depend, of course, upon the number ofplayers, and the character of the country. A stream, a road, a wall,or any other obvious line of demarkation, is sufficient ; but when suchis not readily found, sticks called " meanings," or " shearing twigs,"are placed in the ground. It is the Saxon word Quaere, which is usedby SpenserAnd Hygate made the mere thereof by west" Fairy Queen, III. ix. 46.a proof, among many others which may be adduced, that several obsoleteEnglish words are still current in Ireland.160 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Against both hill arid weather, they all bore on together,And picked the well-sewed leather ; twas wonderful,indeed :The north was then contested, on that their last hoperested,But soon they were down-crested on the plains ofOnnabuoy.Two baronies of boasters, one district of our coasters,*Have made look foolish toasters, and their former fameundone ;For lost is now the honour of their leader, Mister Conner,Whose mother has upon her all my pity for her son.In Cope s field ends the story of their goaling and hisglory,And he ll travel far before he will play by the Annabuoy.Success to young O Daly, who led us on so gaily,He is our hero really shout for Kilmoney s pride !And here is for his brothers, and three times for all others,True sons of worthy mothers, who were upon our side ;Their names are here recorded, may they be all rewarded,For never king nor lord did so much for the Onnabuoy.First I ll extol stout Saunders, and after him brave Landers,They behaved like great commanders ; and next I llaggrandiseO Toomey and Mulcahy ; two Parties, and Bat Fahey ;O Callaghan of llahey, and also Thomas Wise ;That is, dwellers on the coast. A large portion of the barony ofKerricurihy is bounded by the sea.THE CARRIGALINE Corners DEFEATED. 161O Finn, with head like carrot, De Cogans, Jack andGarret ;And Jordan, Welsh, and Barrett, on the plains ofOnnabuoy.Now Shanbally give over Colore lie up in clover,And Ballybricken s rover, the leader of them all ;Loughbeg and Barnacle, Ring and Amount by O DalyWere beaten till quite mealy, and to tatters like the ball ;Here s to our boys so clever, their equals they saw never,Success to them for ever on the plains of Onnabuoy.THE CARRIGALINE Corners DEFEATED.A reply to the preceding song, on the defeat of theaforesaid " Victorious goalers of Carrigaline and Kil-money,"by a party belonging to Tracton, a neighbouringdistrict ; which match appears to have been played in theensuing spring. The rival poets, although they havecarefully noticed the month and even the precise daywhen these memorable struggles took place, are alikesilent as to the year, no doubt presuming that the date ofsuch important occurrences could not be forgotten.The single rhyme used throughout the entire songcannot escape the reader s notice. It is evident from thelast line, which in itself contains four rhymes similar tothe one used throughout the song, that this monotonousjingle, which, to the Editor s ear, does not sound offensively,has been an object of considerable ambition to the author,162 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.and was apparently done with no other view than to .exhibita command over the rhyme.The song is copied from a broadside without the nameof the printer, procured by the Editor at Cork in 1829.A much inferior version is also in his possession on abroadside " printed by Haly, Hanover Street, Cork,"embellished with a rude woodcut of a horseman leaping athree-barred gate, and entitled " The New Joy of Tracton,by a Mountain Poet."Air " The Roving Journeyman."For ages hold on record Kinalea with ecstasyThe triumph of our goalers at the top of Boherbuoy ;By utterly defeating with the greatest braveryThe goalers that were famed upon the banks of Onnabuoy.On the second day of April, to will conformably,The supple Tracton goalers put an end to all their spree ;With packing round the ball did bound, and such activityWas never seen upon the green fields of the Onnabuoy.As heroes gay, were they each day, sung through thewhole country ;And on* the public papers named, out of curiosity" In the papers," is the common expression in England ; " onthe papers," in Ireland. " Any news on the paper?" is obviouslymore correct phraseology than " in the paper."t That is, as a remarkable matter ; anglice, curiosity. " How thatfellow murders the king s English !" remarked a brother barrister toCurran upon bearing an illiterate witness pronounce this word asabove written, and as it is vulgarly pronounced in Ireland. " I cannotagree with you," said Curran, " knocking an J out is neither murdernor manslaughter."THE CARRIGALINE Gales DEFEATED. 163Say, will Kilmoney, my boys, now own ye, since ended isyour glee ;For you were beaten,* early and late on the plains ofOniiabuoy ?Wherever self-persuasion is of gaining the victory,Then fortune never favours it, in high or low degree ;Ballygarven, Douglas, Ring, and Amount, had to seeHow Kinalea could clear the way on the plains ofOnnabuoy.A fortune-teller came by chance and said repeatedlyThat Tracton s skill, on plain or hill, was as eight tothirty-three ;But in spite of all his fairy call and his necromancers,He was too bold in what he told on the plains ofOnnabuoy.And of a leader boasting, they gave publicityTo a gentleman of high renown, living independentlyA star of honour, the great O Connor, shining in dignityAt Ballybricken, no glory seeking from goaling by theOnnabuoy.A gentleman descended from kings of high degree,A honey-scented bosom, and a sprig of purity ;A stately tree that day was he, the pride of his country ;Long may he flourish, and Erin nourish such saplings bythe Onnabuoy.Pronounced in Ireland, batten.164 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.He cleared the field, and justice shewed to all impartially ;And there he stood, eye-witness good, to decide the victory.Long may his line resplendent shine to all conspicuously ;And long a creek in, stand Ballybricken, by the plains ofOnnabuoy.I could not name the half who came that day the gameto see,From far and near, when they did hear that such a sightwould be ;And never gave spectators brave their shouts more lustily,Than when the pride, that did deride, was vanquished bythe Onnabuoy.The poet small, who challenged all, from the Liffey to theLee,His honest trade I ll not upbraid, but tis not prophecy ;The empty praise, w r which he did raise, is now bitter irony ;And his vain song, is sorrow strong to the boys ofOnnabuoy.The boasting ass, I let him pass, nor strive in rivalry ;Dull and sonorous his verse, and small his poetry.I want no fame from whence I came, nor claim (deservedly)The title rare, of poet fair, for the Muse of Carbury.Your ear now lend, to make an end, without vaunt orvanity ;As Autumn gives the quivering leaves to earth devotedly,So Kinalea hath won the day, all men of decencyWith me will see, and will agree on the plains of Onnabuoy.CORK S OWN TOWN. 165CORK S OWN TOWN.This song originally appeared in the " Cork SouthernReporter" newspaper, in March 1825, where it is " datedfrom the vane of St. Finbarr s steeple, this day of thevernal equinox, xxi. Mar."The Editor has no doubt that the authorship may becorrectly assigned to the writer of " O ! Blarney Castle,my darling," (see p. 149), and the subsequent song entitledDarling Neddeen." Speaking of " The Groves ofBlarney," and other rural lyrics, a learned critic on theMunster Melodies" observes, when introducing the followingsong to notice, " But while the country is thuscelebrated, the beauties of the city do not remain unsung.Cork has had many laureates, but the last describer ofits localities best deserves to wear the bays."These localities, however, require some explanatoryremarks. Daunt s Square, from whence the lyrist takes,as sailors say, his departure, will be presently noticed.He next arrives at " the region of frolic and spree,"Fishamble Lane, which, says Mr. Kindle, " no longerpossesses a shambles ; and has lost its once high-soundingname of Ireland s Rising Liberty Street, conferred onit in the days of the Volunteers ; but the stone with thatname, full of recollections, still retains its place on thefront wall of one of the houses."The presiding goddess of this interesting spot,Where salmon, drisheens, and beefsteaks, are cooked best,"has been thus addressed by the Muse of Toleken :166 THE POPULAR SONGS OP IRELAND.The sun had gone down, and the lofty dark mountainsWere hid from the view by a smart shower of rain,When 1. wandered in search of a few of those round thingsCalled sausages, made up in Fishamhle Lane.There as I walked on amidst broiling and frying,I spied out a fair one my heart felt a pain ;I sat myself down, for I thought I was dyingFor Judy MacCarthy of Fishamble Lane.I gazed on the fair one one eye was a swivel,Her nose it was smutty, her hands not too clean ;She told me that she was then broiling a devil,For which they are famous in Fishamble Lane.You re broiling a devil, says I, Judy Carty 1The devil may broil you and boil you again ;For broils 1 detest, and this moment I part ye,Miss Judy MacCarthy of Fishamble Lane ! "Of Blackpool, mentioned in the third verse, a particularaccount will be found in the introductory remarksto a subsequent song. Mallow Lane " is at once theprincipal passage and main trunk" of the northern part ofCork. " At the west side of Mallow Lane, and on stillhigher ground, is an extremely populous suburb, dividedinto numerous alleys and lanes. Its southern boundary isBlarney Lane" (to the description of which the secondverse of the following song is devoted), " a long, oldstreet, formerly the principal western entrance to the city."Returning, in the fourth verse, to the " one-sidedBuckingham Square," and to Daunt s Bridge or Square,which is neither a bridge nor a square, the Editoragain ventures to quote Mr. Kindle in illustration :Of squares, Cork possesses none, although the word,strangely enough, occurs as a name to several places;CORK S OWN TOWN. 167thus we have Buckingham Square, Knapp s Square,Jones s Square, and Daunt s Square, to which a strangerwould find it rather difficult to apply the term." In thelatter square is the domicile of that ingenious citizen,renowned in lathering metres;One Robert Olden,Inventor sole of Eukeirogeneion,Soother of beards."Of the " narrow broad lane that leads up to the dyke,"the Editor can speak from actual measurement. It variesin breadth from eight to ten and eleven feet, and was,until recently, the popular thoroughfare between the eastand west parts of the city of Cork.The Dyke, mentioned in the fifth verse, is, accordingto Mr. Kindle, " a delightful walk about a mile in length,and shaded with ranges of noble elm at either side, forminga long vista in one straight line from beginning to end."It was made in 1720, and about thirty years ago protectedby an iron gate, the erection of which was celebrated,and the inscription recorded in an ode attributed to Mr.John Lander:Here future shoemakers shall read on Sunday,When our good mayor shall be in heaven,As bird-catching they re going. John DAY,ESQUIRE, MAYOR, 1807. "Blair s Castle that trembles above in the breeze,"Mr. Kindle calls " a modern absurdity, consisting of acentre tower and side wings, finished in the Dutch fashion ;but it possesses the advantage of a beautiful situation,168 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.and indeed, like the rest of Sunday s well, of a fine prospect,"which locality is alluded to as " sweet Sunday swell" in the seventh verse.Dr. Blair was a man of skill,He built his castle on a hill ;He set four statues in the front,And every morning went to hunt.From his castle you may seeUp and down along the Lee."So says an old song. This Dr. Blair was a Scotch physician,who settled in Cork about the middle of the lastcentury ; and, in 1775, published a freethinking volume,entitled, " Thoughts on Nature and Religion ;" the ableanswer to which first brought the famous Father O Learyinto public notice.Glanmire and Blackrock, the roads leading to whichare referred to in the sixth verse, are both agreeableoutlets of Cork ; The Boreen Manah is a minor road ofthe latter environ, which, literally translated, means " thelittle road to the fields." The steeple, termed " pepperbox," in the seventh and last verse, will be particularlynoticed hereafter as the edifice from whenceThe bells of ShandonSound so grand onThe lovely waters of the river Lee."Regarding it in a general point of view," Mr. Kindle,with great truth, asserts that " Cork may be justly calleda fine city. Strangers have, without exception, describedit as such ; but the natives, with a very pardonable vanity,CORK S OWN TOWN. 169borrowing the words of an old song, speak of it as thebeautiful city; and looking at it in conjunction with itsunrivalled outlets, the claim may, we think, be safely conceded."Air " They may rail at this life"They may rail at the city where first I was born,But it s there they ve the whisky, and butter, and pork ;And a neat little spot for to walk in each mornThey call it Daunt s Square, and the City is Cork.The square has two sides why, one east and one west,And convenient s the region of frolic and spree,Where salmon, drisheens,* and beefsteaks are cooked best :Och ! Fishamble s the Eden for you, love, and me !If you want to behold the sublime and the beauteous,Put your toes in your brogues, and see sweet BlarneyLane,Where the parents and chiltern are comely and duteous,And dry lodging both rider and beast entertain ;In the cellars below dine the slashing young fellowsThat come with the butter from distant Tralee ;While the landlady, chalking the score on the bellows,Sings, Cork is an Eden for you, love, and me IBlackpool is another sweet place in that city,Where pigs, twigs, and weavers, they all grow together,With its smart little tan-yards och, more is the pityTo strip the poor beasts to convert them to leather !Sheep s puddings.I170 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Further up to the east is a place great and famous,It is called Mallow Lane antiquaries agreeThat it holds the Sheebeen, which once held King Shamus:*Och ! Cork is an Eden for you, love, and me !Then go back to Daunt s Bridge, though you ll think it isquareThat you can t see the bridge f faix you ne er saw thelikeOf that bridge, nor of one-sided Buckingham Square ;Nor the narrow Broad Lane that leads up to the Dyke,Where, turning his wheel, sits that saint, " Holy Joe," JAnd umbrellas are made of the best quality,And young virgins sing " Colleen cas croothin a TWO;"And Cork is an Eden for you, love, and me !When you get to the Dyke, there s a beautiful prospectOf a long gravel walk between two rows of trees ;On one side, with a beautiful southern aspect,Is Blair s castle, that trembles above in the breeze.Far off in the west lie the Lakes of Killarney,Which some hills intervening prevent you to see ;But you smell the sweet wind from the wild groves ofBlarneyOch ! Cork is the Eden for you, love, and me ITake the road to Glanmire, the road to Blackrock, orThe sweet Boreen Manah, to charm your fair eyes ;James Itt" There is no bridge, but an archway under the street."\ " A noted knife and oath grinder, now deceased."The pretty girl milking her cow."CORK S OWN TOWN. 171If you do what is wise, take a dram of Tom Walker,Or if you re a Walker, toss off Billy Wise.*I give you my word that they re both lads of spirit ;But if a " raw chaw"f with your gums don t agree,Beamish, Crawford, and Lane, brew some porter of merit,Though poteen is the nectar for you, love, and me !Oh ! long life to you, Cork, with your pepper-box steeple,Your girls, your whisky, your curds and sweet whey ;Your hill of Glanmire, and the shops where the peopleGet decent new clothes down beyond the Coal Quay.Long life to sweet Fair Lane, its pipers and jigs,And to sweet Sunday s well, and the banks of the Lee ;Likewise our court-houses); where judges in wigsSing, Cork is the Eden for you, love, and me !Mr. Walker, whose " Bounce upon Bess" has been alreadynoticed at p. 86, and Mr. Wise, were two famous distillers in Cork ;their memories are enshrined in the following epigram :You people of Cork that are talkers,I beg you will shew me the rules,Why Walker won t let you be walkers,And Wise strives to make you all fools."t What Mr. Daniel MacCarthy would have termed " naked truth."Vide p. 99.| The rapid improvement in Cork is in nothing more evident thanits architecture. So recently as 1806, when the old County CourtHouse was built, an English architect was imported to design andexecute it. " They have managed these things differently in ourdays," observes Mr. Kindle; " the names of Deane, Pain, Hill,Cottrell, &c. are now connected with some of our public edifices, towhich the citizen may point without shame."172 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.CORK S Good-humoured FACES.A specimen of the ingenious manner in which a wittymanufacturer in Cork of an excellent liquid shaving-soap,and other articles, that really require no puffing, contrivesto attract attention to his inventions. Mr. Olden,who has been already noticed in the introductory observationsto the preceding song, p. 167, modestly remarksin one of his poetical effusions, when commending thesuperiority of his goods,I hope that you not such an ass areTo send for shaving-soap as far as Naples,Or to imagine oil brought from Macassar,From aged pates each hair that s turning gray pulls."And in another he thus eulogises the merits of his Essencede Savon, which bears what country gentlemen call " aconfounded hard Greek name," and which may be classedwith those words that Moore has recommendedShould only be said on holidays,When one has nothing else to do."EYKEIPOFENEION,When er 1 lay eye on,I firmly rely onA capital shave ;And as for the water,Tis not a pin matterFrom where derivaturThe well or the wave."Cork has sometimes been styled " the Irish Athens,"CORK S Good-humoured FACES. 173possibly from the fame of Olden s verses, and his andFather Prout s partiality for Greek.It is stated that Mr. Olden s very amusing and mostlearned poems have been collected and printed for privatecirculation, with the title of " Soap Bubbles." All hisverses which have come under the Editor s observation,display an extraordinary command of rhyme, which issported with in actual wantonness. As Messrs. Day andMartin, and Mr. Warren, of blacking notoriety, are believedrespectively to have retained a poet on their establishment,so it has been shrewdly conjectured that Mr. Oldencannot make good his claim to the authorship of all thesongs put forth by him, and that he has even secured theservices of more poets than one ; among whom the Rev.Mr. Chester and Mr. John Lander are suspected to bethemost industrious.Tune " Ballinafad."For good-humoured faces, Cork once beat all placesHow altered the case is, more a three marine ! *By politics now are contracted each brow, orEvery nose turned up sour, like a dog with a bone.Then Olden, beholdingYoung and old in a scolding-matchjoining, the whole din resolved to assuage :In he pops, the state propsWith soap drops, fast as hopsLathering chops, ill-blood stops, and all dire party rage.An Irish phrase, expressive of deep regret.174 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Thus Peter of Russia, with a razor and brush, heOnce made a great fuss a his subjects to shave ;He smoothed their manners, like hides scraped by tanners,Wherever his banners triumphant did wave.Then at home let us try, onEach phiz, low and high on,The Eukeirogeneion of Olden so rare ;Catholic or Brunswick,By this liquor will quickerCease to bicker, though thicker than pigs in a fair.An old witch seized Asmodeus, a devil most odious,And did for his abode use a bottle so frail ;But Olympus sweet vapours, condensed for chin-scrapers,Olden bottles, like capers, or smart Burton ale.Let this drug aid your ruggedOld mug, it so smug itWill look, the maids hug it, and tug it both ways ;Then you sooty muzzled brute, ay,In truth, I will mute eyeWith wonder your beauty, when you shave but three days.THE COURT OF CONSCIENCE IN CORKIs copied from a newspaper-cutting in Miss Elliot sScrap-book, entitled " Reflections occasioned by theCourt of Conscience of Cork being held over the Meat-market."THE GROVES OF BLACKPOOL. 175How various are the roads we mortals takeTo happiness, this building a strong test is :Some dive below, to purchase a beefsteak ;Others ascend, to stake their all for justice.In either region, with an equal handThe scales are held, and like material put on ;For when the blood is drained, you understandThe conscience of a suitor s dead as mutton.Thus, twixt the market-scales and those of law,A strong similitude exists, quite pat inPoint ; for whoe er did informations draw,But he for make-weight slipt a bit of fat in ?Above, below, the inmates live by broils ;Their wares are equally plunged in hot water,Or in sad pickle, after all their toils,And destined finally to go to pot are.Below hangs many a slaughtered fatted calf;Above, their skins are pressed by lips of sinners ;By which the flesh (esteemed the better half)Becomes mock-turtle for their worships dinners.THE GROVES OF BLACKPOOL.(Descriptive of the return of the City of Cork Militia.)Blackpool is an extensive suburb on the northern sideof Cork, which has been particularly noticed in the song176 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.at p. 169. John Wesley, in his " Journal," describes it in1765 as a place " famous, from time immemorial, for allmanner of wickedness for riot in particular." Blackpoolwas, in short, as its name denotes, a sink of iniquity, whichthe Muse of Dr. De la Cour has thus depicted :Oh, the very first day that I came to Blackpool,I stared, and I gaped, and I gazed like a fool ;For the butchers and bull-dogs were beating a bull,On the very first day that I came to Blackpool.There were tanners, and skinners, and dressers of leather,And carriers, and combers, and dyers together :Oh, the devil himself never saw such a schoolAs I did, the first day that I came to Blackpool."Cork, like London, Paris, and other great cities,"says Mr. Kindle, " possesses a patois nearly peculiar toitself; it will be found most prevalent, and least adulterated,in Ballythomas (a locality in the immediatevicinity of Blackpool). The vernacular of this regionmay be regarded as the ancient cockneyism of the mixedrace who held the old city Danes, English, and Irish.It is a jargon, whose principal characteristic appears in thepronunciation of th, as exemplified in dis t dat, den, dethis, that, then, they : and in the dovetailing of words, ashum our wish, for * come out of this. There is ageneral attenuation or contraction in the articulation ofwords, accompanied by a hissing and jarring wherevers and r occur, which it would be difficult to convey anysufficient idea of. * De Groves of de Pool, is a verypopular exemplar of the poetry of this dialect; and Mr.Daniel Casey may be regarded as its living laureat.As to the population, they are a hardy, hard working,improvident, and vivacious race; attached to oldTHE GROVES OF BLACKPOOL, 177usages and habits of thinking and acting. Here have everbeen found the readiest and gayest actors in the mumseries of the < May-day mummers. None ever equalledthem in the hearty ceremony of whipping out the herringon Easter Saturday, or throwing bran on the new mayor.What other part of the city has ever furnished so jollyor uproarious a train of males or females, to sustain thehumours of the Irish carnival the * going to Skellig?The groups of * Wren Boys here muster strongest onSt. Stephen s morning ; and the mimic warfare of abatter between the clans of rival streets, is nowhere elsewaged with more spirit or earnestness. But the march ofintellect is even here visible ; the mummers, and batterkings, and bran throwing are, of recent years, become moreinfrequent ; and the day may not be far distant when thememory of these things shall pass away."The watercourse mentioned in the sixth verse, addsMr. Kindle, in his interesting notices of Cork, is " thebusiest outlet of the city ; the principal seat of its tanneriesand distilleries. At the end of this well-frequented waythe water is open ; a police station adjoins, and an antiquenarrow bridge, impassable for horse or carriage, bearingthe odd name of Tanto Bridge, leads over into the onceumbrageous haunt of the Muses the birth-place of manya militia legioneer the classical Groves ode Pool!But the Blackpool is now treeless ; its long rows of elmsand poplars have been cut down ; its manufactures haveceased ; its looms are silent ; and its once numerous andrespectable inhabitants have given place to a poor andill-employed population. The glory of the pool is nomore."i2178 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.De groves of de Pool," which was written by " honestDick Millikin " (see p. 89), was intended to depict thereturn, or, as he humorously calls it, the " advance backagain," of the " gallant Cork city militia," after therebellion of 1798, and their reception in " de groves,"which had sheltered the infancy of " dose Irish heroes."It is given from the recitation of Mr. John Lander, bywhom the last verse is said to have been added.Now de war, dearest Nancy, is ended,And de peace is come over from France ;So our gallant Cork city militiaBack again to head-quarters advance.No longer a beating dose rebels,We ll now be a beating de bull,And taste dose genteel recreationsDat are found in de groves of de Pool.Ri fol bidder rol bidder rol, &c.Den out came our loving relations,To see whether we d be living or no ;Besides all de jolly ould neighbours,Around us who flocked in a row.De noggins of sweet Tommy Walker *We lifted according to^rule,And wetted our necks wit de nativeDat is brewed in de groves of de Pool.Ri fol, &c.Alias, " Bounce upon Bess." Vide pp. 86, 171. A nogginis the fourth of a pint. Cocoon ce, a " quartern."THE GROVES OF BLACKPOOL. 179When de regiment marched into de Commons,Twould do your heart good for to see ;You d think not a man nor a womanWas left in Cork s famous city.De boys dey came flocking around us,Not a hat nor wig* stuck to a skull,To compliment dose Irish heroesReturned to de groves of de Pool.Ri fol, &c.ovid our band out before us in order,We played coming into de town ;We up d wit de ould " Boyne water,"Not forgetting, too, " Copies lie down."fBekase you might read in the newsesTwas we made dose rebels so cool,Who all thought, like Turks or like Jewses,To murther de boys of de Pool.Ri fol, &c.In " Castle Racket," a note upon the Irish practice of using thewig instead of a sweeping brush states, " that these men (labourersof the old school) are not in any danger of catching cold by taking offtheir wigs occasionally ; because they usually have fine crops growingunder their wigs. The wigs are often yellow, and the hair whichappears from beneath them black ; the wigs are usually too small, andare raised up by the hair beneath, or by the ears of the wearers."t Two loyal tunes. The Cork militia were especially Orange.They suffered severely in the rebellion of 1798, particularly at Oulart,where they lost 115 men. The officers killed in this unfortunate affairwere Major Lombard, the Honourable Captain De Courcy, LieutenantsWilliams, Ware, Barry, and Ensign Keogh.180 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Oh, sure dere s no nation in MunsterWit de groves of Blackpool can compare,Where dose heroes were all educated,And de nymphs are so comely and fair.Wit de gardens around entertaining,Wit sweet party posies so full,Dat is worn by dose comely young creatureDat walks in de groves of de Pool.Ri fol, &c.Oh ! many s de time, late and early,Dat I wished I was landed again,Where I d see de sweet watercourse flowing,Where de skinners dere glory maintain :Likewise dat divine habitation,*Where dose babies are all sent to schoolDat never had fader nor modern,But were found in de groves of de Pool.Ri fol, &c.Come all you young youths of dis nation,Come fill up a bumper all round ;Drink success to Blackpool navigation,And may it wit plenty be crowned.Here s success to the jolly hoop-boilers ;Likewise to de shuttle and de spool ;To de tanners, and worthy glue-boilers,Dat lives in de groves of de Pool.Ri fol, &c.Alias, the Foundling Hospital. Established under act of parliamentin 1735.THE COURT OF CAHIRASS. 181THE COURT OF CAHIRASS."About a mile from Groom," says the " History ofLimerick," by Fitzgerald and MacGregor (vol. i. p. 332),situated on the Main, is Cuirass House, with its finelywooded park and plantations, belonging to David Roche,Esq.* a descendant of the house of Fermoy ;" and a noteadds, " There was once a chapel of ease here belongingto the Carbery family, whose property it was. Thechaplain falling desperately in love with the daughter ofLord Carbery, and being disappointed, hanged himself inthe chapel, which soon afterwards went to decay. Thisunfortunate lover had composed a song beginning withAt the Court of Cuirass there lives a fair maidenwhich is still recollected by the country people."Another version of the tradition, which the Editorobtained from his sister, Mrs. Eyre Conte, in 1827, agreeswith the above, except in the manner of the imprudentchaplain s death, who is stated to have shot himself on atomb in the churchyard of Cuirass, when this song wasfound in his pocket ; and it is said that the marks of hisblood are still visible on the tombstone.Unluckily, however, for the romance of this story,the name of Kateyy occurs as a rhyme in the first andseventh verses, and is twice repeated in the last ; and fivemanuscript copies of the song, procured through variouschannels, though differing materially in many lines, allretain that name. It is, therefore, impossible to reconcilethis with the facts, that the only daughter of the first LordNow Sir David Roche, Bart. Map.182 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Carbery was named Anne; the only daughter of thesecond lord, Frances Anne ; and the only daughter of thethird lord, Juliana. So stands the case in Armadale sedition of " Lodge s Irish Peerage," vol. vii., versusTradition.In the Court of Cuirass there dwells a fair lady,Of beauty the paragon, and she is called Kateyy ;Her lofty descent, and her stately deportment,Prove this lovely damsel was for a king s court meant.There s many a great lord from Dublin has sought her ;But that is not strange for a nobleman s daughter :Yet if she was poor as the poorest of creatures,There s no one her rival in figure or features.On a fine summer s morning, if you saw but this maiden,By the murmuring Main, or the green fields she stray d in ;Or through groves full of song, near that bright flowingriver,You d think how imperfect the praise that I give her.In order arranged are her bright flowing tresses,The thread of the spider their fineness expresses;*And softer her cheek, that is mantled with blushes,Than the drift of the snow, or the pulp of the rushes.The verse of an Irish song, in which the poet describes the firstmeeting with his mistress, was thus translated to the Editor by Mr.Edward Penrose :Her hair was of the finest gold,Like to a spider s spinning;In her, methinks, I do beholdMy joys and woes beginning."THE COURT OF CAHIRASS. 183But her bosom of beauty, that the heart which lies under,Should have nothing of womanlike pride, is my wonder ;That the charms which all eyes daily dwell on delighted,Should seem in her own of no worth, and be slighted.When Charity calls her she never is weary,Though in secret she comes with the step of a fairy ;To the sick and the needy profuse is her bounty,And her goodness extends through the whole of the county.*I felt on my spirit a load that was weighty,In the stillness of midnight, and called upon Kateyy ;And a dull voice replied, on the ear of the sleeper,Death ! death I " in a tone that was deep, and grewdeeper.Twas an omen to me twas an omen of sadness,That told me of folly, of love, and of madness;That my fate was as dark as the sky that was o er me,And bade me despair, for no hope was before me.O, Kateyyyy, dear Kateyyyy, disdain not your lover ;From your frowns and your coldness he cannot recover :For if you but bid him his passion to smother,How fatal the day when we first met each other.The prosaic close of this verse is strangely contrasted with thestrain of poetry which pervades those immediately following ; butinequality of sentiment appears to be the chief characteristic of Irishsong in the English as well as the Irish language j in fact, the Irishstyle.184 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.THE DONERAILE LITANY.The popularity of this jingle in the south of Irelandis remarkable; and is, among many other instances,a proof of the national fondness for rhyme, and the admirationof any production which displays a commandover it, however rude or grotesque the exhibitionmay be.The Doneraile Litany consists of a series of anathemasupon that town, strung together, it appears, in consequenceof the author having there lost his watch, of Dublin manufacture; in what manner is not stated, and, possibly, it hasescaped the author s recollection, who, from the bardicpropensity exhibited in Ireland towards intoxicatingdraughts, subjects himself to the suspicion that the loss heso vigorously deplores may have occurred while he wasunder the influence of that spirit, or Irish goddess, addressedasDivine Malthaea."The occurrence, however, took place upwards of thirtyyears ago; since when, it is trusted, the morality ofDoneraile has very much improved.In 1808, Mr. Patrick O Kelly published at Dublin,Poems on the Giant s Causeway and Killarney, with otherMiscellanies," among which was introduced "the Litany forDoneraile." This volume was followed in 1812 by another,named " The Entomologist, or an Topographical Surveyof the West Parts of Ireland," and which contains severalattacks upon an unfortunate poet, who had ventured toput forth " a Defence of Doneraile," in reply to O Kelly sTHE DONERAILE LITANY. 185malediction. Ultimately, a recantation, entitled " ThePalinode," most humbly dedicated to Lady Doneraile, appearedin a volume of poems, entitled " The IonianKaleidoscope," printed by O Kelly at Cork, in 1824.Prefixed to this are " Verses addressed to the Author,"by J. J. C. (Callanan, see p. 130), and P. S. (Dr. Sharks,of Cork); of course, ironically intended, but whichMr. O Kelly seriously entertains. In the latter, the linesalluded to, but not correctly quoted, by Mr. Lockhart inhis " Life of Sir Walter Scott," occur. Speaking of thegalaxy of genius which adorned the reign of George IV.,after noticing Moore, P. S. says,Scott, Morgan, Edgeworth, Byron, prop of Greece,Fate, in thy death, shall blast the hopes of peace;O Kelly, too, of proud Iberian blood,Shall, from Castilian fountain, pour the floodOf bardic song "*The ancient glories of our native song,In him shall live, to him those bays belong."O Kelly s introduction to George IV. is thus relatedin the " Roscommon Gazette." " When his majestywas in Dublin, our countryman, the poet, PatrickO Kelly, Esq., of the county of Galway, waited on himat the Phoenix Park. His majesty, when Prince ofWales, having subscribed his name for fifty copies, thepoet took that opportunity to deliver his work. Hewas announced to the king by Sir Benjamin Bloomfield,who ordered the baronet to hand the poet fifty pounds,which Sir Benjamin accordingly did. Mr. O Kelly declinedaccepting it, declaring that he would rather see186 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.his majesty than receive the money, and requested SirBenjamin to say so, which was complied with. The kingordered him to be introduced. When admitted into theroyal presence, his majesty received him most graciously,hoped he was well, and then observed that Mr. O Kellywas lame as well as Lord Byron. And Sir Walter Scott,too, said Mr. O Kelly ; and why should not the Irishbard be similarly honoured ? forIf God one member has oppressed,He made more perfect all the rest.At which the king smiled.The Marquess of Conyngham, who was present, requestedMr. O Kelly to express himself, extempore, onLord Byron, Sir Walter Scott, and himself; to which thepoet replied, in the following impromptu :Three poets for three sister kingdoms born,One for the Rose, another for the Thorn ;One for the Shamrock, which will ne er decay,While Rose and Thorn must yearly fade away.At which the king and his court laughed heartily."O Kelly seems to have been fond of associating hisfame as a poet with that of Byron and Scott. Mr. Lockhart,in his Life of the latter, says, "I find recorded inone letter (August 1825), a very merry morning atLimerick, where, amidst the ringing of all the bells inhonour of the advent, there was ushered in a brother poet,who must needs pay his personal respects to the author ofMarion. He was a scarecrow figure, attired much inthe fashion of the strugglers by name O Kelly; and heTHE DONERAILE LITANY. 187had produced, on the spur of the occasion, this modestparody of Dryden s famous epigram:Three poets, of three different nations born,The United Kingdom in this age adorn :Byron, of England ; Scott, of Scotia s blood ;And Erin s pride, O Kelly, great and good.Sir Walter s five shillings," adds Mr. Lockhart,u were at once forthcoming ; and the bard, in order thatMiss Edgeworth might display equal generosity, pointedout, in a little volume of his works (for which, moreover,we had all to subscribe), this pregnant couplet:Scott, Morgan, Edgeworth, Byron, prop of Greece,Are characters whose fame not soon will cease. "The worthy inhabitants of Doneraile do not seem tohave taken the slightest offence at O Kelly s Litany ; onthe contrary, it has been a subject of much amusement tothem. The Editor recollects to have heard it sung, in1821, by a ballad-singer through the streets of that town,much to the amusement of his auditors, and the profit ofthe vocalist.Alas ! how dismal is my tale 1I lost my watch in Doneraile ;My Dublin watch, my chain and seal,Pilfered at once in Doneraile.May fire and brimstone never failTo fall in showers on Doneraile ;May all the leading fiends assailThe thieving town of Doneraile.188 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.As lightnings flash across the vale,So down to hell with Doneraile ;The fate of Pompey at Pharsale,Be that the curse of Doneraile.May beef or mutton, lamb or veal,Be never found in Doneraile ;But garlic soup, and scurvy kail,Be still the food for Doneraile.And forward as the creeping snail,Th industry be of Doneraile ;May Heaven a chosen curse entailOn rigid, rotten Doneraile.May sun and moon for ever failTo beam their lights in Doneraile ;May every pestilential galeBlast that cursed spot called Doneraile.May no sweet cuckoo, thrush, or quail,Be ever heard in Doneraile ;May patriots, kings, and commonweal,Despise and harass Doneraile.May every Post, Gazette, and Mail,Sad tidings bring of Doneraile ;May loudest thunders ring a peal,To blind and deafen Doneraile.May vengeance fall at head and tail,From north to south, at Doneraile ;THE DONERAILE LITANY. 189May profit light, and tardy sale,Still damp the trade of Doneraile.May Fame resound a dismal tale,When er she lights on Doneraile ;May Egypt s plagues at once prevail,To thin the knaves of Doneraile.May frost and snow, and sleet and hail,Benumb each joint in Doneraile ;May wolves and bloodhounds trace and trailThe cursed crew of Doneraile.May Oscar, with his fiery flail,To atoms thresh all Doneraile ;May every mischief, fresh and stale,Abide, henceforth, in Doneraile.May all, from Belfast to Kindle,Scoff, curse, and damn you, Doneraile ;May neither flour nor oatmealBe found or known in Doneraile.May want and wo each joy curtailThat e er was known in Doneraile ;May no one coffin want a nailThat wraps a rogue in Doneraile.May all the thieves that rob and steal,The gallows meet in Doneraile ;May all the sons of GranawealBlush at the thieves of Doneraile.190 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.May mischief, big as Norway whale,O overwhelm the knaves of Doneraile ;May curses, wholesale and retail,Pour with full force on Doneraile.May every transport wont to sailA convict bring from Doneraile ;May every churn and milking pailFall dry to staves in Doneraile.May cold and hunger still congealThe stagnant blood of Doneraile ;May every hour new woes reveal,That hell reserves for Doneraile.May every chosen ill prevailO er all the imps of Doneraile ;May no one wish or prayer availTo soothe the woes of Doneraile.May th Inquisition straight impaleThe rapparees of Doneraile ;May Charon s boat triumphant sail,Completely manned, from Doneraile.Oh ! may my couplets never failTo find a curse for Doneraile ;And may grim Pluto s inner gaolFor ever groan with Doneraile.DUBLIN AFTER THE UNION. 191DUBLIN AFTER THE Union.A jeu d esprit, printed in the posthumous collection ofMr. Lysaght s poems (see p. 115), with the followingintroductory observations, copied from Sir John Carr sStranger in Ireland."As I have given a little specimen of the prose whichthe measure of the Union lyr^TtrtVu, iujT^ers will, perhaps,h*v-pieased with the following excellent song, which,Amongst the many good ones written at that time, I thinkshe most witty and playful, and has much of the spiritof Swift in it. It was a great favourite with the Anti-vats,and I give Af^nfcft tne-msorft jjfwjjflfe, becauseits piA?cai predictions have not been verified ; and, I feelconfident, never will be. It is from the sprightly pen ofMr. Lysaght."Capell Street, which, it is prophesied in the song, wouldbecome a rural walk, leads from the Castle, the residenceof the Lord Lieutenant, to College Green, where stood theParliament House, now converted into the Bank of Ireland.Dame Street, in which it is foretold that cabbages wereto be cultivated, was the principal street leading fromEssex Bridge through the northern portion of Dublin.The jocular allusions to the anticipated produce of theCollege, in "wild oats;" the Courts of Law, in "hemp;"the Parliament House becoming the resort of " vermin,"as placemen were called; and Daly s Club House, thehaunt of "rooks" and "pigeons," terms applied togamblers and their dupes, are so obvious, as not to requirefurther comment.192 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.How justly alarmed is each Dublin cit,That he ll soon be transformed to a clown, sir !By a magical move of that conjuror, Pitt,The country is coming to town, sir !Give Pitt, and Duncan, and Jenny, a glass,Who d ride on John Bull, and make Paddy an ass.Through Capell Street, soon, as you ll rurally range,You ll scarce recognise it the same street ;Choice turnips shall grow in your Royal Exchange,Fine cabbages down along Dame Street.Give Pitt, &c.Wild oats in the College won t want to be tilled.And hemp in the Four Courts may thrive, sir J^Your markets, again, shall with muttons be filledBy St. Patrick, they ll graze there alive, sir !Give Pitt, &c.In the Parliament House, quite alive shall there beAll the vermin the island e er gathers ;Full of rooks, as before, Daly s Club House you ll see,But the pigeons won t have any feathers.Give Pitt, &c.Our Custom House quay, full of weeds, oh, rare sport !But the minister s minions, kind elves, sir,Will give us free leave all our goods to export,When we ve got none at home for ourselves, sir IGive Pitt, &c.THE HUMOURS OF DONNYBROOK FAIR. 193Says an alderman, " Corn will grow in your shops ;This Union must work our enslavement."That s true," says the sheriff, " for plenty of Crops,*Already I ve seen on the pavement ! "Give Pitt, &c.Ye brave loyal yeomen, dress d gaily in red,This minister s plan must elate us ;And well may John Bull, when he s robbed us of bread,poor Ireland, " The land of potatoes ! "Give Pitt, &c.THE HUMOURS OF DONNYBROOK FAIRHave been already introduced to the reader, in Mr. Lyss song of " The Sprig of Shillelah and Shamrockso green," p. 112.Prince Prickles Muskau, who was a spectator of thisscene on the 29th August, 1828, says, " I rode out againto-day, for the first time, to see the fair at Donnybrook,near Dublin, which is a kind of popular festival. Nothing,indeed, can be more national ! The poverty, the dirt, andthe wild tumult, were as great as the glee and merrimentwith which the cheapest pleasures were enjoyed. I sawthings eaten and drunk with delight, which forced meto turn my head quickly away, to remain master of my" A proverbial term for the rebels in 1798, who wore their hairclose cut."194 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.disgust. Heat and dust, crowd and stench (ilfaut le dire),made it impossible to stay long ; but these do not annoythe natives. There were many hundred tents, all ragged,like the people, and adorned with tawdry rags instead offlags ; many contented themselves with a cross on a hoop ;one had hoisted a dead and half-putrid cat as a sign !The lowest sort of rope-dancers and posture-masters exercisedtheir toilsome vocation on stages of planks, anddressed in shabby finery, dancing and grimacing in thedreadful heat till they were completely exhausted. A thirdpart of the public lay, or rather rolled, about drunk ;others ate, screamed, shouted, and fought. The womenrode about, sitting two or three upon an ass, pushing theirway through the crowd, smoked with great delight, andcoquetted with their sweethearts. The most ridiculousgroup was one which I should have thought indigenousonly to Rio de la Plata: two beggars were seated on ahorse, who, by his wretched plight, seemed to supplicatefor them ; they had no saddle, and a piece of twine servedas reins.As I left the fair, a pair of lovers, excessively drunk,took the same road. It was a rich treat to watch theirbehaviour. Both were horridly ugly, but treated eachother with the greatest tenderness and the most delicateattention. The lover especially displayed a sort of chivalrouspoliteness. Nothing could be more gallant, and, atthe same time, more respectful, than his repeated efforts topreserve his fair one from falling, although he had no littledifficulty in keeping his own balance. From his ingratiatingdemeanour, and her delighted smiles, I could alsoperceive that he was using every endeavour to entertainTHE HUMOURS OF DONNYBROOK FAIR. 195her agreeably, and that her answers, notwithstanding herexalted state, were given with a coquetry, and an air ofaffectionate intimacy, which would have been exquisitelybecoming and attractive in a pretty woman.My reverence for truth compels me to add, that notthe slightest trace of English brutality was to be perceived; they were more like French people, though theirgaiety was mingled with more humour, and more genuinegood nature ; both of which are national traits of the Irish,and are always doubled by poteen (the best sort of whisky,illicitly distilled."In the " Apologia Hibernica," for April 1793, " AnOde on Donnybrook" appeared, of rather a sentimentalcast, which was followed, in the June number of thatperiodical, by "An irregular Ode" on the same locality,after a passage in which the song now given seems to havebeen copied.Ah ! muse debonair,Let us haste to the fair.;Tis Donnybrook tapsters invite.Men, horses, and pigs,Are running such rigs,As the cockles of your heart will delight.Such crowding and jumbling,And leaping and tumbling,And kissing and stumbling,And drinking and swearing,And carving and tearing,And coaxing and snaring,And scrambling and winning,And fighting and flinging,And fiddling and singing;Old Dodder, enchanted, refuses to flow,But hit mouth waters fast at each kiss and each blow."196 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Donnybrook is situated on a mountain stream, calledthe Dodder, over which there is a handsome bridge withlofty arches. In dry weather the quantity of water is soinconsiderable, that a stranger would be very apt to usethe sarcastic observation of the Spaniard, who, on viewingthe magnificent bridge that spanned the contemptibleManzanares, near Madrid, exclaimed, * Es minister, venderla puente, para compare ague; (They ought to sell thebridge to buy water;) but in a few hours after a heavyfall of rain in the mountains, the Dodder becomes a riverindeed, and swells up to the very summit of the arches.This has been mentioned for the sake of noticing a peculiarityin the name Donnybrook, * little brook. It iscurious that the word * brook hardly ever occurs in Englishspeech or writing, except in the sense defined by Johnson,a running water, less than a river; and is always associatedwith the idea of flowery meads, &c. ; but in Irelandit appears to be employed in its true and original sense.The streams, which, in the county of Wicklow, duringrain, burst or break from the hills, are always, by the commonpeople, called brooks. Now, the Anglo-saxon, bjioc,from whence it evidently comes, signifies a torrent,torrens, xupa^ovs ; and it is clear that it is derived frombpocan, the participle of bjiecan, * to break. "Air" Ballynafad."To Donnybrook steer, all you sons of ParnassusPoor painters, poor poets, poor newsmen, and knaves,To see what the fun is, that all fun surpassesThe sorrow and sadness of green Erin s slaves.THE HUMOURS OF DONNYBROOK FAIR. 197O, Donnybrook, jewel ! full of mirth is your quiver,Where all flock from Dublin to gape and to stareAt two elegant bridges, without e er a river:So, success to the humours of Donnybrook fair IO you lads that are witty, from famed Dublin city,And you that in pastime take any delight,To Donnybrook fly, for the time s drawing nighWhen fat pigs are hunted, and lean cobblers fight ;When maidens, so swift, run for a new shift ;Men, muffled in sacks, for a shirt they race there ;There jockeys well booted, and horses sure footed,All keep up the humours of Donnybrook fair.The mason does come, with his line and his plumb ;The sawyer and carpenter, brothers in chips ;There are carvers and gilders, and all sort of builders,With soldiers from barracks and sailors from ships.There confectioners, cooks, and printers of books,There stampers of linen, and weavers, repair ;There widows, and maids, and all sort of trades,Go join in the humours of Donnybrook fair.There tinkers and nailers, and beggars and tailors,And singers of ballads, and girls of the sieve ;With Barrack-street rangers, the known ones and strangers,And many that no one can tell how they live :There horsemen and walkers, and likewise fruit-hawkers,And swindlers, the devil himself that would dare,With pipers and fiddlers, and dandies and diddlers,All meet in the humours of Donnybrook fair.198 THE POPULAR SONGS OP IRELAND.Tis there are dogs dancing, and wild beasts a prancing,With neat bits of painting in red, yellow, and gold ;Toss-players and scramblers, and showmen and gamblers,Pickpockets in plenty, both of young and of old.There are brewers, and bakers, and jolly shoemakers,With butchers, and porters, and men that cut hair;There are mountebanks grinning, while others are sinning,To keep up the humours of Donnybrook fair.Brisk lads and young lasses can there fill their glassesWith whisky, and send a full bumper around;Jigg it off in a tent till their money s all spent,And spin like a top till they rest on the ground.Oh, Donnybrook capers, to sweet catgut-scrapers,They bother the vapours, and drive away care ;And what is more glorious there s naught more uproariousHuzza for the humours of Donnybrook fair !GLASHEN-GLORA.This lyric originally appeared, with the signatureW. , in the " Cork Constitution " newspaper of 4thJune, 1824; and was introduced by the following note tothe editor of that paper :Mr. EDITOR, Your politeness in inserting a fewlines which I wrote on the death of Lord Byron (dated18th May), induces me to request a place for the trifle Inow send you in your poet s corner.A RAMBLER."GLASHEN-GLORA. 199Glaslien-glora," adds the author, " is a mountaintorrent, which finds its way into the Atlantic Ocean throughGlengariff, in the west of this county (Cork). Glashen-glory, I have been informed, signifies the roaring torrent.Whether this is a literal or liberal translation, I will notventure to assert."The Editor may add that the name, literally translated,signifies " the noisy green water : " olaf, green ; ei), water ;noisy.Tis sweet, in midnight solitude,When the voice of man lies hush d, subdued,To hear thy mountain-voice so rudeBreak silence, Glashen-glora !I love to see thy foaming streamDash d sparkling in the bright moonbeam ;For then of happier days I dream,Spent near thee, Glashen-glora !I see the holly and the yewStill shading thee, as then they grew ;But there s a form meets not my view,As once, near Glashen-glora !Thou gaily, brightly, spark st on,Wreathing thy dimples round each stone ;But the bright eye that on thee shoneLies quench d, wild Glashen-glora I200 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Still rush thee on, thou brawling brook ;Though on broad rivers I may lookIn other lands, thy lonesome nookI ll think on, Glashen-glora !When I am low, laid in the grave,Thou still wilt sparkle, dash and raveSeaward, till thou become st a waveOf ocean, Glashen-glora !Thy course and mine alike have beenBoth restless, rocky, seldom green ;There rolls for me, beyond this scene,An ocean, Glashen-glora !And when my span of life s gone by,Oh ! if past spirits back can fly,I ll often ride the night-wind s sighThat s breathed o er Glashen-glora !Gouge BARRA.The river Lee, the Lucius of Ptolemy, has its originin the romantic lake of Gougane Barra, which is abouttwo miles in circumference, and is formed by numerousstreams descending from the mountains that divide thecounties of Cork and Kerry.One small island, with some luxuriant ash-trees uponit, growing amid the ruined walls of a rude building, isstrikingly contrasted with the bare precipices and the wildand uncultivated hills which surround this beautiful lakeGouge BARRA. 201of dark clear water. The approach to Gougane Barrawas formerly over rocky moors, intersected by numerousmountain defiles ; and this difficulty of access, togetherwith the remote situation of the place from " tower ortown," made it a secure retreat for the vanquished andpersecuted of various periods.The verdure of a solitary island reflected from thegentle bosom of a lake, encircled by the stately cliffs ofmajestic mountains, would have been sufficient to consecratethe spot in the minds of those who, in times oftrouble, sought as an asylum the rugged scenery amidwhich it reposed. They fled from clamour, strife, anddanger; and here they found stillness, peace, and safety.The island which rested on the waters of " lone GouganeBarra," seemed to those who had retreated there, " whenall but hope was lost," as an ark sanctified by a traditionof the early ages of Christianity, from whence they mightsecurely look abroad for the olive-branch of peace. Butalas ! no dove was ever sent forth by the defeated, yetunconquered Irish, as the spirit of the verses to whichthese remarks are prefixed will testify. In this " greenisland " it is believed that the venerable St. Fin bar, sonamed from his gray locks,* led for many years a life ofholy seclusion about the close of the sixth century, previousto his founding the cathedral church of Cork ; andfrom this circumstance Dr. Smith says, that GouganeBarra signifies the hermitage of St. Finbar. The doctor,however, is mistaken in this assertion, as the Irish wordgougane,f like the French glouglou, is descriptive of aFin, or pipe, whiteness; bast, a bead.~t" 55-<M}, cackling, prating. O REILLY.K2202 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.bubbling or gurgling sound ; and Gougane Barra means,literally, the " gurgling head " of the river Lee : thanwhich name nothing can accord more closely with thewords of a writer in Bolster s " Magazine," a Cork periodical,who, in an account of this lake, speaks of " themurmur of the young Lee, as complainingly its watersquitted for ever their wild home in the mountains."Mr. Callanan, of whom a short memoir will be foundat p. 130, is the author of the following spirit-stirring songon Gougane Barra. It was composed by him in 1826.During Mr. Callanan s residence in Bantry," says hisbiographer, " he made many excursions to visit the surroundingscenery, which is of the most romantic andinteresting character. The beautiful lines on GouganeBarra were written in that secluded hermitage during athunder storm, which had overtaken him there." A copyof these verses was transmitted by Mr. Callanan to Dr.Maginn, in a letter (now in the Editor s possession) datedSeptember 27, with a request to endeavour to get theminserted in the " New Monthly Magazine," then editedby Mr. Thomas Campbell ; but they do not appear tohave been printed in that periodical. An inferior versionto that now given is included in the posthumous collectionof Mr. Callanan s poems, entitled " The Recluse ofInchidony," &c.There is a green island in lone Gougane Barra,Whence All of songs rushes forth like an arrow ;In deep-valley d Desmond* a thousand wild fountainsCome down to that lake, from their home in the mountains.South Munster, in distinction to Thomond or North Munster,the ancient division of the kingdom of Ammonia. Like the Hebrews.Gouge BARRA.There grows the wild ash ; and a time-stricken willowLooks chidingly down on the mirth of the billow,As, like some gay child that sad monitor scorning,It lightly laughs back to the laugh of the morning.And its zone of dark hills oh ! to see them all brightening,When the tempest flings out his red banner of lightning,And the waters come down, mid the thunder s deeprattle,Like clans from their hills at the voice of the battle ;And brightly the fire-crested billows are gleaming,And wildly from Mallow* the eagles are screaming:Oh, where is the dwelling, in valley or highland,So meet for a bard as that lone little island ?How oft when the summer sun rested on ClaraAnd lit the blue headland of sullen Ivara,^;Have I sought thee, sweet spot, from my home by th jocean,And trod all thy wilds with a minstrel s devotion,And thought on the bards who, oft gathering together,In the cleft of thy rocks, and the depth of thy heather,Dwelt far from the Saxon s dark bondage and slaughter,As they raised their last song by the rush of thy water.the Irish expressed the south and north by the right and left hand.Thus, be-Ar, the right hand, is the only word in the Irish languagewhich signifies south ; as CUAC, the left, is the north. The compoundmont probably means a mountain chain.A mountain over the lake.t The Irish name for Cape Clear.Beer Have.204 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.High sons of the lyre 1 oh, how proud was the feelingTo dream while alone through that solitude stealing ;Though loftier minstrels green Erin can number,I alone waked the strain of her harp from its slumber,And gleaned the gray legend that long had been sleeping,Where oblivion s dull mist o er its beauty was creeping,From the love which I felt for my country s sad story,When to love her was shame, to revile her was glory !Last bard of the free ! were it mine to inheritThe fire of thy harp and the wing of thy spirit,With the wrongs which like thee to my own land havebound me,Did your mantle of song throw its radiance around me ;Yet, yet on those bold cliffs might Liberty rally,And abroad send her cry o er the sleep of each valley.But, rouse thee, vain dreamer ! no fond fancy cherish,Thy vision of Freedom in bloodshed must perish.I soon shall be gone though my name may be spokenWhen Erin awakes, and her fetters are brokenSome minstrel will come in the summer eve s gleaming,When Freedom s young light on his spirit is beaming,To bend o er my grave with a tear of emotion,Where calm Avonbuee* seeks the kisses of ocean,And a wild wreath to plant from the banks of that riverO er the heart and the harp that are silent for ever.fThe Carrigaline River, see p. 157.t Alas ! the melancholy wish expressed by poor Callanan was notrealised. He lies buried in a foreign land. See p. 133.YOUNG KATE OF KILCUMMER. 205YOUNG KATE OF KILCUMMERIs copied from a tale entitled " The Rapparee," printed inBolster s " Quarterly Magazine, No. Ix," a Cork periodicalpublication, August 1828, where this ballad is said to beafavourite Irish song, which we have endeavoured totranslate, preserving as much as possible the simplicity ofthe original." The Editor, however, does not recogniseany thing to induce him to credit this statement. Hebelieves it to be an original composition. Kilcummer isa seat of the Bowen family, in the county of Cork, on theeast side of the river Awbeg, not far distant from thetown of Doneraile.There are flowers in the valley,And fruit on the hill,Sweet-scented and smiling,Resort where you will.But the sweetest and brightestIn spring time or summer,Is the girl of my heart,The young Kate of Kilcummer.Oh ! I d wander from daybreakTill night s gloomy fall,Full sure such anotherI d ne er meet at all.As the rose to the bee,As the sunshine to summer,So welcome to meIs young Kate of Kilcummer.206 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.THE BOYS OF KILKENNY.The Editor believes that this song, although unclaimed,is not incorrectly attributed to Mr. Thomas Moore, andthe reasons for his belief are these :1. Moore was a prominent member of the Kilkennyprivate theatricals about the years 1802, 3, and 4.2. The melody called " The old head of Denis," wasan especial favourite with Moore ; to it he wrote his well-knownsong in the first Number of the " Irish Melodies,"on the Meeting of the Waters in the county of Wicklow,commencing, " There is not in this wide world," &c. ; aline, by the by, which the fastidiousness of Moore smatured judgment has changed into " the wide world."3. The internal evidence of the song itself. Theluscious picture conveyed to the fancy in the concludinglines of the second, and the beautiful local imagery of thethird verses, as well as the humour which pervades theentire song, partake more of the tone of Moore s mindthan of the national character.It was no doubt originally written for, and sung onthe Kilkenny stage, and the last verse was probably anadjunct by the author when he sung " The Bo r s of Kilkenny"in England, where he became a permanent residentabout 1807.*The Kilkenny theatre has been already noticed (p. 57),as a speculation of Owenson s. Mr. Banim, in somegossiping letters on Ireland, published in a London periodical(" The Literary Register, 1822,"), says, UntilSince the above was written the Editor has been informed, " bygood authority," that he is wrong in ascribing this song to Mr. Moore.THE BOYS OF KILKENNY. 207within the last few years, a private theatre was annuallyopened in Kilkenny under the management of Mr. RichardPower,* an accomplished and amiable gentleman, at which,with other characters of consideration, Mr. Carry (Secretaryto the Linen Hall) exhibited his very rare talents.The cause of charity was joined with elegant recreation,and extensive advantages resulted to the local charitableinstitutions. Other benefits also accrued to the inlandcity, which was the scene of those periodical amusements.It became the rendezvous of the wealthy and fashionablefrom all parts of Ireland during the short theatricalseasons, and business of every kind thereby received asprightly stimulus. My friend went on, adding someinformation and detached anecdote which interested menot a little. It was at these Kilkenny theatricals thatMiss O Neil lost her heart to Mr. Becher;f while theworld consequently lost its first-rate actress. Mr. B. wasthe Coriolanus of the amateur company, and became captivatedwith his present celebrated lady during the verylast Kilkenny season, while Miss O Neil was gratuitouslylending her mighty talents in behalf of the widow andthe orphan. It is said, too, that here, at a very earlyperiod of her life, and when retained as an accessory,Miss O Neil met with a cordial and decisive encouragement,which materially influenced her after-success in themetropolis. I have more to say to you about Kilkennypic-nics. Tom Moore was for some years the Spado,Of Clashraore House, in the county of Waterford, which countylie represented in many successive parliaments. He was born in1780, and died at his Louse, in Baker Street, London, on the 12thMarch, 1834.t Now Sir William Wrixon Belief, Bart.208 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Mungo, and Peeping Tom of the boards ; and, by allaccounts, a glorious little actor he made. I am informedthat his Spado was a treat. Indeed, the character seemsmade for him. How I should like to have seen the Irishladies eying him as he sungOh, lasses ! of love can you fail,With such a compact little lovey ?Though no one can taste the big whale,Sure all love the little anchovy !And again,Though wanting two feet in my body,lu soul I am thirty feet high.Here he recited his own decalogue ; and, as a final bitof tattle be it added, here Tommy also met, wooed, andwon his present good lady."Air " The old Head of Denis."Oh ! the boys of Kilkenny are stout roving blades,And if ever they meet with the nice little maids,They kiss them and coax them, they spend their money free.Oh ! of all towns in Ireland, Kilkenny for me.Oh I of all towns in Ireland, Kilkenny for me !Through the town of Kilkenny there runs a clear stream,In the town of Kilkenny there lives a pretty dame,Her cheeks are like roses, her lips much the same,Like a dish of ripe strawberries smothered in cream.Like a dish of ripe strawberries smothered in cream.Her eyes are as black as Kilkenny s famed coal,And tis they through my bosom that have burned a bighole;THE HERMIT OF KILLARNEY. 209Her mind, like its waters, is as deep, clear, and pure,But her heart is more hard than its marble, I m sure.But her heart is more hard than its marble, I m sure.Oh ! Kilkenny s a famous town, that shines where it stands,And the more I think on it, the more my heart warms ;For if I was in Kilkenny, I d think myself at home,For it s there I d get sweethearts, but here I get none.For it s there I d get sweethearts, but here I get none.THE HERMIT OF KILLARNEY.The authorship of this ballad is attributed to the RightHon. George Ogle (see p. 138). It is probably not a merepoetic invention, but suggested by an actual occurrence.Mr. Weld, in his account of Killarney, says, " It isscarcely possible, indeed, to enter the confines of thissequestered and enchanting region without feeling theinfluence of a spell, which abstracts the mind from thenoise and folly of the world, and banishes for the momentthe desire of returning to the gay and busy scenes ofhuman life. So powerful are its effects, that instancesare not wanting of persons who, on first coming hither,have fondly resolved to retire to these distant shades ;and who, with the permission of the proprietors of theshores, have actually determined on the precise positionof their intended retreats. But as if the spell was liableto be dissolved when the mountains of Killarney fadedfrom view, or as if a temporary absence from the habitualenjoyments of the pleasures of social life served but to210 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.render a return to them the more agreeable, these visionaryschemes have been generally abandoned on withdrawingfrom the scenes which gave them birth.One man, however, there was, upon whose romanticmind a deeper impression was made ; he was an Englishman,of the name of Ronayn. The spot which he selectedfor his retreat was this small island, which yet retains hisname ; and when first I visited Killarney (1800), the ruinsof his little habitation, planted in the midst of rocks verynear the water, were still visible. They inspired one witha respect for the place ; nor was it possible to contemplatethem without falling into a train of reflection upon thevariety of sentiments entertained by men about happiness,that invariable object of eager and hourly pursuit. Themind was also led to consider how little was actuallywanting to supply the real necessities even of a man whohad, from infancy, perhaps, been habituated to the comfortsand conveniences of civilised life. Surely the spotshould have been held sacred as long as a fragment ofthe habitation remained visible ; but the spirit of improvement,as it is often so falsely styled, has swept away everyvestige of Ronayn s cottage, and the mossy rocks wherehe was wont to seat himself before it, have given placeto the trim surface of a smooth-shorn grass-plot.Of the motives which induced this gentleman towithdraw from the world, whether they arose from aninnate love of retirement, from disappointment in hispursuits, or fromStrokes of adversity no time can cure,No lenient hand can soften or assuage ;or whether they arose from his experience of the insuf-THE HERMIT OF KILLARNEY. 211deficiency of the ordinary pleasures and luxuries of life toafford permanent satisfaction, it has never fallen withinmy power to learn. He avoided all society, and seldomleft the island, except to partake of his favourite amusementsof shooting or fishing, by which he procured hischief sustenance. Thus singular in his habits, he becameexposed to the eye of curiosity ; and, offended at frequentand impertinent intrusion, his jealousy of the approachof strangers sometimes betrayed itself in acts of savagemoroseness; nevertheless, his name is still mentioned atKillarney with respect nay, even with admiration."The enthusiastic and unfortunate John Bernard Trotter,the private secretary of Fox, speaking, in his " Walksthrough Ireland," of this " celebrated song," the localityof which he confounds with " Anna s Banks," says, <; Itbegins some way thus :On Anna s lonely banks I strayed ;and every couplet ends withAdieu, adieu, thou faithless world,Thou ne er wert made for me !So powerful," continues Trotter, " are some early impressions,that I recollect learning the words of this song manyyears ago when a schoolboy. It then seemed to me theperfection of poetry. Its melancholy strains, so oftenrepeated, ofAdieu, adieu, thou faithless world,Thou ne er wert made for me !filled me with mournful pleasure. Careless of the playsand sports usual with boys, I have often pored over these212 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.verses, unknowing their full import, but devouring anddwelling on them with secret and indescribable satisfaction! I knew not then what a faithless world meant;I had never seen or heard of Anna s Banks, and comprehendednot what was misfortune or disappointment.These were the topics which had inspired the author ofthis pleasing song. By what mysterious sympathy did Iconceive feelings which I never imparted I or by whatpresentiments did I anticipate the afterwards too wellunderstanding this song!"As on Killarney s bank I stood, near to her crystal wave,I saw a holy hermit retired within his cave ;His eyes he often turn d to heaven, and thus exclaimed he :Adieu, adieu, thou faithless world, thou wert not madefor me ! "His bed was strewed with rushes, which grew along theshore,And o er his limbs emaciate a sackcloth-shirt he wore;His hoary beard and matted hair hung listless to his knee :Adieu, adieu, thou faithless world, thou wert not madefor me ! "I thought his heart had broken, so heavy were his sighs,I thought his tears would dry up the fountains of his eyes ;Oh ! twas a grievous thing to hear, a piteous sight to see :Adieu, adieu, thou faithless world, thou wert not madefor me ! "His sorrows pierced my bosom, in all I took my share ;My sighs, his sighs re-echoed, I gave him tear for tear;THE HERMIT OF KILLARNEY. 213I had no comfort left to give it might intrusion be:Adieu, adieu, thou faithless world, thou wert not madefor me ! "He ceased awhile his mourning, and seemed in thoughtprofound,But anguish soon returning, he started from the ground ;In agony he smote his heart, and thus exclaimed he :Adieu, adieu, thou faithless world, thou wert not madefor me !How vain and foolish mortals are, who sigh for pompand state;They little know the dangers that on high stations wait ;They little know the woes and ills that follow high degree :Adieu, adieu, thou faithless world, thou wert not madefor me IAmbition s but a bubble, a circle in the sea,Extending o er the surface, and ne er can ended be,Till in itself, itself is lost, the breath of vanity:Adieu, adieu, thou faithless world, thou wert not madefor me !Why did I trust to honour I reckoned by my own ?Why did I trust to virtue, when she to heaven was flown ?Alas I too late, I now lament my fond credulity :Adieu, adieu, thou faithless world, thou wert not madefor me !I thought that there was friendship, but that s a gemmost rare ;I thought that love was sacred, and beauty was sincere ;214 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.But these are visions all like dreams, which with themorning flee :Adieu, adieu, thou faithless world, thou wert not madefor me !Oh, had I been a shepherd upon the mountain s brow,I ne er had known those feelings that I experience now ;My flocks had been my only care, from every other free :Adieu, adieu, thou faithless world, thou wert not madefor me !These toils will soon be over, my pilgrimage is past ;The gates of heaven are open, redemption smiles at last ;May all my enemies be blest, my wrongs forgiven be :Adieu, adieu, thou faithless world, thou wert not madefor me ! "He laid him down upon his bed, the threads of life werebroke ;His eyes seemed closed in death s dim shade, I thought hene er had spoke :Again, with faltering voice he said, twas life s last agonyAdieu, adieu, thou faithless world, thou wert not madefor me ! "THE KILRUDDERY HUNT.Called, by Ritson, " the Irish Hunt," and printed byhim in the second volume of his collection of EnglishSongs (ed. Park. 1813, p. 184), is remarkable, if for noTHE K1LRUDDERY HUNT. 215other reason, as eliciting Ritson s opinion of Irish songs.With respect to the lyric productions of our now sister-kingdom,Ireland, the best of them have been generallyesteemed and ranked as English songs ; being few innumber, and possessing no national, or other peculiar ordistinguishing marks. Of these, however, the number isvery few ; and that which might be deemed the mostexceptionable (the hunting song) may be well pardoned,on account of the superior excellence of its compositionto most others on the same subject: this description ofsongs being, in general, as utterly void of poetry, sense,wit, or humour, as the practice they are intended to celebratewhether it be the diversion of the prince or thepeasant is irrational, savage, barbarous, and inhuman."The Editor is indebted to Mr. J. C. Walker, of Dublin,for the annexed map, which illustrates the topography ofthe Kilruddery Hunt," the original of which was sketchedby the Rev. James Whitelaw * for the late Mr. JosephCooper Walker, in 1796, and was, most probably, intendedfor Ritson ; although it would seem that Mr. Walker had,some years previously, made inquiries of Ritson respectingthis song. Ritson, in a letter addressed to that gentlemanon the 25th June, 1790, says, " The author of the IrishHunt, whose name you tell me you have been in pursuitof, was Mr. St. Leger, son of Sir John St. Leger, formerlyone of the barons of the Exchequer ; at least it is so said,in the Gentleman s Magazine for April."Mr. Walker, in reply, informed Ritson f- that " theA memoir of this able and excellent man is prefixed to Whitelawand Walsh s " History of Dublin," 2 vols. to, 1818.f Note in " Ritson s Letters," i. 179. Edited by Sir HarrisNicholas. 1833.216 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Irish Hunt was written by T. Mozeen. It appeared inacollection of * Miscellaneous Essays, which he publishedby subscription in 1762. Sherwood gives an account ofMozeen."On the 14th December, 1790, Ritson writes toMr. Walker " There is a collection of I know not whatsort of poetry, in two small duodecimo volumes, by oneMozeen : can this be the author of the Irish Hunt ?If so, I must have been egregiously blind to their merit,and shall make it a point to give them a more attentiveperusal. His name, I find (from the * Biographia Dramatic), was William, and he died after 1762. The songis indisputably excellent ; and were my book likely toattain a second edition, I would be most thankful for anynotes you might be pleased to communicate."This request, no doubt, led Mr. Walker to make furtherinquiries on the subject ; and from letters addressedto him by Mr. Whitelaw, at the period that he sketchedthe map, the following particulars have been collected:He (Mr. Whitelaw) was of opinion that * the Kil-rudderHunt was the production of a Mr. T. Mozeen,and was published in London, 1762, 8vo. in a * Collectionof Miscellaneous Essays, which contained, besides, a songin praise of John Adair, Esq. of Kilternan ; also an invitationto Owen Bray s, at Loughlinstown.*Mr. Whitelaw writes In 1744, the Inn at Loughlinton was kept by Owen Bray, one of the heroes of theThe Editor finds all these songs in a little volume entitled " TheLyrick Packet, containing most of the favourite songs, serious andcomic, that have been performed for three seasons past at Sadler sWells," &c. By T. Mozeen. London, printed and sold by J. Dix-well,in St. Martin s Lane, near Charing Cross. 1764. Pp. 118.THE KILRUDDERY HUNT. 217song, and was at that period one of the best houses ofaccommodation in the kingdom, in consequence of thesingular attention of the host, who was a man of someeducation, of much plain, solid, good sense, and so remarkablyobliging, that the neighbouring gentlemen frequentlymade parties to dine at Laughlinstown. Here particularly,from a similar motive to promote his interests wereheld the cock-fights, which, though now happily forgotten,were then a favourite amusement of this country.* Mr. Mozeen, a comedian skilled in music, lodgedseveral summers at the inn, and particularly that of 1744 ;and the song in question came forth as the joint productionof this gentleman and Owen Bray. But as Mozeenwas not in the field that day not being a sportsman, andas stout Owen Bray was a keen one, it was the generalopinion that the song was the composition of the latter,and that the sole claim of the former consisted in havingset it to music. The soul of the sportsman, indeed, seemstransferred into the song. The topography of the scene isminutely accurate, and the language so perfectly sportsmanlike,that the major is confident it could not be theproduction of Mozeen.The major," adds the Editor s friend, Mr. Walker,I find to be Major Sirrr, who is described by Mr. White-lawas his * worthy old friend, intimate with the partiesmentioned in the song, and particularly with the Earl ofMeath. * Mr. Whitelaw (1796) continues to write of theMajor Sirrr went to Ireland, in 1757, with the Duke of Bedford.He was then a captain in Bright s, the sd regiment. Major Sirrrwas subsequently appointed town-major of the city of Dublin, andpratique-master of the port. He was high-sheriff of the county ofL218 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.parties not one, I believe, survives. Death, thatmighty hunter, has earthed them all. "Songs commemorative of a good day s sport are commonin Ireland, and resemble " The Kilruddery Hunt" inenumerating the sportsmen, the ground run over, and thefinale a jovial dinner, with sometimes the description ofa will made by the dying animal. A specimen of onecomposed about the close of the seventeenth century,although sadly messed by an ignorant transcriber, hasbeen preserved in the British Museum among the SloaneMSS., No. 900, entitled " The Fingallian Hunting of theHare," where the hospitality of St. Lawrence s Hall(Lord Howth s) is commended, and the sportsmanlikequalifications of Michael St. Lawrence and his companionsare duly set forth.* The description of a " County ofLimerick Buck-Hunt," in 1735, may be found at page251 of this volume; and in singing the fame of an Irishfox-hunt, which occurred on the 1st March, 1833, theDublin, and deputy judge-advocate-general of Ireland ; and governorof most of the institutions of the Irish metropolis. He was the faithof the present well-known Major Sirrr of Dublin.In this song, the dying hare is thus made to settle her worldlyaffairs :But in a fine mead, she being almost spent,She made her last will, ay, and testament.Cropt cur, with thee, says she, I will not stay ;Nor with true running Cutty, that shewed such fair play;But to thee, brave Hector, I yield up my life.And so Hector bore her, and ended the strife."According to another hunting song,When Reynard was taken, his last task to fulfil,He asked for paper, pen, and ink, to draw out his will," &c.THE KILRUDDERY HUNT. 219lyrist becomes so delighted with the performance of someyoung men, that he concludes by stating his determinationto make his will in their favour, as follows :Here s to you, Mr. Casey, my Curraghmore estate ;And to you, young O Brien, my money and my plate ;And to you, Thomas Densely, my whip, spurs, and cap ;For you crossed the walls and ditches, never looking for a gap."In the manuscript Journal of a recent visit to Irelandby Lady Chatterton, which her ladyship has been so kindas to allow the Editor to peruse, he finds among numerousfaithful and clever sketches from nature, the followingaccount of an Irish peasant, who accompanied Lady Chattertonon an excursion in the neighbourhood of Limerick:Our companion sung us several songs ; one was ahumorous ballad, half in English and half in Irish, detailingthe adventures of a fox, as related by himself.How he swam across the Shannon, from Tervoe toCradle, closely pursued by the hounds, Blossom, andSweet-lips, and Silver-tongue, and Ponto ; and in howdisagreeable a situation he found himself afterwards,stuffed head-foremost into the huntsman s bag. Some ofhis songs," adds Lady Chatterton, " were in a wild andmournful strain, pathetic and tender enough almost tobring tears into one s eyes ; and all the time he was singing,he accompanied his voice with the most expressivegesticulations of his hands and feet."Mozeen s verses upon Squire Adair, of Kilternan,before mentioned, are entitled " Time took by the forelockat Kilternan, the seat of John Adair, Esq., in theCounty of Dublin." The author, after a short introducesTHE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.tion levelled against the fashionable taste for foreign music,relates, to the tune of " Derry Down,"how old daddy Time took a frolic,By the help of good claret to dissipate cares :The spot was Kilternan, the house was Adair s.Not used to the sight of the soberer race,With the door in her hand, the maid laughed in his face ;For she thought, by his figure, he might be at bestSome plodding mechanic, or prig of a priest.But soon as he said that he came for a glass,Without further reserve she replied he might pass ;Yet mocked his bald pate, as he tottered along,And despised him, as moderns despise an old song.Jack Adair was at table with six of his friends,Who, for making him drunk, he was making amends ;Time hoped at his presence none there were affronted :Sit down, boy, says Jack, and prepare to be hunted.They drank, hand to fist, for six bottles and more,Till down tumbled Time, and began for to snore ;Five gallons of claret they poured on his head,And were going to take the old soaker to bed.But Jack, who s possess d of a pretty estate,And would to the Lord it was ten times as great !Thought, aptly enough, that if Time did not wake,He might lose all he had by the world s turning back.So, twitching his forelock, Time opened his eyes,And, staggering, stared with a deal of surprise;Quoth he, 1 must mow down ten millions of men,But e er you drink thrice I ll be with thee again. "THE KILRUDDERY HUNT. 2*21Time at length departs, after giving his worthy host amost friendly shake by the hand, and declaringGo on with TOUT bumpers, jour beef, and good cheer,And the darling of Time shall be Johnny Adair."Mozeen entitles the song, to which this long, but, it ishoped, not uninteresting introduction is prefixed, " A Descriptionof a Fox Chase that happened in the County ofDublin with the Earl of Meath s Hounds."222 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Tune " Shell na Guiragh."Hark, hark ! jolly sportsmen, awhile to a tale,Which, to pay your attention, I hope will not fail ;Tis of lads, and of horses, and dogs, that ne er tire,O er stone walls, and hedges, through dale, bog, and briar.A pack of such hounds, and a set of such men,Tis a shrewd chance if ever you meet with again.Had Nimrod, the mightiest of hunters, been there,Fore, gad, he had shook like an aspen for fear.La, la, la, &c.In seventeen hundred and forty and four,The fifth of December I think twas no more ;At five in the morning, by most of the clocks,*We rode from Kilruddery,-]- to try for a fox ;The Laughlinstown landlord, the bold Owen Bray,JWith Squire Adair, sure, were with us that day ;Theobald Wolfe Tone, whose practice it was to quote snatches ofsong, notes in his " Journal," 20th April, 1797, " Set out fromCologne, at Jive in the morning, by most of the clocks on myway," &c.t About a mile and a half beyond Bray, and near the lesser Sugar-loaf,or Gold-spur Mountain a noble seat of the Brabazons, createdEarls of Meath in 1627.Mozeen advises all travellers landed from England, " sick of theseas," to proceed to Laughlinstownwithout any delays,For you ll never be right till you see Owen Bray s.With his Ballen a Mono, Ora, Ballen a Mono, Ora, Ballon a Mono, Tota,A glass of his claret for me !Were you full of complaints from the crown to the toe,A visit to Owen s will cure you of wo;THE KILRUDDERY HUNT. 223Joe Debill, Hall Preston, that huntsman so stout,Dick Holmes,* (a few others), and so we went out.La, la, la, &c.We had cast off the hounds for an hour or more,When Wanton set up a most tuneable roar.Hark, to Wanton ! " cried Joe; and the rest were not slack,For Wanton s f no trifler esteemed by the pack ;Old Bonny f and Collier f came readily in,And every dog joined in the musical din.Had Diana been there, she d been pleased to the life, ^And some of the lads got a goddess to wife.La, la, la, &c.Ten minutes past nine was the time o the day,When Reynard unkennelled, and this was his play;As strong from Killeager,J as though he could fear none,Away he brushed round by the house of Kilternan ;A buck of such spirits ye never did know,For, let what will happen, they re always in flow,When he touches up Ballen, &c.The joy of that fellow for me !Fling leg over garron, ye lovers of sport,Much joy is at Owen s, though little at Court;Tis thither the lads of brisk mettle resort,For there they are sure that they 11 never fall shortOf good claret, and Ballen, &c.The eighty-fourth bumper for me ! " &c.Married, in 1756, Elizabeth, daughter of the Honourable CaptainWordsworth.t " Favourite hounds of Lord Meath s." Note by MOZEEN.| Now a deserted farm-house on the Enniskerry side of the Scalp.See Map.On the Dublin side of the Scalp, once the residence of the famousSquire Adair of the song.Quaere : May not this have been the Adair, and this the identical224 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.To Carrick Mines* thence, and to Cherry woods thenSteep Shank Hills he climbed, and to Bellman Glen,Bray Common || he passed, leaped Lord Anglesey s wallsAnd seemed to say, " Little I value you all."La, la, la, &c.He ran bushes and groves** up to Carbury Bourns,f fJoe Debill, and Preston, kept leading by turns;The earth it was open, but Reynard was stout,Though he could have got in, yet he chose to keep out.occasion, which gave the name of " Clair s leap " to an enormous rockwhich overhangs the western side of the Scalp? The tradition is, thata gentleman of the name of Adair, in following the hounds, withbreathless, fiery haste," suddenly found himself on the very brink ofthis precipitous rock ; and, when his companions gave him up as lost,he skilfully wheeled his courser and escaped. According to the Irishfashion, it was called his leap, because he did not take it.A hamlet in the neighbourhood of Leopardstown, the magnificentresidence of Lord Castlewood.t A wood still, close to the village of Laughlinstown.| A high hill, about eight miles from Dublin, forming the eastwing of the Scalp, now remarkable for its lead mines.A wild romantic glen, through which flows Merrily s-brook, whichhere separates the counties of Dublin and Wicklow, watering thevalley of Diamonds, till it is lost in the Bray river. Reynard s retreatsare still to be seen in this glen.|| Remains a common at this day.IT Has disappeared, nor does any tradition of its existence remain.** Ritson s reading is, " He ran Bushes s Grove." Bush Grove,now Cork Abbey, was the seat of the late Colonel Whitfield.ft It is remarkable that a man named Carbury Borne should atpresent reside at this place : he is a respectable carpenter.THE KILRUDDERY HUNT. 225To Malpas s* summits away then he flew;At Dalkey sf stone common we had him in view;He shot on through Bullock, J to Shrub Glenagary ;And so on, to Mount Town,|| where Larry grew weary.La, la, la, &c.Through Roches town woods[ like an arrow he passed,And came to the steep hills of Dalkey ** at last ;There gallantly plunged himself into the sea,And said in his heart, " Sure none dare follow me."But soon, to his cost, he perceived that no boundsCould stop the pursuit of the stanch mettled hounds ;His policy here did t serve him a rush,Five couple of terriers were hard at his brush.La, la, la, &c.The bill next to Killiney ; an obelisk, was erected on its summitby Colonel Maps in 1741, for the benevolent purpose of employingthe poor in a season of distress, and in imitation of the example of SirPiggot Piers, who had a pillar constructed at Stillorgan with the sameobject the preceding year. On the Killiney range, and in the verytrack of the hounds, as described in the song, the young Duke ofDorset was killed on the 14th February, 18 15, by a fall from his horse,whilst hunting with Lord Powerscourt s hounds. A small pyramidmarks the spot.f No longer a common.J A small fishing village.A mile and a half from Kingstown. The name no longer retainsthe " Shrub," being now simply called " Glenageary."[| Should be Monk s Town, close to Kingstown.^[ About half a mile from Glenageary, a remnant of the ancientwood still exists.** The sea side of Killiney, the land, or northern side, havingnearly disappeared, to form the pier of Kingstown harbour.L2226 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.To recover the shore, then again was his drift,But ere he could reach to the top of the cleft,He found both of speed and of cunning a lack,Being waylaid and killed by the rest of the pack ;At his death there were present the lads that I ve sung :Save Larry, who, riding a garron, was flung.Thus ended at length a most delicate chase,That held us five hours and ten minutes space.La, la, la, &c.We returned to Kilruddery s plentiful board,Where dwells hospitality, truth, and my lord;*We talked o er the chase, and we toasted the healthOf the man who ne er varied for places or wealth.Owen Bray balked a leap ; said Hal Preston, " Twas odd !"Twas shameful ! " cried Jack, " by the great living G !"Said Preston, I hallooed, " Get on, though you fall,Or I ll leap over you, your blind gelding and all ! "La, la, la, &c.Each glass was adapted to freedom and sport ;For party affairs were consigned to the Court.Thus we finished the rest of the day, and the night,In gay flowing bumpers, and social delight :Then, till the next meeting, bid farewell each brother ;For some they went one way, and some went another.And as Phoebus befriended our earlier roam,So Luna took care in conducting us home.La, la, la, &c.Chatsworth, the sixth Earl of Meath, born in 1686. He died atCalais on his way to Aix la Chapelle, 14th May, 1763, and was buriedat Canterbury. His brother Edward succeeded to the title.THE PRAISE OF Kindle. 227THE PRAISE OF Kindle.This satirical song, with the subsequent reply to it,are given from a broadside purchased by the Editor in1831, at the shop of Haly, a ballad printer in HanoverStreet, Cork. They were respectively entitled, " PaddyFarrell, of Kindle, to his friend at Mallow;" and " Answerof Shady Mullowny, of Mallow, to Paddy Farrell,Kindle."The authorship is ascribed to Mr. John Lander, aneminent solicitor in Cork, who has been mentioned morethan once in the preceding pages.The World s End," alluded to in the seventh verse,is a district so called on the south-west side of the townof Kindle. Dr. Smith, in his " History of Cork," describingScilly, recommended for its perfumes in the followingverse, quotes as an " exact picture," Pope s imitationof Spenser :And on the broken pavement, here and there,Doth many a stinking sprat and herring lie ;A brandy and tobacco-shop is near,And hens, and dogs, and hogs, are feeding by,And here a sailor s jacket hangs to dry;At every door are sun-burnt matrons seenMending old nets, to catch the scaly fry ;Now singing shrill, and scolding oft between,Scolds answer foul-mouthed scolds bad neighbourhood, I ween."Scilly," says Smith, " is a small village near Kindle,well built, and inhabited by fishermen, who have, bothhere and in that town, a considerable number of fishingvessels, and yearly take good quantities offish, which they228 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.salt for foreign markets and home consumption. Thesefishermen were an English colony,* who settled here afterthe defeat of the Spaniards in Queen Elizabeth s time.They never marry out of the village, so that they are allrelated to each other."As shepherds and ploughmen in verses so clever,Have sung of their heath-covered mountain or vale ;Why not a poor fisherman try his endeavourTo sing of his own native town of Kindle ?By folks esteem d learned, I m reckon d amphibious,Because half my time on the water I sail ;And each morning arise from the ocean with Phoebus,When we both spread our rays on the strand of Kindle.To do the theme justice exceeds my poor powers ;Then expect but a round and varnish d tale :To hook in the aid of poetical flowersIs not in my line, while I sing of Kindle.For bathers of all sorts, we ve hot baths and cold ones,And boxes for ladies their charms to conceal ;We ve races and quadrilles for young and for old ones,And billiards and cards at the rooms in Kindle.We ve a Royal Hotel fit for kings to repose in,Built and furnished in style by a brewer of ale ;Where are soft arm-chairs after dinner to dose in,While fanned by the zephyrs that breathe o er Kindle.It is traditionally said from the Scilly Islands, after which theirIrish location was named.THE PRAISE OF Kindle. 229We ve a choice set of books for the student who wise is,The eel of true science to seize by the tail ;At all seasons, a skate you can have where no ice is,Or a sinecure plaice you may get at Kindle.Would you seek for that solace of life, a true friend, sir ?In this mart of pure friendship you never can fail ;Not a man but would travel e en to " the World s End," sir,To serve any friend that he has in Kindle.If you re partial to perfumes, cross over to Scilly,Where scents odoriferous float on the gale ;Where you ve cold baths if warm, and warm ones if chilly,And much higher fragrance than is in Kindle.Cold bathing, tis said, gives additional tensionTo muscles, and renders the fibres more hale;Would you weigh this opinion with rigid attention,You d not want for scales on the strand of Kindle.Then take my advice, if you ve gout, boil, or cholic,Only try what our baths and pure air will avail ;Or if you re in health, just come here for a frolic,And abundant amusement you ll find in Kindle.Kindle VERSUS MALLOW.The introductory remarks prefixed to the precedingsong, render any observations here unnecessary, exceptthat the " Break-heart Hill," mentioned in the ninth verse,230 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.is called Compass Hill, upon the side of which Kindleis built ; the principal street runs at the base, and is likeall old streets, " narrow and incommodious. Over thisare other streets, but the communication is by steep,slippery lanes, which, to strangers, are far from beingagreeable."In a manuscript Journal of the Rev. Richard Allyn,chaplain of H. Mes. Centurion, 1691 (which was purchasedfor Sir Walter Scott in 1823), Kindle is described asalarge, stinking, filthy hole, that hath nothing good init, besides honest Parson Tombs. I was very glad,"writes the pious chaplain, " to leave so vile a place, thoughindeed I was somewhat sorry to part with Parson Tombs,and the two only fit men for Christian conversation besideshimself in the whole town ; viz. Mr. Swell, the mayor,and Parson Mead."The Spa of Mallow alluded to in the fifth verse, willbe particularly noticed hereafter.The present with which Paddy Farrell accompaniedhis poetic epistle," and which fish, " the sovereign" (soisthe chief magistrate of Kindle styled), is representedas regulating the price of when dried, is a gigantic speciesof haddock, which should be eaten as soon as possible-afterit is caught ; in fact, should be put into the potalive. " As dead as a hake," is one of the most contemptuousphrases of an Irish fish-market. The hake isvery plentiful during the summer months on the southerncoast of Ireland. There existed in Kindle (the Editorspeaks of the years 1815 or 1816), a yacht, or ratherhooker club, called " the Hake Club," of which the lateLord Kingsley was commodore and president. The mem-kindleVERSUS MALLOW. 231hers were distinguished by the figure of a hake fish embroideredor painted on a riband, which was worn insertedthrough the button-holes of the waistcoat, like the badgeof the society called Friendly Brothers.Dear Paddy, I got your poetic epistle,Along with the hake that you sent by the mail ;But what could bewitch you, to sing, or to whistle,In strains so melodious the praise of Kindle?In all baits you re well skilled, you cod-dragging curmudgeon,To hook every fish from a sprat to a whale ;But your lines shan t catch me by my sole I m no gudgeonTo flounder or starve in the streets of Kindle.I know your design is as usual sell fish;For catch what you will, my old boy, I ll be bailYou ll jolt off to Cork your best hake and best shell-fish,And leave barely a claw for the town of Kindle.But what to Kindle boys are solids or liquids,Madeira, or turbot, beef, mutton, or veal,So they swallow the whisky, and in their jaws stick quidsOf tobacco, while grumbling the praise of Kindle ?Your bathers, oculi battersea /* Paddy, no boasting,Tis in Mallow our fair ones are hearty and hale ;Those that drink of our Spa, need no boiling or roastingLike the coddled old dabs that play cards in Kindle.Oh, may be so!232 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Your hotel, terra Paddy be easy, devil burn ye !Was not built, well you know, by a brewer of ale ;But a dealer in spirit, an honest attorney,Who stills all the breezes that rise in Kindle.What king, you spalpeen, will have a sight of your inn,Or on your fine chairs clap his majesty s tail ;But that king of good fellows, your own portly sovereign,When fixing the price of dried hake in Kindle ?Your sinecure place, Pat, is filled by a butcher,Or else your librarian to claim it won t fail ;For he who for mind or for body loves good cheer,Must go somewhere else from the town of Kindle.Your friendship too, Pat, for your own " World s End" is,I mean when you re paid for it down on the nail ;You ll not catch one insane or so silly as to bend hisSteps up Break-heart Hill, for a friend in Kindle.I ve no gout, nor consumption, nor jaundice so yellow;Nor, cameleonlike, do I feed on the gale :Sick or well, full or fasting, I ll stay here in Mallow ;So, e-cod you ll not drag me, old boy, to Kindle !THE RIVER LEE,By moonlight. This beautiful lyric is by Mr. Millikin.A copy of it in the author s autograph, entitledAn Ode to Cynthia," embellished with a vignette exe-THE RIVER LEE. 233cutcd in pen and ink, representing a gentleman recliningon the bank of a romantic stream and touching the chordsof a guitar, occurs in a manuscript volume in the Editor spossession, which appears to have been written about 1803.These verses were first printed in " The Harmonica,"a collection of lyrics published by J. Bolster, Cork, 1818;and they are reprinted among the " Poetical Fragmentsof the late Richard Alfred Millikin," 1823.Pale goddess, by thy ray sereneI fondly tread the level green,Where Lee serenely rollsHis smooth and ample tideMid fields in flowers profuse, and woody knolls;Thy silver lamp my guide.To thee I tune a rural shellIn some lone sequestered dell,Where hums the secret rillThrough shrubs that tangling meet,Or gurgling brook, that flies its native hillW T with limpid current fleet.For these, the gentle sounds thou low st to hearThese, Cynthia ! suit thy sad and chaster ear ;And not the trumpet s clangour,Or the nerve-wounding fife :Thee more delights the lute s harmonious languor,That shuns the voice of strife.Thou shalt my frequent steps directwhen, by thy calmer radiance deck d,234 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.The murmuring streams, and groves,And meadows, mildly bright,Invite to converse sweet the timid lovesBeneath thy kinder light.And fays, as poet s fain, and fairy throng,And elfin light, the pride of antique song,To the warm fancy thenAppear, from hall or bower,In gaudy troops to ride o er flood or fen,Exerting fairy power.But when the rose of morn, with blushing light,Buds in the laughing east, each fading spriteTo rocky dens retreatingBreak off their airy show ;And then fond lovers, endless vows repeatingAt parting, fonder grow.THE BELLS OF SIIANDON,As here introduced according to alphabetical arrangement,refer toThe spreading LEE, that, like an island fair,Enclosed Cork with his divided flood."SPENSER S Faery Queen, ii. 4.The steeple of the Church of St. Anne, or Upper Shan-don,in which hang the bells celebrated in the followingsong, is 120 feet high, and, being built upon a consider-theBELLS OF Shannon. 235able eminence, appears a remarkable object in every pointof view of the city of Cork ; but especially from whatMoore has termed " its noble sea avenue," the River Lee.The building of this church was commenced in 1722, andits steeple was constructed of the hewn stone from theFranciscan Abbey, where James II. heard mass, and fromthe ruins of Lord Barry s castle, which had been theofficial residence of the lords president of Munster, andfrom whence this quarter of the city takes its name,Shandon (rest) bun) signifying, in Irish, the old fortor castle. But as the demolished abbey had been built oflimestone, and the castle of redstone, the taste of thearchitect of Shandon steeple led him to combine the discordantmaterials which ecclesiastic and civic revolutionhad placed at his disposal, by constructing three sides ofhis work of white, and the remaining side of red stone;a circumstance which has occasioned many local jokesand observations, the most memorable of which are somerhymes commencingParty-coloured, like the people,Red and white stands Shandon steeple,"said to have been addressed to Dr. Woodward, bishop ofCheyne, by the famous Father O Leary.Fitzgerald has chronicled, in his " Cork Remembrancer,"that Shandon bells were put up in the summerof 1752. The first joyful peal they rung was for themarriage of the present (1783) burgess, Henry Harding(mayor of Cork in 1789, and who died in office), withMiss Catherine Dorian, on Thursday, December 7th.Dr. De la Cour, whose song on Blackpool has beenquoted at p. 176, lies buried in the churchyard of Upper236 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Shandon. The author of the lyric now given upon thebells of that church, is the Reverend Francis Mahony. Itwas originally published in " Eraser s Magazine " for1834, and is reprinted in " The Reliques of FatherProut," i. 255, where the reverend author, after indulgingin his usual strain of facetiousness, speaks really from hisheart. A discussion, about the melody of bells, is thusconcluded : " All these matters, we agreed, were veryfine ; but there is nothing, after all, like the associationswhich early infancy attaches to the well-known and long-rememberedchimes of our own parish steeple; and nomusic can equal on our ear, when returning after longabsence in foreign, and perhaps happier countries."Sabbath pangs.Jpuncra plano.Omnia clang.Inscription on an old Bell.With deep affectionAnd recollectionI often think ofThose Shandon bells,Whose sounds so wild would,In the days of childhood,Fling round my cradleTheir magic spells.On this I ponderWhere er I wander,And thus grow fonder,Sweet Cork, of thee;THE BELLS OF Shannon. 237With thy bells of Shandon,That sound so grand onThe pleasant watersOf the river Lee.I ve heard bells chimingFull many a clime in,Tolling sublime inCathedral shrine,While at a globe rateBrass tongues would vibrate ;But all their musicSpoke naught like thine.For memory, dwellingOn each proud swellingOf thy belfry knellingIts bold notes free,Made the bells of ShandonSound far more grand onThe pleasant watersOf the river Lee.I ve heard bells tollingOld Adrian s Mole " in,Their thunder rollingFrom the Vatican,And cymbals gloriousSwinging uproariousIn the gorgeous turretsOf Notre Dame ;238 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.But thy sounds were sweeterThan the dome of PeterFlings o er the Tiber,Pealing solemnly.Oh ! the bells of ShandonSound far more grand onThe pleasant watersOf the river Lee.There s a bell in Moscow,While on tower and kiosk O !In Saint SophiaThe Workman gets,And loud in airCalls men to prayerFrom the tapering summitOf tall minarets.Such empty phantomI freely grant them ;But there is an anthemMore dear to me,Tis the bells of Shandon,That sound so grand onThe pleasant watersOf the river Lee.THE SILVERY LEE. 239THE SILVERY LEEIs evidently the effusion of a juvenile Cork poet, who,fascinated by the charms of whisky (vide the secondverse), and some sentimental simpering (vide the fourthverse) from a pretty girl of " the beautiful city," feltconvinced of the truth of the old proverb about goingfurther in search of rivers whereby to locate himself, andfaring worse. The author, therefore, appears to havebeen quite content with the banks of " the Silvery Lee ;"and so would many a Cockney angler, if the description ofan Irish poet can be fully credited.As crystal its "waters are pure,Each morning they blush like a bride ;And, when evening comes gray and demure,With the softness of silver they glide.Of salmon and gay speckled troutIt holds such a plentiful store,That thousands are forced to leap out,By the multitude jostled on shore."However the latter assertion may be doubted, the Leeis, beyond all question, a lovely river. The lyric nowgiven is copied from a broadside, printed at Cork in 1818.Rivers are there great and small,Romantic, too, the course of many,With castled crag and foamy fall ;But never river saw I anyHalf so fair or dear to meAs my own, the silvery Lee.240 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Much I ve heard about the Rhine,With vineyards gay and castles stately ;But those who think I care for wine,Or lofty towers, mistake me greatly :A thousand times more dear to meIs whisky, by the silvery Lee.The Tagus, with its golden sand,The Tiber, full of ancient glory,The Danube, though a river grand,The Seine and Elbe, renowned in story,Can never be so dear to meAs the pure and silvery Lee.Tis not the voice that tongues the stream,In winter hoarse, in spring time clearer,That makes my own dear river seemAbove all other rivers dearer ;But tis her voice, who whispers meHow lovely is the silvery Lee ! "THE PRAISES OF LIMERICKAppeared in the " Apologia Hibernica" for February,1793, prefaced by the following communication to theeditor of that periodical:The enclosed humorous song was (I imagine) neverbefore printed; it was composed by a very witty butsatirical genius, a Dr. MacDonnell, about the year 1757.THE PRAISES OF LIMERICK. 241He was an eminent physician, but lost almost his wholebusiness by this song.Yours, &c.P L L Y."This statement is confirmed by a passage from the " Memoirsof Sir James Campbell," of Ardkinglas, publishedin 1832. " One of the members of the Medical Board(in Dublin," says Sir James, or the writer of his memoirs,was a very amiable young man, who practised his professionin Limerick. He had lived very much with theregiment when quartered there ; but had fallen intodisgrace with the fair sex, in consequence of a jeucC esprit which he had been so indiscreet as to circulate.Here are four lines by way of specimen :O what a sweet and pretty town Limerick is,Where neither sly one, nor siskin, nor slattern is ;It would do your heart good, on the quay as they walk at eve,To see them so funny, so skittish, so talkative.The beauties of Limerick took the joke in suchdudgeon, that the poor doctor was fain to make his escapein the night time, and never return. He settled afterwards,I think, in Chester, and did very well. By way ofgloss to the stanza, I should have added, that a siskin isa person with a loose shambling gait,"Tune " My name is Molly Mucky," &c.Oh ! what a dainty, sweet, charming town Limerick is,Where neither sly nor slippery slim trick is ;For true generosity, honour, fidelity,Limerick s the town, ne er doubt it I tell it you.Toll de roll, &c.M242 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Of smart pretty fellows in Limerick are numbers ; some,Who so modish are grown, that they think good sensecumbersome ;And, lest they should seem to be queer or ridiculous,They affect not to value either God or old Nicholas.Toll de roll, &c.You neighbours of Ennis, of Kerry, and Galloway,*Whose characters justly are taken by all away,Come hither among us, we ll make honest men of you ;For, in every respect, one of us is worth ten of you.Toll de roll, &c.Though fame has given out our shopkeepers have a cant,And in selling their goods they charge us extravagant ;Yet I, the other day, heard an honest man swear it,That he never charged more than his conscience couldbear it.Toll de roll, &c.Our wives behind counters, not saucy nor slatterns are ;For meekness, politeness, and goodness, they patterns are :It would do your heart good, on the mall where they walkat eve,To see them so dressy, so flirtish, so talkative.Toll de roll, &c.The old and vulgar pronunciation of Galway. " All the way fromGalloway, early in the morning," is the burden of a popular song descriptiveof the march of the Galway militia. In the " London Gazette,"No. 2598, Oct. 2d to 6th, 1690, the Editor finds, " Two persons comefrom Galloway confirm the former account," &c.GARRYOWEN. 243GARRYOWEN,In English, " Owen s Garden," is a suburb of Limerick;for a copy of the very popular song respecting which,the Editor is indebted to Lieut. Colonel Sir CharlesO Donnellll.Mr. Banim (the author of " The O Hara Tales "), inaletter which appeared in the " Literary Register," ashort-lived London weekly paper of the year 1822, says,** The celebrated Garryowen forms part of the filthysuburbs of Limerick. The former character of its inhabitantsis said to be well described in a verse of theirown old song:In Garryowen we ll drink nut-brown ale,An score de reckoning on de nail ;No man for debt shall go to gaolFrom Garryowen in glory whu! [a yell.]Some years ago the Garryowen boys, headed by ayoung gentleman of respectable family, did what theylisted in every department of heyday wildness and devilment: they were the half-terror, half-admiration of thesurrounding communities. But the present generation is,comparatively, a decayed and insignificant race, notremarkable for any peculiar acts of daring ; while the oldleader, to whom I have alluded, is now a most respectablequiet citizen, about sixty, famed for propriety and urbanityof demeanour, and at the head of one of the mostthriving mercantile concerns in the town. My antiquary(Mr. Geoffrey Foote) pointed him out and introduced meto him, the other day, in the streets ; and I futilely sought,244 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.in the grave and generous expression of his features, inthe even tone of his voice, and in the Quaker cut andcoloured suit which he wore, for any characteristic ofthe former George Robinson of an Irish Porters mob.Neither age nor change of habits had altered the talland muscular figure which, in the redolence and buoyancyof youth, must have been equal to any achievementof physical prowess."Mr. Connell (the Johnny Connell of Garryowen)and Darby O Brien (some versions have Harry, othersJerry O Brien) were," writes Sir Charles O Donnellll tothe Editor, in 1833, " two squireens in Limerick, and,about the time the song was written, between the years1770 and 1780, devil-may-care sort of fellows, who defiedall authority : they were the sons of brewers ; the formeris still alive, and has, or had, until very lately, a largebrewery in Limerick."The feat mentioned in the last verse, of O Brienhavingleapt over the dock,In spite of judge and jury,"(some versions run " In spite of all the soldiers),although the Editor is unable to give the particulars ofthis occurrence, has many parallels in the history ofthe administration of justice in Ireland. Fitzgerald, inhis " Cork Remembrancer," chronicles that, in 1753,Matthew Callaghan, aged 18 years, was capitallyconvicted in the City Court on Tuesday, April 17th, forthe robbery of Captain Capell at Glanmire. As soon ashereceived sentence of death, he leaped out of the dockwith his bolts on, made his escape out of court, but wasGARRYOWEN. 245retaken the same day, and hanged at the corner of BroadLane on Wednesday, the 25th of April. The informerwho discovered on him was so ill-treated by the mob(having one of his ears cut off), that his life was despairedof. Since this transaction happened," adds Fitzgerald,the dock in the City Court has been made higher."Limerick is as notorious for its nocturnal irregularitiesas for its memorable sieges; many instances of which maybeproduced. Before the freaks of Johnny Connell,Mr. Hayes,* whose memory is recorded in the cathedralof that city asDAN HAYES, AN HONESTMAN AND LOVER OF HIS COUNTRY,"has thus described his departure from the scene of hisjuvenile excesses, under the title of " The Farewell."Ye gentle virgins, set your hearts at ease,No more the town s disturbed with riotous Hayes ;No more in Barrack Street his sword he draws,Nor murders horses, nor ravages the laws ;No more inspired with rack he scours the streetsTo swear and play the devil with all he meets ;No more the windows clink with clattering stones,Nor dying pigs emit untimely groans ;The peaceful street, no more with clamour rings,Nor nightly fiddlers ply their sounding strings," &c.Previous to the midnight vagaries of " Buck Hayes,"or " Count Hayes," as he was sometimes called, we findHe died at Kensington on the 20th July, 1767, at the early ageof thirty-four ; it may be presumed, from the effects of dissipation. Byhis will, he left his estates to aid the foundation of a hospital inLimerick ; but his heirs successfully contested the bequest.246 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Dr. Smith, the bishop of Limerick, complaining by hisletter of the 27th October, 1710,* of similar wantonproceedings.On the 12th of September, about one or two in themorning, several persons with musical instruments, whosang a song, which (I am informed by those who heardit most distinctly) was a very scandalous one. Afterwards,I heard them repeat the words, confusion anddamnation, which, I suppose, was when they drank confusionand damnation to Dr. Sacheverell and all his adherents,and all of his principles, as I was informed theydid by a gentleman, who says he opened his casement andheard them. They staid before my house a considerabletime, and (the same gentleman informed me, whose depositionsare taken before the mayor and other justices)drank other healths, among which was the health mostprophanely called * The Litany health, wherein theyprayed that plague, pestilence, and famine, &c. mightfall on all (and among them particularly on all archbishopsand bishops, &c., to the best of his remembrance, and asheverily believes) who should refuse to drink the gloriousmemory of King William. The former of these healthswas likewise drank at one Alderman Higgins s, and neitherof them drank at any other houses appears by depositionstaken as before. The persons concerned in this (as appearsupon oath) were Major Cheater, at that time commandingofficer in chief of the garrison, Captain Plato,Lieutenant Mason, Lieutenant Barely, and LieutenantAutograph in the Editor s possession, with the depositions referredto : they were sold among the Southwell MSS. by auction atMessrs. Christies , in February 1834.GARRYOWEN. 247Walsh, all belonging to Sir John Whittier s regiment,and Captain Blunt, of Colonel Rooke s regiment. Afterthis, on the 21st of this month, about four, as I conceive,in the morning, I and my family were again disturbed byseveral persons who passed by my house, and made astrange unusual noise, by singing with feigned voices, andby beating with keys and tongs (as it appears on oath)on frying-pans, brass candlesticks, and such like instruments.Afterwards, on the 24th instant, about the samehour, I was startled out of my sleep (as I was each timebefore) by a hideous noise made at the corner of myhouse by the winding of horns, and the following of men,and the cry of a pack of dogs. I lay some considerabletime in bed, in hopes they would soon have gone away,but finding they did not, I got out of my bed and openedmy window, and stood there for some time in hopes ofdiscovering who they were (for it was a moonshine night),but could not. At length the dogs, in full cry (to thenumber, I believe, of twenty-three or twenty-four couple,or thereabouts) ran by my house, and in some time afterreturned again, and soon after in the same manner ranback again, making the same noise. After they hadpassed by my house the first time, I called to the sentinelat my door, and asked him who those men were, and whatthey were doing ; who answered me that they were officers,who had got a fox and dragged him along, and sent thedogs after him. Who these persons were, who wereguilty of the second and third riots, appears by the depositionstaken before our justices of the peace. I cannotbut observe that Major Cheater, with others of thatregiment (as I think appears by my depositions), was248 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.always one ; and in the second riot, was accompanied byLieutenant Barely.The gentlemen who put the first great affront uponme having owned their fault and asked my pardon, Ishould never have mentioned it to their prejudice, hadit not been for the repeated indignity they have put uponme since ; which, if continued, will oblige me to removewith my family out of town, till the gentlemen come toa better temper.Beside these abuses which I have mentioned, I andmy family have been frequently alarmed and awakenedin the dead of night by soldiers (as they afterwards appearedto be), who feigned themselves to be spirits, someby stripping themselves naked, and others by putting onwhite garments, and throwing stones at the sentinel atmy door, and at other times by throwing stones on theslates of my house, which made an unusual noise whenthey were tumbling down ; and one night particularly thecentury was so much affrighted, and made such a noise,that I was obliged to rise out of my bed to encouragehim, and to assure him they were no spirits.All this having been done since the first abuse thatwas put on me, and never before having received anysuch abuses by any officers or soldiers since my firstcoming to this town, there having been always a goodunderstanding betwixt us, and the officers of all formerregiments having been at all times very obliging andcourteous to me, which I think myself bound in justiceto acknowledge ; for these reasons I cannot but believethat these later outrages were the result of some resentmentsoccasioned by the first abuse, and that the first abuseGARRYOWEN. 249was occasioned by an opinion they conceived that myprinciples did not in all things agree with their own.(Signed) " Tuo : LIMERICK."Speaking of the enjoyments of the people of Limerickat fair time or on festival days, Fitzgerald and MacGregornotice in their history, a fondness for music of the fiddleor bagpipe. " Amongst the airs selected upon these occasions,Patrick s Day, and Garry owen, always hold adistinguished place."Let Bacchus s sons be not dismayed,But join with me each jovial blade;Come booze and sing, and lend your aidTo help me with the chorus:Instead of Spa* we ll drink brown ale,And pay the reckoning on the nailsNo man for debt shall go to goalFrom Garryowen in glory IWe are the boys that take delight inSmashing the Limerick lamps when lighting;Through the streets like porters fighting,And tearing all before us.Instead, &c.The spa of Castle Connell, about six miles from Limerick, wasin high repute at the period when this song was written.f " Circular tablets of metal in the Exchange, so called, and whereit was customary to pay down the earnest money." SIR CHARLESO Donne. " Paying the reckoning on the nail was a cant phrasefor knocking a man on the head. " Nail him," being equivalent toknock him down."" Lamps were first put up in the streets of Limerick at the soleexpense of Alderman Thomas Rose, in 1696." Ferrara S Limerick.M2250 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.We ll break windows, we ll break doors,The watch knock down by threes and fours ;Then let the doctors work their cures,And tinker up our bruises.Instead, &c.We ll beat the bailiffs, out of fun,We ll make the mayor and sheriffs run ;We are the boys no man dares dun,If he regards a whole skin.Instead, &c.Our hearts, so stout, have got us fame,For soon tis known from whence we came ;Where er we go they dread the nameOf Garryowen in glory.Instead, &c.Johnny Council s tall and straight,And in his limbs he is complete ;He ll pitch a bar of any weight,From Garryowen to Thomond Gate.*Instead, &c.Garryowen is gone to rackSince Johnny Connell went to Cork,Though Darby O Brien leapt over the dockIn spite of judge and jury.Instead, &c.That is, from one side of Limerick to the other. In Fitzgeraldand MacGregor s " History of Limerick," when noticing the customsand amusements of the lower orders, it is stated that the tradesmenformerly marched in grotesque procession on Midsummer-day, andthat " the day generally ended in a terrible fight between the Garryowenand Thomond Gate boys, the tradesmen of the north and southsuburbs."THE COUNTY OF LIMERICK BUCK-HUNT. 251THE COUNTY OF LIMERICK BUCK-HUNT.From a manuscript copy, most obligingly procured forthe Editor by Miss Crump. In Fitzgerald and Macgregors "History of Limerick" (vol. ii. Appendix, p. 50),it is stated that the popular song of, " By your leave,Larry Grogan," was made on Edward Croker, Esq., ofRawleighstown, high-sheriff of the county in 1735, " bythe late Pierce Creagh of Dangan, Esq."Mr. Grogan is traditionally said to have composed asong upon the vagaries of a disappointed suitor of MissAlicia Croker, which became exceedingly popular;* shewas the high sheriff s second sister-j- and is the MissCroker mentioned in the fifth verse of the following song :Let no nice sir despise the hapless dame,Because recording ballads chant her name."No doubt all the beautiful lasses toasted in that versewere celebrated belles. Who Miss Cherry Singleton andMiss Sally Curry were, the Editor is unable to determine.Ally Croker" married Charles Langley, Esq., of Kilmarnock,county of Kilkenny, and died at an advanced age,without children to inherit their mother s charms, whichonly live in song. A sampler, worked by the hands of thefair Alice, was carefully preserved at Ballydavid, a seatof the Baker family, in the county tipperary, and hungin an old oak frame, over the fireplace of the dining-rooma venerated relic.SeeBoswell s "Johnson," vii.84, Murray s 10 vol. ed. ; Hone sEvery-day Book," col. 1641 ; Nichols " Collection of Poems," &c.t His eldest sister had married John Dillon, Esq., of Watertown,iu the county of Cork.252 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Miss Bligh was the eldest sister of the first Earl ofDarnley. Her second brother, who was an officer ofdragoons, had married, about the period that the songwas written, the sister of William Bury, Esq., of ShannonGrove, in the county of Limerick ; she subsequently (in1748) became the wife of Thomas Le Hunt, Esq., Map.for Wexford, and died in 1772, without issue.Miss Prittie, whose sister Mr. Croker had married,was the eldest daughter of Henry Prittie, Esq., of Kilboy,county of Tipperary, and married, in 1736, Sir RichardMeade, Bart., Map. for Kindle. Their son was createdEarl of Clanwilliam. She afterwards married the RightHonourable Sir Henry Cavendish, Bart, and died in 1779.Miss Peruse was of a Galway faintly ; but it is not inthe Editor s power to add any particulars respecting thissubject for verse."By your leave, Larry Grogan,*Enough has been spoken ;Tis time to give over your sonnet, your sonnet. fCome listen to mine,Tis far better than thine,Though not half the time was spent on, spent on it.A celebrated amateur piper, of the family of Grogan of JohnstownCastle, in the county of Wexford.t In the early part of the last century commonly used for song, orballad. For instance, in an imitation of the famous ballad of " MollyMong "Now if Curl will print me this sonnet,To a volume my verses shall swell ;And a fig for what Dennis says on it.He cannot find fault with Lepdl."THE COUNTY OF LIMERICK BUCK-HUNT. 253Oh I tis of a buck slainIn this very campaign :To let him live longer twere pity, twere pity ;For fat and for haunches,For head and for branches,Exceeding the mayor of a city, a city.A council assembled(Who d think but he trembled),Of lads of good spirit, well mounted, well mounted ;Each with whip and with cap on,And spurs made at llipon,*To the number of twenty were counted, were counted.Off, a score, we went bounding,Sweet horns were sounding,Each youth filled the air with a whoop and a halloo ;Or Rippon, in Yorkshire. " Rippcn spurs were formerly veryfamous.Why, there s an angel, if my spursBe not right Rippon. BEN Jonson S Staple ofN., 13.Whip me with wire, headed with rowels ofSharp Rippon spurs. - The Wits, Old Play, viii. p. 501.Ray has a local proverb, As true steel as Rippon rowels ;with this note subjoined: It is said of trusty persons, men ofmetal, faithful in their employments. Rippon, in this county, is a townfamous for the best spurs of England, whose rowels may be enforcedto strike through a shilling, and will break sooner than bow. P. 263.Fuller Las the same saying and explanation. A modern account ofRippon says, that when James I. went there, in 1617, he was presentedby the corporation with a gilt bow, and a pair of spurs : thelatter article cost 5i. It is said, also, that this manufacture is nowneglected there. " Names S Glossary.254 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Dubourg,* were he there,Such sweet music to hear,Would leave his Cremona, and follow, and follow.Knockaderk and Knockaney,fAnd hills twice as many,Saw us fly o er their stone walls, and hedges, and ditches.He skimmed o er the grounds,But to baffle our houndsWas ne er yet in any buck s breeches, buck s breeches.Four hours he held outMost surprisingly stout,Till at length to his fate he submitted, submitted ;His throat being cut up,The poor culprit put up,To the place whence he came was remitted, remitted.A celebrated performer on the violin, whose skill in the executionof Irish melodies is thus alluded to in Lawrence White sDissertation on Italian and Irish Music," 1742.Dub g improves them in our days,And never from the subject strays ;Nor by extravagance perplex d,Will let them wander from the text."Dubourg was a pupil of Geminiani, and, in 1728, was appointedMaster and Composer of the State Music in Ireland. He died in Londonin 1767. Some interesting particulars of Dubourg are to be foundin a very curious and amusing little volume, entitled " The Violin,"recently published by his grandson, Mr. George Dubourg; whosepreface, whimsically enough, commences with the assertion, that"Mankind may be divided into two classes those who play theviolin, and those who do not."t Two high hills, about twelve miles south-east of the city ofLimerick.THE COUNTY OF LIMERICK BUCK-HUNT. 255A place most enchanting,Where nothing was wantingThat poor hungry huntsman could wish, sir, could wish, sir.Though our number was there,Yet of delicate fareFor every man was a dish, sir, a dish, sir.We fell-to with fury,Like a long-famished jury,Nor stayed we for grace to our dinner, our dinner;The butler a-sweating,The knives all a-whetting,The edge of each stomach was keener, was keener.Oh ! the bumpers went round,With an elegant sound,Chink, chink, like sweet bells, went the glasses, the glasses.We drank Queen and King,And each other fine thing,Then tempered the beautiful lasses, sweet lasses.There was Singleton (Cherry),And sweet Sally Curry,Miss Croker, Miss Bligh, and Miss Prittie, Miss Prittie ;With lovely Miss Peruse,That subject for verse,Who shall ne er be forgot in my ditty, my ditty.With a great many more,From fifteen to a score ;Oh ! had you but seen them together, together,Such charms you d discover,You d pity the lover,And look on St. James s a feather, a feather.256 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Long prosper this county,And high-sheriffs bounty,Where thus we indulge, and make merry, make merry ;For, jovial as we are,We ll puff away all care,To poor busy Robin, and Fleury, and Fleury.*DEAR MALLOW, ADIEU!The following song, entitled " The Farewell, a pastoralballad in imitation of Whetstone," is copied froma quarto volume, published in Dublin in 1772, calledThe Shamrock, or Hibernian Cresses, a collection ofpoems, songs, epigrams, &c., Latin as well as English,the original production of Ireland. To which are subjoined,Thoughts on the prevailing System of SchoolEducation respecting Young Ladies, as well as Gentlemen,with practical Proposals for a Reformation. By SamuelWhyte, Principal of the English Grammar School."Whyte, whose memory is embalmed in a sonnet addressedto him by his pupil, Thomas Moore, ruled, forabove fifty years, a noisy mansion in Grafton Street,Dublin. " He was," observes another of his distinguishedpupils,-)- formed by nature for a schoolmaster ; indeed, heseemed to consider it the highest office of which man wascapable, and himself fittest of all the world to sustain it.Sir Robert Walpole and the Cardinal Fleury were, at thisperiod, respectively the prime ministers of England and France.t Manuscript Autobiography of the late Sir Harding Giffard, chiefjustice of Ceylon.DEAR MALLOW, ADIEU ! 257His temper was admirable, his habits and pursuits almostthose of the children he taught ; a pun ; or a story of themost innocent or powerless kind, gave him the utmostdelight, and, seated among the grandchildren of those hehad first taught, he was little else than an object of theirworship. Next to a school, in his estimate, stood atheatre ; and his pupils were all taught to declaim in thestyle of Mossop, Barry, and Sheridan, the friends andassociates of his youth. This had, I doubt not, a verypowerful influence upon the tone of Irish rhetoric, formost of those who were prominent at the bar or in thepulpit had passed under his tuition. It was delightful tosee the old man presiding at one of his public examinations.It was a jubilee time to him. A large company,and that not a very disinterested audience, attended toobserve the rivalry for prizes, which were, with no smallpolicy, awarded by temporary judges, friends from theUniversity, whose character gave weight to their decisions,while their presence imposed solemnity on the scene.Poor Sam Whyte I\\~ho ruled o er children was himself a child,at least in worldly matters ; but he was neither wastefulnor intemperate, and if he grew not wealthy, neither washe poor. He died since I left Ireland, and must havebeen above fourscore years of age." *In 1750, Dr. Smith thus describes Mallow, which wasthen a very fashionable watering-place: " Not far fromthe Castle is a fine spring, of moderately tepid water,"Mr. Samuel Whyte died in Dublin, 4th October, 1811, agedseventy-eight." Annual Register.258 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.which bursts out of the bottom of a great limestone rock,and approaches the nearest, in all its qualities, to the hot-wellwaters of Bristol, of any that has been discovered inthis kingdom. Here is generally a resort of good companyduring the summer months, both for pleasure andthe benefit of drinking the waters. Near the spa thereare pleasant walks, agreeably planted, and on each sideare canals and cascades, for the amusement and exerciseof the company, who have music on these walks. Thereis also a long room, where assemblies are held for dancing,card-playing, &c. Adjoining to the well is a kind ofgrotto, on which the following lines were wrote, andprinted in the public papers, when it was first erected.Joint work of judgment, fancy, taste, and art,Nature s wild wondrous rival s counterpart ;By avarice opposed, by envy blamed,By bounty built, to future ages famed,Live long; by time, by malice undestroyed,By avarice or by envy enjoyed.The town being well situated, the country about itpleasant, and the company agreeable, it hath obtainedamong some the name of the Irish Bath."The Ulster Miscellany," printed in 1753, containsA Poem on the Hot Wells at Mallow," p. 294 ; andalso " A new Ballad on the Hot Wells at Mallow," p. 342.The former, after commending " this healing fountain,"whichfar more virtues hath,Than those of Bristol, or her sister Bath,"thus concludes :Attend, ye lovers, while the muse recordsThe charming pleasures which the place affords :DEAR MALLOW, ADIEU ! 259Here stands a wood bedecked with summer s pride,There the Blackwater rolls his dusky tide ;Here a canal of waters, deep and clear,Whose spouting cascades please the eye and ear,While on the pebble-walks fresh air you breathe,Trees nod above, and fishes swim beneath.Music, in consort, from a side retreat,Gives life to all, and makes the scene complete ;At night a gay assembly and a ball,Murphy s sweet harp, and dancing closes all."The ballad mentioned very glibly runs on in praise ofthe springs of Mallow, according to this fashion, to the airof " Ballyspellen,"All you that areBoth lean and bare,With scarce an ounce of tallow,To make your flesh- Look plump and fresh,Come, drink the springs at Mallow !For all that youAre bound to doIs just to gape and swallow;You ll find by thatYou ll rowl in fat,Most gloriously at Mallow !Or, if love s painDisturbs your brain,And makes your reason shallow,To shake it off,Gulp down enoughOf our hot springs at Mallow ! "Notwithstanding this advice, the author of the " Adieuto Mallow," instead of there shaking off " love s pain,"260 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.seems to have become so fascinated by the charms ofSusan, or Mary, or Bess, that if the words of man are tobe believed, one of these damsels should have had an earlyopportunity of considering whether she would like tocry hallow,To lull and keepHer babe asleepBeside the springs of Mallow !"Oh, Mallow, dear Mallow, adieu !How oft have I walked by thy spring,While the trees were yet dropping with dew,Ere the lark his shrill matin did sing.How often at noon have I strayed,By the streamlet that winds through thy vale ;How oft, at still eve, on thy mead,The soft breeze have I toyed to inhale.O er thy green hills, high-bosomed in wood,O er thy sweetly diversified ground,How oft, as my walk I pursued,Have I gazed in wild transport around 1Invoking the powers that presideO er the stream, o er the grove, o er the hill,With their presence my fancy to guide,With their fire my wrapt bosom to fill.On a rock hanging over the flood,Through the wild glen meandering slow,Half-frighted, how oft have I stood,To pore on the mirror below.DEAR MALLOW, ADIEU ! 2G1To see, in the heart of the wave,The glen, and the rock, and the sky,How bright the reflection it gave,How pleased, how delighted was I.At the foot of an elm, or a lime,How oft have I stretched me along,Enchanted with Collins s rhyme,Or Akenside s rapture of song !How oft, too, as accident led,Through the churchyard path s fear-stirring ground,Busy Fancy has called up the dead,T^o glide in dread visions around.These sweet walks, this soft quiet, and allThose blameless, those rational joys,Must I quit for the buzz of the hall,For dissonance, wrangling, and noise ;For the city s dull uniform scene,Where jobbing, and party, and strife,Dissipation, and languor, and pain,Fill up the whole circle of life.The language which flows from the heart,"In Susan, in Mary, and Bess,How exchanged for the polish of art,Smooth nonsense, and empty address !For painting, which Nature bestowsOn the village-maid s innocent cheek,Mid the birthright s fantastical rows,How lost were the labour to seek !262 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Yet oft shall fond Memory anew,Present each loved scene to my eye,And, with painful enjoyment, reviewThe delights that too hastily fly ;Through all the sweet landscape around,Not a stream, not a rock, nor a tree,Not a field-flower nor shrub shall be found,Unmarked or unhonoured by me.And ye, my companions so dear,What words my deep anguish can tell ?Receive from a witness this tear,How it pains me to bid you farewell.Ye, too, for I read in your eyesThe emotions that swell at your heart,Ye have not yet learned to disguise,Ye are sorry to see me depart."Sweet seat of Contentment and Ease,Where Rest her still sabbath may keep,Where all may live just as they please,Eat, drink, read, laugh, saunter, or sleep ;The next spring may new-brighten thy scene,And thy leaves and thy blossoms restore :But bring the loved circle again,Or the landscape will charm me no more.Sweet commerce of unison minds,A treasure how rarely possess d ;How seldom, through life, the heart findsThe joy that gives worth to the rest.THE RAKES OF MALLOW. 263But, hark ! tis the chaise at the door,My mare is already in view-alas! I have time for no more,Oh, Mallow, dear Mallow, adieu !THE RAKES OF MALLOW.So were the young men of that fashionable water-drinkingtown proverbially called ; and a set of " prettypickles" they were, if the song, descriptive of their modeof life, here recorded after the most delicate oral testimony,is not very much over-coloured.Air " Sandy lent the man his Mull."Bearing, telling, dancing, drinking,Breaking windows, damning, sinking,*Ever raking, never thinking,Live the rakes of Mallow.Spending faster than it comes,Beating waiters, bailiffs, duns,Bacchus s true begotten sons,Live the rakes of Mallow.One time naught but claret drinking,Then like politicians thinkingTo raise the sinking funds when sinking,Live the rakes of Mallow.Cursing extravagantly; ie. " damning you to hell, and sinkingyou lower."264 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.When at home with daddy dying,Still for Mallow water crying ;But where there s good claret plyingLive the rakes of Mallow.Living short, but merry lives ;Going where the devil drives ;Having sweethearts, but no wives,Live the rakes of Mallow.Racking tenants, stewards teasing,Swiftly spending, slowly raising,Wishing to spend all their days inRaking as at Mallow.Then to end this raking lifeThey get sober, take a wife,Ever after live in strife,And wish again for Mallow.DARLING Redden.Neddeen," says Mr. weld, " is the principal placeof trade on the Denmark river.* It is a very small town,and though we have observed some new houses, has, onthe whole, an appearance of decay."Neddeen is now generally known as Denmark, and theauthorship of the song respecting its attractions js alreadyAn arm of the sea, west of Bantry Bay.DARLING Redden. 265attributed to Mr. Wood, the gentleman mentioned atpages 14 and 149. The Banimian style of writing thewords as vulgarly sounded, in which this and the songsat these pages originally appeared, together with the richstore of traditionary knowledge displayed, and the loveof local allusion, leave no doubt upon the subject, unlessindeed the Editor has suffered himself to be carried awayby circumstantial evidence, as he has reason to believe hedid, when giving judgment upon the authorship of theBoys of Kilkenny."The song now republished there can be no question,from the mention of the Marquess of Lansdowne s visitto the south of Ireland in company with Mr. Moore, waswritten in 1823. It was originally printed in a Corkscurrilous publication, called " The Freeholder" (August30, 1823), with the subsequent introductory letter.Mr. Boil,* I am toul the Marquis o Lansdown isgone down to Neddeen, and as I heard that Tommy Moorwas gone off to Kearney to write about the Lakes, I thinkthat a hint about Neddeen mite make him write aboutthat too. I wish he d built a poem on the follow foundation; an as I m would the Marquis manes to build a newtown, I could give a plan for that too. The above mayserve for a dedication for both, from your humble servantto common,JACK GRAUMMACHREE."This visit of Mr. Moore to Ireland was followed bythe appearance, in the ensuing year, of the ninth numberMr. Boyle, the editor.N266 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.of the " Irish Melodies," perhaps the most Irish part ofthat national work, as well as the one most identified withthe author. Of the twelve songs which it contains, ninehave reference to local feelings or traditions, or to circumstanceswhich arose out of the poet s tour. Thus,Sweet Innisfallen," and " Twas one of those dreams,"obviously allude to Mr. Moore s visit to Killarney ; andIn yonder valley there dwelt alone," is said to haveoriginated in an anecdote connected with O Sullivan scascade. The song commencing, " By the Feal s wave.benighted," is founded on a romantic anecdote in thehistory of the Geraldine. These four songs fairly belongto the county of Kerry. Then, descriptive of a glance ata map of Ireland, preparatory to the tour, we find,Fairest, put on a while," in a note on which, by the by,the Skellig rocks, mentioned, at p. 126, as off the coastof Kerry, are confounded with the Salts which are inthe barony of Forth, off the coast of Wexford. Onmeeting with a party of old friends in Dublin, " And dothnot a meeting like this." On Irish politics, " As vanquishedErin wept beside," &c. ; and, " Quick, we havebut a second," is just the song that might have beensuggested by a pleasant travelling party being hurried offfrom an agreeable meeting. The horn of the mail-coachguard, or the voice of some equally urgent personage, isabsolutely ringing in the ear.Tune " The Sprig of Shillelah."As Shady Mac Furlough O Shaughnessy, doge,T other day was industriously mending a brogue,On a neat little hill that they call Drumcusheen,DARLING Redden. 267His sole, and his welt, and his cord was so strong,That, soon waxing warm, he lilted a song ;He bellowed as loud as his lungs they could bawl ;Oh ! bad cess to the tanners, I ll leather them all,But I ll first sing the praises of darling Neddeen !On the face of this earth tis the most curious place,I swears black and blue, by the nose on my face,Tis the sweetest of any that ever was seen ;Och ! it s there you will see both the hedgehog and whale,And the latter continually flapping his tail,Just to raise up a breeze for the fowls of the air,As the eagle, the jackass, or gosling so fair,While they sing round the cabins of darling Neddeen !There stone houses all, are weather-slated with mud,And the praties, and women, and whisky is good,And the latter small hardware, they call it poteen.Small blame to them keeping no lamps there at night,Because of the girls, whose eyes shews them light ;You may talk of your lamps, that is all lit with gas,Och ! give me the black eye of a sweet Colleen cas,Such as light up the cabins in darling Neddeen !There the geese run about through the most of the street,Ready roasted, inviting the people they meetTo eat, lord an squire, cobbogue an spalpeen ;From the cows they gets whisky, the ganders give milk,An their best woollen blankets is all made of silk ;Their party young girls, they never grows old,And the sun never set there, last winter, I m told,But stay d lighting the pipes of the boys of Neddeen 12G8 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Oh ! if I kept singing till this time next year,Not a half of the beautiful beauties you d hear,From the Swellings down west, to the great Noersheen ;There the sea s great broad bottom is covered with grass,Where many a young mermaid s seen washing her glass,An great elephant teeth are turned up in the bogs,Some charmed into sawdust, some changed into logs,Or converted to tooth-picks in darling Neddeen !Long life to the Marquis, I m glad he s gone downTo his own little city a far sweeter townThan Brandon, Dunmanway, or Ballyporeen.Long life to his honour, till after he s deadMay nothing that s teazing e er run in his head ;May he give to each tenant a long building lease ;May their praties, an butter, an chiltern increase,Till Dublin looks smaller than darling Neddeen ITHE TOWN OF PASSAGE.No less than three songs upon the town of Passage,which is situated between Cork and its Cove, are heregiven to illustrate the manner in which popular lyrics areimitated and sometimes amalgamated. ,As to the authorship of No. I., there can be nodoubt. Mr. Simon Quin, stimulated by the discomfortsof a drowsy landlady and her lively lodgings, having, inthe concluding verse, saved the Editor the risk of conjecture.This song was introduced, with considerableeffect, upon the London stage by the late Mr. CharlesTHE TOWN OF PASSAGE. 269Connor, in Lord Glendale s very amusing farce of theIrish Tutor;" the fourth verse, especially, never failingto produce a burst of laughter and applause.Of the author of No. II., it may be said as of Junius,Stat nominis umbra" It is, however, evidently, fromthe fourth line of the second verse, a subsequent compositionto No. I.In what manner the Rev. Francis Mahony, under thenom de guerre of Father Prout, has combined the songsNos. I. and II., the reader can judge from the version ofThe town of Passage," No. III. Its reverend author,or rather conductor, has described it as " manifestly animitation of that unrivalled dithyrambus, the Groves ofBlarney, with a little of its humour, and all its absurdity."Notes are appended to such local matters as appear torequire explanation.No. I.The town of Passage is neat and spacious,All situated upon the sea ;The ships a-floating, and the youths a-boating,With their cotton coats on each summer s day.Tis there you d see, both night and morning,The men of war, with fresh-flowing sails ;The would lieutenants, and the tars so jolly,All steering for Cork in a hackney chaise.Tis there s a stature drawn after nature,A leaping from the mud upon the dry land ;A lion or a leopard, or some fierce creature,With a Reading-made-easy all in his hand.*The figure-head of an old ship.270 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.There s a rendez-vous house for each would heroFor to take on, whose heart beats high ;The colours a-drooping, and the children s rocketsAll pinned across it, hanging out to dry.Tis there s a Strand too, that s decked with oar weeds,And tender gob-stones* and mussel-shells;And there s skeehories,^ and what still more is,A comely fresh-flowing water rill.Tis there the ladies, when break of day is,And tender lovers, do often pelt ;Some a-airing and some a-bathing,All mother naked, to enjoy their health.And there s a ferry-boat that s quite convenient,Where man and horses do take a ride ;Tis there in clover you may pass overTo Carrigaloe J on the other side.There may be seen, oh ! the sweet Marino,With its trees so green O I and fruit so red ;Brave White Point, and right forefeet itThe Giant s Stairs, and sweet Horse s Head. [|There s a house of lodgings at one Molly Bowen s,Where often goes in one Simon Quin ;Oh ! tis there without a coat on, you d hear her grope onThe door to open, to let him in.Round pebbles.f Hawthorn berries.J A village on the Great Island, opposite Passage, between whichplaces there is a ferry.The seat of Savage French, Esq., on the Great Island.|| White Point, the Giant s Stairs, and Horse s Head, are remarkableobjects not far from Passage.THE TOWN OF PASSAGE. 271Then straight up stairs one pair of windows,With but the slates betwixt him and the sky ;Oh, tis there till morning, the fleas all swarming,Do keep him warm in where he does lie.No. II.Oh, Passage town is of great renown,For we go down in our buggies thereOn a Sunday morning, all danger scorning,To get a corning* at sweet Passage fair.Oh, tis there you d see the steam-boats sportingUpon Lough Mahon,-]- all so fair to view ;Bold Captain O Brien: with his colours flying,And he advising with the Waterloo.There s a patent slipping, and dock for shipping,And whale-boats skipping upon the tide ;There ships galore is,|| and Cove before us,With " Carrigaloe on the other side."" The town is much frequented during the summer by the inhabitantsof Cork, for the benefit of salt-water bathing." MR. SHAWMASON S Su?Tys of Ireland, vol. iii. 1819.f A fine sheet of water between the point on which BlackrockCastle stands, and the town of Passage.The well-known commander of a steam-boat which plied betweenCork and Cove.A rival steam-boat.|| " The principal trade carried on in the town is the repairing ofvessels, of which a good number in the year come thither for that purpose.Timber ships from Sweden, and the northern powers, alwaysstop and unload at Passage, and many merchant ships belonging toCork also take in their cargoes and discharge there." MR. SHAWMASON S Surveys of Ireland, vol. iii. 1819.272 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Tis there s the hulk that s well stored with convicts,Who were never upon decks till they went to sea ;They ll ne er touch dry land, nor rocky island,Until they spy land at sweet Botany Bay.Here s success to this foreign station,Where American ships without horses ride,And Portuguese* from every nationComes in rotation upon the tide.But not forgetting Haulbowline Island,That was constructed by Mrs. Deane :Herself s the lady that has stowed the waterTo supply the vessels upon the mainsAnd these bold sons of Neptune, I mean the boatmen,Will ferry you over from Cove to Spike ; {And outside the harbour are fishers sporting,Watching a nibble from a sprat or pike ;" Passage, whose chief trade comes from the ships that ride beforeit. We counted sixteen then at anchor, among which were seven Portuguese,that were taking in beef, tallow, and hides." Tour by TwoEnglish Gentlemen through Ireland, published in 1748.t The late Mrs. Deane, the mother of Sir Thomas Deane, was awoman of extraordinary energy of character. She took an active partin the superintendence of the naval works which were constructed uponHaulbowline Island, in Cork harbour, between the years 1816 and1822, at the cost of nearly 200.000/. The tank alluded to above isdivided into six compartments, each one hundred feet long, twenty-sevenfeet and a half wide, and eight feet in depth, which are eachcapable of containing 176,000 gallons : the entire, consequently, holds1,056,000 gallons of water.J " From Cove the harbour s mouth seems closed by the islandcalled Spike, lying opposite the entrance, so that this harbour is notTHE TOWN OP PASSAGE. 273While their wives and daughters, from no danger shrinking,All night and morning they rove aboutThe mud and sand-banks, for the periwinkle,The shrimp and cockle, when the tide is out.No. III.The town of PassageIs both large and spacious,And situatedUpon the say;Tis nate and decent,And quite adjacent,To come from CorkOn a summer s day.There you may slip in,To take a dipping,Forefeet the shipping,That at anchor ride ;Or in a wherry,Cross o er the ferry,To " Carrigaloe,On the other side."Mud cabins swarm inThis place so charming,With sailors garmentsHung out to dry ;unlike the fine description given by Virgil, in his first .Aeneid, of abeautiful port.Est in recess long locus ; insula portusEffect object lateran, kc."SMITH S Cork.N2274 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.And each abode isSnug and commodious,With pigs melodious,In their straw-built sty.Tis there the turf is,And lots of Murphies,*Dead sprats and herrings,And oyster-shells ;Nor any lack, oh !Of good tobacco,Though what is smuggledBy far excels.There are ships from Cadi,And from Barbadoes,But the leading trade isIn whisky-punch ;And you may go inWhere one Molly BowenKeeps a nate hotelFor a quiet lunch.But land or deck on,You may safely reckon,Whatsoever countryYou come hither from,On an invitationTo a jollificationWith a parish priest,That s called " Father Tom."fA popular name for potatoes.t The reverend conductor of this song, who would palm it uponBarry the painter, observes, on the mention of " Father Tom,"THE FAIR MAID OF PASSAGE. 275Of ships there s one fixtFor lodging convicts,A floating "stone jug"Of amazing bulk;The hake and salmon,Playing at backgammon,*Swim for diversionAll round this hulk ;There " Saxon" jailorsKeep brave retailers,Who soon with sailorsMust anchor weigh.From th em rale island,Ne er to see dry land,Until they spy landIn sweet Bot ny Bay.THE FAIR MAID OF PASSAGE.From a manuscript in the autograph of the late Mr.Millikin. The Editor has received a copy of this songfrom Mr. Edward Quin, between which and the versionThis cannot possibly refer (without a flagrant anachronism) to thepresent incumbent, the Rev. Thomas England, Pap., known to theliterary world by a life of the celebrated friar, Arthur O Leary,chaplain to a club which Curran, Wolverton, Earls Moira, Claremont,&c. &c., established in 1780, under the designation of the monks ofthe screw. "See page 146.276 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.now given, the only material variation occurs in the firstlines. According to Mr. Quin, they areMy dear Molly Mong,You re soft as a bog."In a note (1838) he adds, "I assure you, from my ownrecollection, the song is known in my family upwards ofthirty-five years. I have no doubt that it originated inCork, though I do not know its author."Oh, fair maid of Passage,As plump as a passage,And as mild as a kitten,Those eyes in your face !Yerrah ! pity my case,For poor Dermuid is smitten 1Far softer nor silk,And more white than new milkOh, your lily-white hand is;Your lips red as cherries,And your eyes like blackberries,And you re straight as a wand is.Your talk is so quare,And your sweet curly hairIs as black as the devil ;And your breath is as sweet, too,As any potatoes,Or orange from Seville.When dressed in her bodiceShe trips like a goddess,THE ENTRENCHMENT OF ROSS. 277So nimble, so frisky,One kiss from her cheek,Tis so soft and so sleek,That twould warm me like whisky.So I sobs and I pine,And I grunts like a swine,Because you re so cruel ;No rest can I take,All asleep or awake,But I dreams of my jewel.Your hate, then, give over,Nor Dermuid, your lover,So cruelly handle ;Or, faith, Dermuid must die,Like a pig in a stye,Or the snuff of a candle.THE ENTRENCHMENT OF ROSS.The ballad on the entrenchment of New Ross, in 1265,which is here given as a specimen of ancient local song,was first printed in the " Archaeological," vol. xxii., havingbeen communicated to the Society of Antiquaries in 1829by Sir Frederic Madden, with the following introductoryobservations :Among the Harleian MSS. in the British Museum,is preserved a highly curious volume, written at the commencementof the fourteenth century, containing a miscellaneouscollection of pieces in verse and prose, appalsTHE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.gently the production of an Irish ecclesiastic, and chieflyof a satirical description. Most of these pieces are inEnglish or Latin ; and there is great reason to concludethat they are from the pen of Friar Michael Kildare,*who is expressly named as the author of a ballad, fol. 10,and who is erroneously assigned by Ritson, in his BibliographyPoetica, to the fifteenth, instead of the beginningof the preceding century. But towards the close of thisMS. (which, from the folios having been strangely misplaced,is very difficult to follow in the order of contents),occurs an extremely interesting poem, written in the ancientor Norman-french language, contributing in a remarkabledegree to throw illustration on the early topographyand history of the town of New Ross in Ireland.The poem in question is thus described in the HarleianCatalogue, No. 913, Art. 43, ( Isthmus facture mile deRosse, being a French poem upon the quarrel which happenedthere, between Sir Morice and Sir WaterA. D. 1265. This is not a very accurate description,since the object of the writer (who was an eye-witness,and therefore of undoubted authority) was not to relate aquarrel between two anonymous knights, but to give adetailed and highly interesting narrative of the erectionof the walls and fortifications of the town of Ross ; occasionedby the dread felt by the inhabitants, lest the unprotectedand open situation of the place might causeIn Bishop Tanner s " Bibliotheca Britannico-Hibernica" (a dictionaryof all the English and Irish authors previous to the seventeenthcentury) this article occurs. " Kildare [Michael] monarchsvel frater Mendicant, script Anglice carmen pius. Pi. Sweet Jesulend and fre. M. S. Norwich. More, 784." ED.THE ENTRENCHMENT OF ROSS. 279them to suffer from a feud then raging with violence betweentwo powerful barons."These barons," according to Sir Frederic Madden,were Maurice Fitzpatrick,* the chief of the Geraldinefaction, and Walter de Burgh or Burke, Earl of Ulster,whose deadly wars, as Sir James Ware writes, under theyear 1264, wrought bloodshed and troubles throughoutthe realm of Ireland. "The Editor, however, is inclined to think, that whoeverthe Sir Maurice mentioned may have been, and he probablywas a Fitzgerald, the Sir Walter was not a De Burgh,but a Le Power, or Power, not improbably the father ofthe Walter le Power, who is chronicled by Holinshed, in1302, as having " wasted a great part of Mounster, burningmanie farmer and places in that countries."Stanihurst s account of the entrenchment of New Ross,as given in Holinshed, is exceedingly minute. " Rosse,"he writes, is " an haven towne in Mounster, not far fromWaterford, which seemeth to have beene in ancient time atowne of great port. Whereof sundrie and probable conjecturesare given, as well by the old ditches that are nowa mile distant from the walls of Rosse, betweene which wallsand ditches, the relics of the ancient walls, gates, andtowers, placed betweene both, are yet to be scene. Thetowne is builded in a barren smile, and planted among acrue of naughty and rolling neighbours. And in oldtime when it flourished, albeit the towne were sufficientlypeopled, yet as long as it walls not compassed with walls,they were formed with watch and ward, to keepe it fromthe greece snatching of the Irish enemies. With whomeHe died in New Ross in 1286. Collins S Peerage, ED.280 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.as they were generally molested, so the private consentingof one peasant on a sudden incensed them to environ theirtowne with strong and substantial walls.There repaired one of the Irish to this towne onhorseback, and espied a peace of cloth on a merchant sstall, tooke hold thereof, and bet the cloth to the lowestprice he could. As the merchant and he stood dodgingone with the other in cheating the ware, the horsemanconsidering that he was well mounted, and that the merchantand he had grown to a price, made wise as thoughhe would have drawn to his purse to have defrayed themonie. The cloth in the means while being tucked up andplaced before him, he gave the spur to his horse and ranawaie with the cloth, being not inward from his postingpase, by reason the towne was not enclosed either withditch or wall. The townsmen being pinched at the heartthat one rascal in such scornful wise should give themthe champagne, not so much weieng the slenderness of theloss, as the thankfulness of the file, they put theirheads together, consulting how to prevent either the suddenrushing, or the post-hast fling of anie such adventurousrakehell hereafter.In which consultation a famous Dido, a cast widow,a politics dame, a bountiful gentlewoman, called Rose,who, representing in sincerity of life the sweetness ofthat hearse whose name she bare, unfolded the devise,how anie such future mischance should be prevented, andwithall opened hir coffers liberally to have it furthered ;two good properties in a councellor. Hir devise was, thatthe towne should incontinently be inclosed with walls, andwherewithal promised to discharge the charges, so thatTHE ENTRENCHMENT OF ROSS. 281they would not stick to find out labourers. The devise ofthis worth ie matrons being wise, and the offer liberal, thetownsmen agreed to follow the one, and to put theirhelping hands to the achieving of the other. The workewas begun, which, thorough the multitude of hands, seemedlight. For the whole towne was assembled, tag and rag,cut and long table ; none exempted, but such as were bed-redand impotent. Some were tasked to delve, othersappointed with mattocks to dig, diverse allotted to theunmeaning of rubbish, manie bestowed to the carriage ofstones, sundrie occupied in tempering of porter, the bettersort busied in overseeing the workmen, ech one accordingto his vocation implored, as though the cavities of Carthagewere afresh in building, as it is feature versified by the goldenpoet Virgil, and neatly English by Master Doctor Phaer.But to return from Dido of Carthage to Rose ofllosse, and her worke. The labourers were so manie, theworke, by reason of round and exchequer payment, so wellapplied, the quarries of faire marble so nere at hand (forthey affirme that out of the trenches and ditches hard bytheir rapiers the stones were had ; and all that plot is sostone, that the foundation is an hard rocks), that thesewalls with diverse brave turrets were suddenly mounted,and in manner sooner finished, than to the Irish enemiesnotified ; which I wise was no small corse to them.These walls in circuit are equal to London walls. It haththree gorgeous gates, Bishop his gate on the east side,Agate on the east-south-east side, and Southgate on thesouth part. This towne was no more aroused for thesewalls, than for a notable wooden bridge that stretchedfrom the towne unto the other side of the water, which282 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.must have beene by reasonable survey twelve score [ ],if not more. Diverse of the poles, logs, and stakes, withwhich the bridge was underplot, stick to this daie in thewater. A man would here suppose, that so flourishing atowne, so firmelie builded, so substantiate walled, so wellpeopled, so plenteously with thriftie artificers stored,would not have fallen to anie sudden decade"*Stanihurst, whose account was published in 1586,adds, " The walls stand to this daie, a few streets andhouses in the towne, no small parcel thereof is turned toorchards and gardens. The greater part of the towne issteep and steaming upward. Their church is calledChrist s Church, in the north side whereof is placed amonument, called the King of Denmark, his tome ;whereby conjecture may rise that the Danes were foundersof that church. This Rosse is called Rosse Nova, orRosse Ponte, by reason of their bridge."In addition to what Sir Frederic Madden has saidrespecting the manuscript in which the ballad on theentrenchment of New Ross occurs, an attempt to trace itshistory may not be unsatisfactory. That a friar namedMichael of Kildare was the writer, is not only tolerablycertain from the passage alluded to by Sir Frederic Madden,which is the closing verse of a religious song, viz.This sang wrozt a frere,Jesu Christ be is secure,Loved bring him to the tour,Free Michel Kyldare ;"Dormer, a lawyer, is enumerated by Stanihurst among theauthors of Ireland as a scholar of Oxford, born in Ross, who wrote inballad royal, " The Uecaio of Rosse."THE ENTRENCHMENT OF ROSS. 283but from a satire in Latin, at p. 26 v, which commences,Ego, Michael Bernard." The manuscript consists of64 leaves of vellum, 12mo. size, and is written in a goodhand, and embellished with initial letters in colours. Onfolio 25, a paragraph commences " Anno domini, m. cc.vii. xx a . die Feb." which is the identical year when the songon the death of Sir Piers de Birmingham, printed byRitson, in his " Collection of Ancient Songs," from thismanuscript, appears to have been composed.* From thiscoincidence, the year 1308 may be fairly assigned as thedate of this manuscript. Various notices respecting it atdifferent periods, enable us to trace its history with somedegree of accuracy. On the suppression or dissolution ofthe monastery in which the volume had been preserved,it came into the possession of a George Wyse, as is evidentfrom the following entry, in the writing of Elizabeth stime, on the back of the second folio :Iste Liber pert net ad .me Georgia WYSE."" Sith Gabriel gan greteUre led mari swedeThat Gode wold in hir liteA thousand ser hit esseThre hundred ful i wiseAnd over veris eizte.Than of the eizt sereTak ties ten fereThat wol be xx y full ; 1288 date of event.Alan the xx taiOf Averil bifor MaiSo death us gan to pulled."284 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.The comparison of the autograph of George Wysc,who was bailiff of Waterford in 1566, and mayor of thatcity in 1571, which is extant in the State Paper Office,leaves little doubt as to the identity of this individual.The Wyse family, it may be observed, were distinguished fortheir literary taste. Stanihurst, speaking of them, remarks,that " of this surname there flourished sundrie learnedgentlemen. There liveth," he adds, " one Wise, in Waterford,that maketh [verse?] verie well in the English;" and hparticularly mentions " Andrew Wise, a toward youth anda good versifier." To the same family were grantedvarious ecclesiastical possessions in Ireland. Sir WilliamWyse, the ancestor of the late member for Waterford, andpossibly the father of the above-mentioned George, had agrant of the Abbey of St. John, near that city, 15thNovember, 1536.However this manuscript may have come into thehands of a member of the Wyse family, it seems to havecontinued, if not in their possession, at least in the samelocality ; as, in the reign of James I., it is noticed asThe Book of Ross or Waterford:" see No. 418 of theLansdowne MSS. in the British Museum, a collectionmade by Sir James Ware, which contains transcripts ofseveral pieces from it, where the following note occursupon the copy of the song already mentioned respectingthe death of Sir Piers de Birmingham : " Out of a smallolde book inarch*, called the book of Posse or Waterford.Feb. 1608."The Editor is not aware of any further notice by whichthe history of this interesting manuscript can be traced,until the appearance of the " Catalogus ManuscriptTHE ENTRENCHMENT OF ROSS. 285Anglia et Hibernia," printed in 1697, where it is mentionedas in the library of More, Bishop of Norwich.That this little collection of monkish rhymes should haveescaped the fanaticism of the Commonwealth, proveseither how highly it was prized, or that its escape wasalmost miraculous, and therefore baffles sober conjecture.But having been transferred to the library of BishopMore, a few years after that in which it is registered asbeing in his possession, the English poem which thismanuscript contains on Cokaygne, was printed in theThesaurus" of Dr. Hickes, from a manuscript lent to himby Bishop Tanner.A careful comparison of the poem on Cokaygne, asprinted by Hickes, with the copy in " the Book of Rossor Waterford " (the only early copy now known to existin manuscript), can leave no question that the original ofHickes was derived from the copy in the British Museum.And, as no such manuscript is to be found in the publiclibrary of the University of Cambridge, where More smanuscripts were deposited after his death, and also as thecontents in the catalogue of 1697 agree with those of theHarleian MS. No. 913, there can be little doubt thatthe MS. " Book of Ross or Waterford," as Sir JamesWare s copyist calls it, had been lent by More to Tanner,and that not having been returned before the death of theformer prelate, or from some other cause, it had afterwardspassed into the library of the Earl of Oxford. The circumstance,hitherto unexplained, of this manuscript beingmentioned, at nearly the same period, as in the possessionof several persons, has led to the supposition that two, oreven three, copies of it were in existence.286 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.At the time that "the Book of Ross or Waterford"came into the Harleian Library, it certainly was in a verytattered condition, and some of the leaves wanting. Atpresent (as already noticed by Sir Frederic Madden)many of the leaves are transposed, the order of the piecesdoes not coincide strictly with that in More s catalogue,and two or three articles have evidently been lost.Among the transcripts made for Sir James Ware(Lansdowne MSS. 418), the following tantalizing note isan evidence of the loss of an Anglo-Irish ballad of someinterest at least to any one engaged in the investigationof the history of Irish Song.There is in this book a longe discourse in meterputting the youth of Waterford in mind of harm takenby the powers,* and wishing them to beware for the timeto come ; I have written out the first staff onlyYoung men of Waterford," &c.And it would seem from the transcript that the copyistwas deterred from proceeding, by the difficulty he experiencedin reading his original. " The Book of Ross orWaterford" being now known as the Harleian MSS.Upon tins the compiler of the Lansdowne Catalogue (who wasthe late Mr. Douce, justly esteemed in his day for superior accuracyand antiquarian knowledge) observes : " The Powers seem to meanthe paupers or rabble," in perfect ignorance that the Powers or Powerswere the clan alluded to. Mr. Lemon, of the State Paper Office, hasqueried, Whether the common expression of " By the powers," doesnot refer to the warlike strength of the Power family, or faction,becoming proverbial ?THE ENTRENCHMENT OF ROSS. 287No. 913, it may save the inquisitive Irish reader sometrouble by stating that its contents are of a very miscellaneouscharacter. Most of the articles in it are, as nimisartists say, " unique and unpublished ;" but the onlypoems which have any direct reference to Ireland, besidethe Anglo-norman ballad on " The Entrenchment of NewRoss," are the song on the death of Sir Piers de Birmingham,already mentioned as printed by Ritson, and asatirical lyric, in which the conduct of the monks of variousorders, and the nuns of St. Mary s house, is severely handled,as well as the mode of dealing then practised, and, it is to befeared, but since little amended, by the merchants, tailors,shoemakers, tanners, potters, bakers, brewers, hucksters,and wool-combers. Both the latter songs are in English.There is also the following scrap in Anglo-norman [fol.1.5. v.], entitled " Proverbial comitis Desmond" thehistory or point of which is not very evident beyond aningenious play upon wordsSoule su simple e saunz soles,Seigniory me amount sojourner,Si surprise sei de mount soles,Sages se deit soul solacer.Sole ne solar sojourner,No solemn estre de petit soles,Sovereign se est de se solacer,Que se sent soule e saunz soles."To return to the ballad on " The Entrenchment of NewRoss." It appears evident from it that the inhabitants fearedthat, in the war between two powerful barons, they shouldbe exposed to insult and reprisal from the Irish who wereengaged in the quarrel. At this period the middle of288 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.the thirteenth century it should be borne in mind, thattown and country were two distinct states, under entirelydifferent governments. The towns were republics, underthe protection of the king ; the country was under thedespotic government of a whole tribe of tyrants, and underno protection whatever. The corporate towns, therefore,walled themselves, in order to be able to preserve theirneutrality in the wars of the district which surroundedthem. This, which was the case in England, must havebeen still more necessary in a country like Ireland, wherethe townsmen were English, and the countrymen chieflyIrish.The whole tenour of this very remarkable song shewsthat it was written when the foss was nearly finished, butbefore the walls were begun. The foss, or ditch, wasalways the first part of such undertakings ; therefore, inthe translation, where, for the sake of rhyme, or from anyother cause, the word "wall" is used, it must be understoodas meaning the foss, or preparatory step towards thebuilding of the wall ; and in the passage where the wordrampart" occurs, it is intended to express the groundabove the foss. Indeed, the passage is not unlike the onein "Hudibras," descriptive of the entrenchments formed bythe citizens of London in 1642, upon the alarm that itwas the intention of the royal army to attack the metropolis:March d rank and file, with drum and ensign,T entrench the city for defence in ;Raised rapiers with their own soft handsTo put the enemy to stands ;From ladies down to oyster wenches,Laboured like pioneers in trenches jTHE ENTRENCHMENT OF ROSS. 289Fall n to their pick-axes and tools,And helped the men to dig like moles."The burgesses of New Ross, however, as far as thesong goes, laboured not in building the wall, but in diggingthe foss ; and, while they rested on Sunday, the ladiescarried stones, and placed them alongside of the foss, tobe ready to build the wall when the entrenchment wascompleted. And thence these fair dames go and talk ofbuilding one of the gates themselves. After Sunday theburgesses again resumed their digging at the foss, whichwas twenty feet in depth, and, according to the wordsof the ballad, so soon as it shall be completed will bealeague in length. It is, therefore, to be presumed,that the foss was not quite completed when the songnow given was composed by some merry minstrel ofthe place on the day noted at the conclusion, and itwas perhaps sung at the corporation dinner after theirwork.In Sir Richard Margrave s " History of the IrishRebellion of 1798," a plan of the town of New Ross maybefound (which plan was, the Editor believes, sketchedfor Sir Richard, by Miss Mary Ann Tottenham). Inthis plan the town appears inclosed by a wall, defended bytowers, to which the following names are attached :North Gate," u Maiden Tower," " Market Gate," " unionGate," " Weaver s Tower," " Brogue Makers Tower,""Three Bullet Gate" (where Lord Mountjoy was killedin the attack on New Ross, in 179), " Mary s Tower,"and " The Priory, or South Gate."Upon the line,E od flies e taburs,"O290 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Sir Frederic Madden remarks, in the " Archaeological,"The flute is mentioned as a musical instrument in theromances of Alexander, Dolopathos, and several others ofthe 13th and 14th centuries. In a curious poem of Guillaumede Machault, a writer of the 14th century, amongother instruments of music, is noticed i Laflauste brchaigne,on which Roquefort remarks, C etoit probablement uneflute chapelry. But may we not interpret this the Irishflute, in contradistinction to the flute traversed, or Germanflute ? Walker, in his < Historical Memoirs of theIrish Bards, p. 90, has stated, that no record exists toprove the use of the flute among the ancient Irish ; but atthe same time owns it highly probable this instrument wasknown to them, particularly from the length of some ofthe notes in the early Irish melodies appearing calculatedrather for the flute than the harp."Jt only remains for the Editor to add, that the translationof the curious ballad to which these observations areprefixed, was made, at his request, by Mrs. George Maclean,in 1831. In the playful letter which accompaniedher translation, she (L. E. L.) observes, " I am not quitesure that I perfectly understand the lineQe ja ne li leireit vilein fere,which Mr. Madden, in his communication to your Society,is pleased to slur, by saying, after paying a compliment tothese heroines, in the usual style of such compliments, andtherefore not worth repeating, &c. Now, I doubt whetherany compliment ever paid to a woman was utterly thrownaway ; and, in the belief that some fair dame of the presentclay may like to see that the ladies of old were flat-theENTRENCHMENT OF ROSS. 291tered much the same as now, I have ventured to turn thecompliment."I have a whim to speak in verse,If you will list what I rehearse,For an unheeded tale, I wise,Not worth a clove of garlic is.Please you, then, to understand,Tis of a town in Ireland,For its size the one most fairThat I know of anywhere.But the town had cause of dreadIn the feud two barons spread ;Sir Maurice and Sir Walter see,Here their names shall written be ;Also that fair city s nameRoss they then did call the same.[Fol. 64.] Isthmus failure Ville de Esse.Talent me parent de romancer,S il vous plet de escoteir ;Kar parole qe n est oVe,Ne vaut pas un ailiie.Pur ce vous prie d escorted,Si me oi es ben aiicerDe une vile en Ireland,La plus bele de sa grandQe je sache en rule tere.Mes pure avoient de un terre,Qe fu par entre deus barons,Wei-ci esprit amadeus lur nunsSire Morice e Sire Water.Le noun de la vile vol homer,Ros le devez apeler ;292 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Tis the new bridge-town of Ross,Which no walls did then enclose ;It therefore feared a stranger s blows.Commons both, and leading men,Gathered in the council then,What for safety to devise,In shortest time and lowest price :Twas that round the town be thrownWalls of mortar and of stone.For this war filled them with fear ;Much they dreaded broil so near.Candlemas, it was the day *They began to delve in clay,Marking out a foss, to shewWhere the future wall should go.C est le novel pont de Ros :Ce fu lur pure ke lie furent clos.A lur conseil un jour adherent,E tot la commune ens interest ;Lur conseil pristerent en tele maner,Qe .i. mure de porter e def pereSilent entire la vile fire,Qe pure avoient de eel geese.A la chandelier commencement,De mercier la fosse y adherent,Moment le mure dut aler.Aleint liz rooms mercier,Candlemas day is the 2d of February. It is proverbially thecommencement of spring.On Candlemas dayThrow candle and candlestick away,"t De is repeated in the MS. by an error of the scribe.THE ENTRENCHMENT OF ROSS. 293Soon twas traced, and then were hiredWorkmen ; all, the task desired.More than a hundred workmen ply,Daily, neath the townsmen s eye ;Yet small advance these fellows made,Though to labour they were paid.So the council met again ;Such a law as they pass d then ISuch a law might not be found,Nor on French nor English ground.Next day a summons, read aloud,Gathered, speedily, a crowd ;When the law proclaimed they hear,Twas received with many a cheer.Then a good man did advance,And explained the ordinance,E avoient le mure marche" :Pur governors aunt tost mande,Fol. 646.] Cent ou plus cbescun jourI vont overer od grand honour.Les burgess eutur la fosse adherent.E gent lewis poi espleiterent ;E a lure conseil re-adherent.E un puritans purparlerent,Ke unkes tele purveyanceNe fu en Engleter, ne en France.E lendemain en firent crier,E tot la commune ensemble jLa purveyance fu la lustre,E tot la commune ben paie.Une produce sus leva,La puritans i nostra,294 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Vintners, drapers, merchants, allWere to labour at the wall,From the early morning time,Till the day was in its prime.More than a thousand men, I say,Went to the goodly work each day ;Monday, they began their labours,Gay, with banners, flutes, and tabours ;Soon as the noon-hour was come,These good people hastened home,With their banners proudly borne.Then the youth advanced in turn,And the town, they make it ring,With their merry carrying ;Singing loud, and full of mirth,Away they go to shovel earth.Dies lune. 1F Ke le Lundi tot primers,Irrunt a la fosse le winters,Mercers, marchant, e drapers,Ensemblement od lez winters,Del our de prime de ke mine soneDussent overer au fosse.Et si si sunt eus must movement,I vont overir od bele gent,M; Mil e plus, pur voir vous die,I vont overir chacun lundi,bees banners e grants lions,E od flies e taburs.E aussi tost cum none sound.1 vont al ostel li produce ;[Fol. 61.] Lure banners y vont devant.La serene gent haut cbantant,THE ENTRENCHMENT OF ROSS. 295And the priests, when mass was chanted,*In the foss they dug and panted ;Quicker, harder, worked each brother,Harder, far, than any other ;For both old and young did feelGreat and strong, with holy zeal.Mariners came next, and theyPass d along in fair array,With their banner borne before,Which a painted vessel bore.Full six hundred were they then ;But full eleven hundred menWould have gathered by the wall,If they had attended all.Par tot la vile parole,Oue grant poi count laborer.E les preserves quau[t] ont chanteSi vont overir au fosse,E travellers nut decrement,Plus qe ne sunt autre gent.Kar i sunt sevens e villes,E grand e forts ben sojourned.Le mariners kant al ostel sunt,En bele maner au fosse count,Lure baner en vote devout,La nef clemens est point.E acres la baner vont sentDC. Bien vj. cens de bel gent ;The preceding " hora prima," or, as it is translated, the " earlymorning time," means the break of day ; and the "hora none," threeo clock in the afternoon. The priests went to work after vespers,which began at four o clock P.M.296 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Tuesday came, coat-makers,* tailors,Fullers, cloth-dyers, and * sellers ;"fLight good hands, these jolly blades,Were they counted at their trades.Away they worked liked those before,Though the others numbered more;Scarce four hundred did they stand,But they were a worthy band.Wednesday, following, down there cameOther bands, who worked the same ;E si furent tus alouteus,Tus le nefs e bates,xic. Plus i averment de xi. cens,Sallies pur weir, de bone gens.^[ Le Mardi prochein suant papers,I vont tailors e painters.Ventures, fullers, e celery,Bell gent sunt de lur masters,I vont overir cum dit devant ;Mes ne sunt tant de gent,cccc. Mes bien sunt iii. cens,Sachez pur weir, de bele gens.[Fol. 616.] Le Mekirdi prochein suant.I vont autre maner de gent,Parties means faisenrs d habits, what we call habit-makers,which, up to a recent time, appears to have been a distinct trade, by-tailorsstill calling themselves " tailors and habit-makers."t Saddlers, from the French, selle, a saddle. The word frequentlyoccurs in Spenser :What mighty warrior that mote be,Who rode in golden sell, with single spare."Fairy Queen, n. iii. 12.THE ENTRENCHMENT OF ROSS. 297Butchers, cordwainers, and tanners,Bearing each their separate banners,Painted as might appertainTo their craft, and, mid the train,Many a brave bachelor ;Small and great, when numbered o er,Singing as they worked their song,Just three hundred were they strong.Thursday came, the fishermenAnd the hucksters followed then,Who sell corn and fish : they bearDivers banners, for they wereFull four hundred; and the crowdBarrelled and sung aloud ;Cordiwaners, tanners, macecrers,Mult i a de bees bachelors ;Lur banners en sunt dpeintSi com a lur mester apeint.cc. Cc. sunt, si cum je quit,Qe oue grant e oue petit,E hautement vont parole,Aussi com sunt li primer.f Le Jude vont li recurs,E lez regraturs trestuz,Qe able verdant e poisons ;Divers sunt lur gonfanuns.Bien y vont en ice jour,cccc. CCCC. od grant honour.E karoleut e chantent haut,Com le primers par devant.Lez waynpayns vont aussiMimes en ice Jude,o2298 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.And the wainwright, they came tooThey were only thirty-two ;A single banner went before,Which a fish and platter bore.*But on Saturday the stirOf blacksmith, mason, carpenter,Hundreds three with fifty told,Many were they, true and bold ;And they toiled with main and might,Needful knew they twas, and right.Then on Sunday there came downAll the dames of that brave town ;Know, good labourers were they,But their numbers none may say.Acres les autres vont deer,E par devant out bele banerLe esquire e le meissen par deadensEn lur baner est depend.Isti vont ens au fossae,xxxi j t Xxxi. sunt pur verite.T Le parti . . s vont le Vendredi, j # Fr .^ nor ., no(cc d Bien SUnt Cc. e demy. I translated, at there it nojp* ] Lur tanners en sunt devant, ~T*? " "Al orle de fosse en extant. JLez carpenters vont le Samariafevers e masons autres ;Mult bele gent sunt je vous leviCCCtd< Ben sunt cc. e demy,E tus vont overir od bon courage,Sachez de ce en sunt qe sage.^ Le Derange les dames i vont,Sachez de verres bon over i sunt;THE ENTRENCHMENT OF ROSS. 299On the ramparts there were thrown,By their fair hands, many a stone ;Who had there a gazer been,Many a beauty might have seen.Many a scarlet mantle too,Or of green or russet hue ;Many a fair cloak had they,And robes dight with colours gay.In all lands where I have been,Such fair dames working I ve not seen.He who had to choose the power,Had been born in lucky hour.Many a banner was displayed,While the work the ladies aid ;When their gentle hands had donePiling up rude heaps of stone,Numerus non est. Le nombre ne sai de cert homer,Rule born vivant ne les put center.Tot la pere i vont Jeter,E hors de fosse a porter ;Ki qe la fut pur esgarder,Meint bele dame y put il veer,Meint mantel de scarlet,E de verd e de burnet,E meant bone rocket bien ride e,Meint blank fen ben coloured jKe unkes en tere ou je ai este,Taut bele dames ne vi en fosse,Mult fu cil en bon ure ne,Ke current closer a sa volume".Meint bele baner lur sunt devant,Tant cum sunt la pere portant;[Fol. 556.] E quant ont la pere apostle,300 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Then they walked the foss along,Singing sweet a cheerful song ;And returning to the town,All these rich dames there sat down :Where, with mirth, and wine, and song,Pass d the pleasant hours along.Then they said a gate they d make,Called the Ladies , for their sake,And their prison there should be ;Whoso entered, straightway heShould forego his liberty.Lucky doom I ween is his,Who a lady s prisoner is ;Light the fetters are to wearOf a lady kind and fair :Tant cum lest a volume",Enter la fosse vont chanter,Avant qe en vile violent] entrer.E quant en la vile sunt entries,Les riches dames sunt ensemble s,E juent et event e karolent,E de bons enveisurus en parent,E chacun a autre en comfort,E tient qe ferunt un port,La Port de Dames avert a none ;E la en ferunt lur presume.E qi en lur prison est entre,De tut n en avert sa volume",II ne di pas pur rule blame,Bon secret estre en prison de dame ;Kar bone dame est debonair,Qe ja ne li leireit vilein fere.THE ENTRENCHMENT OF ROSS. 301But of them enough is said,Turn we to the foss instead.Twenty feet that foss is deep,And a league in length doth creep.When the noble work is done,Watchmen then there needed none ;All may sleep in peace and quiet,Without fear of evil riot.Fifty thousand might attack,And yet turn them bootless back.Warlike stores there are enough,Bold assailant to rebuff.We have hauberks many a one,Savage, garcon, haubergeon ;Doublets too, and coats of mail,Yew-bows good, without fail.De dames ore me veil lesser,E du fosse plus en parler.Le fosse est xx pees parent,E une lue de wei teint ben de lung.Al our qe serra tot perfect,Ja n avert mester de aver gate,Mes dormir punt seulement ;Ja n avert gard de male gent.Me ke venissent xl. mile,Ja n en entrust deadens la vile.[Fol. 56.] Kar ens aunt aces de garnesuns,Meint blanc aubert, e aubersuns,Meint parent, e meant attunemeant savage garonnemust de bon arbiters,E de arc de main must bons archers,302 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.In no city have I seenSo many good glaives, I ween.Cross-bows hanging on the wall,Arrows too to shoot withal ;Every house is full of maces,And good shields and talevaces.*Cross-bow men when numbered o er,Are three hundred and three score ;And three hundred archers shew,Ready with a gallant bow ;And three thousand men advance,Armed with battle-axe and lance ;Qe unkes en vile ou je ai esteemNe vi tant do bone glenne,Ne tant arblastes au paris pendre,Ne tant de quarrels despendre ;E cliescun ousted plein de maces,E bones escuz e tolfaces.Been sunt garnis, je vous levis,Pur bien defence de lur enemies.Qe arblaster, vus di pur vers,ccc[lxiij.] Cc. suntlxiij,Ke a lur mostresun furent contes,E en lore rol sunt rolled.x ijc. E de autres archers xii. cens,Sachez pur weir, de bon gens.flI7 E de autre part furent iij mileO lances, e od beaches de members la vile.The talevace was a large wooden shield, particularly used by theScotch and Irish, as would appear. See Derange, in vv. Talavaciusand Tavolacius. Sir Frederic Madden s note is, " See Roquefort, v.Talents, and notes and glossary to the Romance of Havelock, v. 2320."THE ENTRENCHMENT OF ROSS. 303Above a hundred knights, who wieldArms aye ready for the field.I warrant you the town s preparedGainst all enemies to guard.Here I deem it meet to say,No desire for war have they,But to keep their city free,Blamed of no man can they be.When the wall is carried round,None in Ireland will be foundBold enough to dare to fight.Let a foeman come in sight,If the city horn twice sound,Every burgess will be foundEager in the warlike labour,Striving to outdo his neighbour ;c iii. E gens a cheval C. e quater,Bien furent armes pur combated.Me je vous die tot, sanz faille,Ens ne desire rule battle,Mes lur vile violent garter,De mavis gent, a lur power.[Fol. 566.1 Rule home de ce ne lez dut blamerQe lur vile violent fermer,Qe quant la vile serra ferme,E le mure tot throne,N ad Ires en Island si hardi,Qi 1 serene sailer, je vus levi,Qe kant aunt j. corne ij. fees corner ;Tantost la commune est ensemble,E as armes vont tost courant ;Chacun a envie pur aler devant,Tant sunt corpus e hardiPur eus venger de lur enemy.304 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.God give them the victory !Say amen for charity.In no other isle is knownSuch a hospitable town ;Joyously the people greetEvery stranger in their street.Free is he to sell and buy,And sustain no tax thereby.Town and people once againI commend to God. Amen.Neu lur point si en venger !E la vile a honour garder;Qe deus en set de tot paie ;E tus dies amen pur chart.Kar ce est la plus french vileQe set en certain ne en yle ;E tot horn estrange est ben venu,E de grant poi est receivechapter e vendre en pute ben,Qe nul horn ne li deianira reen.A deu la vile je command,E tous qe deadens sunt habitat.Amen, amen, amen.Effet Van del incarnation nostra Seigneur, m.cc.lxv.SHANDRUM BOGGOON.Boggoon is the Irish for bacon. Stanihurst quotes thefragment of a song that probably was popular in Irelandin the reign of Elizabeth ; according to which,He is not a king that heareth eaten,But he is a king that eateth bacon."SHANDRUM BOGGOON. 305Shandrum (in English, the old hill) is the seat of WilliamAllen, Esq. near Charleville, in the county of Cork, agentleman no less remarkable for his hospitality thanShandrum is for the excellence of the bacon producedthere.The author of the song in praise of Shandrum boggoonis Mr. Edward Quin, also the writer of another popularsong, called " Bobety Daily," and the brother of Mr.Simon Quin, whose " Town of Passage" may be foundat p. 269. Both the brothers have long since abandonedtheir coquetry with the Irish Muse for the moresubstantial employment of English coach-building, whichMr. Edward Quin successfully carries on in London.Blackrock Castle, and the Baths, mentioned in thesecond verse, are prominent objects on the south shore ofthe river Lee, along which the New Wall, a stone embankment,extends for more than a mile from Cork. MountProspect race-course is distant about four miles from " thebeautiful city."On the circumstance alluded to in the third verse, itis only necessary to state, that the ingenious fancy of theIrish ballad publishers produces annually, or sometimesmore frequently, a marvellous story of the appearanceof the evil one, with various minute particulars of hisdining, supping, or spending the evening in the companyof some individual ; and which stories, adorned witha fearful woodcut, being duly printed, sell and circulate,to the no small profit of the publishers, advantage of thevenders, and terror of all true believers therein.306 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Air" The Black Joke."To Goddesses, Graces, the Lakes of Killarney,To " Bobety Daily," to Passage, to Blarney,Some folks have attempted their lays to attune ;But the subject on which these few lines are composeWas never yet chanted in verse or in prose.The reason is plain, no praise did it need ;If you ever should taste it, you d swear it, indeed:What I mean now, an please you, is Shandrum boggoon.Of old greedy Midas a strange story s told,That, whatever he d touch, it would turn into gold.Were that attribute mine, I would barter it soonFor the gift that, whatever I d touch, I d at easeConvert to the substance or form that I d please :Oh ! I d touch Blackrock Castle, the Baths, and New Wall,Mount Prospect race-course, the racers and all,And I d turn them at once into Shandrum boggoon.If you credit report, about this time last yearHis terrific highness the Devil did appear,And dined with one Martin, who lives in Johnstown.Tis said in that place he has chosen to dwell,Perhaps somewhere near us. Lord save us ! tis wellThat they ve got no boggoon : by my soul, twould requireA host of the clergy to banish the squire,If he e er set his eyes upon Shandrum boggoon.Since in praise of boggoon I ve the honour to start,Indulge me, for once, in a wish of my heartAnd this wish shall be mine till I m laid in the tomb :SHANNON S FLOWERY BANKS. 307May the inmates of Shanclrum, encircling that board,Enjoy every comfort this world can affordHave always a plenty, and, should we go there,A heart to divide it, and never worse fareThan a ham, flitch, or gammon of Shandrum boggoon.SHANNON S FLOWERY BANKS.The music of this song was by Mr. Carter, a memberof the choir of Cheyne, who also composed the beautifuland well-known melody of " O, Nannie, wilt thou gangwith me ? " The Shannon, and its banks, have been long afavourite locality with Irish poets. Among the popularbroadsides now lying before the Editor, are songs entitledThe Shannon Side," " Lovely Jane of the ShannonSide," " Shannon s Cottage Maid," &c. ; and, in a verysmall book among the Sloane MSS. (No. 3514),* maybefound, " The Shannon s Praise," wherein, after othermatters, it is stated, thatFor sixty miles and more, the swelling seaComes rolling up its streams twice every day,Where vessels of great burden safely ride,And swiftly smile, assisted by the tyde ;And if that craggy, steep, confounded rock,Near Killaloe, were, by good fortune, breakThis manuscript is chiefly in the Irish character. The followingnotes occur in it:" Written in Ireland Nov br y e 17, 1713."Mr. John Scandal to Mr. Dennis Connor, Truly." Also, " Sep r y e4 th . 1727." Some of the initial letters are rather grotesque.308 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Up to its very head, from raging sea,You vessels of great burden might convey :Which winding voyage, if you rightly count,To twice a hundred miles it will amount.Some rivers are for their great bridges praised,And for the many arches on them raised ;The Themis has nineteen arches, and no more,Portumney nineteen, and, besides, a score,Which shews the Shannon doth widely exceedThe Themis, the Clyde, and the dividing Tweed."Lord Macartney, when embarking, in 1781, for hisgovernment at Madras, thus addressed this noble river :Raptured, I try the strain,Great king of floods ! to hail thy new-born reign,Which breaks from darkness like the rise of day,And gives the promise of imperial sway !Already Commerce spreads her ample stores,Pours Africa s riches on herne s shores ;Brings either India s treasures to her view,Brazilian gold, and silver of Peru !Bids wondering navies on thy billows ride,Rolls the world s wealth, O Shannon, to thy tide ! "The view of Herbert, given in Milton s " Seats of theNobility and Gentry of Ireland," engraved after a pictureby Wheaten, refers to the embarkation of Lord Macartney from the seat of Edward Leslie, Esq., afterwardsSir Edward Leslie, Bart., and the projected railroad mayrealise his lordship s anticipations of the Shannon.In summer when the leaves were green,And blossoms decked each tree,Young Teddy then declared his loveHis artless love, to me.SHANNON S FLOWERY BANKS. 309On Shannon s flowery banks we sat,And there he told his tale ;Oh, Patty ! softest of thy sex,Oh, let fond love prevail !Ah ! well-a-day, you see me pineIn sorrow and despair,Yet heed me not. Then let me die,And end my grief and care."Ah, no, dear youth," I softly said,Such love demands my thanks ;And here I vow eternal truthOn Shannon s flowery banks."And then we vowed eternal truthOn Shannon s flowery banks ;And there we gathered sweetest flowers,And played such artless pranks.But wo is me, the press-gang cameAnd forced my Ned away,Just when we named next morning fairTo be our wedding-day.My love," he cried, " they force me hence,But still my heart is thine;All peace be yours, my gentle Pat,While war and toil are mine ;With riches I ll return to thee."I sobbed out words of thanks,And then we vowed eternal truthOn Shannon s flowery banks.310 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.And then we vowed eternal truthOn Shannon s flowery banks,And then I saw him sail awayAnd join the hostile ranks.From morn to eve, full twelve dull months,His absence sad I mourned ;Then peace was made, the ship came back,But Teddy ne er returned.His beauteous face and manly formHave won a nobler fair ;My Teddy s false, and I forlornMust die in sad despair.Ye gentle maidens, see me laid,While you stand round in ranks ;And plant a willow o er my headOn Shannon s flowery banks.THE MAYOR OF WATERFORD S LETTER.The manuscript volume from which the two followingancient ballads respecting Waterford are transcribed, is inthe State Paper Office. It appears to be the collection ofsome laborious antiquary about the latter end of the reignof Elizabeth, and consists of nearly nine hundred pages,many of which are pasted over with apparently arrangedscraps and memoranda, chiefly relative to the history andlegends of the South of Ireland.This volume, which was bound in the time ofCharles II., and bears the royal impress, is lettered onTHE MAYOR OF WATERFORD s LETTER. 311the back, " INSTRUCTIONS," merely because the firstarticle in it is a copy of instructions from Edward VI. toSir Anthony St. Leger, lord deputy, and others, for thebetter government of Ireland.*Ballad royal," or rhyme royal, was the name givento the measure in which the ballads or songs about Waterfordare written ; and it will be seen that they are in strictaccordance with the rules laid down by George Gascoigne,in " Certain Notes of Instruction concerning the making ofVerse or Rhyme in English," attached to " The princelyPleasures at the Courte of Kenilworth ; that is to say, thecopies of all such verses, proses, or poetical inventions, andother devices of pleasure, as were then devised and presentedby sundry gentlemen before the Queene s Majestie,in the year 1575."Rythme royal is a verse of tonne syllables, andtonne such verses make a staff, whereof the first andthird lines do aunswer (across) in like terminations andrime ; the second, fourth, and fifth, do likewise answerecho other in terminations ; and the two last do combine,and shut up the sentence. This hath beene called ritchieroyal, and surely it is a royal kind of verse, serving butfor grave discourses."These specimens of Waterford rhyme royal have beenevidently composed about the years 1487 and 1545.The following very curious prose introduction, preservedwith the manuscript copy from whence the balladSince this was written (1829), the volume above described hasbeen taken to pieces, in order that its contents may be classified inthe general arrangement of State Papers now in progress. The accountof it, however, is retained, as in some degree connected with thehistory and preservation of these curious songs.312 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.designated by the Editor " The Mayor of Waterford sLetter," and now for the first time printed, is transcribed,and with which copy it is contemporary, detailsthe circumstances so minutely wherein the letter, orrather the metrical version of it, originated, that nothingis left for the Editor to observe ; except that, upon thesuppression of the rebellion, against the progress of whichthe town of Waterford took so decided a part, Sir RichardEdgeeomb was sent over to Ireland.*Lambert, a boy, crowned an " To the great discredit ofDublin King of England, I foolish men, then held for wise,&c. An. Henri. 7. 3. J j t j s remembered, and the posteritieis to take notice of the foolery, that one Lambert, aboy, an organ - maker s sonne, was crowned at DublinKinge of England and Lord of Ireland, in the third yereof Henry the 7. The circumstances may not be forgotten.The Erie of Kildare, then governor of the realme, withthe assistance of all the lordes spiritual and temporal, andcommons, of the north part of Ireland, assembled in theCastell of Dublin, crowned the same boys and proclaimedhim as aforesaid. The crowne they took off the head ofthe image of our Lady of Damascus, I and clapt it on theThe particulars of his visit, as is conjectured, written by himself,are printed in Harris s " Hibernica," No. III.f Cox says he was crowned in Christ Church, Dublin.J According to tradition, the crown was taken from the statue ofthe Virgin Mary in St. Mary s Abbey, or the Church of St. Maryles Dames. The identical statue is stated to be still in existence, andthe one preserved in the New Church of the Carmelite, in WhitefriarStreet, Dublin. At the time of the Reformation, this statue, it issupposed, was consigned to the flames. " One half of it was actuallyburnt but it was the moiety which to a saint is perhaps not absolutelyTHE MAYOR OF WATERFORD*S LETTER. 313boy s head.* The mayor of Dublin tooke the boy in hisarras, cried him about the citie in procession with greattriumph, the clergie going before ; the Erie of Kildare,then governor; Walter, archbishop of Dublin, lord chancellor,the nobilitie, counsel, and citizens of the said citie,following him as their kinge : unto whome, also, all thepartes of Ireland yielded obedience. Shortly after the saidErie, as tutor and protector of the said kinge, wrote toJohn Butler, mayor of Waterford, and to all the citizens,a straight charge and severe romaunt upon their duty ofallegiance to be well prepared, and with all refines toindispensable, and which, at least when placed in a niche, is not muchmissed ; the other half was carried by some devout or friendly handto a neighbouring inn yard, where, with the face buried in the ground,and the hollow trunk appearing uppermost, it was appropriated, forconcealment and safety, to the ignoble purpose of a hog-trough ! "However accurate the foregoing statement may be which is givenwith a print of the statue in that curious and interesting work, "TheDublin Penny Journal " it is too much for the most credulous tobelieve, that " within the last few years the ancient silver crown, withwhich it was adorned, was taken from the Virgin s head, sold for itsintrinsic value as old plate, and melted down." An editorial note,however, states, after doubting that it was the identical crown used attLe coronation of Lambert Simnel, that " the crown itself we haveoften seen exposed for sale in the window of the jeweller to whom itwas sold. It was a double-arched crown, such as appears on thecoins of Henry the Seventh, and on his only ; a circumstance whichmarked with exact precision the age of the statue which it had adorned."The ceremony was rendered somewhat more solemn bv a sermon,which was preached on the occasion by John Payne, who had been aDominican friar, and was consecrated Bishop of Meath in 1483. " Heturned," says Harris, " with the tide, and preached what he hadpreached before in favour of the mock prince."P314 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.receive their yonge kinge and lord, and, with all the forcesthey possible cold make, to assist him in his voyage untohis province of Mounster, where he and his counsel wereto take order in affaires of great importance touching hiscrowne and dignitie. The mayor of Waterford, discreetlytaking the wayne of some small tyme to conferred with hisbretherne, answered, I will send him answer by one ofmyne owne men ; and so sent him away."Within few dayes, with advice of his bretherne, heframed him an answer as followeth : All loyalty andsubjection to our sovereign lord, Henry the 7. kinge ofEngland and lord of Ireland, and health to your honorableperson. With advice of my bretherne, having weed inthe ballance of loyalty your imperial and peremptoryromaunt, with one consent, and being directed by themthat are experienced, well seene in the lawes of bothrealms, and are not to seeke much in roiall affaires concerningthe tyme, this is that we have to say : that he,whosever he be, taking upon him the imperial crowne orname to be kynge of England, and is crowned in Dublinby a subject, Therle of Kyldare, and inhabitants of thecitie of Dublin, having no right thereunto ; the citie ofWaterford accepted and teeth such a one, and all suchas embrace and further such a coronation and proclamationmade in Dublin, to be rude enemies, traitors, andrebells, to the right prince and kinge of England.Therle mightily stormed at this answer, and in hisrage commanded the poore messenger presently to behanged in Hoggin Greene,* adjoining to the citie ; where-now,College Green, Dublin.THE MAYOR OF WATERFORD s LETTER. 315with Walter, archbishop of Dublin, then lord chancellorof Ireland, and others of the counsel, were not a littledispleased. Mediately the said Erie sent an herald inhis coat of armes to Waterford, whome John Butler,mayor, espied beyond the river, and caused a boat to ferryhim over to understand his pleasure. The herald beingcome to the key, offered to land ; the mayor commanded heshould not sett foote on shore, but deliver his message outof the boat, and that favor he wold shew him in regard ofhis coat, and for Therle of Kyldare s sake, who, contraryto the lawe of armes, had hanged his messenger.The harold, though at the first amazed, yet gatheringbreath, and fearing hard mesure because of executionof the mayor s messenger, drew this sword, commanded themariners to putt of the si^pre,- and, if they wold not bedirected by him, he wold runtae them through. All forthat tyme being effected to his content, he turned himto the mayor and citizens, and saide Therle of Kildare,tutor and governor to the kinge, with tl)e consent of hismajesty s counsel, straightly comaundeth the mayor ofthe citie of Waterford, and the inhabitants of the same,upon payne of hanging at their cores, that they forthwithproclaimed, or cause the kinge lately crowned at Dublin tobe proclaimed, in their citie, Kinge of England and Lordof Ireland, and with all expedition to be in a refines to goewith him into his province of Mounster upon specialservice.Whereunto the mayor, of himself (being a man of boldspirit and good courage) gave answer, Goe tell themthat sent thee hither, that I will not suffer thy foote tocome ashore, that I will not yeld unto their directions, and316 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.that I will save them a great labor that they shall notneeds to come to our cores; for I (by the grace of God),with the citizens of Waterford and aide of our neighbors,faithfull subjects to the crowne and dignitie of England,and the true and lawfull kinge of the same, being lordof Ireland, will meet them xxx miles of, and ariswcrethem with the sword of true loyalty and subjection : andthou, herald, get out of our sight. Forthwith the mayorand his bretherne sent messengers to all the Butlers andBrenys,* and the t of Carre, Clonemell, Callan,Kilkenny, Hitherto, Gawran, Bala mac kanden, Rosse inWexford, that they and their followers wold receiveentertainment of the citie of Waterford in defence ofthe most noble Prince Henry 7., the true kinge of Englandand lord of Ireland, against a counterfeit kinge andhis adherents lately crowned at Dublin. The Butlers,with their followers, returned answer that they, at a dayand place appointed, with sufficient armes, colors displayed,and at their owne charges, with the adventure oftheir lives, wold meet them with v hundred horse and athousand foote, and further if need required. TheBrenys offered all kindness, together with the theretofore mentioned.When of all sides great thundering passed, comepeople in feare doubting what effect this course mighttake, and armes ready, the wynd blew a faire gale fromthe east, and brought the forces and power of KingeHenry 7. from England, some landing at Scerrese, someat Clontarf, and some others at Dalkey, and the places nereWalsh or \Velsl), as often called Trench or Briton.THE MAYOR OF WATERFORD*S LETTER. 317Dublin ; which daunted the counterfeit kinge, Therle ofKyldare, and all their complices, cooled their stomach, andquailed the haute mind of rebellious hates ; so that theirattempt against Waterford was frustrate ; and the counterfeitkinge, with his Erie tutor, Walter, archbishop of Dublin,and many others, wer taken prisoners, and carriedto the town of London to receive reward condign, theirdesert.During this parent, not daring send messenger toTherle of Kyldare, the citie wrote to Walter, archbishop ofDublin, in English rome as followeth :O thou most noble pastour, chosen by God,Walter, archbishop of Dublin. "In consequence of the conduct of the citizens ofWaterford on this occasion, King Henry VII. addresseda letter to them, a copy of which may be found in Dr.Smith s " History of Waterford ;" it is dated from warwickthe 20th October (1487). and in the subsequent May anew charter was granted to the city. Sir Richard Edge-combearrived in the port of Waterford on the morningof the 30th June, 1488 ; " and the same day, at afternoon,two boats came from the city of Waterford, and broughtthe send Sir Richard to the city, and ther the mayor andworshipful men of the same honourably received hym,and the mayor lodged the se r d Sir Richard in his ownhouse, and made him right herty cheer."After breakfasting with the mayor on the 1st July,Sir Richard Edgecombe embarked for Dublin ; and it doesnot seem improbable that the mayor s metrical letter wassung before Sir Richard, upon the occasion of his public318 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.entertainment by the city of Waterford. The State PaperOffice manuscript is entitledA Copie of Letter sent by the Manor and Inhabitantsof the Citie of Waterford unto Walter, archbishopof the Citie of Dublin, the Manor and Citizens ofthe same, in the tyme of their Rebellion."O thou most noble pastour, chosen by God,Walter, archbishop of Dublin,Elect by th Apostle, bearing the roadOf perfect lief, and also of doctrine,To rule thy people by true discipline ;And if by custom men used a crime,Thou shouldest correct them from tyme to tyme.To thee we recommend us right humble,And to all our masters of that citie ;Our neighbours of Dublin right hartelie,That be to us bound of old amitie,And we to them knit both in one unite,Which restes with us by their seale and writing,Not for a tyme, but, perpetual enduring.Our old progenitors kept well the sameUndefiled, without disseveraunce,Following there truth and right noble fame,As men of worth, with true perseverance ;Wherefore all men said of their governanceThe cities of Dublin and Waterford,As true brother, loveth in one accord.THE MAYOR OF WATERFORD*S LETTER. 319The noble citizens of that faire citieNewberry, Wonder, Burncll and Crape,Bennett and Ledelawe* God, of his pitied,Rest their soules on the celestial sea,With all the sequele-f- of their affinities ;And of that noble man, Thomas Fits Simon, {In whose tyme Dublin was a noble town.This noble men, by grace and victorie,Fortune inclined her wheels to them so,Their enemies to them did always applied ;They had no resistance where they should go :All this, and other laudable actes mo,This worthie men purchased so by grace,That all men loved them in everie place.The names enumerated, with the exception of Ledelawe, whoprobably was the town clerk or official secretary, appear as mayors ofDublin between the years 1434 and 1466. Thomas Newberry wasmayor of Dublin in 1438, 47, 51, 52, 58, 62, 63 ; and Sir ThomasNewberry in 1464. Nicholas Wonder (Harris, in his " History ofDublin," writes the name Wonder) was mayor in 1434, 39, 41, 43, 44,45, and 46 ; Nicholas Wonder, jun., in 1448 ; and Sir Nicholas Wonder,in 1453. Sir Robert Burnet was mayor in 1450, 54. 59, and 61.William Crape was bailiff of Dublin, 1448 and 50, and mayor in1466; and John Bennett was mayor in 1449 and 1457.t Relations ; from sequax, a follower. It very frequently occursin the letters of Henry VHIth s time. " To O Honour and his sequel,""The sequel of M William," &c. Mr. LEMON.J Bailiff of Dublin in 1469, and mayor in 1475 and 1476.A common abbreviation of more ; so common, that, in the publicversion of the Bible, it was continued so late as the edition of 1717(Oxon), and perhaps later. " The children of Israel are mo and mightierthan we." Exod. i. 9. The black-letter quarto of 1584 has, in thesame passage, "greater and mightier than we." At the same time, mo320 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.O Dublin! Dublin ! where be the jurors,Thy noble men of aurea glories ?They be all passed by process of years ;So is their renowned, worship, and victorie.Alas ! therefore, thou mast be right sore,For thou hast made a plaine depressionFrom thy true vengeance unto rebellion.The old amitie betwixt thee and usIs now late broken of thy parte onely ;Our men by thee were taken right marvellous,Their goods spoiled without remedie :And albeit so, wee were not guiltieOf anie thing contrarie to good intent,Thou hadst our good without anie judgment.O ye citizens of that faire citie !Your progenitors, of blessed memorie,Were not endure by no perversityAgainst their king ; but they right humblyObeyed, as subjects, well and trulie :They gave no singular opinionAgainst their king, for none occasion.Your citie, then in well * and prosperitie,Prospered and floured of all manner thingsOf worth, manhood, and all felicities,That in all landes rumour did springe.O fie, false Fortune ! with thy sugared flattering,and more were both used ; and it does not appear why one or theother was preferred in any particular passage, except when it favoureda rhyme.Well-being, or weal.THE MAYOR OF WATERFORD s LETTER. 321Thy peerless play turneth oft to shame ;The end is woe that first began with game.Her mutable wheels, she changed, alas !To you, that by long continuanceHave rebelled against the king s grace.Though Fortune have lead you unto that mischance,We servile greatlie of your perseverance ;For the doctor saith it is natural to sonne,But diabolic to persevere therein.Knowledge your king ; for you shall understandThat Henry vis th is king, by grace,Of England and Fraunce, and lord of Ireland,And by just title have taken his place,His crowne, and scepter, with joy and solace ;And of his title ye may read a parte,Which is not fanned by logic nor by art.Moses had of God, by commandment,If a man died without issue maleHis lands should, by tyndall descent,Descend to daughters, his heirs generall ;For fault of issue, his heirs colaterti.ilShould have the same. Ye may read this storyOf Sulphate is daughters in the booke of Numero,* 17.The passage Deferred to appears to he the 27th chapter of Numbers,from the 1st to the lath verse, where God states to Moses thelaw of inheritance, in consequence of his bringing before the Almightythe case of the daughters of Zelophehad. Quaere: Will some of theolder versions of the Bible give a different arrangement of the chapters!322 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Which was a figure of Christe s inheritance,Descended to him by his mother Mary ;So that he, without doubt or variance,As man incarnat, I saie fynallie ;And, as Scripture have it in memorie,He was borne of the Virgin in Bethlehem,And, by her, true king of Jerusalem.The actes of Christ, as saith the Scripture,Is fynallie for man s instruction ;That wee his steppes should follow by nature ;That everie man, without division,By perfect law without conclusion,Might be a king and have a monarchyBy his mother, as Christ had by Mary.The figure and law is kept in generall ;For the more perfect among all other princesOf Christe s faith, and in especiallyIn England, stabled with all sheernesswe shall shew you by divers chronicles,And passed the tyme of man s memorie,How, by a woman, descended that monarchy.King Henry the First, after the last conquest,He passed his trance without issue male.Then entred King Stephen, at the requestOf the lordes spiritual and temporal!,And reigned xix th years, as teeth the tale.He was this first Henry is sister s soon,And hereby had the title of his crowne.Sureness certainty.THE MAYOR OF WATERFORD s LETTER. 323And after him Henry, called Fits Ensures,The second Henry named by writing ;He was sonne to Maud, as I can devise,Daughter of the first Henry without leasing,*And by her title he married as a kingMany years, as teeth the story,And was a prince of noble memory.When he accomplished his years of nature,His issue reigned King of England,And then f that tyme have born the scepter,Having the governance of all that landFrom sonne to sonne, ye shall understand ;Till Edward the iii th most noble of fame,Had the monarchic, and bare thereof the name.Stephen and Henry were not of England ;They both were strangers, of the realme of Fraunce;Stephen, by title, as I understand,Was Earle of Bloyes by his inheritance.This Henry J had under his governanceThraldom of Angeoi ; who list to looke,Shall find the same in the chronicle booke.This fourth King Edward his title and rightDescended to him first by a woman,The Duke s daughter of Clarence she lightsLying. It occurs in the Psalms, iv. 2. Shakspere, Spenser,Prior, and Gas, have used this word.f From the Saxon pfcfcan ; a common expression of the time, aswell as sith and silence, for since, in the sense of because.Duke of Normandy and Aquitaine, and Earl of Anjou.A participle of the Anglo-saxon verb satan, to call ; used in a324 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Duke Lonely, called a noble man ;His daughter Philippa, of whom beganThis Edward s title of England and Fraunce,And by her occupied as her inheritance.Here may you see noble authorities,And first of Christ, which was made incarnate,Whom he descended by many degreesOf that glorious Virgin immaculate ;In his gene logie you maie read it algae,*Whom he was king, by lineal descentBy his mother, without anie argumentsthree princes that we spake of before,Reigned in England, to everie intentTrulie obeyed ; we can saie no more.The lordes and commons, by their whole assent,Were to them right humble and obedient.This president sheweth that th heir femaleIn England shall succeed for fault of the male.By this process unmanned we may shewThat Stephen and Henry, before tyme of mind,By both their mothers, as is well known,Were kings of England we can find ;And also by scripture Christ was betideOf Jerusalem king, and of Jude :So was the fourth Edward by the Philippa.very peculiar way for some of the passive tenses, without the additionof the auxiliary am or was, or their several persons.Full carefully he kept them day and nightIn fairest fields, and Strophe he hight."Put, on account of the rhyme, for agates by all means.THE MAYOR OF WATERFORD*S LETTER. 325Which title is fallen to our sovereign ladie,Queene Elizabeth,* his eldest daughter lineal ;To her is com all the whole monarchic,For the fourth Edward had no issue male.The crowne, therefore, and scepter imperial,Both she must have without division,For of a monarchic byf no partition.It is so that by Divine purveyance,King Henry the VII th , our sovereign lord,And Queene Elizabeth, to God is pleasure ;Ben married both by amiable accord,Why should we speake more of this matter a word ?He is our true king without variance,And to him by right we should owe our legeaunce.Fortune on him have cast her lost and chance,That he by God is onely providedOf England to have the sovereign governance ;And of the people chosen and elected,By grace in battle he have obtained ;The auncient right of the Britons also,Is cast on him with titles manie mo.After the murder of Edward V. and the Duke of York, thisElizabeth, who was the eldest of the seven daughters of Edward IV.,was the heir-presumptive ; but her right was set aside by the usurpationof Richard III. and the victory of Henry VII., whom she afterwardsmarried, by which marriage his otherwise weak title to thecrown was set at rest.f By, is not unfrequently used for be, in old MSS.326 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.First we saie that, by Code s provision,This noble prince came by this his sceptre ;Second, by the common electionOf the lordes and commons, he was made sure ;The queene s title, by fortune s adventure,He have this three ; the fourth by victorie ;And the fifth by the old Britain store.*Our hole father the pope, our pastour,Of his certaine science and mere motion, fHave written to all them that beare charge and cure,By his bull papall,J without exception,Affirming this titles, with sharpe executionAgainst all persons that will make debateUpon King Henry the VII th , his royal estate.And have given, also, plaine indulgenceTo everie man by his said letters,That cometh in aide, or maketh defenceFor his noble king and his said titles ;Which bull, with full diligent business,Is dulce executed by terrible censures,By all true curates that beareth cures.Quaere : Any of Merlin s Prophecies, or the History of Britaingenerally 1t This line is a literal translation from the technical phrase in allbulls, royal grants, &c., " Certe scientia et nero motu;" now rendered," of our certain knowledge and mere motion."| The bull may probably be found either in Rymer or the Bul-latium.THE MAYOR OF WATERFORD*S LETTER. 327O thou archbishop and metropolitan,The chief lampe of pastoral dignitieOf all this land, for thou in vertue began,If thou be cause of this perversityThat late is fallen against all quite,We know it not ; but certaine we can saie,Thou deepest silence, and saidst not once nay.A man that beareth an ordinaries charge,If anie person grievously offended,And the crime notorious, she * should at largePunished the man till he were amended,But now an errour is well defended;And as well by you as others in conclusion,For all ye be of one opinion.Ye may see, by common experience,What vengeance God have shed in your country,By murther, slaughter, and great pestilence ;The fruits dearer than they were wont to be,And manie of your men drowned in the sea.This are not without cause after our intent,But we be not privie to Code s judgement.What is he that have read in chronicle,In old stories, or in anie writing,Or in the volume of the Hole Bible,So rude a matter and so strange a things,As a boy in Dublin to be made a kinge ;And to receive therein his unction,The solemn act of his coronation ?Quaere, Virtue 1328 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.O by what law, custome, or libertie,May a king of England be made in Ireland ?There is no man that have such aucthoritie,For there was no such act made in this landTill now right late, as we understand.O fie false land, full of rebellion,And with all men had in great division !O God ! where was the prudence of reasonOf you that have your whole common assent,That a boy, an organ-maker is sonne,Should be made a king of England, and regent,To whom as yet all ye ben obedient ?To your dishonour and evil fame,An horrible slander and great shame.It is great pitied that ye be deceivedBy a false priest,* that this matter began ;And that ye his child as a prince receivedA boy, a lady, an organ-maker is soon,Which is now kept in the Tower of London ;fHis keepers there, to all men declaring,This is of Dublin the first crowned king."fAnd it is strong and great pittieThat thou, reverend father and pastour,Then thou hast of that noble citieSir Richard Simon.t Sent to the Tower in June 1487, after the battle of Stoke. SeeRapin, Cox, &c.J The sarcasm hee is very good : " Now you shall see the wonderfullion." 3\]r. LEMON.THE MAYOR OF WATERFORD s LETTER. 329The charge, and beareth of all them cure,That they ben suffered so long to endureIn their great errour, which is understandBy all the people of everie land.And as it is written in the Gospel,Thou shouldest shew the light of true doctrine,It should not be hid under a bushell ;No love nor feare should thee undermine :But now wee see that all true discipline,For feare or love of mightie estates,Is put a part by all prelates.The pope s censures ben grievous and sore,But they be not taken with you in credence ;They ben despised dailie, more and more.Ye know that in open audience,Solemplie they have ben executed with reverence ;Therefore religious we thinke, and regular,That singer masse with you ben irregular.It is tyme for you to be reconciled,Of this matter now we will end ;Ye have ben to long from truth exiled,The tyme is now come for you to amend,A convenable tyme is to you sent ;The tyme of Lent, the mirrour of mercy,For all them that will reverse their folie.Retourne ones, and forsake this folie,If anie there be revolved in your mind ;Correct yourself, amend it shortlie,330 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.And to your sovereign lord be not unkind :The people tongues no man can bind.In such cases they saie, now and then,The best cleared be not the wisest men.O Ireland, Ireland ! by what conclusionIs thy mirrour of bertie eclipsed all ?By murder, slaughter, and great rebellion,Thy fertile bones have had great fall,Thy synge of venyme, as bitter as gall.Fortune have cast on thee so her chance,That always thou must stand in variance.Reverend father, and our masters all,Wee make to you our protestation,Not to offend one, nor you in generall ;But for to repress your great rebellionWe send to you this our conclusion ;Hereby heartache praying you that you applied ;For your rather* dealing we be right sore.Thinke not in us no malice or envie,For of your honour we would be right faine,fAnd of your reproche we be full sore;We pray to God that we may once againeYour old worship, truth, and manhood attained ;So that ye please God and the kinge,And eftsonesj to keape you from all ill dealing.Earlier ; the comparative of the Saxon rathe. Early, soon ;rather is still used in the sense of sooner.f Glad.J Immediately ; soon after; from the Saxon kept, after. It occursfrequently in Spenser ; in whose time, however, it was beginning to beobsolete.THE PRAISE OF WATERFORD. 331quoth James Rice.Take the matter and leave the dittiesFor tis a cause of great pittie, jTake no disdain,!You to refrain, [> to your sovereign lord.And to be plaine JYe may be faine "|So to attained I with him to accord.His grace againeJOHN BUTLER, Manor of Waterford.Finis. JAMES RICE.Wm. LYNCOLLE.THE PRAISE OF WATERFORD.The citie of Waterford," says that " learned gentleman,Maister Richard Stanihurst," as the old chronicler,Holinshed, styles him, " hath continued to the crowne ofEngland so loiall, that it is not found registred since theconquest to have beene disdained with the smallest spot,or dusted with the least freckle of treason ; notwithstandingthe sundrie assaults of traitorous attempts : and, therefore,the citie s armes are deckt with this golden word,Intact manet: a posse as well to be hartilie followed, asgreatlie admired of all true and loiall t."The motto of " Urbs intacta manet Waterford,"which forms the burden of the following verses, was conferredon the city, with other honours, by Henry VII.,for the conduct of the mayor and citizens against PerrinWarbeck. The date of this composition is satisfactorily332 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.fixed, by the twentieth and twenty-second verses, to beabout 1545. In the former, Henry VHIth s present to.the city waterford of a sword of justice in 1523, isspoken of as " lately sent;" and in the latter, the term,our triumphant king" (which would scarcely be appliedto Edward Vi), must have been written subsequent to1541, when Henry assumed the title of King of Ireland.This ballad was first printed in Mr. Island s " Historywaterford" (1824), but without the foot-notes hereadded in italics, which occur in the margin of the originalmanuscript, and are important illustrations of it. A carefulcollation with the manuscript, will account for thedifferences which exist between Ryland s reading, and theone now given.It would, perhaps, be going too far to ascribe theauthorship to Patrick Strong, from his name appearing atthe commencement, although the knowledge displayed oncivic affairs, may warrant the conjecture. Mr. Ryland,who gives a list of no less than thirty charters whichwere granted to Waterford, remarks, " Of these valuabledocuments, the only one of which even the corporationof Waterford has any knowledge, is the charter ofCharles I., under which the city is at present governed ;all other documents prior to 1G80 were destroyed by fire,and no steps have since been taken to supply theirplaces."The marginal annotation of "anno 16* Elis. 1573,the city had sheriffs," which occurs upon the second andthird verses, appears to be a subsequent and unconnectedmemorandum ; but it deserves notice, as correcting theIncorrectly printed 24 by Ryland.THE PRAISE OF WATERFORD. 333errors in the list of civic officers given by Dr. Smith andMr. Ryland in their respective histories of Waterford.Smith (p. 158) places the first city sheriffs in 1568, andRyland (p. 406) in 1575, although the latter speciallytells us (p. 219) what perfectly accords with the noteupon the ballad, that by the second charter granted byElizabeth in " 1573, the office of sheriffs was first created."Patrick Strong, Towne Clerkeof Waterford, tempore Henry 8.God of his goodness, praised that he be,For the daylie increase of thy good fame ;O pleasant Waterford, tho\v loyal citie,That five hundred yere receives thy nameEr the later conquest unto thee came ;In Ireland deserves to be peerlessQuia tu semper intacta manes.Therefore Henry the Second, that noble kinge,Knowing thy proves and true allegiance,Assigned thy branches and metes,* namingAll thy great port, with each appurtenances,Commanding his son cheyne honor to advance,With gifts most special for thy good easeQuia tu semper intacta manes.Boundaries. In compliance with a precept of Henry II., acharter was granted to Waterford by John, in the seventh year of hisreign, dated at Cambridge, 3d July. Among the extracts from it givenby Dr. Smith, is the following: " Civitas nostrils civitatis nostraWaterford, infra muros dictate civitatis manentibus total civitatesnostra de Waterford cum omnibus pertineiitiis ; et quod praedicti334 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.John, I do means the first-named lord,Elected governour to rule all Island,For thine amorous truth and loyal accord ; >In the first seised of all this land,Then thy charters large,* he did command,t*3Of his bounteous grace the for to please gf-Quia tu semper intacta manes.To the was granted that every shipEntring thy port, so wide and large,Only in thy presence for great worship, g,Ever thereafter should lade and discharge,And no where eyes, no vessel nor barge, jBy thy charters noble it doth expresseQuia tu semper intacta manes.And of thy sage citizens chose thou mustA provost f merely, thy people for to guide ;That by aucthorytie when hym last,Sass conduct may give to lands wide,To encrease thine honer matt every tyde,By this noble king that knew natheless JQuia tu semper intacta manes.cives et forum Haeredes et successors in perpetuum habet metalseas. Sicut probate fere per sacramentum fidelity Dominus(viz.) duodecim de ipsa civitates et duodecim extra per preceptsregis Enrich patris nostri," &c.In addition to the charter above quoted, John granted another toWaterford, dated at Dublin, 8th November, in the ninth year ofliisreign.t A provost in John s tyme.Not the less ; nevertheless.THE PRAISE OF WATERFORD. 335Then Henry,* his son, affirming the same,Granted thy fee-ferme for a yearly rent ;And of each ship to encrease thy fame,That enter shall with wine thy port so potent ;The prysadgef of them this he did consent,Thine honour to conserve without distressQuia tu semper intacta manes.And Edward the First a maiour to the did grant,His son confirmed the same in every case ;Edward the Third, J of triumph most abundance,Granted that all pleas, by special grace,In thee shale tried, and in no other place,For ease of thy people and great provesQuia tu semper intacta manes.The staple || statute assigned he had by name,Unto the by grant, with gyftes many moe ;Kilkenny and Cassel ought to obey the same ;Wexford and Rosse, Donegarvon also,And each other t adjoining thereto,Within the sayd bound, this for thine easeQuia tu semper intacta manes.This king first by Rosse falsly seduce,To make her a grant contrary to his will ;Then matt thy request of new he did productHenry III.t Prize Wines.t Edward III. anno 45 [1371].U Statute Staple.336 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.All thy noble grants and hrs did he spill.The law did assent, for he knew by skillOf thy true love and service not reckless *Quia tu semper intacta manes.Richard the Second, of his abundance,Confirmed the same, and in the took place,Trusting thy fydelytie and true allegiance,Which always shall continue and never deface ;And Henry the Fourth followeth his trace,Thy grants knitting to put the in presseQuia tu semper intacta manes.The lusty Henry that conquered France,In the did creat by his grants royal,All officers needful the to advance ;In honour and ease, with aucthoritie special,Excluding others to kepe thee from fall,And by high parliament did give releaseQuia tu semper intacta manes.Henry f the Holly, that borne was in Windsor,Collected thy charters, then uniting in oneEvery point distinctly that king's beforeDid grant unto the, for like I know none ;Confirming thy loyalty and true subjection,From the said conquest that never did seaseQuia tu semper intacta manes.Written also reckless and weakness. Careless, negligent, properlyreckless ; a compound of reck, from the Saxon riecan j wbeuce,also, our word reckon.f Henry VI. anno 9 [1430].THE PRAISE OF WATERFORD. 337Then Edward* the Strong the same did know,Of which he was glad then for thine ease ;Commencing of new thy grants to shewe,And the same granted the for to pleas,Enlarging thy liberty thine honour to increase,Called the his chamber of elegance peerlessQuia tu semper intacta manes.Submit art thou under hiss protection,Against all wrongs the for to save ;Not giving thine honour in oblivion,A sworfl of justice to the he gave ;Thine equytie known and thy good lawe,With other large grants the for to pleaseQuia tu semper intacta manes.Henry I the Valiant, famous of memory,Well did he know by true experience,Thy great fydelytie in tyme of victory,When Lambert was crowned by false advertence,And Parkin, also, with no lesse reveres,Then only of this land thou were empresseQuia tu semper intacta manes.Thy prowess, therefore, and renowned so prudent,His grace remembring, exempted thy portFrom bondage and subsidy, by letters patentes ;Edward IV. anno 10 [1470],t Edward IV. gave the siiorde.Henry VII. anno 3 [1487].Q338 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.That thereby all strangers should gladly resort,For thy true vengeance, to thy comfort,And thy people in quietness to redresseQuia tu semper intacta manes.And of thy gale the full deliverance,*To the he gave with execution ;Thy church with anuall rent he did advance ;Thine honour, also, with retribution,Confirming thy grants from resumption,In his high parliament, for thine increaseQuia tu semper intacta manes.And his noble son, Henry the Triumphant,Beholding thy virtue in cache degree ;Of his gracious favour most abundantAll grants affirmed, grants unto theBy his progenitors, noble and free :Under his great scale it doth expresseQuia tu semper intacta manes.His bounteous grace revolving in myndeThine old fydelytie and perfect allegiance,Affirmed in the of duty and kynde,Without web or spot and dyceaveraunce,Accepted had new thy perseverance,With hearts infallible that always shall ceaseQuia tu semper intacta manes.Anno 11 [1495].THE PRAISE OF WATERFORD. 339And to the, Waterford,* in special tokenOf his princely favour, he lately sentThe sword of justice, of which is spoken ;No less honour than worthy is the present,The gift well followed his gracious intent,To comfort them that find faultlessQuia tu semper intacta manes.And triumph, gladness, and great honour,Thy cityzence all with humble obedience,On Easter day, matt a convenient house,In their best manner, with good observance,Hath this received, with letters in affirmance,To have them in protection, both more and lesseQuia tu semper intacta manes.O joyful tyme ! O day and feast most pleasant !In which thy people illumined wasWith loyalty true, and love ardent ;Adverting thy swede favor and great graceOf our triumphant king to our solace,Avoiding all doubt syttf he know nathelessQuia tu semper intacta manes.O citizens all, this knott surely ye knottIn fast allegiance, your name to conserve,And your ancestors hath, and not permitA second score, anno 15 [1523].t Since.Nevertheless.340 THE POPULAR SONGS OF IRELAND.Your famous loyalty slander deserveBy corrupt matters, but truly observeYour princes will from it, do not digressQuia tu semper intacta manes.Now God, we pray, that three art in one,Preserve his high grace in royal estate ;And kepe this citie from dyvysyon,In true allegiance, without debate ;And our hates in the same to societe,Then Waterford true shall never decrease -Quam diu vere intacta manes.THE END.LONDON: PRINTED BY James MOVES, CASTLE Street,LEICESTER Square.