KLOSTERHEIM:OR,THE MASQUE.KLOSTERHEIMOR,THE MASQUE.BTTHE ENGLISH OPIUM-EATER.WILLIAM BLACKWOOD, EDINBURGH ; ANDT. CADELL, STRAND, LONDON.MDCCCXXXn.'93.BALLANTTKE AND OO., PRINTERS, PAUL** Worst, Edinburgh.KLOSTERHEIM,ORTHE MASQUE.KLOSTERHEIM.CHAPTER I.The winter of 1633 had set in with unusualseverity throughout Qualia and Bavaria, thoughas yet scarcely advanced beyond the first week ofNovember. It was, in fiwrt, at the point when ourtale commences, the 8th of that month, or, in ourmodem computation, the 18th ; long after whichdate it had been customary of late years, inter anyordinary state of the weather, to extend the courseof military operations, and without much decline ofvigour. Latterly, indeed, it had become apparentthat entire winter campaigns, without either formalsuspensions of hostilities, or even partial relaxations,had entered professedly as a point of policy into thesystem of warfare which now swept over Germany4 KLOSTEBHEIH.in full career, threatening soon to convert its vastcentral provinces — so recently blooming Eden ofpeace and expanding prosperity — into a howlingwilderness j and which had already converted immensetracts into one universal aceldama, or homanbailies, reviving to the recollection at every stepthe extent of past happiness in the endless memorialsof its destruction. This innovation upon thoold practice of war had been introduced by the Swedisharmies, whose northern habits and traininghad fortunately prepared them to receive a Germanwinter as a very beneficial exchange ; whilst uponthe less hardy soldiers from Italy, Spain, and theSouthern France, to whom the harsh transition fromtheir own sunny skies had made the very same climates severe trial of constitution, this change ofpolicy pressed with a hardship that sometimes*crippled their exertions.It was a change, however, not so long settled as toresist the extraordinary circumstances of the weather.So tierce had been the cold for the last fortsOf Kbich tWe ii man! Ignat dislioiioiir of if Frenvin the TTurtj' Yeim' Ww.KLOSTERHEIBT. 5night, and so premature, that a pretty confidentanticipation had arisen, in all quarters throughoutthe poor exhausted land, of a general armistice.And as this, once established, would offer a readyopening to some measure of permanent pacification,it could not be surprising that the natural hopefulnessof the human heart, long oppressed by gloomyprospects, should open with unusual readiness tothe first colourable dawn of happier times. In fact,the reaction in the public spirits was sudden anduniversal. It happened also that the particular occasionof this change of prospect brought with it aseparate pleasure on its own account. "Winter,which by its peculiar severity had created the apparentnecessity for an armistice, brought manyhousehold pleasures in its train — associated immemoriallywith that season in all northern climates.The cold which had casually opened a path to moredistant hopes, was also for the present moment ascreen between themselves and the enemy's sword.And thus it happened that the same season, whichheld out a not improbable picture of final restoration,however remote, to public happiness, promised thema certain foretaste of this blessing in the immediatesecurity of their homes.KXOSTEHHEIH.But in tha ancient city of Klosterheim it mighthave been imagined that uobodj participated in thesefeelings. A stir and agitation amongst the citizenshad been conspicuous for some days ; and on thecoming' of the Sth, spite of the intense cold, personsof every rank were leon crowding from an earlyhour to the city walls, and returning homewardsat intervals, with anxiaoG and dissatisfied looks.Groups of both sees were collected at every cornerof the rider streets, keenly debating, or angrily protesting; at one time denouncing vengeance to horaegreat enemy ; at another, passionately lamentingsome past or half-forgotten calamity, recalled totheir thoughts whilst anticipating a similar catastrophefor the present day.Above all, the great square, upon which the ancientcastellated palace or schloss opened by one ofits fronts, as well as a principal convent of the city,was the resort of many turbulent spirits. Most ofthese were young men, and amongst them manystudents of the university : For the war, whichhad thinned or totally dispersed some of the greatestuniversities in Germany, under the particular circumstancesof its situation had greatly increasedthat of Klosterheim. Judging by the tone whichprevailed, and the random expressions wlucli fellupon the ear at intervals, a stnwi^r might conjecturethat it was no empty lamentation over impendingevils which occupied this crowd, but someserious preparation for meaning or redressing them.An officer of sora distinction had been for sometimeobserving them from the antique portals of thepalace. It was probable, however, that little morethan their gestures had readied li"' ; for at lengthhe moved nearer, and gradually insinuated himselfinto the thickest part of the mob, with the air ofone who took no further concern in their proceedings,than that of simple curiosity. But his martialair and bis dress allowed him no means of coveringhis purpose. With more warning and leisure toarrange his precautions, he might hove passed as anindifferent spectator ; as it was, his jewel-hilted sabre,the massy gold chain, depending in sont from a costlybutton and loop which secured it half way down hisback, and his broad crimson scarf, embroidered inastyle of peculiar splendour, announced him as afavoured ofScer of the Landgrave, whose ambitiouspretensions, and tyrannical mode of supporting them,were just now the objects of general abhorrence inKlosterheim. His own appearance did not beliethe service which he hail adopted. He wis a manof stout perean, somewhat elegantly formed, in ageabout three or five-and-thirty, though perhaps ayear or two of his apparent age might be chargedupon the bronziug effects of eun and wind. Inbearing and carriage, he announced to every eye themixed carelessness and self-possession of a militarytraining ; and as his features were regular, and remarkablyintelligent, he would have been pronounced,on the whole, a man of winning exterior,were it not for the repulsive effect of his eye, inwhich there was a sinister expression of treachery,and at times a ferocious one of cruelty.Placed upon their guard by his costume, and theseverity of his countenance, those of the lower rankwere silent as he moved languor lowered theirvoicesinto whispers and inaudible murmurs. Amongstthe students, however, whenever they happened tominster stnragly, were many fiery young men, whodisdained to temperate expression of their feelings,or to moderate their tone. A large group of theseat one comer of the square <lrew attention uponthemselves, as well by the conspicuous station whichthey occupied upon the steps of a church portico,as by the loudness of their voices. Towards thenXLOSTERHEIM. 9the officer direct'! hia steps ; and probably' no loverof scenes would have had very long to wait for someexplosion between parties, both equally ready totake offence, and careless of giving it ; but at thatmoment, from an opposite angle of the square, wagseen approaching a young man in plain clothes, whodrew off the universal regard of the mob upon himself,eiid by the iipPOBfofwekome which saluted him,occasioned all other sounds to be stifled. " Long lifeto our noble leader 1" — " Welcome to the goodMax I" resounded through the square, " Hail toour noble brother I" was the acclamation of thestudents. And every body hasfenwl forward tomeet him with an impetuosity which for the momentdrew off all attention from the officer : he wasleft standing by himself on the steps of the church,looking down upon this scene of joyous welcome—the sole spectator who neither fully understood itsmeaning, nor shared in its feelings.The stranger, who wore in part the antique costumeof the university of Klosterheim, except wherelie still retained underneath a travelling dress, stainedwith recent marks of the roads and the weather,advanced amongst hia friends with an air at oncefrank, kind, and dignified. Ha replied to their10 KLOSTERBEIM.greetings in the language of cheerfulness ; but hisfeatures expressed anxiety, and his manner' washurried. Whether he had not observed the officeroverlooking them, ur thought that the importanceof the communications which he had to make transcendedall common restraints of caution, therewaa little time to judge ; so it was, at any rate, thatwithout lowering hie voice, he entered abruptlyupon his business.Friends I I have seen the accursed Holkerstein jI have penetrated within his fortress. With my owneyes I have viewed and numbered his vile assassins.They are in strength triple the utmost amount ofour friends. Without help from us, our kinsmenare lost. Scarce one of us but will lose a dear friendbefore three nights are over, should Klosterheim notresolutely do her duty."She shall, she shall !" exclaimed a multitude ofvoices.Then, friends, it must be speedily ; never wasthere more call for sudden resolution. Perhapsbefore tomorrow's sun shall set, the sword of thisdetested robber will be at their throats. For he hassome intelligence (whence I know not, nor howmuch) of their approach. Neither think that Holkw-KLOSTERHEIM. 1 1fltein is a man acquainted with any touch of mercy orrelenting. Where no ransom is to be had, he is inthose circumstances that he will and must deliverhimself from the burden of prisoners by a generalmassacre. Infants even will not be spared."Many women had by this time flocked to theouter ring of the listening audience. And perhaps£}r tJteir ears in particular it was that the youngstranger urged these last circumstances ; adding,Will you look down tamely from your city wasupon such another massacre of the innocents as wehare once before witnessed ?"'^ Cursed be Holkerstein I" said a multitude ofVoices.And cursed be those that openly or secretlysupport him V* added one of the students, lookingearnestly at the officer.<^ Amen I'' said the officer, in a solemn tone, andlooking round him with the aspect of one who willnot suppose himself to laye been included in thesuspicion.And, Mends, remember this," pursued the popularfavourite ; " whilst you are discharging thefirst duties of Christians and brave men to thosewho are now throwing themselves upon the hospestalityof your city, you will tilso be acquitting yourselvesof a great debt to the Emperor."Softly, young gentleman, softly," interruptedthe officer; "his Serene Highness, my liege lord andyours, goren here, and the Emperor has no partin our allegiance. For debts, slut the city owes tothe Emperor, she will pay. But men and horses,I take it"Are precisely the coin which the time demands ;these will best please the Emperor, and, perhaps,will suit the circumstances of the city. But,leaving the Emperor's rights as a question for lawyers,— you, sir, are a soldier, — I question not, abrave one, — will you arise his Highness the Landgraveto look down Irom the castle windows upona rile marauder, stripping or murdering the innocentpeople who are throwing themselves upon thehospitality of this ancient city?"*' Ay, sir, that will I, he you well assured — theLandgrave is my sovereign"« Since when ? Since Thursday week, I think ;Jbr so long it is since your terlia* first enteredKloEterheim. But in that as you will, and if it beKLOSTERHEIM. 13<a point of honour with you gentlemen Walloons, tolook on whilst women and children are butchered.JPor such a purpose no man is my sovereign ; and asto the Landgrave in particular'« Nor ours, nor ours," shouted a tumult ofvoices — which drowned the young student's wordsabout the Landgrave, though apparently part ofthem reached the officer. He looked round in quest-of some military comrades who might support himixL the vote dujhit, to which, at this point, hispassion prompted him. But, seeing none, he exclaimed,<< Citizens, press not this matter too far—*and you, young man especially, forbear, — you treadupon the brink of treason I"A shout of derision threw back his words.<< Of treason, I say," he repeated furiously ; " andsuch wild behaviour it is, (and I say it with pain,)that perhaps even now is driving his Highness topl^e your city under martial law."<< Martial law I did you hear that ?" ran alongfrown mouth to mouth.Martial law, gentlemen, I say ; how will you-relish the little articles of that code ? The ProvostMarshal makes short leave-takings. Two fathomof rope, and any of these pleasant old balconiesr14 KL08TEEHEIM.which I eee around me, (pointing, as he spoke, tothe antique galleries of wood which ran round themiddle stories in the convent of St Peter,) with &confessor, or none, as the Provost's lireak&st maychance to allow, have cut short, to my knowledge,the treuks of many a better fellow than any I nowsee before me."Saying this, ho bowed with a mock solemnity allround to the crowd, which, by this time, had increasedin number and violence. Those who were inthe outermost circles, and beyond the distinct hearingof what ho said, had been discussing with heatthe alarming: confirmation of their fears in respectto Holkcretein, or listening to the impassioned narrativeof a woman, who bad already seen one of hersons butchered by this ruffian's people under thewalls of the city, and was now anticipating the samehate for her last surviving son and daughter, in casethey should happen to be amongst the party nowexpected from Vienna, She had just recited thetragical circumstances of her son's death, and hadworked powerfully upon the sympathizing passionsoftbecrowd, when, suddenly, at a moment so unseasonablefor the officer, some imperfect repetition ofhis words aliout the Provost Marshal and the lope.ELOBTERHKIM.passed rapidly iron mouth to moutfa. It was saidthat he had threatened every roan with inhabitdeath at the drum-head, who should but speculateon assisting: his iTii?nd8 outside, under the heaviestextremities of dang-er or of outrage. The sarcasticbow, and the inflamed couDtcnoiice of the officer,were seen hy glimpses farther than his words extended.Kindling eyes and listed arms of manyamongst the mob, and chiefly of those on the outsidewho had heard his words the most imperfectly,proclaimed to such as knew Klosterheim and itstemper ai this moment, the danger in which heStood. Maximilian, the young student, generouslyforgot his indignation in concern for his immediateeatety. Seizing him by the hand he exclaimed, —Sir, but a moment ago you warned me that IStood on the brink of treason, — look to your ownsafety at present ; for the eyes of some whom I seeyonder are dangerous."Young gentleman," the other replied contemptuously," I presume that you are a student ; let mecounsel you to go back to your hooks. There youwill be in your element. For myself, I am familiarwith ses as angry as these — and hands somethingmore formidable. Believe me, I see nobody here,"ami he affected to speak yeiih iffipertnrbabk coolness,bat his Voice became tremulous with pauioii,■■ whom I can even esteem worthy of « a<d£er*»ccxBidentio&."And yet. Colonel ron Aremberg, there is atleast one man here who has had the honour of commandingmen as elevated as yoais«l£" Saving'which, be hastily drew from his bosom, where ithung suspended from his neck, a barge fiat tablet ofremarkably beautiful onyx, on one side of whichwas sculptured a rei striking face ; but on theother, which he presented to the gie of the Colonel,was a fine representation of an eagle grovellingon the dust, and beginning to expand its wing—with the single word Heturgam by wsy of motto.Never was revulsion of feeling so rapidly expressedon any man's countenance. The Colonellooked but once — he caught the image of the birdtrailing its pinions in the dust — he heard the wordRexurgam audibly pronounced — his colour fled —his lips grew Ovid with passion — and, furiously on-sheathinghis sword, he sprung, with headlong forgetfulnessof time and place, upon his calm antago-I list. With the advantage of perfect self-posBeseioDimilan found it easy to parry the teB^eatnaiiiKLOSTERHEIM. 17blows of the Colonel ; and he would perhaps havefound it easy to disant him. But at this momentthe crowd, who had been with great difficulty repressedby the more thoughtful amongst the students,burst through all restraints. In the violent outrageoffered to their champion and leader, they sawnaturally a full confirmation of the worst impressionsthey ha received as to the Colonels temperand intention. A number of them rushed forwardto execute a summary vengeance; and the foremostamongst these, a mechanic of Klosterheim distinguishedfor his Herculean strength, with one blowstretched Von Aremberg on the ground. A savageyell announced the dreadful fate which impendedover the Men officer. And, spite of the generousexertions made for his protection by Maximilianand his brother students, it is probable that at thatmoment no human interposition could have availedto turn aside the awakened appetite for vengeance,and that he must have perished, but for the accidentwhich at that particular instant of time occurred todraw off the attention of the mob.A signal gun from a watch-tower, which alwaysin those unhappy times announced the approach ofstrangers, had been fired about ten minutes before ;B^18 KLOSTEKUEIM.Iiut, in the turbulent uproar of the crowd, it hadpassed unnoticed. Hence it was, that, without pre*rioiis warning to the mob assembled at this point, amounted courier non sprung into the square at fillgallop on his road to the palace, and was suddenlypulled up by the dense masses of human beings.News, news !" exclaimed Maximilian'' tidingsof our dear friends from Vienna '" This he saidwith the generous purpose of diverting the infuriatedmob from the unfortunate Von Aremberg,though himself apprehending that the courier hadarrived from another qmuttT. His plan succeeded ;the mob rushed after the horseman, all but two orthree of the most sanguinary, who, being' now separatedfrom all assistance, were easily drawn off fromtheir prey. The opportunity was eagerly used tocarry off the Colonel, stunned and bleeding, withinthe gates of a Franciscan convent. He was consignedto the medical care of the holy others ; and Maximilian,with his companions, then hurried away tothe chancery of the palace, whither the courier hadproceeded with his despatches.These were interesting in the highest degree. Itbad been doubted by iDany, and by others a pretendsdoubt had been ruled to serve the landgrave'spurpose, whether the great cavalcade iron Viennawould be likely to reach the entrance of the forestfor a week or more. Certain iiewK had now arrived,and W9& published before it could be stifled, thatthey and alt their baggage, af):er a prosperous journeyso &r, would be assembled at that point on thisTery evening'. The courier had left the advancedguard about noonday, with an escort of four hundredof the Black Yagers from the Imperial Guard,sod two hundred of Papenheim's Dragoons at ,on the very brink of the forest. Themain body and rear were expected to reach thesame point in four or time hours ; aod the wholeparty would then fortify their encampment ns muchte possible against the night attack which they hadtoo much reason to apprehend.This was news which, in bringing a respite offorty-eight hours, brought relief to some who hadfeared that even this very night might present themwith the spectacle of their beloved friends engagedin a bloody struggle at thu very gates of Kloster-lieim ; for it was the fixed resolution of the Landgraveto suffer no diminution of his own militarystrength, or of the means for recruiting it hereafter.Men, horses, anna, all alike were rigorously laidKLOSTBHHEIH.Under embargo by the existing government of thecity ; and such was the military power at its disposal,reckoning not merely the Numerical strengthin troops, but also the power of sweeping the mainstreets of the town, and seven of the principalroads outside, that it was become a matter of serioustloubt whether the unanimous insurrection of thepopulace hfkd a chance for making head against thegovernment, But others found not even a momentarycomfort in this account. They considered thfttperhaps Waldenhausen might be the very ground!selected for the murderous attack. There was herea solitary post-house, but no town or even village.The forest at this point was just thirty-four milesbroad ; and if the bloodiest butchery should bo goingon under cover of night, no rumour of it could beborne across the forest in time to alarm the manyanxious friends who would this night be lyingawake in Klosterheim.A slight circumstance served to barb and pointthe public distress, which otherwise seemed previouslyto have reached its utmost height. Thecourier had brought a large budget of letters toprivate individuals throughout Klosterhoim ; manyof these were written by children nnactinainted withKLOSTERHEIM. 21the dread catastrophe which threatened them.Most of them had been long separated, hj the fieryof the war, from their parents. They had assembled,from many different quarters, at Vienna, inorder to join what might he called, in Oriental phrase,^ caravan* Their parents had also, in many instances,from places equally dispersed, assembled atKlosterheim, — and, after great revolutions of fortune,they were now going once more to rejoin eachother. Their letters expressed the feelings of hopeand affectionate pleasure suitable to the occasion.They retraced the perils they had passed during thetwenty-six days of their joumey,-the great towns,heaths, and forests they had traversed since leavingthe gates of Vienna ; and expressed, in the innocentterms of childhood, the pleasure they felt in havingcome within two stages of the gates of Klosterheim.In the forest," said they, " there will be no moredangers to pass ; no soldiers ; nothing worse thanwild deer."Letters written in these terms, contrasted withthe mournful realities of the case, sharpened theanguish of fear and suspense throughout thewhole city ; and Maximilian with his friends, unableto bear the loud expression of the public feelings.22 kLOSTEBHBIM.separated themselves from tke tumultuous crowds,and adjourning to the session of their collegerooms determined to consult, whilst it was yet nottoo late, whether, in their hopeless situation foropenly resisting the Landgraye without causing asmuch slaughter as they sough to prevent, it m%htnot yet he possible for them to do something in theway of resistance to the bloody purposes of Holker-stan*KLOSTEBHELU.CHAPTER II,Tete travelling: party, lor whom so mucrb anxietywas felt in Klosterheim, had this evening reachedWaldenhansen without loss or any violent alan ;and indeed, considering the length of their journey,and the distracted state of the empire, they hadhitherto travelled in remarkable security. It wasnow nearly a month since they had taken their departurefrom Vienna, at which point considerablenumbers had assembled from the adjacent countryto take the benefit of their convoy. Some of thesethey had dropped at different turns in their route,bat many more had joined them as they advanced ;for in every considerable city they found large accumulationsof strangers, driven in for momentaryshelter from the storm of war as it spread over onedistrict after another ; and many of these were eagerto try the chances of a, change, or, upon more con-moderategrounds, preferred the protection of a placeKU>aTEBHEIH.Situated like Klosterheim, in a nook as yet unlimitedby the scourge of military execution. Hence ithappened, that from a party of seven hundred andfifty, with an escort of four hundred Yagers, whichWHS the amount of their numbers on passing throughthe gates of Vienna, they had griiduaUy swelled intoa train of sixteen hundred, including two companiesof dragoons who had joined them by the Emperor'sorders at one of the fortified posts.It was felt, BB u circumstance of noticeable singularity,by most of the party, that, after traversing alarge part of Germany without encountering anyvery imminent peril, they should be first summonedto unusual vigilance, ad all the most jealous precautionsof fear, at the very termination of theirJourney. In all [tarts of their route they had metwith columns of troops pursuing their march, andnow and then with roving hands of deserters, whowere formidable to the unprotected traveller. Somethey had overawed by their display of militarystrength ; from others, in the Imperial service, theyhad received cheerful assistance ; and any Swedishcorps, which rumour bad presented as formidableby their number;, they had, with some exertion offorethought and contrivance, constantly evaded.JS5either by n little detour, or by b, temporary halt insome place of strength. But now it was universallyknown that they were probably waylaid by adesperate and remorseless freebooter, who, as he puthis own trust exclusively in the sword, allowed nobodyto hope for any other shape of deliverance.Holkerstein, the military robber, was one of themany monstrous growths which had arisen upon therains of social order in this long and unhappy war.Drawing to himself ail the malcontents of his ownneighbourhood, and as many deserters from the regulararmies in the centre of Germany as lie couldtempt to hia service by the license of unlimited pillage,he had rapidly created a respectable force — hadpossessed himself of tbHous castles in Wittenberg,within fifty or sixty miles of Klosterheim — had attackedand defeated many parties of regular troopssent out to reduce him — and by great activity andlocal knowledge, had raised himself to so much consideration,that the terror of his name had spreadeyes to Vienna ; and the escort of Yagers had beengranted by the Imperial government as much on hisaccount as for any more general reason. A lady,who was in some way related to the Emperor's family,and, by those who were in the secret, was re-KI,OSTERHEIU>pouted to be the Emperor's natural daughter, accompaniedthe travelling' party, with a suit! of femaleattendants. To this lady, who was knonii by thename of the Countess Paulina, the rest of the companyheld themselves indebted for their escort ; andHence, as much as for her rank, she was treated with:ceremonious respect throughout the journey. 'The Lady Paulina travelled with her suite incoaches, drawn by the most powerful artillery horae'that could befiimishwi at the varions military posts*'On this day she had been in the rear ; and having; ibeen delayed by an accident, she was waited forwith some impatience liy the rest of the party, thelatest of whom had reached Waldenhausen early in'the afternoon. It was sunset before her train ofcoaches arrire<l ; and, as the danger from Holker'stein commenced about this point, they were immediatelyapplied to the purpose of strengthening theirencampment against & night attack, ley chaining;them, together with all the baggage carts, in a triple• OwcliO! were oDmniDii inpeople of rank : at the reinstateburgh, by Gustavus Adolphus, though withoutmore Lum fotmcore of couth vere trembled.t of the Dukes of MtcUenline, across the different nveuneB whirl setuneil mostexposed to a charge of cavalry. Many uther preparationswere made ; the agere and dragoons madearroQ^ments for mounting ivitb ease ou the finttalarm ; strong outposts were established ; sentinelsposted all round the encampment, who were dulyrelieved every poor, in consideration of the extremecold ; and upon the whole, as many veteran officerswere amongst them, the great body of the travellerswere now able to apply themselves to the task ofpreparing their evening refreshments with some degreeof comfort ; fur the elder part of the companysaw that every precaution had been taken, and theyounger were not aware of any extraordinary danger,Waldeniiftusen bad formerly been a considerablerHla^, At present there was no more than onehouse, surrounded, however, by such a large establishmentof beams, stables, and other outhouses,that, at a little distance, it wore the appearance of atolerable hamlet. Most of the outhouses, in theirupper Stories, were filled with hay or straw ; andI there the women and children prepared their couchesfer the night, ns the warmest resorts in so severe aReason. The house was furnished in the plaineststyle of a farmer's ; but in other respects it was of39 U.OSTBRUUH.A superior order, being roomy and extensive. Thebest apartment Lad linen reserved for the Lady Pau-hasaud her attendants ; one tor the officers of mostdistinction in the escort or among the travellers ;the rest had been left to the use of the travellers in-diBcriminiitelf.In passing through the hall of entrance, I^ulinahad noticed a man of striking and^arouc^ appearance,hair black and matted, eyes keen and wild,and beaming with malicious cunning, who surveyedher as she passed with a mixed look of insolence andcuriosity that involuntarily made her shrink. Hehad been half-reclining carelessly against the wall,when she first entered, but rose upright with a saddenmotion as she passed him — not probably fromany sentiment of respect, but under the first powerfulimpression of surprise on seeing a young womanof peculiarly splendid figure and impressive beauty,under circumstances bo little according with whatmight be supposed her natural pretensions. Thedignity of her deportment, and the numbers of herattendants, sufficiently proclaimed the luxurious accommodationswhich her habits might have taughther to expect ; and sho was now entering a dwellingwhich of late years had received few strangerKLOSTERHEIM. 29of her 6ex> and probably none but those of thelowest rank.Know your distance, fellow I" exclaimed one ofthe waiting women angrily, noticing his rude gazeand the effect upon her mistress.<^ Good sith, madam, I would that the distancebetween us were more ; it was no prayers of mine,I promise you, that brought upon me a troop ofhorses to Waldenhausen, enough in one twelvehours to eat me out a margrave's ransom. Lightthanks I reckon on from yagers ; and the paymentsof dragoons will pass current for as little in theforest, as a lady's frown in Waldenhausen."Churl I" said an officer of dragoons, " how knowyou that our payments are light ? The Emperortakes nothing without payment ; surely not fromsuch as you. But a propos of ransoms, what nowmight be Holkerstein's ransom for a farmer's beamsstuffed with a three years' crop ?"How mean you by that, captain ? The crop'smy own, and never was in worse hands than myown. God send it no worse luck to-day I"« Come, come, sir, you understand me betterthanthat : nothing at Waldenhausen, I take it, is yours orany man's, unless by license from Holkerstein. And39 KLOSTERHEIM.when I see so many goodly beams and games, withtheir jolly charges of hay and com, that would feedone of Holstein's garrisons through two sieges,I know what to thijik of him who has saved themscot-fire. He that serree a robber, miiet do it on arobber's terms. To such bargains, there goes butone word ; and that is the robber's. But come, man,I am not thy june. Only 1 woiJd have my on their guard at one of Holkerstein's outposts.And thee, thinner, I would have to rememberthat an Emperor's grace may yet stand thee instead,when a robber is past helping thee to a rope."The soliliere laughed, but took their officer's hintto watch the motions of a man, whose immunityfrom spoil, in circumstances so tempting to a militaryrobber's cupidity, certainly argued some collisionwith Holkerstein.The Lady Paulina had passed on during this dialogueinto an inner room, hoping to have found thequiet and the warmth which were now become soneedful to her repose. But the antique stove wastoo much out of repair to he used with benefit ; thewood-work was decayed, and admitted currents ofcold air ; and, above all, from the slightness of thepartitions, the noise and tumult in a house occupiedKLOSTF.RHEIM. 31bf Soldiers and travelers proved «* iiic«Mwiit, tint,iLftef taking reireahuicnts with her nttenilante, sheresolved to adjourn fur the night to her coach ;which afforded much superior resource, both inwarmth and in freedom from noise.The carriage of the Countess was one of thosewhich had heed posted at an angle of the encampment,and on that side terminated the hne ofdefences ; for a deep mass of wood, which commencedwhere the carriages ceased, seemed to present anatural protection on that side against the approachof cavalry ; in reality, from the quantity of tangledroots and the inequalities of the ground, it appeareddifficult for a single horseman to advance even ufew yards without falling. And upon this side ithad been judged sufficient to post a single sentinel.Assured by the many precautions adopted, andby the cheerful language of the officer on guard, whoattended her to the carriage door, Paulina, with oneattendant, took her seat in the coach, where shehad the moans of fencing herself sufficiently fromthe cold by the weighty robes of nineveh and erminewhich her ample wardrobe afforded ; and thelarge dimensions of the coach enabled her to turn itto the use of a so or couch.32 KI.08TERHEIM,Youth and health sleep well ; and with all th<>means and appliances of the Lady Paulina, weariedbesides as she had been with the fatigue of a day'smarch, performed oyer roads almost impassable fromroughness, there was little reason to think that shewould miss the benefit of her natural advantages.Yet sleep failed to' come, or come only by fugitivesnatches, which presented her with tumultuousdreams — sometimes of the Emperor's cubit inVienna, sometimes of the vast succession of troubledscenes and fierce Vices that had passed beforeher sint'e she bad quitted that city. At one momentsis beheld the travelling equipages and far*stretching array of her own party, with their militaryescort filing off by torchlight under the gatewayof ancient cities ; at another, the ruined villages,with their dismantled cottages— doors and windowstorn off, walls scorched with fire, and a few gauntdogs, with a wolf-like ferocity in their bloodshoteyes, prowling about the ruins, — objects that hadreally so often afflicted her heart. - Waking somthose distressing spectacles, she would fill into afitful dose, which presented her with remembrancesstill more alarming ; hands of fierce deserters, thateyed her travelling party witbasavBge rapacity whichKLOSTEtLHEIM. OHibid noi confess any powerful sense of inferiority ;and in the very fields w tui they had once cultivated,now Silent und tranquil from utter desolation, themouldering bodies of the unoffending' peasants, leftunhonoured with the rites of sepulture, in manyplaces from the mere extermination of the wholecorol population of their neighbourhood. To thesesucceeded a wild chaos of figures, in which the dressand tawny features of Bohemian gipsies conspicuouslyprevailed, just as she had seen them of latemaking: war on all parties alike ; and, in the personof their leader, her fiuicy suddenly restored to her avivid resemblance of their suspicious host at theirpresent quarters, and of the malicious gaze withwhich he had disconcerted her.A euddea movement of the carriage awakenedher, and, by the light of a lamp suspended from aprojecting bough of a tree, she beheld, on lookingout, the sallow countenance of the very man whoseimage had so recently infested her dreams. Thelight being considerably nearer to him than to herself,she could see without being distinctly seen ;and, having already heard the very strong presumptionsagainst this man's honesty, which hail beenui^d by the officer, and without reply from the suspectedparty, she now determined to watch Lira.KXCBTESHEIM.CHAPTER III.The night wbs pitch dark, and Paulina felt amomentary terror creep over her as she looked intothe massy blackness of the dark alleys which ranup into the woods, forced into deeper shade underthe glare of the lamps from the encampment. Shenow reflected with some alarm that the forest com-mended at this point, stretching away (as she hadbeen told) in some directions upwards of fifty miles ;and that, if the post occupied by their encampmentshould be inaccessible on this side to cavalry, itmight, however, happen that persons with the worstdesigns could easily penetrate on foot from the concealmentsof the forest, in which case she herself,and the splendid booty of her carriage, might be thefirst and easiest prey. Even at this moment, thevery wM^t of those atrocious wretches whom thetimes had produced, might be lurking in concealment,with their eyes hastened upon the weak orKLOSTERHEIM. :35exposed parts of the encampment, and waiting untilmidnight should hare buried the majority of theirwearied party into the profoundest repose, in orderthen to make a combined and murderous attack.Under the advantages of sudden surprise and darkness,together with the knowledge which they wouldnot fail to possess of every road and liy-path in thewoods, it could scarcely be doubted that they mightstrike a very effectual blow at the Vienna caravan,which had else so nearly completed their journeywithout loss or memorable privations ; — and theknowledge which Holkerstein possessed of the shortlimits within which his opportunities were nowcircumscribed, would doubtless prompt him to somebold and energetic effort.Thoughts unwelcome as these, Paulina foundleisure to pursue, for the ruffian landlord had disappearedalmost lit the same moment when she firstcaught a glimpse of him. In the deep silence whichsucceeded, she could not wean herself from the pain-iiifascination of imagining the very worst possiblecities to which their present situation was lille.She imaged to herself the horrors of a palisade, asshe had ofleii heard it described ; she saw, in apprehension,the savage band of confederate butchers.rS6 KLOSTERHETM.issuing' Ceaai the profound solitudes of the forest.in white shirts drawn oyer their armour ; she seemedto read the murderous features, lighted Tip by thegleam of Temps — the stealthy step, and the suddengleam of sabres ; then the yell of assault, thescream of agflny, the camp floating with blood ; thefiery, the vengeance, the pursuit , — all these circumstancesof scenes at that time too Jamihar to Germany,passed rapidly before her mind.But after some time, aa the tranquillity continued,her nervous irritation gave way to less agitating'but profound sensibilities. Whither waa her loverwithdrawn from her knowledge? and why? and forhow long a time? What an age it seemed sinceshe had last seen him at Vienna 1 That the serviceupon which he was employed would prove honourable,she felt assured. But was it dangerous ? Alas Iin Germany there was none otherwise. Would itsoon restore him to her society ? And why had hebeen of late go unaccountably silent ? Or again,had he been silent ? Perhaps his letters had beenintercepted, — nothing, in fiict, was more common atthat time. Tie rarity was, if by any accident aletter reached its destination. From one of the worsteohcitudea incident to such a situation, Paulina was.KLOSTEBHEIM.however, delivered by lier own nobility of mind,which raised her alKJve the meanness of jealousy.Whatsoever might have happened, or into whateversituation her lover might hft»a been thrown, hefelt no fear that the fidelity of his attachment couldhave wandered or faltered for a moment ; — thatworst of pangs the Lady Paulina was rniHed above,equally by her just confidence in herself and in herlover. But yet, though faithful to her, might henot be ill? Might he not he languishing in someoneof the many distresses incident to war ? Mighthe not even have perished ?That fear threw her back upon the calamities andhomsv of war ; and insensibly her thoughts wanderedround to the point from which they had started,of her own immediate situation. Again shesearched with penetrating eyes the black avenuesof the wood, as they lay forced almost into strong reliefand palpable substance by the glare of the lamps.Again she fancied to herself the murderous heartsand glaring eyes which even now might be shroudedby the silent masses of brest which stretchedbefore her, — when suddenly a single light shot itsrays from what appeared to be a considerable distancein one of the avenues. Paulina's heart beatKLOBTEBHEIM.fast at this alarming spectacle. Immediately after,the light was shade, or in some way disappeared.But this gave the more reason for terror. It wasnow clear that human beings were moving in thewoods. No public road lay in that direction ; norin so populous a region, could it be imagined thattravellers were likely at that time to be abroad.From their own encampment, nobody could haveany motive for straying to a distance on so severe anight, and at a time when he would reasonably drawupon himself tile danger of being shot by the nightThis last consideration reminded Paulina suddenly,aa of a very singular circumstance, that theappearance of the light had been followed by nochallenge fi'om the sentinel. And then first sheremembered that for some time she had ceased tohear the sentinel's step, or the rattle of his bandoleers;Hastily looking along the path, she discoveredtoo certainly, that the single sentinel pasted onthat side of their encampment was absent from hisstation. It might have been supposed that he had tkllenasleep from the severity of the cold ; but in thatcase the lantern which he carried attached to hisbreast would have continued to bum ; whereas allIlLOBTSBHEIU.traces of light lead vanished from the path which beperambululeJ. The error was now ajipareiit toPaulina, both in having appointed no more thanone sentinel to this quarter, and also in the selectionof his beat. There had been frequent instancesthroughout this war in which by means of u net,such as that carried by the Roman retaliate in thecontests of the gladiators, and dexterously appliedby two persons from behind, a sentinel had beensuddenly muffled, gagged, and carried off, withoutmuch difficulty. For »ucli a purpose it was clearthat the present sentinel's range, lying by the mariaof a wood from which his minutest movementscould be watched at leisure by those who lay inutter darkness themselves, afforded every possiblefacility. Paulina scarcely doubted that he had beenmdefid carried off, in some such way, and not impossiblyalmost whilst she was looking on.She would now have called aloud, and have alarmedthe camp, — but at the very moment when shelet down the glass, the savage landlord reappeared,and, menacing her with a pistol, awed her into silence.He bore upon bis head a moderate-sizedtrunk, or portmanteau, which appeared, by the imperfectlight, to be that in which some despatcheshad been lodged from the Imperial governmentto different persons in KloBterlieim. This had beenput from one of the carriages in her suite ; andher anxiety was great on recollecting that) fromsome words of the Emperor's, she had reason tobelieve one at least of the letters which it conveyedto be in some important degree connected with theinterests of her lover. Satisfied, however, that hewould not find it possible to abscond with so burdensomean article in any direction that could savehim from instant pursuit and arrest, she continuedto watch for the moment when she might safelyraise the alarm. But great was her consternationwhen she saw a dark figure steal from a thicket,receive the trunk from the other, and instantly retreatinto the deepest recesses of the forest.Her fears now gave way to the imminence of soimportant a loss ; and she endeavoured hastily toopen the window of the opposite door. But thishad iieen so electuary barricaded against the cold,that she ailed in her purpose, and immediately turningback to the other sides called loudly — " Guard Iguard I" The press of carriages, however, at thispoint, so far deadened her voice) that it was sometimebefore the alarm reached the other side of theencampment distinctly enough to direct the'w motionsto her Summons. Half a ilor^n yngera andan officer at length presented themselves ; lout thelandlord had disappeared, she knew not in neatdu^ctiou. Upon explaining the cimuustanees ofthe rubbery, however, the officer caused hie men tolight a number of torches and advance into the wood.But the ground was so impracticable in most placesfrom. tangled roots and gnarled stumps of trees, thatit was with difficulty they could keep their footing.They were also embarrassed by the crossing shadowsfrom the innumerable boughs above them ; and asituation of greater perplexity for effective pursuitit was scarcely possible to imagine. Every wherethey saw alleys, arched high overhead, and resemblingthe aisles of a catbednJ, as much in form asin the perfect darkness which reigned in both atthis solemn hour of midnight, stretching away apparentlywithout end, but more and more obscure,until impenetrable blackness terminated the longvista. Now and then a dusky figure was seen toorosB at some distance; hut these were probably deer ;and when loudly challenged by the yagers, no soundreplied but the vast echoes of the forest. Betweenthese interminable alleys, which radiated us from ak42 KL0STERU£1M.centre at this point, there were generally thicketsinterposed. Sometimes the wood was more open,fad clear of all undergrowth — shrubs, thorns, orbrambles — for a considerable distance, bo that asingle file of horsemen might have penetrated forperhaps half a mile ; but belts of thicket continuallychecked their progress, and obliged tbera to seektheir way hack to some one of the long vistas whichtraversed the woods between the frontiers of Sua—bia and Bavaria.Ill this perplexity of paths, the officer halted hisparty to consider of his further course. At thismoment one of the yagers protested that he had seena man's hat and £kce rise above a thicket of bushes,apparently not more than 150 yards iron their ownposition. Upon that the party were ordered toadvance a little, and to throw in a volley as nearlyas could be judged, into the very spot pointed outbythe soldier. It seemed that he had not been mistaken; for a loud laugh of derision rose immediatelya little to the left of the bushes. The laughterswelled upon the silence uf the night, and in thenext moment was taken up by another on the right,which again was echoed by a third on the rear. Pealafter peal of tumultuous and scornful laughter re-KLOSTKRHSIH. 43sounded from the remoter solitudes of the forest ; andthe officer stood aghast to hear this proclamation ofdefiance from a multitude of enemies, where he hadanticipated no more than the very party engaged inthe robbery.To advance in pursuit seemed now both uselessand dangerous. The laughter had probably beendesigned expressly to distract his choice of road ata time when the darkness and intricacies of theground had already made it sufficiently indeterminate.In which direction, out of so many whencehe had heard the sounds, a pursuit could he institutedwith any chance of being effectual, seemed now ashopeless a subject of deliberation as it vas possibleto imagine. Still, as he had been made aware ofthe great importance attached to the trunk, whichmight very probably contain despatches interestingto the welfare of Klosterheim, and the whole surroundingterritory, he felt grieved to retire withoutsome further attempt for its recovery. And he stoodfor a few moments irresolutely debating with himself,or listening to the opinions of his men.His irresolution was very abruptly terminated.All at once, upon the main road from Klosterheim,at an angle about half a mile a-head where it firstKL08TERHEIM,wheeled into eight from Waldenhausen, a heavythundering trot was beard ringing iron the frozenroad, as uf a regular body of cavalry advancing rapidlyupon their encampment. There was no timeto be lost ; the officer instantly withdrew his yagersfrom the wood, posted a strong guard aX the woodside,Bounded the alarm throughout the camp,agreeably to the system of signals previously concerted,mounted about thirty men, whose horsesand themselves were kept in perfect equipment duringeach of the night watches, and then advancingto the head of the barriers, prepared to receive theparly of strangers in whatever character they shouldhappen to present themselves.All this had been done with so much promptitudeand decision, that on reaching the burners, the officerfound the strangers not yet come up. In pact, theybad halted at a strong outpost about a quarter of umile in advance of Waldenhausen ; and though oneor two strollers came dropping in from by-roadson the forest heath, who reported them as enemies,from the indistinct view they bad caught of theirequipment, it had abbacy become doubts >iromtheir movements whether they woulil really prove so.Two of their party were now descried upon theKLOSTERKtlH.Iroad, and nearly close up with the Rates of Wakens; they were accotniianieil by several of thenthe outpost ; and, immediately on beinghailed, they exclaimed, " Friends, and from Kiosk1"Heidio spoke was a. young cavalier, magnificentalike in his person, dress, and style of his appointments.He was superbly mounted, wore the decorationsof a major-general in the Imperial service,and scarcely needed the explanations which he gaveto exonerate himself from the suspicion of being aleader of robbers under Hoikerstein. Fortunatelyenough also, at a period when officers of the mostdistinguished merit were too often iinlaithfiil totheir engagements, or passed with so much levityfrom service to service, as to justify an indiscriminatejealousy of all who were not in the public eye,it happened that the officer of the watch, formerly,when mounting guard at the Imperial palace, hadbeen familiar with the personal appeaTBUcc of thecavalier, and could speak of his own knowledge tothe favour which he had enjoyed at the Emperor'scourt. After short explanations, therefore, he wasadmitted, and thankfully welcomed in the camp ;46 KLOSTEKHEIM.and the officer of the guard departed to receive withhonour the generous volunteers at the outpost.Meantime, the alarm, which was general throughoutthe camp, hind assembled all the women to onequarter, where a circle of carriages had been formedfor their protection. In their centre, distinguishedby her height and beauty, stood the Lady Paulina,dispensing assistance from her wardrobe to any whowere suffering from cold under this sudden summonsto night air, and animating others, who were morethan usually depressed, by the aids of consolationand of cheerful prospects. She had just turned herlace away from the passage by which this little sanctuarycommunicated with the rest of the camp, andwas in the act of giving directions to one of berattendants, when suddenly a well-known voice hellupon her ear. It was the voice of the strangercavalier, whose natural gallantry had prompted himimmediately to relieve the alarm, which, unavoidably,he had himself created ; in a few words, be wasexplaining to the assembled females of the camp inwhat character, and with how many companions, hehad come. But a shriek from Paulina interruptedhim. Involuntarily she held out her open arms,and involuntarily she exclaimed, " Dearest .47milan I" On his part, the young cavalier, for amoment or two at first, was almost deprived ofspeech hy astonishment and excess of pleasure*Bounding forward, hardly conscious of those whosurrounded them, with a rapture of fiEdthfiil lore hecaught the noble young beauty into his arms, amovement to which, in the frajoik innocence of herheart, she made no resistance; folded her to hisbosom, and impressed a fervent kiss upon her lips *;whilst the only words that came to his own were,<< Beloved Paulina I oh, most beloved lady I whatchance has brought you hither?"CHAPTER IV.In those days of tragical confusion, aiidof suddencatastrophe, alike for better or for worse-when thereadings aside of domestic charities were openwithout ail hour's warning, when ra-unioiiB wereas dramatic and as unexpected as any which areexhibited on the stage, and too often separationswere eternal, — the circumstances of the times concurredwith the spirit of manners to sanction a toneof frank expression to the stronger passions, whichthe reserve of modem habits would not entirelylicense. And hence, not less than from the nobleingenuousness of their natures, the martial youngcavalier and the superb young beauty of the Imperialhouse, on recovering themselves from their firsttransports, found no motives to any feeling of elseshame, either in their own consciousness, or in thereproving looks of any who stood around them.On the contrary, as the grown-up spectators wereJKL03T£RH£IM. 49almost exclusively female, to whom the violencesof ^thfiil love are never other than a serious subject,or jiatTirullj' associated with the ludicrous ;many of them expressed their synipnthy with thescene before them by tears, and all of them in somewayor other. Even io this age of more fastidiousmanners, it is probable that the tender interchangesof affection between a young couple rejoining eachother after deep calamities, and standing on thebrink of fresh, perhaps endless separation, wouldmeet with something' of the same indulgence fromthe least interested witnesses.Hence the news was diffused through the campwith general satisfaction, that a noble and accomplishedcavalier, the favoured lover of their belovedyoung mistress, had joined them from Klosterheimwith a chosen band of volunteers, upon whosefidelity in action they might entirely depend. Somevague account floated about, at the same time, of themarauding attack upon the Lady Patna's carriage.But naturally enough, from the confusion and hurryincident to a nocturnal disturbance, the circumstanceswere mixed up with the arrival of Maximilian,in a way which ascribed to him the merit of havingrepelled an attack, which might else have provedso KLOSTEBHEIM.fatal to the ]a<lr of Iub heart. Aid whig romanticinterposition of Evidence on a young lady's behalf,through the agency of her lover, unexpected onher part, and unconscious on his, proved so equallygratifying to the passion for the marvellous and theinterest in youthful love, that no other or truerversion of the cose could ever obtain a popularacceptance in the camp, or afterwards in Kloatei^heim. And had it been the express purpose ofMaximilian to found a belief, for Lis own futurebenefit, of a providential sanction vouchsafed to hisconnexion with the Lady Paulina, he could not, bythe best arranged contrivances) have more fullyattained that end.It was yet short of midnight by more than anhour ; and therefore, on the suggestion of Maximilian,who reported the roads across the forestperfectly quiet, and alleged some arguments forquieting the general apprehension for this night,the travellers and troops retired t« rest, as the bestmeans of preparing them to face the trials of thetwo next days. It was judged requisite, however,to strengthen the night-guard very considerably,and to relieve it at least every two hours. Thatthe poor sentinel, on the forest side of the encampment,had been in soma mysterious way trepannedupon his post, was now too clearly ascertained. forhe was missing ; ind the character of the man, nuless than the absence of all intelligible temptationto such an act, forbade the suspicion of his having(leserteil. On this (quarter, therefore, a. file of selectmarksmen was stationed, with directions instantlyto pick off every moving figure that showed itselfwithin their range. Of these men, Maximilianhimself took the command, ad by this means heobtained the opportunity so enviable to one longseparated from his mistress, of occasionally conversingwith her, and of watching' over her safety.In one point he showed a distinguished control overhis inclinations ; for, much as he had to tell her,and ardently as he longed for communicating withher on various subjects of common interest, liewould not suffer her to keep the window down formore than a minute or two in so dreadful a state ofthe atmosphere. She, on her part, exacted a promiseIrom him that he would leave his station atthree o'clock in the morning. Meantime, as on theone hand she felt touched by this proof of her lover'ssolicitude for her safety, so, on the other, she wusbis account, from the knowledge she52 KL06T£SH£IH.had of his long habituation to the hardships of acamp, with which, indeed, he had been iitiniliar&Dtnhis childish days. Thus debarred from conversingwith her lover, and at the same time feeling the mostabsolute confidence in his protection, she soon fellplacidly asleep. Theforemost subject of her anxietyand sorrow was now removed ; her lover had beenrestored to her hopes ; and her dreams were nolonger haunted with horrors. Yet, at the sametime, the turbulence of joy and of hope fulfilledunexpectedly, had substituted its own disturbances ;and her sleep was often interrupted. But, as oftenas that happened, she had the delightful pleasure ofseeing her lover's figure, with its martial equipments,and the drooping plumes of his eager barrette, uhe took his station at her carriage, traced out onthe ground in the bright glare of the flambeaux.She awoke, therefore, continually to the sense ofrestored happiness ; and at length fell finally asleep,to wake no more until the morning trumpet, atthe break of day, proclaimed the approaching preparationsfor the general movement of the camp.Snow had helen in the night. Towards fouro'i'Iock in the morning, amongst those who heldthat watch, there ha been a atnmg apprehensionKLOBTERHEIH.that it woiJd fell heavily. But that slate of the atmospherehad passed off; and it had not in betMien Sufficiently to abate the cold, or much to re-tftrd their march. According to the usual customof the camp, a general breakfast was prepared, atwhich all without distinction meted together— asniEcient homage being espresaeil to superior rankby resigning the upper part of every talile to thosewho hod any distinguished pretensions of that kind.On this occasion, Paulina had the gratification ofseeing the pnbhc respect offered in the most markedmanner to her lover. He had retired about daybreakto take an hour's repose, — for she found, fromher attendants, with mingled vexation and pleasure,that he had not fulfilled his promise of retiring atan earlier hour, in consequence of some renewed appearancesof a suspicions kind in the woods. In ibisabsence, she heard n resolution proposed and carriedamongst the whole body of veteran officers attachedto the party, that the chief military command shouldbe transferred to Maximilian, not merely as a distinguishedfavourite of the Emperor, but also, andmach more, as one of the most brilliant cavalry officersin' the Imperial service. This resolution wasto him on his taking the place re-KLOSTEBHEI3I.eervedforhim, at the head of the principal ; and Paulina thought that he had never appearedmore interesting or truly worthy of admiration,than under that exhibition of courtesy andmodest dignity with which he first earnestly declinedthe honour in favour of older officers, — and thenfinally complied, with what he found to be the sincerewish of the company, by frankly accepting it.Pauhna had grown np amongst military men, andhad been early trained to a sympathy with militarymerit — the very court of the Emperor had somethingof the complexion of a camp — and the objectof her own youthful choice was elevated in her eyes,if it were at all possible that be should be so, by thisratification of his claims on the part of those whomale looked up to as the most competent judges ■Before nine o'clock the van of the party was inmotion ; then, with a short interval, cano all thecarriages of every description, and the Papenheimdragoons as a rearguard. About eleven, the snn beganto burst out, and illuminated, with the cheertiilcrimson of a frosty morning, those horizontal draperiesof mist which had previously stifled his beams.The extremity of the cold was a good deal abatedby this time, and PaoHna, alighting from her .55rage, mounted a led horse, which g-uve her the opportunity,so raii[:h wished for by them both, of conversing'freely with Maximilian. For » long timethe interest and animation of their reciprocal communications,and the magnitude of the events sincethey had parted, affecting either or both of themdirectly, or in the persons of their friends, had thenstunJ effect of banishing any dejection whichnewer and more pressing concerns would else havecalled forth. But, in the midst of this factitiousanimation, and the happiness which otherwise sonndisgnLsedly possessed Maximilian at their unexpectedre-union, it shocked Paulina to observe in herlover a degree of gravity almost amounting to sadness,which argued, in a soldier of his gallantry,some overpowering sense of danger. In &ct, uponbeing pressed to say the worst, Maximilian franklyavowed, that he was ill at ease with regard to theirprospects when the hour of trial should arrive ; andthat hour he had no hope of evading. Holkerstein,he well knew, had been continually receiving reportsof their condition, as they reached their nightlystations, for the last three days. Spies had beenround about them, and even in the midst of them,tbnmghout the darkness of the last night. Spieswere keeping' pace with them as they advancedThe certainty of being attacked was therefore prettynearly absolute. Then, as to their means of defence)and the relations of strength between the parties,in numbers it was not impossible that Holkersteinmig-ht triple themselves. The slice of their ownmen might he superior to most oFhis, though pointingamongst their number many deserters from veteranregiments ; but the horses of their own partywere in general poor and out of condition, — and ofthe whole train, whom Maximilian had inspectedat starting, not two hundred coidd be pronouncedfit for making or sustaining a charge. It was true,that by mounting some of their picked troopers uponthe superior horses of the most distinguished amongstthe travellers, who had willingly consented to anarrangement of this nature for the general benefit,some partial remedy had been applied to their weaknessin that one particular. But there were othersin which Holkerstein had even greater advantages ;more especially, the equipments of his partisanswere entirely new, having been plundered from anill-guarded armoury near Munich, or from convoyswhich he had attacked. " Who would be a gentleman,"says an old proverb, " let bim storm a town,"KXOSTESBEIM. 57and the gay appearance of this robber's companionsthrew a light upon its meaning. The ruffian com-pinions of ttiis marauder were, besides, animated byhopes such as no regular commander in an honourableservice could find the means of holding out.And finally, they were familiar with all the forestroads and innumerable by-paths, on which it wasthat the beet points lay for surprising' an enemy, orfor a retire t wh I t m their own case, encounteredwith th p t fa large body of trBTEl-hera and help j \] whom, under any circumstances,it w 1 rd ns t leave, they were tiedup to the m 1 vi h d p ndeticy upon the weaknessof the mp Q and had it not in theirpower with t d th most evident advantageon the side of the enemy, or to pursue such as theymight he fortunate enough to create for themselves.But, after all," said Maximilian, assuring atone of gaiety, upon finding that the candour of his;explanations had depressed his fair companion, " the• Eying of an old Swedish" enemy of mine is worth;remembering in such cases, — that nine times outIt vn the Swedish Genera] Knipliaaseii, EWGmtEVBi, to whom t1u> miaam ■■ derived.58 KLOSTEtE®tK?of ten a drachm of good luck is worth an muiee ofgood continuance, — and were it not, dearest Paulina,that you are with us, I would think the risk notheavy. Perhaps, by to-sorrow's sunset, we shellall look back from our pleasant seats in the warmrefectories of Klosterheim, with Something of scornupon our present apprehensions. — And see ! at thisTery moment the turn of the road has brought usin view of our port, though distant from us, accordingto the windings of the forest, something morethan twenty miles. That range of hills, which youobserve a-head, but a little inclined to the left, overhangsKlosterheim ; and with the sun in a more favourablequarter, you might even at this point deseiythe pinnacles of the citadel, or the loftiest of the conventtowers. Half an hour will bring us to the closeof our day's march."In reality, & few minutes suited to bring themwithin view of the chateau, where their quartershad been prepared for this night. This was a greathunting establishment, kept up at vast expense bythe two last and present Landgravess of X .Many interesting anecdotes were connected with thehistory of this building ; and the beauty of the forestscenery was conspicuous even in winter, enlivenedKLOSTEHHSIU. 59as the embers woods continued to be by the scarletberries of mountain-ash, or tbo dark verdure of theholly and the ilex. Under her present frame ofpensive feeling, the quiet lawns and long-withdrawingglades of these vast woods, had a touching' fiFectupon the feeling's of Paulina ; their deep silence,and the tranquillity which reigned amongst them,contrasting in her remembrance with the hideousscenes of carnage and desolation through which herpath bad too often lain. With these predisposinginfluences to aid him, Maximilian found it easy lodraw off her attention from the dangers whichpressed upon their situation. Her sympathies wen'so quick with those whom she loved, that she readilyadopted their apparent hopes or their fears ;and so entire was her confidence in the superiorjudgment, and the perfect gallantry of her lover,that her countenance reflected immediately the prevailingexpression of his.Under these impressions Maximilian sufferedher to remain. It seemed cruel to disturb her withthe truth. He was sensible that continued anxiety,and dreadful or afflicting spectacles, had with her, aswith most persons of her sex in Germany at thattime, unless protected by singular insensibility.60 KLOST£RH£IM.somewhat impaired the firm tone of her mind. Hewas determined, therefore, to consult her comfort,hj disguising or palliating their true situation. Butfor his own part, he could not hide from his convictionthe extremity of their danger ; nor could he,when recurring to the precious interests at stakeupon the issue of that and the next day's trials, facewith any firmness the afflicting results to which theytended, under the known barbarity and ruffian characterof their unprincipled enemy.KLOST£BH£lM* 61CHAPTER V.The chateau of Falkenberg, which the travellersreached with the decline of light, had the usualdependencies of offices and gardens, which may besupposed essential to a prince's hunting establishmentin that period. It stood at a distance ofeighteen miles from Klosterheim, and presentedthe sole oasis of culture and artificial beauty throughoutthe last extent of those wild tracts of silyanground.The great central pile of the building was dismantledof furniture ; but the travellers carried withthem, as was usual in the heat of war, all the meansof fencing against the cold, and giving even a luxuriousequipment to their dormitories. In so largea party, the deficiencies of one were compensatedby the redundant contributions of another. Andso long as they were not under the old Romaninterdict, excluding them from seeking fire and water63 KLOSTEBBEIU.of those on whom their day's jones had thrownthorn, their own travelling stores enabled them toaccommodate themselves to all other privations.On this occasion, however, they found more thanthey hud expected ; for there was at Falkenber^ autorii of uU the grime in season, constantly kept uptor the 11811 of the Landgrave's household, and themure favoured iiiuiiiistories at KloBterheim. TheHiiiidl iwi.nliUiih 111 tint of keepers, foresters, and otherRvrviiiKH, who oDCiipiwI the chateau, had received110 i>nli>r* til ivtuue the hospitality usually practised111 if l.iuid};ruvos iiiimH i or thought proper toiti>a«uiM« Ihuiii ilk [heir (uvsuiit circumstances ofkluUulity tv iivtixt. And lisviiig fnuu necessity per-HutWU I*' luwht they wtro W by a sense of theirwM«lw'u IwMMitTi ur Ihw own syiui«thy with the» vim may wtwwu stud chlldreti. to do;Mi»w«r> ilbtnbaUd liberallyte was Mat rafiiMd hj the oldk W ft b aW fay —ine their tecmaOs.ukBi>*W<i;i:m«Dt,^M tik» Wet kant-ks««n so>B«t(tues aptupon tlM •rhufe) it■ agreed that no such aTeniag uf coiufiiit mtit.even luxurious enjoyment had been spent sincetheir departure from Vienna.One thing of the chateau was magnificently ; this, which of itself was lolemlily extensive,had been resigned to the use of Paulina, Maximilian,and others of the military gentleman, whosemanners and deportment seemed to entitle them tosuperior attentions. Here, amongst many marksof refinement and intellectual culture, there was alibrary and a gallery of portraits. In the library,some of the officers had detected sufficient evidencesof the Swedish alliances clandestinely maintainedby the Landgrave ; numbers of rare books, bearingthe arms of different Imperial cities, which, in theseveral campaigns of Gustavus, hail been appropriatedas they feU in his hands, by way of fairreprisals for the robbery of the whole Palatine libraryat Heidelberg, had been since transferred (as itthus appeared) to the Landgrave, by purchase or aspresents ; and on either footing argued a correspondencewith the Emperor's enemies, which hithertohe had strenuously disavowed. The pictish gallery,it was very probable, had been collected in the samemanner. It contained little else than portraits, butthese were truly admirable and interesting, being1 recentKLOStERH!arks from the pencil of Vandyke, andcomposing a series of heads and features the mostremarkable for station in the one sex, or for beautyin the other, which that age presented. Amongstthem were nearly all the Imperial leaders of distinction,and many of the Swedish. Miixiinitian and hisbrother officers took the liveliest pleasure in perambulatingthis gallery with Paulina, and reviewingwith ber these fine historical memorials. Out oftheir joint recollections, or the fiicts of their personalexperience, they were able to supply any defectivelinks in that commentary, which her own knowledgeof the Imperial court would hare enabled herin BO many instances to furnish upon this martialregister of the age.The wars of the Netherlands had transplanted toGermany that stock upon which the camps of theThirty Years' War were originally raised. Accordinglya smaller gallery, at right angles with thegreat one, presented a series of portraits from theold Spanish leaders and Walloon partisans. F^<omEgmont and Horn, the Duke of Alva and Anno,down to Spinosa, the last of that distinguishedschool of soldiers, no man of eminence was omitted.Even the worthless and insolent Earl of Leicester,KLOSTERHEIM. 65with his gallant nephew — that ullimw Somanontmin the roBs of chivalry — were not excluded, thoughit was pretty evident that a Catholic zeal had presidedin forming the collection. For together withthe Prince of Orange, and Henri Quatre, were toho seen their vile assassins— portrayed with a lavishostentation of ornament, and enshrined in afiske BO gorgeous, as russel thorn in some degreeto the rank of consecrated martyrs.From these past generations of eminent persons,who retained only a traditional or legendary importancein the eyes of most who were now reviewingthem, all turned back with delight to the activespirits of their own day, tnuiiy of them yet living,and as warm with ife and heroic aspirations as theirinimitable portraits had represented them. Herewas Tilly, the " Utile corporal," now recentlystretched in a soldier's grave, with his wily and inflexiblefeatures. Over against him was his greatenemy, who had first taught him the hard lessonof retreating, Gustavus Adolphus, with his colossalbast, and " atlantean shoulders, fit to hear the weightof mightiest monarchies." He also had perished, andt»o probably by the double crime of assassinationand private treason ; but the public glory of his66 KLOSTER.HE1M.gfaort career was proclaimed in the ungenerous exultationsof Catholic Rome from Vienna to Madrid,and the individual heroism in the lamentations ofsoldiers under every lanner which now floated inEurope. Beyond him ran the long Une of Imperialgenerals — from Wallenstein, the magnificent andthe imaginative, with Hamlet's infirmity of purpose,De Mercy, &c., down to the heroes of partisanwarfare, Hoik, the Butlers, and the noble Papersor nobler PJccolAmini. Below them wereranged — Instants Horn, Banner, the Prince ofSaxe-Weimar, the Rhinegrave, and many othoProtestant commanders, whose names and militarymerits were fiuniliar to Paulina, though she nowbeheld their features for the first time. Maximilianwas here the best interpreter that she could possiblyhave met with. For he had not only seen thegreater part of them ou the Held of battle, hut as afavourite and confidential officer of the Emperor's,had personally been concerned jn diplomatic transactionswith the most distinguished amongst them.Midnight insensibly surprised them whilst pursuingthe many interesting historical remembranceswhich the portraits called up. Most of the companyupon this warning of the advanced hour beganKLOSTERUEJM. 67to drop off; some to rest, and some upon the auai-monfi of the military duty which awaited them intheir turn. In this way, Maximilian and Paulinawere gradually left alone, and now at length found8 time which had not before offered for communicatingfreely all that pressed upon their hearts.Maximilian, on his part, going hock to the periodof their last sudden separation, explained his ownsadden disappearance from Vienna. At a moment'swarning he had been sent off with sealed ordersfrom the Emperor, to be first opened in Kloster-heim ; the mission upon which he had been dispatchedwas of consequence to the Imperial interests,and through his Majesty's favour would eventuallyprove so to his own. Thus it was that he had beenperemptorily cut off from all opportunity of communicatingto herself the purpose and direction of hisjourney previously to his departurefromVienni; andif his Majesty had not taken that tare upon himselfbut hadcontentedhimaelf in the most general termswith assuring Paulina that Maximilian was absenton a private mission, doubtless his intention hadbeen the kind one of procuring ber a more signalSurprise of pleasure upon his own sudden return.Unfortunately, however, that return had becameimpossible ; things had latterly taken a turn, whichembarntEaed himself, and continued to require hispresence. These perplexities had been for some timeknown tu the Emperor ; and upon reflection, beiloutited not, that her own journey, undertakenbefore his Majesty could be aware of the dangerwhich would beset its latter end, must in some waybe connected with the remedy which the Emperordesigned for this difGcuIt affair. Bnt doubtless sheherself was the bearer of sufficient explanationsIrom the Imperial minister on that head. Finally,whilst assuring her that his own letters to herselfhad been as frequent as in any former absence,Maximilian confessed that he did not feel greatlyastonished at the fact of none at all having reachedher, when he recollected that to the usual adverseaccidents of war, daily intercepting all messengersnot powerfully escorted, were to be added, in thiscase, the express efforts of private malignity in commandof all the forest passes.This explanation recalled Paulina to a very painfulsense of the critical importance which might beattached to the papers which she had lost. As yet,she had found no special opportunity, or, believingit of less importance, had neglected it, for commune69eating more than the general fact of a robbery. Shenow related the case more circumstantially ; andboth were struck with it, aa at this moment a veryheavy misfortune. Not only mig-ht her own perilousjourney, and the whole purposes of the Emperorembarked upon it, be thus rendered abortive ; buttheir common enemies would by this time be possessedof the whole information which had been socritically lost to their own party, and perhaps wouldhare it in their power to make use of themselves asinstruments for defeating their own most importanthopes.Maximilian sighed as he reflected on the probabilitythat a lar shorter and bloodier event mightdefeat every earthly hope within the next twenty-fourhours. But he dissembled his feelings ; recoveredeven a tone of gaiety ; and, begging of Paulinato dismiss this vexatious incident from herthoughts, as a matter that after all would probablybe remedied by their first communication with theEmperor, and before any evil had resulted from it,he accompanied her to the entrance of her own suiteof chambers, and then returned to seek a few hours'repose for himself on one of the sofas he had .served in one of the scdbII anterooms attached tothe library.The particular room which he selected for hispurpose, on account of its small size, and its warm appearancein other respects, was furnished under footwith layers of heavy Turkey carpets, one laid uponanother (according to a fashion then prevalent inGermany), and on the walls with tapestry. In thismode of hanging' rooms, though sometimes heavyand sombre, there was a warmth sensible and apparentOS well as real, which peculiarly fitted it forwinter apartments, ami a massy splendour whichaccorded with the style of dress and furniture tnthat gorgeous age. One real disadvantage, however.it hod as often employed : it gave a ready concealmentto intruders with evil intentions; and under theprotecting screen of tapestry many a secret hud beendiscovered: many robberies facilitated ; and some celebratedmurderers had been sheltered, with circumstancesof mystery that for ever bailed investigation.Maximilian smiled as the sight of the hangings,with their rich colours glowing in the fire-light,brought back to his remembrance one of those taleswhich in the preceding winter had made a greatnoise in Vienna. With & soldier's carelessness, heXL08TERH£IU.thought lightly of all dangers that could arisewithin four walk ; aud having' extinguished theLights which neil upon a table, and unbuckledhis sabre, he threw himself upon a sola which hedi«w near to the lire ; and then enveloping himselfin a large horseman's cloak, he courted the approachof sleep. The fatigues of the day, and of the precedingnight, had made this in some measure needliilto him. But weariness is not always the best prefaceXa repose ; and the irritation of many busyanxieties continued for some time to keep him in amost uneasy state of vigilance. As he lay, he couldsee on one side the fantastic figures in the £re composedof wood and turf ; on the other side, lookingto the tapestry, he saw the wild forms and thetaelie, little less fantastic, of human and brute featuresin a chase — a boar chase in front, and a stagchase on his left hand. These, as they rose fitfullyin bright masses of colour and of savage expressionunder the lambent flashing of the fire, continued toexcite his irritable state of feeling ; and it was notior some time that he felt this uneasy conditiongive way to exhaustion. He was at length on theTery point of sidling asleep, or perhaps had already&Uen Into its very lightest and earliest stage, when72 KL08TEIIHEIH.the echo of a distant door awoke hint. Headstonealight impression that a noise in Ills own room hadconcurred with the other and more distant one toawake him. Bnt, after raising himself for a momenton his elbow and listening, he again resigned himselfto sleep.Again, however, and probably before he had slepta minute, he was roused bj a doable disturbance.A low rusting was heard in some part of the room,and a heavy foot upon a neighbouring staircase.Roused at length to the prudence of paying someattention to sounds so stealthy, in a situation besetwith dangers, he rose and threw open the door. Acorridor, which ran round the head of the staircase,was ht up with a brilliant light ; and he could commandfrom this station one flight of the stairs. Onthese he saw nothing ; all was now wrapt in a softeffulgence of light, and in absolute spence. No soundrecurring after a minute's attention, and Indisposedby weariness to any stricter examination, where allexamination fi^jm one so little acquainted with thelocalities night prove unavailing, he returned to hisown room ; but before again lying down, he judgedit prudent to probe the concealments of the tapestryby canning his sabre round, and everywhere pressingKLOSTEKHEIH.the hangings to the wull. In this trial he met withno resistance at &nj point ; and willingly believingthat he bad been deceived, or that his ear had exag'ge-1 some trivial south), in a state of imperfect sluiceagain laid down and addressed himself to sleep.Still there were rememlimncea which occurred atthis moment to disturb him. The readiness withwhich they had been received at the chateau wasitself suspicious. He remembered the obstinatehaunting of their camp on the preceding night, andthe robbery conducted with 80 much knowledge of(circumstances. Jonas Milk, the brutal landlord ofWaldeohausen, a, man known to him by reputethough not personally), as one of the vilest tents■ employed by the Landgrave, had been activelyengaged in his master's service at their precedingi. He was probably one of those who hauntedthe wood through the night. And he had beenrepeatedly informed through the course of the day,that this man in particular, whose features werenoticed by the yagers, on occasion of their officer'sReproach to him, had been seen at intervals in companywith others, keeping a road parallel to theiritywn, and steadily watching their order of advance.These recollections, now laid together, impressedhim with some uneasiness. But overpoweringweariness gore him a strong interest in ilifmuBsingthem. And a soldi, with the images of fifty com-lists fresh in his mind, does not willingly admit theidea of danger from a single arm, and in a situationof household security. Pshaw I he exclaimed, withsome disdain, as these martial reraemlirBnces roseup before him, especially as the silence bad nowcontinued undisturbed for a quarter of an lioor. Inaye minutes more he had fallen profoundly asleep;and in less than one half hour, as he afterwardsjudged, be was suddenly awakened by a dagger athis throat.At one bound he sprung upon his feet. Thecloak, in which he had been enveloped, caught npcmsome of the buckles or ornamented work of hisappointments, and for a moment embarrassed hismotions. There was no light, except what camefrom the sullen and intermitting gleams of the fire.Bnt even this was sufficient to show bim the duskyoutline of two figures. With the foremost hegrappled, and, raising bien in his arms, threw himpowerfully upon the floor, with a force tjiat left him |stunned and helpless. The other had endeavouredto pinion hia arms from behind; fin the bodyKLOSTSBHEIM.armour, which Maximilian had not laid aside for thenight, under the many anticipation of service whichtheir situation sug'gL'stod, proved a suiEcient protectionagainst the blows of the assassin's poniard. Impatientof the darltoesa and uncertainty, Maximilianrushed to the door and Sung it violently open. Theassassin still cling to his arms, conscious that if hetmce forfeited htg hold until he bad secured a retreat,be should be taken at disadvantage. Dut Maximiliannow drawing a petronel which hung at his belt,cocked it as rapidly as his embarrassed motionsallowed him. The assassin faltered, conscious thatB moment's relaxation of grasp would enable hisantagonist to turn the muzzle over his shoulder.Maximilian, on the other band, now perfectly awake,md with the benefit of that self-possession whichthe other so entirely wanted, tell the nervous tremorin the villain's bands ; and profiting by thismoment of indecision, mite a desperate effort,released one arm, which he used with so much effectu immediately to liberate the other, and then interceptingthe passage to the stairs, wheeled roundlen his murderous eneiay, and presenting thepetronel to his breast, bad him surrender his armsif he hoped for quarter.KLOSTERHEIH.The man was an athletic, and, obviously, a mostpowerful mffian. On his fcc he carried more thanone large glazed cicatrix, that asserted the savageexpression of malignity impressed by nature uponhis features. And his matted black ir, with iteelf locks, completed the pictniv^ae effect of a face,that proclaimed, in every lineament, a recklessabandonment to cruelty and ferocious passions.Maximilian himself, familiar as he was with thefaces of military butchers in the dreadful hours ofsack andcamag«, recoiled for one instant from thishideous rufBan, who hail not even the paUiationsofyouth in his favour, for he seemed fifty at the least.All this hod passed in an instant of time ; and now,as he recovered himself iron his momentary shockat so hateful an expression of evil passions, greatwas Maximilian's astonishment to perceive his antagonistapparently speechless, and struggling withsome over-mastering sense of horror, that convokedhis features, and for a moment glazed his eye-maximilianlooked around for the object of hisalan ; but in vain. In reality it was himself, inconnexion with some too dreadful remembrances,BOW suddenly awakened, that had thus overpoweredthe man's nerves. The brilliant light of a laELOSTERHEIH. 77chandelier which overhung the staircase, fell stronglyupon Maximilian's features ; and the excitementof the moment gave to them the benefit of theirfullest expression. Prostrate on the ground, andabandoning his dagger without an effort at retainingit, the man gazed, ae if under a rattlesnake's fascination,at the young soldier before him. Suddenlyhe recovered his voice ; and, with a piercing cry ofObjected terror, exclaimed, " Save me, save me,blessed "Virgin I — Prince, noble prince, forgive me !swill the grave not hold its own ? — Jesu Maria Iwho could have believed it ?""Listen, fellow 1" interrupted Maximilian; "Whatprince is it you speak of? — For whom do you takeme ? speak truly, and abuse not my forbearance."Ha ! and his own voice too ! — and here on thisspot I — God is just I — Yet do thou, good patron,holy St Ermengarde, deliver me from the avenger I"Man, you rave ! — Stand up, recover yourself,and answer me to what I shall ask thee : speaktruly, and thou shalt have thy life. Whose goldwas it that armed thy hand against one who hadinjured neither thee nor thine?"But he spoke to one who could no longer hearThe man grovelled on the ground, and hid his78 KLOSTERIIEIM.face from a Iteing, whom, in some incomprehensibleway, he regarded as an apparition from the otherworld.Multitudes of persona had by this time streamedin i summoned by thi: noise of the struggle fromall parts of the chateau. Some fancied that, in thefrenzied BssssBin on the ground, whose panic toomanifestly attested Itself Hs genuine, they recognisedone of those who had so obstinately dogged themby side-paths in the forest. Whoever he were, andupon whatever mission employed, he was past allrHtioniil oxaininiition ; at the aspect of Mongolian,li iiJiijiRftd into convulsive horrors, which soonImouuit) Um} lit lor nieilienl treatment to allow ofany tiff 1'nl jiidiciul i'in|uiry ; and for the present hewu i'l'iiHiffliMl \o slid Mifi^-keeping of the .Ili i<uiii{WDii.>ii, nienntimo, had profited by hisvpporliinity, and ihu (general confusion, to effecthi* Mi'api^ Nor wm thin difficult. Perhaps in theconsternation of tint jim diluent, and the exclusiveattention that soltlod upon the party in thecorridor, he might conn have mixed in the crowd.But this Wu not necessary. For, on raising thetapestry, a door was discovered which opened intorH a private prestige, having a general coramnmcatioiiB with the rest of the rooms on that floor. Steps■ were now taken, hy sentries disposed through theH interior of the inaction at proper points, to securethemselves firm the enemies who lurked within,whom hitherto they had too much neglected foravowed and more military assailants who menacedthem from without. Security' was thusrestored. But a deep impression accompanied theparty to their couches, of the profound politicalmotives, or (in the absence of those) of the rancourpersonal malignity, which could prompt suchobstinate persecution ; ]>y modes also, and by hands,which encountered so majiy chances of failing ; andwhich, even in the event of the very completest«esB for the present, could not be expected, ruderthe eyes of so many witnesses, to escape a final exposure.Some enemy, of unusual ferocity, was tooseriously working in the dark, and by agencies asmysterious as bis own purpose.Meantime, in the city of Klosterheim the generalinterest in the fortunes of the approaching travellershad suffered no abatement, and some circumstanceshad occurred to increase the popular irritation.It was known that Maximilian had escaped with a80 KLOSTERHEIM.strong party of Irieiids iroxa the city ; but iiow, orby whose connivance, could in no way be discovered.This had drawn upon all persons who were knowsas active partisans against the Landgrave, or liableto suspicion as friends of Maximilian, a vexatiouspersecution from the military police of the town.Some had been arrested ; many collect upon to givesecurity for their future behaviour ; and all had beenthreatened or treated with harshness. Hence, aswell as from previous irritation and alarm on accountof the party from Vienna, the whole town was in astate of extreme agitation.Kloeterheim, in the main features of its politicaldistractions, reflected, almost as in a representativepicture, the condition of many another German city.At that period, by very ancient ties of reciprocal service,strengthened by treaties, by religious faith, andby personal attachment to individuals of the Imperialhouse, this ancient and sequestered city was in-amenable bound to the interests of the Emperor-boththe city and the university were CatholicPrinces of the Imperial tiunily, and Pupal commissioners,who had secret motives for not appearingat Vienna, had more than once found a hospitablereception within the walls. And] amongst manyacts of grace by which the Emperors Lad acknowledgedthese Berries and marks of attachment, oneof them had advanced a very large siam of money tothe city chest for an indefinite time ; receiving in return,as the warmest testimony of confidential gratitudewhich the city could bestow, that jus Uterimgresn&s which entitled the Emperor's armies totafree passage at all times, and, in cases of extremity,to the right of keeping the city gates andmaintaining a garrison in the citadel. Unfortunately,Klosterheim was not git turin, or on the roll offree cities of the Empire, bnt of the nature of anappanage in the family of the Landgrave of X :and this circumstance had produced a double perplexityin the politics of the city ; — for the lateLandgrave, who had been assassinated in a veryI mysterious manner upon a hunting party, benefitedto the fullest extent both by the political and religiousbias of the city — being a personal friend of theEmperor's, a Catholic, amiable in his deportment,and generally beloved by his subjects. But thePrince who had succeeded him in the LandgraviateS the next heir, was every where odious for theharshness of his government, no less than for theI gloomy austerity of his character ; and to Kloster-S3 ' XLOSTERHEIM.lieim, in particular, which had been pronounced bysome of the first jurisprudence a female appanage,he presented himself under the additional disadvantagesof a very suspicious title and a Swedish biog,too notorious to be disguised. At a time when thereligions awl political attachments of Europe werebrought into collisions so strange, that the foremostauxiliary of the Protestant interest in Germany wasreally the most distinguished Cardinal in the Churchof Rome, it did not appear inconsistent with thisstrong leaning to the King of Sweden, that theLandgrave was privately known to be a Catholicbigot, who practised the severest penances, and, tyrantas he showed himself to all others, grovelledhimself as an abject devotee at the feet of a haughtyconfessor. Amongst the populace of Klosterheim,this feature of his character, confronted with thedaily proof of his entire vassalage to the Swedishinterest, passed for the purest hypocrisy ; and hehad credit for no religion at all with the world atlarge. But the last was otherwise. Consciousfrom the first that he held even the Landgraviateby a slender title (for he was no more than cousinonce removed to his immediate predecessor), andthat his pretensions upon Klosterheim had separateKLOBT£RHEIM. 83and peculiar defects, building of course with thefailure of his claim as LandgniTe, but not thereforeprospering with its success, — he was aware that nonehut the most powerful ami could keep his princelycap upon his head. The competitors for any partof bis possessions, one and all, had thrown themselvesupon the Emperor's protection. This, if noother reason, would have thrown him into the armsof Gustavus Adolphus ; and with this, as it happened,other reasons of local importance had thenand since co-operated. Time, as it advanced, broughtincrease of weight to all these motives. Rumoursof a dark and ominous tendency, arising no oneknew whence, nor by whom encouraged, pointed injuriouslyto the past history of the Landgrave, andto some dreadful exposures which were hangingover his head. A lady, at present in obscurity, wasalluded to as the agent of redress to others, throughher own heavy wrongs ; and these rumours werethe more acceptable to the people of Klosterheim,because they connected the impending punishmentof the hated Landgrave with the restoration of theImperial connexion ; for it was still insinuated,under every version of these mysterious reports,that the Emperor was the ultimate supporter, in the84 KLOSTESHEIM.last resort, of the larking claims now on thi; point<)f coming forward to challenge public attention.Under these alarming notices, and fitly aware thatsooner greater he must be thrown into collision withthe Imperial court, the Landgrave hail now forsaketime mode up his mind to found a merit with theSwedish chancellor and general officers, by precipitatingan uncompromising rupture with his Catholicenemies, and thus to extract the grace of a Voluntaryact, from what, in feet, he knew to be sooneror later inevitable.Such was the positive and relative aspect of theseveral interests which were now struggling in Klos-terheim. Desperate measures were contemplated byboth parties ; and, as opportunities should arise, andproper means should developed themselves, more thanone party might be said to stand on the brink ofgreat explosions. Conspiracies were moving indarkness, both in the council of the burghers and ofthe university. Imperfect notices of their schemes,and sometimes delusive or misleading notices, hadreached the Landgrave, The city, the university,and the numerous convents, were crowded to excesswith refugees. Malcontents of every denominationand evei7 shade, — emissaries of aU the actionswhich then agitate J Germany, — reformation soldiers,laid aside by their original employers, under newarrangements, or from private jealousies of newcommanders, — great persons with special reasonsfiw courting a temporary seclusion, and preservinga strict ino^ito, — misers, who fled with theirhoards of gold and jewels to this city of refuge, —desolate ladies, Aom the surrounding provinces, insearch of protection for themselves, or for thehonour of their daughters ; and (not least distinguishedamong the many classes of fugitives) prophetsand enthusiasts of every description, whomthe m^mitude of the political events, and theirreligions origin, so naturally called forth in swarms ;these, and many more, in connexion with theirattendants, troops, students, and the terrified peasantry,from ft circle of forty miles radius aroundthe city as a centre, had swelled the city of Klos-terheim, from a total of about seventeen, to six orfive-and-thirty thousand. War, with a sightreserve for the late robberies of Holkerstein, had asyet spared this favoured nook of Germany. Thegrwi, storm had whistled and raved around them ;hut hitherto none had penetrated the silvan ,which on every side invested this privilegedJ86 KLOSTESREIM.city. The ground seemed charmed by some secretspells, and consecrated iron intrusion. For thegreat tempest bud often swept directly upon them,and yet still bed wheeled ois, summoned away bysome momentary call, to some remoter attraction.But now at length all things portended, that, if thewBT should retire in strength after this, brief suspension,it would &11 with accumulated weight uponthis yet unraraged district.This was the anticipation which had governedthe Landgrave's policy in so sternly and barbarouslyinterfering with the generous purposes of the Klos-tetheimere, for carrying over a safe-conduct to theirfriends and visitors, when standing on the raisinof the forest. The robber Holkerstein, if notexpressly countenanced by the Swedes and secretlynursed up to his present strength by Richelieu, wasat any rate embarked upon a system of aggressionwhich would probably terminate in connecting himwith one or other of those authentic powers. Inany case, he stood committed to a course of continuedoffence upon the Imperial interests ; since inthat quarter his injuries and insults were alreadypart forgiveness. The interest of Holkerstein,a the same channel with that of theKLOSTERHEIM.Landgrave. It was impolitic to weaken him.was doubly impolitic to weaken him liy awhich must also weaken the Landgrave ; for anydeduction from his own military force, or from thumeans of recruiting it, was in that proportion aSolitary Gacri£ce of the weight he should obtainwith the Swedes on making: the junction, which henow firmly counted on, nth their forces. But &result which he still more threaded from the co-operationof the Kloaterheimers with the caravan fromVienna, was the probable overthrow of that Supremacyin the city, which even now was so nicelybalanced in his favour, that a slight reinforcementto the other side would turn the scale againstIn all these calculations of policy, and the cruelmeasures by which he supported them, he was guidedby the counsels of Lnigi Adomi — a subtle Italian,whom he had elevated from the post of a privatesecretary to that of sole minister for the conductof state affairs. This man, who covered a temperamentof terrific violence with a masque of Venetiandissimulation and the most icy reserve, met withno opposition, sinless it were occasionally fromFather Anselm, the confessor. He delighted in theKLOarSBBEIH.refinements of intrigue, and in the most tortuouslabyrinths of political manoeuvring, purely for theirown soles ; and sometimes defeated his own purposesby mere superfluity of diplomatic subtlety ;which hardly, however, won a momentary concernfrom him in the pleasure he experienced at havingfound an undeniable occasion for equal subtlety inunmeaning his own webs of deception. He hodbeen confounded by the evasion of Maximilian andhis friends from the orders of the Landgrave ; andthe whole energy of his nature was bent to the discoveryof the secret avenues which had opened themeans ta this elopement.There were, in those days, as is well known toGerman antiquaries, few castles or fortresses ofmuch importance in Germany, which did not com-indicate by subterraneous passages with the exteriorcountry. In many instances these passageswere of surprising extent, first emerging to thelight in some secluded spot among rocks or woodsat the distance of two, three, or even four mUes.There were cases even in which they were carriedbelow the beds of rivers as broad and deep as theRhine, the Elbe, or the Danube. Sometimes therewere several of such communications on differentIKLOSTEBHSIU.pieces of the fortress ; and Sometimes each of thesehrancbeJ, at some distance from the building, intoseparate arms, opening at intervals widely apart.And the uses of such secret communications withthe world outside, and beyond a. besieging' enemy,in a land like Germany, with its prodigious subdivisionof independent states and free cities, were fargreater than they could have been in any one greatcontinuous principally.In many fortified places these passages had existedfrom the middle ages. In Kiosterheim they bodpossibly as early an origin ; but by this period it isvery probable that the gradual accumulation of rubbish,through a course of centuries, would haveunfitted them for use, had not the Peasants' War,in the time of Luther's reformation, little morethan one hundred years before, given occasion fortheir use and repair. At that time Kiosterheim hadstood a siege, which, fi^ra the defect of artillery,was at no time formidable in a military sense ; butas a blockade, farmed suddenly when the citizenswere slenderly furnished with provisions, it wouldcertainly have succeeded, and delivered up the vastwealth of the convents as a spoil to the peasantry,had it not been for one in particular of these subterraneanpassages, which opening on the oppositeside of the little river llties, in a thick boecofff, wherethe enetajr had established no posts, furnished themeans of introducing' a continual supply of freshprovisions, to the great triumph of the gammon,and the after dismay of the superstitious peasants,who looked upon the mysterious supply as a providentialbounty to a consecrated causesmemorable a benefit had given to this onepassage a publicity and aa historical importancewhich made all its circumstances, and amongst thoseits internal mouth, &niihar even to children Sntthis was intently not the arenne by which Maximilianhad escaped into the forest. Far it openedexternally on the wrong side of the ritter, whilstevery body knew that its domestic opening was inone of the chapels of the allots ; and another circumstanceequally decisive was, that a long flightof stairs, by which it descended below the bed of theriver, made it impassable to horses.Every attempt, however, ailed to trace out themode of egress tor the present. By his spies, Adomidoubted not to find it soon ; and lu the meantime,that as much as possible the attention of the publicmight be abstracted from the tnTclleiB ud their,KLOSTERHEIM. 91concerns, a public proclamation was issued forbiddingall resorts of crowds to the walls. Thesewere every where dispersed on the 9th; and for thatday were partially obeyed. But there was littlechance that, with any fresh excitement to the popularinterest, they would continue to commandrespect.KLOSTE&HEnW.CHAPTER VI.Viii: coming of the lOti at length arrived — thatiIb^ mi urbicii the spectral travellers from ^'ienIla,sad ell whaiu tht'T had collected on their pro-gnatutensil; looked to rejoin their long separatedMid* in Klosterheim, and bj those friends werenot |p6s ardently looked for. On each side therewere the same Violent yearnings, on each side thesame dismal and overpowering fears. Eat-h partyarose with palpitating hearts : the one looked outfrom Falkenber^ with longing eyes to discover thetowers of Klosterheim ; the other, from the upperwindows or roots of Klosterheim, seemed as if theycould consume the distance between themselves andFalkenber^. But a little tract of forest ground wasinterposed between friends and friend, parents andchildren, lovers and their beloved. Not more thaneighteen miles of shadowy woods, of lawns, andsilran glades, divided hearts that would either haveencountered death or many' deaths for the other.These were regions of natural peace and tranquillity,that in any ordinary times should laye beenpeopled by no worse inhabitants than the timid harescudding homewards to its form, or the wild deersweeping by with thunder to their distant lairs.But now from every glen or thicket armed maraudersmight be ready to start. Every gleam of sunshinein some seasons was reflected from the ght-I tearing arms of parties threading the intricacies ofthe thickets ; and the sudden alarum of the trumpetrang oftentimes in the nights, and awoke the echoesthat tor centuries had been undisturbed except lithehunter's horn, in the most sequestered hintsof these vast woods.Towards noon it became known, by signals thatbad been previously concerted between Maximilianand his college friends, thai the party were advancedupon their road from Falkenberg, and thereforemust of necessity on this day abide the final trial.As this news was dispersed abroad, the publicanxiety rose to so feverish a point, that crowdsrushed from every quarter to the walls; and it wasnot judged prudent to measure the civic strengthaguuBt their enthusiasm. For an hour or two ther94 KL08TERHE1M.nature of the ground any the wood forbade anyview of the advancing; party : but at length, sometimebefore the light filled, the head of the column,and Boon after the entire body, was descried surmountinga little hill not more than eight milesdistant. The black makes, presented by mounted travellersand baggage waggons, was visible to piercingeyes : and the dullest could distinguish the glancingof arms which at times flashed upwards from themore open parts of the forest.Thus fer, then, their friends had made their waywithout injury : and this point was judged to bewithin nine miles distance. But in thirty or fortyminutes, when they had come nearer by a mile anda half, the scene had somewhat changed. A heathytract of ground, perhaps two miles in length, openedin the centre of the thickest woods, and formed alittle island of clear ground where all beside wastangled and crowded with impediments. Just aa thetravelling party began to deploy out of the woolsupon this area at its further extremity, a considerablebody of mounted troops emerged from theforest, which had hitherto concealed them, at thepoint nearest to Klosterheim. They made wayrapidly ; and in less than half a minute it becameKLOSTERUEIH. 95evident, by the motions of the opposite party, thatthey had Been descried, and that hasty preparationswere makings for receiving them. A dusky mass,probably the Black Yagers, galloped up rapidly tothe front and formed : after which it seemed tosome eyes that the whole party again advanced, butstill more slowly than before.Every heart upon the wails of Klosterheim palpitatedwith emotion, as the two parties neared eachother. Many almost feared to draw their breath,many writhed their persons in the anguish of ruefulexpectation, as they saw the moment approach whenthe two parties would shock together. At lengthit came ; and to the astonishment of the spectators,not more perhaps than of the travellers themselves,the whole cavalcade of strangers swept by, withouthalting for so much as a passing salute or exchangeof news.The first cloud, then, which had menaced theirfriends was passed off as suddenly as it had gathered.But this by some people was thought to bear nofavourable construction. To ride past abandon travellersfrom remote parts on such uncourteous termsargued no friendly spirit ; and many motives mightbe imagined perfectly consistent with hostile intenseKLOSTEBHEIM. ^^tons he jmsAng the trsTeUere assailed, and thug ,gaining the means of coming at »dj time upon theirrau. prudent persons shook their bede ; and theissue of an affair anticipated with so much anxietycertainly did not diminish icIt was DOW for o'clock : in an hour or lees itwould be dark ; and, considering the peculiar difficultiesof the ground on nearing the town, and the Iincreasing exhaustion of the biHseB, it was net tjudged possible that a party of travellers, bo in their eqoipiueuCs, and amongst whom theweakest was now become a Uw for the motion ofthe quickest, could reach the traces of Kloetertieimbefore nine o'clock.Soon after this, and just before tbtd daylight faded,the traveller reached the nearer end of the heath,and again entered the woods. The cold and thedarkness were now becoming greater at every instant,and it might hare been expected that thegreat mass of the spectators would leave their eta'tion ; but such was the intensity of the public interest,that few quitted the walls except for th purposeof reinfurung- their ability to stay and WBt«hthe repress of their friends. This could be donewith even greater effect as the darkness deepened.KLOST£RH£IH.for every second horseman carried & torch ; and a^much perhaps by way of signal to their friends inKlosterheim, as for their own convenience, prodigiousflambeaux were borne uloflon halberds. Theserose to a height which surmounted aU the lowerbushes, and were visible in all parts of the woods, —even the smaller lights, ia the leafless state of thetrees at this season of the year, could be generallytraced without difficulty ; and composing a brilliantchain of glittering points, as it curved and humouredthe road amongst the labyrinths of the forest, wouldhave produced a singularly striking effect to eyesat leisure to enjoy it.In this way, for about three hours, the travellerscontinued to advance unmolested, and to be traced bytheir friends in Klosterheim. It wag now considerablyafter seven o'clock, and perhaps an hour, or atmoat an hour and a half, would bring them to thecity gates. All hearts began to beat high with expectation,and hopes were loudly and confidentlyexpressed through every part of the crowd that thedanger might now be considered as past. Suddenly,as if expressly to rebuke the too presumptuous confidenceof those who were thus thoughtlessly sanguine,the blare of a trumpet was heard from a differsKXOSTESHETH.rent potter of the forest, and about two miles to theright of the dtv. Every eye was Hastened eagerlyupon the spot from which the notes issued. Probablythe signal had proceeded from a, small party iaadvance of a greater ; for in the same direction, bntat a much greater distance, perhaps not less thanthree miles in the rear of the tippet, a very largebody of horse was now descried coming on at a greatpace upon the line already indicated by the trumpet.Theextentof the colonia might be estimated by thelong array of torches, which were carried apparentlyby every fourth or fifth man ; and that they werehorsemen, was manifest infra the very rapid pace atwhich they advanced.At this spectacle a cry of consternation ran along'the whole walls of Klosterheim. Here then at lastwere coming the spoilers and butchers of theirfriends ; for the rout upon which they were advancingissued at right angles into that upon which thetravellers, apparently unwarned of their danger,were moving. The hideous scene of carnage wouldpossibly pass immediately below their own eyes ; forthe point of junction between the two roads wasdirectly commanded by the eye from the city walls ;and upon computing the apparent proportion ofKLOSTEBHEIM.Spiked between the two parties, it seemed likelyenough that upon this very ground, the best fittedof any that could have been selected, in a scenicalsense, as a stage for bringing a spectacle below theeyes of Klosterheim, the most agitating of spectacleswould be exhibited, — friends and kinsmen engagedin mortal struggle with remorseless freebooters,under circumstances which denied to themselvesany chance of offering assistance.Exactly at this point of time arose a dense mist,which wrapped the whole forest in darkness, andwithdrew from the eyes of the agitated Kloster-heifers friends and foes alike. They continued,however, to occupy the walls, endeavouring to penetratethe veil which now concealed the fortunes oftheir travelling friends, by mere energy and intensityof attention. The mist meantime did not disperse,hut rather continued to deepen : the twoparties, however, gradually drew so much nearer,that some judgment could be at length formed oftheir motions and position merely by the ear. Fromthe stationary character of the sounds, and the continuedrecurrence of charges and retreats soundedupon the trumpet, it became evident that the travellersand the enemy bad at length met, and too100 KLOSTESHEIM.probable that they were engaged in & sanguinarycombat. Anxiety bad now reached ite Utmostheight ; and some were obliged to leave the walls,or were carried away by their friends, under theeffects of overwrought sensibility.Ten o'clock Lad now struck, and for Hume timethe sounds had been growing eeoBihly weaker ; andat last it was manifest that the two parties had separated,and that one at least was moving off from thescene of action ; and, as the sounds grew feebler andfeebler, there could be no doubt that it was theenemy who wa drawing off into the distance fromthe field of battle.The enEmy I ay, but how ? Under what circumstancesP As victor? Perhaps even as thecaptor of their friends ? Or, if not, and he werereally retreating as a fugitive and beaten foe, withwhat hideous Sacrifice on the part of their friendsmight not that result have been purchased ?Long and dreary was the interval before thesequestion could be answered. Ful three hours hadel^sed since the last sound of a trumpet had beenheard : it was now one o'clock, and as yet no traceof the travellers had been discovered in any quarter.KLOffTEBHElH.The most hopeful been to despond ; and generallamentations prevailed throughout Klosterheitn.Suddenly', however, a. dull sound arose within aquarter of a nile Irom the city gate, as of somefeeble attempt to blow a blast upon a trumpet. InGve minutes more a louder blast viae sounded closeto the gate. Questions were joyfully put, and asjoyfully answered. The usual precautions wererapidly gone through ; and the officer of the watchbeing speedily satisfied as to the safety of the nies-sore,the gates were thrown open, and the unfortunatetravellers, exhausted by fatigue, hardships, andSuffering of every description, were at length admittedinto the bosom of a friendly town.The spectacle was hideous, which the long cavalcadeexhibited as it wound up the steep streetswhich led to the market-place. Waggons fracturedand splintered in every direction, upon which werestretched numbers of gallant soldiers, with woundshastily dressed, from which the blood had poured instreams upon their gay habiliments ; horses, whoselimbs had been mangled by the sabre ; and coachesor catches loaded with burthens of dead and dying ;these were amongst the objects which occupied theTan in the line of march, aa the travellers defiledr102 ELOSTEBHEIM.through KloBterheim. The vast variety of feces,dresses, implements of war, or ensues of rank,thrown together in the confusion of night and retreat)illuminated at intervals by bright streams oflight fi-om torches or candles in the streets, or atthe windows of the houses, composed a picturewhich resembled the chaos of a dream, rather thanany ordinary spectacle of human life.In the iQ^'ket-place the whale party were graduallyassembled, and there it was intended that theyshould receive the billets for their several quarters.But Such was the pressure of friends and relativesgathering from all directions, to salute and welcomethe objects of their affectionate anxiety, or to wentquire after their fete ; so tumultuous was the conflictof grief and joy (and not seldom in the verysame group), that for a long time no authority couldcontrol the violence of public feeling, or enforce thearrangements which had been adopted for the night.Nor was it even easy to learn, where the questionsB were put by so many voices at once, what had been■ the history of the night. It was at length, however,H collected, that they had been met and attacked withH great fury by Holkerstein, or a party acting underH^ one of his lieutenants. Their own march had beenXLOSTERBEIM.so warily conducted after nightfall, that this attackdid not find them unprepared. A barrier of coachesand waggon had been speedily formed in such anarrangement as to cripple the enemy's movements,and to neutralize great part of bia superiority in thequality of hia horses. The engagement, however,had been severe; and the enemy's attack, thoughmany times baffled, hod lieu as often renewed, untilat length, the young general Maximilian, seeing thatthe affair tended to no apparent termination, thatthe bloodshed wofi great, and that the horses werebeginning to knock up under the fatigue of suchsevere service, had brought up the very ^lile of hisreserve, placed himself at their head, and making adash expressly at their leader, had the good fortuneto cut him down. The desperateness of the char,added to the loss of their leader, had intimidated theenemy, who now began to draw off as from an enterprisewhich was likely to cost them more blood thanafinal success could have recorded. Unfortunately,however, Maximilian, disabled by a severe wound,and entangled by his horse amongst the enemy, hadbeen carried off a prisoner. In the course of thebattle aU their torches had been extinguished ; andthis circumstance, as much as the roughness of theroad, the mlnons condition of their carriages andappointments, and their own exhaustion, had occasionedtheir long delay in reaching Klostprheiin,set the battle was at an end. Si^^iaJa they hadnot ventured to make ; for they were naturally afimiduf drawing upon their track any fresh party of maraudersby so open a warning' of their course as thesound of a trumpet.These explanations were rapidly dispersed throughKlosterheim ; party after party drew off to theirquarters ; and at length the agitated city was onceagain restored to peace. The Lady Paulina had beenamongst the first to retire. She was met by theIiody Abbess of a principal convent in Klosterheim,to whose care she had been recommended by theEmperor. The Landgrave also had famished herwith a guard of honour ; but all expressions of respect,or even of kindness, seemed thrown awayupon, her, so wholly was she absorbed in grief forthe capture of Maximilian, and in gloomy aatici^lions of bis impending fete. ■••■'"■CHAPTER VII.The city of Klosterheim was now ulmuduned toitself, and strictly shut up within its own wsUb. Allroaming beyond those limits wei now indeed forbiddeneven more eiFectiiaUy by the sword of theenemy than by the edicts of the Landgrave. War wasmanifestly gathering in its neighbourhood. Littletowns and castles within a range of seventy miles,on almost BTery side, were now daily occupied byImperial or Swedish troops. Not a week passedwithout some news of fresh military accessions, orof skirmishes between parties of hostile foragers.Through the whole adjacent country, spite of theBerere weather, bodies of armed men were weavingsto and fro, fest as a weaver's shuttle. The forestruin with alarums, and sometimes under gleams ofsunshine, the leafless woods seemed on fire with therestless splendour of spear and sword, morion and06 ELOGTBBUEIU.Breast-plate, or the glittering equipments of theImperial cavalry. Couriers, or Bohemian gipsies,which latter were a class of people at this timeemployed by all sides as spies or messengers, continuallystole in with secret despatches to the Landgrave,or (under the colour of bringing public news,and the reports of military movements) to executesome private mission for rich employers in town ;sometimes making even this clandestine possessbut a cover to other purposes, too nearly connectedwith treason, or reputed treason, to admit of anybut oral communication.What were the ulterior views in this large accumulationof military force, no man pretended toknow. A great battle, for various reasons, was notexpected. But changes were so sudden, and thecounsels of each day so often depended on the accidentsof the morning, that an entire campaign mighteasily be brought on, or the whole burthen of warfor years to come might be transferred to this quarterof the land, without causing any very greatsurprise. Meantime, enough was done already togive a full foretaste of war and its miseries to thissequestered nook — so long unvisited by that hideousscourge.EI.OSTSRHEIM.In tbQ forest, where the inhabitants were none,excepting those who Lived upon the borders, andsmall establishment of the Landgrave's servantat different points, for executing' the duties of theforest or the chase, this change expressed itselfchiefly by the tumnltnoiis uproar of the wild deer,upon whom a murderous war was kept up by partiesdetached daily iron remote and opposite quartersto collect provisions for the half-starving garrisons,so recently, and with so little previous preparation,nndtiphed on the forest skirts. For though thecountry had been yet exhausted by war, too latea proportion of the tracts adjacent to the garrisonswere in a wild silvan condition, to afford any continuedSupplies to so large and sudden athe population ; more especially as, under the nof this change, every walled town in a compass ofone hundred miles, many of them capable of resistinga sudden coup-de-main, and resolutely closingtheir gates upon either party, had already possessedthemselves by purchase of all the surplus supplieswhich the country yielded. In such a state of things,the wild deer became an object of valuable considerationto all parties, and a murderous war was madeupon them from every side of the forest. From theKLOSTEItllElM.city walls they wave seen in sweeping droves, flying'before the Swedish ciiTnlry for a, course of ten,fifteen, or even thirty miles, until headed, and com-pede to turn by another party breaking suddenlyfrom ft covert where they had been waiting theirapproach. Sometimes it would happen that thissecond party proved to be a body of Imperialists,who were carried by the ardour of the chase intothe very centre of their enemies before either wuaware of any hostile approach. Then, according tocircumstances, came sudden flight or tumultuaryskirmish ; the woods rang with the hasty summonsof the trumpet ; the deer reeled off aslant iron thefurious shock, and benefiting for the moment bythose fierce hostilities, originally the cause of theirpersecution, fled fair away from the scene of strife ;and not unfrequently came thundering beneath thecity walls, and reporting to the spectators above, bytheir agitation and affrighted eyes, those tumultuousdisturbances in some remoter part of the forest,which had already reached them in an imperfectway, by the interrupted and recurring echoes of thepoints of war — charge or retreats— sounded uponthe trumpet.But, whilst on the outside of her walls Kloster-Lbeam beheld even this populous region all alivewith military license and outrage, she Buffered noviolence from either party herself. This immunityshe owed to her peculiar political situation. TheEmperor had motives for conciliating the city ; theSwedes for conciliating the Landgrave : indeed theywere supposed to have made a secret alliance withhim, for purposes known only to the contractingparties. And the difference between the two patronswasaimply this, that the Emperor was sincere, and,if not disinterested, had an interest concurring withthat of Klosterheim, in the paternal protection whichhe offered ; whereas the Swedes in this, as in alltheir arrangements, regarding Germany as a foreigncountry, looked only to the final advantages ofSweden or its German dependencies, and to theweight which such alliances would procure themin a general pacification. And hence, in the warwhich both combined to make upon the forest, theone party professed to commit spoil upon the Landgrave,as distinguished fi:om the city ; whilst theSwedish allies of that prince prosecuted their ravagesin the Landgrave's name, as essential! to thesupport of his cause.For the present) however, the Swedes were theno KLOSTERHEIM.prepondei-ant party in the neighbourhood ; they badfortieth the chateau of FHlkenberg-, and made itvery strong military poat ; at the same time, however,sending in to Kloaterheim whatsoever wasvaluable amongst the furniture of that establishment,with s care which of itself proclaimed thslooting upon which they were anxious to stand withthe Landgrave.Encouraged by the vicinity of his military friends,that Prince now began to take a harsher tone isKloBterbeimi The minor Princes of Germany atthat day were all tyrants in virtue of their privileges; and if hit some rarer cases they exercisedthese privileges in a forbearing spirit, their subjectwere well aware that they were indebted for thisextraordinary indulgence to the temper and graciousnature «f the individual, not to the firm protectionof the laws. But the most reasonable and mildestof till! German Princes had been little taught at thatday to brook opposition. And the Landgrave wasby nature, and the (gloominess of his constitutionaltemperament, of all men the last to learn that lessonreadily. He had already met with just sufficientopposition from the civic bwly Find the universityinterest to exdte his passion for revenge. AmpleKI.08TEIUIEIM.indemnification he determined upon for his woundedpride ; Bnd he believed that the time and circumstanceswere now matured for favouring his mostvindictive schemes. The Swedes were at hand ;and a slight struggle with the citizens would removeall obstacles to their admission into the garrison ;though, for some private reasons, he wished toabstain from this extremity, if it should prove possible.Maximilian also wis absent, and might neverreturn. The rumour was even that he was killed ;and though the caution of Adomi and the Landgraveled them to a hesitating reliance upon whatmight be a political fabrication of the opposite party,yet at all events he was detained from Klosterheimby some pressing necessity ; and the period of Lisabsence, whether long or short, the Landgraveresolved to improve in such a way as should makehis return unavailing.Of Maximilian the Landgrave had no personale ; he had not so much as seen him. Butby his spies and intelligencers he was well awarethat he had been the chief combined and aniniaterof the Imperial party against himself in the university,and hy his presence had given life and cadenceto that party in the city which did not eX'A112 KLOSTERKEIH.pres.sly acknowledge him as their head. He wasan-are of the favour which Maximilian enjoyed withthe Emperor, nd knew in gentil, from publicreport, the brilliancy of those military services oivwhich it had been built. That be was likely toprove a formidable opponent, had he continued inKloBterheim, the Landgrave knew too well; andupon the advantage over lira which he had nowgained, though otherwise it ahonld prove only atemporary one, he determined to found a permanentobstacle to the Emperor's views. As a preliminarystep, he prepared to crush aU opposition in Kloster-heim ; a purpose which was equally important tohis vengeance and his policy.This system he opened with a series of tyranny'calregiilations, some of which gave the more offencethat they seemed wholly capricious and insulting.The students were confined to their college bounds,except at stated intervals ; were subject to a militarymuster, or calling over of names, every evening;were required to receive sentinels within theextensive courts of their own college, and at lengtha small court of guano ; with numerous other occasionalmarks, as opportunities offered, of princelydiscountenance and anger.KLOSTERHSIM. 113F■ In lee university, at that time, from looil causes,■ many young men of rank and finely were collected.B Those even, who had taken no pronoun part in theW cause of the Klosterheimers, were now roused to usense of personal indignity. And us soon us thelight was departed, a laisse body of them collectedut the rooms of Count St Alderdieim, whose rankpromised a suitable countenance to their purpose,whilst his youth seemed o pledge for the requisiteactivity.The Count was a younger brother of the Palsgraveof Birkenfeld, and maintained a sumptuous establishmentin Klosterheim. Whilst the state of the foresthad allowed of hunting, hawking, or other amusements,no man had exhibited so fine a stud of horses.No man had eu large a train of servants ; no manentertained his friends with such magnificent hospitalities.His generosity, his splendour, his hincperson, and the courtesy with which he relieved thehumblest people from the oppression of his rank,had given him a popularity amongst the students.His courage had been tried in battle : but, after all,it was doubted whether he were not of too luxuriousa turn to undertake any cause which tidiedfor much exertion ; for the death, of a rich Abbess.Jin KLOSTEBUEIH.who had left the whole of an immense fortune tothe Count, as her favourite nephew, had given himanother motiTB for cultivating peaceful pursuits, towhich tew men were, constitutionally, better dir*It was the time of day when the Count wa sureto be found at home with a joyous party of friends.Magnificent chandeliers shed light upon a tile furnishedwith every description of costly wines producedin Europe. According to the custom of thetimes, these were drunk in cups of silver or gold jand an opportunity was thus gained, which StAldenheim had not lost, of making a magnificentdisplay of luxury without ostentation. The nihywine glittered in the jewelled goblet which theCount had raised to his lips, at the very momentwhen the students entered.Welcome, fiends," said the Count St Aldersputting down his cup, •' welcome always ; bntnever more than at this hour, when wine and goodfellowship teach us to know the value of ourThanks, Count, from oil of us. But the fellowshipwe seek at present must be of another temper ;sur errand is of business."KIOStXRHBIM.then,friend, it shall rest until tomorrow.Not for the papacy, to which my good anne wouldhave raised a ladder for me of three steps, — Abbot,Bishop, Cardinal, would I renounce the Tokay ofto-night for the business of tomorrow. Come,gentlemen, let ns drink my aunt's health."Memory, yon would say. Count."Memory, most learned friend, you are right :Ah ! gentlemen, ale was a woman worthy to bein remembrance : for she invented a capitalplaster for gunshot wounds ; and b jollier oldfellow over a bottle of Tokay there is not at thisday in Swabia, or in the Swedish camp. And thatends me to ask, gentlemen, have any of youheard that Gustavus Horn is expected at Fallen? Such news is astir ; and be sure of this —that, in such a case, we have cracked crowns tolook for. I know the man. And many a hardnight's watching he has coat me ; for which, if youplease, gentlemen, we will drink his health."But our business, dear Count" —Shall wait, please God, until tomorrow ; forthis is the time when man andbeast repose."And truly, Count, we are like — as you take116 KLOSTERUEIM.things — to be timbered with the last. Fie, CountSt Aldenheim I are yoa the man that would haveus Euficr those things tamely which the Landgravehas begun ?"And what now hath his Serenity been doing ?Doth he meditate to abolish burgundy ? If bo, myfaith ! but we are, as you observe, httte above theminutes. Or, peradventure, will he forbid laughing,his highness being little that way given himself?"Count St Aldenheim I it pleases you to jest.But we are assured that you know as well as we,irnil relish no better, the insults which the Landgraveis heaping upon us all. For example, the sentinelat your own door — doubtless you marked him ?How liked you him ? — "■' Methought he looked cold and blue. So I senthim a goblet of Johannislierg."You did ? and the little court of guard — youhave seen thai ? and Colonel Von Aremberg, howthink you of him ?"Why surely now he's a handsome man : pityhe wears so fiery a scarf I Shall we drink his health,gentlemen ?"Health to the great fiend first 1"iKLOBTERHEIM.Ae you please, gentlemen : it is for you to regulatethe precedency. But at least,Hat's to my aunt — the jolly old sinner,Than fasted each day, frcmi breaHoBt to dinner !Saw any msn yet such on orthodox fellow,In the morning when sober, iu the evening when moUow ?Saw sny mm yet," fK.Count, farewell !" — interrupted the leader ofthe party ; and all turned round indignantly to leavethe room.Farewell, gentlemen, as you positively will notdrink my atmt's health ; though, after all, she wasa worthy fellow ; and her plaster for gunshotwounds"—But with that word the door closed upon theCount's farewell words. Suddenly taking up a hatwhich lay upon the ground, he exclaimed, " Ah !behold 1 one of my friends has left his hat. Trulyhe may chance to want it on a frosty night." And,BO saying, he hastily rushed after the party, whomhe found already on the steps of the portico. Seizingthe hand of the leader, he whispered, —Friend ! do you know me so little, as to apprehendmy jesting in a serious sense ? Know thattwo of those, whom you. saw on my right hand, arespies of the Landgrave. Their visit to me, I questionnot, was purposely made to catch some suchdiacoveriesiasyoiiimy friends, would too Sorely havethrown in their way, but for my determined rattling.At this tim, I must not stay. Come againaftcv midnight — &reweU."And then in a voice to reach his guests within,he shouted, " Gentlemen, my aunt, the Abbot of In-p'elheim, — Abbess, I would say, held that her mrswere Ibr her heels, and her beaver fur her head.Whereupon, Baron, I return you your hat."Meantime, the two insidious intelligencers of theIjBudgrave returned to the pace with discoveries,not so ample as they were on the point of surprising,but sufficient to earn thanks foe themselves,Mid to juice tbo counsels of their nosterKLOSTERHEIH.CHAPTER Vir. .«/ ,!.>.)»*That same night a. fill meeting: of the most distinguishedstudents was assembled at the mansionof Count St Aldenheim. Much Btonuy discussionarose upon two points ; first, upon. the particularmeans hj which they were to pursue an end uponwhich all were unanimous. Upon that, however,they were able for the present to arrive at a preliminaryarrangement with sufficient humtony. Thiswas, to repair in a body, with Count St Aldenheimat their head, to the castle, and there to demand anaudience of the Landgrave, nt which a, strong remonstrancewas to be laid before his highness, and theirdetermination avowed to repel the indignities thrustupon them, with their united forces. On the secondthey were more at variance. It happened that manyof the persons present, and amongst them Count StAldenheim, were friends of Maximilian. A few, onthe other hand, there were, who, either ii-jealousyItMjMTIBBSIH.i merit, hated him ; or ae good>. •At<kMWt4n>in), and connected hy old JamiljT^^ - .X *■■ *»WPf«tfl of that town, were disposed**»»,v VsM^'niWan with ambitious views of pris^^.»«t*»wrai>nt at the expense of the city,t tha Emperor's brother, or upon aiii with some lady of the ImperialIM *1>o stop? of Patna's and Maximilian'sl^lMi«hmeDt had transpired through many ofMi,v*<tti'ra : but with some circumstances of fic-(, t« ilffonding- Maximilian upon those charges,<>tf(nb hind betrayed a natural warmth at thenfti>ro(l to his character ; and the hvehBenft <li*pute on this point, had nearly ended in »^0 total to their unanimity on the immediate ^es-(gPh ftt issnp. Good sense, however, and indignation^ Hkt: Landgrave, finally brought them round againM thir first resolution : and they separated iritfa(ke unanimous intention of meeting at noon on tetefhUo^iafc tiny, fas the purpose of carting it intoBitt thir WMniaitx on teak pitt wm of laOim<m3{ lor MiB flu4y buff OB l^ iolhnni^ aocn-Ofh VMrv OW of iLoK Mm i»d heoB inaoBt at dKiKLOSTEKHEIM.of conspiracy, and marched off to one of theprisons. The Count St Aldenhcim was himselfsole exception ; and this was a distinction odious tohis generous nature, as it drew upon him a cloud ofsuspicion. He was sensible that he would be supposedto owe his privilege to some discovery or actof treachery, more or less, by which he tad meritedthe favour of the Landgrave. The fed was, that inthe indulgence shewn to the Count, no motive hadinfluenced the Landgrave but a politic considerationof the great favour and influence which the Count'sbrother, the Palsgrave, at this moment enjoyed inthe camp of his awn Swedish allies. On this principleof policy, the Landgrave contented himselfwith placing St Aldenheim under a slight militaryconfinement to his own house, under the guard ofa few sentinels posted in his hall,For him, therefore, under the powerful protectionwhich he enjoyed elsewhere, there was no greatanxiety entertained. But for the rest, many of whomhad no friends, or friends who did them the ill serviceof enemies, being in act regarded as enemiesby the Landgrave and his council, serious fears wereentertained by the whole city. Their situation wasevidently criticaL The Landgrave had theISO KL08TEBHEIM.of whig distinguished merit, hated him ; or as goodcitizens of Klosterheim, and connected by old finelythea with the interests of that town, were disposedto chaise MuximiUaii with ambitious views of privateaggrandizement &t the eisipenee of the city,grounded upon the Emperor's favour, or upon asupposed marriage with some lady of the Imperialhouse. For the story of Pauhna's and Maximilian'smutual attachment thud transpired through mAny ofthe travellers ; but with some circumstances of fiction.In defending Moximihen upon those charges,his friends had betrayed a, natural warmth at theinjustice offered to his character; and the livelinessof the dispute on this point, had nearly ended in away ital to their unanimity on the immediate questionat issue. Good sense, however, and indignationat the IjLndgTave, finally brought them round againto their first resolution ; and they separated withthe unanimous intention of meeting at noon on thefollowing day, for the purpose of carrying it intoeffect.But their unanimity on this point was of littleavail ; for at an early hour on the following morning,every one of those who had been present at themeeting, was arrested by a file of soldiers on a chaiof conspiracy, and marched off to one of the cityprison. The Count St Aldenheim was himself thesole exception ; and this was a distinction odious tohis generous nature, aa it drew upon him a cloud ofsuspicion. He was sensible that he would he supposedto owe his privilege to some discovery or actof treachery, more or less, hy which he bad meritedthe feyour of the Landgrave. The feet was, that inthe indulgence shewn to the Count, no motive hadinfluenced the Landgrave hut a politic considerationof the great favour and influence which the Count'sbrother, the Palsgrave, at this moment enjoyed inthe camp of his own Swedish allies. On this principleof policy, the Landgrave contented himselfwith placing St Alileuheim under a slight militaryconfinement to his own house, under the guard ofa few sentinels posted in his hall.For him, therefore, under the powerful protectionwhich he enjoyed elsewhere, there was no greatanxiety entertained. But for the rest, many of whomhod ao IHends, or friends who did them the ill serviceof enemies, being in feet regarded as enemiesby the Landgrave and his council, serious fears wereentertained by the whole city. Their situation wasevidently critical. The Landgrave had them in hisKLOSTKRUCIM.power. He wos notoriously a inn of gloomy Bn<tmalignant passions ; had been educated, as hill Europeanprinces then were, in the notions of a plenaryand despotic right over the lives of his subjects,in any case where they lifted their presumptionsthoughts to the height of controlling the Sovereign; and, even in circumstances which to his ownjudgment might seem to confer much less discretionarypower over the rights of prisoners, he hadbeen suspected of directing the course of law and ofpunishment into channels that would not brook thepublic knowledge. Darker dealings were imputedto him in the popular opinion, Gloomy suspicionswere muttered at the fireside, which no man daredopenly to avow ; and in the present instance theconduct of the Landgrave was every way fitted tofall in with the worst of the public fears. At onetime he talked of bringing his prisoners to a trial ;at another, he countermanded the preparationswhich he hail made with that view. Sometimeshe spoke of banishing them in a body ; and againhe avowed his intention to deal with their wineDS treason. The result of this moody and capricioustyranny was to inspire the most vague and gloomyapprehensions into the minds of the prisoners, andKLOBTGRHEIM. 133tu keep their friends, with the whole city of Klos-terheim, in a feverish state of insecurity.Thifi state of things lasted for nearly three weeks ;but &t length a morning of unexpected pleasuredawned npou the city. The prisoners were in onenight &U Pleased. In half an hour the news ranare the town and the university ; multitudes hastenedto the college, anxious to congratulate theprisoners on their deliverance from the double afflictionsof a dungeon and of continual insecurity.Mere curiosity also prompted some, who took butlittle interest in the prisoners or their cause, to enquireinto the circumstances of so abrupt and unexpectedan act of grace. One principal court in thecollege was filled with those who had come uponthis errand of friendly interest or curiosity. Nothingwas to be seen but earnest and delighted faces,offering or acknowledging congratulation ; nothingto be heard but the language of joy and pleasure —friendly or affectionate) according to the sex or relationof the speaker. Some were talking of procuringpassports for leaving the town — some anticipatingthat this course would not be left to theira choice, but imposed, as the price of his clemency,by the Landgrave ; — alt in Short was hubbub andiiISl KLOSTEBBSIH.joyous uproar, when suddenly a file of the city gnttrd,commanded by an officer, made their way rarelyfood violently through the crowd, Bdvancuig evidentlyto the spot where the liberated prisoners werecollected in a group. At that moment the CountSt Aldenheim was offering his congratulations. Thefriends to whom he spoke, were too confident in hishoDoar and integrity to have felt even one moment'smisgiving upon the true causes which had shelteredhim from the Landgrave's wrath, and had thusgiven him a privilege so invidious in the eyes ofthose who knew him not, and on that account solatent in his own. They knew his unimpeachablefidelity to the cause and themselves, and wereanxiously expressing their sense of it by the warmthof their salutations at the very moment when thecity guard appeared. The Cotmt, on his part, wasgailyremindingthera to come that evening and fulfiltheir engagement to drink his aunt of jovial memoryin her own Johannisberg, when the guard, shoulderingaside the crowd, advanced, and, surrounding thegroup of student, in an instant laid the hands ofsummary arrest each upon the gentleman who stoodnext him. The petty officer who commanded,made a grasp at one of the moat distinguished inKLOSTERHEIM.dress, and seized rudely upon the gold chain dependingfrom Ills neck. St Aldenheim, who happenedat the moment to be in conversation with this individual,stung with a sudden indignation at the ruffianeagerness of the men in thus abusing the privilegesof their office, and unable to control the generousardour of his nature, met this brutal outrage witha sudden blow at the officer's face, levelled with sotie an aim, that it stretched him at his length uponthe ground. No terrors of impending vengeance,had they been a thousand times stronger than theywere, could at this moment have availed to stiflethe cry of triumphant pleasure — long, loud, andunfaltering — which indignant sympathy with theoppressed extorted from the crowd. The pain andhumiliation of the blow, exalted into a maddeningintensity by this popular shout of exultation, quickenedthe officer's rage into an apparent frenzy. Withwhite lips, and half suffocated with the sudden revulsionof passion, natural enough to one who hadnever before encountered even a momentary overtureat opposition to the authority with which hewas armed, and for the first: time in his life foundhis own brutahtiea thrown back resolutely in histeeth, the man rose, and by signs rather than the136 SXOSTERHEIH.inarticulate sounds which he meant for words, pointedthe violence of his party upon the Count StAldenheim. With halberds bristling around him,the gallant young nobleman was loudly summonedto attended ; hut he protested indignantly, drawinghis sword and placing himself in an attitude of defence,that he would die a thousand deaths soonerthan surrender the Bwordof his father, the PalsgrsTC,a Prince of the Empire, of unspotted honour, andmost ancient descent, into the hands of a jailer,Jailer !" exclaimed the officer, almost howlingwith passion.Why, then, captain of jaUera, lieutenant.BJispesaade, or what you will. What else than ajailer is he, that sits watch upon the prison-floorsof honourable cavaliers ?" Another shout of triumphapplauded St Aldenheim ; for the men whodischarged the duties of the city guard at that day,or " petty gnaard," as it was termed, correspondingin many of their functions to the modern 'police,were viewed with contempt by all parties ; andmost of all by the military, though in some respectsassimilated to them by discipline and costume.They were industriously stigmatized as jailers ; forwhich there was the more ground, as their dutiesdid in reality associate them pretty often with thejailer ; and in other recipients they wttre a dissoluteand ferocious body of men, gathered not out of thecitizens, but many foreign deserters, or wrestledrun agates from the jail, or from the justice of theProvost-marshal in some distant camp. Not aDum, probably, but was liable to be reclaimed insome or other quarter of Genniinyaa a capital delinquent.Sometimes, even, they were actually detected,claimed, and given up to the pursuit of justice,wheat happened that the subjects of their criminalacts were weighty enough to sustain an energeticenquiry. Hence their reputation became worse thanscandalous : the ming-led infamy of their calling,and the houseless condition of wretchedness whichhad made it worth their acceptance, combined tooverwhelm them with public scorn ; and this publicabhorrence, which at any rate awaited them,mere desperation led them too often to countenanceand justify by their conduct.L " Captain of jailers I do your worst, I say,"I again ejaculated St Aldenheim. She of his blinding passion, the officer hesitated to precipitate himself into a personal struggle with the Count, andH thus perhaps afford his antagonist an o1S8 KLOSTEHUEIM.a :hither triumph. Bat loudly and fiercely heuT^ed on bis followers to attack him. These again,not partaking in the personal nTHth of their leader,even, whilst pressing more and more closely uponSt Aldeabsim, and chilling' upon him to surrender,scrupled to indict a wound, or too marked an ontra, upon a cavalier whose rank was known to thewhole city, and of late most advantageously knownfor his own interests, by the conspicuous immunitywhich it had procured him from the Landgrave. Invain did the commanding-officer insist, in vain didthe Count defy, — menaces from neither smile availedto urge the guard into any outrage upon the personof one who might have it in his power to retaliateso severely upon themselves. They continued obstinatelyat a stand, simply preventing his escape,when suddenly the tread of horses' feet arose uponthe ear, and through a long vista were discovereda body of cavalry from the castle coming up at acharging pace to the main entrance of the college.Without pulling up on the outside, as hitherto theyhad always done, they expressed sufficiently thealtered tone of the Landgrave's feelings towards theold chartered interests of Klosterheim, by plungingthrough the great archway of the college-gates ;KLOBTERHEIM.-1#ind then making' way at the same furious pacethrough the assembled crowds, who broke rapidlyaway to the right and to the left, they reined updirectly abreast of the city guard and their prisoners.Colonel Von Aremberg 1" said St Aldenheim,I perceive your errand. To a soldier I Surrendermyself; to this tynmt of dungeons, who has betrayedmore men, and cheated more gibbets of their duethan ever he said aves, I will never lend an ear,though he should bear the orders of every Landgravein Germany."You do well," replied the Colonel ; " but forthis man, Count, he bears no orders from any landgrave,nor will ever again hear orders from theLandgrave of X Gentlemen, you are all myprisoners ; and you will accompany mc to the castle-countSt Aldenheim, I am sorry that there is nolonger an exemption for yourself. Please to advance.If it will he any gratification to you, these men"(pointing to the city guard) " are prisoners also."Here was a revolution of fortune that confoundedevery body. The detested guardians of the city jailwere themselves to tenant it ; or, by a worse fatestill, were to be consigned unpitied, and their casetutjodged, to the dark and pestilent dungeons whichlay below the Landgrave's castle. A few scatteredcries of triumph were heai^ from the crowd ; bntthey were throned in a tumult of conflicting feelings.As human creature. fallen tinder the displeasureof a despot with a judicial power of tortureto enforce his investigations, even fa claimed somecompassion. But there arose, to call off attentionfrom these less dignified objects of the public interest,a. long train of gallant cavaliers, restored socapriciously to liberty, in order, as it seemed, to evethe greater poignancy and bitterness to the instantrenewal of their captivity. This was the very frenzyof despotism in its very moodiest state of excitement.Many b^;an to think the Landgrave mod.If so, what a dreadful fete might be anticipated forthe sons or representatives of so many noble families,gallant soldiers the greater part of them, with anobleman of princely blood at their head, lying underthe displeasure of a gloomy and infuriated tyrant,with unlimited means of executing the bloodiestSuggestions of his vengeance. Then, in what wayhad the guardians of the jails come to be connectedwith any even imaginary offence ? Supposing theLandgrave insane, hie ag-eta were not so ; ColonelVon Aremberg wBB a man of shrewd and penetratingunderstanding ; and this officer had clearly Spokenin the tone of one, who, whilst announcing the sentenceof another, sympathizes entirely with thejustice and necessity of its harshness.Something dropped from the miserable leader ofthe city guard, in his first confusion and attempt atself-defence, which rather increased than explainedthe mystery. " The Masque I the Masque I" Thiswas the word which fell at intervals upon the ear ofthe listening crowd, as he sometimes directed hiswords in the way of apology and deprecation toColonel Von Aremberg, who did not vouchsafe tolisten, or of occasional explanation and discussion,as it was partially kept ap between himself and oneof his nearest partners in the imputed transgression-twoor three there might be seen in the crowd,whose looks avowed some nearer acquaintance withthis mysterious allusion than it would have beensafe to acknowledge. But, for the great body ofspectators who accompanied the prisoners and theirescort to the gates of the castle, it was pretty evidentby their enquiring looks, and the fixed express132 KLOSTEBHEIM.sion of wonder upon their features, that the wholeaffiur, and its drcmnstances, were to them equallya subject of mystery for what was past, and of blindterror for what was to come.VLOSTERHEIM.CHAPTER IX.The cavalcade, with its charge of prisoners, andits attendant train of spectators, halted at the gatesof the schloss. This vast and antique pile had nowcome to he surveyed with dismal and revolting' feelings,as the abode of a sanguinary despot. Thedungeons and labyrinths of its tortuous passages, itsgloomy has of audience, with the vast corridorswhich surmounted the innumerable flights of stairssome noble, spacious, and in the Venetian taste,capable of admitting the march of an army — somespiral, steep, and so unusually narrow as to excludetwo persons walking abreast ; these, together withthe numerous chapels erected in it to difFerent saintsby devotees, male or female, in the families of forgottenLandgravess through four centuries back;and finally the tribunals, or gericht-kammem, fordispensing justice, criminal or civil, to the cityund territorial dependencies of Klosterheim; — all^\KLOBTEBHEIM.united to compose a body of impressive images,hallowed by great historical remembrances, or traditionalstories, that from infancy to age dwelt uponthe feelings of the Klostcrheimers, Terror andsuperstitions dread predominated undoubtedly in thetotal impression ; but the gentle virtues exhibitedby a series of princes, who had made this their favouriteresidence, naturally enough terminated inmellowing the sternness of each associations into areligions awe, not without its own peculiar attractions.But at present, under the harsh and repulsivecharacter of the reigning Prince, every thing tooka new colour from his ungenial habits. The superstitiouslegends, which had so immemorially peopledthe schloss with spectral apparitions, now revivedin its earliest strength. Never was Germany morededicated to superstition in every shape than at thisperiod. The wild tumultuous times, and the slighttenure upon which all men held their lives, naturallythrew their thoughts much upon the otherworld; and communications with that, or its burthenof secrets, by every variety of agencies, ghosts, divination,natural magic, palmistry, or astrology, found inevery city of the land more encouragement than ever.It cumot, therefore, be surprising that the .135known apparitions the White Lowly (a legend whichaffected Kloaterheim through the fortunes of itsLandgravess, no lees than several other princelyhouses of Genntuiy, descended from the same originalstock), should about this time have heed seenin the dusk of the evening at some of the upperwindows in the castle, and once in a lofty gallery ofthe great chapel during the vesper service. ThisIfldy, generally known hy the name of the WhitfieldAgnes, or Lady Agnes of WeUsemburg, issupposed to have Heed in the 13th or 14th century,and from that time, even to our own days, the currentbelief is, that on the eve of any great crisis ofgood or evil fortune impending over the three orfour illustrious houses of Germany which trace theirorigin from her, sbe makes her appearance in someconspicuous apartment, great baronial hall or chapel,of their several palaces, sweeping along in whiterobes and a voluminous train. Her appearance oflate in the schloss of Klosterheim, confidently believedby the great body of the people, was hailedwith secret pleasure, as forerunning some greatchange in the Landgrave's wittily, — which was butanother name fur better days to themselves, whilstof necessity it menaced some great evil to the PrinceAhimself. Hope, therefore, was predominant in theirprospects, and in the eapematoral institutions of(.-omiag change ; — ^ et awe and deep religious feelingmingled with their hope. Of chastisementApproaching to the Landgrave they felt assured, —some dim religions judgraeat, like that which broodedover the house of (Oedipus, was now at hand, —that was the universal impression. His gloomyasceticism of life seemed to argue secret crimes, —these were to be brought to light ; — for these, andfor his recent tyranny, prosperous as it had seemedtor n moment, chastisements were now impending;and something of the awe which belonged to a princeeii mnrkt^l out tor doom and fatal catastrophe, seemedto attach iUplf to his mansion,— more especially, asit was them only that the signs and portents of theriimiiig Kim bod revealed themselves in the apparitionif the' While Judy.Under Ibis superstitious impression, many of thespMlBtom paosod at the eiitrnnce of the castle, andlingered in the portal, though presuming that thefteinber of justice, according to the frank old usagejrf Germany, was still open to all comers. Of thisMbM they were speedily disabused by the sadden« of the few who had penetrated into the firstRLOSTEBHEIU. 137antechamber. These persons were harshly repelledis a contmtiehoiiB mDuner, and recto the astonishedcitizens another lesson upon the new arts of darknessand concealment, with which the Landgrayefound it necessary to accompany his new acts of tyranny.Yon Arembei^ and his prisoners, thus left alonein one of the antechambers, waited no long timebefore they were summoned to the presence of theLandgrave.After pacing' along' a number of corridors, allcarpeted so aa to return no sound to their footsteps,they arrived in a little hal, from which a door suddenlyopened, upon a noiseless signal exchangedwith an usher outside, and displayed before them along gallery, with a table and a few seats arrangedat the further end. Two gentlemen were seated atthe table, anxiously examining papers ; in one ofwhom it was easy to recognise the wily glance ofthe Italian minister, the other was the Landgrave.This Prince was now on the vei^e of fifty, strikinglyhandsome in his features, and of imposing'presence, from the union of a fine person with mannersunusually dignified. No man understood butterthe art of restraining his least ^y^ikable impliesiof anger or malignity within the decorums of hisrank. And even his worst passions, throwing agloomy, rather than terrific air upon his features,served less to alarm and revolt, than to impress thesense of secret diBtmst. Of late indeed, from thetoo evident indications of the public hatred, his salliesof passion had become wilder and more ferocious,and his self-command less habitually conspicuous.But in general, a gravity of insidious courtesy disguisedFrom all but penetrating eyes the treacherouspurpose of his heart.The Landgrave bowed to the Count St Aldenheim; and, pointing to a chair, begged him to understandthat he wished to do nothing inconsistentwith his regard for the Palsgrave his brother ; andwould be content with his parole of honour to pursueno further any conspiracy against himself, inwhich he might too thoughtlessly have engaged, andwith his retirement from the city of Klosterheim.Tbe Count St Aldenheim replied, that he andall the other cavaliers present, according to hisbelief, stood upon the same footing ; that they hadharboured no thought of conspiracy, unless thatname could attach to a purpose of open expostulationwith his Highness on the outraged privilegesKLOSTSRHEIM. 199of their corporation as a university : that he wishednot for any distinction of treatment in a case whenall were equal offenders, or none at all : and finally,that he believed the sentence of esse from Kloster-heim would be cheerfully accepted by all) or most ofthose present.Adomi, the minister, shook his head, and glancedsignificantly at the Landgrave during this answer.The Landgrave coldly replied, that if he could supposethe Count to speak sincerely, it was evidentthat he was little aware to what length his companions,or some of them, had pushed their plots.Here are the proofs !" and he pointed to thepapers.And now, gentlemen," said he, turning to thestudents, " I marvel that you, being cavaliers of family,and doubtless holding: yourselves men of honour,should beguile these poor knaves into certainruin, whilst yourselves could reap nothing but abrief mockery of the authority which you could nothope to evade."Thus called upon, the students and the city-guardtold their tale ; in which no contradictionscould be detected. The city prison was not particularlywell secured against attacks from without.140 SXOSTEBHBIAI.To prevent, therefore, any sudden attempt at asue, the guard kept watch by turns. One nwatched two hours, traversing the different piof the prison ; and was then relieved. At threeo'clock on the preceding' night, pacing a windinglobby, brig-holy illuminated, the man who kept thatwatch was suddenly met by a person wearing amasque, and armed at all points. His surprise andconsternation were great, and the more so as thesteps of The Masque were soundless, though thefloor was a stone one. The guard, hut slightly preparedto meet an attack, would, however, have resistedraised an alarm ; but The Masque instantlylevelling a pistol at his head with one hand, withthe other had thrown open the door of an emptyceU, indicating ta the man by signs that he mustenter it. With this intimation he had necessarilycomplied ; and The Masque had immediately turnedthe key upon him. Of what followed he knewnothing, until aroused by his comrades setting himat liberty, after some time had been wasted insearching for him.The students had a pretty uniform tale to report.A Masque, armed cap-a-pie as described by theguard, had visited each of their cells in succession ;had instructed them by signs to dress ; and then,pointing' to the door, by a series of directions allcommunicated in the same dumb show, had assembledthem together, thrown open the prison door,and, pointing to their college, bad motioned themthither. This motion they had seen no cause todisobey, presuming their dismissal to be accordingto the mode which best pleased his Highness ; andnot ill-pleased at finding so peaceful a terminationto a summons which at first, from its mysteriousshape and the solemn hour of night, they had understoodas tending to some more formidable issue.It was observed that neither the Landgrave norhis minister treated this report of so strange a transactionwith the scorn Which hud been anticipated.Both listened attentive, and made minute enquiriesas to every circumstance of the dress and appointmentsof the mysterious Masque. What washis height ? By what road, or in what direction, haddisappeared ? These questions answered, hisHighness and his minister consulted a few minutesand then, turning to Von Aremberg,bade him for the present dismiss the prisoners totheir homes, an act of grace which seemed likely142 KLOSTEBUEIM.to do him service at the present crisis ; hut at thesame time to take sufficient security £)r their reappearance.This done the whole hod were liberated.rSI.OSTERHEIM.CHAPTER X.All Klosterheim was confounded by the story ofthe mysterious Masque, For the story had beenrapidly dispersed ; and on the same day it was madeknown in another shape. A notice was affixed tothe walls of several public places in these words : —IdndgTare, beware I henceforth not you, but I,govern in Klosterheim.(Signed) " The Masque."And this was no empty threat. Very soon itbecame apparent that some mysterious agency wasreally at work to counteract the Landgrave's designs.Sentinels were carried off from solitary posts.Guards even of a dozen men were silently trepannedfrom their stations. By and by, other attacks weremade, even more alarming, upon domestic security.Was there a burgomaster amongst the citizens, who144 KLOSltflHEIM.had inside himself conspicuously a tool of the Landgraye,or had opposed the Imperial interest ? Hewas carried off in the night-time from his house,and prettily from the city. At first this was aneasy task. Nobody apprehending any special dangerto himself, no special preparations were made tomeet it. But, as it soon became apparent in whatcause The Masque waa moving, every person whoknew himself obnoxious to attack, took means toface it. Guards were multiplied ; arms were repairedin every house ; alarm bells were hung. ForII time the danger seemed to diminish. The attackswere no longer so frequent. Still, wherever theywere attempted, they succeeded just us before. Itseemed, in &ct, that all the precautions taken hadno other effect than to warn The Masque of his owndanger, and to place him more vigilantly on hisguard. Aware of new defences raising, it seemedthat he waited to see the course they would take ;once master of that, he was ready (as it appeared)to contend with them as successfully as before.Nothing could exceed the consternation of the^y. Those even, who did not fell within the.^f^ent rule which governed the attacks of The^•sque, let a sense of indefinite terror hanging overKLOSTEHHEIM. 145them. Sleep was no longer safe ; the seclusion ofa man's private hearth, the secrecy of bedrooms,was no longer a protection. Locks gave way, barefell, dooi-H flew open, ae if by mog^c, before him.Arras seemed useless. In some instances a partyof as many as ten or a dozen persons had been removedwithout rousing disturbance in the neighbourhood.Nor was this the only circumstance ofmystery. Whither he could remove his victims,was even more incomprehensible than the meansby which be succeeded. All was darkness and fear ;and the whole city was agitated with panic.It began now to be suggested that a nightly guardshould be established, having fixed stations or pointsof rendezvous, and at intervals parading the streets.This was cheerfully assented to ; for, after the firstweek of the mysterious attacks, it began to be observedthat the Imperial party were attacked indiscriminatelywith the Swedish. Many students publiclydeclared that they had been dogged through astreet or two by an armed Masque ; others had beenBudded confronted by him in unfrequented partsof the city in the dead of night, and were on thepoint of being attacked, when some alarm, or the approachof distant footsteps, had caused him to KLOSTEEHEIM.appear. The students, indeed, more particularly',seemed objects of attack; and, as they ware prettygenerally attached to the Imperial interest, the motivesof The Masque were no longer judged to bepolitical. Hence it happened that the students cameforward in a body, and Volunteered as members ofthe nightly guard. Being young, military for themost part in their habits, and trained to support thehardships of night-watching, they seemed peculiarlyfitted for the Service ; and, as the esse was no longerof a nature to awaken the suspicions of the Landgrave,they were generally accepted and enrolled ;and with the more readiness, as the known friendsof that Prince come forward at the same time.A night-watch was thus established, which promisedsecurity to the city, and a. respite from theirmysterious alarms. It was distributed into eightor ten divisions, posted at different points, whilst acentral one traversed the whole city at stated periods,and overlooked the local stations. Such an arrangementwas wholly Unknown at that time in everypart of Germany, and was hailed with generalapplause.To the astonishment, however, of every body, itproved wholly ineffectual. Houses were entered asE.t.OSTEItIl£IU. 147before ; the college chambers proved no fiaiictuary ;indeed, they were attacked with a peculiar obstinacy,which was understood to express a spirit of retaliationfor the alacrity of the Students in combining forthe public protection. People were carried off asbefore. And continual notices affixed to the gatesof the college, the convents, or the schloss, with thesignature of The Masque, announced to the publicbis determination to persist, and his contempt of themeasure organized against him.The alarm of the citizens now became greater thanever. The danger was one which courage could notfitch, nor prudence make provision for, nor wildnessevade. All alike, who bad once been marked out forattack, sooner or later fell victims to the obstinacyof this mysterious foe. To have received even anindividual warning, availed them not at alL Sometimesit happened, that, having received notice of suspiciouscircumstances indicating that The Masquehad turned his attention upon themselves, theywould assemble round their dwellings, or in theirvery chambers, a band of armed men sufficient toset the danger at defiance. But no sooner had theyrelaxed in these costly and troublesome arrangements,no sooner was the sense of peril lulled.a,A148 KLOSTXBHEIM.an <q)C!iuiig made for th Tmrelenliag enemy,than he glided in with his mstMnary success ; andin a morning or two after, it was announced to theaty that they* abo were numbered with his victims.Even jet it seemed that something' remained inreserve to augment the terrors of the citizens, andpush them to excess. Hitherto there had been no«n to think that any murderous violence hadoccurred in the mysterious rencontres between TheMasque and his victims. Butoflate,intho8ehons^or college chambers, from which the occupiers haddisappeared, traces of bloodshed were apparent insome instances, and of ferocious conflict in others.Sometimes a provision of hair was scattered on theground ; sometimes fragments of dress, or splintersof weapons. Every thing marked that on both sides,as this mysterious agency advanced, the passionsincreased in intensity; determination and murderousmalignity on the one side, and the fury of resistanceon the other.At length the last consummation was given tothe public panic ; for, as if expressly to put an endto all doubts upon the spirit in which he conductedhis wHr&re, in one house where the bloodshed hadbeen so great as to aise some considerable loss ofKLOSTERHEIH. 149life, a notice was left behind in the followingterres : " Thus it is that I punish resistance ; mercyto a cheerful. Submission ; but henceforth death tothe obstinate I — The Masque."What was to he done ? Some compelled a publicdeprecation of his wrath, addressed to The Masque.But this, had it even offered any chance of succeeding,seemed too abject an act of abasement to becomea large city. Under any circumstances, it was toohumiliating a confession, that, in a struggle with oneman (for no more had avowedly appeared upon thescene), they were left defeated and at his mercy.A second party counselled a treaty ; would it not bepossible to learn the ultimate objects of The Masque ;and, if such as seemed capable of being entertainedwith honour, to concede to him his demands, in exchangefor security to the city, and immunity fromfuture molestation ? It was true, that no man knewwhere to seek him : personally he was hidden fromtheir reach ; but every body knew how to find him :he was amongst them ; in their very centre ; andwhatever they might address to him in a publicnotice, would be sure of speedily reaching his eye.After some deliberation, a summons was addressedto The Masque, and exposed on the college gates.ISO KLOSTERHEIM.demanding of him a declaration of his purposes, andthe price which he expected for suspending them.The next day an answer appeared in the same situation)avowing the intention of The Masqne to comeforward with ample explanation of his motives at aproper crisis, till which, ^ more blood inst flow inKlosteiheim.''KLOSTERHEIU.CHAPTER XI.Meantime the Landgrave was himself perplexedand Alarmed. Hitherto he had believed himselfpossessed of all the intrigues, plots, or conspiracies,which threatened his influence in the city. Amongthe students and among the citizens he had manyspies, who communicated to him whatsoever theycould learn, which was sometimes mure than thetruth, and sometimes a good deal less. But now hewas met by a terrific antagonist, who moved in darkness,careless of his power, inaccessible to his threats,and apparently as reckless a£ himself of the qualityAdomi, with all his Venetian subtlety, was nowas much at fault as every body else. In vain hadthey deliberated together, day after day, upon hisprobable purposes ; in vain had they schemed tointercept his person, or offered high rewards fortracing his retreats. Snares bad been laid for himKLOSTBaaEIH.in TMH ; erenr wile had protect abortive, every plotkad batt counterparts. And both involuntaryMHfclMd that they Iliad now met with their master.Tlxwl emil confounded. stars for the fixture stirlingwith mortification for the past, the LandgraveWM uttin^. Utt> at iii^l, in the long gallery thereh« unulty held his «nmcik- He was reflectingM'ilh Mtxicrv on the peculiar onpn^itioiis momentMl witch ht« new enemy had tome upon the stage —the Tory crisis of tti» simple between the SwedishMid lm|>«rial interest in Kto^terfaeim, whii^ wouldultimately determine his own place and value inthe eetiBute of his new nlliee. He was not of acharacter to be eoeily duped by my^toy. Yet hecon not but acknowledge to himself that therewas something calculated to impress awe and thesort of fear which is connected with the supernatural,in the sudden appearances, and vanishing assudden, of The Masque. He came no one couldgoeBi whence, retreated no one could guess whither;was intercepted, and yet eluded arrest ; and if halfthe stories in circulation could he credited, seemedinaudible in his steps, at pleasure to make himselfinvisible and impalpable to the very bands stretchedo ut to detain him. Mach of this, no doubt, wasKLOBTERHEIM. 153militia exaggeration, or the fictions of fears self-deluded.But enough remained, after every allowance,to justify an extraordinary interest in sosingular a being ; and the Landgrave could notavind wishing that chance might offer an opportunityto himself of observing him.Profound silence had for some time reignedthroughout the castle. A dock which stood in theroom, broke it for a moment by striking the quarters{ and, raising his eyes, the Landgrave perceivedthat it was past two. He rose to retire for thenight, and stood for a moment musing with onehand resting upon the table. A momentary feelingof awe came across him, as his eyes travelled throughthe gloom at the lower end of the room, on thesudden thought — that a being so mysterious, aidcapable of piercing through so many impedimentsto the interior of every mansion in Klosterheim,was doubtless likely enough to visit the castle ; nay,it would be no ways improbable that he shouldpenetrate to this very room. What bars had yetb«eii found sufficient to repel him ? And who couldpretend to calculate the hour of his visit ? Thisnight even might be the time which he would select.Thinking thus, the Landgrave was suddenly awareof a (whisky figure entering the room by & door atthe lower end. The room had the length and generalproportions of a gallery, and the further end wae80 remote from the candles which stood on theLandgrave's table, that the deep gloom was butslightly penetrated by their rays. Light, however,there was, sulGcient to tlispky the outline of afigure slowly and inaudibly advancing up the room.It could not he Void that the Heure advanced stealthily; on the contrary, its motion, carriage, and bearing,were in the highest dree dignified and solemn.But the feeling of a stealthy purpose was suggestedby the perfect silence of its tread. The motion ofa shadow could not be more noiseless. And thisdrcunistance confirmed the Landgrave's first impressed,that now he wee on the point of accomplishinghis recent wish, and meeting that mysterious beingwho was the object of so much awe, and the authorof so far-spread a panic.He was right ; it was indeed The Masque, armedcap-a-pie as usual. He advanced with an equableand determined step in the direction of the Landgrave.Whether be saw his Highness, who stood alittle in the shade of a laj^e cabinet, could not beknovm i the Landgrave doubted not that he did.iKI08TERH£IH.He was a prince of firm nerves by constitution, andof great intrepidity, — yet, as one who shared in thesuperstitions of his ag-e, he could not be expectedentirely to suppress an emotion of indefinite apprehensionas he now beheld the solemn approach of abeta:, who, by some unaccountable means. Lad trepannedso many different individuals from so manydifferent honseB, most of them prepared for self-defence,and fenced in by the protection of stone walls,locks, and bars.The Landgrave, however, lost none of bis presenceof mind; and in the midst of his discomposure,as bis eye fell upon the habiliments of this mysteriousperson, and the arms and military accoutrementswhich he bore, naturally his thoughts settledupon the more earthly means of annoyance whichthis martial apparition carried about him. TheLandgrave was himself unarmed, — he had no armseven within reach, — nor was it possible for him inhis present situation very speedily to summon assistance.With these thoughts passing rapidly throughhis mind, and sensible that, in any viewof hisnalnireand powers, the being now in his presence was avery formidable antagonist, the Landgrave could notbut feel relieved from a burden of aimons tremors.tS6 KLOBT£HH£lM.when he saw The Masque suddenly turn towards adoor which opened about half way up the room, andlead into a picture-giiUery at right angles with theroom in which they both were.Into the picture-gallery The Masque passed at thesame solent pace, without apparently looking atthe Landgrave. This movement seemed to argue,either that he purposely declined an interview withthe Prince, and that might aise fear, or that hehad not been aware of his presence ; — either supposition,as implying something of human infirmity,seemed incompatible with supernatural faculties.Partly upon this consideration, and partly perhapsbecause he suddenly recollected that the road takenby The Masque would lead him directly past theapartments of the old seneschal, where assistancemight be summoned, the Landgrave foimd his spiritsat this moment revive. The consciousness of rankand birth also came to his aid, and that sort of disdainof the aggressor, which possesses every man —brave or cowardly alike — within the walls of hisown dwelling : — unarmed as he was, he determinedto pursue, and perhaps to speak.The restraints of high breeding, and the ceremoniousdecorum of his rank, involuntarily checked theLandgrave from pnrsning- with a hurried pace. Headvanced with hia habitual gmvity of Step, so thatThe Masque was half way down the gallery beforethe Prince entered it. This gallery, furnished oneach side with pictures, of which some were portraits,was of great length. The Masque and the Princecontinued to advance, preserving a pretty equal distance.It did not appear by any sign or gBBtnrethat The Masque was aware of the Landgrave's pursuit.Suddenly, however, he paused — drew hia wordhalted ; the Landgrave also halted ; then turninghalf round, and waving with his hand to the Princeso as to solicit his attention, slowly The Masque elevatedthe point of his sword to the level of a pictureit wa£ the portrait of a young cavalier in a huntingdress, blooming with youth and youthful ftaergj.The Landgrave turned pale, trembled, and was ruefullyagitated. The Masque kept his sword in itsposition for half a minute ; then dropping it, shookhia head, and raised his hand with a peculiar solemnityof expression. The Landgrave recovered himself— his features swelled with passion — he quickenedhis step, and again followed in pursuit.The Masque, however, had by this time turnedout of the gallery into a passage, which, after a singlet, terminated in the private room of the seneschal.Believing that his ignorance of the localitieswBB thus leading him on to certain capture, theLandgrave pursued more leisurely. The passagewas dimly lighted; every image floated in a cloudyobscurity ; and, upon reaching the curve, it seemedto the Landgrave that The Masque was just on thepoint of entering the seneschal's room. No otherdoor was heard to open ; and he felt assured that hehad seen the lofty figure of The Masque ghdiiig intothat apartment. He again quickened his steps ; alight bumped within, the door stood ajar ; quietlythe Prince pushed it open, and entered with thefullest assurance that he should here at length overtakethe object of bis pursuit.Great was his consternation upon finding in aroom, which presented no outlet, not a living creatureexcept the elderly seneschal, who lay quietlysleeping in his arm-chair. The First impulse of thePrince was to awaken him roughly, that he mightsummon aid and co-operate in the search. Oneglance at a paper upon the table arrested his hand.He saw a name written there, interesting to hisfears beyond all others in the world. Hie eye wasriveted as by fascination to the paper. He read oneKLOSTEaHEIU. 139instant. That satisfied him that the old seneschalmust be overcome hy no counterfeit slumbers, whenhe could thus surrender a secret of capital importanceto the gee of that eye Irom which above allothers he must desire to screen it. One momenthe deliberated with himself ; the old man Hired,and muttered in his dreams ; the Landgrave seizedthe paper, and stood irresolute for an instant whetherto await his wakening:, and authoritatively to claimwhat so nearly concerned his own interest, or to retreatwith it from the room before the old mac shouldbe aware of the Prince's visit, or his own loss.But the seneschal, wearied perhaps with someunusual exertion, had but moved in his chair ; againhe composed himself to deep slumber, made deeperby the warmth of a hot fire. The raving of thewind, as it whistled round this angle of the schloss,drowned all sounds that could have disturbed him.The Landgrave secreted the paper ; nor did anysense of his rank and character interpose to checkhim in an act so unworthy of an honourable cavalier.Whatever crimes he had hitherto committed orauthorized, this was perhaps the first instance inwhich he had offended by an instance of petty knavery.He retired with the stealthy pace of a robberaiudoiis to trade detectuMi; and stole back to hisown apartments with in ov e i yoiiw ij ng interest in thedisooYeij he had made so aoddentaUj, and with anan x i ety to investigate it further, which absinrfoed forthe time all other cares, and banished from histhoughts even The Mssqoe himself, whose soddeniq^peamnce and retreat had in &ct thrown into hishands the secret which now so exdnsiyelj disturbedhim.KLOSTEBHEIM.CHAPTER Xn.Meantime The Masque <:antmue(l to hiirasB theLandgrave, to baffle many of his wiles, and to neutralizehis most politic schemes. In one of the manyplacards which he afSxed to the castle gates, he describedthe Landgrave as ruling' in Klosterheim byday, and himself by night. Sarcasms such as these,together with the practical insults which The Masquecontinually offered to the Landgrave, by foiling hisavowed designs, embittered the Prince's existence.The injury done to his political schemes of ambitionat this particular crisis was irreparable. One afterone, all the agents and tools by whom he could hopeto work upon the counsels of the Klosterheim authorcities, had been removed. Losing their influence,K be had lost every prop of Lis own. Nor was this■ aU ; he was reproached by the general voice of theB city as the original cause of a calamity, which heH had since shown himself impotent to redress. HejjEI.OSTeBRSIU.it was, and his cause, which had drawn upon thepeople, BO ^talJj trepanned, the hostility of themysterious Masque. But for his Highness, all thebut^maHters, captains, city-officers, &c., would nowbe sleeping in their beds ; whereas the best fetewhich could he surmised for the most of them, was,that they were sleeping in dungeons ; some perhapsin their area. And tins the Landgrave's causenot merely lost its most efficient partisans, batthrough their loss determined the wavering againsthim, alienated the few who remained of his ownfaction, and gave strength and encouragement to thegeneral disaffection which had so long prevailed.Thus it happened that the conspirators, or suspectedconspirators, could not he brought to trial, orto punishment without a trial. Any spark of freshirritation felling upon the present combustible temperof the populace, would not feil to produce anexplosion. Fresh conspirators, and real ones, werethus encouraged to arise. The university, the city,teemed with plots. The government of the Princewas exhausted with the growing labour of tradagand counteracting them. And, by little and little,matters come into such a condition, that the controlof the city, though still continuing in the Laadr-klobierbeThgrave's hands, was maintained by mere martial force,and at the very point of the sword. And in no long'tic) it was feared, that with so general a principleof hatred to combine the populace, and ed targe abody of military students to head them, the balanceof power, already approaching to an equipoise, wouldbe tamed against the Landgrave's government.And, in the best event, his Highness could now lookfor nothing from their love. All might be reckonedfor lost that could not be extorted by force.This state of things had been brought about bythe dreadiiil Masque, seconded, no doubt, by thosewhom he had emboldened and aroused within ; and,as the climax and crowning injury of the whole,every day unfolded more and more the vast importancewhich Klosterheim would soon possess as thecentre and key of the movements to be anticipatedin the coming campaign. An electoral cap wouldperhaps reward the services of the Landgrave in thegeneral pacification, if he could present himself atthe German Diet as the possessor £^« ^c/o of Kloster-heim and her territorial dependencies, and with someimperfect possession dejure ; still more, if he couthplead the merit of having brought over this state,so important from local situation, as a willing allyto the Swedish Entered. Bat to this, a free rote ofthe city was •□ essential preliminary : and fromthat, through the macfaiaa6ons of The Masqne, bewas now further than ever.The temper of the Prince began to give way nndetthese accumulated provocations. An en em j" for everaiming bia blows with the deadliest effect ; for everstabbing in the dark ; yet charmed and consecratedfrom all retaliation ; always met with, never to befound I The Landgrave ground his teeth, clenchedhis figt^ with spasms of for. Me quarrelled vi-withwhig ministers ; swore at the officers ; cursed the sentinels; and the story went through Klosterheimthat he had kicked Adomi.Certain it was, under whatever stimulus, thatAdomi put forth much more zeal at last for theapprehension of The Masque. Come what would, hepublicly avowed that six days more should notelapse without the arrest of this " ruler of Kloster-heim by night." He had b scheme for the purpose,a plot baited for snaring him : and he pledged hisreputation as a minister and an intriguer, upon itsOn the following day, invitations were issued byAdomi, in his Highness's name to a masque ballKLOBTERHE1M.Isison that day week. The fashion of masque entertainmentshad been recently introduced from It4dyinto this sequestered nook of Gently ; and here,as there, it had been abused to purposes of criminalintrigue.Spite of the extreme uapopulftritv of the Landgravewith the low and middle classes of the city,among the highest his little court still continuedto famish a central resort to the rank and highblood, converged in such unusual proportion withinthe walls of Klosterheim. The schloss was stilllooked to as the standard and final court of appealin all matters of taste, elegance, and high breeding.Hence it naturally happened that every body, withany claims to such an honour, was anxious to receiveH ticket of admission ; — it became the test for ascertaininga person's pretensions to mix in the firstcircles of society ; and with this extraordinary zealfor obtaining an admission, naturally increased theminister's rigour and fastidiousness in pressing theusual investigation of the claimant's qualifications.Much offence was given an both sides, and manysneers hazarded at the minister himself, whose pretensionswere supposed to be of the lowest description.But the result was, that exactly twelve KI.OSTERHEI3I.died cards were issued ; these were Tegn\arij numbered,and below the device engraved upon the cardwas impressed a seal bearing the arms and motto ofthe Landgrave of X .£very precaution was taken for carrying intoeffect the scheme, with all its details, as concertedhy Adomi ; and the third day of the following weekwas announced as the day of the expected Iste.KLOSTERHEIM.CHAPTER XIH.The morning of the important day at lengtharrived, and all Klpsterheim was filled with expectation— even those who were not amongst the invitedshared in the anxiety ; for a great scene waalooked for, and perhaps some tragical explosion.The undertaking of Adornii was known ; it hadbeen published abroad that he was solemnly pledgedto effect the arrest of The Masque ; and by many itwas believed that he would so fair succeed, at theleast, as to bring on a public collision with thatextraordinary personage. As to the issue, mostpeople were doubtful, The Masque having hithertoso uniformly defeated the best-laid schemes for hisapprehension. But it wa£ hardly questioned thatthe public challenge offered to him by Adomi wouldsucceed in bringing him before the public eye. Thischallenge had. taken the shape of a public notice,posted up in the places where The Masque hadnsuUj- allied his own ; and it was to the followingeffect : — " Tint the adze stnagm now in Kioster-heim. and others invited to the Landgrave's^^, whomight otherwise feel anxiety in presenting themselvesat the tdUott, from an apprehension of meetingwith the criminal disturber of the public peace,known by the appellation of The Masqne, were re-attested by authority to lap* aside aO apprehensionof that nature, as the most energetic measures hadbeen adopted to prevent or chastise upon the spotanr such insufferable intrusion ; and for The Massehimself, if he presumed to disturb the company hjhis presence, he nonld be seized where he stood, andwithout aether enquiry committed to the Provostsfor instant execution ;— on which account,all persons were warned carefully' to forbear fromincisions of simple curiosity, since in the harry ofthe moment it mig-ht be difficult to make the requisitedistinctions."It was anticipated that this insulting notice wouldnot long go without an answer from The Masque.Accordingly, on the following morning, a placard,equally conspicuous, was posted up iji the samepublic places, side by side with that lo which itreplied. It was coached in the following terms :—KI.(lBTERii£IM.'i^'LThat he who ruled by night in Klosterheira,FDuld not suppose himself to bu excluded from anocturnal Jele given liy any person in that city.That he must be allowed to believe himself invitedby the Prince, and would certainly have the honourto accept his Highness's obliging summons. Withregard to the low personalities addressed to himself,that he could not descend to notice any thing of thatnature coming from a man so abject as Adomi,until he should first have cleared himself from theimputation of having been a tailor in Venice at thetime of the Spanish conspiracy in 1618, and banishedfrom that city, not for any suspicions that couldhave settled upon him and his eight journeymen asmaking up one conspirator, but on account of someprofessional tricks in mining a doublet for theDoge. For the rest, he repeated that he wouldnot fail to meet the Landgrave and his honourablecompany."All Klosterheim laughed at this public mortificationoffered to Adorai's pride ; for that minister had 'incited the public dislike as a foreigner, and theirhatred on the score of private character, Adomihimself foamed at the mouth with rage, impotentfor the present, but which he prepared to give deadlyVtS EU-OSTEEHEIM.effect to at the proper time. Bat whilst it laughed,Klosterheim also trembled. Some persons indeedwere of opinion, that the answer of The Masqne wasa mere sportive effusion of malice or pleasantry irmathe students, who had Buffered so much hy hisannoyances. But the masonry, amongst whom wasAdomi himself, thought otherwise. Apart evenfrom the reply, or the insult which had provokedit, the general impi-session was, that The Masquewould not have felled in attending a festival, which,by the very costume which it Imposed, offered sofavourable a cloak to his own mysterious purposes.In this persuasion, Adomi took all the precautionswhich personal vengeance and Venetian subtletycould suggest, for availing himself of the singleopportunity that would perhaps ever be allowed himfor entrapping this public enemy, who had nowbecome a private one to himself.These various incidents had furnished abundantmatter for conversation in Klosterheim, and hadcarried the public expectation to the highest pitchof anxiety, some time before the great eveningarrived. Leisure had been allowed for fear, andevery possible anticipation of the wildest character,to unfold themselves. Hope, even, amongst many.aaLKLOSTCEHEIH.was a predominant sensation. Ladies were preparingfor hysterics. Cavaliers, besides the swordswhich they wore as regular articles of dress, wereproviding themselves with stiletto against anysnddeQ rencontre hand to hand, or an' unexpectedsurprise. Armourers and furnishes of weaponswere as much in request as the more appropriateartists who minister to such festal occasions. Theseagain were summoned to give their professional aidand attendance to an extent so much out of proportionto their numbers and their natural shower ofexertion, that they were harassed beyond all physicalcapacity of endurance, and found their ingenuitymore heavily taxed to find personal substitutesamongst the trades most closely connected withtheir own, than in any of the contrivances whichmore properly fell within the business of their ownart. Tailors, horse-milliners, shoemakers, friseurs,drapers, mercers, tradesmen of every description, andservants of every chess and denomination were summonedto a sleepless activity — each in his severalvocation, or in some which he undertook by proxy.Artificers who had escaped on political motives fromNuremberg and other Imperial cities, or from thesack of Magdeburg, now showed their ingenuity.t172 KLOSTERHEIM.and their readiness to earn the head of industry ;and if Klosterheim resembled a hive in the dose-packedcondition of its inhabitants, it was now seenthat the resemblance held good hardly less in theindustry which, upon a sufficient excitement, it wasable to develop. But in "the midst of all this stir,din, and unprecedented activity, whatever occupationeach man found for his thoughts or for hishands in his separate employments, all hearts weremastered by one domineering interest — the approachingcollision of the Landgraye, before his assembledcourt, with the mysterious agent who had so longtroubled his repose*ICI,OST£RH£IM.CHAPTER XIV.LThe day at length arrived; the guards wore postedin unusual strength ; the pages of honour, and servantsin their state-dresses, were drawn up in longand gorgeoijB files along the sides of the vast gothichalls, which ran in continued succession from thefront of the seasons to the more modem saloons inthe rear ; bands of military music, collected fromamongst the foreign prisoners of various nations atVienna, were stationed in their national costume —Italian, Unitarian, Turkish, or Croatian — in thelofty galleries or corridors which ran round the halls ;and the deep thunders of the kettle-drums, relievedby cymbals and wind-instruments, began to fill themazes of the palace as early as seven o'clock in theevening ; for at that hour, according to the customthen established in Germany, such entertainmentscommenced. Repeated volleys from long lines ofmusketeers, drawn up in the square, and at the other±entrances of the palace, with the deep roar of artillery,announced the arrival of the more distinguishedvisitors ; amongst whom it was rumoured that severalofficers in supreme command from the Swedishctunp, already collected in the neighbourhood, werethis night coming incognito — availing themselves oftheir masques to visit the Landgrave, and improvethe terms of their alliance, whilst they declined therisk which they might have brought on themselvesby too open a visit in their own avowed charactersand persons, to a town so unsettled in its state offeeling, and eo friendly to the Emperor, as Kloster-heim had notoriously become.From seven to nine o'clock, in one unbroken lineof succession, gorgeous parties streamed alongthrough the halls, a distance of fill half a (quarteruf a mile, until they were checked hy the bamereerected at the entrance to the first of the entertainingrooms, as the station for examining the ticketsof admission. This duty was fulfilled in a waywhich, though really rigorous in the extreme, gaveno inhospitable annoyance to the visitors — the harriersthemselves concealed their Jealous purpose ofhostility, and in u manner disavowed the secret aweand mysterious terror which brooded over the .175ing, by the beauty of their external appearance. Theypresented & triple line of gilt lattice-work, rising to& great altitude, and connected with the fretted roofby pendent rupees of the most magnificent velvet,intermingled with banners and heraldic trophiessuspended from the ceiling, und at internal slowlyagitated in the currents which now and then sweptthese aerial heights. In the centre of the latticeopened q single gate, on each side of which wasstationed a couple of sentinels armed to the teeth ;and this arrangement was repeated throe times, sorigorous was the vigilance employed. At the secondof the gates, where the bearer of a forged ticketwould have found himself in a sort of trap, withabsolutely no possibility of escape, every individualof each successive party presented his card of admission,and, fortunately for the convenience of thecompany, in consequence of the particular precautionused, one moment's inspection sufficed. Thecards had been issued to the parties invited not verylong before the time of assembling ; consequently,as each was sealed with a private seal of the Landgrave's,sculptured elaborately with his manorialbearings, forgery would have been nest to impossible.176 ELOfiVEItnElM.These arrangements, however, were made ratherto relieve the company from the too powerful terrorswhich haunted them, and to possess them from thefirst with a sense of security, than for the satisfactionof the Landgrave or his Minister. They weresenaiblethat TheMasijnehadit inhispowertocomf-mont an access from the interior — and this it seemednest to impossible altogether to prevent ; nor wasthat indeed the wish of Adomi, but rather to facilitatehis admission, and afterwards, when satisfied ofhis actual presence, to bar up all possibility ofretreat. Accordingly, the interior arrangements,though perfectly prepared, and ready to close up atthe word of command, were for the present butnegligently enforced.Tims stood matters at nine o'clock, by which timeupwards of a thousand persons had assembled ; andin ten minutes mote an officer reported that thewhole twelve hundred were present without one defaulter.The Landgrave had not yet appeared, his ministerhaving' received the company ; nor was he expectedto appear for an hour — in reality, he was occupied inpoetical discussion with some of the illustrious in-cognitions. But this did not interfere with the .dress of the festival ; and at this moment nothingcould be more impressive than the fer-stretchingsplendours of the spectacle.In one immense saloon, twelve hundred cavaliersand ladies, attired in the unrivalled pomp of thatage, were arranging themselves &>t one of the magnificentHungarian dancer, which the Emperor'scourt at Vienna had transplanted to the camp ofWallenstein, and thence to till the great hoit£es ofGermany Bevies of noble women, in every varietyof fencifid costume, hut in each considerable grouppresenting deep masses of black or purple velvet,on which, with the most striking advantage of radiantrelief, lay the costly pearl ornaments, or thesumptuous jewels so generally significant in thosetimes of high ancestral pretensions, intermingledwith the drooping plumes of martial cavaliers, whopresented almost universally the soldierly air offrankness which liclongs to active service, mixedwith the Castilian grandest that still breathedthrough the camps of Germany, emanating originallyfrom the magnificent courts of Brussels, ofMadrid, and of Vienna, and propagated to this ageby the links of Tilly, the Bavarian commander, andWallenstein, the more than princely commander forJKl-OSTERUEIAI.the Emperor. Figures and habiliments so commandingwere of themselves enough to till the eye andoccupy the imagination ; but, beyond all this, feelingsof awe and mystery, under more shapes thanone, brooded over the whole scene, and diffused atone of suspense and intense excitement throughoutthe Test assembly. It was known that illustriousstrangers were present incognito. There now beganto be some reason for anticipating a great battlein the neighbourhood. The men were now presentperhaps, the very hands were now visibly displayedfor the coming dance, which in a few days or evenhours, (so rapid were the movements at this periods-were to wield the truncheon that might lay theCatholic empire prostrate, or might mould the destinyof Europe for centuries. Even this feelinggave way to one still more enveloped in shades —The Masque 1 Would he keep his promise and appear?might he not be there already? might henot even now be moving amongst them ? may henot, even at this very moment, thought each person,secretly be near me — or even touching myself— orpainting my own steps?Yet again thought most people, (for at that timehardly any body affected to be incredulous in mattersKLOSTERHEIM. 179allied to the supernatural), was this raysteriona beingliable to touch F Was he not of same impassivenature, inaudible, Invisible, impalpable ? Many ofhis escapes, if truly reported, seemed to argue asmuch. If then connected with the spiritual world,was it with the gctoil or the evil in that inscrutableregion P But then the bloodshed, the torn dresses,the marks of deadly struggle, which remained behindin some of those cases where mysterious dis-appearanceshad occurred, — these seemed undeniablearguments of murder, foul and treacherous murder.Every attempt, in short, to penetrate the mysteryof this being's nature proved as abortive as the attemptsto intercept his person ; and all efforts atapplying a solution to the difficulties of the case,made the mystery even more mysterious.These thoughts, however, generally as they pervadedthe company, would have given way for a timeat least to the excitement of the scene ; for a suddenclapping of hands from some officers of the household,to enforce attention, and as a signal to theOrchestra in one of the galleries, at this momentproclaimed that the dances were en the point of commencingin another half minute, when suddenly ashriek from a female, and then a loud tumultuous180 KLOSTERUEIM.cry hai a multitude of voices, announced somefearful catastrophe ; and in the next moment a shortof '< Nicer !" firoee the blood of the timid amidstthe company.KLOSTERHEIM.CHAPTER XV.So vast was the saloon, that it had been impossible,through the maze of figure, the confusion ofcolours, and the mingling' of a thousv><l voices, thatany thing should be perceived distinctly at the lowerend of all that was now passing at the upper. Still,BO awful is the mystery of life, and so hideous andaccursed in man's imagination is every secret extinctionof that consecrated lamp, that no news thrillsso deeply, or travels so rapidly. Hardly could it beseen in what direction, or through whose communication,yet in less than a minute a movement ofsympathizing horror, and uplifted hands, announcedthat the dreadful news had reached them. A murder,it was said, had been committed in the palace.Ladies began to saint ; others hastened away insearch of friends ; others to learn the news moreaccurately ; and some of the gentlemen, who thoughtthemselves sufficiently privileged by rank, hurried182 KLOSTERHEIM.off with a stream of agitated enquirers to the interiorof the castle, in search of the scene itself. A stewonly passed the guard in the first moments of ,and penetrated with the agitated Adonisthrough the long nd winding passages, into the veryscene of the murder. A rumour had prevailed foramoment that the Landgrave was himself the victim; and as the road by which the agitated householdconducted them took a direction towards hisHighness's spite of rooms, at first Adornii had fearedthat result. Recovering his self-possession, however,at length, he learned that it was the poor oldseneschal upon whom the blow had fallen. Andhe pressed on with more coolness to the dreadfulspectacle.The poor old man was stretched at his length onthe Poor. It did not seem that be had struggled withthe murderer. Indeed, from some appearances, itseemed probable that he had been attacked whilstsleeping ; and though be had received three wounds,it was pronounced by a surgeon that one of them(and ikat, from circumstances, the first) had beenSufficient to extinguish life. He was discovered byhia daughter, a woman who held some respectableplace amongst the servants, of the castle ; and everyKLOSTERHBIH. IS!presumption concurred ia fixing the time of thedreadful scene to about one Lour before.■' Such, gentlemen, are the acts of this atrociousnoster, this Masque, who has so long been thescourge of Klosterheim," said Adorai to the strangerswho had accompanied him, as they turned away ontheir return to the company ; " but this very night,I trust, will put u bridle in his mouth."God grant it may be so I" said some. But othersthought the whole case too mysterious for conjectures,and too solemn to be decided by presumptions.And in the midst of agitated discussions on the scenethey had j must witnessed, as well as the whole historyof The Masque, the party returned to the saloon.Under ordinary circumstances, this dreadful eventwould hare damped the spirits of the company ; asit was, it did but deepen the gloomy excitementwhich already had possession of all present, andraise a more intense expectation of the visit so publiclyannounced by The Masque. It seemed as thoughhe had perpetrated this recent murder merely by «-ayof reviving the impression of his own dreadful characterin Klosterheim, which might have decayed alittle of late, in all its original strength and freshnessof novelty ; or, as though he wished to sendmediately before htm an act of atrocity that sbonldform an appropriate herald or harbinger of bis ownentrance upon the .Dreadful, however, as this deed of darkness nit seemed of too domestic a nature to «continued influence Ripon bo distinguished ablj, so numerous, so splendid, and brought togetherat so distinguished a summons. Again, therefore, themasques prepared to mingle in the dance ; again thesignal was given ; again the obedient orchestra preludedto the coming strains. In a moment more,the full tide of harmony swept along. The ratsaloon, and its echoing roof, rang with the stone ofmusic. The masques, with their floating plumesand jewelled caps, glided through the fine mazes ofthe Hungarian dances. All was one magnificentand tempestuous confusion, overflowing with theluxury of sound and sight, when suddenly, aboutmidnight, a trumpet sounded, the Landgrave entered,and all was hushed. Tbe .glittering crowdarranged themselves in a. half circle at the upper endof the room; bis Highness went rapidly round, salutingthe company, and receiving their homage inreturn. A signal was again made ; the music and thedancing were resumed ; and such was the animationELOSTEHHEIH. 185and the turbulent delight araoiig«t the gayer part ofthe company, from the com mingling of yonthiiilblood with wine, hghta, music, and festal conversation,that, with many, all thoughts of the dreadfulMasque, who " reigned by night in Klosterheim,"had faded before the exhilaration of the moment.Midnight had come ; the di-eadfui separation had notyet entered : young ladies began timidly to Jest uponthe subject, though as yet but faintly, and in atonesomewhat serious for a jest ; and young cavaliers,who, to do them justice, had derived most part oftheir terrors from the superstitious view of the case,protested to their partners that if The Masque, onmaking ha appearance, should conduct himself in amanner unbecoming a cavalier, or offensive to theladies present, they should feel it their duty to chastisehim ; " though," said they, " with respect to oldAdornii, should The Masque think proper to teachhim better manners, or even to cane him, we shallnot find it necessary to interfere."Several of the very young ladies protested that,of all things, they should like to see a battle betweenold Adornii and The Masque, " such a love of a quizthat old Ailomi is !" whilst others debated whetherThe Masque would turn oat a young men or an oldKtOSTERHEISr;one ; and a few elderly maidens mooted the pointwhether he were likely to i>e a. " single" gentleman,or burdened with a " wife and family." These andsimilar discussions were increasing in vivacity, andkindling more and more gaiety of repartee, when suddenly,with the effect of a funeral knell upon theirmirth, a whisper began to circulate, that there wanone Masque too inantf in company. Persons hadbeen stationed by Adomi in different galleries, withinstructions to note accurately the dress of everyperson in the company ; to watch the motions ofevery one who gave the slightest cause for suspicion,by standing aloof from the rest of the assembly, orby any other peculiarity of manner; but, above all,to count the numbers of the total assembly. Thislast injunction was more easily obeyed than at firstsight seemed possible. At this time, the Hungariandances, which required a certain number of partnersto execute the movements of the figure, were ofthemselves a suiScient register of the precise amountof persons engaged in them. And, as these dancescontinued for a long time undisturbed, this calculationonce made, left no further computation necessary,than simply' to take the account of all whod otherwise engaged. This list being much theklosteaheiiw. 187smaller one, was soon mule ; aud the reports ofseveral <liffereiit observers, stationed in different galleries,and checked liy each other, all tallied in reportinga total of just twelve hundred and one persons,after every allowance was made for the knownmembers of the Landgrave's suite, who were all nnereport was announced with considerable trepidation,in a very audible whisper to Adomi andthe Landgrave. The buzz of agitation attracted in-slant attention ; the whisper was loud enough tocatch the ears of several ; the news went rapidlykindling through the room that the company wastoo many by one : all the ladies trembled, theirknees shook, their voices failed, they stopped in thevery middle of questions, answers halted for theirconclusion, and were never more remembered byeither party ; the very music began to falter, thelights seemed to waned sicken ; forth fact was nowtoo evident — that The Masque had kept his appointment,and was at this moment in the room, " tomeet the Landgrave and his honourable company."Adomi and the Landgrave now walked apartfrom the rest of the household, and were obviouslyconsulting together on the next step to be taken iKLOSTERHEIM.or on the proper moment for executing one whichhad already been decided on. Some crisp seemed^imncbiog, and the knees of many ladies knockedtogether, as they anticipated some cruel or bloodyact of vengeance. " Oh, poor Masqne !" sighed ayoimg lady is her tender-hearted concern for onewho seemed now at the mercy of his enemies ; " Dof mi think, sir," addressing ber partner, *' they willcnt him to pieces?" — <<Oh,thatwicke(lald Adonis"exclaimed another ; -' 1 know he will stick the poorMasqne on one side, and somebody else will stickhim on the other; I know he will, because TheMasque called him a tailor : do yon think he wtu ataibr, sir ?" — " Why, really, madam, he walks likea tailor ; hut then he inst be a Teiy bad one, consideringbow ill bia own clothes are made ; and thai,you know, is next door to being none at all. Bat see*hia Highness is going to stop the music."In &ct, at that moment the Landgrave made asignal to the orchestra ; the music ceased abruptly ;aid bis Highness advancing to the company, whostood eagerly awaiting his words, said — " Dlns-nods and noble friends I for a very urgent andspecial cause I will request of yon all to take yourKL08TEBBEIU.The company obeyed, every one sought the chairnext to him, or if a lady, accepted that which wasoffered by the cavalier at her aide. The standardcontinually diminished. Two hundred were left,one hundred and fifty, eighty, sixty, twenty, till atlast they were reduced to two, — both gentlemen,who had been attending upon ladies. They weresuddenly 'aw are of their own situation. One chaironly remained out of twelve hundred. Eager toexonerate himself from suspicion, each sprang furiouslyto this seat ; each attained it at the same moment,and each possessed himself of part at the sameinstant. As they happened to be two elderly corpulentmen, the younger cavaliers, under all therestraints of the moment, the panic of the company,and the Landgrave's presence, could not forbearlaughing ; and the more spirited amongst the youngladies caught the infection.His Highness was little in a temper to brook thislevity ; and hastened to relieve the joint occupantsof the chair from the ridicule of their situation.» Enough I" he exclaimed, " enough ! all myfriends are requested to resume the situation mostagreeable to them ; my purpose is answered." — ThePrince was himself standing with all hie household,190 KLOST£RHEIM.and, as a point of respect, all the company rose.(J^ As you were" whispered the young soldiers totheir fair companions.)Adomi now came forward. << It is known," saidhe, << by trials more than sufficient, that some intruder,with the worst intentions, has crept into thishonourable company. The ladies present will thereforehave the goodness to retire apart to the lower<»nd of the saloon, whilst the noble cavaliers willIMTtNiCut themselves in succession to six officers ofhi Hijrluu^s household, to whom they will prigt^^umuuu^te their names and quahty.'*'n^\» «^^ii¥)V^v«^HMU w^ implied with, not hoW'e>W v^^^Us^wl the e\chw\ge ixf a <ew flying jests onll 1^^ v^'lW >\^^^^:\H^ oi^Y^idier^ and their air ^ ^Wx 9^'(Ni^^^U^ ikvr iW purpose* The ^^^ >'^>'^v vy^iIh^ iMvvrv' iWn tire hundred in«^^«mK'^\ ^v^t ^ ^ <hev >fkv«>^ unbuttoned by theWMMWr vnarki^ upoii their chid$ \\t admission, andpviTmlelr cxwimunkmling with some ixne of the offi-Mn appointed, were soon told off. and died away toUm right of the Landgrave, waiting fer the signalwhich should give them permission to rejoin theirparties.AU had been now told off, within a score. TheseKLOSTERHEIM. 191were clustered together in a group ; and in thatgroup undoubtedly was The Masque* Every eyewas converged upon this small knot of cavaliers ;each of the spectators, according to his fancy, selectedthe one who came nearest in dress, or in personalappearance, to his preconceptions of that mysteriousagent. Not a word was uttered, not a whisper; hardly a robe was heard to rustle, or a featherto wave.The twenty were rapidly reduced to twelve, theseto six, the six to four — three — two ; the tale of theinvited was complete, and one man remained behind.That was, past doubting. The Masque !There ttsnds he that governs KlosUrfaeim bjoigfat r thought every cavalier, «s he endeavouredto [aerce the gloomy being's concealment, with penetrating:eyes, or by scrutiny, ten times repeated,to Djunasqae the dismal secrets which Induced beneathhis disguise. ■■ There stands the gloomymurderer !" thought another. " There stands thepoor detected criminal," thought the pitying younglatina, " who in the next moment must lay bare hitbreast to the Landgrave's musketeers."The figure meantime stood tranquil and collected,apparently not in the least disturbed by the consciousnessof his situation, or the breathless suspenseof more than a thousand spectators of rank andeminent station, aU bending their looks upon himselfHe had been leaning against a marble column,as if wrapped up in reverie, and careless of everythingabout him. But when the dead silentKLOSTEKHEIU.announced that the ceremony' wis closed, that heonly remained to answer for himself, and upon palpable[«W)f — evidence not to be gainsay — incapableof answering satisfactorily ; when in feet itwas beyond dispute that here was at length revealed,ia bodily presence, before the eyes of those whomhe had so long haunted with terrors, The Masque ofKloeterheim, — it was naturally expected that nowat least he would show alarm and trepidation ; thathe wonid prepare for defence, or address himselfto instant flight.Far otherwise I — cooler than any one person besidein the saloon, lie stood, like the marble column againstwhich he had been reeling, upright — massy — andimperturbable. He was enveloped in a voluminousmantle, which at this moment, with a leisurelymotion, he suffered to fell at his feet, and displayeda figure in which the grace of an Antigua metwith the columnar strength of a Grecian Hercules,presenting, in its tout ensemble, the majestic proportionsof a Jupiter. He stood — a breathingstatue of gladiatorial beauty, towering above allwho were near him, and eclipsing the noblest specimensof the human form which the martial assemblypresented. A buzz of admiration arose, whichELOBTEBHBIM.in the following moment was suspended hj thedubious recollections investing his past appearances,and the terror which waited oven on his presentnioTementSi He wits armed to the teeth ; and hewas obviously preparing to move.Not a word had yet been spoken ; so tumultuouswas the succession of surprises, so mixed and conflicting'the feelings, so intense the anxiety. Thearrangement of the grouped was this : — at the lowerhalf of the room, but starting forward in attitudesof admiration or suspense, were the ladies of Klos-terheim. At the upper end, in the centre, one handraised to bespeak attention, was The Mosque of KloB-terfieim. To his left, and a little behind him, witha subtle Venetian countenance, one hand wavingback a half file of musketeers, and the other raisedas if to arrest the arm of The Masque, was the wilyminister Adomi — creeping nearer and nearer with astealthy stride. To his right was the great body ofKlosterheim cavaliers, a score of students and young-officerspressing forward to the front ; but in advanceof the whole, the Landgrave of X , hat^bty,lowering, and throwing out looks of defiance. Thesewere tho positions and attitudes in which the firstdiscovery of The Masque had surprised them ; andKLOGTEHHEIM.these they still retained. Less dignified spectatorswere looking ilownwarils from the galleries.Surrender I" was the first word hy which silencewas broken ; it came from the LandgmTe.Or die !" exclaimed Adornii.« He dies in any case," rejoined the Prince.The Masque still raised his hail with the actionof one who bespeaks attention. Adorui he deignednot t« notice. Slightly inc linen g his head to theLandgrave, in a tone to which it might be thehead-dress of elaborate steeUwork that gave a sepulchraltone, he replied, —The Masque, who rules in Klosterheim bynight, surrenders not. He can die. But first he willcomplete the cerenwrny of the night, he will revealhimself."That is Superfluous," exclaimed Adomi ; " weneed no further recreations. — Seize him, and leadhim out to death !""Dog of an, Italian Threshed The Masque, drawinga dag* from his belt, " die first yourself i" Andso saying, he slowly turned and levelled the barrelKLOSTERHEIH.at Adomi, who fled with two bounds to the soldiersin the retire. Then, withdrawing the weapon hastily,he added in a tone of cool contempt, " Or bridlethat coward's tongue."But this was not the minister's intention, " Seizehim I" he cried again impetuously to the soldiers,laying his hand on the arm of the foremost, andpointing' them forward to their prey.No I" said the Landgrave, with a commanding-voice; " Halt ! I hid yon." Something there wainthe tone, or it might be that there was somethingin his private recollections, or something in thegeneral mystery, which promised a discovery thathe feared to lose by the too precipitate vengeance ofthe Italian. " What is it, mysterious being, thatyou would reveal ? Or who is it that you nowbelieve interested in your revelations ?"Yourself. — Prince, it would seem tint you haveme at your mercy : wherefore then the coward hasteof this Venetian hound ? I am one ; yon are many.Lead me then out ; shoot me. But no : Freely Ientered this hall ; freely I will leave it. If I mustdie, I will die as a sohlicr. Such I am { and neitherrunagate from a foreign land ; nor" — turning toAdornii — " a base mechaiuG."^KL08TEHHEIU.But a murderer !" shrieked Adornii : " but amurderer ; and with hands yet reeking from innocentblood I"Blood, Adornii, that I will yet avenge. — Prince,you demand the natm^ of my revelations. I willreveal my name, my quality, and my mission."And to whom ?"To yourself, and none beside. And, as & pledgefor the sincerity of my discoveries, I will first of allcommunicate a dreadful secret, known, as youfondly believe, to none but your Highness. Prince,dare you receive my revelations ?"Speaking thus, The IVIa§que took one step tothe rear, turning: his back upon the room, and by agesture, signified his wish that the Landgrave shouldaccompany him. Bnt at this motion, ton or a dozenof the foremost among the yomig cavaliers startedforward in advance of the Landgrave, in part formingB half circle about his person, and in part commandingthe open door-way.He is armed I" they exclaimed ; " and treblyarmed : will your Highness approach him toonearly ?"I fear him not," said the Landgrave, with somethingof a contemptuous tone.KLosTEanaiK.Wherefore should you fear me ?" retorted TheMasque, with a manner so tranquil and serene bbinvoluntarily to disarm suspicion : " Were it jiOssJ-able that I should seek tho life of any man here inparticular, in that ease, (pointing to the fire-orniBin his belt,) why should 1 need to come nearer ?Were it possible that any should find in my conducthere a motive to a personal Vengeance uponmyself, which of you is not near enough ? Haijour Highness the courage to trample on eachThus challenged as it were to a trial of his couragebefore the assembled rank of Klosterheim, theLandgrave dared off all who would have steppedforward officiously to his support. If he felt anytremors, he was now sensible that pride and princelyhonour called uj>on him to dissemble them. Andprobably, that sort of tremors, which he felt inreality, did not point in a direction to which physicalsupport, such as was now tendered, could havebeen available. lie hesitated no longer, hut strodeforward to meet The Masque. His Highness andThe Masque met near the archway of the door, inthe very centre of the groups.ELOSTERHEIU. 199With a thrilling tone, deep — piercing — full ofalarm, The Masque began thus : —« To win your confidence, for ever to establishcrest with your Highness, I will first of all revealthe name of that murderer, who this night dared topollute your palace with an old man's blood. Prince,head your ear a little this way."With a shudder, and a visible effort of self-command,the Landgrave inclined hie ear to The Masque,who added, —Your Highness will be shocked to hear it :"then, in a lower tone, " Who could have believedit ? — It was ■" All was pronounced clearlyand strongly, except the last word — the name ofthe murderer : that was made audible only to theSadden and tremendous was the effect upon theprince: he reeleil'afew paces off ; put his hand tothe hilt of his sword; smote his forehead; threwfrenzied looks upon The Masque, — now half imploring,now dark with vindictive wrath. Then succeededa pause of profoundest silence, during whichallthe twelve hundred visitors, whom he had himselfassembled, as if expressly to make them witnessesof this extraordinary scene, and of the powtjr withSOO K1.0STERHEIM.which a Btran^i^br could shake him to and fro in atempestuous strife of passions, were looking andhearkening; with senses on the stretch to pierce theveil of silence and of distance. At last the Landgravemastered his emotions sufficiently to say,Wel, sir, what next ?"Next comes a revelation of another kind ; and1 warn you, sir, that it will not be less trying tothe nerves. For this first I needed your ear ; nowI shall need your eyes. Think again. Prince, whetheryou will stand the triaL"Pshaw ! sir, you trifle with me ; again I tellyou " But here the Landgrave spoke with anaffectation of composure and with an effort that didnot escape notice ; — " again I tell you that 1 fearyou not. Go on."Then come forward a little, please your Highness,to the light of this lamp." ' So saying, with astep or two in advance, he drew the Prince under thepowerful glare of a lamp suspended near the greatarchway of entrance from the interior of the palace.Both were now standing with their faces entirelyaverted from the spectators. Still more effectually,however, to screen himself from any of those groupson the left, whose advanced position gave themKLOBTERUEIM. SO]somewhat more the advantage of an oblique aspect,The Masque, at this moment, suddenlydrewup, withhis left hand, a short Spanish mantle which dependedfrom his shoulders, and now gave him the benefit ofa lateral screen. Then, so far aa the company behindthem could guess at his act, milockiiig withhia right hand and raising the masque whichshrouded his mysterious features, he shouted aloudin a. voice that rang clear through every comer ofthe vast saloon, " Landgrave, for crimes yet unrevenged,I summon you, in twenty day, before a tribunalwhere there is no shield but innocence I" andat that moment turned his countenance full uponthe Prince.With a yell, rather than a human expression ofterror, the Landgrave fell, as if shot by a thunderbolt,stretched at bis fill length upon the ground,lifeless apparently, and bereft of consciousness orSensation. A sympathetic cry of horror arose fromthe spectators. AU rushed towards The Masque.The young cavaliers, who had first stepped forwardas Volunteers in the Landgrave's defence, were foremost,and interposed between The Masque and theoutstretched arms of Adomi, as if eager to seizehim first. In an instant a sadden and dense cloudIof smoke arose, nobody knew whence,discharges of fire arms were heard resounding' ironthe doorways and the passBg-es , Ihcse increased thesmoke and the confusion Trumpets soundedthrough the corridors The « hole archway, underwhich The Masque ani! the Landgrave had beenstanding, became cloaked up with soldiery, summonedby the furious alarms that echoed through thepalace. All vaa one uproar and chaos of masques,plumes, helmets, halberds, trumpets, gleamingsabres, and the fierce aces of soldiery forcing themselvesthrough the floating drapery of smoke thatnow filled the whole upper end of the saloon.Adomi was seen in the midst, raving fruitlessly.Nobody heard : nobody listened. Universal panichad seized the household, the soldiery, and the company.Nobody understood exactly for what purposethe tumult had commenced — in what direction ittended. Some tragic catastrophe was reported fratfimouth to mouth : nobody knew what. Some said — >the Landgrave had been assassinated ; some — TheMasque; some asserted that both had perished undoreciprocal assaults. More believed that The Masquehad proved to be of that supernatural order of beings,with which the prevailing opinions of KlosterheimKLOSTERHEIBT.had long closed him ; and that, upon raising' hiBdisguise, he had revealed to the Landgrave thefleshless skull of some forgotten tenant of the grave.This indeed seemed to many the only solution that,whilst it fell in with the prejudice and superstitionsof the age, was of a nature to account for thattremendous effect which the discovery had producedupon the Landgrave. But it was one that naturallycould be little calculated to calm the agitations ofthe public prevailing at this moment. This spreadcontagious. The Succession of alarming events, —the murder, the appearance of The Masque, his subsequentextraordinary behaviour, the overwhelmingimpression upon the Landgrave, which had formedthe catastrophe of this scenical exhibition, — theconsternation of the great Swedish officers, whowere spending the night in Klosterheim, and reasonablysuspected that the tumult might be owingto the sudden detection of their own incognito, andthat, in consequence, the populace of this Imperialcity were suddenly rising to arms ; the endless distractionand counteraction of so many thousandpersons — visitors, servants, soldiery, household —all hurrying to the same point, and briiig^ng assistanceto a danger of which nobody knew the origin,KLOSTERHEtH.nobody the nature, nobody the issue ; multitudescoDunaiuling where all obedience wa forgotten, allsubordination had gone to wreck ; — these circumstancesof distraction united to sustain a Scene ofabsolute frenzy in the castle, which, for more thanhalf an hour, the dense columns of smoke aggravatedalarmingly, by raising, in many (charters, additionalterrors of fire. And when at lost, after infiniteexertions, the soldiery had deployed into the ballroomand the adjacent apartments of state, and badsucceeded, at the point of the pike, in establishinga safe egress for the twelve hundred visitors, it wasthen first ascertained that all traces of The Masquehad been lost in the snake and subsequent confirm; and that, with hie usual good fortune, he hadn having his pursuers.KL08TEEHE1M.CHAPTER XVII.Meantime the Lady Paulina bad spent her timeId secret grief, inconsolable for the supposed tragicalfinite of Maximilian. It was believed that he hadperished. This opinion had prevailed ei]ii&lly amongsthis friends, and the few enemies whom circumstanceshad made him. Supposing even that he had escapedwith life from the action, it seemed inevitable thathe should have fallen into the bands of the bloodyHolkeretein ; and under circumstances which wouldpoint him out to the vengeance of that cruel nifBanas having been the leader in the powerful resistancewhich had robbed him of bia prey-stungwith the sense of her irreparable loss, andthe premature grief which had blighted her earlyhopes, Paulina sought her refuge in solitude, and herconsolations in religion. In the convent, where shehad found a home, the ceremonies of the RomanCatholic service were Maintained with the strictnessand the pomp suitable to its ample endowments.The Emperor had himself, as well as seyera! of hisprogenitors, been a liberal benefactor to this establishment.And a lady of his house, therefore, recommendedby a special introduction from the emperorthe attentions uf the Lady Abbess, was soreof meeting kindness and courtesy in every possibleshape which could aran) to mitigate her sorrow.The Abbess, though a bigot, was a human being,with strong human sensibilities ; and in both charactersshe was greatly pleased with the Lady Paulina.On the one hand, her pride, as the head of areligious establishment, was flattered by the extremeregularity of the Lady Paulina in conforming to theritual of her house ; this example of spiritual obedienceand duty seemed peculiarly edifying in aperson of such distinguished rank. On the otherband, her womanly sensibilities were touched by thespectacle of early and unmerited sorrow in one soeminent for her personal merits — for her extremebeauty, and the winning sweetness of her mannersshe readily offered to the young Contesall the attentions and marks of sympathy which herretiring habits permitted, and every species of indulgencecompatible with the spirit of the institution.KLOSTERHEIH. Soothewhole convent, nuns as well as strangers,taking' their tone from the Abbess, vied with eachother in attentions to Paulina. But, whilst acknowledging'their kindness, she continued to shrinkfrom al! general intercourse with the society abouther. Her attendance was constant at the matinsand at vespers ; not unfrequently even at the midnightseirioe ; but dejection was too rooted in herheart, to allow her any disposition to enter into theamusement or mixed society which the convent atthat time offered.Many noble strangers had been allowed to takeup their quarters in the convent. With some ofthese the Abbess was connected by blood, withothers, by ties of ancient friendship. Most of thisparty composed a little society apart from the rest,and continued to pnreue those arrangements or occupationswhich properly belonged to their stationsand quality, but by their too worldly nature, werecalculated to exclude the religious members of theinstitution from partaking in them. To this society,Paulina received frequent invitations, which, however,she declined so uniformly, that at length allefforts ceased to draw her from the retirement whichshe so manifestly adhered to from choice. The motivesof her dejection become known throughout theconvent, and were respected ; and it was now reportedamongst them, from her aversion to society aswell as her increasing' devotion, that the Lady Paulinawould soon take the veil.Amongst the strangers was one, a lady of matureage, with heouty still powerful enough to fascinateall beholders, who seemed to survey Paulina withan interest har beyond that of curiosity or simpleadmiration. Sorrow night be supposed the commonbond which connected them ; for there wereamours amongst the sisterhood of St Agnes thatthis lady had Buffered dissections heavier than fell toan ordinary lot in the course of the war which nowdesolated Germany. Her husband, (it was said,) ofwhom no more was known than that he was someofBcer of high rank, had perished by the hand of violence; a young daughter, the only child of two orthree who remained to her, had been carried off in infancy; and no traces remained of her subsequent fate.To these misfortunes was added the loss of her estatesand rank, which, in some mysterious way, were supposedto be withheld from her by one of those greatoppressors whom war and the policy of great allieshad aggrandized. It was supposed even that for theK1.08SGKH£IU.means of subsistence to herself, and a few &ithftilattendants, she was indebted to the kindness of theLady Abbess, with whom she was closely connectedby ancient friendship.In this tale there were many inaccuracies mixedup with the truth. It was true that, in some oneof the nmny dire convulsions which had passedSraia land to laud since the first outbreak of the Bohemiantroubles, in 1618, and which had coveredwith a veil of political pretexts so many local actsof private family feud and murderous treason, thislady had been deprived of her husband by a violentdeath under circumstances which still seemed mysterious.But the fate of her children, if any hadsurvived the calamity which took off her husband,was unknown to every body except her confidentialprotectress the Lady Abbess. By permission of thispowerful friend, who had known her from infancyand through the whole course of lev misfortunes,she was permitted to take up Ler abode in the convent,under special privileges, and was there knownby the name of Sister Madeline.The intercourse of the Sister Madeline with theLady Abbess was fi-ee and unreserved. At all hoursthey entered each other's rooms with the ^Lmiha-310 KI.OSTERHEIM.city of sisters ; and it might bave been thought thatin every respect they stood upon the equal footinguf near relatives, except that occasionally in themanners of the Abbess was traced or imagined asecret air of deference towards the desolate SisterMadeline, which, as it was not countenanced at allby their present relations to each other, left peopleat liberty to build upon it a large superstructure ofromantic conjectures.Sister Madeline was as regular in her attendanceupon prayers as Paula. There, if nowhere else,they were sure of meeting ; and in no long time itbecame evident that the younger lady was an objectof particular interest to the elder. When the sublimefugues of the old composers for the organswelled upon the air, and filled the vast aisles of thechapel with their floating labyrinths of sound, attentionto the offices of the church service being suspendedfor the time, the Sister Madeline spent theinterval in watching the countenance of Paulina.Invariably at this period her eyes settled upon theyoung Countess, and appeared to court some returnof attention, by the tender sympathy which her ownfeatures expressed with the grief too legibly inscribedupon Paulina's. For some time Paulina, absorbed 'ELOSTEaHEIM.by her own thoughts, failed to notice this very particularexpression of attention and interest. Accustomedto the gaze of crowds, as well on account ofher beauty as her connexion with the Imperialhouse, she found nothing; new or distressing in thisattention to herself. After some time, however,observing herself still haunted by the sister's furtiveglances, she found her own curiosity somewhatawakened in return. The manners of Sister Madelinewere too dignified, and her face expressed toomuch of profound feeing, and traces too inextinguishableof the trials through which she had passed,to allow room for any belief that she' was under theinfluence of an ordinary curiosity. Aiding ownsstruck with a confused feelings that she lookedupon features which had already been femihar toher heart, though disguised in Sister Madeline byage, by sex, and by the ravages of grief ; she had theappearance of having passed her fiftieth year ; butit was probable that, spite of a brilliant complexion,secret sorrow had worked a natural effect in givingto her the appearance of age more advanced byseven or eight years than she had really attained.Time at all events, if it had carried off for ever heryouthful graces, neither had nor seemed likely to312 KIXWTBRHEIIf.destroy the impression of majestic beauty undereclipse and wane. No one could fail to read theogDS by which the finger of nature announces agreat destiny, and a mind born to command.Insensibly the two ladies bad established a sort ofintercourse by looks ; and at length, upon fittingthat the sister Madeline mixed no more than herselfin the general society of KloRterheim, Fanlintthad resolved to seek the acquaintance of a ladywhose deportment announced that she would provean interesting acquaintance, whilst her melancholystory and the expression of ber looks were a sortof pledges that she troold be found a syn^>athiziiigfriend.She had already taken some steps towards theattainment of her wishes, when unexpectedly, ancoming out from the vesper service, the Sister Madelineplaced herself by the side of Paulina, andthey walked down one of the long side aisles together.The saintly memorials about them, the recordsof everlasting peace which lay sculptured aXtheir feet, and the strains which still ascended toheaven from the organ and the white-robed choir,—all speaking of a rest from trouble so little to befound on earth, and so powerfully contrasting withKLOSTERHEIM. 313the decorations of poor harassed Germany, — affectedthem deeply, and both hurst into tears. At lengththe eider lady spoke.Daughter, you keep your faith piously withhim whom you suppose dead."Paulina started. The other continued —Honour to young hearts that are knit togetherby ties so firm that even death has no powerto dissolve them ! Honour to the hove which canbreed so deep a s<htow 1 Yet, even in this world,the good are not always the unhappy. I doubtnot that, even now at vespers, you foi^ot not topray for him that would willingly have died foryou."Oh, gracious lady I when — when have 1 foi^otthat ? What other prayer — what other image — isever at my heart ?"Daughter, I could not doubt it ; and Heavensometimes sends answers to prayers when they areleast expected ; and to yours it sends this throughWith these words she stretched out a letter toPaulina, who painted with sudden surprise and delighton recognising the hand of Maximilian.KLOETEltHBlM.CHAPTER XVIII.It was indeed the hand writing of her lower; andthe first words of the letter, which bore a recentdate, aSDOuDced his safi?t}- and his recovered health.A rapid sketch of all which hod befallen him sincethey hill kst parted, informed her that he had beenseverely wounded in the action with Hoikerstein'speople, and probably to that misfortune had beenindebted for his life ; Banco the difficulty of transportinghim on horseback, when unable to sit upright,had compelled the party charged with his care toleave him for the night at Waldenhausen. Fromthat place he had been carried off in the night-timeto a Hall Imperial garrison in the neighbourhoodbathe care of two faithful servants, who had foundlittle difficulty in first intoxicating, and then overpowering,the small guard judged sufficient for aprisoner so completely disabled by hie wowidB. Inthis garrison he had recovered; had correspondedklostebheim:. 215with Vienna ; had concerted measures with theEmperor; and was now on the point of giving fulleffect to their plans, at the moment when certaincircum stances should arise to favour the scheme.What these were, he forbore designedly to say in aletter which ran some risk of falling into the enemy'shan(b ; but he bade Paulina speedily to expect agreat change for the better, which would put it intheir power to meet without restraint or fear, — andconcluded by giving utterance in the fondest termsto a lover's hopes and tenderest anxieties.Paulina had scarcely recovered from the tumultuoussensations of pleasure, and sudden restorationto hope, when she received a shock in the oppositedirection, from a summons to attend the Landgrave.The language of the message vas imperative, andmore peremptory than had ever before been addressedto herself, a lady of the Imperial family. She knewthe Landgrave's character and his present position ;both these alarmed her, when connected with thestyle and language of bis sununons. For that announceddistinctly enough that his resolution hadbeen now taken to commit himself to a hold course,no longer to hang doubtfully between two policies,but openly to throw himself into the arms of theEmperor's menes. Ibbenefit to ber Spirits from this bmgtatiaeia of AeLuidgTave'g messrs Sbe was nether nod, airapt to take offence. On the contrary, sbe wis ^cnlfeand meek ; fw the itnpiilsea of month and elenfcdbirth bail id ber been chastened hj her eadj ae-^urinttuice with great national calamities, and theenlarged STmpatby- which that had bred with hafellow-creatures of every rank. Bat sbe felt that*in this gnperflaouB expression of authority, theLandgrave waa at the same time infringing therightful of hospitality, and her own privileges of«ex.Indignation at his unmanly conduct gave ber spiritto ace bim, though §be apprehended a scene of silence,and had the more reason to feel the trepidationsof uncertainty, because nie very imperfectlycomprehended hia purposes as respected herself.These were not easily explained. She found theLandgrave pacing the room with violence. His backWM turned towards her aa she cat«rnl ; but as thensber announced loudly on her entrance, " TbaCountess Paulina of Hohenhetder," he turned impetuously,and advanced to meet her. With theLandgrave, however irritated, the first impulse waato comply with the ceremonious observance thatKLOSTKSHEIH.belonged to his rank. He made a cid obeisance,whilst an attendant placed a seat t and then motioningto all present to withdraw, began to unfold thecauses which had rated for Lady Paulina's presence.So much art was mingled with so much violence,that for some time Paulina gathered nothing of hisreal purposes. Resolved, however, to do justice toher own insulted dignity, she took the first openingwhich offered, to remonstrate with the Landgrave onthe needless violence of his summons. His SereneHighness wielded the sword in Klosterheim, andcould hare no reaean for anticipating resistance tohis commands.The Lady Paulina then distinguishes betweenthe power and the right ? I expected as much."« By no means ; she knew nothing of the claimantsto either. She was a stranger, seeking onlyhospitality in Klosterheim, which apparently wasviolated by unprovoked exertions of authority."But the laws of hospitality," replied the Landgrave," press equally on the guest and the host.Each has his separate duties. And the Lady Paulina,in the character of guest, violated hers from the momentwhen she formed cabals in Klosterheim, andministered to the fury of conspirators."Poor ear, sir, is atiDfed ; I bare not so mncli asstepped beyond the precincts of the conTent in whichI reside, until this day in paying obedience to yourHighness's mandate."That may be ; and that mar arise only themore caution and subtlety. The personal presenceof a lady, so distinguished in her appearance as theLady Carolina, at any resort of conspirators or in-writers, would have published too much the suspicionsto which such a countenance would be liable.But in writing, hare joq dispersed nothing calculatedto alienate the attachment of my subjects ?"The Lady PsuUna shook her head ; she knew noteven in what direction the landgrave's suspicionspointed.As, for example, this — does the Lady Paulinarecognise this part icnlar paper ?"Saying this, he drew forth from a portfolio a letteror paper of inatmctionB, consisting of several sheets,to which a large official seal was attached. TheCountess glanced her eye over it attentively ; in oneor two places the words Maximilian and KloaUr-keith attracted her attention ; but she felt satisfiedat once that she now saw it for the first time.Of this paper," she said at length, in a .219mined tone, " I know nothing. The handwritingI believe I may hare seen before. It resembles thatof one of the Emperor's secretaries. Beyond that,I have no means of even conjecturing its origin."Beware, madam, beware how fair you commityourself. Suppose now this paper were actuallybrought in one of yoiir ladyship's mails, amongstyour own private property."That may very well be," said Lady Paulina,and yet imply no falsehood on my part. FalsehoodI I disdain such an insinuation ; your Highnesshas been the first person who ever dared to makeit." At that moment she called to mind the robberyof her carriage at Waldenhausen. Colouring deeplywith indignation, she added, " Even in the case,sir, which you have supposed, as unconscious bearerof this or any other paper, I am still innocent of theintentions which such an act might argue in somepeople, I am as incapable of offending in that way,as I shall always bo of disavowing any of my ownacts, according to your ungenerous insinuation. Butnow, sir, tell me how far those may be innocent whohave possessed themselves of a paper carried, as yourHighness alleges, among my private baggage P Was220 KLOSTEBBSIU.it for a Prince to countenance a robbery of that nature,or to appropriate its spoils ?"The blood rushed to the Landgrave templesIn these times, young lady, petty rights of individualsgive way to state necessities. Neither arethere any such rights of iodiridiials in, bar of sacs• an inquisition. They are forfeited, as I told joabefore, when the guest foists his duties. But,"(and here he frowned) " it seems to me, Countess,that you are now forgetting your situation ; not I,remember, but yourself, are now placed on trial."Indeed !" said the Countess, " of that I wascertainly not aware. Who, then, is my accuser, whomy judge ? Or is it in your Serene Highness thatI see both?"Your accuser. Lady I^iuliua, is the paper Ihave shewn you, a treasonable paper. Perhaps Ihave others to bring forward of the same bearing.Perhups this is sufficient'*The Lady PaulJuagrew suddenly stand thoughtful.Here was a tyrant, with matter against her,which, even to an unprejudiced judge, might reallywear some face of plausibility. The paper had perhapsreally been one of those plundered Irom bercarriage. It might really contain matter fitted toKL08TEEHEIM. 221excite (Affection against the Landgrave's government.Her own innocence of Will participation iothe designs which it purposed to abet might find nocredit ; or might avail her not at all in a situationso far removed from the Imperial protection. Shehod in fact unadvisedly entered a dty, which, at thetime of her entrance, might be looked upon as neutral,but since then had been forced iiito the raitksof the Emperor's enemies, too abruptly to allow ofwarning or retreat. This "was her exact situation.She saw her danger ; and again apprehended that,at the very moment of recovering her lover fromthe midst of perils besetting hia situation, she mightlose him by the perils of her own.The Landgrave watched the changes of her countenance,and read lor thoughts.Yes," he said, at length, " your situation is oneof peril. But take courage. Confess freely, and youhave every thing to hope for from my clemency,"Such clemency," said a deep voice, from someremote quarter of the room, « as the wolf shews tothe lamb."Paulina started, and the Landgrave looked angryand perplexed, " Within there I" he cried loudly tothe attendants in the next room. " 1 will no more323 KLOSTEfiHElM.endure these insults," he exclaimed. " Go instantly,take a file of soldiers ; place them at all the outlet,and search the rooms adjoining — shore, and below.Such mummery is insufferable,"The voice replied again, " Landgrave, you searchin vain. Look toyourselfl young Max is upon yon!"This babbler," said the Landgrave, making aneffort to recover his coolness, " reminds me well ;that adventurer, young Maximilian — Who is he,whence comes he ? by whom authorized ?"Paulina blushed ; but, roused by the Landgrave'scontumelious expressions applied to her lover, shereplied — " He is no adventurer; nor was ever inthat class ; the Emperor's savour is not bestowedupon such,"Then, what brings him to Klosterheim ? Forwhat is it that he would trouble the repose of thisBefore Paulina could speak in rejoinder, the voice,from a little further distance, replied audibly — " Forhis rights I See that you, Landgrave, make no resistance."The Prince arose in fury ; his eyes dashed fire, heclenched his hands in impotent determination. Thesame voice had annoyed him on former occasions,KLOSTERHEIM. 223but never under circumstances which mortified himso deeply. Ashamed that the youthful Countessshould be a witness of the insults put upon him,and seeing that it was in vain to pursue his conversationwith her further in a situation which exposedhim to the sarcasms of a third person, under no restraintof fear or partiality, he adjourned the furtherprosecution of his enquiry to another opportunity,and for the present gave her leave to depart ; a licensewhich she gladly availed herself of, and retiredin fear and perplexity.224 KLOSTERHEIM.CHAPTER XDLIt wis dark as Pnnlina returned to ber oooYent.Two servants of the LandgiBTe's preceded ho* withtorches to the great gates of St Agnes, which wasat a Terr short distance. At that point she enteredwithin the shelter of the consent gates, and thePrince's servants left her at her own request. Noperson was now within call bnt a little page of herown, and perhaps the porter at the convent. Bnt afterthe first turn in the garden of St Agnes, she mightalmost consider herself as left to her own guardianship; for the little boy, who followed her, was tooyoung to afford her any effectual help. She felt sorry,as she surveyed the long avenue of ancient trees, whichwas yet to be traversed before she entered upon thecloisters, that she should have dismissed the servantsof the Landgrave. These gardens were easily scaledfrom the outside, and a ready communication ,iste between the remotest parts of this very avenue,and Borne of the least reputable parts of Klos-terbeim. The city now overflowed with people ofevery rank ; and amongst them were continuallyrecognised, and occasion ally challenged, some of thevilest deserters from the Imperial camps. Wallensteinhimself, and other Imperial commanders, bnt,above all. Hoik, had attracted to their standardsthe very refuse of the German jails ; and allowingnn unlimited license of plunder during some periodsof their career, had themselves evoked a fiendishspirit of lawless aggression and spoliation, whichafterwards they had found it impossible to exorcisewithin its former limits. People were every whereobliged to be on their gird, not alone (as heretofore)against the military tyrant or freebooter, but alsoagainst the private servants whom they hired intotheir service. For some time back, suspicious personshad been seen strolling at desk in the gardensof St Agnes, or even intruding into the cloisters.Then the recollection of The Masque, now in thevery height of his mysterious career, flashed uponPaulina's thoughts. Who knew his motives, or theprinciple of his mysterious warfare — which at anyKLOSTERHBIM.rate, in its niiMle, had latterly been marked bj blood'bed ? As these things came rapidly into her mind,she trembled more trora fear, than from the wittywind, which now blair keenly ad gustily throughthe avenue.The gardens of St Ages were extensive, andPaulina vet wanted two hundred yards of readingthe cloisters when she observed a dusky objectstealing along the margin of a little pool, which in[uirts lay open to the walk, whilst in others, wherethe walk receded from the water, the Imnks werestnddedwiththicketsoftallshnibs. Paulina stoppedund observed the figure, which she was soon satisfiedmost be that of a man. At times he rose tohis full height ; at times he cowered downwardsamongst the bushes. That he was not merely seekinga retreat, became evident som this, that thebest road for such a purpose lay open to him in theopposite direction ; — that he was watching henelfalso, became probable from the way in which heseemed to regulate his own motions by hers. Atlength, whilst Paulina hesitated in some perplexitywhether to go forward or to retreat towards theporter's lodge, be suddenly plunged into the thickestKI.08TEKHS1H. S27belt of shnibs, and left the road clear. Paulinaseized the moment, and with a, palpitating heartquickened her steps towards the cloister.She had cleared about one half of the way withoutobstruction, when suddenly a, powerful graspseized her by the shoulder.« Stop, lady I" said a deep coarse yojce, " stop !I mean no harm. Perhaps I bring your ladyshipwhat will be welcome news."But why here ?" exclaimed Paulina ; " whereforedo you alarm me thus ? Oh I heavens 1 youreyes are wild and fierce ; say, is it money that youPerhaps I do. To the like of me, lady, youmay be sure that money never comes amiss ; — hutthat is not my errand. Hero is what will make allclear ;" — and, as he spoke, he thrust his hand intothe huge pocket within the horseman's cloak whichenveloped him. Instead of the pistol or dag, whichPaulina anticipate, he drew forth a large packet,carefully sealed. Paulina felt so much relieved atbeholding this pledge of the man's pacific intentions,that she eagerly pressed her purse into his hand,and was hastening to heare him, when the manstopped her to deliver a verbal message from hismaster, requesting' eamestlv that, if she concludedto keep the appointment arranged in the letter, shewould Dot he a minute later than the time fixed.And who," said Paulina, " is your master?"Surely the General, madam — the yotmg' Gene*nil Maximilian. Many a time and oft have I waitedou liitn when visiting your ladyship at the CertesBut here I dare not show my face. D^Hanker ! if the Landgrave knew that Michael Elotzwas in Klosterheim, I reckon that all the ladies inSt Agnes could not leg him a reprieve till tomorrowmorning."Then, villain 1" said the foremost of two menwho shed hastily from the adjoining shrubs, " beassured that the Landgrave docs know it. Let thisbeyour warrant I" With these words he fired, and,immediately after, his comrade. Whether the fugitivewere wounded could not he known ; for heinstantly plunged into the water, and, after twoor three moments, was heard upon the oppositemargin. His pursuers seemed to shrink from thisattempt, for they divided and took the opposite extremitiesof the pool, from the other bank of whichKLOSTERHEIM. 229they were soon heard animating and directing eachother through the darkness.Paulina, confused and agitated, and anxious aboveall to examine her letters, took the opportunity ofa clear road, and fled in trepidation to the convent.CHAPTER XX.The Countess had brought home with her adouble subject of anxiety. She knew not to whatresult the Landgrave's purposes irene tending': shefeared, also, from this madden and new method ofcommunication opened with herself so soon afterhis persons letter, that some unexpected bad fortunemi^bt now be threatening her lover. Hastilyshe tore open the packet, which manifestly containedsomething larger than letters. The first articlewhich presented itself was a nun's veil, exactly onthe pattern of those worn by the nuns of St Agues.The accompanying' letter sufficiently explained itepurpose.It was in the handwriting', and bore the nature,of Maximilian. In a few words he told herthat a sudden communication, but from a quarterentirely to be depended on, had reached him of aKLOSTEBHEIAI.great danger unending over her from the Landgrave; that in the present submission of Kloster-heim to that Prince's will, instant flight presentedthe sole means of delivering her ; for which purposebe would himself meet her in disguise on the followingmorning, as early as four o'clock ; or, if thatshould prove impossible under the circumstances ofthe case, would send a faithful servant ; — that one orother of them would attend at a particular station,easily recognised by the description added, in aruinous part of the boundary wall, in the rear of theconvent garden. A large travelling cloak would bebrought to draw over the rest of her dress ; butmeanwhile, as a meaosof passing unobserveilthroughthe convent grounds, where the Landgrave's agentswere continually watching her motions, the nun'sveil was almost indispensable. The other circumstancesof the journey would be communicated toher upon meeting. In conclusion, the writer imploredPauhna to suffer no scruples of false delicacyto withhold her from a step which had so suddenlybecome necessary to her preservation ; and cautionedher particularly against communicating her intentionsto the Lady Abbess, whose sense of decorumKLOSTEBBEIH.Inight lead her to nr advice at this moment inconsistentwith her safety.Again and again did Paulina read this agitatingletter; again and again did she scrutinize the handwriting,apprehensive that she mig-ht be making a dupe to some hidden enemy. The handwriting,undoubtedly, had not all the natural freedomwhich characterised that of Maximilian — itwas somewhat stiff in its movement, but not moreCO than that of his previous letter, in which he hadaccounted tor the slight change from a wound eoIperfectly healed in hia right hand. In other respects,the letter seemed halle to no just suspicion. Thedanger apprehended from the Landgrave lied withher own knowledge. The convent grounds werecertainly haunted, as the letter alleged, by the Landgrave'speople, — of that she had just received a convincingproof; for, though the two stranger hadturned off in pursuit of the messenger who boreMaximilian's letter, yet doubtless their originalabject of attention bad been herself; they werelinen posted to watch her motions, and they hadavowed themselves in effect the I^andgrave'a people.That part of the advice, again, which respected theKLOSTBRBEIM.Lady Abbess, seemed judicious, on considering thecharacter of that lady, however much at first sightit mig-ht warrant some jealousy of the writer's purposes,to find him warning' her against her bestfriends. AftuT all, what most disturbed the confidenceof Paulina was the countenance of the manwho presented the letter; if this man were to betherepresentative of Maximilian on the followingmorning, she felt, and was persuaded that she wouldcontinue to feel, an invincible repugnance to commither safety to any such keeping. Upon thewhole, she resolved to keep the appointment, butto be guided in herfiirther conduct by circumstancesas they should arise at the moment.That night Paulina's favourite female attendantemployed herself in putting into as small a compassas possible the slender wardrobe which they woulillie able to carry with them. The young Countessherself spent the hours iu writing to the LadyAbbess and Sister Madeline, acquainting them withallthe circumstances of her iatemew with theLandgrave, — the certain grounds she had for apprehendingsome great danger in that quarter, — andthe proposals so unexpectedly made to her on the234 EL03TEBHXIM.part of Masirailion for evading it. To ask that theyshould fee! no anxiety on her account, in timeswhich mode even a successful escape from dangerso very hazardous, she acknowledged would be Tain ;but, in judging of the degree of prudence which shehad exhibited on this occasion, she begged them toreflect on the certain (hangers which awaited herfrom the Landgrave ; and finally, in excuse for nothaving sought the advice of so dear a friend as theLady Abbess, she enclosed the letter upon whichshe had acted.These preparations were completed by midnight,after which Paulina sought an hour or two of repose.At three o'clock vere celebrated the earlymatins, attended liy the devourer part of the sisterhood,in the chapel. Pauhna and her maid took thisopportunity for leaving their chamber, and shippingunobserved amongst the crowd who were hurryingon that summons into the cloisters. The organ wpealing solemnly through the labyrinth of passageswhich led from the interior of the convent ;Paulina's eyes were suffused with tears, as the gentlerrecollections of her earlier days, and the peacewhich belongs to those who have abjured this worldKLOSTERHEIM. 235and its treacherous promises, arose to her mindunder the influence of the sublime music, in powerfulcontrast with the tempestuous troubles of Germany— snow become so comprehensive in their desolatingsweep, as to involve even herself, and othersof station as elevated.KLOSTEROEIBt.CHAPTER XXLThe convent clock, chiming the quarters, atlength announced that they had reached the Bppointed hour. Trembling: ^itli fear and cold, thoughmuffled up in furs, Pauline and her attendant, withtheir nuns' veils drawn over their head-dress, salliedforth into the garden. All was profoundly dark,and overspread with the stillness of the grave. Thelights within the chapel threw a rich glow throughthe painted windows ; and h? re and there, grata a fewscattered casements in the vast pile of St Agnes,streamed a few weak rays from a taper or a lamp,indicating the trouble of a sick-bed, or the peace ofprayer. But these rare lights did but deepen themassy darkness of aU beside ; and Paulina, with herattendant, had much difficulty in making her wayto the appointed station. Having reached the wall,however, they pursued its windings, certain of meet.237mg ao important obstacles, until they attained apart where their progress was impedes by frequentdilapidation. Here they halted, and in low tonescommunicated their doubts about the precise localityof the station imitated in the letter, when suddenlya man started up fiijm the ground, and greeted themwith the words, " St Agnes I all is right," whichhad been preconceived as the signal in the letter.This man was courteous and respectful lu his mannerof speaking, and had nothing of the ruffian voicewhich belonged to the bearer of the letter. Inrapid tents he assured Paulina, that " the YoungGeneral" hod not found circumstances favourable forventuring within the walls, but that he would meether a few miles beyond the city gates ; and that atpresent they had no time to lose. Sang this, heunshaded a dark lantern, which showed them aladder of rapes, attached to the summit of a wall,which at this point was too low to occasion themmuch uneasiness or difficulty in ascending. ButPaulina insisted previously on hearing somethingmore circumstantial of the manner and style oftheir escape from the city walls, and in what companytheir journey von be performed. The manHSU klosterheim:.had already done something to conciliate Panting'sconfidence by the propriety of his address, whichindicated a superior education, and habits of intercoursewith people of rank. He explained as muchof the plan as seemed necessary for the immediateoccasion. A convoy of arms and military storeswas leaving the dty for the post at Wallenstein,Several carriages, containing privileged persons, towhom the Landgrave or his minister had granted alicense, were taking the benefit of an escort overthe forest ; and a bribe in the proper quarter hadeasily obtained permission, from the officer on dutyat the gates, to suffer aji additional carriage to passa» one in a great lady's suite, on the simple conditionthat it should contain none but females ; aspersons of that sex were liable to no suspicion ofbeing fugitives from the wrath which was now supposedready to descend upon the conspirators ajgEunstthe Landgrave.This explanation reconciled Paulina to the scheme.She felt cheered by the prospect of having otherladies to countenance the mode of her nocturnaljourney ; and at the worst, hearing this renewedmention of conspirators and punishment, whichKLOSTEBHEIH.easily connected itself with all that had passed inher interview with the Landgrave, she felt assured,at any rate, that the dangers she fled from, transcendedany which she waa likely to incur upon herroute. Her determination was immediately taken.She passed over the wall with her attendant ; andthey found themselves in a narrow lane, close to thecity walls, with none hut a few ruinous outhouses oneither side. A low whistle from the man was soonanswered by the rumbling of wheels ; and from somedistance, as it seemed, a sort of calico advanced,drawn, by a pair of horses. Paulina and her attendantstepped hastily in, for at the very moment whenthe carriage drew up, a signal gun was heard ; which,as their guide assured them, proclaimed that theescort and the whole train of carriages were at thatmoment defiling' from the city gate. The driver,obeying the directions of the other man, drove offas rapidly as the narrow road and the darkness wouldallow. A few turns brought them into the greatsquare in front of the wA/om ; from which, a fewmore open streets, traversed at fell gallop, soonbrought them into the rear of the convoy, whichhad been unexpectedly embarrassed in its progressto the gate. From the rear, by dexterous management,they gradually insinuated themselves into thecentre ; and, contrary to their expectations, amongstthe press of baggage-waggons, artillery, and travel'king equipages, all tumultuously clamouring to pushon, as the best chance of evading Holker$tein in theforest, their own unpretending vehicle passed withoutother notice than a curse from the officer onduty ; which, however, they could not presume toappropriate, as it might he supposed equitably distributedamongst all who stripped the road at themoment.Paulina shuddered as she looked out upon thehne of fierce feces, illuminated by the glare oftorches, and mingling with horses' heads, and thegleam of sabres; all around ber, the roar of artillerywheels ; above her head, the vast arch of the gates,its brood massy shadows resting below : and in thevista beyond, which the archway deduced, a mass ofblackness in which she rather imagined than sawthe interminable solitudes of the forest. Soon thegate was closed ; their own carriage passed thetardier parts of the convoy ; and, with a dozen ortwo of others, astounded by a squadron of draggoons, headed the train. Happy beyond kat the certainty that she had now cleared the gatesof Klosterheim, that she was in the wide open forestfree iron a detested tyrant, and on the same sideof the gates as her lover, who was doubtless advancingto meet her — she threw herself back in thecarriage, and resigned herself to a slumber, whichthe anxieties and watchings of the night hal mademore than usually welcome.The city clocks were now heard in the forest,solemnly knelling out the hour of four. Hardly,however, had Paulina slept en hour, when she wasgently awaked by her attendant — who had felt itto be her duty to apprise her lady of the changewhich had occurred in their situation. They hadstopped, it seemed, to attach a pair of leaders tothei wheel horses ; and were now advancing at athundering pace, separated from the rest of the convoy,and surrounded hy a small escort of cavalry.The darkness was still intense ; and the lights ofKlosterheim, which the frequent windings of theroad brought often into view, were at this momentconspicuously seen. The castle, from its commandingposition, and the consent of St Agnes, wereboth easily traced foot bj means of the lights gleamingfrom their long ranges of upper window. ApHticiikr turret, which epnug- to an almost aerialahitiule above the rest of the building, in which itwM generally reported that the Landgrave slc^was more distinguishable than any other part ofEloeterhdiD, from one brilliant lustre which shotits rays through a large oriel window. There atthis moment was sleeping that unhappy prince,tyrannical and Self-tormenting, whose unmanly learnhad menaced her own innocence with so much indefinitedanger ; whom, in escaping, she knew ironif she had escaped ; and whose snares, as a ruefulmisgiving began to suggest, were perhaps gatheringpeter about her, with every echo which the startledforest returned the resounding tread of their flyingcavalcade. She leaned back again in the carriage ;again she fell asleep ; again she dreamed. Bnt herelect was refreshing ; her dreams were agitated,confused, and haunted by terrific images. And sheawoke repeatedly with her cheerful anticipation continuallydecaying of speedily (perhaps ever again)rejoining ber gallant Maximilian. There wis indeedyet a possibility that she might be under theKLOSTERHEIM. 243superintending care of her lover. But she secretlyfelt that she was betrayed. And she wept when shereflected that her own precipitance had facilitatedthe accomplishment of the plot which had perhapsfor ever ruined her happiness.iCHAPTER XXLMeantime, Paulina awoke from the troubled slumbersinto which her fatigues had thrown her, to findherself still flying along as rapidly as four powerfulhorses could draw their light burden, and still escortedby a considerable body of the Landgrave's dragoons.She wss undoubtedly separated from all therest of the convoy, with whom she had left Kloster-heim. It was now apparent even to ber humbleattendant that they were betrayed ; and Paulinareproached herself with having voluntarily co-operatedwith her enemy's stratagems. Certainly thedangers from which she fled were great and imminent; yet still, in Klosterheim, she derived someprotection from the favour of the Lady Abbess.That lady Lad great powers of a legal naturethroughout the city, and still greater influence witha Roman Catholic populace at this particular period,when their Prince had laid himself open to suspicionsof favouring Protestant allies ; and Paulina bitterlybewailed the imprudence, which, in removing herfrom the convent of St Agiies, had removed herfrom her only intends.It was about noon, when the party halted at asolitary house for rest and refreshments. Paulinahad heard nothing: of the route which they hadhitherto taken, nor did she find it easy to collect,from the short and churlish responses of her escortto the few questions she had yet ventured to propose,in what direction their Aitnre advance wouldproceed. A hasty summons bade her alight j anda few steps, under the guidance of a trooper, broughther into a little gloomy wainscoted room, wheresome refreshments had been already spread upon atable. Adjoining was a small bed-room. And shewas desired, with something more civility than shehad yet experienced, to consider both as allotted forthe use of herself and servant during the time oftheir stay, which was expected, however, not toexceed the two or three hours requisite for restingthe horses.But that was an arrangement which depended astM^ yntr. whHi the mia krff of dw mort kadscat on ie palace the nati is ^m mc, am untamedwill the miweloinie ntbcsrami Ime t^BMrdb, in Ae eiceedii^ uutaatlr. The or^r§ ainadj iMBed SiradruMx ir«re therefore luuiJtiuiiiHided ; and a adulationwas at length adopted br the leader of theparts fcrtakiiig' up their abode doing the n^ht intheir pnaent very tolerate quarters.Paulina, wearied and directed, and recoiling nHtn-idly {roni the indefinite prospects of kaiser bdbreher, waa not the least rejoiced at this change in ih«origins] plan, bv which she benefited at any' rate tothe extent of a qtdet shelter for one nigfat more, aMeaning* whkb the next day's adventures mightdeny her, and atiQ more by that postponement ofOpening evil which is so often welcome to thevery finest minds, when exhausted hr toil aodaffliction. Having this certainty, however, of onenight's continuance in her present abode, she re-(pasted to hare the rocnn made a little mare com-KLOSIXRHEIH. M7foretaste by the exhilarating blaze of a fire. For thisindulgence there were the principal requisites in a.hearth and spacious chimney. And an aged crane,probably the sole female servant upon the premises,speedily presented herself with a plentiful supply ofwood, and the two supporters, or andirons (as theywere formerly called), for raising the billets so as toallow the air to circulate from below. There wassome difficulty at first in kindling the wood ; andthe old servant resorted once or twice, after somelittle apologetic muttering of doubts with herself, toa closet, containing, as Paulina could observe, a considerablebody of papers.The fragments which sbe left remained strewedupon the ground; and Paulina, taking them up witha careless air, was suddenly transfixed with astonishmenton observing that they were undoubtedlyin a handwriting familiar to her eye — the handwritingof the most confidential amongst the Imperialsecretaries. Other recollections now rapidlyObviated themselves together, which led her hastilyto open the closet door ; and there, as she had alreadyhalf expected, she saw the travelling mail stolenfrom her own carriage, its lock forced, and the re-KLDSTHBBEnC.Lnaming contents (for every thing bearing a moneyTslue bad probably Vanishing on its first disappearance)lying in confusion. HaTui^ made this discovery,she hastily closed the door of the closet,resolved to prosecute her investigations in the nighttime;but at present, when she was liable to conttntuJintnuioDg, to give no occasion for those suspicion,trfiiidi, once aroused, might end in baffling h^" design.Meantime she occupied herself in conjecturesupon the particular course of accident which couldhave brought the trunk and papers into the situationwhere she had been fortunate enough to £ndthem. And with the clue already in her possession,she was not long in making another discovery ; shehad previously felt some 'him sense of recognition,as her eyes wandered over the room; but bad esplanned it away into some resemblance to one oother of the many strange scenes which she hadpassed through since leaving Vienna. But now onretracing the fumitnre and aspect of the two roomS)she was struck with her own inattention, in nothaving sooner arrived at the discovery, that it *old quarters of Waldeubausen, the very placeKLOSTERErEIM.in which the robbery had been effected, where theyhad again the prospect of spending the night, andof recovering' in part the loss she had sustained.Midnight Lame, and the Lady Paulina preparedto avail herself of ber opportunities. She drew outthe parcel of papers, which was large and miscellaneousin its contents. By fer the greater part, asshe was happy to observe, were mere copies of originalsin the chancery at Vienna; those related tothe civic affairs of Klosterheim, and were probablyof a iiftture not to have been acted upon during thepredominance of the Swedish interest in the counselsand administration of that city. With the revivalof the Imperial cause, no doubt these orderswould be repeated, and with the modifications whichnew circumstances, and the peeress of events, wouldthen have rendered expedient. This portion of thepapers, therefore, Paulina willingly restored to theirsituation in the closet. No evil would arise to anyparty from their present detention in a place wherethey were little likely to attract notice from anybody,but the old lady ia her ministries upon thefire. Suspicion would be also turned aside fromherself in appropriating the few papers which re-^0trained. These contained too frequent mention ofa name dear to herself, not to have a considerablerale in her eves ; she was resolved, if possible, tocarry them off liv concealing them within her bosom; hot at all events, in preparation for any ans-fortunethat might ultimately compel her to resignthem, she determined without hoes of time to makeherself mistress of their contents.One, and the most important of these documents,wa£ a lone and confidential letter from the Emperorto the Town-council and the chief heads of conventualhouse in Klosterheim, It contained a rapidsummary of the principal events in her lover'slife, from his infancy, when some dreadliil domestictragedy had thrown him upon the Emperor'sprotection, to his present period of early manhood,when his own sword and distmgmishe-l talents hadniind him to a brilliant name and n high militarynnk in the Imperial service. What were the of that tragedy, as a case sufficiently welltown to those whom he addressed, or to be from accompanying papers, the Emperor didBut he lavished every variety of praiseMaximilian, with a liberality that won tearsKLOBTSKHEIM. S51of delight from the Solitary young lady, as she nowsat at midnight looking over these gradus testimoniesto her lover's merit. A theme, so delightfulto Paulina, could not be unseasonable at any time;and never did her thoughts revert to him morefondly than at this moment, when she so muchneeded his protecting arm. Yet, the Emperor, shewas aware, must have some more special motive forenlarging upon this topic, than his general favourto Maximilian. What this could be in a case soclosely connecting the parties to the correspondenceon both sides with Kloeterheiro, a little interestedher curiosity. And, on looking more nsr-rmvly at the accompanying documents, in one whichhad been most pointedly referred to by the Emperor,she found some disclosures on the subject of herlover's early misfortunes, which, whilst they Medher with horror and astonishment, elevated the naturalpretensions of Maximilian in point of birthand descent more nearly to a level with the splendourof his self-created distinctions ; and thuscrowned bim, who already lived in her apprehensionas the very mode! of a hero, with the only advantagesthat he had ever been supposed to want —KLOSTEBHEIH.the interest which attaches to unmerited misfortunes,and the splendour of an illustrious descent.As she thus eat, absorbed in the story of herlovers early misfortunes, a murmuring sound etalking attracted her ear, apparently issuiri^ fromthe closet. Hastily throwing open the door, sbafound that a thin wooden partition, veined withnumerous chinks, was the sole separation betweenthe closet and an adjoining hed-room. The wordswere startling, incoherent, and at times daring. Evidentlythey proceeded from some patient stretchedon a bed of sickness, and dealing with a sort of horrorsin his distempered fancy, worse, it was to be.hoped, than any which the records of his own remembrancecould bring before him. Sometimes hespoke in the character of one who chases a deer inaforest ; sometimes he was close upon the haunchesof his game ; sometimes it seemed on the point ofescaping him. Then the nature of the game changedutterly, and became something human ; and a Cipanton was suddenly at his side. With him hequarrelled fiercely aliout their share in the ptu^snitand capture. " Oh, my lord, you must not deny it.Look) look ! your hands are bloodier than mine.KLOSTEBHEIU.Fie ! fie ! is there no running water in the forest ?So young as he i^, and so noble ! — Stand off Ihe H-ill coyer ns all with his blood ! — Oh, what agroan wa£ that ! It will have broke somebody'sheart-strings I think ! It would have broken minewhen I was younger. But these wars make us allcruel. Yet you are worse than I am." Then again,after a pause, the patient seemed to start up in bed,and he cried out convulsively — " Give me my share,I say. Wherefore must ray share be so small ? —There he conies past again. Now strike, now, now,now I Get his head down, my lord. — He's off, byG — ! Now, if he gets out of the forest, two hourswill take him to Vienna. And we must go to Rome :where else could we get absolution? Oh, Heavens 1the forest is full of blood, well may our hands bebloody. I see flowers all the way to Vienna ; butthere is blood below : oh, what a depth I what adepth I — Oh 1 heart, heart I — See how he starts upfrom his lair I — Oh I your Highness has deceivedme I There are a thousand upon one mau !"In such terms he continued to rave, until Paulina'smind was so much harassed with the constantsuccession of dreadful images, and fi^nzted ejaculu-KUISTEBHEIH.tiooB, all making report of a life passed in scenes ofhorror, bloodshed, and violence, that at length, forher own relief, she was obliged to close the door;through which, however, at intervals, piercingshrieks or half-stifled curses still continued to findtheir way. It struck her as a. remarkable coincidence,that something like a slender thread of ou'uexion might be found between the dreadful storynarrated in the Imperial document, and the deliriousravings of this poor wretched creature, towhom accident had made her a neighbour for asingle night.Early the next morning, Paulina and her servantwere suraraoned to resume their journey; andthree hours more of rapid travelling brought themto the frowning fortress of Lovensteio. Their escort,with any one of whom they had found but fewopportunities of communicating, had shown themselvesthroughout gloomy and obstinately silent.They knew not, therefore, to what distance thei,journey extended. But from the elaborate ceremonieswith which they were here received, and theformal receipt for their persons, which was drawn■^KLOSTERHEIM. 265«up and delivered by the governor to the officercommanding their escort, Paulina judged that thecastle of Lovenstein would prove to be their finaldestination.rELOSTERHBUr.CHAPTER XXII.Two days elapsed without any change in Pan-line'ssituation, ae she fotmd it arranged upon herfirst arrival at Lovenstein. Her rooms were not incommodious; but the massy barricades at the doors,the grated windows, and the sentinels who mountedguard upon ail the avenues which led to her apartments,satisfied her sufficiently that she was a pritheethird morning after her arrival brought herastill more unwelcome proof of this melancholytruth, in the summons which she received to attenda court of criminal justice on the succeeding day,connected with the tenor of its language. Her heartdied within her as she found herself called upon toanswer as a delinquent on a charge of treasonableconspiracy with various members of the university 'of Klosterheim, against the sovereign prince, theKLOSTS&HEIU.Landgrave of X . Witnesses in exculpation,whom could sbe produce ? Or how defend herselfbefore a tribunal where all alike, judge, evidence,accuser, were in effect one and the same malignantenemy ? — In what way she could have come to beconnected in the Landgrave's mind with a chaiseof treason against his princely rights, she found itdifficult to explain, unless the mere fact of havingcarried the Imperial despatches in the trunks abouther carriages, were sufficient to implicate her ss asecret emissary or agent concerned in the Imperialdiplomacy. But she strongly suspected that somedeep misapprehension existed in the Landgrave;mind ; and its origin, she fancied, might be found inthe refined knavery of their ruffian host at ,in making his market of the papers wbiclihe had purloined. Bringing them forward separatelyand by piece-meal, he had probably hoped toreceive bo many separate rewards. But, as it wouldoften happen that one paper was necessary in theway of explanation to another, and the whole, perhaps,were almost essential to the proper understandingof any one, the result would inevitably be—grievously to mislead the Landgrave. Furtherc(ning<e, ready &r anT service, h(nr«verdi<r^mtiMe,<arele6Balikeofperilorofin&iiiy. In coraotoDwitbninny partisan officers, who had sprrm^ from the iw)l;sin this adventurous war, seeing on eirry side Badinthe highest quarters, princes as well as supremecommanders, the uttermost contempt of justice andmoral principle, — he had fought his war to discretionand fortune, through every species of ignoblecruelty. He had passed from service to service, usbe taw an opening ibr his own peculiar interest orKLOSTERHEIIrr. 259merit, everywhere vilified as b, soldier of desperateenterprise, everywhere abhorred as a man. By birtha Croatia, he had exhibited himself as one of themost Eavftg^e leaders of that order of barbarians inthe sack of Mag/lebnrgh, where he served underTilly I but, latterly, he had taken service againunder his original patron the Landgrave, who haillured him back to his interest by the rank of generaland the governorship of Lovestein.This brutal officer, who had latterly lived in astate of continual intoxication, was the judge beforewhom the lovely and innocent Paulina was nowarraigned on a chai affecting her life. In fact, itbecame obvious that the process was not designed forany other purpose than to save appearances, — and,if that should seem possible, to extract further discoveriesfrom the prisoner. The general acted assupreme arbiter in every question of rights andpower that arose to the court in the administrationof their almost unlimited functions. Doubts heallowed of none ; and cut every knot of jurisprudence,whether form or substance, by his Croatiansabre. Two assessors, however, he willingly receivedupon his bench of justice, to rdieve him from260 KLOSTERHEIM*the fatigue and difficulty of conducting a perplexedexamination.These assessors were lawyers of a low dash, whotempered the exercise of their official duties withas few scruples of justice, and as little regard to-therestraints of courtesy, as their military principaLThe three judges were almost equally ferocious andtools equally abject of the unprincipled sovereignwhom they served.A sovereign, however, he was ; and I^mlina waswell aware that in his own states he had the powerof life and death. She had good reason to see thather own death was resolved on ; still she neglectedno means of honourable self-defence* In a tone ofmingled sweetness and dignity she maintained herinnocence of all that was alleged against her ; protestedthat she was unacquainted with the ten<Hr ofany papers which might have been found in hertrunks ; and claimed her privilege, as a subject of theEmperor, in bar of all right on the Landgrave's partto call her to account. These pleas were overruled,and when she further acquainted the court that shewas a near relative of the Emperor's, and venturedto hint at the vengeance with which his ImperialKLOfiTEBHEIH.Majesty would not fail to TJsit so bloody a contemptof justice, she was surprised to find this menacetreated with mockery and laughter. In reality, thelong' habit of fighting for and against all the Princesof Germany, had given to the Croatian general adisregard for any of them, except on the single considerationof receiving his pay at the moment ; anda single circumstance unknown to Paulina, in thefinal determination of the Landgrave, to earn amerit with his Swedish allies by breaking off alltents of reserve or compromise with the Imperialcourt, impressed a savage desperation on the tone ofthat Prince's policy at this particular time. TheLandgrave had resolved to stake his all upon a singlethrotv. A battle was now expected, which, if favourableto the Swedes, would lay open the road tovienna. The Landgrave was prepared to abide theissue ; not, perhaps, wholly uninfluenced to so extremea course by the very paper which hill beenrobbed from Paulina. His policy was known to hisagents, and conspicuously influenced their mannerof receiving her menace.Menaces, they informed her, came with bettergrace Irom those who had the power to enforcethem : and with a hill scoff the Croatian badher merit their iodnlguice bj frvik discoveries androloataJT confessions. H« insisted on knowingnature of the connexion which the ImperialColonel of horse, maximilian, had maintained withthe students of Klostnheim ; and upon other discoveries,with respect to most of which Panting wastoo imperfectly informed herself to be capable ofgirtng any light. Her ernest declarations tieffectWH^treatedwithdigre^anL Shewfbr the present, but with an nomination that on Liemorrow she must prepare herself with a more complyingtemper, or with a sort of firmness in maintainingher resolution, which would not perhapslong resist those means which the law had placedat their disposal for dealing with the refractory utiobstinate.KLOSTEKHEIH.CHAPTER Xxii.Pauline meditated earnestly upon the importof this parting threat. The more he considered it,the less could she doubt that these fierce inquisitorshad meant to threaten her with torture. She feltthe whole indignity of such a threat, though shecould hardly bring herself to believe them in earnest.On the following morning she was summonedearly before her judges. They had not yet assembled; but Bone of the lower officials were pacingup aud down, exchanging unintelligible jokes, lookingsometimes at herself, sometimes at an iron machine,with a complex arrangement of wheels andscrews. Dark were the suspicions which assaultedPanting as this framework, or couch of iron, firstmet her eyes — and perhaps some of the jests circulatingamongst the brutal ministers of her brutaljudges would have been intelligible enough, hadsbe ocakdesoeskded to tsmlier attention in that dirBc-tool. Mesntbi^berdMil^asvereotliflnnsedispefsedHie Croatia osBoer zkhw entered the loom acme,bis assists hftrinr proifaabh- deemed psrdc^palioain that put of the hoixid iioDDctioiis which Remainedunder the Lmd^imre s conunisskMi.This mm. presenting a p>pv wish a long list ofinterrogatories to IVohna, bade her now rdieaiseTerinllT the sum of the answers which she designedto give. Running la^dh' though them, Pmliiiareplied with dignity, ret trembling and agitated,that these woe qaesdons which in an j sense shecould not answa* — man j of them le^Hiing to paintson which she had no knowledge, and none of tientbeing consistent with the gratitude and friendshipso largely due on her side to the persons implicatedin the bearing of these questions.Then you refuse ?"'' Certainly ; there are three questions only whichit is in my power to answer at all — even thes imperfectly.Answers such as you expect would loadme with dishonour."Then you refuse ?"<< For the reasons I have stated, undoubtedly Ido."KLOSTEBHEIH.Once more — you refuse 7"I refuse, certainly ; but do me the justice to recordmy rGftsons."Reason ! — ha I lia t they had need to be strongones if they will hold out against the arguments ofthis pretty anything," laying his hand upon themachine. " However, the choice is yours, notSo spring, he made a sign to the attendants. Onebegan to more the machine, and work the screwsor raise the clanking grates and framework, witha savage din, — two others bared their arms. Paulinalooked on motionless with sudden horror, and palpitatingwith fear.The Croatian nodded to the men ; and then in aloud commanding voice exclaimed — " The questionin the first degree !"At this moment Paulina recovered her strength,which the first panic had dispelled. She saw a manapproach her with a ferocious grin of exultation.Another, with the same horrid expression of countenance,carried a large vase of water.The whole indignity of the scene flashed hillupon her mind. She, a lady of the Imperial house.threatened with torture by the base ancient of & titledmffisD ! She who owed hint no iaij — had Tiltedno claim of hospitality, thcmgti in her own prisonall had been atrocious ouistg^ !Thoughts like these flew rapidly through herbrain, when suddenly a diMH" opened behind her. Itwas an attendant with some implements for tighteningor relaxing bolts. The bure-anued roman atthis moment raised his arm to seize hers. Shrinkingfrom the pollution of his accursed touch, Paulinatamed hastily round, darted through the open door,and fled, like a dove punished by restores, alon thepassages which stretched before her. Already abefelt their hot breathing upon her neck, already theforemost had raised his hand to arrest her, when asadden tnm brought her full upon a band of youngwomen, tending upon one of superior rank, manifestlytheir mistress.Oh, mBdw" I" exclaimed Paulina, " save me Isave me 1" — and with these words fell exhausted atthe lady's feet.This female— young, beautiful, and with a touchingpensiveness of pointers — raised her tenderlyin her arms, and with a sisterly tone of afiec-KLOSTBRHBIM.tion bade her fear nothing ; — and the respectfulmanner in which the officials retired at her command,satisfied Paulina that she stood in some ver'near relation to the Landgrave — in reality she soonspoke of him Eis her Either. " Is it possible,"thought Paulina to herself " that this innocent andlovely child" (for she was not more than seventeen,though with a prematurity of womanly person thatraised her to a level with Paulina's height) " shouldowe the affection of a daughter to a tyrant so savageas the Landgrave ?"She found, however, that the gentle PrincessAdeline owed to her own childlike simplicity thebest gift that one so situated could have receivedfrom the bounty of Heaven. The barbarities exercisedby the Croatian governor, she charged entirelyupon his own brutal nature ; and so confirmed wasshe in this view by Paulina's own case, that shenow resolved upon executing a resolution she hadlong projected. Her father's confidence was baselyabused ; this she said, and devoutly believed. " Nopart of the truth ever reached him ; her own lettersremained disregarded in a way which was irreconcilablewith the testimonies of profound affectionhereof, dail showered opoo ber hj hie High.In reality, this sole cod of thealso the one sole jewel that gBT« a hie is has eyMto his else desolate life. Ever thiii^ is and mboukthe castle of Loresteiii was placed under her ahM>-Into control ; even the brutal Cnndan goTemorknew that do plea or extremity of cimunstanccswould atone for one act of disobedience to h^ onlen,and hence it was that the ministers of this tynatretired with so much prompt obedience to ber commands.Experience, however, had taught the Princesthat, not nofre^aentlytOrdersappareatlT obeyed wmafterwards secretly evaded ; and the disregard paidof late to her letters of complaint, satisfied her tbUthey were stifled and suppressed by the tenor.Paulina, therefore, whom a few hours of restrain'ed intercourse had made interesting to her heart,she would not suffer even to sleep apart from herself.Her own agitation on the poor prisoner's behalfbecame greater even than that of Paulina ; anda4 fresh circumstances of suspicion daily arose nthe sava tremor's deportment, she now took inKLOSTEBHEIM. 269good earnest those measures for escape to Kloster-beam which she had long arranged. In this purposeshe was greatly assisted by the absolute authoritywhich her other had conceded to her overevery thing but the mere military arrangements inthe fortress. Under the colour of an excursion, suchas she had been daily accustomed to take, she foundno difficulty in placing Paulina, sufficiently disused,amongst her own servants. At a proper point ofthe road, Paulina and a few attendants, with thePrincess herself, issued from their coaches, and biddingthem await their return in half an hour's interval,by that time were &r advanced upon theirroad to the military post of Falkenberg.279 ClosesCHAPTER XXIV.Is tw&Ay day the Mysterious Masque had smn-moved the Landgimye ^ to answer, Sdt agnes u-atoned, before a tribunal where no power but that ofinnocence could avail him'* Hies days worenearly expired. The morning of the Twentiethhad arrived.There were two interpretations of this summons.By many it was believed that the tribunal contemplatedwas that of the Emperor ; and that, by somemysterious plot, which could not be more difficultof execution than others which had actuallybeen accomplished by The Masque, on this day theLandgrave would be carried off to Vienna. Others,again, understanding by the tribunal, in the samesense, the Imperial chamber of criminal justice, believedit possible to fulfil the summons in some wayless liable to delay or uncertainty, than by a longKLOSTEfiHEIM. 371journey to Vienna, through a country beset withenemies. But a third party, differing from boththe others, understood by the tribunal where innocencewas the only shield — the judgment seat ofheaven ; and believed that on this day justice wouldbe executed on the Landgrave, for crimes knownand unknown, by a pnbhc and memorable death.Under any interpretation, however, nobody amongstthe citizens could venture peremptorily to deny, afterthe issue of the manned ball, and of so many otherpublic denunciations, that The Masque would keephis word to the letter.It followed of necessity that every body was onthe tiptoe of suspense, and that the interest hangingupon the issue of this night's events swallowedup all other anxieties, of whatsoever nature. Eventhe battle, which was now daily expected betweenthe Imperial and Swedish armies, ceased to occupythe hearts and conversation of the citizens. Domesticand public concerns alike gave way to the comingcatastrophe so solemnly denounced by The Masque,The Landgrave alone maintained a gloomy reserve,and the expression of a haughty disdain. Hehad resolved to meet the summons with the KLOSTERHEIM.lies expression of defiance, by fixing this eveningfor a second masque ball, upon a greater scale thanthe first. In doing this he acted advisedly, and withthe counsel of his Swedish allies. They representedto him that the issue of the approaching battle nightbe relied upon as pretty neaiiy certain ; all the indicationswere indeed generally thought to promise adecisive turn in their favour ; but in the worst case,no defeat of the Swedish army in this war had everbeen complete; that the bulk of the retreatingarmy, if the Swedes should be obliged to retreat,would take the road to Klosterheim, and would furnishto himself a garrison capable of holding thecity for many months to come, (and thai would notfill to bring many fresh chances to all of them,)whilst to his new and cordial allies this course wouldoffer a secure retreat from pursuing enemies, and asatisfactory proof of his own fidelity. This even inthe worst case; whereas in the better and more probableone, of a victory to the Swedes, to maintain thecity but for a day or two longer against internal conspirators,and the secret co-operators outside, would bein effect to ratify any victory which the Swedes mightKLOSTERUEIM. S73gTiin by putting into their hands at b, critical momentone of its most splendid trophies and guarantees.These compels fell too ranch into the Landgrave'sown way of thinking to meet with any demursfrom him. It was agreed, therefore, that asmany Swedish troops as could at this important momentbe spared, should be introduced into the hallsand saloons of the castle, on the eTentftil evening,disguised as reasoners. These were about four hundred; and other arrangement were made, equallymysterious, and some of them known only to theLandgrave.At seven o'clock, as on the former occasion, thecompany began to assemble. The same rooms werethrown open ; but, as the party was now ibr morenumerous, and was made more comprehensive inpoint of rank, in order to include all who were involvedin the conspiracy which had been some timematuring in Klosterheim, fresh suites of rooms werejudged necessary, on the pretext of giving feller effectto the princely hospitalities of the Landgrave.And, on this occasion, according to an old privilegeconceded in the case of coronations or gas of magnificence,by the Lady Abbess of St Agnes, the ;§o tint the tro Twt wtiWiih— B t i , winchon one sde wcxe tuutJg » ui to eachdis laid into one.The oon^uij had Bow counaedtotwo hoofs. The pdbce ani the lefecsiairj of therent vere now orerdowiii^ with hghtB and npkniMiiiaf^[iies ; the areiuies and commons nmg with m-sic; and, though ereiy heart was thnMug withhear and SDspeniey DO outward expression was w«Bt-in of jos and festal measure. For the freaen t, allwas cain around the shnnberiiig TolcaDOuSuddenly the Count St Aldenhejm, whostanding with anne £dulled, and screwing theliant scene, Mt some one tondi his hand, in theway concerted amongst the conspirators as a statesignal of recognition. He turned and recognisedhis friend the Baron Deport, who sainted him withthree emphatic words — " We are betrayed V — then,after a pause, *^ Follow me'St Aldenheim made his way through the glitteringcrowds, and pressed after his conductor into oneof the most pnvate corridors.KL03TERHEIM. 273Fear not," said the other, " that we shall behatched. Vigilance is no longer necessary to ourcrafty enemy. He has already triuinjihed. EverysTenue of escape ia barred and secured against us :every outlet of the palace is occupied by the Landgrave'stroops. Not a man of us will return alive."Heaven forbid we should prove ourselves suchgulls ! Yon are but jesting, my friend."Would to God I were I my information is buttoo certain. Something I have overheard by accident; something has been told me ; and BonesI have seen. Come you also, Count, and seewhat I will show you: then judge for yourself."So saying, be led St Aldenheim by little circuitof passages to a. doorway, through which they passedinto a hall of vast proportions ; to judge by the ,and mural monuments, scattered at intervalsalong the vast expanse of its orchis, this seemedto be the ante-chapel of St Agues. In fact itwas so ; a few Hunt lights glimmered through thegloomy extent of this immense chamber, placed(according to the Catholic rite) at the shrine of thesaint Feeble as it was, however, the light waspowerful enough to display in the centre a pile ofscaffolding' covered with black drapery.at the foot, they could trace the outlines of a stageat the stint, fenced in with & railings, a block,and the other apparatus for the solemnity of a publicexecution, whilst the saw-dust below their feetascertained the spot in which the heads were to fell,Shall we ascend and rehearse our parts ?" askedthe Count : " for methinks every thing is prepared,except the headsman and the spectators. A plagueon the inhospitable knave I"•' Yes, St Aldenheim, all is prepared — even tothe Sufferers. On that list, you stand foremost. believeme, I apeak with knowledge ; no matter wlmeg;aiiied. It is certain."Well, necemloi non habet legem ; and he thatdies on Tuesday will never catch cold on Wednesday.But still, that comfort ia something of theoldest. Think you that none better could be hod ?"As bow?"Revenge, par exemple ; a little revenge.Might one not screw the neck of this base Prince,who abuses the confidence of cavaliers so perfidiously? To die I care not ; but to be caught in ak iiKL06TERHEIM. 277trap, and die like a rat lured by a bait of twistedcheese — Faugh I ray country blood rebels againstitrSomething might surely be done, if we couldmuster in any strength. That is, we might diesword in hand ; but"Enough ! I ask no more. Now let us go. Wewill separately pace the rooms, draw together hemany of our party as we can single out, and thenproclaim ourselves. Let each answer for one victim.Ill take his Highness for my share."With this purpose, and thus forewarned of thedreadful fate at hand, they left the gloomy ante-chapel,traversed the long suite of entertainingrooms, and collected as many as could easily be detachedfrom the dances without too much pointingout their own motions to the attention of all present.The Count St Aldenheim was seen rapidly explainingto them the circumstances of their dreadful situation;whUsthandsupliftedjorsuddenlyapphed tothe hilt of the sword, with other gestures of suddenemotion, expressed the different impressions of rageor fear, which, trader each variety of character, impressedthe several hearers. Some of them howr, weretoomgvudedm^iciraMitiaaB; and theeaei^ of AgggertknktionsliadiMnr b e giuA to st-tactthe attention of the company.The LandgimTe hhrntrff had his ere iron them.But at this momait his atipntiiM wasdnmu ciShwan npoar of oonfbsian in an antechamber, whichaifned some tragical impottanoein the case thatoonld pi u m| i t so sudden a d infer e ga id ior the le-studentsof time and place.KL09TEHHEIM.CHAPTER XXV.His Highness issued from the room in consternation,followed by many of the company. In thevery centre of the anteroom, hooted and spurred,bearing all the marks of extreme haste, pam'c, andcontusion, stood a Swedish officer, dealing forth hastyfragments of some heart-shaking intelligence. " Allielost I" said he, " not a regiment has escaped !"And the place?" exclaimed a press of enquirers.Northmen." " And which way has the Swedisharmy retreated?" demanded a masque behind him.Retreat !" retorted the officer, " I tel you thereis no retreat. All have perished. The army is nomore. Horse, foot, artillery — all is wrecked, crushed,annihilated. Whatever yet lives, is in the power ofthe Imperialists."At this moment the Landgrave came up, and inevery way strove to check thes too liberal communesKLiOanBBBMlU.nicatioos. He frowned; the officer saw him not.He laid his hand on the officer's ana, bat all in vwn.He spoke, hut the officer knew not, or forgot hisrank. Panic and immeasurable sorrow had crushedhis heart; he cared not lor restraints ; decomm andceremony were become idle words. The Swedifiliarmy had perished. The greatest easter of thewhole Thirty Years' War had fallen upon his countrymen.His own eyes had. witnessed the trB^pedjr,and he bad no power to check or restrain that whichmode his heart overflow.The Landgrave retired. But in half an boorthe banquet was announced; and his Highness badGO much command over his own feelings, that hetook his seat at the table. He seemed tranquil inthe midst of general agitation ; for the company weredistracted by various passions. Some exulted in thegreat victory of the Imperialists, and the approachingliberation of Klosterheira, Some who were inthe secret, anticipated with horror the coming tragedyof vengeance upon his enemies, which theLandgrave bad prepared for this night. Some werefilled with suspense and awe on the probable fulfilmentin some way or other, doubtful as to the mode.but tragic (it was not doubted) for the result, of TheMasque's mysterious denunciation.Under anch circumstances of universal agitationand BUflpense,— for on one side or other it seemed inevitablethat this night must produce a tragical catastrophe,— it was not extraordinary that silence andembarrassment should at one moment take possessionof the company, and at another, that kind of forcedand intermitting gaiety, which still more forciblyproclaimed the trepidation which really mastered thespirits of the assemblage. The banquet was magnificent: but it moved heavily and in sadness. Themusic, which broke the silence at intervals, wasanimating and triumphant ; but it had no power todisperse the gloom which hung over the evening,and which was gathering strength conspicuously asthe hours advanced to midnight.As the clock struck eleven, the orchestra hadsuddenly become silent ; and, as no buzz of conversationsucceeded, the anxiety of expectation becamemore partially irritating. The whole vast assemblagewas hushed, gazing &t the doors — at each■ of taa tn vkiM it «gov ■teh MR «bviBWk tlMM aTgiirfwif d« wm Mi it «M koi^dia tk next iMtHt, tW FhMK HMe wiA «k■itjoa; MdviAft wry iiniiwfal afeddMck it wa) of tJiit^Li iM ^ riBty , k»to CM of fkammoMS, iawki^ ■LWImv Hid OB «l«t mi ?— The ifasti wlMcfe MNriKkc4 the cMriMi^ af «aaoag Ice rnmjiy who had Ibi cwiaKLOSTERHETM. ' signalevent, and more painfully Interested otherswhose finite was consciously dependant upon the which the next hour might happen to bringup. Silence still continuing to prevail, and, if possible,deeper silence than before, it was inevitablethat all the company — those even whose honourabletemper would least have brooked any settled purposeof aui^risingp the Landgrave's secrets — should, insome measure, become a party to what was nowpassing in the anteroom.The voice of the Landgrave was heated at times —briefly and somewhat sternly in reply — but apparentlyin the tone of one who is thrown upon thenecessity of self-defence. On the other side, thespeaker was earnest, solemn, and (as it seemed)upon an ofllce of menace or upbraiding. For a time,however, the tones were low and subdued ; but, asthe passion of the scene advanced, less restraint wasobserved on both sides; and at length many believedthat in the stranger's voice they recognised that ofthe Loftily Abbess ; and it was some corroboration ofthis conjecture, that the name of Paulina began nowfrequently to be caught, and in connexion withominous words, indicating some dreadful fate supposedto have befallen her.ELOSTERBBnr.A fear moments dispersed all doubts. The tonesof bitter and angry reproach rose loader baa before;theywere.wiUiontdoolpt, those of the Abbess.She charge the blood of Panama npou the Laad-^Te's head ; denounced the instant vengeance ofthe Emperor for so great an atrodtT : and, if thatold be ervded, tie him expect certum Ktribotioiifroai Hmtsb far so motdn and useless bo efiiuionThe Lamina nffie^ ia a icma key ; and hiswarfc were few lad iipii TW tier were ir(n«dsrf fan e wtgi»iMrioB,w««*glyooll«qed from theMac ; »M ia the nux tante t^ panics ee^Miateduti linie cenaMin' (■ ne saAaentlv evident)ilwnlh. Thel^nd-BfthabitiM] hk AsiiBiilKtioD,tort, br the tide he tndwd hk mm, all tnccs of■— i" i t »*■ n«wl expression of rtCTn serenity, nd hisMMBcn their annul air of perfect aTbe clock of St Agnes struck twefTe. At thatklostehheiu. Uasound the Landgrave rose. " Friends, and illustriousStranger !" said he, " I have caused one seatto be left empty for that blood-stained Masque, whosummoned me to answer on this night for a crimewhich he could not name, at a bar which no manknows. His summons you heard. Its fulfilmentis yet to come. But I suppose few of us are weakenough to expect"TTiat The Masque of Klosterheim will ever breakhis engagements," said a deep voice, suddenly interruptingthe Landgrave. All eyes were directed tothe sound ; and behold 1 there Stood The Masque,and seated himself quietly in the chair which badbeen left vacant for his reception.It is well 1" said the Landgrave ; but the air ofvexation and panic with which he sank back intohis seat belied his words. Rising again, after apause, with some agitation he said, " Audaciouscriminal [ since last we met, I have learned to knowyou, and to appreciate your purposes. Jt is now fitthey should be known to Klosterheim. A scene ofjustice awaits you at present, which will teach thiscity to understand the delusions which could buildany part of her hopes upon yourself, — Citizens andSBC I. sac passe: ^msl esmaMKFrakot; hurrj&i on w mk to tikelis lillilifBi ; mother resfftxu it named » St AUeaheim }mi.left it.The Swedish maiBeqacs had inaDT of them with-dimfipom the gala on hearing the dreadful tar ofNcyrdUiifeik. But eocra^ remained, when strengthenedbf the body gnaid of the Landgimre, to makeop a corp of nearij fire hundred men. Under theeoQunand of C<AafDeL V<m AieaibeFg, part of themnow enclosed the scaffold, and part prepared to seizethe perMnM who were printed oat to them as .2B7operators. Amongst these stood foremost TheTissue.Striking; ofF those who attempted to lay handsupon him, he strode disdainfully within the ring ;and then taming to the Landgrave, he sudPrince, for once be generous ; accept me as aransom for the rest."The Landgrave smiled sarcastically. " That weredn unequal bargain, methinks, to take a part inexchange for the whole."The whole ? And where ia then your assuranceof the whole?"Who should now make it doubtful ? There isthe block ; the headsman is at hand. What handcan deliver from this extremity even you. SirMasque ?"That which has many times delivered me froma greater. It seems, Prince, that you foi^et thelast days in the history of Klosterheim. He thatrules by night in Klosterheim, may well expect agreater favour than this when he descends to suefor it"The Landgrave smiled contemptuously. " Butagain I ask you, sir, will you on any terms grantimmunity to these young men?"r2S8 Kl-OSTEKHEIX.Toa sat as ranlf ior others te tod voold dofor j-oBTself."Then all grace is hopeless ':' Th L«ndgnreroDchsafeii no uiswo', bat made signals to TwAremberg.Gentlemen, cuTalieis, citizens of KlosteAam,you that are not involved in the L&ndgTsre's suspicions,"said The Mae appealingly, " will ym notjoin me in the intercession I offer for these swagfriends, who are be to perish nnjodged, by Uaakedict of martial law ?"The citizens of Kloeteriieim interceded with ineffectualsupplication. '^ Gentlemen, joa wmUyour breath ; they die without reprieve," replied theLandgrave.Will your Highness spare none ?"'■ Not once" he exclaimed angrily, " not theyoungest amongst them."Nor grant a day's respite to him who mayappear on examination the least criminal of theA day's respite ? No, nor halfHeadsman, be ready. — Soldiers, lay the heads of theprisoners ready for the case."KLOfiTERHBIH.i Prince, now look to your own I"With succession of passions flying over his face,rage, disdain, suspicion, the Landgrave looked roundupon The Masque as he uttered these words, andwith pallid, ghastly consternation, beheld him raiseto his lips a hunting horn which depended from hisneck. He hew a blast, which was immediatelyanswered from within. Silence as of the grave ensued.All eyes were turned in the direction of theanswer. Expectation was at its summit; and in lessthan a minute solemnly uprose the curtain, whichdivided the chapel from the ante-chapel, revealing ascene that smote many hearts with awe, and theconsciences of some with as much horror as if it hadreally been that final tribunal, which numbers believedThe Masque to hare denounced.iCHAPTER XXVI.The great dispel of St AgTies, the iihall of coronation for the Landgrave of X '. ,was capable of containing with ease from seen toeight thousand Spectators. Nearly that number WHJ10W collected in the galleries, which, on the Recurrenceof that great occasion, or of a royal marriage,were usually assigned to the spectators. Hiewere all eijiiipped in burnished arms, the veinelite of the Imperial arm'. Resistance was hopeless; in a single moment the Landgrave saw himselfdispossessed of all his hopes by an overwhelming-force,the advanced guard in fact of the victoriesImperialists, now fresh from Nordlingen.On the marble area of the cbapol, level with their 'own position, were arranged a brilliant staff of officers; and a little in advance of them, so as almostto reach the ante-chapel, stood the Imperial LegesKU»TXB1«IH.Seior ambassador. This nobleman advanced to thecrowd of Klosterheimers, and spoke thus : —Citizens of Klosterheim, I bring yon from theEmperor yom* tie and lawful Landgrave, Maximilian,son of yo\ir last beloved Prince."Both chapels resounded with acclamations ; andthe troops presented anne.Show U8 our Prince ! let us pay him our homage!" echoed from every mouth.This is mere treason !" exclaimed the Usurper,The Emperor invites treason against his ownt^Boae, who undermines that of other Princes. Thebte landgrave had no son ; so much is known toyou all."None that wasThe Masque, " else had he met nhis unhappy father,"Murderer I — And what art thou, blood-pollutedMasque, with bands yet reeking' from the bloodof all who refused to join the conspiracy againstyour lawful Prince?""Citizens Klosterheim," said the Legate, " firstlet the Emperor's friend be assailed from all injuriousthoughts. Those whom ye believe to haveo Isis murderer," replied□ better fitted thanSes KLOSTEBHZIM.linen removed by murder, are here to speak for them-uponthis the whole line of those who had mysteriouslydisappeared from Klosterheim, presentedthemselves to the welcome of their astonishedfiends.These," said the Legate, " quitted Klosterheim,even hy the same secret piissag-es which enabled asto enter it, and for the self-same purpose, to preparethe path for the restoration of the true bear, Maximilianthe Fourth, whom iu this noble Prince youbehold, and whom may God long' preserve !"Saying this, to the wonder of the whole assemblyhe led forward The Masque, whom nobody had jetsuspected for more than an agent of the true bear.The Landgrave, meantime, thus suddenly denouncedas a tyrant — usurper — murderer, had stoodaloof, and had given but a slight attention to thelatter words of the Legate. A race of passions hadtraversed his countenance, chasing each other in &y-hag succession. But by a prodigious effort he recalledhimself to the scene before him ; and, striding iq) tothe crowd, of which the Legate was the ceatnlfigure, he raised his ann with a gesture of iudigna^KLOSTEBHEIM.tion, ail protested vehemently that the aesasgJDEitionof Maximilian's father had been iniquitous chaiseupon himself; — " And yet," said he, " upon thatone gratuitous Assumption have been built all theother foul suspicions directed against my person."Pardon me, sir," replied the Legate, " the evidenceswere such as satisfied the Emperor and hisConndl ; and he showed it by the vigilance withwhich he watched over the Prince Maximilian, andthe anxiety with which he kept him from approachingyour Highness, until his pretensions could beestablished by arms. But, if more direct evidencewere wanting, since yesterday we have had it in thedying confession of the very agent employed to strikethe fetal blow. That man died last night penitentand contrite, having fitly unburdened bis conscience,at Waldenhausen. With evidence bo overwhelming,the Emperor exacts no further sacrifice fromyour Highness than that of retirement from publiclife, to any one of your own castles in your patrimonialprincipality of Oberhomstcin. — But, nowfor a more pleasing duty. Citizens of Kloater-heim, welcome your young Landgrave in the emperor'sname : and tomorrow you shall welcomeJr294 KXOSTERBZtK.also your fixture Landgravine, the lovely CountessPaulina, cousin to the Emperor, my master, andCousin also to your noble yonng- Landgrave."No I" exclaimed the malignant usurper, " heryou shall never see alive : for that, be veil assured,I have token care."*' We, unworthy Prince I" rq)h'ed Maximilian,his eyes kindling with passion, " know that ytnirintentions, eo worthy of a fiend, towards that mostinnocent of ladies, have been confounded andbrought to nothing by your own gentle daughter,worthy of a fer nobler whither."If you speak of my directions for administeringthe torture, a matter in which I presume that Iexercised no unusual privilege songs Germansovereigns, you are right. But it'was not that ofwhich I spoke."Of what else then ? — The Lady Fanning hasescaped."True, to Wittenberg. But, doubtless, youngLandgrave, you have heard of such a thing as thsintercepting of a fugitive prisoner ; in such a caseyou know the punishment which martial taw awards.The governor at Falkenberg had his orders." HowKI.08T£KHEIMt 29Slast significant words he uttered in a. tone of peculiarmeaning. His eye sparkled with bright gleamsof malice and of Ravage vengeance, rioting in itscompletion.Oh, heart — heart I" exclaimed Maximilian,can this be possible ?"The Imperial Legate and all present crowdedstroud him to suggest such consolation as theycould. Some offered to ride off express to Fallen; some argued that the Lady Paulina had beensee within the last hour. But the hellish exulterin ruined happiness destroyed that hope as soon asit dawned : —Children I" said he, " foolish children 1 christnot such clemens. Me you have destroyed, Landgraye,and the prospects of my house. Now perishyourself. — Look there : is that the form of one wolvesand breathes ?"All present turned to the scaffold, in which directionhe pointed, and now first remarked, coveredwith a black pall, and brought hither doubtless toaggravate the pangs of death to Maximilian, whatseemed but too certainly a female corpse. Thestature, the fine swell of the bust, the rich iii f I ifTI I T 'Uw««d m^ M hat At itemp.^ w •« .»r Ik pi. «i bb. ii liF nIII. iJllil IIB1(.IM1| MBlllJ Jl^,hlMrcrai«rndk*falM-««Mfel. Dw^MiV «iMM ha te «nr bred ; ud tk« ptiitte ■flf dw fcO ilwtTwytr ■wmuil to ere wbHm to itSirmf body MOfnlMndcd tke mkbke manil^iHiiliiMinitiw inlMtHiB of an L^acki Hip, lAkli ihahBdSl^STEIlHSIH. 291met in her flight, The tyrant, who hail heard ofher escape, but apprehended no necessity for Sucha step on the part of his daughter, had issued suddenorders to the officer commanding the militarypost at Falltenberg, to seize and shoot the femaleplainer escaping front confinement, without blowingany explanations whatsoever, on her arrival atFalkenberg. This precaution he had adopted inpart to intercept any denunciation of the Emperor'svengeance which Paulina might address to theofficer.As » rode soldier, accustomed to obey the letter ofhis orders, this commandant had executed his commission; and the gentle Adeline, who had naturallyhastened to the protection of her father's chateau,surrendered her breath meekly and with resignationto what she believed a simple act of military violence; and this she did before she could know asyllable of her father's guilt or his fall, and withoutany the least reason for supposing him connectedwith the occasion of her early death.At this moment Paulina made her appearance unexpectedly,to reassure the young Landgrave by herpresence, and to weep over her young friend, whomshe hadst almost before he had come to know herrX9S KLOSTERHEIH.The scaffold, the corpse, and the other images of sorrow,were then withdrawn; — seven thousand Imperialtroops presented anus to the youthful Landgrave-andthe future Landgravine, the hrilhant favouriteof the Emperor ;the immense area of St Agnesresounded with the congratulations of Klosterbetm ;and as the mag-munificent cortege moved off to the-interiorof the schloss, the swell of the Coronatknt-anthem rising' in pears upon the ear from the choughof St Agnes, and from the mihtaiy hands of theiImperial troops, awoke the promise of happier days,,and of more equitable government, to the lough-aiharassed inhabitants of Klosterheim. iThe Klosterheimers knew enough already, perifinally or by questions easily answered in every:quarter, to supply any links which were wanting in-,the rapid explanations of the Legate. Neverthelessthat nothing might remain liable to misapprehension,or cavil, a short manifesto was this night decoratedby the new government, from which the following'facts are abstracted : — >The last rightful Landgrave, whilst yet a youngKi^fmBueiH.man, had been assassinated in the forest whenhunting'. A year or two before this catastrophe hehad contracted, what, from the circumstances, waspresumed, at the time, to be a morganatic, or lefthandedmarriage, with a lady of high birth, nearlyconnected with the Imperial House. The effect ofsuch a marriage went to incapacitate the children whomight be born under it, male or female, Join Succeeding.On that account, as well as because current reporthad represented her as childless, the widow ladyescaped all attempts from the assaesiii. Meantimethis lady, who was no other than Sister Madeline,had been thus indebted for her safety to two honours,irhich were in fact equally false. She soon foundmeans of convincing the Emperor, who hod beenthe bosom Friend of her princely husband, that hermarriage was a perfect one, and conferred the fullestrights of succession upon heriiifiint son Maximilian,whom at the earliest age, and with the utmostsecrecy, she had committed to the care of his ImperialMajesty. This powerful guardian bad in everyway watched over the interests of the young Prince.But the Thirty Years' War had thrown all Germanyinto distractions, which for a time thwarted the300 klobterheih: |Emperor, and favoured the views of the nsnrpei'.Latterly also another question had arisen on the cityand dependencies of Klosterheim as distinct somthe Landgrariate. These, it was now affirmed, werea female appanage, and could only pass back to theLandgrave of X through a manage with thefemale inheretrix. To reconcile all claims, therefore,on £ending this bar in the way, the Emperor hadresolved to promote a marriage for Maximilian withPaulina, who stood equally related to the Imperialhouse and to that of her lower. In this view he haitdespatched Paulina to KlosteTheim, with proper documentsto support th claims of both parties. Ofthese documents she had been robbed at ; and the very letter, which was designedto introduce Maximilian as " the child and sole representativeof the late murdered Landgrave," fellingin this Surreptitious way into the usurper's head,bad naturally misdirected his attacks to the personof Paiihna.For the rest, as regarded the mysterious movementsof The Masque, these were easily explained.Fear, and the exaggerations of fear, had done onflhalf the work to his hands — by preparing people toKLOBTERHEIM.&11 easy dupes to the pins laid, hind bf increasingthe romantic wonders of bis achievements. Cooperationalso on the part of the very Students andothers who stood forward as the night watch airdetecting' him, had served The Mnaque no lesspowerfully. The appearances of deadly struggleshad been arranged artificially to countenance theplot and to aid the terror. Finally, the secret passageswhich communicated between the forest andthe chapel of St Agnes, (passages of which manywere aeluallj applied to that very use in the ThirtyYears' War,) had been unreservedly placed at theirdisposal by the Lady Abbess, an early friend of theunhappy Landgravine, who sympathized deeply withthat lady's unmerited sufferings.One other explanation followed, communicatedin a letter from MaxinuUau to the Legate ; thisrelated to the murder of the old seneschal, a matterin which the young Prince took some Mame tohimself — as having unintentionally drawn upon thatexcellent servant his unhappy fate. " The senex'chsl," said the writer, " was the laithinl friend otmy bnuly, and knew the whole course of its misfortunes.He continued his abode at the schloss, toMSKLOStBBBEIM.serre my interest ; and in Kine measure I moy fearthat I drew upon him his fate. Traversing lfate ooeerenittg a spite of rooms, which his assistance and myown mysterious disguise laid open to mv passage atall hours, I came suddenly upon the Prince's retirement.He pursued me, but with hesitation : S<nBecheck I gave to his motions by halting bef(W«'aportrait of my unhappy father, and eraphaticaQypointing his attention to it. Conscience, I wellknew, wotild supply a commentary to my act. Iproduced the impression which I had anticipated,but not BO strongly as to stop his pursuit. Myvmirae necessarily drew faim into the sene8clid*s |rotten. The old man was sleeping ; and this cadetthrew into the Prince's hands a paper, which,I have reason to think, shed some considerable lightupon my own pretensions, and, in feet, first mmy enemy acquainted with my existence and tinyclaims. Meantime, the seneschal had secured ibaPrince's vengeance upon himself. He was aew mknown as a feithfiil agent in my service. That &Gt Isi^^ed his death-warrant. There is a window In JB gallery which commands the interior of the Iseneschal's room. On the evening of the last J^tf, ]waiting there for an opportunity of speaking securelywith this faithful servant, I heard a deepgroan, and then another, andaaother ; I raised myself,and with an ejaculation of horror, looked downupon the murderer — then surveying his victim withhellish triumph. My loud exclamation di'ew themurderer's eye upwards : under the pangs of an agitatedconscience, I have reason to think that he tookme for my unhappy father, who perished at my age,and is said to have resembled me closely. Who thatmurderer was, I need not say more directly. Hefled with the terror of one who flies iron an apparition., Taking a lesson from this incident, on thatSeine night, by the very same sudden revelation ofwhat passed, no doubt, for my father's countenance,aided by my mysterious character, and the proof Ihad announced to him immediately before of my acquaintancewith the secret of the seneschal's murder— in this and no other way it was, that I producedthat powerful impression upon the Princewhich terminated the festivities of that evening, andwhich all Klosterheim witnessed. If not, it is forthe Prince to explain in what other way I did orfiouldaflTect him so powerfully."IM KLOnZKHEIX.Teak exptanttMH) of tliedieiinr wttniUated by the Ex'LandgiMTc on tiexposure of The Masqne'a featmc^ rec«sr«d • R-taarkable confirmation from the canfaaaoa of tenuMnble asBuain at WaUenbanacB. Tins ^^"iilium had been sint night on I17- the mmiitmbock of a ntiutioa pretty nearly the atm^ *Bisona conscience more disturbed and a more a^er-ititioiu mind. In the rety act of attempting to at-innateor rob Maximilian, be had been BaildenlTdragged by that Prince into a dazzling light ; «^this settling full upon features which too vividly recalledto the murderer's recollection the last anbap|nrLandgrave e, nt the very same period of blooming mu-boot,and in his own favourite hunting palace, notfar from which the murder had been perpetrated, naturallyenough ha<I for a time unsettled the guiltyman's understanding, and terminating in a nervousfever, had at length produced his penitential death.A death, happily of the same character, soon oyer-tookthe deposed Landgrave. He was laid by theside of his daughter, whose memory, as much evenas his own penitence, availed to gather round hisfinal resting-plfloj the forgiving thoughts even ofKLOSTERHEIM. 305those who had suffered most from his crimes.Klosterheim in the next age flourished greatly, beingone of those cities which benefited by the peaceof Westphalia. Many changes took place in consequence,greatly affecting the architectural characterof the town and its picturesque antiquities ; but,amidst all revolutions of this nature, the secret passagesstill survive, and to this day are shewn occasionallyto strangers of rank and consideration, bywhich, more than by any other of the advantages athis disposal. The Masque of Klosterheim was enabledto replace himself in his patrimonial rights,and at the same time to liberate from a growingoppression his own compatriots and subjects.FINIS.