REMINISCENCESOFA LITERARY LIFE;BY THE REVERENDTHOS. FROGNALL DIBDIN, Dad.These are the Masters that teach whh ou* scolding and chastise without stripes "RICHARD DB BURY.LONDON:JOHN MAJOR, 71, GREAT Russell-street,BLOOMSBURY.MDCCCXXXVI.ALONDON:PRINTED BY Wiseman WILCOCKSOK, \VH1TEFRIARS.TOSIR FRANCIS Feeling, BART.&C. &C. &C.THIS WORKIS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBEDBY HISAFFECTIONATE FRIENDANDFAITHFUL SERVANTTHE AUTHOR.PREFACE.KEEP to Things as much as possible, andleave Persons as much as possible alone."Do not over-feed us with Anecdotes of Books,but give us as much Personal Anecdote as youplease." Such was the conflicting advice, byLetter, as well as by word of mouth, underwhich I sat down to the composition of thisWork. Recollecting however that an ancientBard of high classical authority hadsaid that " the middle way was the safest," Iresolved to abide by his advice; and to guidemy adventurous " chariot" between objectstoo passive on the one hand, and too activeon the other. It remains to be seen withwhat degree of failure or success.Dr. Johnson has somewhere told us thatAuto-biographies, even of the humblest individuals,are not written without some specificbenefit derivable from their perusal. I willhope therefore that from a steady and impartialexamination of the contents of theseVI PREFACE.pages, some profit may accrue to the Reader.It must not, however, be concealed, that thetask of composition has been at times both ofdifficult and delicate execution. On the onehand, there has been such an excess of matter,or abundance of materials (from which to makea judicious selection), as to perplex me in theextreme ; for a literary course of some thirty-fiveyears is not one of ordinary occurrence.On the other hand, I have had to strugglewith difficulties so as to avoid giving offenceby the introduction of some names or circumstancesin preference to others; and, aboveall, have my anxieties prevailed in bringingforward, by way of illustration, or evidence,the testimonies, in the form of letters, of theLIVING and the DEAD. But, if my hearthave not greatly deceived me, I am willingto believe that I have, in no one instance,wounded the feelings of the former, or tarnishedthe memories of the latter.The suppression of such evidence wouldhave been childish, and unworthy of an individualwho has mixed so long and so largelyin the world as myself. I have lived in vainif I cannot boast something like such treasuresas these : and if, by the introduction ofPREFACE. Vllsuch " Testimonies," I have unwittingly contrivedto throw my own narrative into comparativeshade, I shall be to the full as wellpleased if the reader derive additional gratificationin consequence. To me, at thisperiod of life, and under the operation ofcircumstances which have suddenly comeupon me as in the hour of darkness anddifficulty, I look upon this portion of myReminiscences" as upon the bright andbeautiful part of life's picture. I estimateand treasure these " Testimonies" as my BESTmy ONLY wealth : binding them about meas" ornaments of grace unto my head, andchains about my neck*" I am also much deceived,if, in the perusal of some of theseletters (for I will not institute the invidioustask of comparison between them) the readerbe not as agreeably instructed as surprised.It must not be concealed however that, incommitting many of them to the press, Ihave been deeply sensible of what I havelost by the DECEASE of several of their Authors.Yet, in the length of period described,See page 300. The only infidelity of which I considermyself to have been guilty, has been, in some instancesthe qualifying, in others the suppression, of a portionof the commendation bestowed.Vlll PREFACE.it were both unwise and unreasonable to supposethat ALL should have been preserved towitness this public evidence of the value oftheir communications.In re-introducing, as it were, my formerworks of which the ensuing pages maybe saidto give a sort of apperfu I have endeavouredequally to avoid a prolixity which might bewearisome, and a brevity which might be superficialor obscure. But some latitude of recitalmay be tolerated in the account of those morecostly and elaborate performances upon whichthe patronage of the Public has been so decidedlybestowed ; and if that patronage havenot led, in the end, to the enrichment of theauthor, it has cheered him in gloom and invigoratedhim in despondency*. Upon fourworks alone f there has been an expenditure,and consequent risk, of TWENTY THOUSANDPOUNDS. Perhaps the personal history ofliterature exhibits not many instances ofgreater courage and daring. But I was neverwilling to believe that an unwearied industryin the production of works of a good tendencycould ultimately be overlooked by my counselpage 8 1 5, post.The Spencer Library, JEdes Althorpiance, BibliographyCameron, and The Tour.PREFACE. IXtry ; whilst I felt, and yet strongly feel, thatthe quantity of employment it occasioned, inaddition to my own, was a species of Patriotismwhich might challenge the approbationof the wise and the good. Indeed, onthe present occasion, the support which Ihave derived from so numerous and so respectablea List of Subscribers seems in somemeasure to be a confirmation of the truth ofthis position ; except that, in many instances,the warmth of individual friendship may havebeen the preponderating motive of action.It was my first intention to have incorporatedin these pages one entire chapter designatedas " Flowers of the Olden Time; " butmy materials increased so abundantly, andappeared to be of such varied and edifyinginterest, that I resolved, rather than executesuch a task superficially, to omit italtogether.Full many a FLOWER is born to bloom unseen,And waste its fragrance in the desert air."One of the greatest Collectors, in timespast, of these " Flowers," was the celebratedARCHBISHOP PARKER: whose MSS., depositedin Corpus College, Cambridge, are yetto be made known. Here also are depositedX PREFACE.the Original Thirty-nine ARTICLES OF THECHURCH OF ENGLAND, with the subscribingautographs of the respective bishops ; of laterendered familiar to us by the very curiousand instructive volume of Dr. Lamb*. Consideringthat Smith was the first to breakground in this very extraordinary collectionof MSS. collected by the Archbishop, andDr. Lamb's work is a quarto volume, printed at theUniversity Press of Cambridge in 1829, of which only 250copies were struck off. It is " curious and instructive," ascontaining, 1. An Historical Account of the Thirty-nineArticles, from the first promulgation of them in 1553, totheir final establishment in 1 571, with two plates offa similes.2. An exact copy of the Articles of Edward VI., in 1553,at the end of the little book entitled " Catechisms BrevisChristiana Religionist The parts printed in red ink wereomitted in the Articles of 1562. 3. An exact copy of theLatin Manuscript of the Articles of 1 562 : each page, line,and word corresponding with the original, with fac similesof the signatures of the Archbishops and Bishops. 4. A facsimileof the " LITTLE BOOK," to which the Act of Parliamentof 13 Elizabeth refers. 5. An exact copy of theEnglish MS. of the Articles of 1571, each page, line, andword corresponding with the original ; with fac similes of thesignatures of the Archbishops and Bishops. 6. The Latinedition of Day, printed under the direction of Bishop Jewelin 1571. 7. The English edition of Jung and Cawood,printed under the direction of Bishop Jewel in 1571. Eachof these pieces has a distinct imagination. The reader canscarcely doubt of the importance of such a work in somethingbeyond a merely billiographical point of view.B LI AMr. IN ''APREFACE. XIthat his Catalogue* professes to contain onlythe heads or titles of the several pieces examined,posterity is under no small obligationto him for his exertions t.His catalogue was published in the Latin languagein 1777, 4to. with a copy, by Tyson, of Hogenberg's rareportrait of the Archbishop facing the title. It must not besupposed that the contents of this volume have an exclusivereference to theological subjects. Far from it : philologyin every department will be found in it; and poetry andepistolography in English as well as in Latin. Inter alia,look at page 54, for a specimen of the " Romance ofSt. Gray."Tlianne passeth forth this story e with alThat is cleped ofsom men Sent GRAAL,Also the SANK Real ycleped it isOf michel people with often mys"But, as a whole, this library is yet a sort of TERRA IN-Cognate.f It had been a joyous day for me, some six years ago,to have been present at the commemoration of the close ofthe third centenary, or jubilee, celebrated at Corpus, of theelection of their illustrious Archiepiscopal President to theMastership of the College. On that emphatic occasion, allthe plate left to the College by the Archbishop was exhibitedupon the banqueting-table.The OPPOSITE ENGRAVING of the Salt-cellar of the Archbishopis taken from a drawing by R. B. Harden, Esq.of Cambridge, from the original plate of silver and gold :being precisely one half the dimensions of the original. Thedrawing is now in the possession of His Grace the Archbishopof Canterbury, at Lambeth; he being the Nineteenthsuccessor of Matthew Parker. It is most faithfullyexecuted by the burin of M. Audire.Xll PREFACE.But although the " Flowers" of which I hadcontemplated the gathering, might not havebeen of such ancient growth or pungent fragranceas those in the library of ArchbishopParker, yet, I think, from the subjoinedspecimen*, the reader would not have all men, living or dead, it strikes me that not ONEwould have relished the ensuing " anecdote" more than thelate Sir Walter Scott, Bart. : and I feel abundantly persuadedthat he would have contrived to have brought thevenerable EARL OF SHREWSBURY, or some similar characterfor the sake of his speech into one of his historicalnovels. I selected this " sparkling bit" from a very gravebut wholesome treatise supposed to have been written byour Archbishop Himself, and printed in the black letter byJudge, without date, in the reign of Elizabeth having fortitle, " The Defence of Priests Marriages" 4to.It chanced that there came a French ambassador tothe king's highness, King Henry the Eight (I trust Godhath his soul) with letters, I trow, from the French king,not long before that sent to him from the holy father ofRome. This ambassador, sitting at the counsel table, beganto set up a stout countenance, with a weak brain, andcarped French exceedingly fast ; which he thought shouldhave been his only sufficient commendation of them all,that were at the table, that he could speak so readily. Thematter of his talk was universal everywhere. But the substancewas, partly, much noting the gluttony of Englishmen,which devoured so much victual in the land : partly, magnifyingthe great utility and necessity of the French tongue,which he noted to be almost throughout the world frequented.And in his conference, he marvelled of diversnoblemen that were present, for that they could not keepPREFACE. Collectedto a more general acquaintance withthem.him talk, or yet could not so much as understand him, toperceive his great wit.Among the number of the lords, there sat the oldhonourable Captain, the Lord Earl of Shrewsbury, lookingat his meat, and gave neither ear nor countenance to thisfolie man, but gave others leave to talk, and sat, as hemight, shaking head, and hands, in his palsy, which wastestimony enough, whether he were not in his days a warrior,lying abroad in the field, to take air (qu?) of theground. This French ambassador was offended with him ;and said, ' What an honour were it for yonder Old Nobleman,if he could speak the French tongue. Surely, it is agreat lack to his nobility?' One of the lords that kepthim talk, asking first leave of this conspire to report partof the communication to the Lord Shrewsbury, made reportthereof, yet in most courteous manner, with easy and favourablerehearsal, as might touch a truth.When he heard it, where before his head, by the greatage, was almost grovelling on the table, he roused himselfup in such wise, that he appeared, in length of body, asmuch as he was thought ever in all his life before. Andknitting his brows, he laid his hand on his dagger, and sethis countenance in such sort, that the French hardie ambassadorturned colour wonderfully. ' Saith the Frenchwhoreson so?' saith he; < marry, tell the French dog again,by sweet St. Cuthbert, if I knew that I had but one pestilentFrench word in all my body, I would take my daggerand dig it out before I rose from the table. And tell thattawnie whoreson again, howsoever he have been hunger-starvedhimself at home in France, that if we should noteat our beasts, and make victual of them as fast as we do,they would so increase beyond measure, that they wouldmake victual of us, and eat us up.'When these words were reported again to the FrenchXIV PREFACE.The principal, and indeed besetting, difficultyagainst which I have had to struggle,has been the constant introduction, if notobtrusion, of Self, I have been inevitablycompelled to put that "Self" in the foreground,as it were, of every picture delineated; but not, I trust, at the expense ofinjuring the effect of the middle or backgroundof the composition. The readerwill perhaps admit the impracticability ofrendering the matter otherwise ; but to console,or to reconcile him, he may be assuredthat in most instances the middle or backgroundwill be found to be the most picturesqueor instructive portion of the picture.To keep up the metaphor. TIME, which is ofso much use in mellowing the colours andblending the tints of the pencil, seems to be notless occasionally serviceable in harmonisingthe productions of the pen. Much that mayappear raw or glaring, in the following pages,may, in the course of a few revolving years,guest, he spoiled no more victual at the dinner after that,but drank wondrous oft ; which, whether it was his convenance,because he had left talking, or whether for that hewas inwardly dry, the reporter of this tale could tell menofurther ; but said, that his eyes were never off him [theEarl of Shrewsbury] all that dinner while after !" P. 128.PREFACE.XVassume a milder and a more mellow tone.The hand, which has recorded the events orcharacters described therein, will have ceasedto act ; and we may be then induced to tolerate,for the sake of the Dead, what withreluctance we should concede to the claimsof the Living. Posterity will hold with aneven hand the balance of literary merit andliterary claims ; and in that balance I hopeto be found among those writers " who," inthe language of Johnson, " have given ARDOURTO VIRTUE and CONFIDENCE TO TRUTH."T. F. D.Exning Vicarage, Dec. 1, 1835.XviiLIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.His ROYAL HIGHNESS THE DUKE OF SUSSEX,Keg.Abbott, Thomas, Esq. Large paper.Abel, Messrs. Booksellers, NorthamptonAcheron, LORDAdamson, John, Esq. F.S.A.Adams, Richard, Esq.Adams, Dr. JesseAlderney, Thomas, Esq.Adolphus, John, Esq. F.S.A.Alsace, Henry, Esq.Amyot, Thomas, Esq. F.R.S. Trees. Sea.Anders, John, Esq.Anderson, Rev. JamesAndrews, Mr.Appleyard, George, Esq.Arch, Messrs. John and Arthur Twelve copies.Barnard, Elias, Esq.Garnett, Mr. JohnAsher, Mr. Berlin Two copies.Audire, Mr. P. EngraverAltera, Joseph, Esq.Backhouse, John, Esq.Bailie, Hunter William, Esq. Four copies.Bain, Mr.Baker, Mr. George, Historian of the County of NorthamptonBandied, Rev. Dr. F.S.A. Keeper of the Bodleian LibraryBANNATYNE CLUB.Bannerman, James, Esq.Darling, Rev. ThomasBarlow, Mrs.bXV11I SUBSCRIBERS.Barnard Benjamin, Esq. F.S.A.Baron, N. T. Esq.Barrett, Rev. Dr.Bartlett, Esq.Barton, Dr. EdwardBarwis, John, Esq. Five copies.Batsman, William, Esq. F.S.A.Bazelgette, Mrs.Basest, MissBeale, Daniel, Esq.BEDFORD, DUKE OF Large and Small paper.Bentham, William,, Esq. F.S.A. Three copies.BERNARD, LADY Two copies.Bernard., William, Esq.Berry, R. S. Esq. Large paper.BIBLIOPHILES Francis, SOCIETE DES Six copies.Bibliotheca DU Roi, a Paris Large paper.Bridewell, Thomas, Esq.Bigger, C. W. Esq.Firewood, Rev. William Imwood, Mea.Birdsall, Mr. Bookseller, NorthamptonDistich, James, Esq.Bliss, Rev. Dr. F.S.A. Registrar of the University ofOxford Five copies.Bore, Edward, Esq. D.C.L. F.S.A. Five copies.Blower, Joseph, Esq.Bohn, Mr. Henry, Bookseller Twenty-five copies.Bohn, Mr. James, Bookseller Twelve copies.Holland, Mr. BARON Six copies.Bolton, James, Esq.Boone, Messrs. Booksellers Two copies.Borradaile, Abraham, Esq.Borradaile, John Watson, Esq.Bosworth, Rev. Dr. F.R.S. F.S.A.Botfield, Serial, Esq. One Large, two Small paper.Touch, Mr. Bookseller, LiverpoolBouverie, Rev. JohnSUBSCRIBERS. XIXAbraham, John, Esq.Brent, Miss. Four copies.Brighten, J. Esq.Bright, B. H. Esq.BRISTOL, BISHOP OF Two copies.Bradley, Henry, Esq. M.A. F.S.A. Large paper.Bracket, John Trotter, Esq. F.S.A.BRODIE, SIR BENJAMIN, BART. Six copies.Brodie, P. B. Esq.Brown, Charles, Esq.Cruelly, Henry, Esq.Bryant, MissRymer, Rev. WilliamBUCCLEUGH, DUKE OF, K.G. Large and Small paper.Buck, George, Esq. Two copies.Banbury, SIR HENRY, BART. Two copies.Burney, Rev. Charles Parr, D.D. F.R.S. F.S.A.Burr, Miss Two copies.Barrel, John Palfrey, Esq. Four copies.BUTLER, REV SAMUEL, ARCHDEACON, D.D. F.R.S.F.S.A. One Large and two small paper.Butler, Rev. Edward, D.D.Byfield, Mr. John Four copies.Cell, Mr. Robert, Bookseller, EdinburghCAMPBELL, LADY Two copies.Campbell, Rev. A.M.CANNING, VISCOUNTESS Two copies.CANNING, HON. CHARLES JOHNCape, MajorCape, John, Esq.Carey and Hurts, BooksellersCARLISLE, EARL OF Two copies.Carroll, George, Esq. Large paper.Canton, Rev. Richard, M.A.Cave, Mrs. OtwayCave, Rev. John, M.A.XX SUBSCRIBERS.CAWDOR, EARL Large paper.Chandler, Rev. Dr. DEAN OF CHICHESTERChapman, Henry, Esq.Castlewood, ColonelCharlton, Rev. William Henry, M.A.Charley, Mr. Newcastle-on-TyneHatfield, Charles, Esq. F.S.A.Chauncey, N. I. Esq.Chelmsford Philological SocietyCHETWODE, SIR JOHN, BART.CHICHESTER, BISHOP OF, F.R.S. F.S.A. Two copies.Children, John George, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A. Two copies.Clarke, E. M. Esq. Large paper.CLIFFORD, SIR AUGUSTUSCLIVE, VISCOUNT Two copies.Cobbett, Philip, Esq.COCKAYNE, HON. MRS.Osborne, Mr. Thomas Two copies.Osborne, J. Esq.Collins, Mr.Combes, William, Esq. Four copies.Compton, Miss.Compton, S. W. Esq. Five copies.Compton, Charles, Esq.Corner, Benjamin, Esq.COTTON, REV. ARCHDEACON, D.D.Cox, Edward Townshend, Med.Cox, J. C. Esq.Cox, J. S. Esq. CheltenhamCraig, I. T. Gibson, Esq. EdinburghCrawley, John, Esq.Callum, Rev. T. Very, Bart.Cureton, Rev. WilliamCurtis, L. J. Esq.Currer, Miss One Large, and five Small paper.CURZON, HON. ROBERT, M. P.Must, HON. SIR EDWARD, Map.SUBSCRIBERS. XXIDallas, Robert, Esq.Dalton, Mrs.Dalton, Rev. JamesDangers, Charles, Esq.Darby, Francis, Esq.DAVID'S, ST. BISHOP OF Two copies.Davies, Mr. John, Bookseller, Shrewsbury Two copies.Day, MissDebure, Messrs. ParisDeacon, Samuel, Esq.Leighton, Messrs. Booksellers, Cambridge Six copies.DELAWARE, EARLDenial, Mrs. Twelve copies.Penman, LORD Large paper.Devon and Exeter LibraryDEVONSHIRE, H. G. DUKE OF, K.G. Large paper.Dicey, T. E. Esq.D'Israeli, I. Esq. D.C.L. F.S.A. Two copies.Dobie, James, Esq. BirthDodd, Rev. Philip, Chaplain in Ordinary to His MajestyDormer, Daniel, Esq.Douglass, Mrs.D'Oyly, Rev. George, D.D. Two copies.Drury, Rev. Henry, M.A. F.R.S. F.S.A. Four copies.Durant, Delan9on, Bibliophile ParisienDice, Rev. AlexanderTyson, William, Esq. Two copies.Eaton, Richard, Esq.Eaton, Richard, jun. Esq. M. P.Egmont, EARL OF, F.R.S. F.S.A.Skins, Rev. ThomasEllison, R. Esq. M. D.Evans, Hugh Robert, Esq.Evans, Hugh Robert, junior, Esq.Sailcloth, Richard, Esq.Falconer, Thomas, Esq. Med.XX11 SUBSCRIBERS.Faults, Andrew, Esq. BarnsleyFazakerly, John N. Esq. Map.Fellows, Rev. Dr. Two copies.FIFE, EARL OFFields, Andrew, Esq.Fisher, Robert, Esq.Flassans, Madame deFlesher, Gilbert, Esq.Fletcher, William, Esq. DublinFlood, Mr.Forbes, Mrs.Fordham, Rev. Josiah, M.A. F.R.S. F.S.A. BritishMuseumFordham, John Edward, Esq.Foss, Henry, Esq.France, Mrs. Two copies.Fraser, Rev. PhilipFeeling G, SIRFRANCIS, BART. F.S.A. Large, two Small.Free* ng, G. H. Esq. Two copies.Freeling, Mrs.Freeling, MissFreeling, J. Clayton, Esq. Largepaper.Freeling, Rivers, Esq.Freeling, Charles, Esq.Freeman, Rev. W. G.Freeman, Charles, Esq.Furlong, I. S. Esq. DublinGarden, Rev. J.Reeves, Mr. Bookseller Five copies.Gilfillan, James, Esq.Silly, Rev. W. S. Prebendary of DurhamGLYNN, SIR STEPHEN R. BART. F.S.A.Goddard, Rev. R.Goodwill, Rev. George, D.D. Provost of Eton CollegeTwo copies.Goodman, Edward, Esq.Gordon, Rev. WilliamSUBSCRIBERS. XX111Barren, John Edward, Esq.Oxford, EARLGosset, Rev. ThomasGosling, Dr.Grant, Miss Two copies.Greenwich, James Hugo, Esq.Greenwood, Rev. Dr.Greenwood, Thomas, Esq.GRENVILLE, RT. HON. THOMAS Large paper.Greville, Charles Cavendish, Esq.GREY, EARL DEGrosvenor, General . Two copies;Grosvenor, Mrs.Gurney, Hudson, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A. Two copies.Gutch, J. M. Esq.Hazlitt, Rev. George, M.A.Afford, Rev. Thomas, M.A. Two copies.Hall, Rev. George William, D.D. Master of PembrokeCollege, OxfordHamilton, Mr.Hammock, Rev. St. Vincent Love, M.A.Hammond, William, lsq.Hanson, I. O. Esq.Harden, R. B. Esq.Harrow, Mr. AltrinchamHart, Rev. George A. F.Hartshorn, Rev. Charles Henry, M.A.Hasted, Rev. Henry, M.A.Hatchettt, Charles, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A. Two copies.Hatton, Mrs. Four copies.Hawtrey, Rev. Edw. Craven, D.D. F.S.A-head Masterof Eton School Large paper .Have, Henry, Esq.Heberr, Miss.Heberr, Miss Harriet SarahHeath, James, Esq.Hannah, Henry, Esq.XXIVSUBSCRIBERS.Hensfall, John,, Esq.Hester, G. Esq.Hetherington, MissRhone, Mr.Hibbert, George, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A. Large paper.Hill, John, Esq. Two copies.Hill, Rev. N. Isaac, M.A.Hill, Rev. G. R. O.Hill, George, Esq.Hoar, SIR RICHARD COLT, BART. F.R.S. F.S.A.Hare, Henry Merrick, Esq. Large paper.Hodges, William, Esq.Hodges and Smith, Booksellers, Dublin Two copies.Hodgkinson, Mr.Hodgson, Mr.Holding, James, Esq.Oxford, John Josiah, Esq. Three copies.Holland, Henry, Esq. Two copies.Holiest, Anthony, Esq.Holmes, John, Esq. F.S.A.Hope, Henry Philip, Esq. Twelve copies.Hope, Alexander, Esq.Horseman, Rev. John, M.A. Two copies.Hovenden, I. E. Esq.Hewlett, Rev. John, M.A.Hughes, John, Esq.Hume, Joseph, Esq. M. P.Hunter, Benjamin, Esq.Hustler, Rev. John, M.A.Gallant, Boswell, Esq.James, Rev. John, D.D. Prebendary of PeterboroughTwo copies.James, Mr.James, T. S. Esq.Carman, G. F. Esq.INGLIS, SIR ROBERT HARRY, BART. M. P. LL.D.F.R.S. F.S.A.SUBSCRIBERS. XXVGraham, Edward D. Esq. PhiladelphiaIngram, Rev. James, D.D. F.S.A. President of TrinityCollege, OxfordJones, Rev. John, M.A. Large paper.Jones, Jenkins, Esq.Isaacson, W. Parr, Esq.Kennedy, Rev. Ran, M.A.Kennedy, Rev. Benjamin, M.A.KENYON, GEORGE LORD, F.S.A. Four copies.Kensit, Rev. George Robert, M.A. Two copies.Kerr, John, Esq. Glasgow Three copies.King, James, Esq.Kitson, John, Esq.Laing, Messrs. W. and L. EdinburghLaing, David, Esq. EdinburghLaing, Rev. Francis, M.A.Lang, Mrs. Two copies.Lang, Miss.Lang, C. P. Esq.Langton, Mr.Langley, William, Esq.Langton and Houghton, BooksellersLawrence, Thomas, Esq.Leckie, Mrs.Lee, Rev. L.LEEDS, DUKE OFLewis, W. L. Esq.Lewis, Mr. Frederick CharlesLewis, Mr. Charles Large and Five small.LICHFIELD, EARL, OFLINCOLN, EARL OFLi vie, Mrs.LITTLEDALE, MR. JUSTICE, M.A. F.S.A. Six copies.Littledale, Edward, Esq. Three copies.Littledale, Edward, jun. Esq.Littledale, R. H. Esq.XXVI SUBSCRIBERS.LLANDAFF, BISHOP OF, F.S.A. Three copies.Livingston, ColonelLockwood, MissLower, Esq.Long, Walter, Esq.Langley, Rev. Thomas, D.D. Head Master of HarrowSchoolLucina, James, Esq.M c Douall, Col.Mckenzie, I. W. Esq. EdinburghMaitland, Thomas, Esq. Advocate, EdinburghMajor, Mr. Bookseller Fifty copies.Man, Mr. William, ReadingMarie, MajorMarkland, James Heywood,Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A.Ten copies.Markland, Mrs. BathMartin, Mr.Masquerier, John James, Esq. Five copies.Maude, Francis, Esq. F.S.A.Male, Rev. JohnBelford Book Society.Meredith, John, Esq.Merest, James, Esq.Derivable, Mr. Commissioner, F.S.A. Two copies.Messenger, Thomas, Esq.Miller, William, Esq.Millington, Rev. R. Henry, M.A.Milan, Rev. H. H. Prebendary of Westminster.Worketh, VISCOUNT, M. P.Mordant, W r . N. Esq.Morgan, Thomas, Esq. One Large and five Small paper.Morice, John, Esq. F.S.A.Morsel, Baker, Esq.Morris, Rev. ThomasMorris, Charles, Esq.Morris, John, Esq.Morrison, James, Esq. Two copies.SUBSCRIBERS. XXV11MURRAY, SIR ARCHIBALD, BART.Hutchison, R. I. Esq. Two copies.Margrave, T. M. Esq.Napier, Mr. Professor, EdinburghNeal, J. P. Esq.Neeld, Mrs.Neeld, MissNeeld, Joseph, Esq. M.P. Large and two Small paper.Neeld, John, Esq. M.P. Two copies.NEWCASTLE, His GRACE THE DUKE OF, K.G.Needham, Robert, Esq.Nichols, MissNichols, John Bowyer, Esq. F.S.A.Nicholson, Mrs. GeneralNicholson, Alexander, Esq. F.S.A. Large paper.Nicol, William, Esq. PaU MallNlGHTINGALL, LADY TWO Coals.Notable, BARONESS DENORTHAMPTON, MARQUIS OFNORWICH, BISHOP OFNorwich Chapter Book SocietyNorwich Book SocietyNugee, Andrew, Esq. Two copies.Body, R. S. Esq.Ord, J. P. Esq.Otter, Rev. GeorgePage, AdmiralPalatine, CountParker, Henry, Esq.Pawsey, Mr. F. IpswichPayne, T. I. Esq.Peacock, W. B. Esq.Redder, Robert, Esq. Five copies.PEMBROKE COLLEGE LIBRARY, OxfordTenfold, Rev. George Saxby, D.D.XXV111SUBSCRIBERS.Penrose, Rev. Dr.PEPYS, SIR WILLIAM W. BART.Pepys, William Hasledine, Esq. Two copies.Percival, Samuel, Esq.PETERBOROUGH, BISHOP OF, F.S.A.Petit, Louis Hayes, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A. Two copies.Petrie, Henry, Esq. F.S.A. Keeper of H. M. Recordsin the Tower of London Five copies.Pettigrew, T. J. Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A.Phelps, John Delafield, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A. Four copies.Phillips, SIR THOMAS, BART. F.R.S. F.S.A. Fourcopies.Phillips, Thomas, Esq. R.A. F.R.S. F.S.A.Phillips, John, Esq.Phillips, Charles, Esq.Phillpotts, T. G. Esq. MonmouthPickering, Mr. W. Bookseller Twelve copies.Pickering, Mr. Bookseller, BostonPigott, J. H. S. Esq. F.S.A.Pilgrim, Charles James, Esq. Two copies.Piper, Edward, Esq.Cock, Charles Innes, Esq.Ponton, Thomas, Esq. F.S.A. Four copies.Porter, Miss Jane.Porter, Sir Robert KerrPortman, Mrs.Portman, Edward Berkeley, Esq. Three copies.POTT, REV. ARCHDEACON, M.A.Powell, John, Esq.Ponder, Edward, Esq.Points, W. G. Esq. M.P.Pratt, Rev. I. S.Price, J. Esq. Med.Rodgers, Rev. Edwin, M.A. Two copies.Racket, Rev. Thomas, M.A. F.R.S. F.S.A.Raine, Rev. James, M.A.Rawlinson, John, Esq. Two copies.SUBSCRIBERS. XXIXRay, Mr. John, BarnsleyReeve, Mrs. Two copies.Remington, J. Esq. F.S.A.Kennel, Rev. Thomas, D.D. F.S.A. DEAN OF Winchester.Repton, John Aden, Esq. F.S.A.RICHMOND, His GRACE THE DUKE OF, K.G.Robertson, A. Esq. Med. NorthamptonRobertson, Francis, Esq.Robinson, Mr. M.Robson, Miss.Robson, John Udney, Esq. Two copies.Road, Mr. BooksellerRogers, W. L. Esq.Rogers, Mr. Bookseller, NewmarketRolls, John, Esq. Two copies.DE Roos, HON. MR. Buncombe.Rose, Rev. Henry, M.A.Routh, Rev. Martin Joseph, D.D. President of MagdalenCollege, Oxford Two copies.Roxburgh, HlS GRACE THE DUKE OF TWO Copies.Rusher, Mr. BooksellerRusher, Mr. jun.Rutherford, Andrew, Esq.Sainsbury, MissSt. Barbe, Charles, Esq. F.S.A.Schneider, Rev. Henry, M.A.Schneider, Robert Wilmot, Esq.Scott, Anthony, Esq.Severe, Samuel Amy, Esq. Three copies.Severe, John Michael, Esq.Satchel, Mr. BooksellerSharpe, Mr. Bookseller Twelve copies.Shaw, James, Esq.Shaw, Charles, Esq.Shrewsbury LibrarySinger, S. Weber, Esq. F.S.A. Two copies.XXX SUBSCRIBERS.Sisson, Rev. Lawrence, D.D.Skinner, Mrs.Skullthorp, Thomas, Esq.Slade, Philip, Esq.Shandy, R. Esq.Smith, Horace, Esq.Smith, Rev. Dr.Smith, William, Esq.Snare, Mr. Bookseller One Large and Small paper.Somerwell, W. Esq.Sotheby, Messrs. J. and Leigh Two copies.Southward Literary SocietySpending, Anthony, Esq.Speedwell, Rev. Thomas, M.A. Two copies.Spring, Henry, Esq. Large paper.Squire, Rev. Edward, M.A.Stephenson, Maj-Gen Sir Benjamin Charles, K.C.H.F.S.A.Stevenson, Esq.Story, Mrs. Three copies.Strafford, I. C. Esq. CheltenhamStreatfeild, Rev. Thomas, M.A. F.S.A.STRONG, REV. ARCHDEACON, D.D.Strong, Mr. Bookseller, BristolStyleman, Esq.Suckling, Rev. Alfred Indigo, M.A.Sureties, Mrs.SUTHERLAND, DUKE OF Large paper.Swain, James, Esq. EnshamSykes, Mrs.Sykes, Rev. Christopher, M.A.Talbot, Mr. Robert, Bookseller, Oxford Four copies.Taylor, Mrs.Taylor, Robert, Esq.Taylor, R. S. Esq.Tenant, William, Esq.Terry, Rev. Michael Two copies.SUBSCRIBERS. XXXIStewart, Preston, Esq.Stewart, Edward, Esq.Thackeray, Rev. George, D.D. Provost of King'sCollege, Cambridge Two copies.Thompson, Jonathan, Esq.Thompson, William, Esq.Thomson, Abraham, Esq.Thomson, Henry U. Esq. Med. Two copies.Thomson, Richard, Esq.Thomson, Thomas, Esq. Advocate Two copies.Thorpe, Mr. Bookseller Twelve copies.THURLOW, LORD Large paper.Robin, SIR JOHN Large paper.Tobin, Miss.Tobin, Rev. John, M.A.TODD, VENERABLE ARCHDEACON, M.A. F.S.A. Twocopies.Tooke, William, Esq. M.P. F.R.S.Town, Ithuriel, Esq. New York Large paper.Townshend, Rev. G. Prebendary of DurhamTrevelyan, William Waverley, Esq. F.R.S.Tucker, Messrs, and Son, Christ ChurchTurnbuU, W. B. D.D. Esq.Turner, Dawson, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A. One Large and fiveSmall copies.Turner, Charles, Esq. F.R.S. Two copies.Burton, Rev. Thomas, D.D. DEAN OF PETERBOROUGHUttersonon, Edward Vernon, Esq. F.S.A. Five copies.Valpy, Rev. Richard, D.D. F.S.A. Five copies.Valpy,A.J. Esq. M.A.Valsamachi, Lady Two copies.VERNON, LORD Large paper.Vernon, Edward, Esq.Wakefield, Charles James, Esq. Two copies.Walker, John, Esq.Wellesley, Edward, Esq. Six copies.XXXll SUBSCRIBERS.Walpole, Rev. Robert, M.A.Ward, George, Esq.Warden, John, Esq.Watson, T. J. Esq.Watt, James, Esq.Way, Rev. William Two copies.Beale, Mr.Webb, Daniel Hale, Esq.Welch, George, Esq.Selden, Mrs.WESTMINSTER, MARQUIS OFWheaten, Mr. Benjamin Eight copies.Wheeler, Henry J.White, Mrs. KearneyWhiting, James, Esq. Two copies.Wilbraham, George, Esq. M. P. Two copies.Wilbraham, Miss ElizaWilkie, David, Esq. R.A.Williams, Mr. Cheltenham Three copies.Williams, MissWilliams, J. Pinkerton, Esq. LL.D. F.S.A. ShrewsburyWilson, Rev. Plympton, M.A.Wilson, ColonelWINCHESTER, BISHOP OFWhitfield, Charles, Esq.Wintle, Rev. Thomas, M.A.Wolverton, Mrs.Wolsey, Mrs.Woolcombe, Henry, Esq.Worthington, W. H. Esq.Wake, T. F. Esq.WRANGHAM, REV. ARCHDEACON Two copies.Way, Robert, Esq. Three copies.Wright, Mr. JamesWrightson, B. W. Esq. M. P.Winter, Rev. Dr. President of St. John's College, OxfordTatian, William, Esq.YORK, His GRACE THE ARCHBISHOP OFLIST OF PLATES.Portrait of the Author to face Title.Archbishop Parker's Salt-cellar, p. xi. (Preface). Vol. I. Page.Portrait of Francis Douce, Esq. . . . .312Initial Letter, B (referred to at p. 910) . . 345Portrait of Roger Wilbraham, Esq. . . .408The Library, Ashton Hall. . . Vol. II. 557Assumption of the Virgin . . . . 769Demons 770Interior of the Drawing Room of Ashton Hall . . 952Child with a Cardinal's Hat, from a Manuscript in the possessionof Sir John Tobin , 974CORRECTIONS,Page 18, line 3 from bottom, for occupy, read occupies.19, 12, " (called a Snow," &c.151, 10 from bottom, for National, read Cabinet.235, 11 from bottom, for in, read as.277, 8 from bottom, for Langton, read Langton.314, 9 from bottom, for genial, read gentleman.319, 17 of note, for antiquities, read Antiquities.26 of note, for know, read knew.324, 5 of note, for have, read having.327, 10 from bottom, for History of Durham, read Historyof the county of Durham.358, last but one, for 18, read 81.375, 8 of note, for Steamer, read Sledmere.396, 5 of note, for Niebuhr, read Niebuhr.397, 6 of text, for loco, read loco.459, 3 of note, for through, read throughout.18 of note, for Roxburghee, read Buccleugh.595, for supervene, read supervene.665, bottom line, for When, read Where.683, line 3 of note, for Doubtlessly, read Doubtless.Page 195. The " Two Pilgrims in Grey" was published in one of Mr.Ackermann's " Forget me not," with a plate from a drawing by Stall.Page 384. The anecdote here recorded of the death of Mr. JamesBoswell, was not communicated to me by Mr. Markland ; but by a commonfriend of the deceased and myself.REMINISCENCES,c\r. Sec. %c.CHAPTER I.PARENTAL HISTORY.My boast is not that I deduce my birthFrom loins enthroned, and rulers of the earth ;But higher far my proud pretensions riseThe son of parents pass'd into the skies ! "COWPER : Verses on his Mother's Portrait.AFTER a good deal of anxious consideration, Ihave resolved to begin quite at the beginning. Ihave resolved, from a conscientious impulse whichit were as difficult to describe as I find it to beimpossible to resist, to start, on these Reminiscences,with a tribute of affectionate respect tothe memory of my Parents. And yet, I have notthe slightest remembrance of them. They bothdied when I had scarcely attained my fourth year ;but not without leaving behind those testimonies or.memorials, of worth and excellence, mingled withtoo many evidences of misfortune and affliction, whichrender such memorials too permanently engraved onthe mind of their offspring.2 PARENTAL HISTORY .My father, Thomas Dibdin, was the TOM Bowlingof his younger brother, Charles Dibdin : aname, synonymous with all that is incomparable inthe nautical ballad-poetry of our country. CharlesDibdin, my paternal uncle, made the Ocean theprincipal element of his muse. No poet before himhad ever dwelt so much, and almost so exclusively,upon its characteristics and attributes. He peopledit with a set of human beings peculiarly his own.Whether its surface were rippled with the breeze,or its depths agitated by the storm, the sailor thatwas borne upon that surface was always the genuineTar of Great Britain. Whether directing his courseunder easy sail *" into the harbour where parent,wife, or former messmate might dwell whetherrushing into the shock of battle, or braving the wilduproar of the elements t still, the love of kindred" Sweet is the ship, that, under sail,Spreads her white bosom to the gale,Sweet, oh ! sweet, the flowing can ;Sweet to poise the labouring oar,That tugs us to our native shore.When the boatswain pipes the barge to man,Sweet sailing in the favouring breeze ;But oh, much sweeter than all these,Is Jack's delight his LOVELY Nant"Blow high, blow low,Let tempests tear the mainmast by the board ! "In this wild ballad, which has ever struck me as one of the mostspirited and tender of its class, and which was also the author's firstsea-song, the sailor solaces himself, in the very phrensy of the elements,In hopes, on shoreTo be once more "with Her, who divides with him the empire of his heart. The followingPARENTAL HISTORY.and of country was ever uppermost in that sailor'sbosom. And how admirably was the ocean itself,under every varying breeze and climate, under everyis singularly sweet and tranquil, after the violence and bluster of thepreceding.And on that night, when all the crewThe memory of their former lives,O'er flowing cans of flip renew,And drink their sweethearts and their wives,111 heave a sigh, and think on thee :And as the ship rolls through the sea,The burden of my song shall be,Blow high, blow low !" &c.The sentiment of Dibdin's Sailor is peculiarly his own. It is neverdegraded by vulgarity, nor enervated by that sort of mawkish sensibilitywhich might be construed into cowardice. So felicitously, sometimes,is the tender passion described, that, in ordinary life, onewould think it to be the sole inmate of a sailor's bosom. The Corydonand Demons, which cut such a figure in the days of "good QueenAnne," seem, comparatively, to have been mere mechanical puppetsthe vehicles of whining exclamation and artificial rapture. Let butamong thousands of beauties the task of selection is at once unnecessaryand endless only let the reader select that which begins'Twas post meridian, half-past four,where, at the conclusion of each stanza, our honest tar solaces himselfwith " looking on the moon and thinking of his Nancy." Can anythingexceed the natural tenderness of the conclusion of the second andthird stanzas ? The other sailors are indulging themselves in theclamorous mirth of the " grog," when our tar is little disposed to sympathisewith their merriment.I, little to their mirth inclined,While tender thoughts rushed on my fancy ;And my warm sighs increased the windLooked on the moon, and thought of Nancy.Round went the can, the jest, the glee,While tender wishes filled each fancy ;And when, in turn, it came to me,I heaved a sigh, and toasted Nancy."PARENTAL HISTORY'.dark shadow and golden gleam, depicted by the samefelicitous pencil !I have said that my father was the Tom Bowlingdescribed in the well-known and justly-celebratedballad of Charles Dibdin's beginning thus :Here, a sheer hulk, lies poor TOM BOWLING,The darling of our crew :" &c.From what I have been able to learn, his figure wastall, robust, and proportionate ; in strict accordancewith the words of the same balladHis form was of the manliest beauty *,His heart was kind and soft."But, with reference to the " battle" as alluded to in the text whatis there of ballad-composition that approaches, within many degrees,the " Poor Jack" of Charles Dibdin ? How thoroughly wise, good,brave, gentle, and considerate, are the sentiments there uttered andyet the whole ballad is so mixed up with frequent and quaint technicalphrases, or expressions, as to render it perfectly characteristic and inimitable.I remember when this ballad was heard upon almost everyhand-organ in the street ; as often with, as without, the words. Fromthe town it quickly circulated into the country. In the uplands andlowlands by plough-boy, or waggoner among " hewers of wood anddrawers of water," its cheering burdenThere's a sweet little cherub that sits up aloftTo keep watch for the life of Poor Jack"seemed to smooth the brow of care and to soften the severity of toil.The religious complexion of the whole ballad is obviously striking andinstructive. The author parted with his share or property in it toosoon; and the purchaser is said to have realised, five hundred pounds bythis INDIVIDUAL BALLAD !The reader will probably smile at the following anecdote. So singularlywere the days of my youth past, that I had never seen any one whohad had personal knowledge of my father. But, towards my twenty-parentalHISTORY. 5It should seem that, from early youth the rulingpassion in each brother quickly and powerfully developeditself. My father took to the sea ; and withsuch zeal and success, that, at the age of twenty-five(1756) he commanded the "Eagle Gaily," asloop-of-war in the chops of the Bristol Channelcarrying twenty-eight guns, with a complementof two hundred and twenty men. My uncle, afteran education for the church, at Winchester school,became a candidate, at the age of fourteen, for thesituation of organist to the cathedral. His youthalone, is said to have stood in the way of his success.At the precocious age of sixteen, he wrote and composedan opera, in two acts, called the Shepherd'sArtifice.' 9first year, being in company with an elderly gentleman who knew himwell, some one asked " if I resembled my parent ?" " Not at all,"says the , gentleman, " Captain Dibdin was a fine-looking fellow ! !"That " his heart was kind and soft," there are too powerful, and at thesame time, too melancholy, evidences to prove. One, who knew himwell, described him to me as " among the kindest-hearted men alive."I have given but a brief and an unworthy outline of the talents ofCharles Dibdin. He is supposed to have written about twelve hundredlyrical and dramatical pieces in the course of his career. His intellectualfecundity seems to have been inexhaustible. Of these pieces,the opera and farce of Lionel and Clarissa, and The Padlock will placehim amongst the most successful contributors to the stage. The musicis peculiarly his own ; and his performance of Mungo, in the Padlock,has, I understand, been rarely equalled and never surpassed. It receivedthe warmest eulogies of Garrick. I had but a very slight knowledgeof him never having conversed with him but once; just before mycoining of age. He was then in the plenitude of fame and wealth. Theunrivalled excellence of his Sans Souci brought crowds to his theatre ;and the publication and copyright of his Songs (which he seems to havePARENTAL HISTORY.x.Of my father's subsequent destiny, up to the periodof his union with my mother (his second wife),the slenderest possible materials survive. Whether,during Lord Chatham's glorious administration, heledthese two hundred and twenty men into actionvictory or defeat is mere matter of idle conjecture: it is certain that he never could have continuedinactive. Enough of the short history ofhim, after his union with my mother, proves thathis was a mind which neither courted nor couldendure mere animal repose. Within three yearsafter his command of the Eagle, my father marriedhis first wife, of whose maiden name I am whollyignorant. He seems to have been at this time inpretty easy circumstances, for I find a letter fromhis sister Penelope to Mrs. Dibdin, in which thelatter is at once congratulated and envied on ,accountof her good fortune. This letter is in partso racy and characteristic, that I scruple not toassign a portion of it to a place in the subjoinednote *. A daughter and son were the fruits of thismarriage.composed by inspiration) were a source of yet greater income. He lived,however, as many distinguished men have lived before him, to see publicadmiration abate, and the streams of prosperity to flow in contractedchannels. He died in 1814, in his sixty-ninth year.Southron, [Southampton, Jan. 1759.DEAR SISTER, I received your letter. A kind one, I won't call it:for I had prided myself on receiving a long letter from you and at lastcomes a few lines, with hardly an account of your health, or of that ofone of my friends. But, however, I must forgive you now, and flatterPARENTAL HISTORY. 7There is too good reason to believe that this marriagewas soon clouded by sinister events, totallyunconnected with incompatibility of temper or disunionof principle. In the year 1772 he became awidower, his wife dying while he was abroad. Whatdirected his views to India, is altogether undiscoverable; but finding no employment during the peace,he became a " Rover" upon the Indian Ocean, andin the year 1775, at Calcutta, married ELIZABETHCo MPT ON, my mother.myself with that pleasure in answer to this. Dear sister, oh how I envyyour happiness ! Yes, let me say I envy you because 1 can't partakeof it : but, at the same time, I am sure you don't think I wish you less.No, may you abound in all the happiness this life can afford, till I wishit less and then you will be completely happy ! For my part, I amquite a dull stupid creature: know nothing of what's done in the worldor hardly partake of the social joys of company or conversation. Ilive in as much obscurity as if I lived in the remotest corner of theearth : as much a recluse as if [ were a nun. My dear mother is all thecompany I have : who, to be sure, is the most indulgent mother thatever a child had. But you know, my dearest sister, that it is no goodfor a child to be always under a mother's wing : and I have lived one-and-twentyyears under (I wont use so harsh an expression to saya tyrannical father, but) one, whose commands are a little too severe ;and I don't know but I may turn out this summer and seek my fortune:so if you know ever an old lady who wants a companion (but not an oldman who wants a nurse) or a young lady that wants a confidante, I amat their service. And now I have told you my mind, you will excuseme when I say, that I envy you, or any body, that lives in so muchgaiety," &c.To this sister of my father, my mother, immediately on her marriage,wrote an affectionate letter ; disclosing the event, and challenging her toa correspondence which might be beneficial as well as comforting toboth parties. On this letter, my father has endorsed, "No answer everreturned." In all probability it never reached her.PARENTAL HISTORY.A word, with the reader's leave, respecting thatsame mother. To me, she lives only hy report andin her letters : letters, so tender and touching, socharacteristic of a pious, cheerful, active, resigned,and happy disposition, developing, at the same time,no uncultivated talents or disputable taste, that, hadthe casket which contained them, and in which Ifound them on taking possession of my trifling inheritance,been "rifled of its sweets " and thousandsof pagodas substituted in their place I should haveconsidered the exchange as a robbery of the cruellestdescription. The inimitable Cowper seems to havewrought his fancy to the most painful, and yet natural,pitch of ecstacy, on a contemplation of hismother's portrait by the hand of Art. His was arepresentation of the external features. The portraitwhich it is my good fortune to possess, of aparent "pass'd into the skies," is wholly of thefeatures of the mind and heart ; and it is a portraitof which the colours are perennial *. It is also aAnd yet I am not wholly destitute of a notion of her form andface. She was of middle stature, with a clear complexion, hazel eyes,and light brown hair ; possessed of a colour so bright and blooming,that my maternal uncle and guardian, Mr. William Compton, used totell me that there was no countenance on which he gazed with suchthorough delight. He accompanied her to India, and returned in thevessel which took her over. Her cousin, Miss Boone, afterwards Mrs.Duke wishing to make the description of her as epigrammatic as possiblehas often said that she had " the colour of a milk-maid !" I neverheard of her portrait having been executed by any artist.I might perhaps be here indulged in the venial vanity of familyPARENTAL HISTORY.speaking portrait. It describes incidents as vividly,as naturally ; overshadowed, however, occasionallywith that " pale and sickly cast of thought," whichis too often the result of frustrated schemes andblighted hopes. It is, however, more than negativeconsolation to know, that the period of her sufferings,as a widow, was short ; indeed, the career of herwedded life scarcely reached beyond its fifth year.Never was a union more warm and cordial ; although,perhaps, little anticipated by either partyon quitting their native shores. My mother hadarrived in India in 1770*, having been taken outbyher brother, Captain Compton, in his own vessel,relationship by my mother's side ; but, without wishing to push thepoint with heraldic pertinacity (what will not heralds accomplish?) orfeeling the least disappointment if the conclusion be drawn from falsepremises, it may be permitted me to say, that she was not only aCOMPTON, but her family bore, in crest and shield, precisely the sameform and motto as those of the illustrious family of NORTHAMPTON.Her chief employment on her voyage was the making of housewives(then a fashionable exercise of the needle), and copying copiouslyfrom the works of Milton and Pope : occasionally, however, " invokingthe muse " as 1 find some verses by her, " On seeing a Man buried atSea, on board the Merest, Captain Compton, when the Author wasgoing to India," beginning thus :A fine large ship, in weather fair,Glides on the sea as if in air."I also find the following verses, descriptive of her passage, writtenshortly after her arrival, and beginning thus :From India's bright and burning climes,I send apologies for rhymes.*****'Twas fate commanded I should come,A wanderer from my native home ;10 PARENTAL HISTORY.the " Merest ;" a vessel, doomed to be wrecked* onits return. Of her situation, employment, or courseGod bless'd our ship in wind and weather,And all was favourable together :Our passage short, &c.*-x- * * *My first arrival, much surprised ;Could not have such a sight devised.Blacks without clothes, a numerous crew,My first attention blushing drew.I look'd with wonder all around,To find myself on steady ground.In palanquins we stately ride,With slaves attending by our side."* # * *Her affectionate disposition thus develops itself at the conclusion ofthis poetical epistle :Then blame me not, my friends most dear,But let me often from you hear.I '11 kiss the lines with heart-felt glee,When first your letter blesses me."It seems that this voyage was undertaken in a state of extreme mentalagony, which arose from her determination not to marry a husbandselected for her by her uncle, Captain Frognall, and to whom she hadthe most decided personal objection. She missed her " coach and four,"but she maintained her independence. Sir Charles Raymond (whom Ican just remember when a little boy, from his mulberry-coloured suitcovered with snuff, and his giving me several gentle pats on the head,with a large diamond flaming on his little finger) was particularly kindand considerate to her on her departure : acting quite the part of aguardian. It is evident, from some part of the poetical address abovequoted, that she quitted England with a heavy heart, and with a deeply-fixedpresage that she should return to it no more.This shipwreck took place off the island of Mauritius. At midnightthe vessel struck upon a reef of hidden rocks, and broke her backright in two. My uncle, Mr. William Compton, who accompanied hisbrother, the Captain, told me, that so tremendous was the concussion,he was thrown bolt upright in his berth. A melancholy yet instructivelesson is to be learned from the conduct of one individual on board.PARENTAL HISTORY. 11of life, from her arrival to her marriage, I have beenunable to glean any materials ; except that she seemsto have had many kind and respectable friends, towhom she now and then showed her gratitude bycourting her muse, and sending them her poeticaleffusions * . If these effusions do not always run onall fours," they do not betray a hopelessly limpingpace.The only means of safety for the crew was the construction of a raft ;which being completed, every body was importuned to jump overboard,or descend upon it as quickly and cleverly as they could the breakersbeating a-head with an astounding uproar. The individual in questionhad 1500 double gold moors, which he wished to be his companions onthe raft. He entreated my uncle, the captain, to take them under hisspecial protection, adding, that "he would not charge him any interest!"My uncle, spurning his offer, told him he had not a moment to lose.The unhappy man could not bear the thought of parting with hismammon. He strapped the bag, in which the moors were contained, tohis waist; and making a leap to reach the raft, the weight of the"precious metal" paralysed his efforts. He fell greatly short of the raft,and sunk to rise no more.Among these effusions are some of her happiest efforts : they arebrief and epigrammatic. That " To Mrs. Mapleloft (a family withwhom she was very intimate) on presenting the Author with a plainGold Ring," begins thus :A plain gold ring was such a sight,It flutter'd all my senses quite ;As thoughts of the connubial kindHad ceased to occupy my mind."I give the whole of that " To the fair Diana Coles, on sprainingher ancle shortly after her marriage."Will you never cease romping, my dear married friend,Though sorrow and sadness must come in the end ?The single fair damsel may foot it away,With romping, and gadding, and any thing gay ;But when she is wedded, such doings should cease,If she hopes to enjoy what is true married peace.12 PARENTAL HISTORY.My father was a widower of forty-four when hewas united to my mother ; whose description of him,on her marriage, may perhaps be endured in itsplace below*. He was then in command of a vesselMethinks I behold you, just hopping around,One foot is quite off, t' other scarce on the ground ;With one finger held up, and a smile on your face,Which all, to be sure, has an exquisite grace ;When lo ! what avails such sad tricks in a wife,Her poor ancle's sprain' d, and the plague of her life ;As a punishment due, she sits crying with pain,And vows and declares that she '11 ne'er romp again."The verses " On the Birthday of Mrs. Wynne, after her Recoveryfrom a dangerous Illness," are in a grave and affecting strain ; whilethose " On presenting Miss Pearson with a Cup," begin in this sprightlymanner :This little cup is made for you,Sweet prattling Sally will it do?"Those " Intended for the Tomb of Mrs. H. Ross," commence thus:See, cruel Death, with his destroying hand,Hath cropp'd the fairest flower in Asia's land;Nor youth, nor innocence could aught avail,Nor suppliant prayers, nor ardent vows prevail."But enough. The Rosses seem always to have been the affectionateand constant friends of the author.This description is contained in a long and particular letter to heruncle and aunt, Captain and Mrs. Frognall, in England, to whom shefirst made known the important fact of her marriage, and on the formerof whom she wholly depended for her future support. It runs thus :I am sure, my dear sir and madam, were you to see my husband,you would be much pleased ; for without partiality he has a great dealof true genuine humour : and every one allows that my Captain is amost entertaining companion. For example, he plays on the fiddle, theflute, and the drum : sings a number of diverting songs ; and has aparticular back of telling stories with so much humour, that he wouldmake you laugh from morning till night. And I really think there isno end to them : for he brings out some new ones every day. Added1'AHENTAL HISTORY. 1*5called the Diana, the size of a large Indiamen. Mymother was in her thirty-first year. They weremarried at Calcutta by the first marriage licenceever granted in India ; under the chief-justiceshipof Sir Elijah Imply, Knight. The original documentis in my possession. For the first two yearsat the termination of the second of which I was bornmy mother resided wholly at Calcutta, my fathermaking coasting voyages from thence to Madras.Here she received the attentions, and even experiencedthe friendships, of many leading charactersof the place * secretly, however, sighing for a per-to all this, he is quite of an active temper, and seems to mind his businesswith great diligence which is, indeed, a most material thing: forwithout it, the pot would boil but very slowly indeed. In short, though1 may, perhaps, be called partial, yet I both name him and think him myTom often millions! for ten thousand is not giving him his full value !"To the names mentioned in a preceding page, as those of some ofher best friends, may be added those of Mr. Carter, Mrs. Palk, Mr.Coles, Captain Patton, and others which are humorously recordedin a poetical scrap called "The Medley." None of those friendsshewed her, perhaps, quite so much affectionate attention as Mrs.Johanna Ross ; whose " chit" to her, in my possession, (although hername only is attached as that of an aged person, from its mode ofscription) is as follows: "How do you do, my dear Mrs. Dibdin?Why am I to be deprived of a sight which you know will give pleasureto your old friend and well-wisher ? So many days in the river,and not to call at my home, is something strange ! There is a saying,out of sight, out of mind Some truth in that saying, is there not,dear Mrs. D. ? Why yes, says you. Pray come, therefore, and spendthe day with me before you go down. Do so, sauce-box and obligeyours, sincerely, JOHANNA Ross.N. B. Remember me kindly to your lord and master."A name, yet DEARER to both husband and wife, will be disclosed in afew pages onwards.14 PARENTAL HISTORY.manet residence at Madras: for the expense ofhouse-rent, and the frequency of separation, did notcontribute to the tranquillity of her mind. Add towhich, the intense heat of Calcutta (she is alwayscomplaining of the " prickly heat" a symptom,however, of sound health) made her anxious for aresidence where the breeze was less burning, andthe adjacent country more picturesque ; as well asmore immediately connected with her husband's occupations*.The reader must now be more exclusively madeacquainted with my Father ; whose adventures, orrather misfortunes, assume, in some instances, almostthe stirring character of those recorded in anovel. They are, however, too indissolubly and toosadly founded upon FACT. Some slight mention hasOf the long and trying separations which these " occupations" necessarilyoccasioned, my mother's epistles bear frequent and affectingevidence. It should seem that worldly matters were soon beginning towear rather a rough aspect; for about the anniversary of her wedding-day,my mother writes thus to her absent husband :" After havingpartaken of a hearty dinner of curry, I have the pleasure to take up mypen to tell my dear husband that I am well, and as happy as can be expected,considering my separation from the one I most love in all theworld. My happiness does not consist in any prospect of good fortune.No, my dear ; it is owing to a resignation to the divine will who, in hisown good time,' will open to view, or bring to pass, more pleasingcircumstances than I have lately experienced, or am likely to experiencein time to come." She, however, describes with complacency, in otherletters, " her never being idle for what with working, and reading, andwriting (in the intervals of receiving friendly visits), the day neverpasses away unproductively." And in one particular letter she talks ofhaving "just risen from her curry dinner, serenaded the whole time bythree sweet songsters in cages."PARENTAL HISTORY. 1 ">been made of his being in possession of a " fine largemerchant vessel," called the Diana, at the time ofhis marriage. In the spring of the same year(April, 1775) this vessel was hired to carry a companyof seasons, belonging to Captain Kelly's battalion,on the Madras establishment, from the portof Tillicherry to the presidency of Bombay. TheMahratta fleet, supposed to be abroad, was at thattime both active and hostile, if not formidable ; andmy father was appointed, " by a majority of countrycommanders," commodore of a large fleet of merchantvessels bound in the same direction. The Dianamounted sixteen carriage guns, having on boardthirty European sailors, the same number of Lascars,and one hundred rank and file of seasons, with anofficer. The contract for freight was managed by aMr. Boddam; and the remuneration was distinctlyunderstood to come from the Governor and Council ofBombay, through the intervention of a Mr. Hornby.A more treacherous contract was never executed.Twice the number of troops were put on board towhat was originally agreed upon ; and on my father'smentioning the difficulty, if not impracticability, ofsupplying so large a company with water from hisown casks, he was told " the chief would put onboardwater sufficient for the passage, and properprovisions for the voyage." However, after lingeringtwo days, neither additional water nor provisionsmade their appearance. The monsoon season was16 PARENTAL HISTORY.coming on, and another twenty-four hours delaymight have been perilous.Accordingly, my father sailed, making all possibledispatch for Bombay; "but the southerly currentsprevailing, he was obliged to put in at several placesfor want of water, and did not arrive in Bombayuntil the 19th of May in all thirty days ; carryinginto that port only one leaguer of water, being in aheavy gale of wind, with the loss of the foremast.On the 20th the troops were landed ; and some daysafter, an application was made for payment by CaptainDavid Scott, in the name of the whole." What followedwas rather curious, and, I should hope, sosingular as never to have been repeated. " Thethanks of the Governor and Council were given, butthey did not think any of the ships entitled to anypay or profit whatsoever ; alledging, that the troopswere a protection to the several ships : forgettingthat the Mahratta fleet was at this time stripped andlaid up at Genial, for the monsoon season."The passages in inverted commas are taken frommy father's memorial to the Commander-ins Chief,which concludes thus : " And your memorialist,knowing your high station as Commander-in-chiefof the Honourable Company's forces in India, takesthe liberty of laying before you these particulars foryour inspection and indulgence ; begging leave tomention, at the same time, that the Louisa, CaptainTasker, received 10,000 Bombay rupees for a pass-paternalIHSTORV. 17age of some troops from Madras to Bombay, whichship belonged to Mr. Hornby."This memorial, so far from being written or pressedwith precipitancy, was actually not written or presentedtill a twelvemonth after the accomplishmentof the voyage. It is dated " Calcutta, May 3, 1776."It was wholly ineffectual. Of what materials Mr.Hornby's conscience must have been composed, orupon what data of logic or justice the Governor andCouncil of Bombay issued their edict, it were nowidle to conjecture. The transaction is a disgrace toall pretensions to honourable government. But aheavier calamity speedily befel the memorialist. Insome subsequent enterprise, of which I have neverbeen able to ascertain the particulars, the Dianafoundered. This was a terrible blow to my father.AU the consolation derivable from intense sympathyin the bosom of an affectionate wife, it was his lot toexperience. My mother wrote to him in a strain ofthe warmest attachment, and most entire Christianfortitude * ; solacing herself with a more successfulresult from another employment, of far greater im-thecommencement of this letter is thus : " My more than everdear husband for, believe me, if possible, I have loved you better sinceyour misfortune in losing the Diana, than ever I did before : and I cannothelp being angry with myself for not taking up my pen directly totell you the real sentiments of my heart. That I was shocked on thinkingof the dreadful accident is certain, as I was sure you must havesuffered acutely when it happened. But a moment's reflection mademe thankful for your preservation, and repining at the accident, asno lives were lost. In a minute, hard as the stroke was, I was blessedC18 PATERNAL HISTORY.portance, which had been somewhat mysteriouslydisclosed to her in her husband's letter. Of thatemployment, the last in which he was concerned, amore particular detail may be acceptable.In the autumn of the same year (1776) commencedmy father's intimacy with George Stratton, Esq., Governorof Fort St. George, Madras ; and, throughhim, with the Nabob of Arcot. Just at this timepublic affairs should seem to have worn rather asuspicious aspect in that quarter. Lord Pilot, theGovernor of Madras, and his right-hand counsellor,Mr. Stratton, appear to have subjected themselvesto the probability of a severe scrutiny at fortitude sufficient to say, that I was sure it would eventually turnoutfor the best." A little onward she writes thus : " I was at Mrs.Ross's when Mr. Dunham brought me your letter ; and I assure you theold lady (see p. 13) behaved very kindly on the occasion : doing all shecould to keep up my spirits,, and telling me that her house should bemy home in the time of your absence, if you got another ship," &c.Believe me, my Tom, by your frequent and affectionate letters youhave endeared yourself greatly to your Betsy; but to answer them allnow in particular would be needless, as I am in hopes you will not be inMadras when this arrives."In the letter just alluded to, my father had hinted to her the probableengagement with the Nabob of Arcot and Mr. Stratton, governor ofFort St. George, though, doubtless, in indirect, if not obscure, terms :to which my mother thus replies : " But though I will not answer allyour letters, yet I cannot help noticing that wherein you mention thatyou have a prospect in view which must not transpire till it takes place,as a premature disclosure might mar all. The thoughts of that prospect(I will not say more for fear of accidents to this letter) gave me suchpleasure, that I cried for joy by myself." The " prospect" here alludedto occupy the above pages of the text. It was at this moment tingedwith a golden hue. My poor mother had reason enough to shed tears ofa different description on its realization !PATERNAL HISTORY'. 19tears in Leadenhall-street ; and before any serious andfinal measures should be resorted to, there, it wasperemptorily necessary to make an early and favourableimpression in behalf of the Madras governor.An over-land dispatch appeared to be the only likelyplan to accomplish this ; and a navigator and negociatorof adroitness and experience was instantlyrequired to carry that plan into effect by a dispatchup the Red Sea, to the isthmus of Suez, and fromthence to Grand Cairo, and so on to England. MyFather was pitched upon as the man. He had justpurchased a small trading vessel called a (Snow inthat country), of 180 tons burthen, for 1800 star pagodas; and with this it was resolved that he shouldundertake the voyage, at the rate of 800 star pagodasper month. The vessel, named the Expedition, wasthen lying at Pondicherry ; but it was ordered roundimmediately to Trincomalee bay, in the island ofCeylon, for the purpose of my father's joining her.Not relying upon the efficacy of the nabob's promiseof remuneration, my father told Mr. Stratton thathe must lean entirely upon himself. Mr. Strattonreplied, that his word and honour were at issue inthe final and satisfactory settlement of this importanttransaction. On the 14th of October, a writtencharter-party was drawn up, and its contents wereapproved by Mr. Stratton. The next day it wasread to the Nabob of Arcot by a Mr. Macpherson.The nabob entirely approved ; but said " it was beneaththe dignity of a prince to sign it ! " On menesPaternal HISTORY.turning this to Mr. Stratton, the latter said " nevermind the nabob's not signing it, I will see everythingsettled to your satisfaction, according to myagreement."Upon the strength of these repeated assurances,my father prepared to get his officers and a selectcrew in readiness, and to wait the final instructionsof his employers for departure. An unnecessary delayintervened. It was promised to advance 2000star-pagodas on account ; for immediate expenseswere heavy, and the contingencies of a voyage upthe Red Sea at that time considered of precarious,if not perilous, achievement demanded the utmostforesight, and a supply of every thing which mightbe obtainable, in case of sudden emergencies, bymeans of money. After a pretty palpable specimenof shuffling and prevarication, 1000 star-pagodasonly were advanced ; and not till December the16th, towards midnight, did my father receive hisfinal instructions being " a large paper packet, directedto the Hon. Company of East India Directors,at India House, in Leadenhall-street." But, as ifthe safety of the entire settlement depended uponthe issue of this enterprise, he first received, from aCaptain Wolsey, the following pertinent note. " ToCaptain Dibdin. You are to read this when yougo on board, and not before" On getting on boardbe read as follows :Orders from the Nabob Wallajau, &c. To CaptainThomas Dibdin. You are not to carry a singleI'AHBRNAL HISTORY. -letter except from Governor Stratton." With the"large paper packet " to the East India Directors,were delivered the final instructions from GovernorStratton, accompanied by the following letter.SIR The accompanying packet will give youinstructions for your future proceedings ; and I canonly add thereto, that no person whatsoever is toknow your destination, and of course that your vesselis to be employed on no other service but for thedispatch of the packet. Enclosed are your writteninstructions, which are to be opened in a certainlatitude : and you know that such is your agreementwith His Highness the Nabob : and that your fulfillingthe same in the strictest sense will alone entitleyou to the freight he has engaged to pay you.This he requests I will communicate to you,\ and Iadvise you to be punctual in the performance. Iam, Sir, &c. GEORGE STRATTON. Fort St. George,Dec. 15, 1776:" and sealed with the Company'sseal.But there was yet another " note of preparation"before departure. It was necessary to have a passportfrom the Nabob * ; and Mr. Sullivan, the militarysecretary, delivered a notification that the packetwas not to be broken open till my father had reachedthe latitude 09 00' north. On the 23d January,1777> n reaching this latitude, and " being to theThe passport runs thus : " In the name of the merciful and compassionateGod. Praise be to God, the Lord of Worlds : and prayer22 PARENTAL HISTORY.eastward of Jingo," he opened his instructions ;and read another yet more particular letter fromGovernor Stratton, which could leave no doubt asto the importance and delicacy of the mission entrustedto him. A letter, written in a more thoroughspirit of diplomacy more circumspect, particular,and imperative could scarcely have been penned ;as the reader shall judge from a faithful transcriptof it below*. Owing to the delays and consequenttardiness of setting sail, my father did not leave theMalabar coast till very late ; and springing a leak,with other accidents, he did not get to Suez thatand salutation to our Lord and Master Mahomet (who is the best ofancients and moderns) and to his descendants and friends in general.Whereas this dispatch from the sovereign of the Carnatic (wherehe governs) to the territories of the potentates,, ameer,, and nobility ofArabia (whom may God for ever preserve, and bless their mornings andevenings) imports, that his friend CAPTAIN DIBDIN, of the ship calledExpedition, is sent to the famous port of Suez (belonging to the GrandSignor) with letters to the powers of Europe upon matters of importanceto the welfare of Mussulman ; he therefore hopes, from their goodness,that they will permit the said Captain Dibdin, with his ship, topass through their dominions, and prevent their being impeded by theirsubjects or soldiers. ADIEU." The foregoing is a literal translation bya Captain G. Mackay.SIB The Nabob has acquainted me that he has freighted yourvessel for a certain time, and has requested of me to give you whatinstructions I thought necessary for the execution of the purposes forwhich your vessel is intended. In consequence of this request made tomeby His Highness, and the instructions received from him, I am todesire you will, on the receipt hereof, make the best of your way to theport of Suez ; at which place you are to remain for a packet or packetsof letters from the East India Company for this Presidency ; or fromCol. Capper to the Nabob or myself; which packets you will take chargeof, and immediately return to this place ; taking particular care thatneither yourself nor officers mention any news that may come to yourI'AUUNTAL HISTORY. 23season. At Juddah, in the direct way thither, hehad the misfortune to have his " thigh shivered bylightning." A sudden and severe illness ensued;but, preparing for the worst, and rousing all hisenergies to carry the mission into execution, (havingmade his Will) he dispatched his second officer, Mr.George Romaine, to the port of Suez, under veryspecial instructions, enclosing the passport of theNabob, to carry Governor Stratton's packet fromthence to Grand Cairo, and to deliver it, at thatplace, into the hands of George Baldwin, Esq. Mr.Romaine was dispatched up the Red Sea in a largeknowledge, or any circumstances whatever, to any person : for I mustremark to you, that SECRECY is to be observed in every transaction nowcommitted to your charge.The packets herewith delivered to you, being of the greatest importance,you will take the most particular care of them ; and on yourarrival at Suez, you will leave your vessel in charge of your first officer,and proceed immediately with them to Mr. Baldwin at Grand Cairo, towhom you will deliver them, and consult with him about the most expeditiousand safe method with which these packets may be forwardedfrom thence to England. And that every precaution be taken, I am todesire you will direct Mr. Romaine (your second officer) to accompanyy ou to Grand Cairo, that in case Mr. Baldwin should be at a loss for atrusty person to take charge of these packets from thence, that Mr.Romaine may proceed with them to England. The accompanying letterfor Mr. Baldwin I put under a flying seal for your perusal, that youmay receive every instruction on this subject which I can give you,relative to the service on which you are employed. I rely on diligenceand attention in the execution thereof, and am to desire you will adviseme, by every opportunity, of whatever occurrences may come to yourknowledge, and that you send me what newspapers you can procure.I wish you a good passage, and am, Sir, your most obedient servant(Signed) GEORGE STRATTON." Sealed with the Company's seal.24 PARENTAL HISTORY.boat, to the port of Suez ; my father lying at anchorin the Mocha road. From Suez the former pursuedhis journey across the desert, in caravans, to GrandCairo, and reached that place on the 7th of June.He appears to have conducted himself throughoutlike an honest and intelligent person : and althoughuneducated, his letters and accounts current* withmy father prove the particularity and fidelity withwhich his part in the transaction was conducted.On his return from Grand Cairo to Suez, he chargesonly sixteen dollars " for the hire of four camelsacross the desert."On the 4th of July following, Mr. Baldwin wroteto my father, then at Mocha, the following very im-oneof the most curious of his letters is that dated from Bamboo,30th April, 1777, in his way from Juddah to Suez, where the Vizierand Durbar of Juddah are described as being upon a pretty good understandingwith each other on the score of cheating, and where Mr.Romaine was obliged to submit to almost any terms for the pilotage andprovisioning of his boat up to Suez. When he thought all matters dulysettled, he was obliged to pay " four dollars for a guard along the coast,part of the way, to prevent the Furore from attacking them :" and this,in spite of the passport of his " Highness of the Carnatic ! "In his General " Account Current," among the items charged duringhis residence at Grand Cairo, is one " for making up a country suit ofclothes, forty-three dollars;" another, " to a country dress, a present tothe Sheriff Tor, for his assistance, forty-nine dollars. 5 ' This account wasclosed by the payment of 400 dollars by George Baldwin, Esq., on accountof the Hon. George Stratton, being a letter of credit, for whichhe gave his receipt. It may just as well be observed, that the expenseof hiring this boat, or small vessel, from Juddah to Suez, cost my father1375 Arcot rupees; for which he drew a set of bills on Governor Stratton,at fifteen days sight, but whether ever honoured, is unknown.PARENTAL History . 25portant letter ; from the conclusion of which thereader will observe that a breeze of no ordinary descriptionwas likely to be stirring at Madras.TO CAPTAIN THOMAS DIBDIN, AT MOCHA.Cairo, Uh July, 1777.SIR, I was favoured with your letter from Mr. Romaine, whoarrived at Cairo on the 7th of June, in the afternoon ; and the packetfrom the Honourable the President and Council of Madras for theCourt of Directors, was consigned safe to me, and forwarded on the8th following, per Alexandria. As the conveyance from hence to anypart of Europe is as safe, and so much more expeditious by the ordinarycouriers, than it possibly can be by a gentleman on purpose, I dissuadedMr. Romaine from proceeding any further. I ordered myagent at Alexandria to freight a small vessel to take the packet toSmyrna, where it most probably would arrive in twelve days, and fromthence it would require thirty-three days more to reach England. Atthis season of the year the passage to Marseilles is very uncertain.Mr. Romaine had a very dangerous and fatiguing voyage from Juddah,and merits the reward which was appointed for him, if he had been theconductor of the packet all the way. Had a person been necessary, Ishould most certainly have concurred with your recommendation inconfiding this packet to his care. It seems, by the advices which accompanythis from England, that great vacancies must be made in theboard of Madras, and that all parties will be required to plead theircauses personally in England.I shall be very happy to oblige you in your particular commands,and am, with respect, Sir, your devoted humble servant, GEORGEBALDWIN."This letter was not received by my father till hehad arrived at Madras ; as his physicians had advisedhim to leave Mocha, on account of his uniformlybad health during his continuance in theRed Sea. He left Mocha on the 9th of June, givingcharge of the " Expedition" to his first officer, RobertRutherford ; with a letter of very particularinstructions, in which I find, for the first time, mentionmade of " the return of Lord Pilot's packet,26 PARENTAL HISTORY.sent to Europe at the same time with GovernorStratton's." Was it a race between the two forpriority of claim or hearing ?The sequel is briefly narrated, involving a taleof a sufficiently melancholy complexion. On returningto Madras, July 23, 1777 9 m y father waitedupon Governor Stratton with his accounts, whichwere approved; and afterwards, waiting upon theNabob, presented him with a letter from the Vizierof Juddah. He was requested to come again assoon as his health would permit him, and in themean time to get ready his general account. Hedid so, and in September brought it in ; by which itappeared that the hire of the vessel for ten months,at 800 star pagodas per month, amounted to 8000star pagodas, from which was to be deducted theadvance of 1000 star pagodas leaving a balancedue of 7000. This account, through the interventionof Mr. Stratton, was laid before the Nabob, andapproved by him ; and the former told my fatherthat "he should in a little time receive the mostpart of the balance in money, and the remainder bya negotiable order." " This," adds my father, " Mr.Stratton firmly promised, on his word of honour, hewould DO for me ; but when he went from Madras,he left the business ENTIRELY UNFINISHED." Meanwhile,Captain Rutherford pursued his voyage inthe Expedition from Mocha to Madras ; but (fromthe original document in my possession) he met withsuch terribly adverse weather, as to cripple the vestHISTORY. 27sel, and render her scarcely sea-worthy ; so that hewas obliged to go into Bombay to refit. As no assetswere put into my father's hands from the Nabob topay the officers and the crew, the latter necessarilybecame clamorous for indemnification. Mr. Romaine,the second officer, had agreed to accept thesum of 233/. on the faith of the Nabob's promisedletter of credit or bond ; but for the indemnificationof Captain Rutherford and the ship's company, fiftyin number, no resource was left but the sale of thevessel. This was a heart-breaking expedient ; butnecessity prompted it, and she was sold to one LewisBretton for 3500 rupees. Considering her damagedstate, the result might have been more disastrous.This amount just about squared the claims of CaptainRutherford for himself personally (as chief mateand as commander), and for his disbursements. Thesale took place in July, 1778.There are other bosoms than those of a Sonwhich would be moved at such a sequel as this. Iknow not the precise period of Mr. Stratton's departure; but I do know that, some thirty-sevenyears ago, I waited upon him then, apparently,a very old man and shewing him his own handwriting,asked him " how these things could be ?"Soft words were all I got in reply. To return tothe sufferer. My father's career was now rapidlyverging to its close. He was in fact a brokenheartedman. There appeared to be only one resourceleft. Sir Thomas Rumbold, who had sue-parentA L History V .needed Mr. Stratton as President of Fort St. George,was a character of known humanity and generosity ;and to him my father resolved to make a directappeal, in a strain of equal simplicity, diffidence,and pathos. The reader will endure a portion ofit, which commences by saying that " the all of apoor but honest man was involved in the issue ofhis transaction with the Nabob." It continues thus :embarrassed in his circumstances by the recentloss of a vessel, in which he had embarked the fruitof a whole life's labour, he was but just beginningto emerge from his difficulties, and had a hope thatthe produce of this voyage, doubly secured (as hethought) by the promise of a prince and the undertakingof the governor of the settlement, would, erenow, have enabled him to make new efforts for anindependence which he now finds is only to beeffected by the interposition of some gentleman,whose situation in the Presidency gives him a certainclaim to attention at the durbar. Thus circumstanced,he knows not to whom he can with morepropriety, or with a better prospect of supply, apply,than to YOURSELF : which he now presumes to dohoping that your benevolent interposition will notbe wanting at this crisis of his fortune."Luckily, at this crisis, the office of Master Attendantat Nagore became vacant ; and I believeit was exclusively through Sir Thomas Rumbold'sinstrumentality that my father was appointed to fillit. He entered upon its duties with alacrity andI'VKENTAL History. 29steadiness. In his first letter from thence, (10thAug. 1779?) to Henry Norris, Esq., he describesit as "a settlement, which, if properly attended to,might be one of the finest* places in India especiallyfor shipping. It has a bay eighteen feet deepat low water ; and the bar can, by a little troubleand expense, be made capable of admitting largeships over it." In a second letter, to Col. mcclellan,of Tanjore, he adheres to his opinion that "itmight be made one of the finest places in India ;"and adds, in a P. S., that " he had surveyed theriver, the island, the bay, and land adjacent ; andsent the marine draught to the Board, which hadbeen pleased to compliment him, and to ' expresstheir entire satisfaction thereupon." 1 But the eligibilityor advantage of the situation would necessarilydepend upon its salary. Gen. (Sir Thomas)Munro, with Mr. Secretary Sullivan and Mr. Stanhope,supported by the promise of the governor, SirThomas Rumbold, were anxious that this salaryshould be seventy pagodas per month ; but, to myfather's astonishment and chagrin, he received anorder from Council * that he " stood on the booksIn his last letter to Sir Thomas Rumbold, dated Oct. 6, 1779 andin which my father disclosed to him his final resolution to leave India,and return to England as soon as might be, in consequence of somelittle property left to my mother he says, in allusion to this disappointment," I thought you would have been able to fix the salary you wereso obliging as to promise, but I am afraid it {Hd not meet the approbationof the rest of the gentlemen ; and should there be a salary nowthought of, I fear it must come out of your private purse ; a circumPARENTAL HISTORY.only as Master Attendant of Nagore, without salary."The proceeds, or perquisites of the place, dependedentirely upon boats touching there ; and these didnot average eighteen pagodas per month. To besure, a brisk trade might have been pushed on ; butabrisk trade required something like a brisk capitalto begin with ; and of that, as the reader will necessarilyinfer, my father was wholly deprived. Therewas, therefore, but one alternative left to make aresolute effort to get possession of the bond of theNabob, upon which two years' interest were nowdue. And as both his health and prospects weredaily diminishing, and as about this time intelligencehad arrived of some little property having beenleft to my mother, by the death of her uncle, CaptainFROGNALL, my father lost no time in placinghis affairs in the hands of respectable agents ; and,assigning to the trustees of Mr. Dare, his principalcreditor, the bond in question *, he preparedstance which would hurt me much." After another recapitulation ofthe ruinous trip to Suez, and adverting to the Nabob's consolidatedbond, upon which two years' interest then remained due, he observesthus : <f But, as that undertaking has ruined both my health and pocket,was I so lucky as to have some friend to advance the capital of thebond, without the interest, it would make a whole family happy ; as Icould then settle all my business to my satisfaction in Madras pay mypassage to England have some little matter left and look joyouslyforward to the future." He then begs the interposition of Sir Thomasabout securing him a passage in a Danish vessel which should sail fromTranquebar the approaching season.Mr. Charles Darke was one of the principal, if not the principaltrading merchants of Madras, but his concerns with the Nabob ofArcot had subjected him to immense embarrassment; indeed, thatPARENTAL HISTORY. 31for his departure homewards ; observing, however,to his friend Mr. Sykes, of Madras, that " he mightreturn again within three years, after waiting uponthe East India Directors with his own plan or chartNabob seems to have involved every one who came within the vortexof his engagements. I have heard that Mr. Darke was a creditor ofthe Nabob to the amount of 100,000/. I possess a copy of my father'sletter to the trustees of Mr. Darke's estate, as well as the original accountscurrent between him and my father by which it should seem,that on the satisfaction of my father's debt, about 4500 star pagodaswould have been due to his representatives or heirs. The bond was %taken up by this government, and paid off (I believe without interest)in 1788; but a tale belongs thereto, which shall be narrated in itsproper place towards the end of this parental memoir.The family of Mr. Darke was well connected ; and the union of hisdaughter with General Floyd, one of the bravest and most honourableofficers' in India, and colonel of a cavalry regiment, was an alliance ofwhich the father's heart might justly swell with pride. From thosewho had a personal knowledge of her, I learn that she was a singularlyvivacious and original character, at times full of merriment and " wittieconceits." The following is one of these " conceits." Some few monthsafter becoming a mother, she took her infant in an open carriage toattend one of her husband's reviews, and calling him to her, begged hewould take the child in his arms and caress it. The General was onhorseback ; and on receiving the child, the carriage drove off rapidlyfrom a preconceived signal, leaving him with the infant under his arm,galloping to replace it in the carriage. On returning to England, GeneralFloyd was appointed commander-in-chief in Ireland. By MissDarke he had a son and two daughters; one of the latter becomingthe wife of Sir Robert Peel, Bart., the late premier. It was only theother day, by mere accident, that I heard a trait of the characteristicbravery of General Floyd when he was in India, and engaged in thewar with Tippoo Said.At the head of only 350 cavalry, he came in contact with 2000 ofTippoo's body-guard the elite of his troops, A contest was inevitable,and each party was resolved upon victory or defeat. The General madethe attack, the enemy waiting in one solid, determined body to receiveit. Instead of charging with his whole little handful of men, he dividedthe corps into seven companies of fifty each, and commanded only fiftyto commence the charge. They moved en echellon, without the slightest32 PARENTAL HISTORY.of Nagore ; which place, in his view of the subject,might become ultimately one of the most flourishingharbours in India." All my father's letters seemfilled with this notion ; and it must be admitted thatit was not the notion of an inexperienced man.Among those friends and acquaintances whom myfather would necessarily leave behind, there was oneof the name of BACON (Captain Nathaniel Bacon),who seems, in all the trying vicissitudes of his fate,to have invariably adhered to him to have soothedhim under every possible form in which solace couldbe administered ; to have supported him in deed aswell as by " word of promise ;" and to have provedto BOTH my parents that undeviating, uncompromising,unceasing friend, of which the value canONLY be known and appreciated by those who havestood in need of it. Captain Bacon appears to havebeen a seafaring man, of an active turn of mind ;of a warm heart, and of a straightforward dispositionand habits *. I possess a small collection ofmurmur or hesitation ; but the odds were fearfully against them. In afew minutes they were desperately engaged with the enemy, and thinningfast in number. Then succeeded another fifty, and at a givensignal, another. The enemy, thinking there was no end of them,fled in dismay just as the last fifty were preparing to show themselvesworthy of their victorious companions.Between the interval of my father's return from his ill-fated expeditionto Suez, and his obtaining possession of the master-attendantshipat Nagore, the intercourse between these warm-hearted friends was incessant.Among the amusements to relieve the languor and diversifythe monotony of an oriental life, was that of acting ; most officers, navaland military, partaking of this recreation, I remember to have heard thePARENTAL HISTORY. '*:*his letters to my father and mother, written in allthe naivete of a brother officer ; full of sweetness oftemper combined with the most unflinching steadinessof purpose. His heart is always in his hand.He comforts my mother by telling her " to keep upher spirits, to trust in a gracious Providence, and tohope that the soil of Old England would set allthings to rights." Indeed, he himself and familywere to have accompanied my father homewards ;but this plan was never carried into effect, as CaptainBacon was left my father's attorney in India to makea final settlement of his affairs. Whenever the momentof separation between these valued friends tookplace, it would necessarily be one of severe trial.They are all three now at rest in their " long homes."To Captain Bacon, in particular this trifling tributeis due, from one whom he only knew in infancyand who is in utter ignorance whether a singlebranch of his family be alive to bear evidence of thesincerity of this tribute.His saltern accumulem dons, et fungar inaneMunere !"It was at length settled that my parents shouldgo in a Danish ship from Tranquebar on the Coromandelcoast, to the Cape of Good Hope, and fromlate Colonel Marshall, of Madras, say, that " he had often dressed myfather for the part of Serjeant Kitely, than whom few played it better."Captain Bacon was to have played Commodore Trunnion in some newpiece, purposely written to develop his powers.D34 PARENTAL HISTORY.thence in a Dutch ship to England. This plan,both on account of the war between England andFrance, and the reasonableness of the charge, wasindispensable. Before quitting Madras, my fatherwrote to his friend Mr. Petrie*, a member of thecouncil, for a letter of introduction to the Governorof the Cape. The letter, writtenWarm from the heart, and faithful to its fires,"was dispatched to him quickly. It breathed the veryspirit of a finished gentleman and a tried friend. Itis brief; but I shall select only one passage. "Deceivedby those who professed a friendship for youdeserted by those, who, from their promises werebound by the ties of honour to stand by you in thehour of need and distressed in a very singularmanner in your present situation, you become possessedof those claims to my assistance, againstwhich, thank God, my heart has never been shut.* * May you and Mrs. Dibdin recoveryour health, and experience many comfortable yearsin Old England." From Colombo, and just beforeIt is a pleasing rather than curious coincidence, that a NAME, sobeloved and respected by the father, should be entitled to at least equalaffection and respect by the son. In the ever-varying shifting of life'sscene, it is unspeakably gratifying to record the steady attachment andwarm-hearted virtues of some few old friends; among whom none areentwined round the author's heart by stronger cords than THE Individualwhose name is here incorporated.nee * * orator ulla estQuam sibi quae PETRIE prescription vagina nomen."PARENTAL HISTORY. 35he sailed, (January 30, 1780,) my father receivedthe following pleasing letter from Mr. Brother, theResident. " Dear Sir. As your departure drawsnear, I take my last farewell of you, your dear ladyand son, by a reiteration of my best wishes for yourhealth and happiness ; a prosperous voyage ; with ajoyful meeting of all your friends in Old England.May the blessings of God attend you always, is thesincere wish of, Dear Sir, your most obedient humbleservant and friend S. Brother."In the month of April, the vessel reached theCape ; but my father's health was rapidly decliningbefore he left the country. A complication of disorders,with a broken-down spirit, brought on aninflammation of the bowels. After a short but severeillness, borne with exemplary patience, he expired(according to the testimony of ONE whose truthwas as undoubted as her affection) in "great resignationto the divine will *." As I have said in the open-the" testimony" above alluded to, is the letter written by mymother to her aunt, Mrs. Frognall, herself recently become a widow,immediately on the death of my father at the Cape. A more movingpicture of mental desolation can scarcely be conceived. It is as follows :Very great, indeed, my ever dear and kind Madam, are the trials ofyour poor Betsey, who is now left a disconsolate widow in a strangeland, without a friend near her. Unfortunate as the married state hasbeen, the great love the dear departed had for me, makes his loss analmost insupportable affliction. His great resignation to the divine will,and wish to be with his Saviour, is, therefore, now my greatest comfort ;for never poor creature was more patient than he was under the mostdreadful pains. The original cause of his death was a decay of natureor consumption, as he had laboured under many disorders a long time.To describe what I have undergone, and still feel, would be impossible.D 236 PARENTAL HISTORY.ing of this parental memoir, I have no recollectionwhatever of the figures or countenances of those aboutwhom I am speaking ; but I have something morethan an indistinct recollection of the moment, when,the boat nearing the side of the vessel, the coffin,which contained my father's body, was lowered intoit and the boat was rowed slowly and solemnly towardsthe shore. There are distinct remembrancesin children of an earlier age than I then was, butthis I do distinctly remember. No tomb ever markedthe spot of his interment. The reader will readilyimagine the feelings of HER who was left behind.Only three days elapsed between the death of myfather and the necessity of my mother's departurefrom the Cape, in a Dutch company's vessel, calledthe Hobson, of which a Mr. Endears was the captain; and on board of which there was not one lady,or single person, that could speak English exceptherself and her female black servant. Her miser-wereit not for my child, and a black woman-servant (which I broughtfrom India), I should really be quite stupid with grief. Oh ! my dearMadam, if I should ever be so blessed as to be under your protectionagain, I shall never know how to be half thankful enough for such ahappiness ; as I may say with certainty that J have never known truebliss since I left you. And did I not, in this my great distress, have afirm reliance upon a merciful God, who heareth the prayer of the widowand the fatherless, I should be wretched indeed."In a letter to my Uncle, written on board the ship Hobson, about thesame time, she says, ec In my husband's will (which was made atJudea), I am left whole and sole executrix and possessor of everythinghe died worth ; and if it had been a million, I am sure he lovedme so well that he would have done the same." Then follows an allusionto the ill-fated bond of the Nabob.PARENTAL HISTORY. 37able, forlorn situation is sufficiently developed in theletter quoted in the last note ; but there are otherletters from her which throw a yet more darkeninggloom upon her sorrows.The vessel was bound for Magdeburg, in Zealand.When it arrived I know not, but from that spotmy mother was doomed never to move. There maybean intensity of sympathy in a BROKEN HEART,from the effects of which the hardiest temperamentmay not recover. With my mother, there seems tohave been no spring of mind to counteract her bodilyailment, whatever it w r as. The BOND OF THE NABOB,which had precipitated her husband's departure, wasever uppermost in her thoughts*, and haunted herThis bond is expressly mentioned in her will, and in almost everyletter which she wrote to her confidential friends. A " tale" (as referredto at the end of a preceding note, p. 31), is said to be connected withit. It shall be as briefly told as possible. Some sixteen or seventeenyears after the death of my parents, a gentleman of the name of La-thanwas at an evening party in the city, when (as the fashion was inthose days) some one was called upon to sing a song. He sang one ofCharles Dibdin's sea-songs. Mr. Nathan, who had but just returnedto England after a long residence in India, immediately observed, " thatis one of Tom Dibdin's songs: the words are precisely his." He wascorrected in this error ; and then added, " there is a good slice of propertyfor his son, or heir, if he have left any behind him, as a bond of theNabob of Arcot is paid off, and the assets are lying in the hands of Mr.Darke, to be paid to the claimant."By the merest accident this intelligence reached the ears of my uncleand guardian, Mr. William Compton. Not a moment was to be lost.We both waited upon Mr. Nathan, and found him quite firm and confidentof the fact. Letters of administration with probates of the willsof my father and mother annexed, were instantly taken out, and addressedto the house of Kingsley, Watts, and Co., of Fort St. Georgeappointing them agents or attornies to collect the assets due to me. At38 PARENTAL HISTORY.hours of retirement. At length, nature gave way.A " wounded spirit," like hers, was glad perhaps totake shelter in the grave from a prolongation ofbodily sufferings ; and although the leaving her onlychild in a foreign country without one friend,scarcely one acquaintance, to stand by her in herlatter moments * might have torn the breast of anymother into a thousand pieces, yet she appears tohave resigned her breath with that tranquillity andthat consciousness of ultimate happiness which wasto last for ever, which renders such a departure IN-Structure beyond every other earthly lesson. Shesays, in her will, dated Oct. 10, 1780, that " shethis time all was hope, if not ecstacy, in my own bosom. The sumdue, with the accumulation of interest, was estimated at several thousandpounds. A college friend, more in earnest than in jest, asked me " ifI would take 3500/. for the chances?" Upon every consideration, Ideclined this offer. At length came the answer from Messrs. Kin-darnley,merely acknowledging the receipt of the documents which hadcost, I think, about So. A second letter from the same quarter quicklysucceeded. A " little cloud" was beginning to make its appearance inthe horizon of my hopes. The third letter contained matter whichwholly darkened the entire firmament ; and from that day to this (somethirty-six years ago) the appropriation of the assets in question remainswholly unaccounted for. There can be no doubt, however, as I amcompelled to believe, that the circumstances of the holder of the bondwere too desperate to justify the indulgence even of a shadow of hopeof success.Let it be allowed me here to apply the beautiful and too appositeverses from Pope's Elegy on an unfortunate Lady.By foreign hands thy dying eyes were closed,By foreign hands thy decent limbs composed ;By foreign hands thy funeral rites adorned ;By strangers honoured, and by strangers mourned !"PARENTAL HISTORY. 39should like to have a modest tombstone placed uponher grave, with a few lines to the purport of an unfortunatetraveller being, through mercy, in the armsof Redeeming Love." She then adds, that " shedies in charity with all mankind." I believe, as inthe case of my father, the spot of her interment wasnever indicated by a tombstone.With many a proof of recollected loveTogether down they sink in social sleep ;Together freed, their gentle spirits flyTo scenes where love and bliss immortal reign."THOMSON.On a revision of what I have written, I feel that,whatever laudable motives might have induced theraising of THIS MONUMENT (in the absence of allothers) to the memories of those so endeared to me,some apology seems nevertheless due for its extension,and, probably in part, wearisomeness of detail.But if the heart runs away with the head, itis difficult to attend to the observance of the " certainboundaries" prescribed by Horatian authority.Her will is in parts very quaint, but written with the utmost composureand self-possession. Among other things, she observes, in acodicil, thus : " I, Elizabeth Dibdin, have likewise by me a MARRIAGESETTLEMENT of twenty thousand rupees, of which I never received afarthing, or laid any claim to, on the creditors, when my husband died."This settlement is in my possession, with the seals and signatures of myparents and the two trustees, " Hercules Durham and James Irwin."It seems that 10,000 rupees were actually vested in them, and 10,000more were to be so vested : but what has become of the absolute property,and what was the result of the contingent property, are, I fear, EQUALLYResolvable. So dark, so impenetrable, seems to be the cloud whichhas set upon the earthly destinies of my Parents !40 PARENTAL HISTORY.Should there, however, be any one yet existing (asI have reason to think there may) who might takemore than an ordinary sympathy in this narrative,the time devoted to it will not have been devoted invain and the abuse of the reader's patience may beappeased by this confession.At page , I have intimated that by the maternal line, there mayhave been some former affinity between my family and that of theillustrious house of NORTHAMPTON. By my fathers side I know ofnothing particularly distinguishable, beyond that of my great grandfather,a successful if not eminent merchant, having built houses, andfounded that village near Southampton which goes by his name,Deepden.There is, however, a Deaden in Essex. It is certain that my father'sfamily were established in Hampshire.CHAPTER II.SCHOOLBOY DAYS.t The tear forgot as soon as shed ;The sunshine of the breast."So says or rather sings the celebrated GRAY.It may be however a questionable dictum, whetherin verse or in prose. In five out of eight parties inwhich I remember the truth of the above position tohave been doubted and impugned, the decision wasagainst the tear being quickly forgotten, and thesunshine being uniformly unclouded. It is a merematter of personal experience, and is not worth themooting. The sequel will at least prove that " sunshine"was paramount to shower.It will be seen, from the conclusion of the precedingchapter, that, if I was not to be exactly consideredasThe child of misery, baptised with tears,"yet my infancy was one of incessant solicitude to myparents ; a solicitude, not bereft however of manyhours, and days, and months of unspeakable transportto sympathising and grateful bosoms. Thereis always hope where there is offspring. In essayingto lift up the veil of futurity, as to the probable SCHOOLBOY DAYS.tiny of a child, wishes are reasons ; and reasons aretoo frequently as transparent and unsubstantial asthe dews of the morning. My mother's letters areastriking exemplification of this truism. It is evidentthat, while her heart was half breaking fromthe gloomiest forebodings, her spirits assumed anartificial and even joyous tone. She calls the attentionof her husband, when absent, to their only childto what a comfort and blessing that child mightone day be to them; and yet, while hanging overhis cradle, or caressing him in her arms, it is evidentthat she was secretly indulging a wish, or pouringforth a prayer, that the miseries of the parent mightbe for ever unknown to the offspringNo sigh that rends thy father's heart and mine !"Never was a limited and united family broken upmore speedily and more sadly. Indeed, I have frequentlycompared myself to a floating piece of timber,in a wreck, which has accidentally and luckilyreached the shore. I was brought over from Middle-burgh,very shortly after my mother's death, by atotal stranger, one Captain Smith, who took care tocharge enough for the voyage. If he had taken asgood care of the object for which the charge wasmade, it had been a little more creditable to hischaracter. My person was almost wholly neglected.Ardent spirits, (the potent Scream, in some of itsvarieties!) however diluted, had made sad havoc witha young stomach ; and when I was landed, I haveSCHOOLBOY DAYS. 43been told that I presented a melancholy spectacle,with scarcely half a dozen hairs upon my head. Icould walk with difficulty; and had no appetite.Most fortunate it was that I was consigned to ONE,who never ceased, from the moment I came underhis roof, to make my wants, and wishes, and comforts,commensurate with all the means which he hadin his power to gratify them : who, from my fourthto my twenty-first year, proved himself to be a Guardianin deed as well as by name. That " one" wasmy mother's younger brother, Mr. WILLIAM Compton; appointed in her Will to that office. On receivingme, it was necessary to adopt immediate measuresfor conveying me into the country, for the establishmentof my health, and placing me in somesmall retired school, where, when that health wasestablished, the common rudiments of educationmight be taught. But every thing necessarily dependedon the kind feeling and constant care of thosewith whom I might be placed.I was again fortunate. My mother's aunt, the widowof Captain Frognall (both of whom have been mentionedin the preceding pages) had quitted Plymp-ton, in Devonshire, for Reading, the capital of Berkshire.Here she had a comfortable house in Castle-street,and lived very respectably on a handsomeincome. She was at this time in her seventy-sixthyear; and for the last five years was bed-ridden.Her temper was soured probably from her longconfinement ; but she had an ever vigilant and restsSCHOOLBOY DAYS.less suspicion ; and loved sometimes to act the partof a tyrant with inflexible rigour. Her sister fearedher, and her niece, about thirty-five, trembled underher threat of castigation. She never had the leastpersonal affection for me : the only child of a niece,whom she affected sometimes to extol to the skiesfor her talents and her virtues." Her delight wasto thwart and tantalise me. But I believe the mainspringof this conduct to have been a knowledge thata third of her income was to come to me at her decease.Add to which, my uncle had discovered thatshe was a debtor of some 150/. to my father's estate.In consequence, she undertook to get me clothed,educated, and boarded, at the least possible expense,in order that she might have a longer period for thepayment of the debt. My clothing and educationcost only 20/. per annum. I had but one suit ofclothes a-year, all of the same colour, and of thestoutest cloth that could be procured ; and on thefirst day of wear, a sedan chair was always sent toconvey me from school to spend the whole day at herhouse. It was in vain that I protested against thismode of conveyance, as a confinement wholly disagreeableand abhorrent to my feelings. She persistedin it, saying " it was the proper way to shewthat I was come of genteel parents." I once brokea window to obtain a little air, and in consequencenarrowly escaped the " extreme punishment" of domesticdiscipline. To this was added a determinationto deduct the amount of the reparation of theSCHOOLBOY DAYS. 45damage from my quarterly payment. I remember,there was a large cupboard, and a small beaufort, inthe room in which she sat, or rather lived : a bedroomupon the first floor. These were well filledwith plate and china; and my attention, especiallyas I got on towards my tenth year, was usually andperhaps naturally directed to them.On taking now and then a sly peep, she used toobserve it, and invariably to chide me for it : sometimessaying, "what! because you see a Frog forthe crest, you think all these fine things will oneday be yours : which they shall never be " andthen she would command me to leave her presence.It must in truth be confessed that she was a sad oldtyrant*.It is now time to notice the school, and to makemention of SCHOOLBOY DAYS. I have said that Iwas " fortunate" in having been transplanted toReading in spite of the tyrannical worrying of anold aunt. I was eminently so : for had I beenShe died at the advanced age of eighty-three, in the year 1788.A handsome square stone monument, encircled by an iron railing, inSt. Mary's churchyard, attests the place of her interment. She is theredescribed as Clementina FROGNALL, widow of the late CAPTAIN FROG-all,commander of the Duke of Dorset East Indiamen. The inscriptionconcludes with the following quaint line : " What she was, the lastday will shew." As to the " fine things " of plate and china above alludedto, I am in utter ignorance of their present destination. As my greatuncle was a frequent trader to the East, it is probable that the china wasof a superior description. But the crest of frog seemed to be so naturallythe property of a Frognall, that its leaping into other-quarters may befairly regretted without the slightest imputation of selfishness. For itsown sake, I should have preferred it to the plate.46 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.placed with the leading school of the town, at thattime rising into considerable distinction under themagisterial hands of Dr. Valpy, I might not havebeen able, from my then extremely delicate state ofhealth and tender age, to have braved the buffet-thingsof a hundred boys, and endured the hardships,in whatever mitigated form, of fagging. I wasplaced, therefore, with a Mr. JOHN MAN, who livedin an obscure part of the town, called Hosiers-lane.His establishment was small, and his terms were proportionablymoderate. He was a singular, naturallyclever, and kind-hearted, man : had a mechanicalturn ; and could construct electrifying apparatuses,and carve a picture frame. His studio, of this description,was at the top of the house ; and many anhour do I remember to have spent therein, gazingwith surprise and delight upon the mysteries ofturning, planing, and counselling. He had marrieda Miss Baker, and succeeded to the school of hisfather-in-law. Old Mr. Baker lived in the house,occupying a study. He wore what was called a buzzand usually appeared in a large, flowered, darkgreen camlet-gown. He would frequently admit mewithin his study ; give me books ; and once, seeingme very attentively engaged over a large family Bible,with cuts*, came up to me with a solemn, measuredOf these cuts, ONE almost scared me out of my wits : and what israther curious, I do not remember to have seen another impression ofthe same plate, although (as the pages of the Bibliotheca SpencerianaSCHOOLBOY DAYS. 47pace, and stooping down, and patting my head, thusaddressed me : " Mind your learning, my child, andyou may become what you please." I knew nothingof the import of these words at the time spoken ;but, although I do not think I was eight years ofage, they made a very particular impression uponme. I thought much of them, wrote them down,and showing them to his daughter, my mistress, wastold that they implied " mind and always get yourlessons well, or else you will be sure to be whipped."This was sufficiently intelligible.The preceding is, perhaps, a little out of the orderof time ; but having dispatched the father-in-law,let it be permitted me to indulge in fond remembranceof the daughter, and of her husband, my firstschoolmaster, MR. JOHN MAN. Their unremittingattention and kindness perhaps saved my life. Oftendo I remember to have heard my mistress say, thaton passing through the boys' bed-rooms, the lastthing at night, and seeing me asleep, (in the samebed with her eldest son*) she would "wonderand Bibliographical Cameron may attest) my researches in this particulardepartment of art have not been very limited. The cut in questionconsisted of the order or degrees of demons, according to theirhorrible forms, and supposed power of working evil. Lucifer, with acrown upon his head, sitting, was marked No. 1 ; a huge and dreadfullyconvoluted serpent, with his mouth open, and an elongated sting,was No. 2 but enough.His Christian name was HENRY. Our attachment was as thatof brothers. Jt " grew with our growth and strengthened with curstrength." We were also class-fellows : but, as he himself would often.48 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.whether I should live to see the morning light ?"so weak and emaciated appeared to he my condition.But, when up and stirring, few could be more aliveto what was passing around me ; and the boys delightedto make me sing them a Dutch song *. Mrs.Man had four small children. Hearing them addresstheir parents by the familiar titles of fatherand mother, it seemed to me to be natural to do thesame; and their tenderness fully justified the appellation.Here I remained six years, making littleprogress in anything but writing, arithmetic, andFrench.But, so strangely are our habits formed, from someearly impressions which take deeper root than othersso oddly do we appear to see, think, reason, andact, in this plastic state of existence, from sourceswhich seem now to be wholly unintelligible, if notforgotten that, in after-life, I know of few thingsin after-life, readily and cheerfully admit, we were unequally yoked ; forI generally outstripped him in getting the lesson first, and he would crydreadfully if I "went up to say" without him. In the month ofJanuary, 1808, I married him to a widow with a small family, and hesurvived his marriage only a few years. He had a fine manly spirit,with an affectionate heart, and had a sincere regard for me. He diedprematurely of an erysipelas in the arm.As I came over in a Dutch vessel from the Cape (see p. 42, ante), onboardof which not a single creature of the crew could talk English andas I remained some time in Middleburgh, where the Dutch languagewas necessarily the only one spoken I became so familiarised to it thatI spoke it almost as fluently as English. The lads, who always lovesomething out of the ordinary course of things, were constantly puttingme upon singing one of these songs of which all traces of recollectionboth of words and tune have long ago perished.SCHOOLBOY DA VS. 49which have had a more decided effect upon me thansome of those which occurred during my " schoolboydays" at Reading. Towards my eighth year, myhealth became settled and strong and my constitutiongood ; and any bodily exertion, for that seasonof life, could be successfully encountered. Therewere few big lads, and none exceeding their fifteenthor sixteenth year. If I was petted by the seniorboys, I affected great superiority over my juniorsnot so much in years, as from their being in an inferiorgrade in the school. As I reached my tenthyear, I seem to have become enthusiastically enamouredof Soldiery and of Letter-writing. Frommy weekly allowance of threepence, I regularly deductedone halfpenny for a sheet of foolscap paper,and the ponderous residue was as regularly devotedto the purchase of laths, and scraps of deal, to makeswords for my troops. These troops were wheeled,marched, and countermarched in column and inline to the number of about twenty-five, with incessantclatter and din, especially of a half-holiday.And when, by means of my weekly allowance, thehostile weapons were all completed, that sum wasregularly devoted to the commissariat department,in the purchase of cakes for my faithful followersnothing, however, preventing me from the weeklyacquisition of the said folio sheet of foolscap. Uponthat sheet, strange as it may appear, I was in thehabit of writing accounts of the conquests of count50 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.tries, by means of British valour, led on by thescribe himself; and when it came to the turns ofFrance and Spain, I took care to make the subjugationof those countries sufficiently complete. I readthis enormous mass of absurdity, which I had concocted,every Monday morning at the head of myregiment, with a loud voice, and it was received withthree hurrah. My reading, out of school-hours, waswholly of the same complexion. I was allowed to gointo my master's private room whenever I pleased.It was sufficiently well filled with books. A largearm-chair was near the fire-place, with a set of Humeand Smollett's History of England, with cuts, closeat hand. I was for ever taking down these volumes,and reading nothing but the battles of Henry V.,Edward III., and John Duke of Marlborough. Theengraved portraits of those illustrious warriors, withthat of the Black Prince, seemed to rivet what Ihad read more strongly upon my memory. At thistime of day, I ought to have been second only toWELLINGTON !Let me not, however, quit the sanctum sanatoriumof my indulgent master, without just mentioningthat, it was here, for the first time, I caught, orfancied I caught, the electric spark of the Bibliomania.My master was now and then the purchaserof old books by the sack-full; these were tumbledout upon the floor, the arm-chair, or a table, just asit might happen. The work that first caught mySCHOOLBOY DAYS. "> Ieye, and fixed my attention, (although I could notread a word of the text), was the small octavo editionof Sandy's Horace, with cuts *. HowI long'd to call the sparkling treasure mine !"There is sometimes stealing across one it isstealing across me at this moment a recollectionof the pure, keen, exhilarating joyfulness, relishedin early youth, by the participation of pleasureswhich are not only gone, never to return, but ofwhich the sources, in after-life, seem to be scarcelycredible. And yet what, in after-life, from sourceshowever deemed more rational and permanent, hasbeen equal to the rapture of those of early, unsuspicious,uncontaminated YOUTH ? Where are nowthe soft, sweet, moonlight nights, when the whoopof " I spy flight" re-echoed through their stillness,I have mentioned this anecdote, with some trifling but most trueadditamenta, in the Bibliographical Cameron., vol. iii. p. 376. Foran account of Sandy's Horace, see Introduction to the Classics, vol. ii.p. 109 ; fourth edition.t It was the custom, at the time of which I am speaking, for youngladies the children of respectable tradesmen in the immediate neighbourhoodto take evening lessons of reading, writing, and arithmetic,at boys' schools. There were several at the above school, and after ourpedagogical task was at an end, the girls and boys would unite in bands,or circles, of a moonlight night, to partake of the above game, singingthe well-known invitation, thus:ce Girls and boys come out to play,The moon doth shine as bright as day ;Come with a whoop, come with a call,Come with a good will, or not at all."Then followed the game itself carried on sometimes till nine o'clock.My late friend, Mr. Douce, once shewed me a most curious note uponthese homely lines which he loved to repeat emphatically.i: 252 SCHOOLBOY DAYS,and made the heart of the hearer throb with ecstacy ?the warm and golden sunsets, after bathing in thesalient stream *, and coursing each other along theadjacent meads? the bright and beautiful mornings,when, after a night of tempest, the yellow pearand the ruddy apple, plentifully strewn upon thegrass, invited the ready trespass, and repaid thehazard of the enterprise? And all this while, Ispeak nothing of the ordinary Games t of boyhood ;which need not be particularised. And then camethe Holidays the approach to which was markedby the notched stick, by the formal letter of announcement,by the indulgence of hopes and schemestoo wild even to take more than momentary possessionof the most ardent youthful imagination.This " salient stream" was a branch from Pope's " Bennett swift,,for silver eels renowned." It divides the town of Reading into nearly twoequal parts, and is soon lost in the Thames, just below. The place ofbathing was called Old Orchard, not far from Coly Park.t I am not sure whether there were not some amusements for whichthe preparation was as joyous as the participation. I speak of kite-making,and more particularly of slate, or dump-melting; the latter adangerous, and always a doubtful, process. On leaving school, I had norival in this art. My cocks and dumps used to come out from the meltingprocess perfect and sparkling : attested by the screams of joy of thebystanders. In anticipation of pleasure, what could exceed that of thefire and fireworks on the fifth of November ? I have sat from morn tillnight, on a style, watching the progress of each rising cloud, from theapprehension of an unfavourable evening: and then, on that sameevening, whatever caused such heart-soundings, such shouts of delight,as the blazing tar-barrel, the crackling faggots, and the coruscations ofthe squib, cracker, Catherine wheel, roman candle, and sky rocket asthe fire of the two latter intersected each other in their radiant butquickly perishable orbits !SCHOOLBOY Deus.I know not how it is, but, in hanging upon theremembrance (if I may so speak) of these rapturousdays, it should seem as if the individual describingthem could not have been the same human beingwith him who is described. It should seem as if,like the snake, we had slipped a slough, and comeout a fundamentally altered creature. It is with thewind as with the features ; the alteration is marvellous,and, in some countenances, traces of whatthe features were in early youth are scarcely discernible.Yet it is the same heart that has beenbeating ; they are the same sinews and muscles thathave been put in constant motion ; the same eyeswhich have contemplated ; the same hands whichhave grasped. Well is it for us, if changes, moreserious than those which affect the external form,have not been wrought within us ; well is it, if thatheart's blood has not been dried up by sordid avaricethose hands not been active in the commission ofirreparable mischief those eyes not been prone togaze only upon what is vicious and worthless. Iapologise for this digression ; but there are SOME,yet living, to whom it will not be altogether consideredas a mere " flourish" of words.Before quitting this scene of earliest youth, Icannot help noticing one or two more things whichmay at least be considered as important as thosewhich have preceded them. My passion for drawingcommenced before I had attained my ninthyear; and that passion was much gratified, if, in54 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.distributing copy books, my master happened to giveme one which possessed (as it was then the fashion)a picture, or engraving, more taking than that ofmy comrades *. I instantly set about copying itbut was too poor to have any thing beyond a slatepencil : though once, with a pen, I had the audacityto strive to grapple with the head of Walworth orVise (I forget which) prefixed to the boys' spelling-bookst. I remember to have mastered the velvet-capquickly enough ; but the solemn and sour visageof the sage defied my powers of imitation. My master'sbrother, a very original character, Mr. HenryMan, Secretary of the South Sea House, cameBy a curious coincidence, one of the pictures or prints which usedto make a great impression upon me, was that of a grenadier, with theCumberland-cap beneath which was this ballad line :11 He would be a soldier, would sweet Willy O !"In a book, with this very print, my mother wrote all her little poeticalpieces ; and in another book, with the same ornamented exterior, myfather made copies of his correspondence in India.t In these spelling-books was the well-known tale of Brown, Jones,and Robinson : a tale which I believe to have never been surpassed inits hold upon young minds. A wood-cut of the drowned youth (I nowforget which it was) had always the strongest claim upon my attention,and called forth many a vain effort at copying.^ This ec original character" lived in Fenchurch-street. He wasrather a wag than a wit but was very much above the ordinary inhabitantsof his locality. He had a small, dark, brilliant eye whatThomson calls a u roguish twinkling, in each eye" and a dry, but drolltone of voice. His pen was in constant exercise, upon topics not alwaysconnected with matters of the " South Sea." The speculators in lotteriesat a time when Bonaparte was elbowing all the neighbouring potentatesused to employ him to write lottery puffs, to be placarded inlargeletters in the streets. I remember one singularly quaint andSCHOOLBOY DAYS. 55now and then from London to pay us a visit. Heused to notice me very much knowing the peculiarityof my situation ; and seeing me fond of drawing,asked me if I should like to have some colours ?I jumped with joy at the proposal, and asked forblue, red, and yellow. The first use I made ofthem was to paint paper flogs for my soldiers! ButI did not always make this legitimate use of them ;for a due portion of cunning and conceit frequentlyinduced me to get sly possession of those books ofmy schoolfellows which contained prints, and unmercifullyto daub and disguise them with the useof these primitive colours.I totally forget what Latin grammar we made useof, but I think it was the Westminster ; where thereis a wood-cut of boys clambering up a tree andshaking the fruit down into the laps of their corn-original.Tickets were sixteen guineas each. The author makes sundrysuppositions supposing Bonaparte to defeat, or to be defeated ? Again,supposing the Austrians to make an onward, or a retrograde movement?Again, supposing Prussia to be more or less influenced by this forwardor backward operation ? The reader, wondering what will be the result,is called upon to say " What then will be the price of the lotteryticket? Answer: SIXTEEN GUINEAS." Mr. Henry Man (who was theelder brother) wrote some amusing pieces of poetry, which will befound in two volumes of posthumous works, published in 1 802. Amongthese, a parody upon the song of " Jolly Dick the Lamplighter" containsa few good hits. It begins thus :I 'm Billy P t, the minister, Lord Ch m was my dad ;Though both our views were sinister, yet mine were the more sad."At page 208 of vol. ii. there is a short poem upon " Delicacy," which is,in parts, as original as it is sweet and tender.56 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.pinions *. This was my favourite page ; but whenI was told that it was a representation of the treeof knowledge, of which the fruit could not he obtainedwithout cultivation and gathering, I seemedto gaze upon it with a yet more intense interest. InLatin authors, I reached Cornelius Nepos beforemy departure, with an occasional acquaintance withCornelius, JSsop 9 and Phaedrus ; authors, not thebest calculated to smooth the ruggedness of classicalliterature to the understanding of early youth t. Ihave mentioned the word Holidays : but to me theywere known only as a cessation from book-toil, andSome notion of this print may be gathered from a fac simile of thesame sort of subject in the Bibliographical Cameron, vol. I. p. 101.I rather think the English original is in Lilly s Grammar.t Surely, some more facile and successful method of instructingyouth in the Latin tongue is yet a desideratum ? The dry compressionof Cornelius Nepos, and the downright crabbedness of some parts ofPhaedrus, are not calculated to allure young minds to become enamouredof the Roman classics. Grammar, the philosophy of language, is a terriblyspiked six-bar gate to scramble over at the very threshold of ourefforts. What abstract notion has the sharpest youth of a noun-substantive,an adjective, a gerund, a supine, &c. ? But he must plungechin-deep into them ere he turn over the pages of the first author. Andin translating, might not easy literal versions of popular passages, ofa graphic or dramatic description, in ENGLISH HISTORY, be made subservientto a quicker mastery of the language itself? What does a ladof nine years of age care, or understand, about consuls, exiles, victors,and Heathen Mythology? Of the latter, a quiet word, in sober sadness.Why are the names (but these are nothing compared with therecorded actions] of gods and goddesses transferred, in a body, to theend of Latin Dictionaries ? Why are youthful eyes suffered to glanceover such details of absurd and vicious narratives ! such a compoundof fraud, profligacy, and monstrosity ! Were I to narrate my own experience,in others as well as myself, these remarks might assume thesterner form of an unanswerable monitor.SCHOOLBOY DAYS 57not by locomotive change. I spent them uniformlyat school; and had the option been granted me(which it was not) I should have made it my deliberatechoice : for the society of my master's children,with the uniform kindness of their parents,was, to my habits and disposition, infinitely preferableto the strait-laced discipline and snappish severityof a great aunt. During those holidays I wasoccasionally taken on a visit to the family of one ofmy schoolfellows, of the name of Sherwood, afarmer at Parley, about four miles off. The impressionreceived on these visits, from the kindnessand courtesy of the parents, together with a personalaffection for one of the sons, of the name ofJOHN, was never, for a moment, diverted or weakenedduring a course of forty years. Although I leftReading in my twelfth year, and never afterwardssaw the father or mother, yet, so deeply was a senseof their kind conduct impressed upon me, togetherwith my unceasing attachment to their son, that, inmy fifteenth year, the worth of THAT family was madeone of the subjects of my earliest hobbling muse *.The kind-hearted reader, taking the will for the deed, will endurewhat follows, as the crude conceptions of a grateful heart. The " hobbling"verses, above alluded to, are comprised in a " PASTORAL" dividedinto two parts ; and supported, after the fashion of our forefathers, bycertain characters, hight Damon, Thyrsis, Phillips, Corydon, and others.In the first part the scene being laid altogether at Parley Thyrsisthus descants upon the virtues of the worthy farmer.He, that is bless'd with every generous art ;Who acts the husband's and the parent's part :58 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.There was also another schoolfellow, very much mysenior, of the name of Billinghurst a sharp, prove,who can see the helpless group appear,And with relief bestow the pitying tear !He, that is bless'd with an ennobled mindTo cheer the wretched, and the oppressor bind.Assist me, swains, inspire me, every muse,To sing for SHERWOOD, who shall dare refuse ?For whom do swains with early vigour rise.Pour forth their prayers and vows with ardent eyes ?For whom do annual ploughshares cut the land,And numerous rustics toil, a willing band ?For whom do cornfields wave their golden grain,And herds and flocks stretch far along the plain ?For whom doth heaven refreshing show'rs distill,Why roars the torrent, and why flows the rill ?For whom do sheep their grateful voices raise,And faithful shepherds tune their sylvan lays ?For whom do sing the rustic nut-brown maids,And deep-grown bow'rs, and thickets, from their shades ?All, all, for SHERWOOD. See the lark on high,In praise of Sherwood, warbling mount the sky !For him, the birds in airs melodious sing,For him, doth bursting nature tell the spring :For him, the rosy maids their garlands bind,For him, the wreath is round their brow entwined :For him, in praise of him, I've bent my way,For him, to Phillips have I tuned my lay !The second part of this motley effort opens with " SCENE, a Wood :Moonlight." Thyrsis is leaning on the tomb of Sherwood. He givesvent to his sorrows in a protracted strain, of which the following maybeconsidered a sufficient specimen.Ah Cynthia ! now in luckless hour you rise,In mournful time you mount your silver car;Alas ! you traverse through the enameled skies,In Damon's woe, or Thyrsis' grief to share.Thou wood, that strikes with gloomy awe the mind,Involved in deep and everlasting shadeNo comfort here my restless sorrows find,For here, in your retreat, a SHERWOOD'S laid.SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 59rising youth, and very partial to me. He precededme in my removal to London, and closed a preachPhilomel ! begin your warbling strain,Swell every note, and tune a sadder lay;Our master's gone ; has left the rural plain ;And silent sleeps, inanimate clay.Ye nymphs, and swains, that used at noon-tide hourTo dance with jocund pipe, and heart-felt glee,Leave, leave your rosy garlands in the bow'r,View Sherwood's tomb, and sigh and weep with me !Come then, and tread the consecrated ground,And softly bring your fav'rite hooks and reeds ;Here swains and nymphs, now stand in order round,And leave, for sadder rites, your flow'ry meads.Or if ye wish, with downcast look, to strewWith fragrant flow'rs his tomb, ye nymphs advance ;For here, shall morn her choicest gifts renew,And nightly fairies round his grave shall dance.Ah why delay ! Begin ye rustic maids,Be present shepherds, tune a mournful lay;Pour solemn music through the gloomy glades,For Sherwood sleeps, inanimate clay.*****No more the village shall with joy abound,Or peace and pleasure lead their jovial train ;No more shall vocal mirth and songs resound,Or gay contentment laugh along the plain.*****But " Claudius jam rives pueri, sat prate biberunt." Such, in afterlife,continued to be the deep impression made from acts of kindnessshewn to }ne in early youth, that, in the infatuated moment when Iresolved upon the publication of a certain volume of poetry, I designeda vignette for the title-page, in which there is a tomb with the wordSHERWOOD inscribed, and over which the branches of a tree are drooping.JOHN, the second son of the above lamented parent, died aboutfour years ago, leaving behind substantial property, and a name worthyof all the virtues of his father. He was my particular crony but I hadnot seen him for twenty years before his decease. His eldest brother,60 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.ture career of ignominy and disgrace, in a foreignland, as a common malefactor *. Such are sometimesour beginnings who shall predict our endings?I cannot, at this moment, recollect any otherEDWARD, died several years previously. The youngest son, RICHARD,after being the most successful practitioner of surgery, for many years,at Reading, has now retired to the immediate neighbourhood of thattown in the full enjoyment of character, competency, health, and fivehunters : his eye yet retaining the sparkling lustre and good humouredexpression of his early youth.He was apprenticed in London, with a Mr. Baker of Salisbury-square; a respectable apothecary, and the brother of Mrs. Man. Hewas sufficiently expert in Latin, and soon made himself useful to hismaster. He had also a very pretty patrimonial estate, and might havebeen about seventeen when he found me out at my second school, atStockwell. We corresponded briskly together. One day I was surprisedby the sudden appearance of a post-chaise at the door of theschool, and by two gentlemen immediately leaping out, and inquiringfor me. It was Mr. Baker with a friend. My letters (as it shouldseem) were left open in Billinghurst's desk Billinghurst himselfhaving run away. It was supposed that I might have been privy tohis decamping, and I was asked what I knew about it ? and what wasthe purport of his last letter to me ? I had then scarcely entered uponmy fourteenth year ; and replied, immediately, that I knew ' ' nothingabout his movements" and that his last letter to me contained an earnestrequest that I would write for him "AN ESSAY UPON LOVE !"The words no sooner escaped me than Mr. Baker and his friend, laughingheartily, sought their post-chaise, and returned. I never saw myold schoolfellow again.Poor fellow ! thorny and perilous as is sometimes the path of love,it had been well for him if he had chosen it in preference to that whichhe afterwards so pertinaciously pursued. He became embued with allthe wild principles of the French revolution, in its maddest days ; wentover to America, I know not upon what account; attempted to disseminatethe same principles there ; and even assumed the character ofa spy for that object. He was seized, tried, and hung up under thebranch of an oak !quis tala fandoTempered a lacrimis ?SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 61favourites or cronies in this, the first, stage of mySCHOOLBOY DAYS.At length came the moment of departure. Itwas necessary, in the opinion of my uncle, that anonward movement should be made ; and that theinsufficiency of the discipline of an obscure schoolshould be exchanged for something near London,which might give an immediate polish to the youngcandidate for learning. The terms of a new school,at Stockwelly were brought down and read aloud bymy uncle himself. They were minute and elaborate; and never was the well-known adage, " omneignotum pro magnifico" more strictly applicablethan on this occasion. I seemed to stare with myunderstanding as well as with my eyes as I heardthese terms. A new world of intelligence was openedto me ; " Globes" " lectures" " a covered playground"merchant's accounts" " the Spectator"and " dancing" were as magical words, heard forthe first time. I rubbed my hands with ecstacy,and longed for the day of departure. My uncleaccompanied me to give my master the necessaryprevious quarter's notice : and on leaving me Isought my bed but found not its repose. I wasabout to take leave of THOSE, who seemed to havesupplied the place of parents ; and the next morningmy swoln eyes and dejected visage told a talethat could not be mistaken. I then began to hatethe thought of departure ; but the day and the hourcame in due course and I broke away with loud62 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.sobs from those who, for upwards of six years, hadperformed the parts of faithful guardians and vigilantpreceptors. My old aunt declared she wouldnot see me on quitting, as she disliked " takingleave ;" but magnanimously sent me half a guineato mitigate the supposed agony of separation ! Ofall my earlier schoolfellows, THREE ONLY, to myknowledge, now survive *.I arrived at Stockwell ; situate within three milesof London Bridge on the Surrey side a flat and notvery picturesque portion of the beautiful county atthe foot of which it stands. It was then only asmall village, with a small chapel. It is now almostmerged in the densely inhabited neighbourhood ofKennington and Brixton ; and two spacious churchesmay be said to attest at once the populousness anddevotion of the inhabitants. In point of size and externalrespectability, my late school-residence shrunkinto insignificance compared with that of my newone. The Master was assisted by his son, fast growingup to maturity ; and a regular usher (as it iscalled,) who taught Latin and French. His " terms"These are, Messrs. Mark and James Morsel, brothers ; now resident,the one a brewer, the other a banker, at Oxford : men of affluence andrespectability. The third is the second son of my master, Mr. WilliamMan, resident in the old town of his nativity. His sister, the only othersurviving branch of their parents, lives in the same town. If friendlinessof disposition, and amenity of temper, entitle any man to respectand esteem, my old schoolfellow is entitled to the largest possible shareof it from myself. He loves science, and he loves books ; and solacesthe necessarily tedious hours of bachelorship by a due portion of readingand reflection, and ingenious'mechanical exercise.SCHOOLBOY DAYS. (Mwere a piece of pompous inanity. You would havesupposed that education was only to be obtainedunder his roof. He wrote a sort of stiff, copperplatehand, and that was almost his only acquirement.His lectures upon geography were of theveriest common-place description, and they werefew and far between." He was a coxcomb in thedress of that day ; although he must have been littleshort of fifty. His cocked hat, powdered queue-peruke,black satin breeches, and silk stockings,were objects of mingled admiration and respect withthe boys. He was a great man for effect ; makingpauses, and clearing his voice before he commencedthose monitory addresses which used to precede eveningprayers. And of what common-place materialswere those addresses composed! He loved to inspireawe ; knowing that he could not generate affection.He was a tyrant, without being exactlycruel ; but his manner of inflicting " the extremepenalty" for disobedience, ill-conduct, or rebellion,was provokingly and unnecessarily severe *.The punishment, here obviously alluded to, took place in a privateapartment : half a dozen of the upper boys of which, to my horror,I was invariably selected as one being called upon to be spectators.The senior boy preceded ; holding upright, before him, the awful instrumentof castigation. The culprit was in his immediate rear ; andthe other boys, followed by the master, closed the solemn procession.The culprit stript, and knelt by the side of a chair ; and we stood withmixed fear and disgust around him. The master was a left handedman, and struck deliberately and heavily; and the evidence of his powerwas simultaneous with the stroke. But he had a sad method of torturing,by prolonging the punishment between each stroke with quotasSCHOOLBOY DAYS.Meanwhile, whether the merits or demerits ofmy Master were the greater, I was conscious of asudden and strong progress in intellectual attainments.My master's son took to me with greatkindness, and never withdrew his affectionate and,as it were, patronizing attention. He taught meFrench and drawing. The Usher, educated atWestminster school (a yet better French scholar)was also exceedingly attentive ; telling me hewould never let me have any rest till I read Voltaireand Virgil with equal facility. I now beganto buy paper and pens on a comparatively wholesalescale ; and whenever the cupboard, containing newschool-books, was opened, I usually contrived to takea. peep at its miscellaneous contents : Chambaud,Wanostrocht, and Perrin : my old friends Walworthand Vise : Phaedrus, Selects, Ovid, and Virgil :Ainsworth and Young : Addison and Johnson :slates, slate-pencils, and copy-books : writing paper,drawing-paper, and black-lead pencils. All theseseemed, to my inexperienced eyes, to be inexhaustibletreasures of incalculable value. The accidental possessionof an odd volume of Shakspeare, containingMacbeth, the Midsummer Night's Dream, and thetons of trite sentences from the Book of Proverbs as, among others,He that spare his rod hateth his son' &c. Once, on making thisquotation, a spirited boy, in the agony of pain, turned his head round,and bellowed out, " Yes, sir, but YOU are not MY FATHER !" The weaponseemed to drop powerless from the operator's hand, and the punishmentinstantly ceased.SCHOOLBOY DAYS (15Merry Wives of Windsor, excited me almost to delirium: and oh ! yet more fatal result, to try mypen at a drama ! I shunned the ordinary games ofyouth ; rose early, sometimes at five, to pursue alternatelydrawing and dramatic composition ; and,ere my fourteenth year, was the author of three exceedinglybloody tragedies. A simple but severeincident * entirely cured me of this mania ; but mylove of art was, if possible, increasing every day. Icannot describe what I used to feel on looking overthe engravings by Heath, from the pencil of Stothard,in the volumes of Harrison's Novelist's Magazine.Indeed they merit the closest attention and thewarmest admiration of maturer life. Among theIt was this. I had brought these plays (of which I now recollectonly the names of two viz. Jasmin and The Distressed Brothers')home to my aunt, Mrs. William Compton ; a lively and sensible woman,and much disposed to humour my vagaries in many ways. I beggedshe would read them, and challenged her approbation. She did readthem, or as much as she liked of them ; but studiously pronounced noopinion. One evening, on retiring to rest, and receiving the bedchambercandlestick from the servant, I found a piece of paper at thebottom" of the candle, to keep it steady in the stick, upon which myhand-writing was but too visible. I stopped and read "Act III.,scene V." and found it to be a fragment of my beloved Jasmin ! Retracingmy steps with a precipitancy which may be well conceived, Ienquired of the servant "where she had got this?" "Sir," said she,my mistress gave it me as WASTE PAPER to light the fire."t The designer and the engraver of these charming little specimensof their earlier efforts in art, have recently paid the debt of nature eachwell stricken in years." Those who would lay the foundations, " strongand deep," of a collection of the British School of Art, will do well tofurnish themselves with choice proofs, when obtainable, of the abovespecimens. To commend the talents, or to declare the reputation of66 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.latest occupations at my new school, connected withart, was the assisting my master's son in scene-painting,for the performance of little after-pieces on half-holidays.But this was sometimes a very severeoperation ; as I used frequently to be called up hyhim, in the depth of winter, at five, and even four, inthe morning, that we might do a good stroke of worktogether before school-hours. Even at this very momentdo I remember how often my knees trembled,my teeth chattered, and my whole frame " shook toits very centre," as I dressed myself looking outupon a sky studded with a million stars, and feelingan atmosphere which seemed to convert my very marrowinto ice*. Perhaps the evidences of an earlySTOTHARD, our domestic Raffaelle, were equally a waste of words andof time. Had his colouring even approached that of Watteau, his compositionshad been invaluable. Loveliness, grace, and innocence, seemto be impressed on every female countenance and figure which he delineated.His productions are almost countless. My friend Mr. Masquerierpossesses about 1000 engravings from his pencil. Mr. JamesHeath was, to Stothard, what Woollett was to Wilson, and Bartolozzi toCyprian and Kauffman. He once told me that he rescued the twomost precious pieces of his property from a devouring fire, in carryingoff his child, and the plate of The Death of Major Pearson; while thelate Mr. Duppa did his utmost to refrain him, from an apprehension ofits proving fatal to himself and tore his coat into two.Our scene of operations was in a back brick kitchen, with now andthen scarcely any thing better than the semblance of a fire to warm andcheer us. The cook left some cold tea, the night before, to be warmed up,and we had a sufficient quantity of bread and butter : but we had onlyone wretched candle to work by. The scenes were almost entirelyarchitectural. The masterpieces acted, were chiefly translations fromBerlin* In rehearsals, I remember I was a most severe disciplinarian.SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 67enthusiasm, in one particular pursuit, were nevermorestrongly indicated.My residence at Stockwell continued two years ;and in spite of the shallow pretensions of my master,it was neither unprofitably nor unpleasantly spent :for I had perfected myself in writing, and hated"merchant's accounts" more lustily on leaving thanon commencing them. Having just got enough ofFrench and Latin to make me emulous of a moreintimate acquaintance with them, it was deemed advisableto remove me to what was called a ClassicalAcademy. There was, to be sure, a neighbouringschool of that description at hand, called LoughboroughHouse but the very approach to thatmansion of learning struck a timid man, like myuncle, with a sort of awe. On a board, shaped inthe segment of a circle, and supported by two posts,was read this exceedingly emphatic inscription :Loughborough House : for the education of noblemenand gentlemen 9 s sons." These were the quackdays of education.I almost forget now by whose instrumentality itwas that I went to my third and last school but Ithink it was through a Mr. Sutherland, a publicnotary, in Birchin-lane, that my uncle was persuadedto remove me to a Mr., afterwards Dr. Greenland :whose seminary was situated between Brentford andIsleworth ; and, as a prelude, we were asked to meethim at dinner. He was a Scotchman, as was his68 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.friend Mr. Sutherland. I was much pleased withhim at the first interview ; for he had a sort of manly,joyous air about him, so very opposite to the starchpriggism of my late master, that, keeping my eyesand ears exclusively occupied with what he might doand say, I was resolved to bring home a pretty accurateremembrance of that day's symposium. It wasthen the fashion to drink lustily after dinner. Atdinner, he spoke to me across the table, and challengedme to drink a glass of wine with him. It wasfor the first time I had been so challenged, and Ithought it a solemn point of duty to fill my glassdeliberately to the brim. He smiled, and said, hehoped we should always be good friends. We continuedso throughout the whole of our connexion.When he told my uncle and myself, after dinner,apart, that he had lads of thirteen and fourteen whohad mastered Horace and Virgil, and could writehexameter by the score, I could not help feelingsecretly ashamed of my own backwardness.I now approach that period of my youthful career,when, as the imaginative and reasoning faculties takea ready spring and a wide range, the passions beginto assume an intelligible, and sometimes a very formidable,aspect. Had these faculties and passionsreceived a luckless bias, by indiscriminate indulgenceon the one hand, or by irrepressible severity on theother, there is no saying whether a result, at least asfatal, although assuredly not so disgraceful, as thatSCHOOLBOY DAYS. <Wrecorded in a preceding page*, might not have beenthe consequence with myself. I could trust my ownheart thus far as to be incapable of vindictive passion,and sordid, base desire as well as of everythingwhich had a tendency to meanness of spirit, sly suspicion,or insolent tyranny. I entered my new schoolwith a determination to excel, and in the end to standquite at its top. There were between threescore andseventy boys, many of whom were much my superiorin size, age, and understanding. I had a long lea wayto make up, having been grounded scarcely in anything.For the first time, the Greek (Eton) grammarwas put into my hand ; and although I do notpretend to have looked at it with a secret assurance,like a Brind\ 9 as if I should master it by inspiration,yet I got briskly on, and, in due course, was admittedto Homeric honours. It were difficult to describethe secret swellings of pride and gratification in myPage GotMy old schoolfellow, Mr. W. Man, mentioned at page 62, ante,writes to me thus, touching this extraordinary character : " Connected asyou are with literary men, I should do wrong not to notice that we havehere (at Reading) a brewer's drayman, of the name of GEORGE Bring,between thirty and forty years of age, who had never received other educationthan that of reading writing, and the first rudiments of arithmetic,taught by a woman at a child's school. A few months since, having seena Greek book, of which the characters excited his attention and curiosity,he fancied he could instruct himself in that language; and, as he informsme, has since made so much progress, without any assistance, as to readand understand it pretty well, but finds the greatest difficulty in its pronunciation; or, as he calls it, in sounding it from never having heard itspoken. He seems quite confident he shall completely master it. He likewisetells me, within the last month he has attempted Hebrew, and finds it70 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.bosom when I was called up to receive a copy ofClarke's Homer*.By this time I was not only "well on" (as theysay) in the school, but with my schoolfellows. I hadnot been a twelvemonth before I had classes to preparefor the upper usher, an exercise in which I particularlydelighted. Meanwhile, nothing could exceedthe kind attentions of those to whom the menagewas intrusted. The house itself had been a nobleone ; and had, both within and without, a most cheerfulair. The dining-room was large and lofty t, andthe sleeping-rooms were spacious and airy ; but theplay-ground was unworthy of its accessories ; yet wealways rambled far a-field when a great sport, suchas cricket, prisoners' base, or football, was in view.How shall I describe the fluttering emotions of myheart, when, after parading through Twickenhammeadows, I first reached "the summit of RichmondHill, and gazed from thence upon a landscape lightedvery easy much more so than Greek and does not doubt of succeeding.He thinks of attempting Latin next. He i quite a rough subject,such as draymen usually are ; but his features remind me of those ofBonaparte." This anecdote is quite a la Magliabecchi !It is the ONLY school-book which I now possess : sufficiently defacedby interlineations and marginal etymons. At the moment of possessingit, how little could I dream of describing the splendour andrarity of the first edition of that work, on LARGE PAPER, of a quartoform, of which an account may be seen in the Introduction to the Classics,vol. ii., p. 55, fourth edition.t On the ceiling of this dining-room was painted, delicately andprettily enough, some mythological subject of a marriage, where Venuswas sprinkling flowers with a plentiful hand ; and upon this painting Iwould gaze almost as frequently as upon the viands before me. ItSCHOOLBOY DAYS. 71up by an autumnal setting sun*! Meanwhile, itmay be quietly affirmed, that my academical progresswas once given out as a subject for twenty-four hexameter verses. Alas !the ceiling, the room, the verses, with the whole suite of apartments,have irrevocably perished.It is not with an exclusive view of intruding any thing so puerileand imperfect as the strains of an unfledged muse, that, in support ofthe radiant picture above described, I venture here to state how it affectedme again and again by a frequent repetition of the view, and as frequentan invocation of the muse. I had now become quite infectedwith the passion of versifying : " aut insanity homo, aut versus fact :"and there was nothing like RICHMOND or TWICKENHAM MEADOWS to givethe vigour of inspiration to my numbers. What follows must thereforebe endured as " part and parcel" of the Philosophy of the HumanMind. The poem of " Twickenham Meadows" is the third in a volumeto be hereafter described. The motto is happy enough :Qua pinus ingens, albaquc popularUmbra hospitale consecrate amantRamis." Oh. lib. ii. Ode. 3.Having Dunham's Cooper's Hill in <( my mind's eye," the following isthe attempt to describe the view from that of Richmond Hill.Lead me, my Muse, to Richmond's tow'ring Hill,Where endless plains the mind with transport fill.Heavens, what a goodly prospect spreads around !"With trees, and lawns, and bow'rs, and winding rivulets crown'd.Yon distant hills aspiring to the skiesAnd the whole view in glowing grandeur lies.The copious THAMES still vindicates his reign,Now lost, now found, now hid, now seen again.The num'rous flocks that bleat along the meads,The lowing herds, and loudly-neighing steeds ;The echoing chant of birds that fill the grove,Transport my mind with Nature's bounteous love.How bright and varied smiles the boundless view !AVTiat glowing tints of carmine's richest hueWarm the whole scene ! Oh ! here my thoughts could stray,And mark with rapture the departing day.72 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.was decisive, if not rapid. Horace, Virgil, Livy,and Tacitus, Herodotus and Homer, were becomingFrom the Hill, the Muse makes a sort of natural digression to RichmondPark ; and there she gives vent to rather an impassioned tone of feeling.Now bear me to some shadowy deep-brown grove,Where pale-eyed Contemplation loves to rove ;Where hooded Silence stalks with measured pace,And Meditation shews her solemn face.'Tis RICHMOND'S PARK affords this much-loved sceneTo lie reclined 'midst bow'rs of richest green ;Where towering elms their beauteous foliage spread,And oaks majestic rear their ancient head."The well-shaped firs, and deep'ning chesnuts rise,The ash, the beech, the poplars seek the skies ;While the brown nut, and spreading shrub below,In firmer beauty, and rich order grow.Here, wrapt in thought, Philosophy retires,And pale-eyed Study feels her native fires ;Here Peace delights, Contentment holds her seats,Wisdom here dwells, and Solitude retreats.A sort of retrograde movement is then made to TWICKENHAM; andPOPE being a kind of poetical synonyme with that place, the bard is thusapproached and appreciated.But haste, and bring me to yon sloping mead,Where Twit'nam's self displays her beauteous head.Pleased as I pass the winding shore along,And cull each flow'r to decorate my song,POPE'S peaceful mansion brings my willing mindTo explore his garden and his grot to find.With softest step I '11 tread the hallow'd ground,Where with immortal bays the Nine their fav'rite crown'd.The fairest flowers around the spot shall grow,The daisy redden, and the violet blow :The rose, the pink, the hyacinth adorn,And the rich laurel consecrate his urn.Ambrosial fragrance fill the sacred place,And lavish Nature pour her happiest grace.Oh NAME for ever loved ! oh bard admired !Whom Phoebus warmed and all the Nine inspired !SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 73familiar to me ; but nothing took such entire possessionof the very strongholds of imagination andreason as the glorious ILIAD ! My little ReadingTo whom the sister Graces lent their aid,And rural elves fantastic homage paid ;For whom the Naiads left their wat'ry bed,And Thames, spontaneous, rear'd his hoary head ;For whom each swain in sprightliest form advanced,And buxom maids in rustic order danced ;For whom the Muse hath pour'd her genuine fire,Enhanced each theme, and struck her choicest lyre ;While Eloise, in her awful cells,Religion's dictates, and Love's passion tells ;While airy sylphs around Belinda fly,And guard the LOCK that 's destined ne'er to die ;The critic in thy ESSAY wond'ring seesRules so concise, and maxims sure to please :In thee MORALITY assumes her power,And Satire stings the breast that never felt before.HORACE to thee his classic tribute pays,And finds his temples crown'd with British bays.O'er unknown-vulgar flight inspired to soar,HOMER invites thee to his welcome shore;To thee his harp in generous triumph gives ;Adorn' d in British strains, each bard transcendant lives.No more, ye trees, no more his lay shall sound !No more, ye bowers, his swelling note rebound !No more, ye winding paths, ye deep-grown shades,Ye grots umbrageous, and ye mossy glades,No more, responsive to each well-wrought taleIn sadness now with drooping head bewail !Mute is his strain, his once-loved lyre unstrung,Fate stops his voice, and Silence seals his tongue.Here, as I tread, with solemn pace, the ground,A deathlike awe and stillness breathe around ;&c. &c. &c.It is just possible that these verses, the production of a lad of littlemore than fifteen, may possess some other claim to attention than that ofhaving been taken from a very rare volume.74 SCHOOLBOY DAYS,regiment * seemed to be resuscitated, and marshalledin array before me as I flew with Hector, or shoutedwith Doomed, for the battle. I could with difficultyresist the impulse of bespeaking a SoXixo'<moc Vyxor, andseven-bull-hided shield, of a neighbouring artificer.But these incipient notions cooled in due course ;and when I had mastered the first twelve books ofthat immortal poem, the version of Pope was putinto my hands. It filled me with an admirationwhich I am unable to express ; and yet its "Viviangraces" did not altogether escape my notice and observation.I was for ever " trying my hand" at arival translation t, which my master would good humouredendure.However, a more rational source of rivalry was inthemes, a didactic English prose composition, everySaturday afternoon (sad inroad upon a half holiday!)upon a given subject, specified by a trite Latin motto ;as, " Carpe diem" " Principiis obsta" " Quo semelSee page, 49, ante.t Especially in the pitched battle between Hector and Ajax; theparting of Hector and Andromache ; the storming of the Grecian shipsby Hector, and the battle of the Gods. The way in which Homermakes all these fierce conflicting deities take part with their favouritemortals, while the thunders of Jupiter are rolling over their heads in acanopy of dense black clouds, is truly magnificent and sublime. Butof mortal heroes, Hector was my favourite and will always be thefavourite of every gallant-hearted schoolboy. I remember reading, longbefore I got through Homer, Fitzosbornes Letters (which awakenedmany pleasing, and I may add elegant, thoughts), where the comparativemerits of the versions of Homer by Dryden, by Addison, and Popeare estimated ; and also the Monthly Review of Cowper's version, whichraised the merits of Pope in a tenfold degree in my humble estimation.SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 75est iinlnita recent" " Pallida mors equopulsat" &c.,and divers others of the like quality. To see, in theupper classes, the solemn, woe-begone countenanceswith which some lads indeed, most lads sat downto master the obvious difficulties of such a task * ; thehunt in Addison or Johnson for a successful crib;the scratching out and scratching in; the feverishrestlessness, ending sometimes in tears of absolutedespair were a sad but not uncommon sight. Formyself, I generally contrived to illustrate the moralpropounded by some tale dressed up in the orientalstyle of fiction, by which I got rid of a great deal ofdry, difficult, commonplace remark, and stiffness ofdiction. Meanwhile, I had so mastered the Frenchlanguage as to carry about me, alternately, Telemachusand Gil Bias, as pocket companions : andif there be one period of these " SCHOOLBOY DAYS"upon which I look back with the consciousness ofThe " difficulties" are not only obvious, but with some boys necessarilyinsurmountable. Experience and reflection are the basis of ethicalcomposition, upon which reason is to be exercised ; but how are thesethree requisites obtainable in a lad of from fourteen to sixteen ? I haveknown instances where hours have been spent in the construction ofthe first sentence. Some few boys, however, had a resolute fancy, andready diction, toadvanceSome desperate doctrines, and be right by chance;"but in secret they had an abhorrence of the task. POETRY, whether inLatin or English, was always a favourite topic of rivalry : especially withthose who had a knack at hejcameterising. I still preserve a Latin prize-poemupon Gold, in which certain hobbling hexameter are ckcd out tothe extent of two hundred lines.76 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.having been more thoroughly happy than another,it is that, when, in the last six months of my residence,being a parlour-boarder, and the captain ofthe school, I used to sit in the branches of the mulberrytree, in my master's garden, alternately pluckingthe ripe fruit and reading the last-named authors.Never, surely, did the sun, before or since, appearto go down with so golden a hue, or orchard treesto be canopied by so ultramarine a sky !And yet, although, both with master and boys,nothing could go on more smoothly and although Iwas confident, in a short time, of being quite at thetop of the first class I began to be weary of schooldiscipline, and impatient of school confinement. Longwalks always brought me back again to the samepoint whence I started. Mulberries were only ripein September. The clang of the up-rising, ringing,school-bell, fixed in an elm tree, became insupportable; and dancing and fencing were miserableafternoon substitutes for fishing, bathing, and cricket.The ploughboy " whistling o'er the lea," the solemnflight of the crow, or the rapid volition of the pigeon,were absolutely objects of deeply-fixed envy*. ButIt seems absurd, and scarcely credible, that for a schoolboy nevershrinking from getting a task, and having a decided love of learningsuch a feeling should possess me, but it did. I would sometimes havegiven anything and everything for a stroll, on a sunny afternoon, toOsterley Park, within the distance of two miles. I loved to look uponits antiquated red-brick exterior but far more did I enjoy the aviary,filled with exotic birds, and situated in a sort of coppice wood, with asmall lake of water, into which a fountain sent forth a gushing stream.SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 77the latter months of my residence were rendered moreendurable by the establishment of a debating club inthe upper school-room, of which I had the honour tobe elected the first president. My principal adversaryin debate, as well as in classical lore, was ayouth of the name of KING *. It was now time tothink of looking forward to the line of life inwhich my future destinies were to be concentrated :when, after divers anxious consultations betweenDr. Greenland and my uncle, it was resolved that Ishould be sent to COLLEGE a resolution, which, atthe time, filled me with something approaching toawe and dread.This place had an indescribably magic charm for me ; and when a ,I was constantly strolling thither, reclining on the grass,and devouring the pages of Thomson, Pope, and Shakspeare. On revisitingthis spot some three years ago, I found an entire metamorphosis.The aviary had disappeared : the lake was dried up : the treeswere cut down. But, as an antidote to this misery, Lord Jersey, itsowner, had given me permission to examine the LIBRARY of the mansion,where two volumes (the Morte d' Arthur printed by Caxton, andthe only thoroughly complete copy of Cover dales Bible of 1535), entirelyreconciled me to the disappearance of the feathered tribe. TwoSUCH volumes cannot fail, in every vicissitude of the BIBLIOMANIA, tohold their heads as high as ever.Now a respectable clergyman, and eminent teacher of youth. Hewas always a well-grounded scholar for his years, and very muchmy superior in grammatical accuracy.CHAPTER III,COLLEGE LIFE.I never hear the sound of thy glad bells,OXFORD, and chime harmonious, hut I say,(Sighing to think how time has worn away),Some spirit speaks in the sweet tone that swells,Heard, after years of absence, from the valeWhere Charwett winds."Bowles.How sweetly and how truly do these " speaking"verses describe the exact emotions of my heart!Forty-two years have passed away since I put on thefreshman's gown yet on every revisiting of ALMAMATER, there should seem to he some secretly-stirringspirit, which, if it gently chide me for hoursneglected, and studies shunned, still assures me thatI have not lived altogether an unworthy or unprofitableSon. There is, and ever will be, an unspeakablepleasure, as well as a defensible pride, in thisdeclaration. Peace to the spirits of such, who haverevisited the ivied walls and grey battlements ofEITHER university with emotions less honourableand consoling ! I was matriculated an independentmember and commoner of St. John's College duringthe vice-chancellorship of Dr. Wills; a name thatmerits to be enrolled among those of the lateri-: LIFE. !WORTHIES * of the University. Dr. Dennis was thethen president of the college. I had the slightestpossible knowledge of him ; as, in those days, thedistance between an independent freshman and thehead of the college was great, unless an immediateapproach was to be obtained through the medium of aletter of introduction. I had nothing of the sort ; andwhy St. John's College was selected for me, neithermy late master nor myself were ever able to ascertaint. The introduction to the tutor, the Rev.Michael Marlowe, was one that afforded me theDr. WILLS died in 1806, leaving to the value of about 15,000/. tothe college of Waltham, of which he was the president ; and procuringthe rescinding of an old and barbarous statute, by which that headshipwas to be always filled by a Bachelor. He was succeeded by Dr.Tournay, also a bachelor ; and Dr. Tournay having resigned the headshipin favour of Dr. Symons, in 1831, this latter now warms the Warden'slodge by all those hospitable rites and makings-welcome, whichare only to be thoroughly and joyously accomplished by means of thePlaces UXOR," as well as the " DOMUS." Of Dr. Tournay I hadscarcely more than a slight knowledge, during the very few latter yearsof his life; but I saw and found enough in him to account for theestimation in which he was held by the university, and especially bythe high Tories. His heart was warm and liberal ; his understandingstrong and acute. If you only granted him his premises, he wouldbuild such a superstructure upon them as it would be very difficultto shake or pull down. He was a very Cornish wrestler in argumentwary, powerful, decisive : while the asperity of his invective was frequentlysoftened, or accompanied, by a sort of heart's chuckle, whichappeared to disarm their terror. His table was always an abundant one,and his puns would sometimes circulate as briskly as his hock. At oneof his symposia, I was proud to receive his hearty concurrence in commendationof that most marvellously-described night battle, in Mr.Gleig's account of the campaign in New Orleans ; and for his good tastein this behalf (as I told him), " I could almost forgive his outrageousToryism !"t The scholars and fellows are elected chiefly from Merchant Tailors'80 COLLEGE LIFE.sincerest pleasure *. He was a gentleman and ascholar, uniting great diffidence with undoubtedattainments. His conduct towards me, from firstto last, was uniformly that of a sensible and kindheartedman. In the third year of my residence,he succeeded to the presidentship, on the death ofDr. Dennis, by the unanimous votes of the Fellows.I regretted that, as a commoner, I had no vote tobestow, or he should have had a dozen from me,had I the means of giving them. On his election,the whole college (dependent and independent members)went en train to do homage to Christ Church.I thought this a very humbling piece of vassalage t.I had scarcely entered upon my studies, or joinedmy class, before I began to be conscious of my corn-school,in Suffolk-lane, London. Thomas White, Lord Mayor of London,was founder of the college in 1557. There is a whole-length portraitof him at the upper end of the college dining-hall. It is a hard,brown, ochery picture, hut genuine and, I dare say, a faithful resemblance.The History of Merchant Tailors' School has been written bythe Rev. H. B. Wilson, 1812-14, 4to.The first interview with Dr., then Mr. Marlowe, was short ; butcivil and decisive. One thing has ever since struck me. Dr. M. toldDr. Greenland that he thought I might maintain myself very respectablyas a commoner for 120/. per annum. To be sure, in those daysport wine was to be had of Mr. Sims for 11. 5s. per dozen. Claret wasutterly unknown at any table.f We were received by the dean and chapter, as I supposed it to be,in full costume and formality. Dr. Cyril Jackson (than whom fewmen could dress themselves in the robes of authority with greater dignityand effect) was the Dean. What took place I know not ; but wereturned in rank and file, as we had issued out. In due course, thewhole college was regaled with a sumptuous dinner by the newly-electedpresident, 'who came to our several common-rooms for drinkingwine, to pledge us, and to receive in return the heartiest attestations ofCOLLEGE LIFE. s lparativc backwardness ; or rather of my prematureentrance upon COLLEGE LIFE. Two years of stiffand steady discipline with a private tutor shouldhave preceded it. The want, too, of an educationat a public school was fancied to be felt ; but mytutor, often seeing my misgivings and anxieties,spared me as much as possible. I always took painsbefore going up, and fancied I could master Herodotusand Xenophon with comparative ease ; Demosthenesand Longinus required closer grapplingwith. Still all these lectures had only the air ofschoolboy proceedings: nothing lofty, stirring, orinstructive was propounded to us. There were nocollege prizes ; and lecture and chapel were all thatwe seemed to be called upon to attend to. Afterlecture, the day was our own ; and oh ! what dayswere these.Boating, hunting, shooting, fishing these formed,in times of yore, the chief amusements of the OXFORDSCHOLAR. They form them now, and will ever formthem ; being good, and true, and lawful amusementsin their several ways, when partaken of in moderatoresteem and respect for him the masters by themselves, the bachelorsby themselves, and scholars and commoners each in their particularbanqueting-room. I remember one forward freshman shoutingaloud on this memorable occasion, as the new president retreated,Nunc est bibendum ; nunc pede liberoPulsandatellus!"The stars of midnight twinkled upon our orgies : but this was a dayNEVER to COME AGAIN. Dr. Marlowe sat thirty-three years in the president'schair of St. John's College.8'2 COLLEGE LIFE.tion. But who shall describe the inward glow ofdelight with which that same scholar first sees thefurniture of his rooms as his own and his rooms, asort of castle, impervious, if he pleases, to the intrudingfoot ! Everything about him begets a spiritof independence. He reads he writes he reposeshe carouses, as that spirit induces. All that heputs his hand upon, is his own. The fragrant bohea,the sparkling port ; the friends, few or many, whichencircle him ; while the occupations of the past, andthe schemes for the coming day, furnish themeswhich alternately soothe and animate the enthusiasticcoterie. The anticipations of the morrowkeep the forehead as smooth and the heart as warmas when the day of sport and of pastime has closed.There can be no let or hindrance. A lecture, whichoccupies a class only one hour, is as an intellectualplaything. It is over, and hah the college is abroad ;some few to wend their solitary steps " where theharebells and violets blow," and to return upon thebosom of Isis beneath the trembling radiance of themoon : after having visited the ruins of Godstow, orentered the sacred antiquity of Iffley *.The ruins of Godstow Nunnery are almost ideal, so scanty are thematerials left. The history attached to them, whether real or feigned,is quite of a romantic cast of character; but the reader may see asmuch gossip as he pleases connected with this nunnery in Herne'sHistoria Gulielmi Ncubrigensis. The dwelling upon Godstow, bringsOvercome, an adjoining village, to my recollection ; where once livedone of the most excellent of men, and kind-hearted of friends Mr.CHARLES SW-ANN, a paper-maker. He died some twenty years ago,COLLEGE LIFE. 83But I am dealing in generals, when, to be instructive,I ought perhaps to particularise. It wasand has been very recently followed to the grave by his only son, abarrister full of promise.The church of IFFLEY has always struck me as being among themost compact, perfect, and interesting specimens of what is vulgarlycalled Saxon (but correctly Norman) architecture in the kingdom. Itswestern entrance, and the zigzag ornamented arches within, upon whichthe stunted tower is built, are full of attractions, which the thoroughlyinitiated only know how sufficiently to appreciate. The style of itsarchitecture is, in almost all respects, similar to that of St. Peter's in theEast, at Oxford; of which some notion may be formed by looking at theplates, and especially of that of " the doorway under the porch," in oneof the numbers of Dr. Ingram's popular work, entitled " Memorials ofOxford."Of the village as well as of the church of Iffley, thus called to remembrance,let me be indulged in expressions to which that remembrancegives birth. That spot had often been the scene of many a pleasantand many an innocent recreation. Early and late have I been an inmatein the house of one of its most respectable inhabitants, now, peradventure,numbered with the silent dead. Often, as the eleventh hourof night was striking by GREAT TOM, have I unmoored my little bark,at the extremity of the garden, " washed by the refluent wave," andmade onwards for home ere the midnight bell marked the certainty ofan imposition. Some twenty-three or four years ago, all the events orimagery, imparted in these few pages, rushed upon my recollection towhich I gave vent in the following would-be poetical attempt referringto the earlier period of a freshman.As thus enthusiastic he pursuesHis varying round, his destiny at lengthLeads him to enter, as a student free,Thy cloister's pale, and academic bowers,BELOVED OXFORD ! There he thrives. There shinesAnd glitters in his own conceit. His daysTo learning little, and his nights to mirthMuch, are devoted for a while. And yetTh' instructive volume oft times duly spread,Is seen upon his desk. 'Tis HistoryOf Ancient Greece or England, from thy pen,Milford or Henry ; or from his who late84 COLLEGE LIFE.some time, and not till after keeping two or threeterms, that I began to adopt what is called a system-hathwrit of Italy's illustrious sons,Immortal Roscoe. Next, 'tis sweet romanceHow Amadis or Arthur through the fieldsOf war, triumphant, shook their blood-stain'd lance,And, like the stubble by the whistling wind,Drove recreant knights before them. Then his breastFeels the full glow accordant then by turnsHe 'd legislate like Solon, or would fightLike Fier-Bras. To mathematic skillIndifferent ; but of ancient classic lore(Transmitted in the everlasting pageOf grave Thucydides, or Livy eloquent)Enamour'd much. And thus the first two yearsHis studies (if a name so lofty mayBe fix'd to such pursuits) are mark'd. But oh !His pleasures, how transcendant ! Down the streamOf Isis, on whose banks the florets blowFor aye in song, he guides the rapid skiff;And like an Indian, freed from vassalage,Sniffs oft the gale delicious : while his heartIs lost in transport unalloyed with care.His vigorous hands the ashen sculls apply,And soft beneath the yielding waters play.Then on he glides towards his favourite spot :Makes fast his little bark, secure from surgeAnd tempest sudden ; and on shore he leapsTriumphant, at his skill delighted. IfThy blooming meads, and art-instructive church,O IFFLEY ! fail to tempt him, forward heTo neighbouring Sandford bends his hast'ning step,By curiosity or hunger driven.The silver eel is dress'd ; the sparkling aleFrom choicest flagon, mantled with brown dust,Nutmeg 'yclept, is brought in meet arrayAnd studied form. His hunger thus appeased,And slaked his thirst, he quits the lowly roofWith joy unspeakable, of place and timeRegardless ; till from Motley's Hill the sun,COLLEGE Lin:. 85attic course of reading ; the love of liberty, or ratherof unrestrained recreation, having kept me previouslyvery much out of college. Abingdon, Blenheim,Needham in short, a new world, with a new set ofideas! But I had usually a pocket companion inthe shape of a volume of English poetry or the drama.I had purchased Bishop Newton's Milton, Warburton'sPope, and Theobald's Shakspeare : but nonetook a stronger hold of me, in those days, thanTHOMSON ; and I loved his Castle of Indolence beyondmeasure*. Of his Seasons, Spring was mySlow moving to his western bed, makes broadThe shades of coming eve : and down the streamThe gently-stirring zephyr wafts thy sound,GREAT TOM ! like cannon heard at Dover cliffFrom Calais' shore, and dreaded more. AnonHe hurries with quick step, and pulse increased,Till his moor'd bark he loosens. Now the tugOf skill and strength against th' opposing streamIn vain ! Bibliography, p. 5.The above were my first book purchases, at a Mr. Collins's, inChange-alley, near my uncle's residence, in Walbrook. They were putup in the window at marked prices, and I think I was upwards of aweek fluttering about that same window, in the agonising hesitation ofpurchasing or not. I disdained to let the showman carry them home,but took them triumphantly under my arm, and deposited them inatrunk. Collins was the most diminutive man I ever had businesswith ; but he knew business well. His shrill pipe and twinkling littledark eyes (especially when looking at you over the rim of his spectacles)cannot be easily forgotten. His shop was absolutely choked, and hiswindows were darkened, with books. He used to get his flying dinner-mealbehind a stack of books, from which he darted with great alertnesswhen a customer entered his shop. He died some years ago, andwas succeeded by his nephew, Mr. Ardour. But the book-shop existsno longer and boots and shoes now occupy the place of quartos andoctavos.86 COLLEGE LIFE.favourite and how natural the preference! Howmany " summer suns" have " rolled unperceivedaway" while, in the deepening glooms of BagleyWood, or near the magnificent expanse of water atBlenheim, I have been seated with some one of theabove authors in my lap ! The future had nothing,then, so entirely rapturous as the present.At length a sort of literary ambition began to bestirringwithin me. It was in the power of everyoneto row, sail, hunt, shoot, and fish ; but to " buildthe lofty rhyme," to store the memory with deeds ofother days, to think, speak, and write well, were objectswhich seemed to me to be of a more exalted andcommanding cast of character. Still I was thrownupon myself and my own resources : there was nocommon link of sympathy. In my fellow-collegians,with some very few exceptions, I discovered no veryobvious sparks or indications of a desire to strike outof the ordinary routine. But if I sought solitude, Ifound instruction in the society of those " who speakwithout opening their mouths, and who chastise withoutthe infliction of stripes." Two works, at thisThe expression is in Richard De Bury's Philobiblon ; a work, aboutwhich there is mention made, almost to raving, in the Bibliomania, p.245-7 ; Bibl. Cameron, vol. iii. pp. 229, 230 ; and JBiblioth. Spentvol. iii. p. 237. Some two or three years since there was publisheda literal English version of the quaint and curious original Latintext. To this version are subjoined notes, apparently destined only tobe the channel of unprovoked and unjustifiable abuse of the ENGLISHCHURCH and her MINISTERS. It is as difficult to divine, as it is tojustify, the motive of such vituperation.COLLEGE LIFE. *7crisis, contributed, instantly and most effectually, tofasten me to my seat, and to make me a constantinmate of college. These were Bowels Life ofJohnson and D* Israeli's Curiosities of Literature.Although composed of wholly opposite materials,they affected me in nearly the same degree. WithJohnson and Boswell I used to sit hour after hour,and day after day, in our groves or gardens a veryparadise of their kind*. I seemed to be one, howeverinsignificant, of the circle described ; and neverknew how to admire sufficiently the masculine understanding,the vigorous reasoning, and colloquial eloquence,of the great sage of Lichfield. D'Israeliwas the companion of my evening hours and lonemusings beyond midnight. I once saw the gothicbattlements t outside my window streaked with theThese are the work of BROWN ; and if ever Cowper's precept ofgiving " ample space to narrow bounds" were realised, it has been inthese delightful gardens. It was said, that when George III. paid hisfirst visit to Oxford, he declared that his dominions did not contain sucha specimen of gardening skill and yet they are comprised within aboundary of four acres!t There is now in circulation a pocket edition, under the editorshipof Mr. Croaker, of this delightful and matchless piece of biography,forming part of an edition of Johnson's entire works. This edition willrun upon all fours through every civilised country in the world. MayI express my regret, or perhaps disappointment, at the autobiographyof the Great Seer in his very earlier years? To be sure, anythingcoming from such a man has a distinct and peculiar zest j but the recordof puling infancy and diseased childhood, together with an imperfectstatement of youthful studies and pursuits, has not much hold upon theimagination or the memory.Upon one of these "battlements" there used regularly to perch, asthe darkness of night came on, a grave, large, and apparently well-fedOWL. He commenced his hooting almost as regularly, but in a more88 COLLEGE LIFE.dapple light of the morning, as I retired to restclosing " the Curiosities of Literature " I was alwaysequally surprised and delighted to see fromwhat sources the " curious" intelligence containedin this work was derived. Never was truth attiredin more attractive garments than in these volumes ;and to them I owe my early passion for ENGLISHPHILOLOGY a passion, which can only cease withmy existence.I loved history exceedingly; and, strange to say,took a violent affection for Rushworth's Collections,as a portion of that of our own country. Beyondmeasure was I pleased with that historian's accountof the reign of James I*., and the development ofsubdued tone, as the nights became moonlight. On one of theseoccasions I was seized with a fit to compose an ode, published in myPoems, entitled, " Ode to the Moon, with my College Window open."It was precisely at one of these D' Israelite studies that I composed thelines in question, which begin thus :Solemn, serene, congenial, hush'd in peace !All nature in reposing grandeur lies.Through the thin tranquil air,The owl pours forth her hollow tone ;Whilst melancholy, thoughtful, and alone,I view with cheerless eye her progress through the skies."Upon what exact data, I know not, but Mr. D'Israeli, whose instructive" Curiosities" has always been appreciated by me as theydeserve to be, is smitten with a most uncommon attachment towards thememory of James I., upon whom he writes an express volume in laudatorystrains. He was at once encouraged and hardened in this predilectionby his friend the late W. Gifford, the well-known and much-dreadededitor of the Quarterly Review. I am more than surprised,being well nigh astounded, at such a partiality. He, who has attentivelyperused a celebrated little volume, entitled " Truth brought to Light byTime" (common and cheap enough), 1651, 4to., may see and be con-collegeLike: 89the intrigues of Gondola and Buckingham, in negociatingthe marriage of Charles with the Infantawinced of the infamy of the protection given by James to Carre, Earl ofSomerset, and the Countess of Essex, at the very moment when thehands of that abandoned couple were stained with the blood of SirThomas Overture, whom they had caused to be murdered in the Tower.James must in his heart have known them to have been privy to thatmurder, and yet he forgave and caressed them ! So true is the remarkof Lord Clarendon, that he " could not resist the influence of fine clothesand a handsome person." His predecessor would have taken especialgood care to have elevated the couple in question to an Raman-tikealtitude. And then, the decapitation, the murder, of Sir Walter Raleigh,during the peaceful reign of the same James !Good Mr. D'Israeli, reconsider your judgment. And yet I have nohopes of its reversion ; for, in the recent edition of his Curiosities ofLiterature, vol. ii. p. 322, the author refers us to this very " Enquiryinto the Literary and Political Character of James I.," and tells us thathe is perfectly satisfied with the view which he had at first, in theseCuriosities," taken of the Scots-Anglican monarch. It seems that thechief ground of his inference, or eulogy, is, that James had " preservedfor us a peace of more than twenty years." But surely this is not acorrect logical datum for such a conclusion. The peace of a country isnot strictly a personal, or a national question, per se; it must depend inagreat measure upon the disposition of other countries. A man maybeamong the most peaceful of citizens or of farmers, but he may havea very quarrelsome neighbour. His windows may be repeatedly broken,or his fields as repeatedly trespassed upon. He must then defend thataggression. Thus, feuds in ordinary life are engendered, and nationalfeuds arise frequently from causes comparatively as sure yet as trivial.When James I. ascended the throne, there was a disposition to peaceabroad. France was wearied and exhausted with the wars of the league;and Spain, not able to trespass upon England by land, had the wings ofher fleet so thoroughly clipt by the destruction of her Armada (theTrafalgar action of that day), that she was in no wise able to makethe slightest hostile effort. But the real secret may be supposed to liein the consummate address of CECIL, the prime minister, upon whoseshoulders the mantle of his uncle seems to have been so gracefully cast.Let any man study the " Memorials" of Sir Robert Winwood, Cecil'ssecretary, and he may not only be convinced of this fact, but in otherrespects have the toil of perusal abundantly rewarded by the fruits tobe gathered from a solid and instructive work.90 COLLEGE LIFE.of Spain. But Henry's history was the sort ofHortus Adonis" from which I strove to gatherripe and perishing fruit. He was always on mytable; and when I could, his authorities were by theside of him. Hume was my sofa companion ; buthis reign of Elizabeth (which I believe to have readthrough four times at the least) has always struckme as a piece of composition scarcely to be equalled.It is also very carefully got up on the score of authorities; while all the author's Dorian propensitiesand attachments are most adroitly interwoven inthe narrative and reasonings of the text * . Strange asmay seem the juxta-position, yet Burton and Gibbonwere frequently lying upon the same sofa or table.From causes utterly remote from each other, I lovedthese authors alike in respect to steadiness of attachmentalthough Gibbon always commanded a moreconsecutive attention and a more frequent reflection.The latter, in his "Account of his Life and Writings,"was among the most winning of authors ; and in hisDecline and Fall" seemed to be the most dignifiedand instructive of historians t. I read him, in theTake, for example, the reasonings on both sides of the question forliberating or executing Mary, Queen of Scots, as urged upon Elizabethby Cecil and Walsingham. You become, by turns, the advocate ofeach measure ; so nicely, ingeniously, and cogently do the argumentsseem to run. For PATHOS, what, in the whole compass of Englishhistory, is comparable to Hume's account of the execution of the unfortunatequeen from the moment of her rising from her early bed tothat of laying her head upon the block ?t Time was, some thirty years ago (see Mores Utopia, 2 vols. 1806),that I made much of BURTON'S Anatomy of Melancholy, from theCOLLEGE LIFE. {> Ilast mentioned work, with such authorities as Icould muster together ; but what was a lad ofeighteen to do with the " Body of the ByzantineHistorians?" The shelves of the college libraryafforded, I believe, about one half of their number,cubical quarto of 1621 to the tapering folio of 1678, being in possessionof these, and of all the intermediate editions. My copies were tall, clean,and goodly in all respects ; and to that of the last was prefixed an impression,bright as silver, of Albert Durer's grand print of " Melancholia,"being a female personification of Melancholy. These copieswere all bound in picked russia, by Faulkner j for then, Charles Lewiswas not." What an extraordinary book it is, and what a most extraordinaryportion of it is the chapter upon " Love Melancholy ! " I wasgrateful for the octavo reprint of it, which has gone through two editions:but Burton has not yet been clothed in the editorial garb which ought toencircle his shoulders.Of GIBBON it were idle now to speak, as criticism has been drawn toits very dregs concerning him ; and we look to receive from the Rev.Mr. Milan an edition of his great historical work (for " great,"questionless it is) in which the subtle ore of infidelity will be extractedfrom the stratum of the text, and innuendoes met and encountered withthe courage of a Christian scholar and critic. To my judgment, inlater life, Gibbon has, what Johnson describes Gray as having, " a sortof strutting dignity, loving always to walk on tiptoe." He tires soonerthan any other historian, from his narrative being too often clogged andencumbered by the drapery of words. But his mind had a capaciousgrasp, and he was perhaps the most ambitious of all historians ancientor modern. His way lay through thorns and brambles, in the midst ofbog, and sometimes of darkness ; but he seemed to glory in masteringthem. From the second century of the Christian era to the middleof the fifteenth, on the capture of Constantinople, he chose a path forhimself; and in that path no successor can walk without borrowinglargely of the light which the volumes of the " Decline and Fall" cannotfail to supply him.I have, however, something like " a crow to pick" with the conclusionof Gibbon's Account of his Life and Writings. It is not only hypochondriacal,but it is almost cowardly. At least, a brave Christian wouldnot so express himself. The author talks of the " abbreviation of timeand the failure of hope, always tinging with a browner shade the evening> COLLEGE LIFE.but who could encounter such a phalanx as a matterof mere amusement * ?Still there was something wanting, as I melloweddown towards the third year of my standing, torender a COLLEGE LIFE thoroughly congenial andsatisfactory. College exercises were trite, dull, anduninstructive. The University partook of this distressingsomnolency. There seemed to be no spur toemulation and to excellence. Whatever was done,was to be done only by means of private energy andenthusiasm. The STATUTES were at that time a sortof caput mortuum ; and yet the members of the Universitywere taught to view and to estimate them asof life:" as if THIS life were to lead to NO OTHER : as if the grave were foreverto hold both the body and spirit of map. Well might the mostbrilliant of all Pagan lyrical poets exclaim,,O beate Sexto,Vitae summa brevis seem nos vetat incohare logan.Jam te premier nox, fabulaeque manes,Et domus exiles platonic," &c.but, for a man like Gibbon, born and writing in the eighteenth century,to close such an "Account" in a strain so querulous and unphilosophical(to say the least) is altogether as pitiable as surprising. How fine isthe burst of YOUNG :Life's a debtor to the grave.Dark lattice, letting in ETERNAL DAY !Death gives us more than was in Eden lost."Even the homely couplet sung in the evening hymn of our metropolitanchurches is infinitely preferable to the Gibbonian philosophy :11 Teach me to live that I may dreadThe GRAVE as little as my BED."This "phalanx" consists of about 50 folio volumes, published at Parisbetween the years 1645-1819. They may now be had for about thirtypounds, but were once not purchasable under threescore and ten guineas.I remember Mr. Heberr telling me, that, on procuring a set abroad (Ithink in the Low Countries), he was obliged to take them about withhim, loose, in a travelling carriage, upwards of fifty miles, tumblingCollege LIFE. 03the ancient Roman was taught to look upon the Rubicon,the sacred boundary of his confine beyondwhich it was sacrilege to pass. The beadles paradedin rustling silks and glittering maces to St. Mary's,to the Divinity School, and to the Theatre. Sermonswere preached, degrees conferred, commemorationscelebrated; gaudies, or college anniversary festivals *,went their joyous and spirit-stirring rounds ; anddinners and deserts were at once plentiful and expensive.But, taking one day and one term withanother, there was a sort of "dull, aching void,"which, with young men of aspiring notions and ardentimaginations, nothing could thoroughly compensateor reconcile. The laws of the universitywere as the heavy sedge, or sea-weed, which onlyabout in all directions, and " threatening to bury him beneath the ruinsof the Lower Empire." This magnificent, and to the historical collectorindispensable, set of volumes, together with the publications of theCouncils, Fathers, and Ancient Classics, reflects immortal honour uponthe PRESS OF FRANCE.Each college has its PATRON SAINT. St. John the Baptist was ours.On that day, June 24th, the hall was set out with flowers and garlands,and the dinner consisted of every luxury in season. The larger grace-cupswere ranged upon the high table, for the senior fellows and visitingdons ; the sideboard glittered and groaned beneath the weight of otherold and massive plate plate, which had been concealed during the civilwars, and not melted down to serve the royal cause, as that of manyother colleges had been. Altogether, the sight and the festival werejoyous and grand. In ancient times, however, the day was ushered inwith pious solemnity ; and even thirty-five years ago, the junior memberswere expected to take the sacrament in the morning a most startlingand unfit prelude to the Saturnalia of the day. This custom iswisely now " more honoured in the breach than in the observance."94 COLLEGE LIFE.encumbered exertion and darkened hope*. Talentslike those of Canning or of Copleston would doubtlesshave burst every " serpent ;" but the alimentof an ordinary understanding required treatment ofa more intelligible and invigorating nature. Therewas, as before intimated, plenty of private or individualenergy, which only wanted sympathy or encouragementto break forth into public distinction ;but the arms of Alma Mater dared not then embraceor cherish the hopes of her offspring. She mighthave commended the zeal, but she had neither thewisdom nor the spirit to " move one finger" in givingit a right direction.At length an experiment was made to breakthrough all this miserable thraldom and melancholystate of things. Several members of several colleges(in the number of whom I was as proud ashappy to be enlisted) met frequently at each other'srooms, to talk over and to concoct a code of laws, orof regulations, for the establishment of a society tobe called a " Society for Scientific and Literary Disquisition"It comprehended a debate and an essay,to be prepared by each member in succession, stu-supposeany sensible man, or half a dozen sensible men, had atthis time set themselves to the task of remodelling these statutes, andhad perfected the very plan which, about a dozen years afterwards,should seem to have been adopted by accusation would that remodellinghave been then approved ? Or would the remodelled have beencalled LUNATICS ? So true is it, that, in legislation as in education, thereseems to be " A TIME TO sow AND A TIME TO REAP."COLLEGE LIFE. 95piously avoiding, in both, all topics of religious andpolitical controversy. There was not the slightestattempt to beat down any one barrier of universitylaw or regulation throughout our whole code. Wewere to meet in a hired room, at a private house,and were to indulge in our favourite themes in themost unrestrained manner, without giving ingress toa single stranger. Over, and over again, was eachlaw revised, corrected, and endeavoured to be renderedas little objectionable as possible. At length,after the final touches, we demanded an interviewwith the vice-chancellor and proctors ; and ourfounder, WILLIAM GEORGE MATON *, of Queen'sCollege, Messrs. STODDART,WHITELOCK, FALCONER,(of Christ Church, Queen's, and Corpus colleges)were deputed to meet the great men in office, and toreport accordingly.Dr. Wills was then vice-chancellor, of whom someWhen the first sheet of this work was printed off, this excellentman, and early and undeviating friend, was LIVING an ornament to his(medical) profession, and an honour to human nature. He was thefirst townsman to whom I had a letter of introduction on my entranceat St. John's. Our acquaintance soon mellowed into friendship, andthat friendship " grew with our growth, and strengthened with ourstrength In life's bitterest moments when those whom we love withan intensity of parental affection are about to be taken from us thesympathy and skill of my departed friend were alike manifested. Andwhat an ENTRANCE was His into his profession ! How much of thehonourable profit of years of toil was first devoted to the dischargeof those debts which his high sense of honour told him to be due tothe memory of a Father ! Dr. Maton died a bachelor, in his sixty-firstyear, leaving the bulk of his fortune to an elder niece.96 COLLEGE LIFE.slight mention has been already made *. He receivedthe deputation in the most courteous manner, andrequested that our laws might be left with him, asmuch for his own particular and careful examinationas for that of other heads of houses or officers whomhe might choose to consult. His request was readilyand as courteously complied' with ; and a day wasappointed when the answer of the oracle might beobtained. In about a week, according to agreement,the same deputation was received within the libraryof the vice-chancellor, who, after solemnly returningthe volume (containing the laws) into the hands ofour worthy founder, addressed them pretty nearly inthe following word. " Gentlemen, there does notappear to be anything in these laws subversive ofacademic discipline, or contrary to the statutes ofthe university but (ah, that ill-omened ' BUT ! ) asit is impossible to predict how they may operate, andas innovations of this sort, and in these times, maySee page 79, ante.tit was during the full swing of the French Revolution, and Oxfordwas at the time tenanted by numerous EMIGRANTS. Many of theseemigrants (clergymen) were of the most meritorious character; civil,unobtrusive, diligent, and well-educated. I was intimate with several,and too happy, on all occasions, to shew them every civility withoutdoors and within. I have walked with them at one time to Blenheim,and at another to Abingdon ; and they have again and again " brokenmy bread and tasted my salt." Round the groves of St. John, or atsunset from Leamington Hill, how often have we perambulated ! Andwell do I remember, on the Abbe * * * and myself assisting each:I: LIFE. 07have a tent/curt/ ichir/t unnj be as littleas it may be distressing to the framers of suchnam compelled, in the exercise of my magisterial authority,as vice-chancellor, to interdict your meetingin the manner proposed" The deputation was notaltogether unprepared for such a reply ; as there hadbeen previously frequent conferences between thedean of Christ Church and Dr. Wills, and theformer was somewhat prone to consider innovationand revolution as synonymous*.other's memories through the first eclogue of Virgil, and coming to thefollowing passage,Impious haec tarn cult novalia miles hahehit ?Barbarous has senates ? En quo discord civesPerduxit misers."the Abbe burst into tears, exclaiming " C'EST LA MA PATRIE !" Whileupon this theme, let it be allowed me to pay a short but sincere tributeof respect to the attainments (perhaps to the memory") of ONE emigrant,of the name of LE Barrier, who had the superintendence of a younggentleman of great fortune and connexions, and who resided at my lastschool with his pupil. Our personal intercourse was succeeded by anintermitting correspondence during the whole time I was at college.His letters (upon which I am unable, in a mass of forty years' correspondence,to lay my hand at this moment) were uniformly in theEnglish language, and I do not remember to have ever seen SUCH specimensof it by the hand of a foreigner. They were, perhaps, notexceeded by those of Walpole and Gibbon in the French language.Yet no man more anxious about all the histories bearing upon theFrench revolution, than Dr. CYRIL JACKSON. But the work of all otherswhich, at that time, was supposed to be secretly doing most mischief,and preparing the intellectual soil for the reception of revolutionary seed,was Godwin s Political Justice ; then just issued into the world in twostately quarto volumes. Nor can it be denied that, in common withmany other enquiring spirits, some of the members of our proposed clubwere a little imbued with the principles of Mr. Godwin's book. Thenovelty, the hardihood, the generalising spirit of these principles, conti98 COLLEGE LIFE.There was, therefore, but one result to adoptone choice left: and that was, to carry the object, sodear to our hearts, into effect within our privateapartments, in rotation. There we might discuss,debate, and hear essays read, ad infinitum ; and,accordingly, our first meeting took place in Queen'sCollege, at the rooms of our founder, afterwards solong and so well known in the medical world as Dr.MATON*. Our society was quickly enlarged ; andthe present BISHOP of LLANDAFF, then a student ofCorpus College, and the Rev. JOHN HORSEMAN,afterwards a tutor in the same college, were enrolledmembers t. The two MONCRIEFFS of Baliol werevexed in language at once lucid and strong, struck the minds of manywith admiration of the author as well as of the work. It was attacked,on its appearance, with combined vigour, adroitness, and success : andwho NOW reads or remembers the " Political Justice" of Mr. Godwin ?Yet is its Author a mighty master in his way. Falkland and St. Leonare among our most philosophical and spirit-moving novels.Dr. Maton (see page 95, ante) commenced his literary, before hismedical, career, by a topographical publication entitled Observationsupon the Western Counties (Dorsetshire and Somersetshire) and by aLife of Linnaeus. The former in 2 vols. 8vo. 1797, the latter in onevolume 4to. The latter was reviewed (I think by the author's friend,the editor), in the Edinburgh Review, vol viii. p. 422.f* I heard the bishop recite both his prizes; the one, in 1793, a Latinpoem, upon <f Caius Marius Coriolanus midst the ruins of Carthage;"the other, in 1796, an English prose essay upon Agriculture. Universitydistinction could not carry a young man beyond these honours.I remember, in our society, that this distinguished prize-gainer oncemade a most ingenious and eloquent speech upon CHIVALRY, whichwas the theme of the evening's debate. Of my old and particular and kindfriend, the Rev. JOHN HORSEMAN, thus brought to my mind, " let me beindulged in the remembrance." He is now, after a separation of sometwenty-five years, become a comparatively near neighbour, and rectorCOLLEGE LIFE. 99also among our earlier acquisitions ; and some gentlemancommoner of Trinity College (whose name Ihave forgotten) together with my oldest, and amongmy most valued friends, Mr. BARWIS of Queen's,Mr.]oibson (afterwards called Liddell) of Worcester,of Peyton, near Boston in Cambridgeshire. His scholarship, readyand various, was always admitted ; while few could turn over the leavesof Plato with a more thorough knowledge of their contents. But thesweetness of his temper, and the playfulness of his muse, were necessarilythe more endearing and attractive objects with his college friends.After the silence of a dozen years (and when he had given up the tutorshipof the college) his unsubdued fondness for familiar verse, spurredhim on to address me in the following lines.Though* *****And Horseman's be unknown to fame,And years have past since last we met,True friends can ne'er old friends forget.How, then, at Cambridge could you beSo near, and yet not come to me ?Or, were your time not quite your own,If summon'd, I to you had flown.Often I muse on OXFORD DAYS,And different friends gone different ways :Some dead, some worse than dead, estrangedIn principle, and heart, too, changed.But could I judge from pictured look,Or from that printed self, your book *,Though somewhat modified, you are,In all essentials, what you were.Such likewise I, though modified,And such for ever may abide ;Possibly not so great a prig,But bear with me, old friend a WHIG.About ten years after this effusion, and on taking up my residence atExning, within about eighteen miles of his own, he writes thus, in thatThe Tour.COLLEGE LIFE.and George F * * * of Lincoln all united to givestrength and respectability to our association. Ourmeetings were frequent and full. The essays, afterhaving been read, were entered in a book ; and Iam not sure whether, at this very day, such book benot in existence. The subjects of debate usuallywere, as of old they ever have been, whether themerits or demerits of such a character (Caesar orQueen Elizabeth, for instance) were the greater?Or whether the good or evil of such a measure, inlegislation or in politics, be the more predominant?Of our speakers, the elder Moncrieff, and GeorgeF * * of Lincoln were doubtless the most fluent andeffective ; especially the latter, who had a fervencyof utterance which was at times surprising. Butthe younger Moncrieff, in course of time, followedhis brother, " passions aquas*" Taking the art ofsoftened and pensive strain which the recurrence of a birth-day, at acertain time of life, will often induce.Oct. 17, 1834.This is my birth-day, and may be my last ;What ought I to expect &t fifty-nine ?Thankful to God for many blessings past,Without a sigh I could this life resign,Were there not some, to me most justly dear,For whom not for myself for whom I fear.Yet, though I lean on God as our best friend,(A friend is HE, and Father, all in ONE) !And Christian hope illume my latter end,I feel as they will feel when I am gone :But, with this truth, I calm my natural fear ;Though dear to me, they are to GOD MORE DEAR.Baliol College has reason to be proud of the name of MONCRIEFF.COLLEGE Liii. 101speaking and the composition of an essay, together,I think Mr. (now Sir John) STODDART of ChristThe two members of it here introduced, were sons of the late Rev. SirHenry Elwood Moncrieff, D.D. Bart., an able, upright, and exemplarycharacter, "gathered to his fathers," in 1827, in the fullness of years.The eldest son, William, who, on going out to Malta and becoming hismajesty's attorney general, was knighted, and who died there in 1813,was one of our most distinguished debaters; and, I think, the bestreplier in the club. He never left a point untouched ; and was alikeremarkably happy in covering the weaker parts of his own case or argument,and taking advantage of those of his adversary. No man requiredsuch little preparation. He seemed to know the chief bearingsof his subject almost intuitively, and spoke with a surprising elasticityof spirit and unhesitating promptitude of utterance. But his periodswere neither rounded nor ornate ; and he neither shook the soul nortook the imagination captive. He was, however, altogether a verypowerful debater, and a fearful opponent. His brother James, who succeededto the baronetcy, and is now LORD MONCRIEFF (one of the lordsof session in Scotland), was not less distinguished for acuteness of perceptionand fluency of speech. He was, in my time, a junior memberof the society, but he became, in the end, one of its most distinguishedmembers. His abilities and reputation are now so duly acknowledgedin his own country, as to render further notice of them in this place amere matter of supererogation.Of all the singular and original characters belonging to our society,GEORGE F * *, of Lincoln College, was one of the most striking. Hisambition for public speaking and public distinction was without bounds.Every thing bent to this one point in his ever-agitated mind. No authorsbut Demosthenes and Cicero, for him. On paying me a visit onemorning, and seeing me busied with my pencil and brushes, and Mit-ford,Burton, and Gibbon lying, as usual, open upon my table, he coollyshut up these volumes, and, pointing to my drawing, exclaimed, " awaywith such baubles, if you think of attaining solid fame." We then tooka turn together in the groves of St. John, and I listened, with amazement,to the outpourings of his ardent spirit, and to his hurried and declamatoryeloquence. He was a Northumbrian by birth, and the constantobject, at once of his admiration and envy, was Mr., now EARL GREY.He used to say, " I could have answered Pitt last night with infinitelymore effect than did my countryman !" His countenance was sallow, hiseye protruding and wild, and his physiognomical expression tart arid102 COLLEGE LIFE.Church beat us all. He was always upon his legs, afearless opponent ; and in the use of a pen, the mostunpremeditated and successful*. There were otherrepulsive. In debating, it was curious to observe how he made us forgethis bur in the blaze of his fancy and the splendour of his diction. Alllanguage would sometimes seem too feeble for giving utterance to thosesentiments by which his very soul appeared to be shook. But thiscould not last for ever. Finding that Mr. Grey would not quit hisprominent station in the House of Commons to make room for himself,his spirit cooled : a reaction was observable a pensive, benevolent expressionsucceeded to that of the more fiery passions by which he hadbeen agitated; and one stormy night, when the heavens were tornasunder by thunder and by lightning, he sallied from his home, andplunging into a perturbed river, was brought back a CORPSE !With what mingled feelings of pleasure and regret do I call tomind the varied talents of this excellent man, who is now adorning thebench of supreme civil and admiralty judge at Malta : pleasure, from aknowledge of his worth and attainments ; regret, from an apprehensionthat we are parted, in ah 1 human probability, never to meet again inthis world. SIR JOHN STODDART married the sister of Lord Moncrieff,some twenty-five years ago, by whom he has a goodly race of representatives; but, before his marriage, HE WAS THE MAN who wrote upThe Times newspaper to its admitted pitch of distinction and superiorityover every other contemporary journal. Mark, gentle reader, I speakof the Times newspaper during the eventful and appalling crisis ofBonaparte's invasion of Spain and destruction of Moscow. My friendfought with his pen as Wellington fought with his sword; but nothinglike a tithe of the remuneration, which was justly meted out to the heroof Waterloo, befel the editor of the Times. Of course, I speak ofremuneration in degree, and not in kind. The peace followed. Publiccuriosity lulled, and all great and stirring events having subsided, it wasthought that a writer of less commanding talent (certainly not the presenteditor, and therefore procurable at a less premium, would answerthe current purposes of the day ; and the retirement of I>r. Stoddart(for he was at this time a civilian, and particularly noticed and patronisedby Lord Swell) from the old Times, and his establishment ofthe New Times newspaper, followed in consequence. But the latter,from the causes above specified, had only a short-lived existence. SirJohn Stoddart had been his majesty's advocate, or attorney-general, atCOLLEGE LIFE, UK)members, of varying shades of merit, but I have forgottentheir names. It is well to be able to particulariseso much upon a subject brought to recollectionafter the lapse of upwards of forty years.Meanwhile, the fame of our club, or society, beganto be noised abroad ; and those who felt no inclinationto write essays*, or to impose upon themselvesthe toil of reading and research for the purpose ofmaking a speech, were pretty free in using sneeringepithets, and in stigmatising by nick-names. Therewas, however, ONE nick-name which we instantlyand courageously took to ourselves and adopted andthat was, the LUNATICS t. Mad, indeed, we were,and desired so to be called if an occasional devilsbefore he retired thither, a second time, to assume the office ofJudge. He has lately published a speech upon the advantages of theintroduction of trial by jury into the Maltese courts. As there could benothing relating to my friend's career, connected with our club, so interestingas these particulars, the reader will dispense with the introductionof other topics.Of these essays, one, on the comparative merits of Dryden OdeonSt. Cecilia's Day with Collins' Ode on the Passions, and anotheron Thomson's Seasons, of both which I was the humble manufacturer,appealed in the European Magazine of 1795 or 1797, I forget which,nor is it worth while to ascertain.t A very remnant of us, under this name, yet meet at each other'shouses, once a month, during the London season : but the recent deathof our FOUNDER has not only thinned but saddened our circleAs those we love decay, we die in part ;String after string is severed from the heart.Till loosen'd life, no more than breathing clay,Without one pang is glad to fall away.Unhappy he, who latest feels the blow !Whose eyes have wept o'er every friend laid low,104 COLLEGE LIFE.lion from dull and hard drinking, frivolous gossip,and Boeotian uproar, could justify that appellation.But let us hold the scales with an even hand, andask what weight is NOW attachable to the names ofour opponents and our deriders ? A seed w r as sownsmall, indeed, in itself, and perhaps slightly coveredwith earth which has since grown up and expandedinto a goodly tree, bearing perennial fruit ; and whenthe fame of the ACADEMICS is known and admittedin London, let it not be forgotten that it is a graftupon this LUNATIC Society of Oxford*. Nor mustwe conceal the truth, that, remotely and indirectly,Still lingering on from partial death to death,Till, dying, ALL he can resign is BREATH."These are sweet and touching lines, from Thomson ; but they are toolugubrious and despondent for a CHRISTIAN POET. Even Horace, in thefourteenth and eighteenth odes of his second hook, while equally moving,is scarcely less melancholy : but Virgil, in his apotheosis of Daphnis, hasaverse which may be put alongside of any among the Poetae Christian,first published from the Aldine press, in volumes rare and tempting onevery score, and which my friend the Archdeacon of * * *, pressesto his bosom at least once in the week. The beautiful line in questionis this :Sub pedibusque vide tubes et sidera Daphnis,"Dr. Maton's death has made a gap in our society which neither survivingnor increasing members can adequately fill up.I forget in what year this "graft" took place, but somewhereabout thirty years ago. And when the reader learns, that with thisgraft were incorporated the names of HORNER, GIFFORD, BROUGHAM,and the two GRANTS, he wil 1 not be much disposed to undervalue asociety to which SUCH MEMBERS were attached or to overpraise thatwisdom which, in the first instance, was opposed to its formation. Dr.Maton continued to sit as president of the Academics till the year 1814,when, his professional business greatly increasing, he found it necessaryto resign.COLLEGE LIFE. 105the university itself was eventually benefited by thespirit engendered by such a society. I seem to tracethe correction, and concoction, of those STATUTES,which were almost an insult to common sense, and abar to progressive improvement a very compoundof monkish absurdity and puerile discipline to thespirit awakened by the CONCLAVE OF LUNATICS.The same hand, " which adorned everything that ittouched," both in that society and in either rostrumof the theatre*, became busied, some dozen yearsafterwards, in the remodelling of the statutes inquestion ; and, yet later, in throwing a seven-bulliedshield over the University, against missileweapons of attack of no common manufactory!.See page 98, ante.t This literary contest, to which I can do little more here than allude,is a subject worthy of treatment by the masterly hand of the writer ofthe " Quarrels of Authors." The university of Oxford had publishedan edition of Strabo, upon which a most severe and unsparing critiqueappeared in the Edinburgh Review : see vol. xiv. p. 429. The authorof that criticism took an opportunity of more than indirectly attackingthe whole system of studies pursued in the same university ; and the lateRichard Payne Knight was its reputed author. An anonymous replyto the " Calumnies" of this review, of which the then provost of Oriel,Dr. Copleston, was the presumed author, quickly made its appearance.This reply was in turn reviewed in the Edinburgh, by, it is said, thejoint hands of a reverend divine and the late Professor Mayfair. It wasa very hail-storm of a rejoinder sarcasm and invective rattling throughevery page of it. The spirit of the Provost of Oriel was naturally upin arms." He took down his choicest yew-bow, and drew forth hislongest and sharpest-pointed arrow to its head :Ac*f/) e /cXayyi} fye'i/eT* 7 ap<yvpeoio /3to<o.And although I will not pretend to say thatThe grey goose wing that was thereon,In their heart's blood was wet'106 COLLEGE LIFE.Oxford would be the most ungrateful of mothers ifshe did not bestow marks of peculiar favouritismupon this, her distinguished child. But may it begently asked, and the question forgiven in asking,Why did he QUIT the studious cloisters pale ? "Two public events, of a very different but equallystirring nature, occurred during my undergraduate-shipat Oxford, which it may not be irrelevant tonotice. The one was, the Encaenia of the Duke ofPortland (on the death of Lord North or the Earlof Guildford) as Chancellor of the University ; theother, the illumination of the whole town and thecolleges, on the victory obtained by Earl Howe overthe French, at sea, on the 1st of June, 1794. Thefirst of these events, to a freshman, was likely to beof a most attractive description, and will never bewholly forgotten ; although its splendor has wellnigh faded away in the remembrance of the recentand more magnificent Encoania of the Duke of Wellington*.London, in both instances, should seemyet that arrow went straight towards its mark, and penetrated a gooddeal beyond the cuticle of the assailants. In this second and greatlyenlarged reply, the author had to prove himself not only an able scholarbut a good mathematician and an acute metaphysician. He did so,and here the contest dropt. But the spirit thus awakened could notsleep till it had manifested itself in some most luminous and masterlyreviews (in the Quarterly upon the splendid metaphysical talents of thelate DUGALD STEWART.The history of the election, or selection (for there was no contest)of this illustrious chieftain for chancellor, is perhaps unprecedented ofits kind, Some five years before, Sir Robert Peel, the member for theCOLLEGE LIFE. 107to have emptied itself of its beauty and fashion.The brow of the tutor relaxed ; the imposition nouniversity, on introducing the bill for Roman catholic emancipation, inthe House of Commons, vacated his seat before that measure was finallycarried in both houses of parliament. Having, as he affirmed, come inas member for the university on a most distinct pledge given againstthe adoption of that measure, he conceived that he could not, consistentlywith that pledge, retain the same situation when a totallyopposite line of conduct was about to be adopted by him in regard tothis same question, unless his constituents were pleased to place him instatu quo. Accordingly he resigned ; and Sir Robert Harry Inglis, bart.,after a smart and keen contest, was elected in his room. The ground-forthe opposition to Sir Robert Peel was, that the measure which hewas now about to advocate and carry through the house, in direct oppositionto his former view of it, was SUBVERSIVE of the BEST INTERESTSof the church, if not of the CHURCH ITSELF. Upon this ground, hisopponents, the high church party, (naturally enough) strove, " manuspedibusque," to displace their old member, and to bring in the veryamiable and highly respectable Candidate, who eventually succeeded bya large majority.All this was, and is, intelligible enough. Sir Robert Peel was and isthe best judge of his own case, and the best appreciate of his ownfeelings ; but I am not single in the avowal, not only that he allowedthe matter to assume too chivalrous and fine-spun a form in his ownmind, but that, had he waited the issue of the measure in question, avery different result had ensued ; and, especially, had he waited till thedissolution of parliament upon the reform bill. Let us note well whathas followed. Because Sir Robert Peel was instrumental to the passingof the act for the emancipation of the Roman catholics, he was RE-Jested. Because his colleague, and the prime minister, the Duke ofWellington, carried that act triumphantly through the upper house, hewas ELECTED CHANCELLOR. " No," say his abettors, " net preciselybecause he did so, but because he was a resolute and uncompromisingTory." Very well : but then what becomes of the great cardinal questionof the SUBVERSION OF THE CHURCH, now the measure is carried ?You must, to be consistent to be honest use the same measure ofjustice with one man as with another; and that which, per se, wasobjectionable with the Baronet, cannot be praiseworthy in the Duke,unless, indeed, the question of the subversion of the church be tacitlysmothered, or allowed to die away ! There are riddles in bodies cortesCOLLEGE LIFE.longer issued from head-quarters ; logic and lectureswere non-entities ; Dun Scotus and Ockham werepirate, as well as in individual characters, which may not sometimesadmit of an intelligible solution.As to the conduct of the Duke, on the acceptance of the offer to becomechancellor, it was entirely worthy of himself. It was manly, straightforward,and quite intelligible. Like another great warrior of antiquity,he seems at first to have " thrice refused" the diadem of distinctionwith which he was pressed to encircle his brows. He alledged hisscholar-like unfitness, and that " arms should yield to the gown : " invain. A negative was not to be thought of, nor listened to : and if notborne upon the caps of those who encircled him, to subscribe his assent,that assent, though with renewed hesitation, was received with acclamation! and, in due course, he was enthroned Chancellor of the Universityin the Theodosian Theatre. The days of that enthronisationwill never be forgotten. Although the shouts of applause with whichthe admission to the usual honorary degree of Doctor of Civil Laws, byBurke and Bingham, at the Duke of Portland's installation, in 1793,might be said to be still faintly ringing in my ears yet NO applausewhich I ever heard, or witnessed, from a refined and splendid audience,ever equalled that which rang round the theatre, and made every spectatorrise from his seat, when, in the English prize poem, an allusionwas made to the military fame of THAT MAN who had eclipsed thesplendour of Hannibal and dimmed the glory of Caesar !The allusion, or rather direct mention, was in the following couplet ;And the DARK SOUL a world could scarce subdue,Bent to thy genius PRINCE of waterloo ! "The " dark soul" was, of course, Bonaparte. It happened to be my goodfortune, by the courtesy and kindness of the Rev. Dr. Rowley, Master ofUniversity College, and Vice-chancellor, to be allowed to take my placebetween himself and the Chancellor, a little behind. The rostrum fromwhich the young man delivered the verses, was to the left of the duke,and unfortunately on his deaf side. He did not hear the couplet, but theeffect was so marked and so marvellous, that he could not fail to bequickly acquainted with its import. Such spontaneous and electrifyingshouting, with all the other accompaniments specified in the text, wasreally a thing to abide by one to one's grave. I shall conclude this unconscionablenote by a very humble, yet, to me, very gratifying anecdote.On the day following the event just related, it was arranged, inCOLLEGE Life. 109beaten with stripes, and .Aeschylus and Thucydidesinterdicted from opening their lips. It was all joy,the program of the morning, that the duke should visit the UniversityPress; when, imbued with the feeling of the " olden time," I wasanxious to know whether that press would be previously occupied inthe impression of some complimentary verses to receive him ? On learningthat it would not, there was no repressing the ardent desire I felt towhip and spur a jaded Muse to afford evidence of a feeling which couldnot be mistaken, and which was wholly remote from the slightest tinctureof party feeling. I obtained permission that the efforts of my poorMuse should be printed at that press, but a veto was placed on the propositionthat they should be presented to the illustrious visitor. Theywere never presented, but they are as follow : premising, that the interiorof the building is very plain, and that the press was at that time occupied,as in fact it always is, with large impressions of the bible, and with aprojected edition of Wickliffe's version of it, from two very valuablemanuscripts.To Arthur Duke of Wellington, Chancellor of the University of Oxford;on his Visit to the University Press, June 12, 1834.Thou com'st, ILLUSTRIOUS CHIEFTAIN, to beholdNor pictured walls, nor marble's breathing forms,Nor " ivory, nor golden roofs," nor sightsSuch as may take the fancy captive, and induceThe deafening shouts of YESTERDAY to beForgotten. No : simplicity is here,And implements minute, and void of formAttractive but in power and solid worthBeyond the price of rubies and of gold.These, had they the gift of sound, should tellHow, e'en THY victories, without their aid,Would in the lapse of ages be forgotten.'Tis these, by which Rome's Warrior yet instructsIn form resplendent* : these, by which the fireOf pure religion warms the Christian's heart,And points his hopes to heaven. The " storied urn"A magnificent edition of Caesar's Commentaries, adorned withplates, was edited by the Rev. Dr. Clarke, and dedicated to John, Dukeof Marlborough, in 1712, folio. Will a similar work ever adorn theOxford press, and be dedicated to its present chancellor?110 COLLEGE LIFE.all festivity, all delirium. The heart as well asthe body seemed to be abroad. The graceful draperyof damsels was seen to be gliding in those cloisters,or along those lawns, where, heretofore, the sableacademic gown was trailing; while, through thegothic-arched windows, the radiant light of youthand beauty gleamed upon the townsman and madehim doubt the reality of the view. Meanwhile, thetheatre is heavily besieged by the motley press ofthe young and the old the countryman and the academic.Woe be to those with encumbered draperies !There is no deference no distinction. The doorsslowly open the rush commences ; screams, shrieks,laughter, shouts, intermingle their stunning sounds ;and it is well if, on entrance, the visitor regain hisrecollection, and preserve his habiliments entire.Speeches, recitals, melodies, and choruses ensue.Degrees are conferred : handkerchiefs wave, trentare beaten and split, and huzzahs rend theroof! as a popular candidate for these honours ascendsto take his station among the " Patris conscripts"of the assemblage.The theatre ejects its suffocated occupants, butShall crumble to decay : the pillar'd domeThe Mausoleum, vast as Egypt's pileShall sink beneath the withering touch of Time.But these shall never die. The PRESS, to Thee,Within these classic precincts, pays her dueAnd fitting homage : for thy name and deedsBespeak her occupation. . . .OXONIEKSIS.COLLEGE Life Illthere is no exhaustion ; no diminution of excitation.In due course, a concert follows and who wouldnot be present to catch the spirit-stirring note ofAbraham, when he pours forth the sublime melodyof Scots wha hoe vi' Wallace bled? Evening approaches; and without knowing whether they havebreakfasted and dined, or not breakfasted and dined,a sally is made for the ball-room where anythingbut room rewards the aspirant's toil. Dense is thecrowd. The thermometer rushes up to ninety : nomatter, the mercury continues to advance, and thecrowd to increase. Rents, fractures, loss of ornamentsmimic anger and determined struggle ensue.Everybody bewails the pressure, and everybody isdetermined to add to it. The chords of Depart'sharp are hardly heard to respond to their master'stouch. An attempt is made to astonish by the waltzor the gallopade. Vain effort ! As well strive tobeat back the roaring sea ere the last surge is dischargedupon the beach. Yet they are all joyous,all satisfied deprecating the very pressure in whichthey seem to take delight. Encoenias are luckilynot annual ; or no physical stamina could encounterthem*.I was not present at Lord Grenville's installation in 1809 j but comparativelywith that of the Duke of Portland's in 1793, matters wereinfinitely better arranged on the installation of last year. It may, however,be said on all these occasions, that both the university and thetown are drunk with delight.112 COLLEGE LIFE.Of a very different cast of character from the foregoing,was the Illumination, of which I have mademention, in consequence of the victory of Earl Howe,on the first of June. The country had been inbreathless expectation and anxiety about the probableresult of that great approaching conflict. Reportsof the most idle as well as contradictory naturehad gone abroad. At one time, our gallant commanderhad been defeated; at another, he hadtwenty captured vessels in his wake. At length camethe truth, and with it the most unbounded acclamationof a grateful country. The night of the illuminationhappened to be moonlight, but soft, calm,and unclouded ; and the very paleness of " Cynthia'sbrow," in high summer, gave even additional picturesqueeffect to the grey battlements and minaretsof the colleges. The candles were thickly placedoutside, in fanciful groups, and unmolested by theslightest breeze ; and those who remember the effectin the High-street, with its undulating sweep andgentle descent of All Souls, University, and Queen'scolleges with the churches of All Saints and St.Mary's (which, after the Italian fashion, were also,I believe, illuminated on the outside) must admitthat such a spectacle seemed to be altogether hardlyterrestrial.Meantime, a stir, of a very varying nature, soonbegan to betray itself. Many had sallied forth fromfoaming bowls (the expression is Virgil's) and shoutedCollect: Lin:. II. '3aloud the names of HOWE and SPENCER* I Otherssung well-known national airs, as they passed along inhurrying groups. A rocket mounted here, a roman-candleblazed there. The roofs and parapet-wallswere crowded by females of every description, whogazed with mixed wonder and delight upon the agitatedscene below. The mails and the night coachesappeared at their usual hour. The " roaring boysof Elysium," for they were anything but disciplesof Heraclitus insisted upon taking on the carriagesanother stage with their own hands. Ribands(England's " true blue") were brought forth in immeasurablequantities, wherewith to decorate thehorses. Some genuine sons of Comus and Bacchusleapt within, and others upon the roofs of, the mails,determined upon taking charge of the letters! Therewas alternate scuffle, and laughter, and delay ; andmore than one, or one dozen, of patriotic academicianswere not exactly aware of the status in quotill they reached the barriers of the metropolis.But in the midst of this maddening uproar, therewere hearts bleeding, and hearts cut in twain. Abrother, a father, a friend, or ONE, combining allthese endearing qualities, had fallen in the victory.Then it was that silence and sadness induced a differentmovement and yet, SUCH was the VICTORY, andEARL SPENCER, K. G., was at this time the first Lord of the Admiralty; and perhaps he was the very first, in another sense, who everheld that most important situation : the English fleet seeming to rise, " likea giant refreshed," under his vigorous and successful administration.114 COLLEGE LIFE-suchthe irrepressible exultation of all classes of society,thatSorrow, smiling through her tears,"could not wholly turn away from some participationof so unprecedented a spectacle*.But it is time to hid adieu to " the groves of Academies;" and to wish my beloved " ALMA MATER"farewell. Yet a gentle word at parting. I havegeneralised rather than particularised. I have noteven alluded to many acquaintances, rather friends,of whom death hath cut off the career when everybud of promise was about to be opened ; or, actinga more friendly part, when the next step about to betakenwould have involved the individual in miseryand ruin. Others again, to one's utter amazement,It was my lot, during that memorable evening of cloudless tranquillityin the heavens, and promiscuous hilarity upon the earth, to stealaway, with some few friends, towards the water's side, for a few minutes'perambulation round Christ Church meadow. The scene I witnessedthere, confirmation of what is said in the text, cannot easily be forgotten.t A more horrible destiny has awaited others. My friend Portiolost, in one evening, his ALL at a gaming table, in London. It was thena sort of fashion among the desperate, to play the part of highwaymenon Finchley and Wimbledon Commons, or on Hounslow Heath. Portiobetook himself to this occupation at the hazard of life or death.He had a father who still loved him, in spite of his unceasing efforts tobreak his heart : for, indeed, bating the diabolical habits of gambling,Phormio was among those who had the sweetest of tempers, the mostcultivated of understandings, the most winning of manners, and mostgenerous of hearts ! On one dark and tempestuous evening of winter,Phormio was on horseback with two loaded pistols in his holsters ; thenoise of a post-chaise was getting nearer and nearer ; on its approach,the travellers were roughly told to " stop and to deliver their monies."COLLEGE LIFE. 1 I >have figured away in parts for which it was hardlypossible to have conceived them to have been qualified; and now, that they bear themselves stiffly andproudly, will scarcely vouchsafe to recognise those towhom professions of indelible obligation were onceprofusely tendered. But this is LIFE ; and its dramamay be said to have begun when the unsuspectingconfidence of undergraduateship has worn away.Farewell, then, to the plans, and schemes, and associationsof early manhood ! when every morning'sdawn was bright, and the most lengthened dayseemed to put on its wings of gold, and to fly tooswiftly away ! Of all the heads of colleges living,when I entered at Oxford, ONE only survives. " serumRepeat IN Coelum."There is, however, or there was, a place, or street,in this university, "hight" Paradise; and when Iadd that my future destinies were in some measureBut the travellers were also armed, a very common practice in thosedays and one of them, discharging his pistol, shot Phormio through theheart. It was the hand of the FATHER which drew the trigger of thatpistol !It will perhaps be immediately understood that Dr. ROUTH, thepresident of Magdalen College, is here alluded to. That venerable andexcellent man, and most profound and pious scholar, yet lives in the fullenjoyment of his extensive and well furnished library, and of the highreputation which his classical and theological works have secured himabroad and at home. If, in pensive anticipation of the future, he besometimes induced to say, with the most finished lyrist of antiquity,Linquenda tellus, et domus, et placesUxor!"he may also, in the confident strains of Rome's banished bard, equallyexclaim :Namque opus exegi : quod nee Jovis ira, nee ignes,Nee potent ferrum, nee edax abler vetustas."COLLEGE LIFE.regulated or fixed in this spot, the reader will benaturally prepared to felicitate me thereon. Sunshineand shade are alternately upon all the sons ofmen. I have felt the former with a grateful heart,but I have tarried longer in the latter ; and yet, ifI now trod a palace of marble I could scarcely feelsuch pure and bounding delight as when, in the timeof life recorded, I saw those portals open to whichmy approach was announced by raising the knockerannexed .COLUXM: LIFE. 117Upon the whole, on a dispassionate and honestreview of this tender, and, in many instances, tryingperiod of human life, my conscience does not reproachme with the commission of the slightest actwhereby, directly or indirectly, the character, comfort,or peace of mind, of any one individual acquaintancewas injured or impaired. That I quittedcollege at a period of life when perhaps I ought tohave entered it, may probably be admitted by many;but the die was cast, and the time is now gone bynever to be recalled. Yet THAT TIME leaves noleaden weight upon the conscience for its abuse.With a limited income, and rather a large and miscellaneousacquaintance, I contrived not only to buybooks, but to devote leisure to their perusal. I joinedin the more manly and cheap exercises of the day,but studiously avoided those amusements which entaileda heavy Expense, or tore up the constitutionby the roots. If I could sometimes rise with thelark for a day's disporting upon the glassy surface ofIsis, I could at others shut myself up in " my den"for a week's consecutive hard reading, diversified bydrawing, and an evening's ramble to Leamington.If, since I have taken my part upon this greatTHEATRE OF LIFE I have not been distinguished asfilling a prominent character, I cannot yet allowmyself to be classed amongst those who have had amerely mechanical part to perform, or who have exhibitedthe ingratitude and wrong-headednesses ofsuch sons of " Alma Mater" as are recorded in the118 COLLEGE LIFE.quaint verses of honest James Howell, the author ofLondinopolis* . As to the present scholastic dis-theseappear, in a cluster of similar quaint verses, in a volumeof CART WRIGHT'S COMEDIES and POEMS, printed in 1651, 8vo. Cartwrightwas a student of Christ Church, and afterwards a proctor ofthe university. Among the authors of these complimentary strains areBen Jonson, the Duke of Monmouth, Sir Edw. Bering, Sir RobertStapleton, Bishop Fell (then a layman), Mayne, Leigh, and IsaacWalton. Never did the stream of adulation set in more uniformlystrong and resistless. Jasper Mayne speaks thus of " Master Cartwright: "For thou to nature hadst joined art and skill;In THEE Ben Jonson still held Shakspeare's quill."Yet, who now records Cartwright ? I guess Bishop Fell to have beena layman at this time, for he thus versifies :But I forbear this theme, denied to menOf common souls, of lay and secular pen ;It is enough if our unhallowed laiesStand at the gate and threshold of his praise."A little before, he thus speaks of Cartwright in no very cold or unimpassionedstrain :When that his voice did charm the attentive throng,And every ear was link'd unto his tongue,The numerous press, closing their souls in one,Stood all transform'd into his passion."The reader was probably not prepared for such verses from a characterso well afterwards known as Dean of Christ Church and Bishopof Oxford. But it is time to introduce " honest JAMES HOWELL," withhis very peculiar and characteristic lines pregnant with all the conceitand antithetical disporting of the age. They are addressed to his " dearMother, the University of Oxford."Many do suck thy breasts, but now in somThy milk turns into froth and spumy scum;In others it converts to rheum and fleam,Or some poor wheyish stuff instead of cream ;In som rt doth malignant humors heed,And make the head turn round as that side Tweed ;LIFE. 1 11)cipline of the university, I pretend not to say oneword upon it ; although, that it is capable of stillgreater extension and improvement, can scarcely bedenied. The lectures of Dr. Auckland form an serain that discipline ; and those of Mr. Senior are notless entitled to notice and commendation. In thetime of the " Lunatics," had such men sprung up toenlighten their brethren, the doors of all publicbuildings would have been shut upon their admissionfor so praiseworthy an object*.These humors vapor up unto the brains,And so break forth to odd fanatic strains.It makes them dote and rave, fret, fume, and foam,And strangely from their texts in pulpits roam.When they should speak of Rheims, they prate of Rome;Their them is birch, their preachment is of broom.Nor 'mong the j orders only such are found,But they who pass the bridge are quite as round.Som of thy sons prove bastards, sordid, base,Who, having suck'd thee, throw dirt in thy face ;When they have squeezed thy nipples, and cast papas,They dash thee on the nose with frumps and rapes ;They grumble at thy commons, buildings, rents,And would thee bring to farthing decrements.Few by thy milk sound nutriment now gain,For want of good concoction of the brain ;But this choice son of thine is no such brat,*Thy milk in him did so coagulateThat it became elixir ; as we seeIn these mellifluous streams of poesie."This extract is made from a copy in the Althorp library, enriched bysome transcripts of poems of Cartwright in other editions not to befound in the present. These transcripts are by the hand of the Rev.Dr. Bliss.I yet adhere to all that is so warmly and unpremeditatedly expressedin the pages of the Bibliophobia (pp. 84-88) respecting whatmay yet be successfully adopted in the course of a college education.COLLEGE LIFE.It remains only to say, although I had passed myexamination (taking up Callimachus, Tacitus, andJuvenal) I left the university without taking mydegree of B. A. till four years after I had quitted ;and in 1825 took my present degree of D. D. persaltem.The great object is, to give wealth and leisure a right and profitabledirection. Why are the Arundel marbles even unknown, because unvisitedby half of the under graduates? What a platform would thatroom afford for lectures upon SCULPTURE and ARCHITECTURE ! Aboveall things, may be desiderated lectures upon modern LITERATURE,chiefly British, from Chaucer to Cowper. What a volume of curiousphilology is that which embraces all the English works of Sir ThomasMore, 15.57, folio. I look back with pleasure, because with profit, tothat period of my life when I sat down doggedly to its thorough perusal.See the affecting description of JANE SHORE, taken from it, in theedition of More' 8 Utopia, vol. i. p. Lxxxiii. 1808, 12mo. The unfortunateobject described was living at the time of the description.CHAPTER IV.CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.O MORTAL man, that livest here by toil,Do not complain of this thy hard estate :That like an emmet thou must ever moil,Is a sad sentence of an ancient date ;And, certes, there is for it reason great :For though sometimes it makes thee weep and wail,And curse thy star, and early drudge and lateWithout that would come on heavier bale,Loose life, unruly passions, and diseases pale."THOMSON: Castle of Indolence.SUCH is the opening of one of the most enchantingand instructive poems in our language ; a poemwhich, perhaps, in the end, will survive the remembranceof the Seasons, although the circle of itspresent reputation may not be so widely extended.The " CHOICE OF A PROFESSION" is probably, afterall, generally speaking, rather the result of the argumentsand admonitions of relations and friends, thanof any extraordinary impulse or predilections of one'sown. There are doubtless numerous instances to thecontrary ; in which a ruling passion has so stronglydeveloped itself in earlier years, that no subsequentreflection or experience can obliterate its traces or divertits tendency. Had my first feelings and earlieststudies been vigorously followed up, I had probablyCHOICE OF A PROFESSION.been at the Bar : although, even then, the passionof my earliest boyhood for Anne was by no meansextinguished. The pages of Plutarch had filled myfancy with a galaxy of heroes and statesmen, suchas Miltiades, Themistocles, Pericles, Scipio, andCaesar.During the vacations at school, including those ofthe first year of being at college, the residence of myuncle, in the city, afforded me every opportunity ofattending the sittings after term, in Guildhall. LordKenyon was then chief-justice of the court of King'sBench ; and beneath him was marshalled the flowerof the English bar Bancroft, Erskine, Mingay,Law, Dallas, and oftentimes G arrow. These wereall king's counsel, with silk gowns. Bancroft, asthe senior, occupied the centre ; Erskine was at hisright hand, and Mingay at his left. At this momentI have them all before me. The first was frequentlycrabbed and dictatorial ; the second wittyand eloquent ; the third, playful and jocose. Thechief business, then, lay with them : but I rememberthat Mr. Law, afterwards Lord Ellenborough (andthe successor of Lord Kenyon) would frequentlycome down with a powerful speech or address, sustainedin a steady and manly tone of eloquence.Yet, on many occasions, no one, in my humble opinion,combined elegance and eloquence more felicitouslythan Mr. Dallas afterwards chief-justice ofthe court of Common Pleas. Of all these illustriouschieftains of the law, ONE only (Baron Narrow)SURVIVES.CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.I never heard Erskine make any of his grand,set speeches * unless, in after-life, it be that in theprosecution of Paine's Age of Reason, at WestminsterHall. This was a fine display of real feelingand impassioned eloquence, and seemed to carryaway the verdict of the jury as if by assault orstorm ; but in the ordinary cases at Guildhall, Iwas, from my earliest attendance, usually struckand delighted by his liveliness of expression andreadiness and dexterity of reply. He had always,in a marked and especial manner, the ear of thecourt not less than of the bar ; and when he knewhis case to be dispossessed of all legal doubts andniceties, nothing could surpass the triumphant mannerin which he pressed it home to the jury, andseemed to get at their hearts, as well as to convincetheir understandings. His voice was melody itself t,Of these, perhaps the very finest are the speeches in defence ofStockdale for a libel in 1789 ; in arrest of judgement in the case of theDean of St. Asaph, upon the question of the jury being judges both oflaw and of fact ; and in defence of Hardy for high treason. Thesespeeches are very fine, as blending matter of law with splendour ofdeclamation. In nisi prius cases, where, from the operation of paroleevidence alone, conclusions were to be drawn, and appeals to be made,the cases of Parson and Sykes, and Howard and Bingham have leftnothing after them of their kind which approach the resistless eloquenceof ERSKINE. I am now speaking only of the English bar ; but thereare those who think CURRAN to have been, in similar cases, more thanthe Erskine of the Irish bartI may not, perhaps, be singular in the opinion that, in many respects,and on particular forensic occasions, I have thought the voiceof Lord Brougham to be not much unlike that of Lord Erskine. Inforensic eloquence a comparison may be more correctly instituted. Bothpossessed POWER, the main engine of persuasion ; both had a rapid, un-choiceOF A PROFESSION.and his bright blue, penetrating eye, charmed withthe power of the basilisk. Lord Eldon, then Mr.Scott, and attorney-general, came occasionally intocourt ; and it was amusing to observe how his greatantagonist (afterwards lord chancellor himself ) seizedevery tempting opportunity to ridicule the courts ofequity, in which Mr. Scott was confessedly the primeornament. Although, necessarily, a very imperfectjudge, I was in a particular manner struck with theterse, vigorous, and perspicuous charges of LordKenyon to the jury. They seem to me to have beenjust what such charges ought to be ; and based, asthey indisputably always were, upon the most inflexibleintegrity, they could not fail to produce aproper and beneficial result *. Towards the even-hesitatingutterance, and a fervid and beautiful fancy ; but the latterwas more terrible and unsparing. The first won, the second commanded,the verdict. The former was the " Jupiter Places" (but stillJupiter), the latter the " Jupiter Tonans." This, within the courts oflaw ; out of them, all comparison ceases. As senatorial debaters andorators, the voice of all parties by acclamation would unite in favour ofthe living ex-chancellor.It was usually my good fortune (being very regular in my attendance)to obtain a standing-place just above Erskine and Mingay, whoafter a short time seemed to recognize and to nod to me. The chief-justicesat close by; one day, on retiring, he accosted me, and said,"Well, young gentleman, do you intend to become one of us?" Ireplied, unhesitatingly but respectfully, " I should like it very much."TRY, THEN," was his immediate rejoinder. These words, which werealways uppermost in my mind, directed me, in the first instance, to thechoice of the Bar. I remember a great many odd but interesting causeswhich I used to hear determined before that sound and most unaffectedjudge. Once, in the case of an action brought for the non-fulfilmentof a contract, upon a large scale, for shoes, the question mainly was,whether the shoes were well and soundly made, and with the bestCHOICE OF A profession.ing, it was the fashion for the leading counsel topromenade, during the summer, in the Temple Gardens,and I usually formed one in the throngingmall of loungers and spectators *.In due course, I became admitted a student atLincoln's Inn, and kept my terms by eating commons,or " messing," with sufficient regularity. Itseemed to be for a time, and as far as this objectwas concerned, " College Life" revived. The studentshad on commoners gowns. At the high tablesat the dons or benchers, with Erskine frequentlyamongst them. The seneschal was called up toknock the table thrice with a mallet, when graceensued said invariably by the chaplain, at thattime, and very many years afterwards, the Rev.Thomas Walker t among the most amiable and re-materials ? " A number of witnesses was called up. One of them, admittedto be a first-rate character, and of great notoriety in " the gentlecraft," upon being closely questioned, returned contradictory answers ;when the chief-justice observed, pointing to his own shoes, which wereregularly bestridden by the broad silver buckle of the day " werethe shoes anything like these?" " No my lord (replied the evidence),they were a good deal better and more genteeler." The court was convulsedwith laughter, in which the chief-justice heartily joined.Cocked hats and ruffles, with satin small-clothes and silk stockings,at this time constituted the usual evening dress. Lord Erskine,though a good deal shorter than his brethren, somehow always seemedto take the lead both in pace and in discourse, and shouts of laughterwould frequently follow his dicta. Among the surrounding promenaders,he and the one-armed Mingay seemed to be the main objects of attraction.t This amiable and exemplary man was long, but slightly, knownto me. Not Cowper and Mrs. Unwind appeared more faithfully andconstantly together than did he and his better half upon all occasions126 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.specter! of the profession to which he was an ornament.Grace ended, the din and clatter of knives,forks, and plates, put into pretty brisk requisition,together with the hum of the guests and vociferationsof the waiters, ensued for usually some twentyor thirty minutes when the hall became empty andsilent. The "mess" consisted of four students,whose meeting together was purely accidental ; andit was rarely, unless by previous agreement, thatthe same individuals found themselves a second timemessmates *. Mine, however, frequently were theRev. William Powell, the present vicar of Aber-ravenna,Henry Hothouse, Esq., afterwards underand every where but especially when, in term time, it was essential thehusband should personally attend to his chaplaincy duties. She wouldaccompany him from their residence at Crompton as far as Lincoln'sInn Fields. He was also the reader or under preacher of Lincoln'sInn ; and what is rather curious, he never obtained preferment of anykind during the whole chancellorship of Lord Eldon although thebenchers are said to have united, more than once, in an applicationfor that object.It happened to be my painful duty to supply his place, in the administrationof the sacrament, within the chapel, on the second or thirdoccasion of Bishop Heberr's doing duty there. Mr. Walker sunk downfrom faintness and weakness during the reading of the prayers, and thebishop (not then advanced to the prelacy of Calcutta) took his place inthe desk. It was Sacrament Sunday, and I afterwards assisted withthe cup. Poor Mr Walker did not long survive this attack. He had asweet, social temper ; deserting no friend in adversity, and scorning allassumed airs from the acquisition of fortune alone. The benchersloved, and the students respected him. Peace to his GENTLE SPIRIT !I remember, in later youth, to have heard, that it was the customat this inn for one of the servants, attired in his usual robes, to go tothe threshold of the outer door about 12 or 1 o'clock, and exclaim threetimes, " VENEZ MANGER !" when neither bread nor salt was upon thetable.CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. I'J7secretary of state to Lord Sidmouth and Sir RobertPeel, and a Mr. Raithby, who afterwards became aneditor of chancery reports.These, however, were little better than meretechnical formalities for the assumption of the wigand gown. It behoved a thoroughbred aspirant to"submit himself to the yoke" to hard study tograpple with Coke upon Littleton to have Blackstoneat his fingers' ends to know Buller and Tideby heart to make Viner, and Bacon, and Coinshis very pillow, mattress, and coverlet. NICASSUSwas a young man (and my especial good friend) ofthis very precise complexion. He was an only son.Nature had cast him in her choicest mould : fortunehad showered down upon him her brightest favours.The carriage of his father, with a stud of horses ofwhich the Osbaldiston of the day might not havebeen ashamed, were at his entire disposal. A countrymansion upon the heights of Clapham Common,overlooking Wimbledon, Richmond, and a landscapeof glorious richness beyond, might have temptedany young man, but Nicassus, to have visited such aspot twice or thrice in the week. To all this wasadded a garden, spacious, rich, and varied in exotics :Flowers of all hue, and without the thorn the rose."The air was perfumed afar with their united odour ;and the sense would sometimes sicken, even to languishment,with its intensity. There were also tricklingfountains and " tinkling rills." To this was128 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.added the society of " three sisters" anything butthe weird" who were always too happy to inviteand to accompany him to the dance, the song, andthe roundelay ; loving, next to their parents, thesociety and sympathies of an only brother. ButHE, that " only brother," rarely indulged them insuch sympathies. Ambition sat deeply at his heartthe ambition to be such as MANSFIELD and Dunninghad been. Accordingly, for quiet's sake, hischambers were on the third floor in the Old Squareof Lincoln's Inn ; for he had a vague, traditionarynotion that the great Mansfield commenced his careerby such a choice of rooms. There he dwelt, read,studied, composed. His idol of past times was Littleton; of present times, Feare. He used tothink Coke sometimes tiresome, and Broke gossipping*. He loved condensing, compression, perspireconclusion is at once crude and untenable. The text ofLittleton and the commentary of Coke just mark the difference betweena comparatively incipient and advanced state of society. Two centurieshad intervened between the former and the latter. It is in hisREPORTS that the marvellous, and as it were oracular, talents of SirEdward Coke must be sought and admitted. They evince a mindwhich had travelled over, and recorded, every thing which, both in thelaw of personal and of landed property, was worthy of cognizance.They are as a vast mine, richly stored with all the varieties of law-strata.But who can now grapple with them ? or rather, how few ? Thevery quaintness of expression, the perpetually recurring brevities, theinterminable authorities, the subsequent alterations both of commonand statute law, are alone a grievous drawback to their perusal anddigestion. And yet, see how the grave, solemn, if not crabbed mind ofthis Chief Justice could relax and divest itself! as in his 4th Institute,among other proofs, doth manifestly appear. Who, like him, wouldtalk about Queen Dido and a wounded stag, in a protege to theOF \ I'KoiTssiox. 129city. Of eminent, and then living characters (histurn of study leading wholly that way), he gave thepreference to the late MR. CHARLES BUTLER, alwaysquietly capping him as he passed, and roundly declaring" that Mr. Hargrave, although the king'sancient serjeant, was not fit to hold a candle tohim *."Jurisdiction of the Courts of the Forest?" See the Bibliomania,p. 138.Great as were the talents, and lofty and undoubted as was the reputationof this extraordinary lawyer, yet he desiderated that ONE THING,without which talents are secondary and reputation is unenviable. SirEdward Coke wanted A HEART. In the time of Charles and James II.he would have been a Jeffreys. His fierceness of demeanour and arroganceof speech towards Raleigh (who had been his patron and friend)are horrible evidences of the worst part of our species. I rememberboth possessing and reading much of the Reports of Crone, one of thejudges of Common Pleas in the reigns of Elizabeth, James and Charles.For about twenty or twenty-five years, I had the gratification ofthe acquaintance of this elegantly-minded man and profound lawyer,who lived to the advanced age of fourscore. It is, perhaps, unknownwhere such diversity of philological pursuit was blended with such consummateskill in his profession, as was evinced in the case of Mr.CHARLES BUTLER. For many years he was in the full swing of practice,and quite at the head of his profession, as a landed property lawyerand a conveyancer. He had pupils without end, and amongst these,ONE who was worthy of his master, and is now an ornament to his professionand whom I choose here to set apart as PETER BELLENGERBRODIE, Esq., and my kind, good friend, of somewhere about thirtyyears' standing. The force of vigorous and almost exclusive applicationto one essential object, was never more strongly verified than in theinstance of Mr. Butler. While he was drawing deeds, writing opinions,and delivering dicta to his pupils, he was editing (in conjunction withMr. Hargrave) Coke upon Littleton; but then he would steal from hishome, even in mid-winter, at four in the morning, bringing his lantern,lighting his fire, and setting doggedly to work till breakfast-time. Thewhole of the day afterwards was given to the ordinary routine of business.Mr. Butler had a natural and a strong love of general literature, butK130 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.The reader will naturally ask, " And what hasbecome of Nicassus?" He was as a bright andhe had necessarily little leisure to produce anything much beyond asketch. His Hora Biblical led the way in these matters. I spoke ofit as I thought and felt, in the second edition of my Classics, in 1804,and I seemed to gain his heart by the trifling eulogy I bestowed. Wewere ever after on the most amicable footing. Although exceedinglysensitive on the score of public praise, he was courteous, candid, andliberal in his bearings towards all sorts and conditions of men : arigid Roman Catholic ; an urbane and most cheerful member of society.His writings are rather numerous than elaborate ; of these, all his tractsconnected with French Memoirs and French literature are at onceelegant and instructive. His Lives of Erasmus and Grotius are meagreand unworthy of him. His Reminiscences want variety and vitality. Ireviewed them in a weekly paper called The Museum, of which hereafter.His works connected with Catholicism, including his " Book ofthe Roman Catholic Church," do honour, I think, to his head andheart Widely different as are my own views and feelings on most ofthe essential points involved in these publications, I yet can respect andvenerate an author like Mr. Butler, who is not only neither afraid norashamed to express his opinions, but who can clothe them in the languageof courtesy, and differ from his opponent with the good-breedingof a gentleman.I shall conclude this brief notice, or tribute of respect to the memory,of Mr. Butler, " TOV fiaKapirrjg" by the insertion of two letters fromhim to myself of no great importance, except to shew the varied turnof his studies and his anxiety about public praise."lincoln's Inn, 2d Feb., 1809."DEAR SIR,WHEN I had the pleasure of seeing you, I mentioned to you mysurprise that, with the exception of the first vol. of the Horce Biblical,none of my publications had ever been noticed by the British Critic.As they have all been favourably received, and, except the last (whichbegins to be scarce), are in the second impression, this appears to mesingular ; and connecting it with another circumstance, with which it isneedless to trouble you, makes me wish to know to what it has beenowing. I shall be obliged to you, if it should come in your way, tosound this matter for me.By the way, I have made an important discovery respecting WantonsPolyglot. I noticed in my last edition, that foreign writers as-choiceOF A PROFESSION. 131beautiful blossom, which, the petals falling away,shewed abundance of good and fixed fruit in thestamen. At thirty he was, as a lawyer, equal toLord Gifford at that age, but beyond him in variedresearch and sound scholarship *. His diffidenceserved, and our own writers denied, the existence of a dedication, independentlyof the preface. Dr. Clarke has denied it with a good deal ofill-humour. But the existence of the preface is now ascertained : it isin the Bodleian copy in one of the copies of the Museum in two orthree other copies. I have procured a written copy of it, which is verymuch at your service. This, and other circumstances, have convincedme that much still remains to be written concerning this importantpublication. I wish you would take it in hand.I am, dear sir, your obedient, humble servant,Lin. Inn, Uti Feb., 1809.DEAR SIR,THE pasted paper in Walton's Polyglottt is noticed in the last editionof the Horse Biblical. I intend to think of an account of the Polyglottt ;but, alas ! we must first have peace, for there are several works upon itof great consequence, common in France, but almost unknown in thiscountry.I am, with great respect,Your obliged, humble servant,CHAS. BUTLER."LORD GIFFORD " should have died hereafter." He was, in formertimes, I believe, a member of the Academics, a ready, acute, and closely-grapplingspeaker. Although conscious of the want of a classical education,he well knew that this alone was no bar to complete success as alawyer ; and to his PROFESSION he gave the whole bent and vigour of hisunderstanding. In consequence, and with what is called a " naturalgenius" for the law, he was, at the age of thirty-five, fit for any situationK 2132 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.even made him shrink from himself. Cowper thepoet had not a more thrilling sensibility and start-uponthe bench. In a masterly argument before the judges with thelate lamented Mr. Homer, upon the law of marine insurance, and in asubsequent one with Mr. Preston, upon a purely landed-property question,wherein he had the better of both his distinguished antagonists,he not only surprised the bench, but astonished his friends. Publichonours quickly awaited him. Sir Vicar Gibbs was his fellow-countryman(a Devonshire man), and his earliest and best friend ; but LordEllenborough was the sole channel of his being recommended to theEarl of Liverpool for the office of Solicitor-general.On his acceptance of this office, he had very speedily to encounter agiant of an adversary, in the late Sir Samuel Reilly. The night beforehe was to meet him in the House of Commons, upon a very importantdebate, he told me that he had not slept one wink. There havebeen sleepless nights amongst senators from causes less weighty andhonourable. Mr. Canning sat close to him as he rose, and cheeredhim as he went on ; but at first he was scarcely conscious of beingupon his legs, and did not know whether the Speaker was in the chair,or his opponent in the house though he sat immediately oppositeto him ; but he shook up his intellectual energies, became warm, fluent,courageous, and convincing. Grant him a particular arena of debate,connected with his profession, and it were difficult indeed to drive himbeyond its barriers.Lord Gifford became Attorney-general, Chief-justice of the Court ofCommon Pleas, and Master of the Rolls : he was also a peer, and veryexpert in matters of Scotch Appeals. At each step, honours, like flowers,seemed to spring up from his foot's pressure. But he was worthy ofALL that thickened and blossomed upon him ; and although envy wasworming its way in minds which ought never for an instant to havegiven it admission, much less to have allowed it to vent itself in bitterinvective and groundless accusation, he allowed the whole to pass unheededby as the idle wind. He had, when Attorney-general, the mostarduous, if not awful charge ever confided to the hands of a publicofficer to execute that of conducting a prosecution against the Queenof England within the walls of the House of Lords. If he failed in hisopening speech, he was most triumphantly successful in his Reply uponthe general bearing of the whole evidence of the case. It was that sortof acute, discerning, and cogent argument which tripped up every fallacyCHOICE OF A PROFESSION./ling bashfulness. But nerve, which is the greatstimulant to success with a lawyer with one, too,who shapes his course, as Nicassus proposed to do,upon the models of Mansfield and Dunning waswanting to Nicassus. His father died before theredolence" of early manhood may be said to havequite left him ; and, listening to the voices of thosewho survived and just in time to save an irreparablebreak-up of constitution he retreated, andsettled down into the plain country gentleman, stillkeeping his law-books. He cultivated his twothousand acres of matchless Boswell wheat foundone day a Latina gleaning in his fields proposedby the heels, and swept away the webs of sophistry in which it wasattempted to shroud them. John Hunter never anatomise a humanbeing with more delicacy and skill than did the Attorney-general theenormous mass of conflicting evidence by which this extraordinary casewas distinguished. His speech was a PERFECT display of its kind. Andall this while he was opposed, day by day, and hour by hour, to talentsof the most gigantic description, rendered yet more formidable by thetide of popular opinion (vox populi vox dei") which ran so stronglywith his opponents ! But this scene of thunder and lightning has longpassed away and Lord Gifford is in his GRAVE, dying at the prematureage of forty-seven. I tear myself from a recollection of such an intellectualtempest, and love to consider the deceased as an early, a kind,and a generous friend. Till he shot up into such public distinction(whereby his whole time was engrossed by public duties), Lord Giffordwas my frequent and joyous guest : a lover of music ; of simple pleasures;of friendly fellowship. He was in fact, at heart, a NATURALCHARACTER ; and "it would have taken a pretty large share of " thepomps and vanities of this wicked world" to have made him an artificialone. Not so with many other associates in common of that day whowill not leave the hundredth part of the shadow even of Lord Gifford'sfame behind them.134 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.was accepted married, and, like their prototypes,. . " flourished long in tender bliss, and rear'dA numerous offspring, lovely like themselves,And good ; the grace of all the country round."It now began to be time that my views should befixed, and my position rendered intelligible. Accordingly,my guardian consulted a Mr. Thomson,a chancery barrister of eminence, and afterwardsa king's counsel, respecting the placing me with apleader, or conveyancer, or equity draftsman ; butthe Court of King's Bench and Lord Kenyon'sreply * would not allow me to think of anything butthe first of these channels of introduction to the profession.Accordingly, through the instrumentalityof a Mr. Spearing, I was placed with Mr. BasilMontagu, of Lincoln's Inn, who had been a pupilof Judge Bailey, and with whom my friend Mr.Stoddart was also intimate. Mr. Montagu has oflate not only attained the distinction of being consideredas the facile princeps of bankrupt lawyers,but has added the honours of editorial toil, in thegreat field of literature, by his elaborate and beautifuledition of the works of Lord Bacon. Indeed, Iam not sure whether the philosopher has not wellnigh superseded the lawyer ; but, be this as it may,the pupil shall at least divide the quantity of ad-seepage 124, ante.CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 1,'J.Jmiration with his ancient master, of the talents ofthat most marvellous man. I learn that Mr. Montagupays an annual pilgrimage to the shrine of hisbeloved Lord Bacon, in the church of St. Michael,in the suburbs of St. Albans *.My law-master was abundantly kind to me, andIn the summer of 1833, while inhabiting a temporary residence atElstree, in the neighbourhood of St. Albans, I just missed my legal masterin the performance of one of these acts of shrine-homage before the statueof his BELOVED, within the church of St. Michael. Of this statue, whichseems to have been done to the very life and soul of the original, and wasexecuted at Florence, there is a beautiful engraving in Mr. Clutter-buck'sHistory of Hertfordshire, after a drawing by my late friend,Mr. Alexander. It is a pity that this statue is not brought down moreto the Level of the eye, by being placed upon the surface of the furtherend of the tomb, instead of being, as it now is, raised more than a footabove it, the tomb itself being five feet high. In consequence, you havea foreshortened view of the face, and look up the chancellor's nostrils.The inscription upon the slab denotes that the original used to sit andmeditate just as the spectator views the statue to be seated, in the actof meditation.To me, however, of equal attraction are the ruins of Lord Bacon'sHOUSE in the immediate vicinity of Gorhambury, the residence of theEarl of Merula. If possible, I would not have a brick or tile of theseruins removed, nor suffer one branch of ivy to entwine its serpent-likearms around them. If the echo of the master's footstep along thesecorridors has ceased for ever to be heard, let us respect every moulderingmullion and every morsel of tesselated pavement. The name ofBacon is a MIGHTY one..' " charm et venerable nomenGenius, et multum notice quod proderat urbis."In intellect it is, altogether, scarcely approached ; in virtue, it has beenfrequently surpassed. Pope has designated both with a sort of terriblecuriosa felicity. Mr. Coleridge (Table Talk, vol. ii. p. 216) thoughtit would take maiiy Newton to make one Milton." How many tomake one Bacon ?CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.within a few months we were as college companions.There was no other pupil. And here it was thatthe passion for analysing possessed me a passioncommunicated to, or rather taught, me hy my master.We were always at work with Blackstone, whosefirst three volumes were dissected and drawn out insuch attenuated fibres, that, at this day, possessingas I do the original drafts, the words cannot bemade out without the help of a glass*. I tooklodgings in the neighbourhood of Queen's-square ;and, though with a slender establishment, began tolook about me, and to consider myself an independentmember of society, in the free choice of friends orfoes. A few old school and college acquaintancerallied around me, and we made a little coterie, ofwhich no one of us need have been ashamed. Mylove of art was, to say the truth, a good deal in theway of improvement in the law ; and I used frequentlyto play truant at the Exhibition t, insteadThe plan was, to make the first ramifications with a pencil, that,,in case of interference, they might he rubbed out. When perfected,the whole was written in with a crow-pen. This plan of study waspeculiar to Mr. Montagu, who has pursued it, in kind, to this very day.The versos of the leaves of his briefs sometimes exhibit a curious exemplificationof ittI possess, almost by chance, a fragment of a critique penned byme, from memoranda taken at the Exhibition in the year 1798, whenthe Coriolanus of Kemble, painted by Lawrence, and the Seven Agesof Shakspeare, by Smirk, were the great stars of that year's attraction ;and when Parsley's portrait of Miss Philips gave promise of a luminaryof no ordinary lustre. Why was it voluntarily withdrawn ? Mr.Turner, now R. A., will have no reason to find fault with what was thenCHOICE OP A PROFESSION. 137of attending the usual hours at chambers. However," whipping days" were past j and my mastersaid of him, nor will he deny me the credit of a true prophet, on readingits conclusion. " Mr. Turner has this year some delightful drawings.He is an artist of distinguished eminence; his genius is grand andoriginal. I hope he will confine himself, by and by, almost solely tooil-painting. His conception is too sublime, and his touch too broadand bold for paper. Canvas must immortalise his fame." This in theyear 1798.I also possess something, which the reader may think with me to beof more importance, in the catalogue of the first ' ' Exhibition of the RoyalAcademy," in 1769, 4to. ; mot4to " Major rerum mihi nascitur ordo."Virgil. Printed by William Ounce, printer to the Royal Academy.The " Avant-propos" or (( Advertisement," is worth quoting. " Asthe present Exhibition is a part of the Institution of an Academy supportedby royal munificence, the public may naturally expect the libertyof being admitted without any expense. The Academicians, therefore,think it necessary to declare, that this was very much their desire, butthey have not been able to suggest any other means than that of receivingmoney for admittance, to prevent the room from being filledwith improper persons, to the entire exclusion of those for whom theexhibition is apparently intended." This must have been a primitiveepoch, when the payment of one shilling (as I presume it to have been)was presumed to be able to prevent the intrusion of " improper persons!" Of the number of pictures or articles sent, there was only onehundred and thirty-six. In these days, we may add a thousand. Ofthe NAMES, how few have survived remembrance how many havepassed into oblivion !illacrymabilesUrgent, ignotique longNote."Not because they " wanted a poet" to make their works " live in description,and look green in song," but because their works defied theart of poetry to do so.In this first year's exhibition, the president, Sir Joshua Reynolds,had portraits of a " lady and her son, whole-lengths, in the character ofDiana disarming Love ; a lady in the character of Juno, receiving thecestus from Venus ; two ladies, half-lengths, * et in Arcadia ego ; ' andHope nursing Love." West here first exhibited his immortal picture(for the burin of Valentine Green has given it a more ready and general138 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.seemed to be as glad to hear my account of the pictures,as I was to give it. Yet I would sometimespassport to that distinction) of the Departure of Regulus from Rome,and Venus lamenting the death of Adonis. Wilson had two landscapes.Dance, two whole-lengths of the King and Queen, with three other portraits; and Gainsborough two whole-length portraits, a boy's head, anda large landscape. Here were also two grave, historical subjects of SamuelWale, also an R. A., and the artist who made the charming designs forSir John Hawkins' edition of Walton's Angler, in 1760. In this, andin similar undertakings, he greatly exceeded his immediate predecessor,Layman.In this first exhibition, the celebrated Sir W. Chalmers, " Comptroller-generalof the Works to the King, Architect to the Queen and to Her. H.the Princess Dowager of Wales, and Treasurer of the Royal Academy,Burners-street" for here the first meetings took place did not disdainto exhibit the " ceiling of her grace the Duchess of Buccleugh's in Grosvenor-square," and the " ceiling of the Right Hon.the Countess of Gower's dressing-room at Whitehall." In this firstexhibition, too, Edward Penny, R.A., the rival of West in the subjectof the " Death of General Wolfe" (Penny's wretched original may beseen in the picture-gallery at Oxford), came forth with a picture, which,by the help of a good mezzotint, may possibly transmit his name toposterity. The subject is chosen from Shakspeare's King John, beginning" I saw a smith stand with his iron thus." The pictures are allplaced under the names, alphabetically, and asterisks are subjoined tosuch as bespeak a purchaser. Of the one hundred and thirty-six picturesexhibited, only three have such a distinction. 1It is, perhaps, not generally known that a " Society of Artists ofGreat Britain," which held their meetings, and exhibited their picturesat the Great Room in Spring-gardens, Charing-cross," was the basisor germ of the establishment of the ROYAL ACADEMY. I possess thecatalogue of the second exhibition there in 1761, which is graced, athead and tail, with an engraving by Grignion, from the pencil of Hogarth,each subject being allegorical and of common-place merit. Inthis second exhibition, Reynolds, not then knighted, produced hisfamous head of Sterne, with four other portraits, of which one was aGeneral on horseback." Here, too, Hogarth first exhibited his celebrated" Sigismund mourning over the heart of Guiscard, her murtheredhusband;" which elicited the well-known terrible tirade of unsparingcriticism from Horace Walpole, who compares, but mostCHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 1 .*.*!>revenge myself, as it were, and redeem the timethus mal a propos devoted, by fagging nine hoursa-day for a fortnight together. A severe fit of illnessonce followed, which taught me that extremeswere both dangerous and absurd.It was at the chambers of Mr. Montagu that Iwas first introduced to the Rev. Francis, now ArchdeaconWrangham * ; these gentlemen being, andsaucily and unjustly compares, the expression of the face and figure ofSigismund to that of a maudlin prostitute. With this picture thereappeared his Gate of Calais ; Piquet, or Virtue in danger ; An ElectionEntertainment ; and three Portraits.Archdeacon Wrangham was, at this period of his life, flushed withacademic honours from Cambridge : a wrangler, a medallist, and a poet,full of ardour and ambition his figure tall, his countenance expressive,his general bearing animated and interesting. He was among thecrack young men" of the day, and his university and his friends hadreason to be proud of him. At three strides and a half he would reachthe chambers of his friend upon the second floor. His fancy had wings,as his body appeared to possess them. In the year 1795 he was " outwitha small volume of poems; and he is "YET" a poet. But he is aptat everything. Hendecasyllabics, Iambics, Archaic, Sapphic, and allthe other "ics" seem to start up " at his bid." In prose compositionhe is facile and eloquent ; being an historian, a sermons, a chartist, anda controversialist of vigour and ability. Why will he not concentratehis " scattered forces," and give us, even now, in this the " sere andyellow leaf" period of his being, a A LIFE OF ERASMUS, with notices ofthe REFORMATION running at the foot of the text? " Ille si quis alius;"and can the "opium cum dignitary" of life be better devoted? Myfriend the archdeacon at once solaces and diversifies the hours of clericaldignity and retirement by the composition of little fugitive pieces, fewin number, but piquant in spirit, and of which, like a worthy Roxburgh,he is choice in the distribution. The reader may not be displeasedto see this rough and rapid outline of the " Archdeacon of theEast Riding of Yorkshire," filled up by something like undeniable proofsof the classical elegance of his intellectual attainments.It is now thirty-five years ago since he published " The Holy Land,"when he was a master of arts of Trinity College, Cambridge. I select140 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.YET being, the closest of friends. What a periodfor friendship's trial ! What a period for its conbeautiful specimen towards its commencement, descriptive of theStar in the East."Whence was that STAB, which through the blue profoundFrom eastern climes advancing, hung its lampO'er royal Bethlehem; not with comet-glarePortending war to nations, but of rayPacific ? 'Twas the harbinger of morn :That Sun's glad herald, from whose living springNatures, scarce finite, in perennial streamDraw floods of intellect, and bathe in lightStrong beyond human ken. In thickest cloudShrouding his native glories, lest the blazeOf orient DEITY with mortal flashShould blast the gazer's vision. He aroseSo darken'd, yet refulgent. Through the cellOf maniac Guilt, exulting in his chain,Darted the sudden dawn. Their rigid claspInstant his bonds remit : with night's foul trainHis cherish'd frenzy flies : and freed he springsOn faith's firm wing, to liberty and heaven."Mr. Wrangham was the intimate friend as well as college-companionof the learned and lamented Wendell, a young man whose " Juveniles" not only gave promise of an intellectual harvest asrich as abundant, but whose Travels in the East were the theme ofgeneral admiration and praise. The introduction of the name andmerits of this extraordinary young man is thus dextrously managedby the author of " The Holy Land :"There in his early bloom, 'mid classic dustOnce warm with grace and genius like his own,Her favourite sleeps ; whom far from Grants bowersTo Attic fields the thirst of learning drew,Studious to cull the wise, and fair, and good.He could have taught the echoes of old Greece(Silent, since Freedom fled) their ancient strainsOf liberty and virtue, to his soulStrains most congenial ! But high heaven forbade.CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 1-41salivation and invulnerability against the efforts ofpetty artifice, base suspicion, and disgraceful ma-rest,youth beloved ! most blest, if to thy shadeTis given to know, what mighty forms of chiefs,Whose deathless deeds oft dwelt upon thy tongue ;Of patriots, bold like thee, with ardent toneT' assert their country's cause ; of bards, whose verseThy Lesbian lyre could emulate so well,Repose in tombs contiguous ! Rest, loved youth,In thine own Athens laid ! secure of fame,While worth and science win the world's applause."A note is here subjoined, containing some hendecasyllables, " whoseexquisite beauty (says Mr. W.) will easily interpret the initials of theirauthor." I present the reader with the beginning and end of thesehendecasyllables :Ulla si profits vel ingens vis,Si frons ingens aut rubens juvenisMorbus flecteret improbosque manes ;Non me carmina maesta postulate,Qui nunc ante diem domes ad arrasIt TWEDDELLIUS omnibus videndas.Frustra Fama tuo sont sepulchre ;Heu! frustra, Juvenis, mea ac quorumManet lacrymal ! Tu nequis redire ;Nee spes ulla dolor ve taught ultra.Felix, si tibi forsan inter umbrasPersentiscere fas sit, ossa tecumIllo despite quanta conquiescant ;Ture te quoque quod tenant Athens !' A. M., Temple.I never saw Mr. Wendell but once. " Virginius tantum vidi."He was intimate with Mr. Montagu ; and his younger brother, whomI knew well, had lodgings in his chambers. I was at the marriage ofthis younger brother (""is he yet alive") and gave away his bride atthe church of St. Clement Danes, in the Strand.Once more, and for the last time. I shall conclude these extractswith the conclusion of the poem itself, which was a Newtonian CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.carnations ! Within such a period, how often haveI seen, in others, the operation of all those badpoem. The compliment to Paley at its close is at once elegant andjust.Yes ! rise it will, Judea, that blest mornIn time's full lapse (so rapt Isaiah sung)Which to thy renovated plains shall giveTheir ancient lords. Imperial fortune still,If right the bard peruse the mystic strain,Waits thee, and thousand years of sceptred joy.With furtive step the fated hour steals on,Like midnight thief, when from thy holy mountSorrow's shrill cry, and labour's needless toil,And servitude, shall cease ; when from above,On living sapphire seated, and begirtWith clustering cherubim, whose blaze dutiesMeridian suns, through heaven's disporting archThy recognized MESSIAH shall descend ;In royal Salem fix his central throne,And rule with golden sway the circling world.Oh ! come that day of glory, that bright speckFar in the dim horizon's utmost vergeBy prophecy's unerring finger mark'dTo faith's strong eye when, with th' innumerous goodOf every age, the white-robed saint shall strayThrough groves of Paradise, and drink unquench'dTh' exhaustless stream of science ! SEATON there,Who bade to GOD the annual hymn ascend ;There NEWTON, whose quick glance, through farthest spaceDarting, in every page of nature's codeSaw DEITY inscribed j and PALEY there(For why should praise, still lingering round the tomb,Her torch sepulchral light but for the dead?)From whose keen spear the atheist crew appall'dShrunk to their native night ; with all, whose voiceAnd harmonizing life in virtue's causeTheir blended rhetoric pour'd, shall shine as stars ;Glowing in heaven's eternal firmamentWith beam unchanged, while suns and worlds decay."CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 143qualities which render human beings but as savagebrutes, ready to spring upon, and to rip up, with thetusks of malice and detraction, all that is honourableand delightful between man and man ! But atruce to such melancholy imagery . . .Sunt lacrymal rerum, et mentes mortal tangent !"My own fireside comforts were much enhanced andbenefited, about this time, by the society of twofriends, among others, with one of whom I had beenin habits of intimacy. Mr. Masquerier was thefirst, Mr., now Sir Robert Kerr Porter was thesecond, of these friends. They had each won theirway, as students in the Royal Academy, to no commonhonours ; but they were artists of very oppositequalities. There was in each a precociousness somewhatremarkable ; especially with the latter, who, atthe age of nineteen, produced a performance at onceinconceivable and unparalleled. It will be readilysupposed that I allude to the Panorama of theStorming and Capture of Seringapatam* . It wasIn order that nothing may be wanting, on the score of accuracy,to make a proper impression upon the mind of the reader touching thismost stupendous production, I have had recourse to the kind and readyaid of the accomplished sister of the artist, JANE PORTER (for she shallnot have the common adjunct of " Miss" to her name), who, from contemporaneousand subsequent memoranda, and from her long andaffectionate union with her brother, is, of all others, the best qualifiedfor the task in question. And yet, a word before we come to the pictureitself. When I first knew this amiable and united family, they residedin Great Newport-street, in the very house once occupied by Sir JoshuaReynolds. It therefore continued to be the haunt of GENIUS. Sir144 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.not the very first thing of its kind, because therehad been a panorama of London exhibited in Lei-robert,then a lad of seventeen, was busied on a picture of the Deathof Virginia; the figures about one-third of the size of life, and painted,as I understood, for the late Earl of Bristol, the Bishop of Derry. Itappeared to possess real merit. Captain Caulfield of the Guards, thenin the bloom of early manhood, often sat for some of the youngerfigures. This canvas was subsequently painted over, as, indeed, weretwo portrait she executed of myself one, a small whole-length, in theOxford commoner's gown ; the other, a half-length, as large as life. Thepainter hated portraits, and he had a right to hate mine as well asothers. Let us now hasten to the siege of Seringapatam, and own that thedescription of the picture, representing that siege, by the pencil of theonly surviving sister, is worthy both of the subject and its delineator ; andI bespeak the reader's very especial attention to the anecdote with whichit ends, touching Sir Robert's picture of the Battle of Agincourt.The historical picture of the Taking of Seringapatam was paintedby my dear brother Robert, at the age of nineteen. It was two hundredand odd feet long ; the proportioned height I have now forgotten. ButI remember, when I first saw the vast-expanse of vacant canvas stretchedalong, or rather in a semicircle, against the wall of the great room inthe Lyceum, where he painted it, I was terrified at the daring of hisundertaking. I could not conceive that he could cover that immensespace with the subject he intended, under a year's time at least, but -and it is indeed marvellous ! he did it in six WEEKS ! But he workedon it every day (except Sundays) during those weeks, from sunriseuntil dark. It was finished during the time the committees of theRoyal Academy were sitting at Somerset-house, respecting the hangingof the pictures there for that year's exhibition ; therefore, it must havebeen towards the latter end of April. No artist had seen the paintingof Seringapatam during its progress ; but when it was completed, mybrother invited his revered old friend Mr. West (the then President ofthe Royal Academy) to come and look at the picture, and give him hisopinion of it, ere it should be opened to the public view. A gentleman,who well understood the peculiar value of the first fruits of genius,had persuaded my brother, young and enthusiastic as he was, to makethis experiment. With his ardour for " the pencil and the sword," andfor the " good-will" of this advice (and with no other risk on his partthan standing at half the rent of the necessary premises where the picturewas to be exhibited), this person was to share equally the profitsCHOICE OF A PROFESSION. M5chesterfield, by Mr. Barker but it was the very firstthing of its kind, if artist-like attainments be con-whichmight arise from the exhibition of the work. This gentlemanwas no artist himself, either professionally or as an amateur, but histaste was good ; and the judgment that Mr. West passed on the picturewhen he saw it, proved it. He went over from the Lyceum, on themorning on which he had called to see my brother and his finishedpainting, to Somerset-house, where the Committee had been awaitinghis presence above an hour. 'What has detained our President solong?' enquired Sir Thomas Lawrence of him, on his entrance. ' AWONDER !' returned he, f a WONDER OF THE WORLD ! I never saw anythinglike it ! a picture of two hundred feet dimensions, painted bythat boy Er PORTER, in six weeks ! and as admirably done as it couldhave been by the best historical painter amongst us in as many months!"You, my dear sir, need no description of this picture, you saw it ; andat the time of its exhibition you also must have heard of, and probablyalso saw, some of the affecting effects the truth of its pictorial war-talehad on many of the female spectators.After its exhibition closed, it was deposited, rolled upon a roller, inafriend's warehouse. Thence, some circumstances caused it to be removedsuccessively to other places of supposed similar security, but inone of which I believe it finally perished by the accidental burningdown of the premises. The original sketches of this f noble and stupendouseffort of art as you so truly call it, are now in my own possession; and you may believe I value them as the apple of my eye. Imust not forget to mention, with regard to Seringapatam, that had ourBritish government, at the time of my brother's ardour for these paintings,possessed a building large enough for the purpose, he would havepresented his country with that picture, and three others on Britishhistorical subjects, to form a perpetual exhibition for the benefit of itsmilitary and naval hospitals. Mr. Pitt lamented to him the impossibilitythen, of commanding such a building ; so the project fell to the ground.The last of these intended four pictures was that of < The Battle ofAgincourt,' which my brother afterwards presented to the city ofLondon, where it was hung up in the Egyptian-hall of the Mansion-house.Some alterations in the room occasioned its being taken downfor a temporary purpose ; but it never saw the light again until histyear, when (after above a dozen years' oblivion in nobody knew where),it was accidentally found in one of the vaulted chambers under Guildhall.When dis entombed, it was hastily spread out against one of the146 CHOICE OF PROFESSION.ordered. The learned were amazed, and the unlearnedwere enraptured. I can never forget itsfirst impression upon my own mind. It was as athing dropt down from the clouds all fire, energy,intelligence, and animation. You looked a secondtime, the figures moved, and were commingled inhot and bloody fight. You saw the flash of thecannon, the glitter of the bayonet, the gleam of thefalchion. You longed to be leaping from crag tocrag with Sir David Baird, who is hallooing hismen on to victory ! Then, again, you seemed to belistening to the groans of the wounded and the dyingand more than one female was carried out swooning.The oriental dress, the jewelled turban, thewalls of the great hall itself, and announced, in the newspapers, as apicture of unknown antiquity, of some also unknown but evidentlydistinguished artist ; and most probably it had been deposited in thosevaults for security, at the great fire of London, and had remained there,unsuspected, ever since ! The hall was thronged, day after day, to seeit; and Sir Martin Shee told me, that so great was the mysteriousvaluation the discovery had put on it, that he heard he had been quotedas having passed his opinion on it, that c it was a picture worth 15,000/.!'Without proper safeguards behind the canvas, a long exposure on thewall would have injured the picture; and it was taken down again beforeI came to London, after having heard of the discovery of ' TheAgincourt ' for I immediately recognised what, and whose, the picturewas and hastened to inform the present gentlemen of the city corporationaccordingly, Owing to its long entombment, I understood ithad sustained some injury from damp ; and, as I also understood fromone of the gentlemen of the corporation, that it was the intention of thecorporation to give the picture a due place in the city, when it can bediscussed and decided upon, I am anxious that it shall meet the sanctionof my brother (I hope next year) when he might be present at thearrangement, and with his own master-pencil repair the damages in thepicture himself." Such is the interesting narrative from the pencil ofthe sister.CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 147curved and ponderous scimitar these were amongthe prime objects of favouritism with Sir Robert'spencil* : and he touched and treated them to thevery spirit and letter of the truth. The colouring,too, was good and sound throughout. The accessorieswere strikingly characteristic rock, earth,and water, had its peculiar and happy touch ; andthe accompaniments about the sally-port, half chokedup with the bodies of the dead, made you look onwith a shuddering awe, and retreat as you shuddered.The public poured in by hundreds and by thousandsfor even a transient gaze for such a sight was altogetheras marvellous as it was novel. You carriedSir Robert not only "well and truly" exercised his pencil uponthese objects, but he introduced them upon figures and in situationswhere they could not fail to tell well. His imagination " ran riot"upon " desarts vast and antres idle' peopled by misanthropes and banditti: " helm and hauberk's twisted mail' " the whiskered candourand the fierce hussar " these, and such like characters, he hit off as ifby magic. The dark, rocky recess, where the coiled serpent might occupyits extremity and of which the entrance was half overgrown with ivyand broom where the Corsair of Byron and the Pirate of Scott mightalike resort for meditation of more mischief here, in such recesses, thefreebooters of Sir Robert, armed cap-a-pie, were always sure to befound. Salvator Rosa himself could not exhibit countenances and attitudesdenoting fiercer desperation of purpose : and had the former continuedin " this line' he might perhaps have equalled the great masterof his adoration in the depths of his shadows, and the mysterioussublimity of his landscape. But having in a manner " touched thestars" with his pencil, he threw up, of a sudden, the professional pursuitof his art. He became a soldier a traveller a diplomatist occupationsin which his heart always palpitated with delight. He is also an author :his most important publication being Travels in Georgia, Persia, Armenia,and Ancient Babylon, &c. 1821-2, 4to. 2 vols., an excellentwork, of which the embellishments, from his own pencil, are equalledby the interest of the materials. His sister tells me that his pencil is byno means allowed to grow rusty, or unruly, from habitual neglect.L 2148 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.it home, and did nothing but think of it, talk of it,and dream of it. And all this by a young man ofNINETEEN !But the merits of my other artist-friend, Mr.Masquerier, must not be forgotten in the record ofthe blaze of public admiration which followed theexhibition of the storming of Seringapatam, by SirR. K. Porter. Having won the silver medal overand over again in the drawing of the Academicfigure, my friend was naturally emulous of encounteringthe living figure, in a different attitude, and witha more intelligible and satisfactory result. As thegroundwork of what might be his future fame as apainter of portraits, he chose his own portrait ; andwith such singular felicity, that the President of theRoyal Academy put him to an unusual test as to itsauthenticity*. In the year 1800, Mr. Masquerierhad occasion to go to Paris on family affairs. HisThe test was, to lay his hand upon his heart and say that it wasall painted by himself." Had my friend Mr. Masquerier gone onaccording to this beginning, we need not have bewailed the losses whichthe country has recently sustained in this department of art. But thiswas not to be. Increased business would not allow even of the leisurerequisite for its execution. A large acquaintance, interesting mannersand conversation, a uniform readiness to oblige, and, like his greatmaster, Reynolds, as uniform an integrity in painting the countenanceof the poor man, as well as of the rich man, to the best of his abilitythese brought my friend into considerable practice and general esteem.I may, indeed, here be allowed to advert to ONE portrait executed byhis pencil of HER, who, for many a long year, has shared with me thetoils and buffets of a troublesome world with sensations of no ordinarygratification. It is, or rather was (" Heu fugaces labuntur anni !")as perfect a resemblance as it is, in all respects, a sweetly executedpicture.Sic oculis, sic ILLA manus, sic ora ferebat."CHOICE OF A 'PROFESSION. 149father was a Frenchman, his mother an Englishwoman,and he was born in this country ; yet hisearlier years were spent abroad, at Paris, where hesaw the first breaking out of the French Revolutionin all its thickening horrors. I have heard himdescribe some of the public scenes of butchery ofwhich he was a very young but most sensitive spectator; and of the hair-breadth scapes which befelhim. Like a sensible man, who made all his pursuitsavailable to the purposes of his profession,my friend conceived the happy thought of obtainingpermission to make a portrait of Bonaparte (thenFirst Consul), and afterwards, portraits of his generalsthe whole of which was concentrated in onegrand picture, of the size of life, and exhibited inthis country as Bonaparte reviewing the ConsularGuard*. Its success was complete. The likenessesThe origin of this picture was simply as follows: premising thatit was painted at the very height of public curiosity to see a portrait ofthe man who was preparing to subjugate all the world, and just after hisproposals for peace, on his being made First Consul, had been rejected.My friend was painting a portrait of Captain (since Admiral) Shank,to whom he expressed a wish to see his mother, then resident at Paris.Admiral Shank, being a Commissioner of the Transport Board, kindlypromised him a licence for that purpose. When at Paris, Mr. Masquerier,through the interest of a friend acquainted with Josephine, gotpermission to be at the Tuileries where he saw Bonaparte in thegrey great coat which has since been so well known throughout Europe.My friend observes, that his appearance, in this costume, was so differentfrom all the portraits of him which he had seen, that he resolved tofix him in his sketch-book in that identical stout : the French thinkingthat the portrait of a great man must necessarily be tricked out infinery. He sketched him just as he saw him, and carried him to England; placing him upon a grey horse, his usual coloured charger, and150 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.were admitted to be admirable ; and the profitsarising from upwards of twenty-five thousand visitorsduring the season of its exhibition, convinced theartist that his judgment had been equal to his powersof execution. It laid the foundation at once of hisfame and his fortune.While upon the subject of ART, I may as wellnotice my introduction, a year or two before, to thecelebrated Mr. Copley, the father of the presentLord Lyndhurst. At the time of introduction,Mr. Copley was busied with his great picture of therelief afforded to the crew of the enemy's gunboatson their taking fireVt the Siege of Gibraltar*.surrounding him with his staff. The picture told in all respects. ThePrince Regent (afterwards George IV.) and Tallies, then in Londonon his return from Egypt, were among the twenty-five or thirty thousandvisitors who came to see it. Tallies left in the exhibition-room thefollowing testimony to the likeness of the First Consul."Jaivu le portrait du General Buonaparte fait par Mr.Masquerier,etje Tai trouve tres resemblant." Tallies, Londres ce 24 Mars, 1801.There is a print of this picture, but I believe it to be rather scarce.The original was afterwards sold for the purpose of going to America ;but its present destination is unknown to me. My friend netted about1000/. by this speculation, but the remuneration did not overpay thetoil. Such was the reaction, from incessant application and anxiety,that the artist was confined to his room several weeks afterwards.This grand picture is now more generally known through themedium of the engraving by Bartolozzi; an engraving, by the by,which disappointed the expectations of the knowing. Of the principalgroup standing on the bastion, one ONLY now survives the historianof the siege my good friend Colonel Drinkwater, who is seen to theright. It is a pity that the history of such a siege should not be reprinted; for as long as the country or the world stands, the gloriousand successful bravery of the BESIEGED will live in the memory of everysucceeding generation. When Copley's magnificent picture, now hang-choiceOF A PROFESSION. 151The picture was immense ; and it was managed bymeans of a roller, so that any portion of it, at anytime,might be easily seen or executed. The artisthimself was raised on a platform. I had the strongestinclination for this visit, as I had gazed again andagain with admiration and delight on the Death ofthe Earl of Chatham and of Major Pearson*. Mr.Copley received me kindly, and even warmly. Forashort time we were well acquainted. His picturewas at length completed, and a most signal mark ofroyal favour was granted him, by his receiving per-ing up in the Egyptian darkness of the Council-room in Guildhall, wasfirst exhibited, I placed myself in front of it, and was sketching theportrait of Lord Heathfield with a pencil on the last blank page of thecatalogue when some one to my right exclaimed, " pretty well, but yougive too much nose" I turned round : it was the ARTIST HIMSELF whosmiled and commended my efforts.The Death of the Earl of Chatham is now among the attractiveornaments of the National Gallery. I cannot help considering it amost highly wrought and thoroughly national picture, combining portraits,grouping, and harmonious light and shade. The resemblancesare considered perfect. There is nothing throughout the whole butwhat is fairly met and successfully encountered. The subject-matterwas worthy of the painter's best efforts, for Lord Chatham was a sort ofultima Romanum in his class and of his kind. The burin of was successfully exercised upon it on a large scale, but that ofNicholson of miniature dimensions in Mr. Major's national gallery,is a perfect miracle of graphic art. Many is the time and oft that I havestolen, in privacy and in secret, to a contemplation of the Death ofMajor Pearson, when it was hung up in a back room on the secondfloor, in the late Alderman Boswell's repository in Cheapside. Fromlatest boyhood I loved this picture as the most perfect, on the scoreof picturesque treatment, of all its author's productions. Had the eventcommemorated been of sufficient national importance, its popularitywould have been without bounds. No painter has subdued the staringglare of scarlet so successfully as Copley.15-2 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.mission to erect a tent in the Green Park for itsexhibition. It attracted thousands. Beneath theprincipal subject, in small, was painted Lord Howe'srelief of the garrison of Gibraltar ; and the portraitsof Lords Heathfield and Howe * (heads only) occupiedeach one side of this smaller subject.Having about this time become a married manitwas necessary, at least, to assume the semblanceof business, and a very humble set of chambers wasThe fame of Copley as a PORTRAIT PAINTER is comparativelylimited. I can speak but of four of his portraits from " Reminiscence ;"those of the late Earl Spencer, Lord Sidmouth, Lord Colchester, and thelate Richard Heberr, Esq. the latter when a boy of eight years, now inthe dining-room at Hodnet Hall. These portraits, with the exception ofthe last, are all engraved. That of Earl Spencer, in his full robes as aKnight of the Garter, and in the prime of his manhood, now placed atthe bottom of the great historical portrait gallery at Althorp, must havebeen a striking likeness ; but, like almost all the portraits of the artist,it is too stiff and stately. The portrait of the young Heberr has, Ithink, considerable merit on the score of art. There is a play of lightand shadow, and the figure, with a fine flowing head of hair, mixes upwellwith its accessories. He is leaning on a cricket-bat, with a ball inone hand. The face is, to my eye, such as I could conceive the originalto have been, when I first remember him a Bachelor of Arts at Oxford,full, plump, and athletic. In short, as Dean Swift expresses it, " if youshould look at him in his boyhood through the magnifying end of theglass, and in his manhood through the diminishing end, it would beimpossible to spy any difference." The contemplation of this portraithas at times produced mixed emotions of admiration, regard, and pity.Of all conceptions, as well as executions of portraits, that of LordHeathfield by Reynolds is doubtless among the very finest and mostcharacteristic. The veteran has a key, gently raised, in his right-hand,which he is about to place in his left. It is the key of the impregnablefortress of Gibraltar and he seems to say, " wrest it from me at yourperil !" Kneller, and even Vandyke, would have converted this keyinto a truncheon. What a bluff spirit of unbending intrepidity andintegrity was the illustrious ELLIOTT ! His country knows no braverwarrior of his class than HE.CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 153secured on the second floor in the smaller square ofGray's Inn. But no business came. I had no busi-ness-like connexions, and none, therefore, could bereasonably expected. To say the truth, I had nothorough love of my profession at heart at least ofits technical parts. Declarations, pleas, rejoinders,and surrejoinders had no hold either of my judgmentor fancy. They seemed to me to be as a vastcompound of wordy nothingness as an effort toconceal the truth, and to substitute mysticism forplain matter of fact *. The composition of thesemechanical parts of a suit the manufactory of thiswardrobe of ponderous and ill-assorted draperyis called drawing; and, on this score, I was acopyist, in constant occupation, having been taughtto consider the special pleadings of Judges Wood,Thompson and Bailey (all then living, and the latterstilt) as classical models upon which to form my ownstyle. But oh ! how infinitely preferable to my earand understanding was a vocal period of Erskineor a printed one of Blacks tone !I continued pretty regular in my attendance atchambers ; but my Academic friends t found theseNow-a-days, much of the circumlocutory verbiage of declarationsand pleas are done away with, and that, it seems, without prejudice tolaw or to reason ! How much more superfluous entanglement may yetbe dispensed with ? Swaddling clothes may be essential for the infant,but if you wish the child to run alone, they must be exchanged forlighter and shorter drapery. Some of the old counts, or forms of drawings,bordered closely upon profaneness.t See p. 104, ante.154 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.chambers a convenient place to call for an hour'sgossip when, instead of discussing the subtleties ofa demurrer, or the incongruities of a plea, we frequentlyfought over again the subject of the lastdebate among the Academics or the collisions betweenPitt and Fox the evening before in the Houseof Commons. This would NEVER do ; and he whowishes to attain eminence in the Law, must denyhis presence or shut his ears on such occasions orrather should imitate the example of the elder Aldus,the famous Venetian printer, by putting up an inscriptionover his door, saying, that " he has noleisure for gossipping, and that those only are admittedwho come upon business, when they areespecially requested to dispatch their business in asfew words as possible *."It will, of course, be remarked by the initiated inthese matters, that the course of law here pursuedwas the common law ; a very unfit legal educationfor the plan shortly afterwards adopted of removingwith my family to Worcester, and establishingmyself there as a Provincial Counsel. I had keptall my terms at Lincoln's Inn, and waited only aconvenient opportunity to be called to the Bar ; as Iwas told that nothing was so indiscreet, and so likelyto drive away practice, as a premature calling toSee the account of the ALIHNE FAMILY in the Bibliographical De-cameron,and particularly at vol. ii. p. 209, where the above inscriptionis referred to as being in Roscoe's Life of Leo X., vol. i. pp. 169-70,4to. edition.CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 155the Bar*. I acquiesced, and prepared to pack upmy library, and to remove my Penates. I haveThis premature assumption of the wig and gown is easily accountedfor, impolitic and unadvisable as in many instances it undoubtedly is.But who can sit, day after day, month after month, and year after year,with no ingress of taped papers to cheer his languid eye, and to stimulatehis anxious desire to excel ? Thus it was with one of my earliestacquaintances and kid-hearted friends, Marcellus. He got littleor nothing as a pleader ; he got less than nothing as a barrister. Buthe was abroad in the world every day ; could thread all the courts, andsee what was going on the most winning and instructive in each ; andwould criticise with acuteness and severity the speeches of the leadingcounsel within the bar. Marcellus went the circuit now in the civilnow in the criminal court ; saw human nature under many degradingand disgusting forms; witnesses brow-beaten, till all sense of recollectionwas beaten out of them ; found truth suppressed, and many verdictsgiven in direct opposition to the charge of the judge and thejustice of the case. He then became " vexed and disquieted ;" for, abstractedly,and without being mixed up with such occupations andscenes, the whole becomes deadly dull and unprofitable. There is,perhaps, a certain point beyond which the patience of a briefless barristerbecomes insupportable. Marcellus, in one of his northerncircuits, stopped, as if by instinct, at Lancaster, where indispositiondetained him several days. On rallying, he went to the lakes ; becamea disciple of Isaac Walton ; an angler of acknowledged dexterity ; purchaseda cottage, built a boat, and was ever loitering upon the bosomof the Lake of Windermere, where the sound of. . " the light dip of the suspended oar"stole with more charm across his ear than the war-note of Catalans orthe deep melodies of Grasping. He is at present, I believe, taking it inSwitzerland.A similar fate, in the end, befel my friend Mucous. He possessedtalents, natural and acquired, and loved intellectual gladiatorial to thecore of his heart. But he was an only son, and had a loving father,and all sorts of plans were laid to get that son introduced into what isequivocally called " uttermost society." Murcius rented chambersand what was worse, a cabriolet. The echos of the splashing fountainin Garden Court, Middle Temple, were less musical to his ear than thegrinding noise of carriages in Hyde Park, from the hour of four till six.In the funereal roundabout of these carriages, the cabriolet of Murcius156 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.now forgotten the particular inducement which ledme to Worcester ; but having taken a small housein a respectable situation (Bridge Street), I pitchedand fixed my tent there, continuing an inhabitantof that city for two years. It is a beautiful provincialtown, well placed by the banks of the Severn,with a race-ground ; with the Malvern Hills, at sevenmiles distance, throwing their lofty and undulatingmasses from nine to twelve hundred feet in the air*.was duly seen, and as duly wedged. At night, and at dawn of day,(" ante solis ortum, albescente die' as Paulus Manutius hath it in hisEpistle to Aureus) it was also seen at the door of Alack's; and afterthe whirl of three hard-working, consecutive seasons, no heiress givingher heart with her hand, the courage of Murcius misgave him. Hewas conscious that he had made a false start, but it seemed to him thatthe retracing of his steps was impracticable : so he went forward, onlyputting on the wig and gown upon great and stirring occasions, whentheir appearance might get him admission within the court; but thewords "Gentlemen of the jury" have never yet fallen from his lips.A young lady at Alack's, knowing him to be a barrister, once askedhim what was the meaning of " granting a rule nisi ?" which she constantlysaw in law reports. He answered, smartly enough, " if anygentleman < proposes you need not say ' yes' unless you like it."I am told that no country in Europe possesses a more perfect rangeor group of hills than those of Malvern. I have twice walked over theirsummits from one end to the other. They are beautiful and grand,both on a near approach and distant survey. For a near view, the roadfrom Worcester, through Upton to Cheltenham ; and at a distance,from Cheltenham to Gloucester. I rarely see these hills without callingto mind what is said by Uvedale Price in his Essay on the Picturesque,when he got on the highest point, in the spring time, to look at thepear-trees of Worcestershire and the apple-trees in Herefordshire infull blossom. He compared the sight to the white teeth of a grinningfool ; a very odd and uncalled-for comparison. But how grand are thevallies of England ! What cultivation ! What natural beauty of verdurewhat fructification ! Among these vallies, Worcestershire may boasther Malvern and her Evesham.CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 157The cathedral is a noble one, and the monument ofBISHOP HOUGH alone will repay a second and athird visit to its interior. The streets are generallybroad and well paved, and there is an activeand money-getting spirit abroad amongst its inhabitants.That portion of its environs which includesa stroll to Powick, with the Severn windingits sinuous course at your left, and the Malvern Hillsbecoming larger and larger to your right, is the veryenchantment of rural scenery.My first client was, at the time, the humblest ofthe legal fraternity residing there. He is now at thevery summit of the profession. A question of dowrywas the first upon which my humble attainmentswere exercised*, and a case or two of commissionof bankruptcy succeeded ; but the reward was littlecommensurate with the time devoted. I soon toobegan to perceive that conveyancing exclusively wasthe main source of business and of profit, and thatI had in consequence taken up a false position. " Toreturn were as tedious as go on." The accidentalmeeting of an old Reading schoolfellow of the nameI yet possess a copy of the case and the opinion, together withmany similar copies. I loved case-hunting and case-quoting; notsimply from the affectation of the display, but for the varying shadesof evidence, and sometimes the varying dicta of the bench. Some ReportsI read determinedly, and with great profit ; and at this momentmay safely venture to recommend, among the materials of a well-chosenlibrary, the Reports of Raymond, Burrow, and Atkins; the first incorporatingthe decisions of Lord Chief-justice Holt, the second ofLord Mansfield, and the third of Lord Hardwicke : illustrious names,and long the leading lights of the profession !158 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.of Prucn *, contributed, with other things, to givemy mind a different and a very decided directionThe late REV. THOMAS PRUEN with whom, off and on, my acquaintancecould have been scarcely less than forty-five years. Hedied in 1834, exemplifying, in his life, those vicissitudes (not of humiliatingdependence or pinching distress) which arise from a capriciousfancy and disordered judgment. He was naturally shrewd and intelligent,but there was an occasional brusquerie in his replies whichoffended "strangers. He was integrity, and honour, and liberality tothe very backbone; but his overweening confidence in others madehim latterly a prey to the bitterest reflections. When we first renewedour acquaintance in i800, my friend, who had been in the law, was afarmer of the post-horse duty, in full and prosperous employment,with a wife and rising family. He offered to take me to the lakes inhis phaeton, sitting behind two beautiful and thorough-bred ponies, intendingto unite business with pleasure. Within six weeks of our startingwe returned, having sauntered upon the summit of Skiddaw, andstood entranced before the Falls of Scale Force and Lodore. It was aheavenly summer, and we wanted for nothing young, healthful, andin full pay. Our acquaintance ripened into a warm and steady friendship,which, for twenty-five years, never knew decay or diminution.The latter years of my friend's life presented a sad subject of regret tohis relations and friends, for he had twisted himself into notions connectedwith his clerical profession, utterly repugnant to commonsense,and subversive alike of scriptural doctrine and scriptural consolation.But peace to his ashes ! In his society, with our mutual and illustriousfriend, the late Dr. Jenner, I have passed some of the pleasantness andsome of the most profitable hours of my existence. His spruce, modestmansion at Prestbury (near Cheltenham) at the foot of Clive Cloud orWinchcomb Hill, was the scene of much domestic happiness and ofwhich I was the frequent partaker at all seasons of the year ; and tohim I owe, in a good measure, my fixed passion for BIBLIOPHILISM.He had a choice library, with a sparing sprinkling of rare and early-printedbooks; and on many a winter's evening have we devouredbooksellers' catalogues, just sent down, to pick out some choice articleof acquisition from the stores of Payne, White, Egerton, Nutshell, orFalter now, ALL swept away from this li wing dies die,Novseque percent interfere lune !"BOOKS ONLY REMAIN.CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 159and I could think and hear of nothing but Literatureand the Church. To give myself only due justice,I had a thorough attachment to the character andgood tendency of that profession, of which I havenow been thirty years a humble but not slothfulmember and at this time I turned an exclusive andeager attention to excel, in the end, in its executivepart, in the church. I became a hearer of this andof that preacher ; but whatever might be my opinionof the doctrine inculcated, the mode of its deliverytoo often chilled my heart *. I thought still thinkand shall be ever disposed to think that, of allThe late Mr. Coleridge (Table Talk, vol. i. p. 103, vol. ii. p. 353),seems to lay a great stress upon the " sermon." In the former place, Ido not think that he reasons with his usual acuteness about "emotions."In the latter, even his subdued and pious feeling, on entering a church,appears to have been fretted by a discourse which he calls " commonplace,"and as if being " invidious in its tone towards the poor." This,doubtless, is very foolish in itself, and in direct opposition to theauthority of HIM, who hath said " Blessed are ye poor ; for yours is thekingdom of God." Luke vi. 20.It may, however, be safely as well as seriously asked, whether thereever yet was a sermon preached, to which, if we listened from beginningto end, and strove to put in practice what it enjoined, we might not retirefrom the church better as well as wiser men ? With a man of Mr.Coleridge's severe taste and wide range of reading, it were difficult tomake a deep or lasting impression ; but if the key to the production ofthat impression be inquired after, I should say it was to be found in thepreacher's earnestness of feeling and of expression that sort of earnestness,in which heart, and mind, and soul mix up with the voice. Thisis the "action, action, action" of Demosthenes. Only throw yourselfinto the bosoms of your auditory, and the quo modo, as to style andreasoning, will be lost in that of the sincerity of feeling, and fervour ofexpression, Homely truths always stick deeper and last longer thanrhetorical flourishes. Of " the prayers," hereafter.160 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.professions, the CHURCH was, and is, one, in whichall the acquirements of education, of eloquence, andof delivery are called up to shew their mastery overthe mind and heart of man ; that the " conversionof a sinner from death unto life" the eradication ofvice and wickedness from the human breast thepath that leads to eternity the glories of another,and the perishable vanities of this, world formthemes, and excite interests, in which every qualificationfrom nature and art may be made especiallyeffective. Cowper led me to consider a preacher asthe St. Paul of Raffaelle preaching at Athens inwhich masterly picture every stage of the humanmind, from sullen indifference to rapturous conviction,is exquisitely depicted. But there can be noparity of reasoning ; inasmuch as a Christian auditorycomes with all its fixed principles to "hear andreceive the word of God gladly, being, in generalessentials, " of one heart and of one soul." On thecontrary, the Greek and the Roman, the " Parthian,Mede, and Elamite" were a benighted and prejudicedauditory, requiring all the energies of talent to rousethem from their intellectual torpidity. To speakwithout the slightest disrespect or irreverence, Ishould say that St. Paul and St. Peter were necessarilygreat preachers both in action and in word*.What might not the impassioned reader conceive to have been theattitude and power of expression of St. Paul, when he launched forthhis thundering reply against Festus ! " I am not mad, most nobleCHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 1(>I1 now, therefore, set myself seriously to work toaccomplish the great object in view, of gettinginto holy orders. Thankful to the Great Disposerof all things, for "a sound mind in a sound body,"I consulted older and wiser understandings uponthe topic in question, and finding no absolute interest,and little profit, in " Indentures Tripartite,"I disposed of my law books to one of my oldestfriends (then just established in chambers in Brick-court),and, in due time, Mede, Chillingworth,Festus' &c. What raising of the hand what elevation of the voice !The whole area was in a manner occupied with his figure exclusively.The very judge upon the hence quailed and cowered before the thunderand lightning of the prisoner's eloquence. And St. Peter, whose sermons,or addresses, in the Acts of the Apostles, are occasionally protracted,was evidently, throughout the whole of them, in a state of nocommon excitation. As his zeal for *his master was without limits, sothe evidences which he afforded of it in his Discourses teach us that ifwe set about our work earnestly, we shall accomplish it successfully.I remember, when a lad of about fifteen, being taken by my uncle tohear the well-known Mr. Newton (the friend of Cowper the poet)preach his wife's funeral sermon in the church of St. Mary Wolcott,in Lombard-street. Newton was then well stricken in years, with atremulous voice, and in the costume of the full-bottomed wig of the day.He had, and always had, the entire possession of the ear of his congregation.He spoke at first feebly and leisurely, but as he warmed, hisideas and his periods seemed mutually to enlarge: the tears trickleddown his cheeks, and his action and expression were at times quite outof the ordinary course of things. It was as the " mens agitans moleet magna se corpore misses." In fact, the preacher was one with hisdiscourse. To this day I have not forgotten his text. Hab. iii. 17-18.Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in thevines ; the labour of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield nomeat ; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be noherd in the stalls: yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the Godof my salvation." Newton always preached extemporaneous.M162 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.Bingham, Hall, Hammond, and Wets ten, were thestately occupants, in folio, of my book-shelves. ButBishop Marsh's Michaelis made me a Christian uponconviction*. For sermons, explanatory of the text,those of Sherlock and Fortin were my favourites ;but Canterbury and Seed for elegance of style andcloseness of reasoning. I was told to make much ofSouth ; but he seemed to me to prefer a pun or awitty point to weight of doctrine ; and his odious,if not profane, flattery to Charles II., in the universitypulpit of Oxford, absolutely disgusted me.Such characters are little better than actors, hiredto play Cardinal Wolsey to-day and Sir John FalstafFHear Bishop Marsh's commendation of a portion of this work :In the chapter which relates to the Authenticity of the New Testament,the evidence, both external and internal, is arranged in so clearand intelligible a manner, as to afford conviction even to those who havenever engaged in theological inquiries : and the experienced critic willfind the subject discussed in so full and comprehensive a manner, thathe will probably pronounce it the most complete Essay on the authenticityof the New Testament that ever was published." The palpableand irresistible conclusion is, that, if authentic, then must it be aninspired book : from the completion of its prophecies or predictionsand especially of that relating to the destruction of Jerusalem.There are, however, two portions of the original work translated bythe bishop, to which I regret that the learned translator, as in other instances,did not furnish notes, either in support of or in opposition to theoriginal. These two portions are, the observations upon St. Paul'sEpistle to the Hebrews, and upon the Apocalypse : both of which areconsidered by Michaelis to be apocryphal. Mr. Coleridge, without beingaware of the opinion of the German theologian, had the same notion ofthe Epistle to the Hebrews. In the philological and critical departments,Bishop Marsh's helps are invaluable. The reader will find a more extendedlist of eminent divines in the Library Companion, pp. 5371,second edition.CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 163tomorrow. Doddridge and Bishop Home unveiledto me all the loveliness of the Christian religion ;and I rarely rose from their perusal without feelingan intense desire of living more and more, everyday," in CHARITY WITH ALL MEN." These amiableand exemplary men, and most invaluable writers,seemed, in my abstract moments, to be moving, asit were, with the wings of angels, upon that greatintellectual and spiritual ladder which reaches fromearth to heaven. Larder's Credibility of the GospelHistory was a storehouse replenished with everythingnecessary for attack and defence in the Christian'scause ; while Macknight upon the Epistlesseemed to have exhausted every debateable point, andto have cleared up every harassing doubt*. InGreek Testaments my little library was rather richlystored. I revelled in choice copies of the first Erasmusand the first Stephen; and defied any neighbouringclergyman to match me in Elzevirs and inJonson. But Western was always my great anchoringpoint in case of perplexity ; especially whereBishop Pearce's Commentary failed to satisfy t.But I must in no-wise allow the student, as he grows older andmakes his " Body of Divinity" more and more impregnable, to dispensewith ESTIUS's invaluable Commentary upon all the Apostolical Epistles,published in 1709, 2 vols. folio. Will that same student forgive myreferring him to so humble a quarter as to two notes at the end of thesecond volume of my Sermons, published in 1825, in confirmation ofthe value of that foreigner's labours ?t Gibbon's account of his " de die in diem" labour in his study,when at Lausanne, had quite warmed my heart, and stimulated me toM 2164 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.Thus I set forward upon a new road in the journeyof life. My excellent neighbour and friend, Mr.Field (a medical practitioner in high repute), applaudedmy motives and seconded my views ; andas I had not taken my Bachelor's degree, it wasthought advisable to consult the Bishop of Worcester,the well-known DR. HURD, whether, in caseof a title offering, he would ordain me without sucha preliminary measure being carried into effect. Icalled upon that venerable prelate at Hartlebury,with a view of having this point settled one way orthe other, and waited his appearance in an anteroom.I had read Gibbon's acute remarks uponhis Letters on Romance and Chivalry, and uponthe Art of Poetry by Horace and seemed to feel aparticular curiosity to see the friend and the editorof Warburton, then far advanced in the vale offollow, however feebly and imperfectly, in the steps of so voracious astudent and so exquisite a critic. I read hard and regularly, and dailynoted down my progress and my feelings. The more I went on myway, the pleasant the prospect became ; and if I commenced in doubt,I concluded in conviction. Thirty years have rendered that conclusionunshaken. My plan was, to interleave the quarto Greek edition of theNew Testament by Baskerville, and write down all the minor andmore puzzling points, with their solutions ; referring only to or rathergiving copious extracts from the authorities selected for such solutions.BISHOP PEARCE was one of the brightest ornaments of our bench. Hewas an elegant classical scholar, a judicious expounder of Holy Writ,and a most thoroughly exemplary man. His conduct about the resignationof his see (Rochester) when age and infirmity had rendered him incapableof performing its functions, reflects upon him immortal honour.With what BENEFIT to the. Church might the occasional repetition ofsuch an example be attended ! Or why, when physical powers fail, maynot a bishop, as well as a judge, have a retiring pension ?CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.years. I shall never forget bis appearance. It wasas if some statue hadStepp'd from its pedestal to take the air." ,He was habited in a brocaded silk morning gown,with a full-dressed wig, stooping forward, and walkingand leaning upon what appeared to be a gold-headedcane. His complexion had the transparencyof marble, and his countenance was full of expression,indicative of the setting of that intellectualsun which, at its meridian height, had shone forthwithno ordinary lustre. He was then, I think, inhis eightieth year. His reception of me was blandand courteous ; but he deemed the taking of thedegree an absolutely essential preliminary measure.On asking me what was my then course of studies,and on receiving my reply, he added, " you cannotdo better."There was, therefore, but one intelligible plan tobe pursued. I bade adieu to the society and to theenvirons of Worcester ; took my degree with as littledelay as possible; and, in pursuit of a title, establishedmy residence at Kensington, where I continuedan inhabitant for the next twenty-one yearsof my life. Many inducements then operated tothis establishment, which, long ere I left it, hadceased to operate ; but there I pitched my tent, andthere my destiny fixed me, for a succession of alternatepleasure and pain, such as is the usual lotof mortality. I was ordained a deacon by the CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.shop of Winchester (Dr. North) on the 24th ofDecember, 1804, and cast about seriously to maintain,if not to improve, the little reputation I hadacquired by the publication of the Introduction tothe Classics, of which the second edition had justmade its appearance. In other words, I determinedupon commencing AUTHOR in right earnest.KinCHAPTER V,AUTHORSHIP.Oh, grant an HONEST FAME, or grant me none !"POPE.FROM the conclusion of the last chapter, thereader will be necessarily prepared for the subjectof the present ; and yet I must trespass upon hispatience some few minutes longer, ere I place himby the side of me in exploring the contents of myshelves and my desk*. It may be just as well tofix myself in the professional niche which I occupiedduring the progress of those labours, which wereunsweetened by preferment, and unrequited by anythingapproaching to adequate remuneration. Forupwards of twenty consecutive years were those laboursunremittingly continued. My neighbour andexcellent friend, the Rev. Mr. King t, used to cheerOf a portion of that " DESK," upon which I am at this momentwriting, and upon which all my lucubrations have been penned, a smallvignette view may be seen at the end of the Bibliographical Cameron,vol. iii. p. 469. In how many seasons of sorrow and anxiety has itbeen my constant and comforting companion !t This worthy man and sound scholar was, I believe, the seniorfellow of New College, in possession of a fine living, the brother-in-law168 AUTHORSHIP.and comfort me, by telling me, not long after I hadbeen in orders, that " if a man got preferment atforty, he must think himself a lucky fellow." I ownthat this did not strike me as very logical or veryencouraging ; especially when I knew that I had nofriends from whom I could expect preferment in theway of claim. I was resolved, however, to work on,and to hope on ; trusting to a gracious Providence toof Sir Thomas Bernard, Bart., and the old and intimate friend of Dr.Huntingdon, the late Bishop of Hereford, to whom the bishop dedicatedthe second volume of his Sermons of which in due course. Hislater professional labours were devoted to a translation of portions ofthe earlier Fathers in support of the evidences of Christianity. Whateverhe took in hand, he took earnestly in hand ; and his friendshippartook of this earnestness and warmth of feeling. Great as was thedisparity of our years, he entered into all my professional and literaryundertakings with the alacrity and zeal of a young man, and used toquote Homer's definition of friendship with an air of conscious triumph,in the amplified but vigorous couplet of Pope :A generous friendship no cold medium knows ;Burns with one love, with one resentment glows."He was a most ardent and zealous anti-bonaparte, and allowed himselfneither composure by day nor repose by night as that restlesswarrior went on in the career of victory. When I brought him thenews of the victory of Trafalgar and the death of Nelson, he raised hiseyes and hands to heaven, exclaiming, " How I envy him his Euthanasia!"Disheartening, however, as might have been my friend's predictionas to the time of life when I ought reasonably to expect preferment,another clerical and mutual friend sunk my spirits to a much lowerpitch of despondency, when he told me that "if 1 preached like anangel, it would never get me a living !" How startling to an inexperiencedand susceptible mind are such gratuitous observations! andhow failing in general application or truth ! at least, while we thinkof Dean Andrews in past days, and of the Master of the Temple inpresent.AUTHORSHIP. K>9dispense his favours and his blessings as to his infinitewisdom it might seem fit. At all events, Iwas thoroughly conscious of the rectitude of my intentions; and resolved in every way to exhibit, tothe utmost of my power, " peace and good will towardsmen." The cares of a family threw at onceincreased responsibility and expense upon my situation,and nothing was left me but to set my shoulderresolutely and vigorously to the wheel. It was clearthat, if I failed, the sin of sloth could not be attachedto my door.Within three months of taking orders, I was ordaineda priest ; my time of life and professionalavocations appearing to justify a measure out of theordinary routine*. I was exceedingly anxious toI preserve the letter of the Bishop of Winchester (who ordainedme a deacon at Farnham Castle) to me on this occasion, and make noapology for its insertion here. The bishop examined me in person fordeacon's orders, and I was both struck and pleased with the amenity ofhis manners and the familiarity of his communication. Courteous,gentlemanly, and affable, all the candidates seemed to love and respecthim. We afterwards dined with him. He was at that time old, andmuch stooping ; but he performed the honours of the table with the airof a man accustomed to good breeding, and as one " GIVEN TO Hospitality."He was very like the portraits of his brother, the famousLord North, whom I had never seen ; and happening to sit next to himat dinner, I was much amused by his playful reference (from some topicstarted, which I have forgotten) to those gladiatorial skirmishes in theHouse of Commons between his brother and Mr. Fox. The letter of theBishop just alluded to is as follows :Chelsea, Feb. 10, 1805.SIR,IT is my usual practice to require more time than you have passedin preparation for priest's orders ; but there are certainly some AUTHORSHIP.excel, and attended various churches and chapelsfor the sake of awakening emulation and obtaininga good taste. Above all, from earliest youth, was Isusceptible of good reading* ; and, in the lessons ofstances in your case very creditable to yourself not often occurring onthese occasions. I shall, therefore, on your sending in your propercredentials, make no difficulty of admitting you at my ensuing ordination,to be held, should no impediment arise, on the 10th of March, atWinchester House, Chelsea.I am, respected sir, your faithful,Humble servant,On the day appointed I attended at Winchester House. My examinationlasted three minutes. Mr. Coulter, the bishop's examining chaplainand brother-in-law, simply asked me " if I felt quite satisfied thatthe CODEX Vatican (as I had stated it to be in my Introduction tothe Classics') was of the fifth century ?" I replied, that " my opinionnecessarily rested upon those of the authorities whom I had quoted."He said he was quite satisfied.When a schoolboy, just turned of fifteen, I was taken by a friendto hear the famous Septimus Hodgson do duty at the Asylum. As thechaplain, he did the whole duty. His reading seemed, to my ear andunderstanding, to be perfect. The second lesson of that morning's servicehappened to be perhaps the most touching, sublime, and in its puresense, dramatic, of all the lessons or chapters in the Bible. It was the26th chapter of the Gospel according to St. Matthew full of incident,dialogue, and feeling over the whole of which our Saviour's agony inthe garden of Gethsemane shines forth with a peculiar and awe-inspiringlustre : being wholly unearthly and sublime. There is no pathoslike unto it : but the reader approaches it with some peril for too muchsensibility, by choking or impairing the voice, will necessarily diminishthe complete effect to be deduced. It seemed to me that Mr. Hodgson waseminently successful, and mine were not the only eyes in the congregationwhich were suffused with tears. His preaching, both then andafterwards, struck me as being very secondary. His advance towards theAUTHORSHIP. 171the church, I have been long and abundantly convincedthat it is one of the most essentially necessaryparts of a clergyman's education and duty, to give totheir perusal all the force and expression of whichhe is capable, and which the grandeur and beautyof those lessons so imperatively demand. Of course,I speak of the greater part of these lessons of which,however, many in the afternoon-service might bejudiciously displaced for others*. An English auditoryis not, I think, much roused even during themost animated and eloquent discourse. Some ofthe more pious and celebrated preachers upon theContinent would probably shock them. A cerein a full suit of silk robes, with a chapeau de bras under hisarm, was a piece of absurd affectation. In the pulpit he ceased to benatural, pronouncing his words mincingly, without breadth or power ofexpression. Both in voice and manner he appeared to me to resembleHolman the actor in many particulars.Will my "REVEREND BRETHREN" forgive a suggestion? Fromthe endless variety of the Bible, why are not lessons, both morning andafternoon, selected for the Sabbath-service ? It may be answered, theyare selected. I reply, they are and are not selected ; that is, the secondlesson, both morning and afternoon, is merely in accordance with theday of the month, which supposes the hearer to read his Bible on everydayin the year. It is, therefore, almost merely accidental that, of twochapters, the more interesting and instructive one happens to be read.The illustrations are without end ; and, what is to be deplored, somechapters in the epistles are read which, however congruous andfitly placed where they are, give rather pain than gratification on theperusal. Surely, in such secondary matters, the hand of reform maybewisely and safely exercised ?t Even Massillon, or Bossuet, or Bourdaloue at this moment I forgetwhich when he made that celebrated apostrophe respecting the immediatepresence of our Saviour, as passing judgment on a prostrateworld and as selecting the congregation before him as objects of that172 AUTHORSHIP.tain grave and fixed attention is uniformly observed ;while, with very many, there is a sort of undergroundcurrent of criticism to catch at venial errors,or to take offence at periods inharmoniously formed.In my younger days, I heard a very grave gentlemanassert that he would not, knowingly, sit beneath aman the second time, who concluded a sentencewith a monosyllable *. All preaching, as to manner,is a mere subject of individuality / and we ought nomore to expect uniformity in preaching than uniformityin colour, form, and sound. As reasonablewere it to expect preachers to have the same mannerof preaching, as the same form or expression ofcountenance. The change of that manner, if it benatural for one that is acquired by an exclusiveimitation of another preacher, is equally absurd andineffective. The late Dean of Canterbury (Dr. Andrews),and the late Vicar of Greenwich (Mr. Matthews),both preached in the same pulpit at St.James's of which parish the Dean was also thejudgment, causing their hearts to quake with very terror would havecomparatively, if not greatly, failed, had the temperament of his auditorybeen composed of British materials ? This phlegm, however, belongsonly to an educated congregation of a particular class ; as who, in theordinary and lower classes of our countrymen, exhibit a more wild andfrenzied zeal in some particular points of religious belief and adherence ?How many Peter the Hermits have we had under a different name ?But such capricious criticism is not confined to matter: it is exercisedsometimes against manner. I knew a person who left a place ofworship " because the clergyman took too many liberties with his righthand !" And a fair critic has been heard to say, " she wondered how aclergyman could presume to preach beyond twenty minutes'AUTHORSHIP. 1 73rector. Their manner was as different as possible ;but the effect of their preaching was equally markedand powerful*. If a man walk out of himself, inhis pulpit, he is sure to go astray. His manner,doubtless, may be a bad one, and, as such, capableof improvement ; but I feel persuaded that the defectof voice, of attitude, and of physiognomical expression(all essentially requisite for what is called aperfect delivery of a discourse), are subordinate to,or greatly remedied by, a natural earnestness andthe throwing of one's self into the subject-matter ofthe sermon. Only let our congregations feel assuredthat we are in earnest, and that we have theirtemporal and eternal interests at heart, and, as faras preaching goes, the GREAT OBJECT is obtained.Fastidiousness, austerity, and prejudice will, in theend, become merged in gratification and approval.I am of course confining myself to clerical dutywithin the church. My own avocations were, for'* What a thoroughly good man and most effective preacher was theDean. He was one of my earliest patrons, if, as he said, the preacher-shipof so obscure a chapel as that of the good Archbishop Tennyson'sin Swallow, now Regent street, could deserve the appellation. Whatpower in the pulpit what playfulness out of it had HE ! And whenhe had turned the mortal corner of " threescore years and ten," howenviable his spirits, how sweet his temper, and how conciliatory andencouraging his manners to the younger clergy ! He had a full, strongvoice, and is said never to have used it more sonorously and effectivelythan when, to the prime minister's question (I think it was Lord Liverpool's,though Mr. Perceval gave him the deanery) " whether he wouldbe a BISHOP," he answered " NOLO !" The chief feature or point of attractionin Dean Andrews' preaching was, that " he spake as one havingauthority."1 74 AUTHORSHIP.twenty years, precisely of that nature ; having obtainedtwo alternate morning-preacherships underthe odious process of competition*. As far as personalfeeling goes, the foregoing cannot he digressivehowever secondary and unimportant it mayhe to my readers.I now commence in right earnest the HISTORYOF AUTHORSHIP ; to be followed by that of PubOdious" in very many respects is this process of " competition ;"but I see no remedy for the mischief, unless by the Bishop's taking thejurisdiction of these chapels under his own immediate cognizance.Why session after session is allowed to glide away, and no one steptaken in the upper house for the correction of this, and of other abusesin church discipline, does sometimes strike one as a melancholy andmarvellous matter. A proprietor of a chapel reasons thus, or rather allhis reasonings are based upon this hypothesis : " I have laid out a largesum of money in the purchase, repairs, and fittings-up of my chapel,and I must have a certain rent to square with the principal sunk. Icannot let my pews with indifferent preachers. They may be verygood and very learned young men ; but my congregation will be scantyif they do not preach wells This, truly, may be an argument " ad hominem,"or rather, perhaps, ad ef rem" (" quocunque modo rem"}, but itis one of the most selfish and offensive that can be brought forwardwhere SACRED INTERESTS are at issue. There is scarcely a consecratedproprietary chapel in London ; and butts of beer and pipes of wine,as articles of trade, form the usual strata of their crypts. To say nothinghow frequently an amiable and highly-gifted young man is subjectedto the coarse caprices of a money-getting, unlettered proprietor,how revolting to all good taste is it to find public singers introducedinto their orchestras and a Bishop sometimes almost elbowing themin the pulpit ! Is it THUS, we may ask, that the fire of devotion is tobe kindled, and " the songs of Jerusalem" to be sung in our places ofpublic worship ? Is the ORTHODOX FAITH of our ancestors to be thuscompromised or neutralised? And is nothing to be heard in suchchapels but a chant and a sermon ? What becomes of those PRAYERS,of which Coleridge has so admirably observed, that "he never distinctlyfelt their heavenly superiority till he attended some kirks in the countryAUTHORSHIP. 175Libations. But the first part requires a separatetreatment, as being more essentially personal. Thefirst engagement of a literary description into whichI ever entered, was that in conjunction with SirRobert Er Porter, with the occasional aid (if Iremember rightly) of his sisters*, an old Readingschoolfellow of the name of Poole (long deceased),and a few others, of whom, at this period of time,my memory does not charge me with the names.This engagement related to the conduct of a weeklyjournal, called THE Quiz, in which I undertook tofurnish the pieces connected with Antiquity and Art.parts of Scotland ?" Table Talk, vol. i. 215. Lord Bacon's observationis worth a place here. " Though the gift of preaching be far above thatof reading, yet the action of the Liturgy is as high and holy as that ofthe Sermon. It appeareth that, as preaching is the more original, soprayer is the more final as the difference is between the seed and thefruit." Pacification of the Church. Works, vol. iii. p. 154, 4to. edit.Jane and Anna Maria ; the latter now in her " shrouded sheet."The former, yet li wing, and yet my ' ' especial good friend," is the authorof three works which have justly found their way into our standardnovels; namely, Thaddeus of Warsaw, the Scottish Chiefs, and thePastor's Fireside. I well remember their author, in the bloom of earlieryears pensive, meditative and the portrait of her, by Parsley, " herrapt soul sitting in her eye." We now meet and talk as if times pasthad not been ; or admit that they seem to be enveloped in a halo, impassiveto immediate touch, or indefinable to present comprehension.This united family had the merit, as well as the consolation, of longwatching over the declining years of an aged mother, who died in hereighty-seventh year. My friend Sir Robert, the chieftain of the pencil(see p. 143, ante), has lately erected the first Protestant Cemetery atCaracas, of which state he is the first accredited Consul by the BritishGovernment. The object and its execution do credit to his head andheart. A woodcut representation of the cemetery may be seen in theSaturday's Magazine for Oct. 18, 1834.176 AUTHORSHIP.There was no very definite or particular object inthe establishment of this paper ; and, it must beconfessed, that its name was neither attractive norclassical. It was published once a-week, in the unassumingform of a crown octavo, at the moderateprice of threepence ; but its period of existence wasshort indeed perhaps fortunately for the reputationof its contributors. A fire consumed the premisesof the printer, and, with them, all the stock in handthe unfortunate Quiz * !I now approach a more decided and critical momentof my literary career, in the mention of thosePOEMS" from which such copious extracts havebeen made in the preceding pages t. Such extractswould imply their intrinsic worth ; but when thereader is informed of the unsparing criticism passedupon them by the hand of their author, in the firstedition of the Bibliomania (1809) t, he will not bedisposed to think that these " Poems" are introducedhere For any other purpose than as a painteris obliged to represent, however delicately, a scar orany particular defect in the portrait which he is delineating.It belongs to the subject matter, and isa part of the truth. On the calmer revision of maido not remember, for the last thirty-five years, to have ever seena copy of " THE Quiz'* Most rare, doubtless it is, if not unfindable :and I confess, crude and jejune as it may be, I would not " stick for atrifle" to possess a copy even of so rickety a progeny of the brain.t See page 37, &c.J Which " criticism" is inserted, with a provokingly good effect, inMr. Pickering's last catalogue, No. 1055, affixed to a copy of thesepoems, marked I/. 4*. ! ! !AUTHORSHIP. 177surer years, I am utterly surprised at the temerityof the attempt of the publication ; but as " part andparcel" of these " Reminiscences of a Literary Life,"I cannot, honestly speaking, blink their introductionin no very slight or indirect manner, as the readerhas already seen. That they abound with puerilities,with halting couplets, crude conceptions, and feebleexecution, is possible, and natural enough, in thelucubrations of a lad from fifteen to nineteen yearsof age ; but that they offend against good feeling orgood breeding, or contain portions in which theslightest infusion of slander, envy, or detraction,appear, is, I should hope, something better thanmere negative commendation. Soberly speaking, Iam not ashamed of the specimens which I have laidbefore the Reader ; and am emboldened again tobring the volume under his notice, in a brief extractortwo from the poetry, and with the entire Preface.*The poetical, or rhythmical, extract is as follows ; taken from thefifth piece, called " The Pleasures of Intellectual Refinement" anddedicated to Mrs. William Compton, the wife of my uncle and guardian,Mr. William Compton ; a man, of whose sweetness of temper and integrityof heart, I shall love, to my dying day, to reflect upon. Seepage43, ante. The lady is addressed by her Christian name.Oh Messina ! fav'rite of my song,To whose just sense, such worthy themes belong,Deign t' accept my lay : say, whence the cause,What is Refinement, whence it claims its laws ?Whence that fine polish in the human breast,That makes true manly reason stand confest ?That elevation breathing through the mind,Expanding senses, and a soul refined ?N178 AUTHORSHIP.%Of the latter I have scarcely a wish to alter a singleword.That source which lifts the intellectual powersTo rove delighted through meads, lawns, and bowers ;That source that pours such ecstasy of soul,Completes the man, and perfect makes the whole :That dawning virtue which our breast inspiresTo feel, and own at times, celestial fires :Say, whence the cause? for these are chiefly boughtBy wisdom's rules, which distant ages sought.*,*##*Now when the various passions grow refined,And blending virtues deck the liberal mind,NATURE'S the field fair Nature courts the sight ;Adorn'd with ev'ry charm that breathes delight,She pours along the earth in loose attire,And with her rosy hand she strikes th' accordant lyre :With this she sings " how Chaos, dark and rude,Sprang into life, with various forms endued :How darkness held her frightful, lifeless reign,And how herself droop'd at its pow'rful fane :When at th' Almighty's nod the fetters brake,Form'd was each void, the loose foundations shake :Nature and order took their various stand,Alternate water, and alternate land."These, the great works of heav'n's omniscient Lord,Nature resounds, and sweeps her echoing chord :Her golden locks in careless ringlets flow,And in her face love, truth, and beauty glow :Her snowy breast, and blushing cheek, discloseThe virgin snowdrop and enamour'd rose :Her azure robes with various gems inlaid,The palsied mead and flow'ry bed display M :The radiant zone that bound her yielding waist,Shew'd the pale ivy round the oak embraced :The polish'd sandals that adorn'd her feet,Told how the various leaves and blossoms meet.In hills, woods, groves, meads, lawns, and every dale,Deep bow'rs, shelled grotto, green glades, and chequer'd vale,She holds her seat eternal source of joy !Thou NATURE, thou, each aid, each art, employ 1AUTHOHSIIil*. 17!)So much for the volume itself, which is henceforwarddismissed. A word about its author. ItInfuse each gift, enforce the truth so great,From Nature's mode, REFINEMENT shines complete."*****As, while some stone beneath a lofty rowOf rocks, that pour their splashing drops below,Receives the trickling current on its head,M listening each weed around its oozy bed :Incessant waters on its surface play,Bored by succeeding drops, the crumbling stone gives waySo all the pleasure, gaiety, and joy,Of life debauch'd, the mind, and soul destroy.I will inflict only one more torture on the reader, by requesting hisattention to the specimen selected by the Analytical Review in commendationat least of the portion selected. It is an odeTO A LILY OF THE VALLEY.Fair flow'r ! that blooms amidst an humbler shade,Still breathing sweetness to the moss-crown'd side ;How shall each reptile plant decline the head,Or gaudier raise their stems through pomp and pride !Go, gentle flow'ret, and in Emma's breastThere add a modest grace, a blooming charm ;Secure reposing in that warmest nest,What frost shall nip thee, and what wind shall harm ?And while thou dearest thy little snowy face,To catch the honey which her lips distil,Say, shall not Emma own how sweet the grace,How rich the transports that her bosom fill ?So, gentle flow'ret, may'st thou live thy day,Claiming the tribute of her generous breast ;Time soon must wear the fairest form away . . .Thy Emma too must fade and sink to peace and rest.PREFACE IN A LETTER TO .My dear Friend,I HAVE at length ventured to comply with your request: in doingwhich, I am aware that you have all along raised too favourable an ideaof the merit of these poetical trifles ; and have forced me, as it were,N ^180 AUTHORSHIP.is an odd, and perhaps a puzzling question, whetherthe joy on receiving a first proof-sheet, or the lastthrough the mere impulse of friendship and good nature on your part,to commit myself, in a sort of precipitate way, before the formidabletribunal of the literary world. I thank you, my friend, for your kindness; and the hopes you entertain, and prayers you prefer, for the successof this very " delicate undertaking." Whether mankind may readwith the same good will, and criticise with the same candour as you havedone, it belongs to me to hope, rather than to assert. This I know, nothingshall induce me to offer a mean and mortifying conciliation, or to indulgemyself in assertions little becoming the modesty and decorum ofa young author.In reading these pages, you will easily perceive, that the Poems havebeen, at various times, and progressively, composed. The Pastorals,and Laura to Cecilia, I wrote when I had just attained my sixteenthyear; Twickenham Meadows, The Epistles, The Pleasures of IntellectualRefinement, and indeed all the rest, were finished within threeyears after them. As you well know the leisure which a college lifeaffords, you may be sure my poetic moods became more frequent, andmy opportunities of application more various, than amidst the perpetualbustle and perplexities of a school. I mention all this from motiveswhich I am sure you will construe in the most obvious and liberal manner: and I make this communication to the world with the idea, thatmy youth will plead something by way of softening acrimony into forbearance,and severity into candour. Should I fail of obtaining any littleshare of praise at present, my time of life, perhaps, will not cut off allhope of amendment.Bo not think, my friend, this mode of reasoning savours any thing ofarrogance ; nor imagine that I am indirectly endeavouring to raise myselfto an eminence at a merciless depreciation of many of my fellow-creatures.God forbid I should abuse what appears to me the highesthappiness and satisfaction of a virtuous mind : but I do say, that aretrospect similar to that in which I am at this moment indulging,affords a pleasure and consolation by no means derogatory to the dignityof human reason. Yes, my friend, I am confident, in spite of temporaryunevenness and disproportions among mankind in spite ofthe momentary prosperity of " wicked men and fools" a time will come,a period must arrive, when nothing shall save a man but integrity andintellect. These will flourish and gather strength, when what appearsto a sensible soul undesirable and worthless, shall finally decay andperish.AUTHORSHIP.proof-sheet, be the greater? Whatever be theanswer, the source of the joy, in each case, is essentiallydifferent : and I incline to the joy-inspiringfirst proof-sheet. Hope is then most ardent not afeather of her wings is plucked, or drooping : thereare no after-thoughts, no misgivings ; the tribunalof the public is yet at a picturesque distance. Nopalpitations, just now, as you remotely approach it ;but as you near it as you review and reconsiderwhat is printed and as the solemn tribunal of publicopinion stands before you, clothed in all its terrifyingforms, you become a little nervous, and start backa pace or two till, summoning up your strengthand courage, you resolve to push onward and toDigressive as these sentiments may appear to the immediate objectof the present publication, yet as they are not wholly irrelevant to thedissemination of merit and truth, I trust, to a friend like yourself, theyneed not be accompanied with the least shadow of apology. To revert,however, once more, to " The Poems." What I have principally aimedat, was a smoothness of metre and simplicity of incident. Unambitiousof aspiring to " the sublime," and desirous of descending to the trivial,I have endeavoured to walk in the plain practical path of the Muses j toselect subjects which rather demand a common conception, and whichnevertheless afford, I hope, a satisfactory share of entertainment. Surely,all monuments of human genius need not be the same : there are ordersthere are degrees. Some may be lasting, though not so durable asadamant ; some may be lofty, though not so towering as the pyramid :peaceful and serene lie the heads of those secured and immortalised bysuch stupendous memorials ! The laurels which blossom and thickenabout them, need not cast others into a barren shade : and though theremay be difference in luxuriance of verdure, I trust there may be a similarityin purity of growth.Believe me, my friend,St. John's College, Yours, very sincerely,Oxon, 1796. THE AUTHOR.18'2 AUTHORSHIP.brave it. After all, you think your book is veryclever and instructive and that in due time you willbe registered and enrolled among the# # * * *Immortal heirs, of universal praise,Whose honours with increase of ages grow,As streams roll down, enlarging as they flow."The printer subjoins the " imprimatur ;" and journals,magazines, and reviews, will quickly circulatethe praises of the fortunate candidate for fame. Tospeak honestly, my own bosom fluttered a little withanticipations of this nature.But a circumstance occurred which materiallycontributed to damp the ardour of hope, and to neutralise,at least, the expectations of fame and profitderivable from this first attempt at AUTHORSHIP*.In dining, one day, at a friend's chambers, whereseveral distinguished and rising young men, both inliterature and in their professions, were invited,there sat a gentleman to me wholly unknown ofa middling time of life, with a sort of saturnine complexionand searching look, who was placed at theright hand of the master of the feast, and who dealtout his discourse with a sufficient mixture of positivenessand severity. He had dark eyes and yet darkerwhiskers ; and not only was his voice loud and penesEssays alluded to in a note at page 103, ante, were, in fact,my very earliest " Authorship" productions: but these, and, if I rememberrightly, two others, on War, and on Foreign Travel, (alsopublished in the European Magazine), were printed without my personalsuperintendence.AUTHORSHIP. 183tt rating, but his dicta seemed to be listened to withsomething like reverential attention. My neighbourwhispered in my ear that " he was an Editor of oneof the Reviews" This intelligence ri wetted my eye tohis person and my ear to his conversation. At thatmoment there seemed to be no one in the room butHE. After dinner, we discoursed of the influence ofReviews *. " Sir (said the unknown, turning to meinreply to some observation which I had made)their influence is inconceivable. I am one of thatCorps Diplomatique. I know a young man, at thismoment, not quite of age, who has a volume of poemsin the press. I know it will be sad trash ; and I amwhetting my critical knife to cut it to pieces themoment it sees daylight." Had I been made ofyielding materials, I must of necessity have faintedaway ; but, contrariwise, I stood to the charge, andAt this time, if there were not more, there certainly were only fourReviews of any public distinction ; namely, the Monthly, the BritishCritic, the Critical, and the Analytical. A full account of these and ofother literary journals has been published by Mr. Parker; and a morecompressed, but fair and candid one, may be seen in the " PreliminaryObservations" prefixed to a work recently published under the title ofSelections from the Edinburgh Review, 1833, 8vo., 4 vols. volumes,which may and ought to find their way into every well-stored library.The account of the effect of the establishment of the Review itself, givenat p. xxiv. of this preliminary piece, as if from the pen of the late SirWalter Scott, in the Edinburgh Annual Register for 1809, strikes measthe production of a very different writer. Its style is too trenchant;and there is a sort of discourteous and saucy air about it, which is notthe characteristic of that eminent and amiable writer. It is full of abili ty ;but it is the ability of strong muscle and huge limbs which have justmastered its victim, and are striding, with Zanga-like fierceness, over itsprostration in death.AUTHORSHIP.promptly and gallantly replied, that " I could notcomprehend how a man could be whetting his knifeto cut to pieces that which he had not seen, andwhich, when seen, might possibly blunt the edge ofhis weapon." His rejoinder struck me as terrible ;although I have long since learnt what commonplacestuff it is. " Pol ! young man," said he, "Isee clearly you know nothing of the world. Thereare at this moment six unfledged authors beggingand praying for a good word from me."I was petrified : horror-struck ; not less at the insolenceof this critical dictator, than at the meannessof those young spirits who could " beg andpray" for his commendation. I said little duringthe rest of the evening, but stole away somewhatearlier than was " my wont," and retired to my pillow,rather than to my rest, with the image of thissaturnine-complexioned" and savage-hearted criticbefore me. " How could HE know of my having avolume of poems in the press? Had my printerbeen faithless, and conveyed a copy to him surreptitiously?" A greater night of torture was never experiencedby any malefactor on the evening precedinghis execution. With mingled feelings of surprise,anger, disdain, and contempt, I was impatient tillthe grey morn" had lifted. . . her pale lustre on the paler wretch."My fears, as to my printer, were entirely groundless ;and all other fears were well nigh subdued, whenmy printer sagaciously remarked, that " there wereAUTHORSHIP. 185surely Other young men with volumes of poems inthe press besides myself \ " and that " he could bringa Reviewer into the field to say clever things for me,to the full as effective as the unknown critic's cuttingthings." The whole affair now seemed to be soevenly poised, or perhaps to wear so ludicrous anaspect, that I desired nothing better than the arrivalof the moment when the shell was to bebroken, and its occupant admitted to daylight andair. That moment arrived in due course. But Ihad no particular or exclusive publisher ; contentingmyself with soliciting permission to leave copies atcertain leading booksellers, on return. The veryobtaining permission I thought a favour*.The humble tome had no sooner made its publicappearance than an extraordinary, but I believe notunusual, reaction possessed me even to agitation.The step taken was irrevocable ; and public opinionmight be as severe as irreversible. At that time Ihad necessarily but limited notions of its power, andSuch is the infantine and humble state of Authorship. It standsat the very lowest step in the ladder of fame in the book-market. Thetopmost step, or its extreme contrast, may be considered as the tenderof the leading booksellers of the day to become purchasers (and of coursepublishers) of Mr. Fox's Historical Work, when Mr. Miller was thefortunate adventurer at the price of FOUR THOUSAND GUINEAS. I cannotnow recollect who were the receivers of my humble ware ; but I leftthem on return, upon condition of their having a good position in thewindow ; and I used frequently to walk by to see if they were still " onview." Alas, they always greeted my eye ! but when one booksellertold me that he had sold^fe copies (the book was published at 3*. 6rf.),I fancied myself at once in the sure road to fortune and fame !186 AUTHORSHIP.did not know that, even in the time of Elizabeth, oneof the most popular poets of the day yet wooed itsGOOD Opinion." Still, on the other hand, I feltdisposed to make use of no sinister or succumbingart, to ensure it even a meretricious notice, or ashort-lived existence, by means of the " puff-direct,"in newspapers and journals ; and, upon thewhole, I buckled myself up to the stiff attitude andstern air of defiance of Robert Heath who, in oneof his epigrams, boldly exclaimsI'd have thee knowPride scots to beg; modesty fears to woof."The poet alluded to is John Marston ; and the work in which thatpoet and satirist's address to the public's " Good Opinion" appears, iscalled " The Metamorphosis of Pygmalion's Image. And CertainSatyres. Printed by James Roberts, and sold at the signe of the Handand Plough in Fleet-street,, 1598, 8vo." The address itself is in verse;but the prefix to it runs thus : " To the Worlds Mightie Monarch,GOOD OPINION : Sole Regent of Affection, perpetual ruler of judgment,most famous Justice of Censures, onely giver of Honor, great procurerof Advancement, the Worlds chiefe Ballance, the all of all, and all inall, by whom all things are that that they are. I humbly offer this MYPOEM." The reader may possibly not object to the first of the threestanzas by which this prefix is succeeded ; premising,|however, that theinitials W. R. are subjoined.Thou soule of pleasure, Honours only substance.Great Arbitrator, Umpire of the Earth,Whom fleshly Epicures call Vertues essence,Thou moving Orator, whose powerful breathSwains all mens judgements, Great OPINION !Vouchsafe to guild my imperfection," &c.Of the work itself, a further notice will be taken in the ensuing pages.A beautiful copy of this rare book is in the old Bridgewater Collectionwith Lord Francis Egerton.t And yet, if a preceding note be duly considered, I cannot be reason-authorship.The final result is well known. The stream oftime quickly whisked it, from its slight weight, intoably supposed to have exhibited the least audacity. The entire passage,quoted from above, is as follows.To my BOOK-SELLER.I 'ave common made my book ; tis very true ;But I'd not have thee prostitute it too ;Nor show it barefaced on the open stallTo tempt the buyer : nor past it on each wallAnd corner past close underneath the PlayThat must be acted at Slack-Friers that day :Nor fee some Herring-cryer for a groatTo voice it up and down, with tearing throat ;Nor bid thy 'prentice read it and admire,That all i' th shop may what he reads enquire :No : proffered wares do smell : I'd have thee knowPride scorns to beg : Modestie fears to wood."It should seem, from this curious and descriptive extract, that theannouncement of new works was frequently stuck up or placarded bythe side of the play bills of the day. The above is taken from Epigramsby Robert Heath, Esq., 1650, 12mo. p. 36, from a copy in the possessionof the late Rev. J. M. Rice. Heath was the author of a popular poemcalled Castella : but among his miscellaneous pieces there is possiblynot one which exhibits the peculiar quaintness of its author, togetherwith the odd phantasies of the times, better than the ensuing.SONG IN A SIEGE.Fill, fill the goblet full with sack,I mean our tall black-jerkin Jack,Whose hide is proof 'gainst rabble-Rout ;And will keep all ill weathers out.What though our plate be coin'd and spent,Our faces next weel send to the mint:And 'fore weel basely yield the town,Sack it ourselves and drink it down.Accurst be he doth talk or thinkOf treating, or denies to drink,Such drie plucking narrow soulsTaste not the freedom of our bowles ;188 AUTHORSHIP.some nook or recess, in which it has been quietlypermitted to rot and perish if the question of celebrityonly be considered. Another lesson this, ifany were wanting, to add to those illustrative of theblight of early hopes, or, rather, of the infatuationof seeking to gather fruit where the seed is incorrigiblydefective. And yet it is a curious feature inthe history of the human mind, or in that of its attachmentto poetry, that many men, even to the last,not only avow their unconquerable propensity to thisdivine art," but think the public have been perverselyblind in not appreciating their excellence in it.From a conversation I once had with Sir HumphreyDavy at Al thorp, in consequence of a passage in Ovid'sMetamorphoses, I felt quite persuaded that he consideredhimself to be a poet as well as a philosopher.He had a right to be conscious of strong feeling andgood taste in the former ; but he must have beenyet more conscious of perpetuity of fame in theThey onely are besieg'd, whilst weBy drinking purchase libertie.Wine doth enlarge, and ease our minds,Who freely drinks no thraldom finds.Let's drink, then, as we used to fight,As long as we can stand, in spightOf Foe or Fortune ! Who can tel ?Shee with our cups again may swell ;Hee neither dares to die or fight,Whom harmless fears from healths affright :Then let us drink our sorrows down,And ourselves up to keep the town."Occasional Poems: 1652, 12mo. p. 22.Authorship. 189latter. On the other hand, of all instances onrecord of early failure in poetry being followed upby the most transcendant success, that of the lateLord Byron was perhaps the most remarkable*.To return. The year of the publication of myunfortunate volume of poetry was marked by thepublicity of another work, of a very different complexion,and less likely, in all respects, to win attentionand secure profit. The reader will be pleasedto throw his eye upon a preceding page t, whereI have read, more than once or twice, the Hours of Idleness, thefirst poetic attempt of the above illustrious writer ; and with every possibleeffort and desire to discover in it a scintillation, however faint, ofthe approaching splendour of the author's reputation but in vain. Itwas, however, with Lord Byron, as the apple falling on Newton's head.An accident produced a miracle. This {< idle" poem was fiercely attackedin the Edinburgh Review, vol. xi. p. 285 ; and attacked as if a spirit ofpersonal hostility had uniformly invaded the critic. The haughtinessof the peer could not brook the insult offered to his Muse, and forthwithcame his memorable poetical reply, entitled English Yards and ScotchReviewers. It was evident that the head which had achieved theHours of Idleness" could achieve something of downright "pith andmoment." Lord Byron's Muse here appeared clad in robes of terror,and with a scalping knife in her hand. The gashes were deep and painful ;and when his first two cantos of Child Harold came forth, the samecritical journal which had heretofore shewn such unprovoked severitytowards the author, was distinguished by a review of this latter workequally remarkable for the justness of its canons, the amenity of its style,and the warmth of its commendation. Mr. D'Israeli has here food bothfor digestion and nutrition, if he ever meditate a continuation of hisQuarrels of Authors." In after life, the Reviewers were sorry to havecast the first stone," and the noble lord to have pelted so vigorously inreturn. He called in his " Bards and Reviewers," and it became soscarce, that although little more than some fourscore pages, a copy of it(till it was incorporated in the noble author's works) has been sold foras high as 2/. 12.?. Qn.t See page 136.AUTHORSHIP.he will find some notice of my being employed in thechambers of a special pleader upon making Analysesof Black stone. I had finished the first volume of theRights of Persons in this manner, and felt a dispositionto publish it under a dedication to Lord (thenMr.) Erskine. Having requested the favour of an interview,that distinguished chieftain in his professionnot only received me promptly, but graciously ; andseemed to recognise me as the " young gentleman,"mentioned at page 124, ante*. I had several interviews,and several letters passed between us ; andwas strongly advised by him to do the Criminal Lawafter the same fashion. In high spirits, I bespoke myartist (whose name I have forgotten) to copy or cutthe whole sheet upon one piece of copper, and to usehis utmost skill and dispatch in bringing it beforethe public at the commencement of the ensuing term.It appeared about the middle of November. TheDedicated expressed his admiration and satisfaction ;and I had nothing but a similar result to anticipatefrom the public t. I was however cruelly mortifiedLord Erskine received me at breakfast, before nine, attired in thesmart dress of the times, a dark green coat, scarlet waistcoat, and silkbreeches. He left his coffee, stood the whole time looking at the chart,and appeared much gratified. On leaving him, a carriage and fourdrew up to whirl him to some provincial town on a SPECIAL RETAINER.He was then coining money as fast as his chariot wheels rolled along.1* It was cut on one sheet of copper, measuring one yard in lengthby about two feet four inches in width ; and was published on the6th of Nov., 1797, by Ogilvy and Son, Clarke and Son, and Butterworth,all law booksellers. Some few copies had the more prominentdivisions coloured: these sold for ten shillings, the plain for five. IAUTHORS!! II'. li>lin that result ; and finding, that of two hundred andfifty copies struck off, not quite fifty were sold in thecourse of one year, nothing remained but to disposeof the copper, to call in the straggling impressions,and to put the best face I could upon this secondfailure of authorship*. And yet, so far from beingdismayed, or irrevocably knocked down in this firstattempt at professional distinction, I published, whenat Worcester, on a very small sheet, price 6d., theLaw of the Poor Rate ; at that time, and till of avery recent period t, the puzzle and the plague alikedo not think that I have met with a copy these last twenty years ; andI feel almost equally persuaded that there are many copies which havebeen lost in the trade without any " valuable consideration" to theauthor.I sold the copper for 3/. 13*. 6rf., the value of the material. Thecutting cost me forty guineas !t If the Poor Laws be not now understood and APPROVED as understood(making allowances for the almost infinite and insurmountabledifficulties of the subject) the fault is surely not at the door of ourlegislators ; and those who shrink from the effort to master the subjectupon broad, constitutional, principles, or according to the interpretationof legal enactments, may, I think, have their knowledge enlarged andtheir judgment strengthened by an article which has lately appeared inthe Quarterly Review under the running title of " English Charities."So much information, such Teniers-like crispness and vigour of touchin the several pictures delineated, such proper and noble-heartiness offeeling " in the matter of the Deal boatmen," together with such arange of intelligence upon all the points bearing or likely to bear uponthe subject, that, extended and elaborate as the article is, it is reallyanything but the feeling of a solemn duty to go directly from one endof it to the other. I never read so long an article in so short a timecontinuously, and without a single gape. Still, in some parts, theknightly author runs rather sharp and close to the wind. The story ofthe "black boy" is, however, altogether perfectly " sui generis" ofcourse, I mean as to powers of narrative, and not as a matter of fact.AUTHORSHIP.of parish officers and legislators. To the best of myrecollection, the sale just covered the expenses ofpublication. If this were not a point gained, it wascertainly not a step lost.But whatever might be the degree of discouragement,I was determined that it should not settledown into black and comfortless despair. . .He would be a Soldier, would sweet Willy, O ! *"I had resolved to beat the bush in search of othergame ; and if pheasants and woodcocks were notprocurable, I might content myself with fieldfare andlarks. About this time, or rather after I had beensettled at Worcester as a conveyancer, the posthumousworks of Gibbon, and especially his Journal ofhis Studies, got into my hands. This put me notonly upon general reading, but upon making a Diaryof what I read, and of the reflections which cameacross me during and after perusal. Then, too,it was, that Harwood's account of the best editionsof Ancient Classical Authors first caught my attention; and, what with Gibbon's library alreadyformed, and Harwood's instructions how inform oneof a classical calibre, my fancy took to run strangelyupon BOOKS . of all qualities and conditions. AnEdition Princeps, a vellum Aldus, a large paper copy(terms, till then unknown and unappreciated) seemedto strike my mind's eye as something magical andmysterious just as those arabic, or some sort of con-seepage 5t, note.AUTIIOllSllll'.juration, figures upon chemists' bottles, strike theeye of the body. - I was all upon the look-out. Abook-stall had irresistible charms ; but the cataloguesof Payne, Falter, White, and Egerton, exhibitedso many stars upon which I loved to gazewith an indescribable satisfaction. How often haveI sighed, when not even .an editio princeps of asecond-rate classical author could be procuredfrom the scantiness of means of purchase ! Of allfortunate book-collectors, I then considered Dr. W.Hunter and the Hon. Topham Beauclerk as themost so i the one, because he was the purchaser ofthe first Aldine Plato, upon vellum, at the sale ofDr. Askew's library; the other, because he was thepossessor of a large paper copy of Dr. Clarke'sCaesar, at the price of 44/. *At length, I was resolved to approach the water'sedge, to view its clearness, and to feel its coolness, ifI could not take a bold and desperate plunge into theThe highest sum ever given for this latter volume was, I shouldconceive, the 64/. which was given for the copy in the late Duke ofGrafton's library, at the sale of it in 18 . But it is doubtful whethereven such a copy would now bring half the sum. How capricious,how inexplicable is taste ! The Aldine vellum Plato above-mentioned,for which Lord Oxford had given 105/., and which was afterwardspurchased by Dr. Askew at one-fifth the cost, became the property ofDr. Wm. Hunter, at the sale of Dr. Askew's library, for 52/. 10*. Itis necessarily now at Glasgow, with Dr. Hunter's library and museum.On referring to a MS. note made by me with the copy, sub oculis, atLondon, some thirty years ago, I find it thus written : ec a perfect copy ;nothing can exceed its splendour: in blue morocco binding." THISCOPY, or SUCH a copy would now be worth three hundred guineas at theleast low as the bibliomaniacal mercury has fallen.O194 AUTHORSHIP.mid-river. I thought I could produce a Manual,or a guide to Editions of the Classics, which mightsupply useful intelligence since the time of Harwood:and after anxious days, and many sleepless nights,appeared my Introduction to the Knowledge of Rareand Valuable Editions of the GREEK and LATINCLASSICS. I was living in the country when it madeits appearance ; but on my publisher (alas ! poorDwyer! *) writing me word that it was selling rapidly,and that a second edition would be speedily calledfor, I felt as I suppose the gamester to feel when hethrows doublets of sixes ! I had in fact secured theSo* vo'v o-7*>," and was resolved to turn my " standingroom" to good account. The further history of thispublication belongs to the next chapter.And here, perhaps, I ought to notice the compositionof those TALES, written just before the -peace of Amiens, in 1801, which were the fruit ofleisure from professional or severe literary occupations.One of these tales, LA BELLE MARIANNE,An honest, worthy, painstaking bookseller, the brother of the lateRev. Mr. Dwyer, well known to many in the vicinity of CashioburyPark, and with whom, in early life, I have passed more than onepleasant and profitable hour. He always carried his heart in his hand ;and when his brother, the bookseller, advised me to dispose of the copyrightof the Classics to Messrs. Longmans, after the second edition wasexhausted, the latter evinced a liberality practised by few of his brethren ;for by so doing, he parted with his own profits as vendor of the work.When this book was first put into Mr. Dwyer's hands, it was little betterthan a tabulated arrangement of the subject-matter, and the fruit oflittle more than my own manuscript POCKET MANUAL : but it struckthe eye at once, from its brevity and obvious utility.AUTHORSHIP. 1 !>.*>has been privately printed ; and the only copy of itwhich I know to have been brought to the hammer,was that of the late Mr. Castlewood *. This tale isnot purely ideal, although it was written to illustratethe pathetic. Others were written to illustrateother passions. SIR JOHN FALKLAND is even toodreadful to think upon. THE Two PILGRIMS INGREY was written to illustrate brotherly affectionor constancy t. Guiscard THE PIRATE was themost elaborate, and might have been the mostpopular. It is the only one of which the MS. ispreserved, and the reader, if he feel so disposed, mayventure upon the experiment of enduring its produced the sum of 2/. 165. in russia binding. Only thirty-sixcopies were printed, every one of which has put on wings and flown outof the cage of the author. This pelican-like generosity or prodigalitydemands commiseration rather than admiration.t The story was simple in its structure. A way-worn traveller entersthe church of St. Genevieve just before night-fall. The sun's partingbeams glance upon two recumbent monumental figures, habited likepilgrims. Their dresses and physiognomical expressions strike himwith peculiar interest. He inquires of the attendant verger who theymight be? The verger replies that their history is most affecting, butit is too long at that time of night to be entered upon. The travellerurges him to make the attempt, for at the break of the following day hehas to set out on a far journey to the shrine of the Lady Saint whosename the church bears, adding, by way of further inducement, that itis now moonlight, and that the tale may be advantageously continuedand concluded by means of such aid, and, peradventure, more in accordancewith the melancholy cast of the history. The verger complies,and both sitting upon a near monument, he takes up the tale.Of its materials, scarcely the faintest outline dwells in my memory. Igave the manuscript many years ago to a friend, who requited mykindness by allowing it to be destroyed or lost. That is my presentimpression of the matter.O 2196 AUTHORSHIP.ing *. All these tales were written in a very curioussort of dormitory, at the top of a small house atThe commencement is as follows, preceded by the above title:Fair was the morning and smooth the ocean, when Count Siffrediand his attendants set sail from Lorenzo to Santiago, in Spain. It wason the 16th of July that this coasting voyage was undertaken; thecount having resolved to visit the several ports on the eastern side ofItaly, and so steer by Cape Passage (the southernmost point of Sicily)in preference to going by land through Tuscany, and hiring a vessel atLeghorn. This latter route was strongly recommended to him theevening before he sailed by an English gentleman whom he casuallymet at the hotel. c I thank you,' replied the count, ' but I have plentyof time, and no dearth of money. I have, moreover, a wish to visit anold college friend at Otranto, and am in the humour for a coastingvoyage.' As the Count seemed absolutely bent upon it, there was noshaking his resolution. ' To be sure,' said the Englishman, ' there islittle danger of a tempest in the Mediterranean ; I know not whatyou have to be terrified at.' ' I have no fears returned the Count.Siffredi and the English gentleman shook hands most heartily. Thenext morning the count set sail.Count Siffredi was a very extraordinary man. (While the vesselglides smoothly on a calm sea, and before it touches at Ferme, I willendeavour to entertain the reader with a short sketch of his history.)He was born and bred a gentleman. A very ample fortune securedto him every attention from without, and administered to him everyluxury from within. His father was an Italian by birth, his motherwas a native of Seville, in Spain ; they had both high notions of familyrenown, and bringing with each other an ample fortune, they had everyopportunity of keeping up the pomp and hospitality of their ancestors.Nine gentlemen, with purple velvet cloaks and silver hilted swords,with five valets waiting on each gentleman, attended the father ofSiffredi on his marriage day. Nine virgins, with necklaces of coraland stomachers of wrought gold, with five females waiting on eachvirgin, moved in the train of Donna Ximena, the bride, and the motherof Siffredi.That day was a jocund one, and the sole offspring of that union wasTHE COUNT SIFFREDI, who, at twenty-nine years of age, came intopossession of all the property of his deceased parents. The mind ofthe Count was adorned with every accomplishment that can shed lustreon the human character. He was virtuous, he was generous, he wasAUTHORSHIP. 1i>7Wick, within a mile of Worcester ; overlookinggarden-grounds and orchards, with the sparklingcourse of the Severn in the distance. But this littlerural retreat had other and more heart-entwiningattractions for me. It was adjoining the residenceof a friend of the name of Tyson, between whomand myself the strictest intimacy was maintainedalas ! for the space of two years only. I believe thatfriend's end to have been hastened by filial ingratitude.W T ho could turn the heel upon such a parent? My last visit to him (some thirty-two yearsago) was in the midst of a frightful thunderstormbrave. His principles were engrafted on a religion which he believedto be divine ; and his hours, whether of merriment or meditation, weredevoted in a manner consistently with the tenets he professed. Deeplyas the Italians and Spaniards love play, the character of Siffredi wasnever polluted with the passion of gambling. His chief exercise wasthe chace. He could dart the spear with 'unerring force against thestrength of < the wild-boar and the fury of the wolf. His hall was hungwith trophies of his prowess. He could fence with the dexterity of amaster. His passion for music, accompanied with a clear and expressivevoice, made him excel on the guitar : but it was in his LIBRARY thatSiffredi shone with unrivalled lustre. Twelve thousand volumes ofchoice works in every department and language, united to continuedapplication and abating research, gave the Count an ascendancy overevery competitor that opposed him. It is not often that, in Spain, suchliterary ardour prevails in a man of the revenues of Siffredi.Thus briefly have I spoken of his character. Said his steward tohim, the evening before he sailed, ' Count Siffredi, you are young, unmarried,and your rental cannot be less than 36,000 pistoles per annum :these are tidings that require care and judicious management on yourpart. Excuse me, but' f Shall I injure these things replied sharplythe Count, ' by a voyage along the eastern coast of Sicily ?' * Godforbid !' answered the old steward. They embraced each other mostaffectionately before their departure," &c.AUTHORSHIP.as night was coming on. I was on horseback, andthe rain and the lightning, commingled, nearly deprivedme of the power of vision. My friend rushedto the garden gate without his hat, commanding allhis servants to follow him. He received me withthe affectionate ardour of an elder brother. Thefatted calf" had been previously killed ; but whatcould the banquet, in any shape, have been, comparedwith the overpowering of a warm heart, andthe demonstrations of an hospitality which disdainedto fix limits to its exercise ? He had a wife whoshared all this friendly feeling with him towardsmyself and my family. I stopped two days withthem both and NEVER saw them afterwards.AUTHORSHIP. 199About this time I became acquainted with the celebratedDR. JENNER, a character and a name whichEngland will do well always to cherish among thoseof her most illustrious sons of science. What a fighthad he to encounter for the establishment of his belovedVACCINATION ! What quackery, what prejudice,what malice and ignorance, were opposed tohim ! He lived in the end to triumph over his foes,and to acknowledge the remuneration of a gratefulcountry. It is true that Russia led the way ; andthe diamond ring of Catharine was perhaps equal,as being an earlier demonstration of feeling, to the20,000 of the treasury of Great Britain *. I neverknew a man of a simpler mind or of a warmer heart,than Dr. Jenner. I never knew a man who, being inthe road, as he was, to incalculable wealth, despisedit all for the benefit of his fellow-creatures ; andIn pecuniary value, the present of the empress was doubtless farbelow that of the British exchequer; but Dr. Jenner was perhapsyet prouder of it as a trophy, or mark of respect,, from a great foreignpower. Its real pecuniary value was about 1500/. It consisted of acluster of brilliant, with a very large one in the centre ; the whole setin an oblong, and, to an English taste, old-fashioned way. We couldnever prevail upon its owner to wear it, except upon the birthday ofone of his children. No man hated pomp and display more thoroughlythan himself. His correspondence was latterly immense ; and when,by the help of a secretary or a friend, he had got through his answers,and returned from paying his professional visits, so as to have the latterpart of the day to himself, he would, when in the country, take his fluteinto the garden, play a number of simple tunes (of which " The BlueBells of Scotland" was a particular favourite), saunter backwards andforwards, notice the flight of the bat and the owl ; seeming to be absorbedin a sort of delightful reverie.200 AUTHORSHIP.having seen his system established to his satisfaction,retired to his native village to the enjoymentof his garden, his roses and honeysuckles, the humof the evening beetle, the echoing note of the cuckoo,his flute and his cigar * !While the vaccine contest was at its height,Jenner availed himself successfully of the active zealandacute discrimination of his friend, Mr. JohnRing, a surgeon in Swallow, now Regent-street. Amore devoted friend, and a more determined coadjutorhe could not have possessed ; and betweenthem both, with the importunity of Mr. Pruen t toboot, I was induced to attempt a poem, in blankverse, entitled VACCINIA. This was to be consideredmerely as a sort of peg to hang notes upon,and I set about reading the whole history of smallpox,resolving to make it out (which in reality ithas been) the most frightful scourge of humanity.Woodville was my text-book, and the notes wereDr. Jenner was a profound naturalist : in whatever department helooked into, he looked into it earnestly and continuously. He had beenthe favourite pupil of the great JOHN HUNTER, who had taught him toconsider all creation as one vast chain, of which every link had someparticular cause in itself of sympathy or affinity. Hunter kept eagles ;loving to look at them, to watch their motions, and to mark their characters.Hence, as Jenner himself once told me, the pupil caught hispassion for ornithology ; and that pupil's first essay in the ornithologicaldepartment being " Observations on the Natural History of the Cuckoo"published in the Royal Society's Transactions for 1788, obtained himan instant and decided reputation throughout Europe. Buffon mighthave envied him such a distinction. In the year 1798 appeared hisfirst treatise on the Cow-pox.t See page 158, ante.AUTHORSHIP. 201doubtless preferable to the versification *. I hadimagined this crude effort to be yet in existence,I shall present the reader with the transcript of an original letterof Dr. Jenner (as if by a miracle yet in my possession), in whichallusion is made to this meditated work under reference to the " Paper."It must also be premised, that at the time of its composition, the wholenation was in a state of excitement by the threatened invasion ofBonaparte, and by the system of volunteering then so generally prevailing.Indeed, I went through more than one drilling myself, by a Scotchserjeant in the Coldstream guards, and heroically resolved upon enteringas a common soldier in the ranks of the Kensington Volunteers. Candidlyspeaking, whatever might have been my military ardour in earlieryears (see p. 49), I thought drilling a very dull, mechanical piece ofbusiness and generally got the serjeant to talk to me about the sieges ofValenciennes and Dunkirk, in preference to hearing his word of command; and, truth to say, my serjeant loved the amendment to the fullas much as the original motion.Dr. Jenner's letter also makes mention of the unfortunate EMMET ;he, over whose hapless and premature grave the muse of Moore haspoured forth one of the sweetest and most solemn of funereal dirges !The letter in question is literally as follows :Cheltenham, 10th Oct., 1803.MY DEAR SIR,You will be somewhat surprised at being informed that the firstintimation I received of your papers being at Cheltenham, was fromyour letter. I posted down to Pruen's and at once took possession ofthem, but have not yet had an opportunity of giving them that seriousperusal they require. An infant of Lord Berkeley's has lately been soill, as to take me repeatedly from Cheltenham to Berkeley Castle ; andthis has thrown my general concerns here into confusion. I hope thatno proof-sheet has yet gone finally to the press without my inspection ;if so, I am confident, from the nature of things, more must be cancelled.Pray satisfy me quickly upon this head by a line, and say whatnumber of copies will be printed. Will the paper be thick enough forcartridge-paper for the soldiers of the invading Corse?It is almost a folly, at the present hour, to speculate in anythingbut swords and firelock, drums and trumpets. The printer shall bepaid for his paper as soon as I know whether my banker in town hascash enough to discharge the debt. Give Pruen a good trimming for202 AUTHORSHIP.but on inquiry of the friend with whom I had supposedit to he deposited, I find all traces of it to belost.Just before returning to fix myself in London orits vicinity, I was induced to revise and enlarge atopographical octavo volume of the HISTORY OFCHELTENHAM ; a place with which I was well acquainted,and of which the text of a Mr. Moreau'swork formed not only the basis, but supplied theprincipal materials. It was undertaken chiefly tohis negligence. His late occupation has been that of erecting a billiard-tablein his hall.How goes on Volunteering? By this time, I trust you are almost aGeneral. Tell me how to address you. The volunteers of this placewere marched into a meadow yesterday afternoon for the second timesince their enrolment. I was struck with astonishment. They marchedand performed a variety of pedestrian evolutions with as much adroitnessas veterans. A young nobleman just come post from Ireland, tellsme the sentiment of Emmet respecting the French is general thereamong the common people. Will Bonaparte be so rash as to showhimself upon any of our shores ? You know I have been a particularobserver of the notes of birds. The crows, kites, and hawks at presenthave assumed a kind of note that is unusual. There is more of the conspirit and the vivace, than in their old common PASTORALES. When yousee my good friend in Swallow-street (an ornithologist likes the termbetter than New-street), remember me kindly to him. I hope thisvery day to look over your sheets.Yours ever most truly,One of Dr. Jenner's happiest, and very characteristic sayings was,that he considered the genuine vaccine pustule as the dissection of apearl on a rose-leaf !AUTHORSHIP. 203oblige Mr. Ruff, the bookseller, who had so beautifullyprinted the first edition of the Classics, andwho then conducted the principal establishment atCheltenham. I now forget what was its sale, butI remember to have received 30 for the editorship.One copy only of this unpretending volumewas printed upon large paper, of a quarto form,and that copy is now in the library at Althorp. Imay therefore now be said to have fairly commencedAUTHOR, both "by trade" and by good will. I wasin no condition to indulge large expectations, nor,on the other hand, to incur heavy expenses. Asmall, bay windowed mansion, in the terrace at Kensington,then comparatively a village, sufficed toconcentrate all my wishes, as to situation and themanage; and in the commencement of this careerI would frequently solace myself with another stanzafrom the same poem from which the quotation at thehead of this chapter is taken.I care not, fortune, what you me deny ;You cannot rob me of free nature's grace ;You cannot shut the windows of the sky,Through which Aurora shows her brightening face.You cannot bar my constant feet to traceThe woods and lawns, by living stream, at eve:Let health my nerves and finer fibres brace,And I their toys to the grit children leaveOf fancy, reason, virtue, nought can me bereave !"CHAPTER VI.PUBLICATIONS.Another and another still succeeds."SHAKSPEARE.LET not the reader imagine that I am about toinflict upon him the punishment of wading througha dry detail or list of PUBLICATIONS of which Ihappen to be the humble Author, without the interspersionof ANECDOTE which may reconcile him insome measure to its personal. A mere " CatalogueRaisonne" of the choicest productions would now,perhaps, pall on the public taste ; but, as in thepresent instance, the intermixture of " LITERARYREMINISCENCES" may give, even to secondary performances,a tone of interest of which otherwise theywould be dispossessed. The field before me is wideand variegated. It shall be my object to make itamusing and productive*.Will the reader endure that natural, if not pardonable, spirit of self-love,which, in the contemplation of the prospect above opened, solacesitself in the application of the following quaint lines ?Tout le dehors ung paradis resemble,Le deadens n'est, ne trop cher, ne trop brun,Mais delectable a veoir, comme il me semble."Illustrations de France : 1513, 4to. sign. Cii, rev.This extract is from a portion of the work, " Epistle du Roy a Hector,"usually added to these Illustrations.C/<i**ic$.'] PUBLICATION v 205Whether, as the conclusion of the last chaptermay induce, I was now to consider myself an Authorby inspiration or " by trade" I certainly commencedmy career in right earnest ; and set about the secondedition of the INTRODUCTION TO THE CLASSICS witha zeal and heartiness which have never since beensurpassed. I was determined to face the thing manfully; and fortunately derived great aid and encouragementfrom the Rev. Dr. Gosset, my nearneighbour, and one of the first bibliographers in thecountry*. He used to smile on seeing me bringhome Maittaire one day, Panzer the next, and Clementon the third. For Patricius I felt a respectapproaching to reverence ; and Charles was ever atmy right hand. But Clement was as my " HortusAdonis." His seductive digressions his interminablenotes upon notes his " rare" " tres rare"excessivement rare" intractable," &c., delightedand distracted me by turns t. A " specimen"of this second edition (1804) preceded its appearstribute of respect to the memory of this intelligent scholar andbibliographer, will be found in the Bibliographical Cameron, vol. iii.p. 5. I have very great and sincere pleasure in here recording the wellbeingand well-doing of his two sons, the Rev. Isaac, and the Rev.Thomas Gosset. We may meet again.t The comparative merits of all these Bibliographers will be foundstated in the third edition of the "Introduction" 1808; and in thesecond part (" The Cabinet") of the second edition of the " Bibliomania."I remember giving nine guineas for Clement, in nine thin4to. volumes; a work which is now rendered so thoroughly obsoleteas to be unsaleable. This identical copy is still in the possession ofMessrs. Payne and Foss.206 PUBLICATIONS. [Classicsonce. It promised so much comparatively with itsprecursor*, that I was urged and flattered on allhands to prosecute it with zeal, and to doubt not ofa favourable issue. Still I felt diffident about carryingit to market. I could command little attentionand as little sale : and if such a man as Sterne cameforward with hesitation and doubt about his Tris-slenderand unobtrusive as was this " precursor" (see p. 194, ante),it nevertheless received the good opinion of the late Bishop of Ely.That most experienced bibliographer, as well as sound scholar, told me,not long before his death, that " although the work was superficial, andclearly the production of a very young and inexperienced author, yet itgave proof of a tact and spirit which would lead to more successfullabour in the same line." In the preparation of the second, and greatlyenlarged edition and which, indeed, might be called a new work Ifelt authorised to say, with Krause, in his preface to Border's BibliographyCritica, 1715, 8vo. " Quanquam enim non fugit me, plumesextare variorum doctor lucubrations, quibus idem est proposition, utharum rerum cupids manu quasi ducat ad parandam rei litterarisecognition ; non tamen omnes eundem attingere scopum, aut eodemcum fructus legs, exploratissimum habet." Sign. e. 3.The first edition consisted of only 75 pages. It was beautifullyprinted, in a tabular form as to editor, place, size, and date of aclassic with very brief notes at the bottom. In these notes I loved, asthe reader will see and which was natural enough to dwell uponbeautiful, large paper, and vellum, copies. At that time, I could haveundertaken a " journey to Mecca" to see a first Homer, or a first Plato,printed UPON VELLUM : and when my neighbour and kind friend, Dr.Gosset, used to describe to me the first Complutensian Polyglot Bibleof Cardinal Ximenes, printed in the same manner, and which wasbrought to him on a bed of sickness (during the Pinelli sale) to gazeupon, and to work a cure clad, as it then was, in its original bindingnothing could exceed the eagerness and delight with which I listened tohis " tale." That identical copy having, since the days of Pinelli, seenthree masters or possessors, now reposes securely in the blue moroccocoating of Charles Lewis, in the very choice and valuable collection ofFrank Hall Standish, Esq.Classics.] PUBLICATIONS. 207tram Shandy*, it seemed to me, after such anexample, to be advisable to spare myself the mortifiedthe favour of Mr. Singer, I am furnished with a transcript ofSterne's letter to Dudley, the bookseller, touching the intended publicationof this work. It will be read, I think, with no common interest."SIR,What you wrote to me in June last, in answer to my demand of 50/.for the Life and Opinions of Tristan Shandy ' That it was too muchto risk on a single volume, which, if it happened not to sell, would behard upon your brother' 1 think a most reasonable objection in himagainst giving me the price I thought my work deserved. You neednot be told by me how much authors are inclined to over-rate theirproductions : for my own part, I hope I am an exception j for if Icould find out by any arcanum, the precise value of mine, I declareMr. Dudley should have it 20 per cent, below its value.I propose, therefore, to print a lean edition, in two small volumes, ofthe size of Tassels, and on the same paper and type, at my own expense,merely to feel the pulse of the world, and that I may know whatprice to set upon the remaining volumes, from the reception of these.If my book sells and has the run our critics expect, I propose to freemyself of all future troubles of this kind, and bargain with you, if possible,for the rest as they come out, which will be every six months. Ifmy book fails of success, the loss falls where it ought to do. The samemotives which inclined me first to offer you this trifle, incline me togive you the whole profits of the sale (except what Mr. Kinsman sellshere, which will be a great many), and to have them sold only at yourshop, upon the usual terms in these cases. The book shall be printedhere, and the impression sent up to you ; for as I live at York, and shallcorrect every proof myself, it shall go perfect into the world, and beprinted in so creditable a way as to paper, type, &c., as to do no dishonourto you, who, I know, never chuse to print a book meanly. Willyou patronise my book upon these terms, and be as kind a friend to itas if you had bought the copyright ?Be so good as to favour me with a line by the return, and believe me,"Sir,Your obliged and most humble servant,(Signed) " LAURENCE STERNE.P. S. All locality is taken out of the book the satire general ; notesare added where wanted, and the whole made more saleable about a208 PUBLICATIONS. Classics.cation of a refusal in annexing a price which wouldprobably be withheld. And so I determined to riskthe whole at my own cost and hazard. If, like itsprecursor, this edition succeeded, I was satisfiedthat the gain would be commensurate with the toil ;for, in early life, the labours both of body andmind are cheerily entered upon, and the world hasnot yet taught us to be capricious or exorbitant.I therefore exerted every energy for its completion,and had worked myself up to a fixed determinationto listen to no terms. To be free and unshackled,gave spurs to my industry. If unsuccessful, I shouldat least be spared the taunts of a mortified publisher ;and I looked again towards the faithful booksellerwho had successfully introduced the first edition tothe notice of the public. My printer was the lateMr. Gospel, of Little Queen-street, Lowborn. Myresidence, as before intimated, was at Kensington ;and I yet call to mind, with emotions which it weredifficult to describe, those mornings, when, ancle-deepin snow, I used to hasten across the Park todeposit the last revise of the proof-sheet with theprinter. Again ; when, after eight or ten hours ofintermitting labour during the day, I stood in needhundred and fifty pages added and to conclude, a strong interestformed and forming in its behalf, which I hope will soon take off thefew I shall print on this coup essai. I had desired Mr. Kinsman towrite the purport of this to you by this post, but least he should omitit, or not sufficiently explain my intention, I thought best to trouble youwith a letter myself.Direct for me, Prebendary of York"PUBLICATIONS-JO!)of exercise ere I retired to rest with what alacrityand readiness would I frequently sally forth, beneaththe lustre of a January full-moon, and upon groundindurated by frost to marble, nearly as far as Chis-wick,and back revolving, with all the ardour ofanticipated fame, upon the future fate of my laboursand situation in life ! That period of fond hope andeager toil has long ceased : but the remembrance ofits existence, and of its application to an honourableobject in an honourable profession, will always bringa consolation to me which I shall not fail to carryto the grave*.This edition was a thick octavo volume of some600 pages, having an " Index Analytics" at theend. There were fifty copies printed upon largepaper, of a royal octavo form, with extra embellishmentst ; my first essay of the kind, and which,The above passage, beginning " and I yet call to mind," was printedas a note in the first proof sheet of the preface of the fourth edition of1827. Why it was afterwards withdrawn, I cannot now remember : butcertainly it is better placed where it now stands. It is true to the veryletter. And I may here add, that, more than thrice or four times, Ihave examined nearly thirty authorities for the establishment of onepoint. But my chief pride lay in the account of the GREEK BIBLES andTESTAMENTS. What in Harwood does not occupy six pages, was expandedby me into fifty.t These extra embellishments were, 1 . A portrait of Bishop Fell ;2. The arms of Cardinal Ximenes ; 3. Devices of a few eminent earlyprinters. There was a 4th plate, common to all the copies, which is afac simile of the Greek and Latin texts of the New Testament ofthe Complutensian Polyglot Bible, than which nothing can be more accurate.The late Dr. Burney, in a note from him yet in my possession,complimented me upon this as well as upon my book. The other plateswere all destroyed, after the given number had been struck off. These210 PUBLICATIONS. Classics.giving an air of splendour to the book, seemed torender it worthy, in the estimation of its author, ofbeing dedicated to a Nobleman of great literary andsenatorial distinction. That nobleman was the lateEARL SPENCER, who then declined the intendedhonour*. At length the work made its appearance,and within a given reasonable time every copy of itwas disposed of. I cannot now remember what weremy gains ; but I can remember that, when the firstcopy of it, upon large paper (bound by Herring, inmorocco, with gilt leaves), was brought to me, Ithought all my toil abundantly remunerated by thevery appearance of the volume. No parent, on thebirth of his offspring, could feel a more heart-swellingdelight ; or, rather, not even Cardinal Ximeneshimself, when he received the first perfect copy ofhis Polyglot Bible at the hands of the younger Bro-largepaper copies (till the publication of the third edition in 1808), havebrought 5/. 5s. a copy. In the library of St. John's College, Oxford,there is a copy of it bound in 2 vols., in blue morocco, containing duplicatesof the plates, and a great number of drawings of illustrative portraits,by the Author of the work, deposited there as a " free-will offering"from himself.I had presented his Lordship with a copy of the neat, little, unpretendingprecursor of 1802, which he was good enough to receivewith " thanks," adding, that he should be " very happy, in the courseof the next winter, when he was in London, to shew me his old editionsbefore the year 1500." This note is dated Sept. 9, 1802. I feel proudon its being yet in my possession, for it was the foundation, more orless, of a correspondence which continued till within a fortnight of thedeath of its noble author. 1 ventured to solicit permission for the dedicationof my second edition to him, when I sent a " specimen" of it inthe year preceding its publication ; for his lordship's reply is dated July4-, 1803.PUBLICATIONS. '21 1carlo*, could have experienced more gratifying sensationsthan I did at the moment in question.For the sake of juxta-position, and not to wearyor distract the reader by recurring at a future periodto this particular publication, it may be as well tosay, that a third edition of this useful work (for suchit was now generally admitted to be) appeared in1808, in a greatly extended and improved form, anda fourth, and the last, in 1827 > yet exhibiting improvementsand additions. The distinctive differencesand comparative merits, together with a fewnot unacceptable " ANA" connected therewith, areembodied in the subjoined note t.The anecdote, although a " twice told tale" by me, is in itself sopretty, as well as short, that it may not opportunely find a place here.I have often heard John Brocario (says Gomecius), son of Arnold'sBrocario, who printed the Polyglot, relate to his friends, that, whenhis father had put the finishing stroke to the last volume, he deputedhim to carry it to the Cardinal. John Brocario was then a lad ; andhaving dressed himself in a very elegant suit of clothes, he approachedXimenes, and delivered the volume into his hands. ' I render thanksto thee, O God !' exclaimed Ximenes, ' that thou hast protracted my lifeto the completion of these biblical labours ! ' And afterwards, conversingwith his friends, the Cardinal would often observe, that ' the surmountingof the various difficulties of his political situation afforded him nothalf the solace as that which arose from the finishing of his POLYGLOT.'Ximenes died the same year (1517), not many weeks afterwards." In-trod. vol. i. p. 10, edit. 1827. Mallinkrot, Le Long, and March, seemall to have delighted in mentioning this anecdote, of which the originwill be found in the text of the first and most valuable biographer ofthe Cardinal, namely, " Gomecius (Gomez) de rebus gentis a FranciscoXimenis Cisnerio Archiepiscopal Tolerant. Complete. 1569," folio: a rarebook, and deserving a place in all useful libraries. For an account ofthe Polyglot Bible, consult Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. i. p. 72, &c.t I have before (p. 194) mentioned the kind and liberal feeling of myfirst publisher, Mr. Dwyer, in advising me to part with the copyright of212 PUBLICATIONS. [Classics.I revert to the year 1805, and take up the threadof " Literary Reminiscences," as well as of the ac-thework, as it was quite certain the second edition, of 1 804, would beshortly out of print. I did so, to Messrs. Longman, Trees, and Co., for200/. In the year 1808, that house engaged me to correct and improvethe work, which I believe was successfully done, by an addition of muchmatter, and by some brief biographies of Editors and Printers of certaincelebrated impressions of classical writers ; but I judged it advisable toomit the " Index Analytics" peculiar to the previous edition of 1804.To the best of my recollection, I received 100/. for my editorial labours;and 1250 copies were printed of this third edition of 1808, without anycopies upon large paper. Of course, such kind of works cannot havea rapid sale ; but yet this third edition seemed to be getting on soberlyand regularly. About three years after its publication (and after I hadreceived many letters from numerous correspondents, known and unknown)I was offered the perusal of a small thin MS. memorandum, ofsome twenty leaves only, being a transcript of GIBBON'S notes upon certaineditions of classical authors, for 2/. 2*. The sum was large for thevery meagre object of temptation j but it was accompanied by a letter,so thoroughly racy and original, that the reader will probably be amusedby its insertion here ; and which, on one score, may not be without itsuse. From mercy to the author, I suppress his name.London, May 20th. 1811.SIR,I have in my Possession a Collection of of Notes, to Harwood on theClassics, written by E. Gibbon Esq: Author of the Decline & fall ofthe Roman Empire, Copy l from a interleave Copy of Harwood, on theClassics, formerly the Property of Mr. Gibbon himself. I am a Bookbinderby Trade and served my Apprenticeship to that Trade at Cambridge,Whare the above Book was sent to bind & Whare I took theLiberty of Copying it. The Gentleman that brought it to Bind said hehad it sent to him to get it Bound by a Relation of Mr. Gibbon, & saidlikewise, that MSS. notes was very Valuable, I took the Liberty ofWriting to you on the Subject, by seeing one of your books of theClassics, thing it might be a service to you in a future Edition of yourbook, I shall be Holiday making on Whitsuntide Monday if you wish*to se them, I would bring them to Kensington ?Yours, &c. * * * *."To the fourth edition, a more particular " avant propos" belongs.The copyright was purchased of Messrs. Longmans, by Messrs. HardingPUBLICATIONS.count of " Publications," from that to almost thepresent period. While the " Classics" were workingtheir way, and before the ultimate result could pos-andLeopard, and Whittaker ; and no less a sum than 500/. was givenby them for the copyright. A further sum of 500/. was given me, bythe publishers, upon condition of the enlargement of the work to bereturned, by me, to them, if the proceeds did not, within eighteenmonths, cover the expenditure of the publication. Two thousand copieswere printed, at 2/. 2s. per copy ; and 230 copies on large paper, at6/. 6*. per copy. The sale by no means corresponded with the expensesincurred ; and the money was, in due time, returned by me to the Publishers.Three palpable causes led to this failure. The price was tooheavy, both upon the small and large especially upon the latter ; andthe number of copies of the latter was more than twice too many. Amost unnecessary and provoking delay occurred, after the work was entirelyready to meet the public eye, owing to some temporary disarrangementof Mr. Whittaker's affairs and during that delay, Mr. Moss'sManual of Classical Bibliography supplied the wants, or rather satisfiedthe curiosity, of the public on this head. Of Mr. Moss's work, presently.This delay was as impolitic as unaccountable ; and might haveexempted me, in a court of equity, from the repayment of 500/. to thepublishers because, when that bonus or premium was given, it wasmost assuredly given on the understanding, implied, if not expressed,that all due diligence and ordinary methods of business should be observedon the part of the Publishers to bring the article into the marketfor the purchasers who were almost clamorous for its acquisition.While the field was thus infatuatedly left open and unwatched, anEnemy" came and " sowed tares" in it. Fairly speaking, the publicwere not to be blamed. A work of the sort had been wanted, especiallywhen the fourth edition of mine appeared to be so tediously delayed.And forthwith came Mr. Moss's book; not, however, till the article"Aristotle" in mine had been committed to press. Nothing can bemore congenial to a kindred spirit (and such I trust the author of thework in question will give me credit for possessing) than to have afellow-labourer in the vineyard in which he has himself so long toiled ;and I hailed the appearance of Mr. Moss's performance as its beinglikely, in conjunction with my own, to promote the instructive study ofbibliography. But the perusal of a very few pages served to damp myardour, and to disappoint my expectations: not so much from dieregret experienced on finding so considerable a portion of what I choose214 PUBLICATIONS. [Classics.sibly be predicted, whether for " weal or woe," itmust not be concealed that I had frequent misgivings.to call extraneous matter*, as from observing that such large demandshad been made upon my own labours, with such sparing avowals of obligation.Mr. Moss is the most liberal borrower, returning the smallestper centage for his loans, with whom I am acquainted. His descriptionsof the Editiones Principes are, with very few exceptions, taken fromthe Bibliotheca Spenceriana; varied, condensed, or amplified, as thesubject invited. It is true that that work is mentioned by name at theend of the list of authorities quoted : but, if I mistake not, every suchauthority had been previously examined and supplied by myself.Another objection may be reasonably urged, in which I can have noindividual feeling whatever. Authorities of minor importance, and nowwell nigh obsolete, have been quoted at great length, and frequently inaforeign language, respecting editions of inferior consequence, and indeedscarcely deserving of the slightest notice.However, Mr. Moss's book was eulogised in one particular journal, forthe sake, apparently, of more than indirectly attacking the individual towhom that author was so largely indebted for his materials. These areamong those " fantastic tricks," at which an inferior tribunal to the oneordinarily referred to, may be reasonably said to laugh : but I believeand know it to have brought its " bitters" on a retrospective reflection,with the author of the review. Of what under currents and shiftingsands is the mind of man sometimes composed ! A word only in addition.The fourth impression of the " Introduction " does not supersedethe third; for although the addition to it of " Hebrew Bibles" is veryimportant, yet it does not contain the account of " Lexicons and Grammars"which were to have formed a third volume, as a work of itself.Why will not my amiable and competent friend, Mr. Edmund HenryBarker, carry this desirable object into effect? For myself, the cable isslipt for ever from bringing me back again into this harbour.I mean, the account of Translations, and of Latin editions of Greekauthors ; as well as of commentators on Aristotle and other writers. Seea remark in vol. i. p. 327. I do not say that these are not legitimate,and it may be even added, beneficial subjects of bibliography; butthey should have been rendered more perfect by being more copiouslytreated, and published in a separate form : as a companionable volumeto their precursors.t Among other specimens, confirmation of the above position, thePUBLICATIONS. U 1 5The " saturnine complexioned" gentleman of whomsuch express mention has been made in a precedingpage*, would now and then come across my imagination; and I used to open with trembling apprehensionsthe monthly journals and reviews. Atlength, an elaborate and commendatory review, withan extract of the entire article of " Pindar," set meatrest. My heart danced with delight at this firstgravely pronounced judgment on my rising biblio-graphical reputation. The booksellers used to quoteme in their catalogues, and thus, at all events, gavepublicity to my name. This, to a young adventurer,was more than half the battle ; but, now and then,to vex me, on the other hand, I found my authoritiesonly quoted, with a studied and ungrateful omissionof the source whence those authorities were supplied.A little time not only reconciled me to this, but tomany other vexations the invariable attendant onthe calling of an author.In this same year I was solicited by Mr. Ruff, theprinter of the first edition of the Classics, and thepublisher of the History of Cheltenham t, to translateFenton's TREATISE ON THE EDUCATION OFDAUGHTERS. The motive on the part of Mr. Ruffreader will be pleased to remark on that selected in a note at vol. i. p.448. But why has Mr. Moss failed to consult the second volume of theJEdes Althorpiante, and the catalogue of the Cassino library ? whichmight have supplied him with many useful notices of are and valuableearly editions of the Classics.See page 182, ante. t See page 202.216 PUBLICATIONS. [Classics.was sufficiently honourable. He had received kindattentions from the Duke and Duchess of Bedford,who had taken a house at Cheltenham and havingan unoccupied font of letter, he wished to put itinto play by the publication of some small workwhich might with propriety be dedicated to theDuchess. By whose suggestion the work of Fentonwas selected, I have now forgotten ; but as theDuchess of Bedford had been recently married, wasthen the mother of two children, and likely to havean increasing family, the choice of the work in questionwas rather happy than otherwise ; and I hadsincere pleasure in complying with the publisher'swishes. The pencil of my friend Mr. Masquerierwas put into requisition for a frontispiece worthy ofthe intrinsic value of the work ; and the Duchesswas so obliging as to give him more than one sittingfor the completion of that graceful composition whichfaces the title-page*. In the summer of 1805 thevolume appeared, with so short a preface, that thereader may tolerate its introduction in the subjoinednote.This frontispiece, for the figure and face of which the Duchess sat,consists of a mother or lady reading a book to a child of about five yearsof age. The attitude of the child is exceedingly natural, bespeaking itsriveted attention to the matter read. The dress of both mother andchild are of the day and elegant.t The whole of the Preface is as follows : " The translation of thefollowing work was undertaken at the request of Mr. RUFF, the publisher,who wished me to paraphrase what I thought might more particularlyinterest and edify the English reader.It is dedicated, by the publisher, to her Grace the DUCHESS OF/ '. /, Am.] PUBLICATIONS. - 1 7I yet think, as I then thought, that there areparts and passages of this work in all respectsBEDFORD and he is anxious that it may be found worthy of herpatronage.The original French work was first published in 1688 ; and the earliestEnglish translation appeared in 1707. This translation, which was byDr. Hicks, I have never seen. In the year 1797, another [anonymous]English translation was printed at Hull, in a duodecimo volume. Inthis performance there is so close an adherence to the idiom of theFrench language, that almost every page abounds with gallicisms. Itis not, however, entirely destitute of merit ; but it appears, on the whole,to have been hastily executed for the purpose of ensuring a cheap andextensive sale.The present translation is offered to the public with a full convictionof its inadequacy to give a just idea of the beauty and force of the original.The author of ' Tilimaque and ' De I' Education des Filles,'appears, on a comparison of these two performances, very unlike thesame writer. In the former, his periods are flowing and luxuriant; inthe latter, they are sententious and logical ; and nearly as difficult toclothe in an English dress as those of the philosophical Tacitus. It willbe seen, therefore, that a literal translation has not been attempted ; anda still greater deviation will be observable, from a wish to distinguish itfrom the translation of 1797. Whether this has always been done forthe better, the reader will determine for himself. An Original ChapterON RELIGIOUS STUDIES' has been submitted to those whose opinions,matured by experience, I have been anxious to obtain ; and it has receivedthe sanction of their approbation.If the work fail of success, it will not be from the want of spirit inthe publisher ; for it is accompanied with considerable beauty of typeand paper, and elegance of ornament. The frontispiece is every wayworthy of the ingenious artist by whom it was executed, and who haslong been known to the world from the taste and fidelity of his pencil.The engraving, by Mr. Freeman, will convince the public that he requiresonly to be known to be more generally encouraged.Terrace, Kensington, " T. F. D."May 2, 1805.Thirty years have elapsed (as the reader will notice) since the compositionof this preface: but it is with pleasure that I call his attentionto its concluding sentence inasmuch as I have been enabled to shew218 PUBLICATIONS. [Fenton.worthy of Fenton than which France has noname more illustrious on record. I will select afew from the more important chapter (vii.) " Ofinculcating Principles of Religion in the Minds ofChildren."Shew children a house, and make them comprehend that this housedid not build itself. The stones or bricks, say you, were not elevatedwithout some one's carrying them so high. It may be as well, too, toshew them the masons at work : then make them contemplate Heavenand Earth, and the principal things which GOD hath made for the useof man. Say to them, ' how much more beautiful and better made isthe world than a house! Was it made of itself'' 'No; assuredly itwas made by the hands of the Almighty.'First follow the method of scripture. Strike their imaginations inas lively a manner as possible. Propose to them nothing which maynot be clothed with sensible images. Represent God as seated on athrone : with eyes more brilliant than the rays of the sun, and morepiercing than the lightning : represent him with ears that hear everything; with hands that support the universe ; with arms always stretchedout to punish the wicked ; and with a tender and paternal heart to makethose happy who love him. The time will come when this informationmay be rendered more exact. Observe every opening of the mind whicha child presents to you. Try her by different methods, so that you maydiscover how these great truths will best occupy her attention. Aboveall, talk of nothing new without familiarising her to it by some obviouscomparison," &c. &c.The most difficult truth for a child to comprehend is, that we havea SOUL more precious than our BODY. Children are at first accustomedto talk about the soul ; and the custom is advantageous for this language,which they do not understand, is perpetually exciting them tohave a (confused) notion of the distinction of body and soul, until theyare able really to conceive it. In proportion as early prejudices aremy own sense of the merits of the artist by whom the frontispiece wasengraved, by having paid him, on different occasions, at least ONETHOUSAND POUNDS "" of lawful money of Great Britain' Of this sum,upwards of 400/. was derivable from the Tour alone. But see postin the order of " Publications."Ft'itdou.] PUBLICATIONS. 219pernicious when they lead to error, so are they useful when they conductthe imagination to truth, until reason is gradually directed towardsit by the force of principles. But, at length, we must fix a true per-.YW.V/O;, and how are we to set about it? Is it by plunging a younggirl in philosophical subtleties? Nothing is worse calculated for it.We must confine ourselves to render clear and distinct to her mindwhat she hears and speaks every day. As to her person, she is perhapstoo well instructed in the knowledge of that. Everything induces herto flatter, adorn, and idolise it. An essential point is gained, if you caninspire her with contempt for it, by observing something of greater valueabout her.Say, then, to a child who is capable of a little reasoning, ' is it yoursoul that eats?' If she answer absurdly, do not be harsh with her:but tell her mildly that the soul does not eat. It is the body that eats :the body, which resembles the brutes. ' Have brutes intellect ? Arethey learned ?' ' No,' the child will answer. ' But they eat,' you willadd, ' although they have no intellect. You see, therefore, that it isnot the soul which eats : it is the body which takes food to nourish it :it is that which walks, and which sleeps ' And what does the soul do ? 'f It reasons : it knows every one : it loves certain things, and dislikesothers,' " &c. &c.Never indulge yourself before children, in any railleries aboutthings which have relation to RELIGION, or on the indiscretion of anypious persons. You may think all this innocent. You are mistaken :it will have its certain consequences. Never speak of God, or of whatregards the worship of him, but with seriousness and respect, free fromall levity. Observe decorum in every thing, but particularly on thishead. People who are very nice observers of it in what regards theworld, are frequently gross and negligent of it in respect to religion,When a child shall have made such necessary reflections as lead toa knowledge of herself and of God add to them the historical facts inwhich she has already been instructed. This union will enable her tohave a correct idea of the whole of religion ; and she will remark withpleasure the connexion between such reflections and the history ofmankind. She will have observed that man did not make himself;that his soul is the image of God ; that his body has been formed withso many admirable resources, by an industry and power which canonly be divine and she will then recollect the Creation. Afterwardsshe will think that he is born with inclinations contrary to reason ; thathe has been deceived by pleasure ; carried away by anger ; and that hisbody hurries on his soul, contrary to reason, as a furious courser rushesforward with a horseman instead of the soul governing the body.220 PUBLICATIONS. [Felon.She will perceive the cause of this disorder in the history of the sin ofour first parents ; and this history will lead her to that of the SAVIOUR,who reconciles man to God. Such is the foundation of religion," &c. &c.But one more short extract upon the ordinaryduties of women, and I conclude :In the education of a young woman, her condition ought to beregarded, and the situation and cast of life she will probably move in.Take care that her expectations do not exceed her fortune and rank ;if they do, they will cost her many sorrows. What would have madeher happy, will become disgusting to her, if she have cast a wistfuleye on a superior condition. If a girl is to live in the country, turnher attention betimes to the occupations of the country. Keep herastranger to the amusements of the town : shew her the blessings of asimple, active life. If her situation be among the middling ranks oflife, let her not come near the people of the court. This intercoursewill only serve to give her unbecoming and ridiculous airs. Confineher, on the contrary, within the bounds of her own station, and pointout to her good examples among those of the same condition. Formher mind to what will be the business of her life : teach her the managementof a tradesman's family : the care that ought to be taken of hisincome, whether from returns out of the country, or rents of houses intown : what belongs to the education of her children : in short, thewhole detail of business or of commerce, into which you foresee shemay probably be thrown, when she is married," &c. &c.The intellectual machine being thus put into motion,it were perhaps difficult to stop it effectuallyfor any length of time ; and finding thatThe labour we delight in physics pain,"I was naturally anxious to add literary to professionaloccupations ; the more so, as the latter onlyoccupied me on the Sunday, producing a verystinted income but in accordance with the usualstipends of the day. For nineteen years I continuedmy career as an alternate morning preacher, withPUBLIC Actions. 2*2 1an evening lectureship, to which the salary of only30/. was attached *. It must be confessed that myprofessional gains could startle no one by theirenormity ; and that if it had not pleased a graciousProvidence to grant me even robust health of body,with an unsuitable activity of mind, I must haveover and over sunk beneath the pressure of theres augusta domi." I have before observed thatat this time, Kensington was, comparatively withits present state, a village. Not one tenement evenwas built upon Camden Hill. All about and beyondLord Holland's house was what is called thecountry ; and in this immediate neighbourhood, aswell as in the lower meadows, about GloucesterLodge, it was equally my habit and delight to stroll,taking with me one day a volume of the letters ofErasmus, Scaliger, Casaubon, and Gipsies an-thiswas at Crompton. After the first year, the evening congregationmade up a little purse of an additional 30/., which was continuedmore or less during my whole stay. The duty was both readingand preaching. With the exception of one family, the individualsof this congregation whom I visited, have ALL paid the debt of nature.Some of them were not only civil and courteous, but encouraging andhospitable. Among the latter, was my amiable friend, PHILIP aisle,Esq , a chancery barrister, who had a delightful little villa atShadwell, in Middlesex, and where my family and self have passedmany happy days. Of late years, fate threw us apart: he, to be theowner and cultivator of a fine domain in Hampshire ; myself, to be therector of a large parish in Marylebone. It was only last year that Iread of his demise. A gentler-hearted, or a more thoroughly gentlemanly,man could scarcely be said to exist. How thoroughly did Iesteem and respect him ! It is tl^e snapping of such cords as thesewhich renders our walk along life's path comparatively unsteady andforlorn.222 PUBLICATIONS.other day, a volume of old English Divinity, scoringthe more striking passages to be afterwards insertedin a common-place book *. I may with truthsay that I have seen many a. . . summer sun roll unperceived away"There are several editions of these Epistles, more or less portable ;but my favourite was an Elzevir 8vo. volume, of the latter half of theseventeenth century. There is, however, a folio edition of 1709, wherethe letters are numbered; and in one of Casaubon's (Ep. Lxvi.) thereis a very lively description, given by the author, of the progress of hisfamous edition of Polybius, finishing at the press a sheet per day;fagging resolutely ah 1 the morning, and spending the evening with hisfriends. In writing to Dom. Bandits (1607) about some copies of hisverses, which the latter had sent to him, and to the chancellor at Paris,Casaubon says, fl I am surprised that you sent no copy to the GREATThanks ; but probably that is gone through a different channel." Headds, " I was not a little gratified with the account of your journey toEngland." Edit. 1709, p. 302. Casaubon's first letter to DE THOUand he wrote a great many is quite delightful. He seeks the acquaintance,and even aspires to the friendship of that great man, in termswhich remind one of a timid and trembling bird essaying to alight uponsome favourite spot of cultivation. In the first letter, the author seemsto hug himself in his BOOK-LUXURY: "itaque e'yxaXv^a.ucM; involveme in mens liberos, et quando public minus passim, mihi certe quo-tidehonor process." It is (I think) in one of Scaliger's letters thatthe sad but too interesting account of Gipsies is given, which I incorporatedin a biographical note about that author in the Introduction tothe Classics, edit. 1808 and which re-appeared in one of the laternumbers of the Museum Critical, derived from the same source asmy own.In a letter from Gerard Vossius to Hugo Grotius, mention is madeof the famous Bleat, the Antwerp printer, who published the hugeAtlas that goes under his name. Vossius wanted some particular workto be executed in a very smart type. Bleu, whose characteristic indolencewas well known, waited for some " new and elegant types fromFrankfort, before he could begin to print, and then he thought he couldgo to work and knock the business off in three weeks." " Sed ubi idtempus advent (growls Vossius) terrorem suum animadvert." Ep. 234.Edit. 1690, London. There is, however, ONE anecdote connected withPUBLICATIONS.in these occupations ; and would sometimes task myselfto vigorous as well as long-continued studies.my love of Classical Epixtolography, which the fullness of my heart willnot allow me to withhold. On my regular annual sojourning at Althorp,I was always in the habit, more or less, of seeking this departmentof reading and always loving to fancy that I could hear Erasmus,Melanchthon, Scaliger, Casaubon, Grotius, and Vossius talk in theirrespective letters. On the year following that (1819), when my eldestson went to India, I happened to stumble upon the following mostmoving, and too apposite, passage of a letter from Gerard J. Vossius tohis son John who had also departed to that country. " Pluribus simonere, et mortar selim, metus ne vicar diffidence. Quamobrem finefacias scribed : sed non deem roland, ut te salvum, ac sospitem, etad Indus ducat, et nobis reduced. Hoc orant quoque mecum, mater,[fratris], stores : nee desisted rare, usquedum, vel te nobis iterumstiteris, vel melior in sedes primus relate. Vale, direct fill, atqueiterum vale, et tertio vale." Amst. 1634. What was the fate of JohnVossius I know not : what was the fate of HIM to whom the similitudeapplies, may be seen on the mural MONUMENT erected within thechancel of Exning Church ! !For the volumes of OLD ENGLISH DUTY, few were of a portable description; but I made up within doors for the out-of-door inconveniences.The following were among my extracts at this time. First, ARCHBISHOPUSHER upon the Sacrament :P. 117. "With what astonishment, then, may we behold our dustand ashes assumed into the undivided unity of God's own person, andadmitted to dwell here as an inmate under the same roof? and yet, inthe midst of these everlasting burnings, the wish to remain unconsumed,and to continue fresh and green for evermore. Yea, howshould not we with Abraham rejoice to see this day, wherein not onlyour nature, in the person of our Lord Jesus, is found to dwell for everin those everlasting burnings ; but, in and by him, our persons also arebrought so nigh thereunto, that God doth set his sanctuary and tabernacleamong us, and dwell with us ; and, which is much more, makethourselves to be the house and the habitation wherein he is pleased todwell by his spirit." Body of Divinity, 1678, folio, p. 429. Again,the same great man upon Trial by Affliction, or Conscientious Conflicts: " God raised a great storm, and when he intends to bring aman to some great work, or to a great deal of joy, he first humble him.The Prince of our Salvation was consecrated by afflictions, and we224 PUBLICATIONS.About this time, too, it was that I fell upon wanton'sHistory of English Poetry, which was at firstmust be conformable unto Christ our head. When the storms arepast, the sea will continue raging for a while; and when you haveturned the wheel round, if you take away your hand, it will go rounditself for a time. So when you are justified by faith, the storm isover yet the roaring of the waves will continue. It will be so withthe children of God : though there be a calm, yet there will be someremainders of a storm," p. 275.I was early taught to respect CHILLINGWORTH, who is rather a dexterousdisputant than an eloquent doctrines : but I felt the force of thefollowing too sensibly not to give it a place among my extracts. It isupon " Works, and not Faith only"Shall we, who have the oracles of God nay, the whole perfect willof God, fully set down in the Holy Scriptures shall we, I say, contentourselves any longer with bare heat-king and knowing of the Word, andno more ? God forbid ! Rather let us utterly avoid this holy templeof God ; let us rather cast his word behind our backs, and be as ignorantof his holy will as ever our forefathers were. Let us contrive any courseto cut off all commerce and intercourse, all communion and acquaintancewith our God, rather than, when we profess to know him, andwilling to allow him all those glorious titles and attributes by which hehath made himself known unto us in his word in our hearts to denyhim, in our lives and practices to dishonour him, and use him despitefully.It were no hard matter, I think, to persuade any but resolvedhardened minds, that fruit is necessary before any admission intoheaven." Chillingworth's Sermons, edit. 1742, p. 22.In regard to " Customs and Ceremonies commanded by the Church,when Scripture is silent," I felt great attention due to the strong goodsense of JACKSON, in the following passage.For, in all cases of this nature, that is, in all cases where the thingitself or action is expressly commanded to be done, and the manner orcircumstance of doing it not so expressly commanded, the authority ofsuperiors must rule our affections or opinions, for the manner or circumstanceof doing what is commanded. Whoever, in this case, hearethnot his lawful pastor or governor, heareth not Christ. Whosoever, inthis case, despise the canons and constitutions of the church whereinhe liveth, despise Christ. Whosoever, in this case, wilfully offendedagainst the canons of the church, is offended in Christ, and puts aPUBLICATIONS.absolutely devoured. Ellis's Specimens oPoetry formed a lighter or second course in theintellectual banquet ; and I now renewed my acquaintancewith Henry's History of England sothat, altogether, I was pretty severely occupied bothabroad and at home.An occasion soon presented itself for applyingthe fruits of this application to a good and profitableobject. The ROYAL INSTITUTION was atthis time in great vogue. The lectures of Sir in his own way; yea, he bars himself out of the kingdomof grace, expressly promised here in my text, to all that are notoffended in Christ, and in more special sort really exhibited to all thatworthily receive this BLESSED SACRAMENT of his body and blood."Works, vol. ii. p. 559. London, 1673, folio.Among SERMONS of rather the olden time (for the copious extractsfrom those of the very olden time, in the Library Companion, maysatisfy the ordinary reader) I was much struck with the followingpassages from Axletree; 1684, folio, part i. 148, and part ii. 6, 83.The first relates to the Death-bed of the Wretched. " And now shouldwe behold a madman on his deathbed, spending his only one remainingminute in execrations ; the paleness of a shroud upon his face, butblood and crimson sins upon his tongue ; the frost of the grave over allhis parts, but a lascivious heat in his discourse ; in fine, one that hadnothing left alive in him but his iniquity : Would not an horror seizeyou at that sight ? And the same frost possess you but to hear him ?And yet his madness is his excuse, and his disease his innocence."The second is illustrative of the text, " Blessed are they that mourn.' 1Wee learn hence the unequitable mistake of those men, who expectand gape for all good things in both lives, quadrigis cestui petitsthey would go to heaven in triumphal chariots, and in smooth and broadways sleep themselves into bliss; have two Paradises; all ease here, andheaven hereafter. No, my brethren, the comfort is promised not tothem that have it here, but to the mourners: take heed least the blessingsyou receive in this life be called ' your good things, or your consolations.'"226 PUBLICATIONS.prey Davy and the Rev. Sydney Smith attractedlarge audiences, of which the first of rank and fashionformed a considerable portion. Albemarle-streetwas regularly crowded with carriages on the days oflecture. The whole had the character of a noondayopera-house. There stood DAVY, every Saturdaymorning, as, the mighty magician of natureas one, to whom the hidden properties of the earthwere developed by some Egeria priestess in hersecret recess. Begirt by his immense voltaic batterywhich was as so many huge cubical links ofwood and metal, forming a vast mysterious chain,and giving to the whole a sort of picturesque andmarvellous character the lecturer called forth itspowers with an air of authority, and in a tone of confidentsuccess. The hardest metals melted like waxbeneath its operation. Copper, silver, gold, platina,became in an instant soluble. The diamond was pulverisedinto charcoal ; and oh I incomparable art, hadcharcoal been re-resolved into the diamond ! Thetremendous force of such an agency struck the learnedwith delight, and the unlearned with mingled raptureand astonishment ; and the theatre or lecture-roomrung with applause as " the mighty master" made hisretreating obeisance. I notice only one of the moreprominent features of these lectures, which, frombeginning to end, embraced a vast field of science,and became the nucleus of many of those subsequentdiscoveries which have ranked their author amongthe greatest philosophers of his time. But for thePUBLICATIONS. 27lecturing-room in the Royal Institution, Sir HumphreyDavy had not sat in the chair of the Presidentof the Royal Society*.I was at Paris in the summer of 1820, when the news of the deathof Sir Joseph Banks reached that capital, where Sir Humphrey Davywas then resident. The late Earl and Lady Spencer were then occupyingthe greater part of the Hotel de I'Ernpire, in the Rue artois, on theirreturn from Italy, when, in their presence, the subject of Sir Joseph'ssuccessor was discussed. Sir Humphrey himself was decided and urgentfor the succession of LORD SPENCER; and had not, I verily believe, theslightest expectation, or even notion, that HE himself was eventually tobe the honoured individual in question. Lord Spencer, both abroad andat home, frequently, in my hearing, disclaimed all pretensions to thatdistinction on the ground of his not being a scientific man : observingthat, " the chair ought to be occupied by Sir Humphrey, and no other."The result is well known ; or, such as desire to have information, haveonly to open the instructive pages of Dr. Paris' Life of that great philosophersSUCH Sir Humphrey Davy must undoubtedly be considered.When a member of the Royal Society, I used to make a point of attendingthe Valerian anniversary oration, delivered by the president, partlyin praise of defunct members of eminence ; and I am free to confessthat I have never heard more original and more beautiful ideas, clothedin more forcible language, than those which were delivered from thechair of the president ; and this, more than once, or twice, or thrice.Among those who were intimate with Sir Humphrey, and whosesympathising pursuits help to tie the knot of intimacy more tightly, itwas said, that no man loved SCIENCE more intensely, and more affectionately,for its own sake, than did HE ; and that his marriage with awidow of large income, and his introduction into the highest circles ofsociety, never, for one moment, weakened his attachment or slackenedhis ardour in those pursuits upon which, exclusively, he must at hearthave been convinced that his reputation would become as permanent asimmovable. Wisely did he act under this persuasion, although, to indifferentobservers it might sometimes seem that he affected the airs ofa man of the beau monde, and would rather be considered fashionablethan philosophical. I know, indeed, that among some of the scientificfraternity this was talked of, if not admitted. But it was as a vapouracross the sun's disc : as you looked, it melted away. It was not for amind like Davy's to seek gratification among the lisping fops and designingaspirants of the day. He would necessarily leave such a moniesPUBLICATIONS.The effect produced by Sir Humphrey Davy, inthe theatre or lecture-room of the Royal Institution,was equalled, both in the number of auditors andwarmth of applause, by that produced by the Rev.Sydney Smith ; at that time considered the mostpopular preacher in London, and one of the mostpowerful contributors to the Edinburgh Review.He took for his subject MORAL PHILOSOPHY asubject which, on first feeling, should seem to composethe muscles into unbending rigidity, and toforbid the exuberance of mirth. Paley had establisheda fame, which alike defied rivalry and diminution,by a work under that express title, andwritten, from beginning to end, in a strain of gravityand the closest reasoning. But under the plastichands of Mr. Smith, this subject was gilded byendless varieties. The humours, caprices, and folliesof mankind were touched and treated with infinitepower and effect ; and now and then the lecturerwould come down with a magnificently eloquentpassage, or period, which shewed the vigourgrey breed to crawl on, in their chrysalis-state while it was for HIM tofly upwards on his wings of gold, and disport in the sun beam of heaven !Take him fc for all in all," he was our greatest philosopher since thetime of NEWTON. There is no spot in the civilised world but what hasrung with his praise. What attic DAYS as well as NIGHTS were those,during the Christmas recesses at Althorp, when Davy and Wollastonwere enlightening the circle by science, as Burney and Elmsly wereby classical, Mackintosh by literary, and ****** by historical, information! And what ACCESSORIES, both living and mute, to renderthe picture complete !PUBLICATIONS. 229of his conception, and the felicity of his style, andwhich could not fail to electrify the audience *.It is, however, due to ONE presiding or influentialperson, connected with the Royal Institution, to say,that it was mainly owing to his exertions and hisjudgment that the lecturers just mentioned cameforward with such splendid success before the public.I necessarily allude to the late SIR THOMASBERNARD, Bart., who, of all men with whom I wasever acquainted, had the happiest tact in the mairemember being present at a very diverting, shrewd, and eloquentlecture delivered by Mr. Sydney Smith on " Female Education,"which, a few months afterwards, I read, totidem verbis, in one of thenumbers of the Edinburgh Review; and it read as well as it washeard. A rare compliment but which, I fear, will not induce its authorto resume his pen in that popular critical journal. The pen, like thesword, may become rusty by quiescence j or is " Mr. Tyson's speech onthe Reform Bill" to be considered as " the winding-up of die concern?" Mr. Smith always writes like a man of fearless independentspirit of a moral courage, which disdains compromise, and will truckleto no hollow truce. He has evinced consistency and principle, whichare to be considered as cardinal virtues " in these degenerate days."Few men, however, have hit harder than the Rev. Mr. Smith in histime. Crichton himself could not have managed his rapier with greaterdexterity as his reviews upon Methodism and Roman Catholic Emancipation,in the journal just mentioned, unequivocally prove ; and Iam free to confess, that I think these reviews did GOOD in their day :although, in regard to the former topic, now that the " albescens capillus"(of Horace) hath quieted the temperament, and caused theheart's blood to flow less hotly, I incline to believe, that if they werere written , they would be largely and advantageously modifiedSingula de nobis anrii prsdantur euntes ;Eripuere jocose" &c.I am among those who consider Mr. Smith's sermons to be among themost original, terse, and in many places eloquent, in our language ;and I felt equal pride and pleasure in embodying two of them in awork which will be noticed in its chronological order.230 PUBLICATIONSengagement of bodies corporate divested of the maceand the fur gown. It is true, the honour of theestablishment of the Institution itself may, by some,be supposed to be shared by COUNT RUMFORD * ;but if these two gentlemen should both " divide thecrown" on this point, it is certain that Sir Thomas(then Mr.) was the great stirring and influentialmember of the committees, and that no importantmeasure was thought of being carried into effectwithout his concurrence and guidance. Under thesecircumstances, I became acquainted with Sir Thos.Bernard through the introduction of his brother-in-law,the Rev. Mr. King, who, in the warmth ofThe Earl of Winchilsea, the Bishop of Durham, and Mr. Bernardwere, in fact, the founders of the ROYAL Institution in 1799, of whichthe original object was " for bettering the condition of the poor." Thecharter was drawn up by Mr. Bernard in the month of April in thesame year. See Mr. Baker's Sir T. Bernard, 1819, 8vo. pp. 45, 46.But as Count Rumford left England for good in 1802, the whole machineryof the Institution may be said to have been under the directionof Sir Thomas Bernard, who did not become a baronet till 1810. TheEarl of Winchilsea was the first president.t See pp. 167-68, ante. Of SIR THOMAS BERNARD, a brief outline,even on the score of gratitude, may be here reasonably expected. Hehad very considerable attainments was a very good, as well as a gentlemanly,man of business : clear-headed in conception, prompt in execution,and I believe that his heart was as benevolent as his head wasstrong. There are those who might have thought otherwise, and thathis extraordinary efforts in behalf of the POOR for at one time he maybesaid to have had half of the poor in the metropolis nestling underthe wings of his patronage were the effect of mere personal vanity andunsuitable restlessness of spirit. And what then ? " Personal vanity "should be made of " sterner stuff" than this. If Sir Thomas Bernardwas hence a vain man, so was Pitt as a statesman and Howard as aphilanthropist. Motives are always of a mixed nature ; and there isPUBLICATIONS. 231private friendship, thought that I might succeed asalecturer at the Royal Institution. I made no hesi-only ONE POWER, * f to whom all hearts are open, and from whom nosecrets are hid," which knoweth the prevalent quality of such motives.Sir Thomas Bernard did much and great good as a philanthropist. Ineasy circumstances, bred up to the bar from which profession he hadthe sense and happiness to retire, after twenty years' labour had nettedhim a sufficiency he resolved to devote the approaching autumn oflife to objects of real practical utility, and he made BETTERING THECONDITION OF THE POOR one of those most essential objects. Howardexplored dungeons. Sir Thomas visited drawing-rooms, to lay themunder contribution for the support of his avowed darling object. Inshort, benevolence may be said to have become fashionable under hisinfluence. Great efforts, on all sides, were made, and societies andestablishments out of number sprung up to (f bless our victuals withincrease, and to satisfy our poor with bread." Seasons of rigorousseverity were met, and in a manner vanquished. Rumford with hissoup, and Bernard with his societies, kept the cold "out of doors" asmuch as possible, and furnished the " rich man's table" with abundanceof " crams," which were largely distributed to the poor.His publications connected with the societies were at once numerousand incessant. Nothing escaped his notice. A foe to irreligion andthe slave-trade the associate of Bishop Barrington and of Wilberforcehe strove heart and soul to disseminate the blessings of Christianityand of freedom. With a ready pen, his printed addresses, which mightreach thousands to whom he could personally never be known schools,chapels, hospitals, dispensaries, infirmaries to how MANY of these washe known by his exertions and his liberal patronage ! The blind, thefevered, the destitute all became objects of his care. And what hetouched he improved. As treasurer of the Foundling Hospital, thatinstitution attained a healthy tone and vigour such as it had neverbefore experienced. Both preachers and household officers were underhis regulation. I will give but one specimen of his powers as a writeron these topics, which I take from his address respecting the establishmentof a Free Chapel in West Street, St. Giles's in the heart of asmuch depravity and destitution as the "by-ways" of London contain.The address was published in 1801.It may appear to future ages an inexplicable enigma, that the social /benevolence ,and religious energy of this country should have beenentirely exhausted in missions to distant and unknown countries, while23-2 PUBLICATIONS. [Lectures.nation about the choice of subject. ENGLISH Literaturehad been, from earliest manhood, the para-thecentre of our metropolis remained uncultivated and forgotten ; andthe spring from which religion and virtue, or vice and iniquity, mustflow through a peopled land, was neglected and deserted. Regardingthe established Church of this country as the most pure and unmixedof all the existing sects of Christianity, and being really and conscientiouslyattached to it, it is my most anxious wish that every scandaland evil should be removed; and that, in this respect, the Church ofEngland should not only have as much, but should possess more merit,in earnestly inviting the poor to hear the Gospel preached to them, thanthe Methodists, the Dissenters, or any other of our Christian and Protestantbrethren.To those who view with a fixed and attentive eye the awful seriesof events which is now (1801) desolating and, we may hope, at thesame time reforming the Christian world, much important observationwill occur on the present subject. It is written in the recent Historyof Europe, it is inscribed in the summary of the preceding ten years,that there is no protection against the calamities which are now layingwaste our quarter of the globe, except that purity of faith and integrityof life which are to be derived from the vivifying influence of religion ;extending, like the solar ray, to every class of our fellow-subjects, andoperating in the moral amendment of the great mass of the people.I venture to submit to those, from whom only such a measure canproperly originate, the expediency of providing some remedy for thisnational evil. What I have to suggest may be considered as a missionfor the instruction and conversion of our neglected fellow-creatures,THE PAGAN INHABITANTS IN THE CENTRE OF LONDON. I should bevery far from soliciting subscriptions for the support of the pettyChapel of St. Giles's, whatever its funds might be. I consider that asof little use or service, unless as the first in number and order of manysuch houses of prayer and instruction, which our duty to our fellow-subjectsand the circumstances of the metropolis require. It may standprior in time, but I flatter myself it will be the last in magnitude andconsequence, of many Free Chapels, which will eventually be openedfor the benefit of the poor of. the metropolis."Enough upon these topics. Touch we now upon that of the LIT-termHumanities. Sir Thomas Bernard, as an author in the usualsense, will be known by a very ingenious Essay, called An HistoricalView of Christianity, 1807, 4to. and by the Comforts of Old Age,f.n-ttirets.'] PUBLICATIONS. 233mount object of my studies. What a wide and variedfield did it comprehend! Divinity, poetry, ethics,of which latter work several editions have been published, and it isnow, I believe, under the process of a fifth. The " Historical View "contained " Select Passages from Scripture" with a " Commentaryfrom Gibbon, Bolinybroke, and Voltaire" in attestation of the worthand solidity of Christianity. The thought is ingenious enough ; but theessay was somewhat roughly handled in the Edinburgh Review ;said to be " done" by a friend. The Director, 1807, 8vo. 2 vols., wasa collection of essays of his planning and part execution ; but as I hada material share in this publication, I shall bring it under the reader'snotice in a following page. The ARTS were also greatly indebted toSir Thomas Bernard, for to him we owe the establishment of theBRITISH INSTITUTION, on a plan so entirely delightful and profitable(especially that part of it which makes us acquainted every spring withthe productions of the ancient masters), that every tongue and pen mustadmit its value. The ALFRED is also another of his institutions for theassemblage of gentlemen, and the convenience of reasonable as well asexcellent dinners. The Athenaeum, the United Service, and the Travellers'Clubs have doubtless thrown the Alfred into comparative shade,but it could once boast of names amongst its members (and may still)of the highest celebrity.Sir Thomas Bernard was one of the very warmest supporters, as wellas founders, of the JENNERIAN SOCIETY. I have before (p. 199) mademention of his intimacy with the illustrious Jenner, with whom I wasin the frequent habit of meeting him at dinner. His patronage ofDr. BELL is well , known. The Madras System of Education was ahobby-horse which I thought he rode to excess ; and no man, on thescore of " quantum meruit" ever was mere fortunate than the Scotchschoolmaster, who ended his days as prebendary of Westminster andmaster of Overborne Hospital leaving behind a fortune running closelyupon 200,000. But his Aberdeen legacy was a noble one. I neverscrupled the freely imparting my own sentiments to Sir T. Bernardupon the respective merits of the Lancaster and Bell systems. I thenthought, as I have always since thought, that too little was done forthe former, and too much for the latter who, in fact, only transplantedthe flower, growing wild upon the sands of Madras, to the more congenialsoil of this country. Personally, Dr. Bell seemed to me to be"' puffed up" with his knowledge, such as it was. In society he wasdry and sometimes drowsy. His introduction to Sir Thomas Bernard234 PUBLICATIONS. [Lectures.tales, romances, were all enclosed within its circle.I made a rough sketch of its leading features, andhaving submitted them to Sir Thomas, it was agreedthat I was to be announced in the next bulletinfrom head-quarters. The terms were liberal ; buthad they been less advantageous, my zeal or ambitionwould have blinded me to their inadequacy.I had thus time to collect and arrange my materialsbefore the announcement took place. Butall along I was fearful of the earlier or introductoryLectures not knowing by what magical process Icould make such names as Gildas, Ennius, theSaxon Chronicle, Ingulf, and William of Salisbury(some of our earlier historians) acceptable tothe ears of a polished and fashionable audience.However, I had great helps in many able works ;and in poetry, Wanton, Ellis, and Ritson, were mygrand authorities. At length the day arrived notwithout emotions which, for one short moment, assumedthe character of perturbation. And this, noton account of a large audience, but from the occupationof an arena which had been filled by such Lecturersas the two just described. However, my materialswere before me, and I was resolved to gluemy attention to them, so as to commit as few errorswas a fortunate one for him ; it obtained him the notice and patronageof the Bishop of Durham, who rewarded him with the mastership ofOverborne Hospital. At this time, the names of Bell and Lancasterwere absolutely as those of opposite feuds ; but, as before, the Lancastriangot worsted in the end. *A /7/f/vs.] PUBLICATIONS. 235as possible. The clock told the hour of two thelittle door was opened and I made my obeisance toan audience of some five hundred ladies and gentlemen.The contrast, from a small dark room, to oneof large size and splendour, produced a momentaryhesitation. However, the building is well constructedfor sound and in a few minutes I got on with theperfect conviction of at least being heard. I delivered,in the whole, twenty-eight Lectures, at threedifferent seasons ; and if I might venture to fix, atthis distance of time, upon those which seemed tohave greater attractions than others, they were thethree Lectures upon Ballad Poetry, from the timeof Chaucer to Cowper ; upon which I receivedmany compliments from the late Lady Crewe, SirHarry Englefield, and the late Bishop of Durham*.There was, about this time, a sort of hue and cry(set going by the author of the Pursuits of Litera-amongthe prime helps to the composition of these Lectures onBallad Poetry, was the ' ' Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border" publishedunder the fascinating editorship of the late Sir Walter Scott, first printedin 1802, 2 vols. Bvo., and much enlarged in 1803, 3 vols. 8vo. Thefirst is both a rare and beautiful production ; but the second furnishesmore copious materials for the student and antiquary. Absorbed in thereputation of this delightful work, even on the score of its notes, has perhapslong been in the blaze of that resulting from the Editor's originalproductions, yet I know of no work of its kind which comes within therange of competition with it. Genius may be seen in notes as well as intext. I recommend every young man, of any pretension to cultivatedtaste, to assign to these volumes a choice place in his library. They willkindle not less the love of country than of kind. Some of the balladsare exquisite, and above all praise : but the Editor, whenever an openingserves, gives evidence of being endued with no small portion of the inspirationwith which the originals are stamped.236 PUBLICATIONS. [Lectures.ture) against black-letter reading ; and the loversand abettors of that species of reading were held uptosomething like public ridicule or contempt. Asapretty severe digger in such a soil, I felt bound tovindicate its value ; and when the course of my Lecturesbrought me to the commencement of the sixteenthcentury, I addressed my audience in the followingterms, as a preliminary portion of the lecture :Certainly no reflecting human being who has had the advantage ofa classical education, and who is alive to the numberless intellectualbeauties which mark the sixteenth century, will allow his enthusiasm toabate, or his judgment to be warped, by the shallow hypercriticismswhich have been advanced against THIS SPECIES OF STUDY. On thecontrary, if there be greater praise in forming a beautiful statue frombrittle or'untractable materials or if greater ingenuity be shewn inlayinga broad and safe foundation where the winds and the waves opposethen, surely, more merit is due to that person who, from appearancesso generally forbidding, moulds into shape, and kindles into life,what before had appeared deformed and inanimate. It is a feeling likethis which has stimulated some of our best critics, and given rise tosome of the ablest dissertations in our language, whether in poetry or intheology."But the black-lettered Student* if he must be so denominated laysclaim to merit of a higher class than that of being only the pioneer oflearning to cut away brambles and fences, and make room for a mereskirmishing body of troops. If he be not the discoverer of absolute andhitherto unknown merit, he oftentimes points out to us how a hint, or asentiment, of one writer has been expanded into imagery, or strengthenedinto a maxim by another : he shews us the slender and subtle materialsof others, with which later poets and writers have built up a precariousreputation ; who, coming forward in the world with the boasting pretensionsof originality, have been detected in their chicaneries, andhurled from the throne which they had usurped. Or, if the reader ofI am much pleased with the following passage of a letter from thelate Bishop of Hereford to Mr. Dove the printer, who was kind enoughto make me a present of the letter. The Bishop writes thus : " Whythe old firm and BLACK LETTER should be superseded, I know not : butthat, within some few late years, every thing since 1762 is to be setaside." Wanton Coll. May 18, 1825.L V//,/Y>.S>.] PUBLICATIONS. 237past ages meet not with instances of such gross deception, he shews ushow later authors of celebrity have transplanted flowers from an ancientsoil to expand and to bloom in the warmer rays of their own superiorgenius : how Shakspeare has borrowed from Chroniclers and Romancers,Spenser from Tasso, Milton from Du Barras, Dryden from Chaucer,and Sterne from Burton.These, and many other similar pursuits, occupy the lover of theancient literature of his country and, in truth, it is this feeling andthese pursuits which are the parent of more than half the intellectualdelights that we enjoy : as the historian is hence influenced to examinethe records of former times, that his own pages may hereafter be readwith that improvement which a love of truth can never fail to impart.Who is insensible to the advantages which are to be derived from thehistorical pages of Clarendon, Rapin, Carte, Tyrrel, Tindal, Robertson,and Hume ? Shut up the volumes of Ingulph, M. Paris, W. Salisbury,Froissart, Fabian, Hall, Holinshed, and Grafton, and you cut offat once the source of almost all the advantages derivable from theselater writers. Then, again, in poetry: why do we feel such frequenttransport in the perusal of Spenser, of Shakspeare, and of Milton ? Itis because the minds of those great men had been stored by a perusal ofsome of the most celebrated productions of their predecessors. Andeven now, to what sources are we remotely indebted for that certaincharm which we feel in the chivalrous language, gothic scenery, andromantic colouring, of the two great modern poems of the day. To thespirit of the ancient legends, chronicles, and romances, may in part beattributed the fire and fancy which seem to have so strongly animated thefeelings and marked the diction of the author of THE LAY and Marion.Enough has probably been said upon the utility and importance ofresearches into ancient literature, and in commendation of a pursuit fromwhich, it is sincerely to be hoped, no rational and spirited student willbe deterred by any appellation, however technical or pointed. Virtuousindustry will live down all the calumnies which assail it : and he mustpossess very airy and fantastic notions of human life who imagines thathe can walk from the cradle to the grave ridiculed by ignorance, andaspersed by calumny. LITERATURE, like TRUTH, is GREAT, and WILLPREVAIL."I yet preserve, with the loss or misplacing of onlytwo, the whole of the Lectures delivered at theRoyal Institution ; of which one course, commencingwith the Art of Printing, was redelivered at the238 PUBLICATIONS. \ Lectures.London Institution, in Finsbury-square, in the year1823*.Ten, only, of the Lectures above specified, were delivered by meatthe London Institution, in the spring of the year 1823. The first ofthese related to the " Origin and Influence of the Art of Printing uponthe Literature of Europe." My excellent friend, Mr. George Hibbert,then resident in Portland-place, and in possession of a library than whichvery few finer could be boasted of in London, was so kind as to furnishme with a carriage full of his earlier printed volumes, to shew to myauditors, by way of illustration of the perfection of the art of earlyprinting. A sight of the interiors of these volumes produced a greateffect which, indeed, it might well do upon an auditory of the gravestphlegm. I was always much struck with the number of female Quakersin those audiences ; and still more so with the evident marks of satisfactionwhich the specimens of the ballad-poetry produced upon them.The lecture-room of the London Institution is a noble one, and thelibrary is in all respects a worthy pendant. It is one hundred feet inlength ; and boasts, among the past curators of its treasurers, the namesof PORSON and MALTBY. What a start or pulsation was there at theprojecting of this establishment! How the shares flew about, withshuttlecock-like nimbleness, from one quarter to another from this sideto that! The city character was stamped upon every stage of the proceedingsand premium and per centage seemed to be engrained in itsvery nature. Will Mr. Thomson, one of the present librarians anantiquary, a herald, and an illuminator ever give us an account of thedepredations and peculations of the library ? Such a furtive historywould not only be amusing, but might operate beneficially, by way ofwarning, to others who possess the organ offurtivity.But I should be ungrateful to close this account, however brief, of theLondon Institution, without express mention made of one of its mostactive, intelligent, and commendable members, W. H. Pepys, Esq. Tosay that he " stood my special good friend" in the matter of the lectures,scarcely amounts to anything beyond the declaration of an interestedparty ; but to add how much and ardently he always has the interest ofthis Institution at heart how constant his attendance how useful hisexertions and how salutary his counsel, is only to say what is the realtruth of the case. And all this, perhaps, only the reflex of his exertionsin higher quarters in the council of the Royal Society, where he shoneand shines as a lover and patron of science as the friend of Davy,Hatchettt, Children, Roget, Daniel, and Griffiths. Most delightful alsolectures'] PUBLICATIONS.It may possibly be gratifying to the reader, or, atany rate, it cannot be considered irrelevant to thematter of these pages, if I submit the heads of thetwenty-eight Lectures which were delivered " ONTHE RISE AND PROGRESS OF ENGLISH LITERATURE."LECTURE I. Introductory. Dr. Johnson ; Tyr-white; Thomas Wanton ; Dr. Henry ; Ellis andRitson : writers who have treated, more or less, ofthe subject under consideration.LECTURE II. Remarks on the Aboriginal Inhabitants,and state of civilization and literature, inthis country, previously to the invasion of the Romans.Druidical Learning.LECTURE III. State of Learning in Great Britainfrom the Roman to the Saxon Invasion.LECTURE IV. Progress of Literature in Greatis it to see a man, as one sees Mr. Pepys, blending with these philosophicpursuits the lighter studies with which the volumes of IsaacWalton and others of this sort of reading furnish him. Pleasant it isto see him rising from the perusal of the experiments of Cavendish, totake water at the Old Swan stairs, and glide upon the scarcely ruffledbosom of the Thames, with an uncut first Angler in one hand, and arod of exquisitely sensitive construction in the other. The last rays ofa setting sun light him home to the enjoyment of his well-earnedbooty ! . . .The bright eyed perch, with fins of Tyrian dye ;The silver eel, in shining volumes roll'd ;The yellow carp, in scales be-dropt with gold ;Swift trouts, diversified with crimson stains ;And pikes, the tyrants of the wat'ry plains."Windsor Forest.But what " philosophy" can reconcile a man to the eating of a (C PIKE ?"240 PUBLICATIONS [Lectures.Britain during the government of the Saxons. Biographicalaccount of Learned Men before the reignof AlfredLECTURE V. Reign and Character of Alfred.LECTURE VI. Progress of Civilization and Literaturein Great Britain from the death of Alfred tothe invasion of William the Conqueror. Charactersof Canute, Edward the Confessor, and Harold.LECTURE VII. The reign of William. Influenceof Norman Literature. High Character of William.Eminent Literary Men in Great Britain during theEleventh Century. Ingulf, Lanfranc, Anselm. TheSaxon Chronicle.LECTURE VIII. Romance and Minstrelsy. Theirorigin, and effect upon the Literature of Europe andof Great Britain.LECTURE IX. Continuation of Remarks on Romanceand Minstrelsy. Account of the more popularRomances of the 12th, 13th, and 14th Centuries,with specimens. Influence of the Welch and ScottishLanguages during this period. Writers who havetreated on Romance and Minstrelsy.LECTURE X. General Review of the Literatureof Great Britain previously to the reign of Edw. III.Eminent Writers in the 12th and 13th Centuries.Progress of Poetry during that period.LECTURE XI. Literature of the 13th and 14thCenturies. Anecdotes and Specimens illustrativeof this subject. Robert de Brune, Adam Davie,Barbour, Hoccleve, Hidden.Lectures'] PUBLICATIONS. 24 1LECTURE XII. Characters of Edward III. andQueen Philippa. Anecdotes from Froissart. TheBlack Prince. Froissart his Life and Writings.Specimens of the latter. His Character as an Historian.Editions of his Works. Mr. Johnes's translation.LECTURE XIII. Continuation of Writers in the14th Century. Richard Rolle specimens of hisprincipal poem, " the Price of Conscience." LaurenceMinot specimens of his poetry. The Lifeand Writings of Sir John Mandeville extractsfrom his Travels. Robert Langland specimens ofhis celebrated poem, called " The Visions of PiercePloughman." Originality and excellence of thatwork. " The Creed of Pierce Ploughman." Authorof this singular work unknown.LECTURE XIV. Chaucer. Specimens of hisPoetry. His high character as a poet.LECTURE XV. John Lydgate specimens of hispoetry. List of his works.LECTURE XVI. The Poetry of Gower. Originof Ballad Poetry. Its influence during the middleand later centuries. Specimens.LECTURE XVII. Ballad Poetry continued. Specimensof later Ballad Poetry.LECTURE XVIII The Ballad Poetry of Scotlandwith specimens.LECTURE XIX John Wickliffe. His Life andWritings. Character. Specimens of his Translation242 PUBLICATIONS. [Lectures.of the Bible *. William of Wykeham. His publicInstitutions. Beneficial effects of them to the causeThere are few things which have afforded me a more sincere gratificationthan the researches now set on foot in respect to the RELIQUIAEWYCLIFFIAN^. That many things are received as his, of which assuredlyhe was not the author, is, I think, evident upon a dispassionateconsideration. His was a sort of " no-men rectum " for all biblical anddevotional pieces of the age. That he was a great, if not a wonderfulman, considering the general darkness of the elements through which hepiloted his tempest-beaten bark, is most certain. Had he lived a centurylater, the PRESS might have been the propagator at once of his doctrinesand his fame ; but in the prevailing " darkness" of which I speak,he held, vigorously and unflinchingly, the torch of truth in his hand, " tobe a light to lighten" the benighted portions of this and other kingdoms.A great part of his history is necessarily involved in obscurity ; butthe biographical manual of Mr. Le Bas, and the more elaborate Biographyof Mr. Vaughan, are delightful helps to instruct us in the moreinteresting parts of it.Two things are moss gratifying to subjoin. The one, a collation ofthe Wycliffe MSS. in the library of Trinity College, Dublin, by no meanor unpractised hand, which appears in a recent number of the BritishMagazine to be continued; the other, a projected edition of WycliffeBIBLE from two of the most ancient and valuable MSS. extant.These MSS. are printed side by side, as text, with running notes, exhibitingvariations of other MSS. The editors are the Rev. I. Marshalland Sir Frederick Madden, both of the British Museum ; names, whichbespeak, and are sure to command, success. But will these gentlemenendure or forgive a suggestion from me ? Is it tante to print the textof two MSS. side by side only ? To the public, this will be consideredonly as a matter of critical nicety, about which they will be generallyindifferent. Might not this opportunity be seized, of printing whatthese learned editors conceive, upon the whole, to be the better of thesetwo MSS. in one column the version of Coverdale from the Bible of1535, in another column ; and that of the Bible of James I., in 1611,in a third column : and thus, you have the three parent streams of thesacred text in our own language, running in parallel lines. If Wycliffe'stext be alone printed, it will be a sealed book " to the many." Associateit with the valuable texts above specified, and you make the volume atonce popular and instructive. As an illustration of the progress of ourlanguage alone, such a book ought to be received with acclamation./,'.7/f/r.s\] PUBLICATIONS.of Literature in Great Britain. Character of thateminent Prelate. Summary review of the progressof English Literature during the 14th century.LECTURE XX. Origin of Printing. Its influenceon Literature and Religion. William Caxton, thefirst English printer. Specimens of his composition.LECTURE XXI. Reign of Henry VIII. DeanColet, Cardinal Wolsey, Bishop Fisher. Influenceof the Reformation upon Literature. Luther. Latimer.LECTURE XXII. Character of Sir Thomas More.Specimens of his works. John Leland.LECTURE XXIII. Poetry of the reign ofHenry VIII. John Skelton. Sir Thomas Wyatt.Earl of Surrey. Specimens of their works. Riseof the English Drama.LECTURE XXIV. Importance of preserving NationalLiterature. Publications of the Primer andthe Book of Common Prayer. John Bale. Dr.Wilson's Treatise of Rhetoric. William Lily, theGrammarian. Account of Roger Ascham. Specimens.LECTURE XXV. The reign of Elizabeth. Hercharacter in a private and literary point of view.Her character as a Sovereign. Influence of bothupon the Literature of the age. Anecdotes relatingto the Queen.LECTURE XXVI. Poetry of the reign of Elizabeth.The Mirror for Magistrates. Paradise ofDainty Devices with specimens. Sir Philip Side2*J44 PUBLICATIONS. [Lectures.ney. Gascoigne. Marlowe. Somerville. Drayton.Harrington.LECTURE XXVII* John Fox. His Book ofMartyrs. Critical analysis of that celebrated work,Holinshed the historian,LECTURE XXVIII. English translations of AncientClassical Authors. Sir Walter Raleigh. Hischaracter as a poet, author, and statesman. Hismartyrdom and high hearing on the scaffold.Such is the outline of those Lectures which I deliveredat the Royal Institution, in the years 1806,1807, an( l 1808. It must be admitted that such anoutline comprehends a great space or period of timein the annals of our indigenous literature ; and thatthe putting together of the materials, to which theseveral heads of these Lectures point, could be awork of no very trivial or inconsiderate toil. Mostcertainly I " laboured hard in my vocation." Theextracts or specimens of the several authors referredto, helped to lighten my labour, and certainly relievedthe didactic gravity of an hour's address. Thechief point which I hoped to carry, was this : to impressupon my audience a pretty correct notion ofthe progress of our literature both in poetry and inprose ; and so far as my performance was of a mixedcharacter, it had the advantage of the extensiveworks of Wanton, Ellis, and Burnett, which are exclusive: the first two, to poetry the second, toprose. All these Lectures, some in a less amputatedstate than others and two or three yet missingPUBLICATIONS. 2 IT)are lying quietly by the side of me possibly to beone day consolidated into a comely octavo volume*,of which the superintendence may be (as the educationof his children was to Gil Bias) " the occupationand amusement of later years ;" when theleaves of autumn shall have all taken their departure,and each branch of the tree be rendered hoar by thefrost of winter.I must not conclude this account of the Lecturesof the Royal Institution, or fold up the muster-rollof the eminent Lecturers who were there engaged,without due and honourable notice of PROFESSORSCrown and CROTCH : the former of Public Oratory,the latter of Music, at the University of Oxford.The first lectured upon Poetry 't, the second uponNot very long ago I was induced to offer the MS. of these lecturesto a great calculating bibliopolistic house in the city, on the speculationof its being likely to succeed in a printed form. Calculation replied " No."The altered character of the times, and that of the present readingportion of the public, might have led to the anticipation of such a reply :but in another quarter, less calculating, there may be a response of amore encouraging nature.t With Professor Crowe, of New College, I had the pleasure of along rather than of an intimate acquaintance: but I saw and knewenough of him to assure me of the warmth of his heart and the attainmentsof his head, as well as of the extreme simplicity of his mannersand address. Perhaps no man who wore the academic gown so longand so constantly, ever suffered so little of the rust of a rural life to beworn off. I used to think him at Oxford, especially in presenting todegrees, or in any rostrum exhibition, a fine old Roman in his way :the broad Winchester style of pronouncing the a giving great and goodeffect to his harangues. The Public Orator was a good Latinist ; andsome of his occasional sermons at St. Mary's, in that language, had adecidedly popular effect. He was, of all men, one of the most original246 PUBLICATIONS.Music. They each did honour, to the Institution,and to the crowded audiences by which their coursesof Lectures were attended. At this moment I seeDr. Crotch expatiating upon the beauties, while hisflying fingers" give a delightful practical proof ofin his habits and modes of expression ; and of a spirit so meek andgentle, that he would not knowingly tread upon the meanest insect.But the Public Orator was a POET of no mean calibre. His poem onLewesdon Hill can never be read but with admiration and delight. Hehad strong feelings and lofty conceptions about poetry ; and his lecturesupon that subject,, at the Royal Institution, although many of them weretoo crudely planned and too hastily put together, shewed him to be amaster of his subject. The first, upon Hebrew poetry, was admirablygot up, and most effectively delivered.The Public^Orator had been a " Liberty Boy" in his way. When thetide of jacobins, during the early stages of the French revolution, ranstrong and high, William Crowe was now and then disposed to smiteWilliam Pitt in a very rude manner : and once said, " If he could getno one else to cut off his head, he'd try and dot himself" He wasmuch thought of, and sought after, about this time : but he hated displayof any kind, and the " digits monstrari" was an abhorrence to him.Once, in a large circle, at New College, it was expected that he wouldshew off before some strangers who were tacitly invited " to meet theauthor of Lewesdon Hill." Crowe sat silent a long time. It was insummer, and very hot. At last, unbuttoning nearly the whole of hiswaistcoat, and placing his arm within, and balancing himself in the see-sawaction of his chair, the poet, looking out on the lawn, exclaimed,Lud } lud, how green the grass looks !" These were the only wordswhich escaped him during the symposium, tn the early revolutionarywar with France, and when things were looking dark and disastroustowards the allies, the Public Orator would often thunder forth his predictionsof disaster ; and once, it is said, he carried this feeling so far inthe pulpit, as to quote the following verse of Virgil by way of a pun :k< Saepe ministry cava prae dixit ab alice COBNIX."I remember the great delight manifested by the late Dean of Canterburywhen I mentioned this anecdote at his table. William Crowe wasPublic Orator of the University fortyfive years.PUBLICATIONS. '247the effect, of the " harmonious blacksmith of Antwerp."To mention the Lectures of Mr. WOOD onPerspective is only to say how a dry and apparentlyexclusive subject may be made generally intelligibleand instructive to the meanest capacity. The Rev.Mr. HEWLETT'S Lectures on the Belles Lettres alwaysevinced the correct taste and sound judgment of thelecturer. They were listened to with promptitude,and remembered with profit.But one of the principal features attached to theRoyal Institution Lectures in 1807> was the serious,and at one time perilous, illness of Sir HumphreyDavy, towards the latter end of the year. This illness,for the particulars of which I refer to Dr.Paris's Life of Sir Humphrey, arose in consequenceof excess of intellectual labour in the prosecution ofhis scientific researches. The mind had, after manyvigorous and gallant efforts of resistance, sunk underbodily exhaustion ; and a " little cloud" seemed tobe gathering in the horizon to alarm the fondness offriends, and to darken the hopes of the country.Medical skill and unremitting medical attendancewere called in to watch and to divert the progressof a disorder that threatened in a short time the lifeof the sufferer : and when the names of Bailie,Barrington, and Franks, are mentioned, it will benecessarily conceded that more effectual aids couldnot have been resorted to.Towards the close of the year, after many weeksof acute suffering, a favourable turn in the disorder248 PUBLICATIONS.Xwas manifest ; and ultimate, although remote, convalescencewas confidently calculated upon. Atthis crisis, early in December, it fell to my lot tomake this announcement to the anxious circles whichfrequented the lecture-room ; which was done in thefollowing manner, as may he collected from Dr.Paris's biography*.Before I solicit your attention to the opening of those lectureswhich I shall have the honour of delivering in the course of the season,permit me to trespass upon it for a few minutes, hy stating the peculiarcircumstances under which this Institution is again opened, and how itcomes to pass that it has fallen to me, rather than to a more deservinglecturer, to be the first to address you. The managers have requestedme to impart to you that intelligence, which no one who is alive to thebest feelings of human nature can hear without mixed emotions ofsorrow and delight.Mr. Davy, whose frequent and powerful addresses from this place,supported by his ingenious experiments, have been so long and so wellknown to you, has for these last five weeks been struggling between lifeand death, The effects of those experiments recently made in illustrationof his splendid discoveries, added to consequent bodily weakness,brought on a fever so violent as to threaten the extinction of life. Overhim, it might emphatically be said, in the language of our immortalMilton, that< Death his dartShook, but delay'd to strike.'Had it pleased Providence to have deprived the world of any furtherbenefit from his original talents and immense application, there certainlyhas been already enough effected by him, to entitle his name toa place amongst the brightest scientific luminaries of his country. Thatthis may not appear an unfounded eulogium, I shall proceed, at theparticular request of the managers, to give you an outline of the splendidSome few dozens of the address were printed for the sake of circulationamong those who were not present at its delivery. I preservepio copy of it, and consider these flitting pages to be among th veryrarest of those which trace their parentage to myself.Director'] PUBLICATIONS. 249discoveries to which I have just alluded ; and I do so with the greaterpleasure, as that outline has been drawn in a very masterly manner bya gentleman, of all others, perhaps the best qualified to do it effectually."The lecturer then proceeded to take a general and rapid view of hislabours, which it is unnecessary to introduce in this place, and concludedas follows :This recital will be sufficient to convince those who have heard it,of the celebrity which the author of such discoveries has a right toattach to himself; and yet no one, I am confident, has less inclinationto challenge it. To us, and to every enlightened Englishman, it willbe a matter of just congratulation that the country which has producedthe two Beacons and BOYLE, has in these latter days shown itselfworthy of its former renown by the labours of CAVENDISH and DAVY.The illness of the latter, severe as it has been, is now abating; and wemay reasonably hope that the period of convalescence is not very remote.'1Fortunately for the scientific world, and for a largecircle of admiring friends, this prediction was verified; and in the month of February Sir Humphreywas again before a crowded audience, which greetedhis return in a manner overwhelmingly affecting.The year 1807 was one marked with a great dealof literary occupation in my humble life. Besidesthe preparation of my lectures, I had the superintendenceand editorship of a weekly journal orpaper, entitled THE DIRECTOR ; of which, in fact,Sir Thomas Bernard was not only the projector,but the furnisher of " the sinews of war" for itssupport. This paper appeared in an octavo form,containing two sheets, or thirty-two pages, and waspublished every Saturday, from the 24th of Januaryto the 4th of July inclusively, 1807- It ceased toappear at the close of the season. Its objects were,1. Essay s y on subjects of literature, the fine arts,250 ' PUBLICATIONS. [Director.and manners ; 2. Bibliographiana, or accounts ofrare and curious books, and of book-sales in thiscountry from the close of the seventeenth century ;3. Royal Institution, or analyses of the lecturesdelivered weekly ; 4. British Gallery, or descriptionsof the principal pictures exhibited for sale.The publishers were Messrs. Longman and Co.,Hatchard, and Miller. The work was completedin two volumes. It is now, I believe, an uncommonbook. A short account of it may not be unacceptable.Of the writers of the essays, the first, on theState of English Art," those on the " Life ofThomas Proctor" on " The Drama" (three essays),and on " Good Living" were written by Sir Thos.Bernard, who also wrote the concluding essay, beingan " Account of the Author of the Fly-flaps." Theessays on the " Causes which have impeded theprogress of Ancient Art" on " The Gaelic Poems inSir Thomas's account of these Essays, of which he was himself theauthor, is whimsical and amusing enough. "As to these essays (sayshe) though I know the author as well as I know myself, and am inhabitsof intimacy with him, yet I shall say nothing about him. Myaffection for him is warm and permanent, and I am in his confidence.I cannot, therefore, persuade myself to reveal all I know of him. Tocaricature the person of an author, and to advertise his foibles andimperfections, would have too much the air of a modern Editor; andtherefore, because he hath offences in him which thou wouldst discoverif thou couldst, I shall let him continue, and reserve what I have tosay upon this subject to a more convenient opportunity. In the meantime,I beg to subscribe myself, with unfeigned regard and respect,my dear Director, your sincere and affectionate friend, TRISMEGISTUSSECUNDUS." Vol. ii. p. 381.I'tBLICATIONS. 251Ireland" and " Parallels between Art and Science"were written by the late Sir Humphrey Davy, andmust now be considered as a curiosity. " I discover(says Sir Thomas Bernard in his Fly-Flap)that these essays are written by a person bearing,at an early period of life, the bloom, the flowers,and the fruits of genius ; who, having been distinguishedeven in boyhood for superiority of science,was called to an elevated and honourable philosophicalsituation at an age when many begin theirstudies. Courted and beloved as he is in privatelife, and filling, with honour to himself, and benefitto the public, appointments which very few at anyperiod of life might venture to aspire to, I perceivethat he retains an undiminished attachment toscience and literature, together with perfect simplicityand modesty of manners." I cannot, withcertainty, pronounce upon the parentage of all theother essays, but I think the late Sir Geo. Beaumont,Prince Hare, the Rev. Mr. Crowe, and theRev. Mr. Collision, were the principal. That uponthe " Statue of Achilles" in the vestibule of theBritish Institution, was by Mrs. Forster, the daughterof the great artist who achieved it. Those entitledSketches of Modern Characters," " The Walkin London," " The Mirror of Truth," and " TheAlarmist, " were my own productions ; as were allThis paper or essay happening to receive much commendation, Ireprinted it in the Bibliomania, p. 633, &c. second edition.252 PUBLICATIONS. [Director.the strictures contained in the department of theBritish Gallery" Perhaps it may be unnecessaryformally to announce, that " BiUiographiana" wasalso the offspring of the same pen which had executedthe four latter essays. Upon the whole, Imay he said to have furnished the materials of atleast two thirds of THE DIRECTOR*.And here I commenced in right earnest to concentratemy scattered information upon Bibliography,and to give it all the point and force of which I wascapable. An unrestrained opportunity presenteditself, and I was resolved that it should not pass byuncultivated. These " Bibliographiana" may beconsidered as the germ of a work, under the titleof THE BIBLIOMANIA, which at once established myreputation as a bibliographer. There is yet a gooddeal of information in these " ANA," with which,after a separation of twenty years, I am well pleasedto renew my acquaintance. They begin with anaccount of the sales of the libraries of Sir CharlesScarborough and Archbishop Tillotson, at the closeof the seventeenth century. The account of theHarleian Library is yet worth perusal. The work,however, met with a cold reception. A few squibs(as usual) were let off against it, which were answeredby a few crackers from the opposite party.I trust that the hour may never arrive, as it hitherto certainly hasnot, when I may do anything to forfeit the good opinion expressed ofmyself and my labours which appears at vol. ii. p. 278, of this publication.PUBLICATIONS. '2:VJThe numbers, as they came out, appeared to languishupon the tables of drawing-rooms ; and oncalling a council of war, it was judged wise and prudentto effect a timely retreat. Had the oppositionbeen fierce and clamorous, we must have strappedon our bucklers, and maintained a tough fight.It was during my constant and familiar intercoursewith Sir T. Bernard, while "The Director" was goingon, that I met the celebrated Mr. COLERIDGE himselfa Lecturer* at the Royal Institution at the tableof the baronet. I shall never forget the effect hisconversation made upon me at the first meeting. Itstruck me as something not only quite out of theordinary course of things, but as an intellectual exhibitionaltogether matchless. The party was usuallylarge, but the presence of Coleridge concentrated allattention towards himself. The viands were usuallycostly, and the banquet was at once rich and varied ;but there seemed to be no dish like Coleridge's conversationto feed upon and no information so variedand so instructive as his own. The orator rolledhimself up, as it were, in his chair, and gave themost unrestrained indulgence to his speech andhow fraught with acuteness and originality was thatHe was not a constant Lecturer not in constant harness, likeothers, for the business of the day. Indisposition was generally preyingupon him, and habitual indolence would now and then frustrate the performanceof his own better wishes. I once came from Kensington in asnow-storm to hear him lecture upon Shakspeare. I might have sat aswisely, and more comfortably, by my own fireside for NO Coleridgeappeared. And this, I think, more than once.254 PUBLICATIONS.speech, and in what copious and eloquent periodsdid it flow! The auditors seemed to be rapt inwonder and delight, as one observation, more profoundor clothed in more forcible language thananother, fell from his tongue. A great part of thesubject discussed at the first time of my meetingMr. Coleridge, was the connexion between LordNelson and Lady Hamilton. The speaker had beensecretary to Sir Alexander Ball, governor of Maltaand a copious field was here afforded for the exerciseof his colloquial eloquence. For nearly twohours he spoke with unhesitating and uninterruptedfluency.As I retired homewards (to Kensington) I thoughta SECOND JOHNSON had visited the earth to makewise the sons of men ; and regretted that I couldnot exercise the powers of a second BOSWELL, to recordthe wisdom and the eloquence which had thatevening flown from the orator's lips. It hauntedme as I retired to rest. It drove away slumber : orif I lapsed into sleep, there was Coleridge his snuffboxand his 'kerchief before my eyes ! his mildlybeaming looks his occasionally deep tone of voicethe excited features of his physiognomy the secretconviction that his auditors seemed to be entrancedwith his powers of discourse ! The speaker, however,it must be fairly admitted, did not "give andtake." His generosity was illimitable, for he wouldreceive nothing in return. It was true, there werevery few who could give as they had received; butPUBLICATIONS. 255still, as an irritated hearer once observed by the sideof me, "fair play was a jewel." The manner ofColeridge was rather emphatic than dogmatic, andthus he was generally and satisfactorily listened to.There was neither the bow-wow nor the growl whichseemed usually to characterise Johnson's methodof speaking ; and his periods were more lengthenedand continuous ; but they were sometimesrichly dight" in splendid imagery and resistlessargument : not, however, betraying such a rangeof reading, or fraught with so much personal anecdote,as were those of Mackintosh. In fact, it mightbe said of Coleridge, as Cowper has so happily saidof Sir P. Sidney, that he was. . . " the warbler of poetic prose."I speak in reference to Mr. Coleridge's conversation. A prettycorrect notion may be formed of this conversation from the ' e Specimensof Mr. Coleridge's Table Talk" just published, in two very taking duodecimovolumes, with a portrait of the " Talker" prefixed. I saw Mr.Phillips in the execution, or rather, perhaps, finishing, of that portraitand I thought it, and yet think it, abundantly resembling " VIRIPSISSIMUS." Could sound have come from the lips, or action been impartedto the eye or hands of that painted portrait, there was COLERIDGEHIMSELF. The lithographic copy prefixed to the " Specimens" is unworthyof all parties concerned. The "Table Talk" itself has beencopiously and vigorously reviewed in the Quarterly and EdinburghCritical Journals. I incline to give the latter Review the preference ;simply because it is more close, pointed, and pertinent. The QuarterlyReviewer seems himself to be both a poet and a relation ; and, in parts,has allowed his imagination to run away with his severer judgment,and his attachment to control the exercise of impartiality. This isnatural and pardonable, per se. On the other hand, the Magazinesof Blackwood and Tait have been yet more copious in their notices ofthe celebrated deceased. The pro and the con have been exhibited with256 PUBLICATIONS,A love of truth, however, obliges me to remarkthat Coleridge was a mannerist. It was always thesame tone in the same style of expression notquick and bounding enough to diffuse instant andgeneral vivacity ; and the chair would sometimesassume the solemn gravity of the pulpit. In consequence,when heard repeatedly, this would have,and did have, the effect of tiring. But there wassuch rhapsody, originality, and marked emphasis, inalmost every thing which fell from him, that thehearer would, three times out of four, endure themanner for the matter. There was always this characteristicfeature in his multifarious conversationit was delicate, reverend, and courteous. The chastestear could drink in no startling sound ; the mostserious believer never had his bosom ruffled by onemore formidable powers of contrast in these respective Periodicals. Theone dips its critical pencil into molten gold, and produces a picturewarm enough for the admiration, if not imitation, of Turner : the otheradumbrates in large masses, and the light is contrived to rest on few,but sparkling, points. Yet each critical artist gives us an interesting picture; and it is still a resemblance of the intellectual powers of Coleridge.If I might presume to offer a very humble opinion upon this " TableTalk" (to which the preceding pages have more than once or twice referredwith satisfaction), I should bring forward the expression of regretthat the subject of POLITICS (cameleon-like and fleeting !) had been introduced;or comparisons instituted of great departed philosophers.When Mr. Coleridge talks of its requiring " two Beacons to make oneJohn Milton," or " two or three such men as Newton and Galileo tomake one Kepler" it surely does imply the possession of somethinglike superhuman powers in the judge, to institute such a comparison !Was Coleridge deeply read in the Calculus of Newton? And uponwhat book, after the Bible, does INSPIRATION ITSELF seem to brood asupon the Principia of Newton ?PUBLICATIONS. 257sceptical or reckless assertion. Coleridge was eminentlysimple in his manner. Thinking and speakingwere his delight ; and he would sometimes seem,during the more fervid moments of discourse, to beabstracted from all and every thing around and abouthim, and to be basking in the sunny warmth of hisown radiant imagination. As a POET, in the largesense of that word, I do not think that his famewill be deeply fixed in the annals of the rising generation; and yet, his very soul seemed to be imbuedwith all the stirring elements of that divine art*.The name of Coleridge must however be written in large charactersin the muster-roll of England's POETS ; because, if not in some of the effusionsof Coleridge, where is POETRY to be found? His "AncientMariner" and "Christened" are the brightest gems of his Muse; buteven these are not divested of that occasional air of dreamy mysticismby which his usual efforts are characterised. His subjects were in ameasure unearthly. If he chose a cottage girl at her spinning wheelthat wheel never went round, nor did that girl spin, in the ordinaryroutine of such an occupation. To rural characters he sometimes gavethe colouring of philosophical abstraction. External nature seemed tohave the impress of something very opposite to what was usually attachedto it. To Coleridge's ear the roaring of the ocean's incoming tide, orthe lifting up of its huge waves, spoke a language which HE only couldunderstand, and imparted ideas which HE only could comprehend andappreciate. The pale blue sky the conglomerated darkening cloudsthe whistle of the rising storm and the roar of the pealing thunderwere, to his mind, all objects of peculiar and intensely absorbing interest.Of all the criticisms upon his poetry, that which appeared in theMagazine of Blackwood for October, 1834, is the most extraordinary andelaborate: evincing, in the Reviewer, the outpourings of an imaginationscarcely less poetical than that which is reviewed being full of peculiarities,aphorisms, and conclusions, which evince a surprising daring.It is, however, too lengthened ; so that the portrait of Coleridge shouldseem to be overlaid by the ponderous and splendid frame in which it isfixed.258 PUBLICATIONS. [Charles.The year 1807 was ne of unusual occupation withme. At its close, I edited a small volume of greatmoral and devotional excellence, written by the well-knownFRANCIS Charles, about the middle of theseventeenth century, under the title of "Judgmentand Mercy for afflicted Souls, or Meditations, Soliloquies,and Prayers. It was edited under thefeigned name of REGINALD WOLFE, Esq. a king'sprinter in the reign of Henry VIII., and containeda biographical and critical introduction. There wasalso a copy of Quarles's portrait, engraved by Marshall,prefixed*. Quarles had long been a favouritewith me ; and I fully agreed with the late lamentedHeadley, that had his "little piece" entitled "Enchiridion,"been written at Athens or Rome, its authorwould have been classed with the wise men ofhis country t. In regard to the work first named,The copy of Marshall's engraving was by Freeman, who was nowrapidly advancing his claims upon my humble patronage. There is acopy of this work somewhere abroad, bound in green morocco, with abroad border of gold, which contains three impressions of Mr. Freeman'sengraving one, on india paper, before the letter; another, an earlyproof; the third, the ordinary impression. The book was printed byGospel, upon miserable paper, having a black and red title-page; andis now so scarce, that 1 know not where a copy may be found. It mightbe advantageously reprinted in a more creditable manner. For a completelist of Quarles' pieces, consult Lowndes' Bibliographical Manual,vol. iii. p. 1525 ; and for Quarles' poetry, see Ellis, vol. iii. p. 121.t See Headley's " Select Beauties of Ancient English Poetry, withRemarks," 1787, 8vo. A scarce volume, till its reprint in 1810, by thelate Henry Kett, who has introduced an elegant and affecting tribute,together with a sweetly-turned sonnet, to the memory of Hadley; ayoung man, of Trinity College, Oxford, of splendid promise, who diedmidway between twenty and thirty. Headley's volume is full of in-I'l Obligations.and of which, in a borrowed guise, I became theeditor, it may be necessary to remark that the planis briefly this. The author introduces a variety ofimmoral characters indulging in studied commendations(under the most specious modes of reasoning)of their particular and vicious habits of life. Thus ;the drunkard, the liar, the profligate, the sabbath-geniusand just sentiments about our old poets, whose merits he appreciatedwith a tact which Wanton has rarely surpassed, and Ellis asrarely equalled. To the poetical world, Headley's loss was irreparable.And here, over the grave of his ENCOMIAST, who would not pause ashort minute to meditate ? In later life, I knew Mr. Kett intimatelywell ; and I remembered him in early life, at Oxford, when he wouldstand in front of the iron gates of his College, with his master's gownpuckered up behind him, and sniff, in a manner, the incense of thepassing homage of his pupils. At that time, he was among the mostdistinguished tutors of Oxford. I will say nothing of his publications ;except that his Elements of General Knowledge passed through seveneditions, and his HISTORY the Interpreter of Prophecy, received thewarm commendation of the late Bishop Toiling. His Juvenile Poems,1 793, were suppressed. The work first named received most undeservedtreatment at the hands of those whose prominent stations should havetaught them at least courtesy and civility over a falling antagonist.There is no saying what, in the after-rubs of life, may ensue to theattacked as well as to the attacked. The stoutest hearts may in the endquail for unmerited chastisement inflicted. How poor Kett, after beinghaunted by Oxford spirits, and living a restless and incomprehensiblelife, terminated his career, is too well known and too generally lamented.I call to mind the many pleasant days when we galloped together, onfiery steeds, in the vicinity of Ramsgate, shortly after the publication ofmy Cameron, and, when nearing the old Roman castle of Richborough,(the ancient RUTUPINUM) my companion would quote Juvenal, Virgil,and Horace, by scores of verses, and put Dryden's version of the secondpoet at the head of every translation of an ancient Classic. And then,at evening, when the hospitalities of the dining table had ceased, how mycompanion would enjoy his quiet rubber, and quote Cowley, Prior, andPope, as he shuffled and dealt out the cards ! Who but HE seemed, atthat time, to be among the most rationally happy of the Sons of Men ?260 PUBLICATIONS. [Quarles.breaker, each pronounces a studied eulogium on hisown particular pursuit. Immediately afterwards,the upbraiding voice of conscience begins to operate.Certain prohibitory texts of scripture come forwardto his recollection. A SOLILOQUY ensues, in whichthe odiousness and the danger of the first mode ofreasoning are strongly dwelt upon. Then follows aPRAYER, in which repentance is manifest, and pardonentreated. In the second part of the work, the sameplan is adopted, except that, in the first instance, thecharacter indulges in a strain of melancholy anddespair : the soliloquy reproves, and the prayer administersconsolation.I subjoin a specimen of each part : but, beforedoing so, I must be allowed to indulge in expressionsof approbation of the author's manner of handlinghis subject, and of the fervid, original, and frequentlyingenious style of its execution. His periods areround and harmonious. His compound epithetsrarely clog their flow. His fancy is fertile, and hismode of expression happy. Quarles is an authorfor all ages. I will now submit an illustration ofthe first part of this pious manual.THE SABBATH-BREAKER's PROFANATION.The glittering prince that sits upon regal and imperialthrone, and the ignoble peasant that sleeps within his sordidhouse of thatch, are both alike to God. An ivory templeand a church of clay are prized alike by Him. The fleshof bulls, and the perfumes of myrrh and cassia, smoke hisaltars with an equal pleasure. And does he make such diff261terence of days ? Is he, that was so weary of the new moons,so taken with the sun, to tie his Sabbath to that only day ?The tenth in tithes, is any one in ten : and why the seventhday not any one in seven ? We sanctify the day : the daynot us. But are we Jews ? Are we still bound to keep alegal Sabbath, in the strictness of the letter? Have theGentiles no privilege by virtue of Messiah's coming, or hasthe Evangelical Sabbath no immunities ? The service done,the day is discharged, my liberty restored ; and if I meet myprofits or my pleasures, then I will give them entertainment.If business call me to account, I dare afford a careful ear.Or if my sports invite me, I will entertain them with acheerful heart. I will go to matins with as much devotionas my neighbour ; I will make as low obeisance, and as justresponds as any; but soon as the evening's ended, mychurch devotion and my psalter shall sanctify my pew tillthe next Sabbath call. Were it no more for an old customsake, than for the good I find in Sabbaths, that ceremonymight as well be spared. It is a day of rest; and what's arest ? a relaxation from the toil of labour. And what islabour but a painful exertion of the frail body ? But whenthe exercise admits no toil, their relaxation makes no rest.What labour is it for the worldly man to compass the seaand land to accomplish his desires ? What labour is it forthe impatient lover to measure Hellespont with his widenedarms, to hasten his delight ? What labour for the youth tonumber music with their sprightly paces ? Where pleasureis reconciled to labour, labour is but an active rest. Whyshould the Sabbath, then, a day of rest, divorce thee fromthose delights that make thy rest ? Afflict their souls thatplease, my rest shall be what most conduces to my heart'sdelight. Two hours will vent more prayers than I shallneed ; the rest remains for pleasure.Conscience, why smartest thou? A judgment strikesme from the mouth of Heaven, and saith,Whosoever doth any work on my Sabbath, his soul shallbe cut off. Exod. xxxi. 14.262 PUBLICATIONS. [Quarles.Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day ; six days shaltthou labour, and do all that thou hast to do, but the seventhday, *c. Exod. xx.Ye shall keep my Sabbath, for it is holy unto you.Exod. xxxi. 14.Verily, my Sabbaths thou shalt keep, for this is a signbetween me and you, throughout your generations. Exod.xxxi. 13.And they returned and prepared spices, and ointments,and rested on the Sabbath day, according to the commandment.Luke xxiii. 56.HIS SOLILOQUY.My soul, how hast thou profaned that day thy Godhath sanctified ! How hast thou encroached on that whichHeaven hath set apart ! If thy impatience cannot act a xSabbath twelve hours, what happiness canst thou expect inaperpetual Sabbath ? Is six days too little for thyself, andtwo hours too much for thy God ! O, my soul, how dostthou prize temporal beyond eternal ! Is it equal, thatGod, who gave thee a body, and six days to provide for it,should demand one day of thee, and be denied it? Howliberal a receiver art thou, and how miserable a requiter !But know, my soul, his Sabbaths are the apple of his eye.He that hath power to vindicate the breach of it, haththreatened judgments to the breaker of it. The God ofMercy, that hath mitigated the rigour of it for charity'ssake, will not diminish the honour of it for profaneness'sake. Forget not, then, my soul, to remember his Sabbaths,and remember not to forget his judgments, lest heforget to remember thee in mercy. What thou hast neglected,bewail with contrition ; and what thou hast repented,forsake with resolution; and what thou hast resolved,strengthen with devotion.HIS PRAYER.O ! eternal, just, and all-discerning Judge ! in thyself,glorious; in thy Son, gracious; who priest without a wit-quarts"]PUBLICATIONS. 263ness, and condemned without a jury. O ! I confess myvery actions have betrayed me ; thy word hath brought inevidence against me; my own conscience hath witnessedagainst me ; and thy judgment hath passed sentence againstme. And what have I now to plead but my own misery ?and whither should that misery flee but to the God ofMercy ? And since, O Lord ! the way to mercy is to leavemyself, I here disclaim all interest in myself, and utterlyrenounce myself. I, that was created for thy glory, havedishonoured thy name. I, that was made for thy service,have profaned thy Sabbaths. I have slighted thy ordinances,and turned my back upon thy sanctuary. I haveneglected thy sacraments, abused thy word, despised thyministers, and despised their ministry. I have come intothy courts with an unprovided heart, and have drawn nearwith uncircumcised lips: and, Lord, I know thou art ajealous God, and most severe against all such as violate thyrest. The glory of thy name is precious to thee, and thinehonour is as the apple of thine eye : but thou, O God ! thatart the God of Hosts, hast published and declared thyselfthe Lord of mercy. The constitution of thy Sabbath wasa work of time ; but, Lord, thy mercy is from all eternity.I, that have broke thy Sabbaths, do here present thee witha broken heart. Thy hand is not shortened, that thou canstnot heal ; nor thy ear deafened, that thou canst not hear.Stretch forth thy hand, O God ! and heal my wounds. Bowdown thine ear, O Lord ! and hear my prayers. Alter thefabric of my sinful heart, and make it tender of thy glory.Make me ambitious of thy service ; and let thy Sabbaths bemy whole delight. Give me a holy reverence of thy word,that it may prove a light to my steps, and a lantern to myfeet. Endue my heart with charity and faith, that I mayfind a comfort in thy sacraments. Bless thou the ministersof thy sacred word, and make them holy in their lives, soundin their doctrine, and laborious in their calling. Preservethe universal church in these distracted times. Give her264 PUBLICATIONS. [Quarts.peace, unity, and uniformity ; purge her of all schism, error,and superstition ; let the king's daughter be all gloriouswithin, and let thine eyes take pleasure in her beauty ; that,being honoured here, to be a member of her militant, I maybeglorified with her triumphant!"A specimen from the Second Part is not the lesslikely to strike the reader's fancy and command hisapprobation.THE WIDOW'S DISTRESS.So vain, so momentary are the pleasures of this world ;so transitory is the happiness of mankind, that, what withthe expectation that goes before it, and the cares that gowith it, and the griefs that follow it, we are not more unhappyin the wanting it, than miserable in the enjoying it.The greatest of all worldly joys are but bubbles full of air,that break with the fulness of their own vanity ; and but,and best, like Jonah's gourd, which please us while theylast, and vex us in the loss. Past and future happiness arethe miseries of the time present, and present happiness isbut the passage to approaching misery ; which, being transitory,and meeting with a transitory possessor, perish in thevery using. What was mine yesterday, in the blessednessof a full fruition, to-day hath nothing left of it but a sad remembranceit was mine ! The more I call to mind thejoys I had, the nitre sensible I am of the misery I have.My sun is set ; my glory is darkened ; and not one starappears in the firmament of my little world. HE fromwhose loins I came, is taken from me. My blessings in theone, my comforts in the other, are taken from me: andwhat is left to me, but a poor third part of myself to bewailthe loss of the other two ! I, that was owned by the tendername of a child, am now known by the off-cast title of anorphan ; I, that was respected by the honourable title of awife, am more rejected by the despicable name of a widow :I, that flourished like a fruitful vine upon the house top, amPUBLICATIONS. 265now neglected and trodden under foot. He, that like astrong wall supported my tender branches, is fallen, andleft my clusters to the spoil of a ravenous swine. Thespring tides of my plenty are spent, and I am gravelled onthe low ebbs of all wants. The sonnets of my mirth areturned to elegies of mourning; my glory is put out; andmy honour grovels on the dust. I call to my friends, andthey neglect me: I spread forth my hands, and there isnone to help me : my beauty is departed from me, and allmy joys are swallowed up.But stay, my soul, plunge not too far. Shall not Hetake that gave ? Cannot He that took, restore ? The Lordis thy portion, who saith,/ will be an husband to the ividow, and a father to thefatherless. Psal. Lxviii. 5.Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child. Exod.xxii. 22.Ifthou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all untome, I will surely hear their cry. Exod. xx. 23.And my wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with thesword, and your wives shall be widows, and your children,fatherless. Exod. xxii. 23./ will be a swift witness against those that oppress thewidow and the fatherless. Mai. iii. 5.Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Fatheris this, to visit the fatherless and widow in their affliction.James i. 27.HER SOLILOQUY.How hath the sunshine of truth discovered what appearednot by the candlelight of nature ! How many atomsin thy soul hath this light descried, which, in thy naturaltwilight, were not visible ! Excessive sadness for so greata loss, can want no arguments from flesh and blood;which arguments can want no weight, if weighed in thepartial balance of nature. A husband is thyself, divided :thy children thyself, multiplied; for whom 'when snatched266 PUBLICATIONS. [Quarles.away) God allows some grains to thy affection : but whenthey exceed the allowance, they will not pass in Heaven'saccount, but must be coined again. Couldst thou so oftenoffend thy God without a tear ? and cannot he, my soul,displease thee once without so many ? Doth the want ofspiritual grace not trouble thee, and shall a temporal lossso much torment thee ? Is thy husband taken away, andart thou cast down? Hath thy God promised to be thyhusband, and art thou not comforted ? True symptoms ofmore flesh than spirit Thy husband was the gift, thy Godthe giver; and wilt thou more despise the giver than thegift ? Be wise, my soul : if thou hast lost a man, thou hastfound a God. Having, therefore, wet thy wings in nature'sshower, go and dry them in the God of nature's sunshine.HER PRAYER.O God ! in the knowledge of whom is the perfection ofall joy, at whose right hand pleasures are evermore ; thatmakes the comforts of this life momentary, that we may notover prize them ; and yet hast made them requisite, that wemay not undervalue them ; I, a late sharer in this worldlyhappiness, but a sad witness of its vanity, do here addressmyself to thee, the only crown of all my joys; in whomthere is no variableness, nor shadow of change. Lord, thoudidst give me what my thankfulness hath taken fromme ; but thou hast taken from me what thy goodness hathpromised to supply. Thou hast given and thou hast takenblessed be thy name for ever ! Thou, then, O God, whoart not less able to perform than willing to promise, whosemercy is more ready to bestow than my misery is to beg,strengthen my faith, that I may believe thy promise. Encouragemy hopes, that I may expect thy performance.Quicken my affections, that I may love the Promiser. Bethou all in all to me, that am nothing at all without thee.Sweeten my misery with the sense of thy mercy, and lightenmy darkness with the sun of thy glory. Seal in my heart(.lu<irlt'S.~\ PUBLICATIONS. 267the assurance of adoption, that I may with boldness callthee my Father. Sanctify my actions with the spirit ofmeekness, that my conversation may testify that I am thychild. Wean my heart from worldly sorrow, lest I mournlike them that have no hope. Be thou my bridegroom,and let our marriage-chamber be my heart. Own me asthy bride, and purify me with the odours of thy spirit.Prevent me with thy blessings; protect me by thy grace.Preserve me for thyself; prepare me for thy kingdom ! Bethou a father to bless me; be thou a husband to comfortme. In the midst of want, be thou my plenty : in the depthof my mourning, be thou my mirth. Raise my glory fromthe dust, and then my dust shall show forth thy praise. Bethou a wall to support my vine, and let my branches twineabout thee : let them flourish in the sunshine of thy grace,that they may bring forth fruit to the glory of thy name."While my lectures at the Royal Institution weredrawing to a close, and about the beginning of theyear 1808, I was occupied in the preparation of anew edition of a work which, in its original form,and at the period of its first appearance, made aconsiderable noise throughout Europe. I mean theUTOPIA of SIR THOMAS MORE. In the thirst forblack letter literature with which, about this time, Ibegan to be violently seized, I stumbled upon thefirst English version of that celebrated work, byRaphe Robinson *, and deemed it to be so veryRobinson's title runs thus: A most pleasant, fruitful, and wittywork of the best state of a public Weal, and of the Isle called Utopia,written in Latin by the Right Worthy and Famous SIR THOMASMORE, Knight, and trmiMwi iiid> English by llaphe Robinson,A. D. 1551.268 PUBLICATIONS. \ More* 8curious and racy, that I resolved to make the publicacquainted with its merits bolstered up " withCopious Notes (including the whole of Dr. Warner's)and a Biographical and Literary Introduction*'9 Mr. Miller the bookseller was then one ofThis introduction comprehended, 1. Some Account of the Familyof Sir Thomas More. 2. The Biography of Sir Thomas More. 3. Accountof his Works, with specimens ; see his description of Jane Shore,vol. i. p. Lxxxiii. 4. Engraved portraits of him. 5. Editions of the Utopia.This Introduction was preceded by the following Address to theReader :GENTLE READER,I here present unto thee a new edition of a celebrated work, whichhas not had the good fortune to be so much admired in our own as inforeign countries. Whether this may have arisen from the want ofcuriosity or discernment in our ancestors, is a point too delicate andweighty for my determination; certain it is, that almost all editorshave complained of the backwardness of our countrymen to notice andcommend the UTOPIA of SIR THOMAS MORE. The text of the presentedition is taken from the first English one, which was translated byRAPHE ROBINSON, and printed by Abraham Vale, in 1551, 12mo. ; awork of such scarcity, as to have escaped the notice of all editors ofancient English authors. Its intrinsic value t has appeared to me tobe equal to its rarity. The notes which accompany the text, are exe-"f " This first edition is particularly analysed at page lix, &c. post.As specimens of the purity of its style, the reader may, in limine, consultpp. 24-5, of the Prologue, and pp. 46-7, 124-5, of the first book.If I were to mention any contemporary work analogous to it in style, itwould be Michael Wood's translation of the famous treatise " De VeraObedient," by the Bishop of Winchester, with Bonner's preface,printed at Rome, 26th of Oct., 1553, 8vo; a work sufficiently knownto, and coveted by, BLACK LETTER COLLECTORS. It is indeed curious.The reader will compare the following with the first half dozen linesof page 22, book i. (post). " But as touching this bishop's worthypraises, there shall be nothing spoken of me at this time ; not onlybecause they are infinite, but because they are far better known to allChristendom, than becometh me here to make rehearsal." Fol. 1, rev'PUBLICATIONS. 269the leading publishers of the day ; and his liberalspirit readily lent its aid to my wishes, by addingcited on the plan of a variorum edition; and without the affectationof antiquarian research, they are intended to throw some little light onthe manners, customs, and sentiments of our ancestors in the sixteenthcentury.The ' Supplemental Notes,' while they may be thought to exhibitamusing specimens of the literature of the seventeenth century, connect,in some degree, the chain of research with the present times *. Thosenotes which allude to modern customs and opinions, may probably, atfirst sight, be considered superficial ; but it should be remembered that,at a future period (if the edition be permitted to live), they may inturn become interesting to the curious antiquary.The 'BIOGRAPHICAL and LITERARY INTRODUCTION' was intendedto give additional interest to the subsequent pages ; so that in readingthe most celebrated performance of Sir Thomas More, a tolerably accurateidea might be formed of the family, the life, and the works of itsauthor. In the present age of elegant and curious disquisition, thePortraits of Sir Thomas More, ' and the Editions of the Utopia' maynot be thought the least acceptable part of this Introduction.In fine (following the example of ancient Lindsay, and the authorof the Complaint of Scotland) I entreat the ( gude rear to correct mefamiliarly and be charity, and til interpret my intentions favourably t,'or in the language of another ancient wight, ' the good reader is to bepraised, for his own relief and the author's, just to correct the errors ofthe print, and then to read and judge' . And thus heartily wishing theefarewell,I am thine,Kensington, June 31, 1808. " T. F. D."" I have adopted both the ancient and the modern orthography inthe extracts from the authors of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.The former, out of compliment to Dr. Johnson's remark in Hamlet(Reed's Shakspeare, vol. xviii. p. 284, note 5), the latter, from respectto the good sense evinced by Mr. G. Ellis, as noticed at p. 75, post.t Dr. Ley den's edition of the Complaint of Scotland, 1801, 4to.,p. 23 Prey. Dissert, and p. 27 of the text ; a work of equal interest anderudition. The first 292 pages are devoted to a preliminary dissertation,the following 294 to a reprint of the text. A useful glossary ofeighty pages concludes the volume.% "An Answer to a Supplicatory Epistle of G. T." London, 8vo.,no date. Printed for Tobit Smith.270 PUBLICATIONS. \ Man engraved portrait of More, in the stipplingmanner and an outline copper-plate engraving ofMore's family, from the celebrated painting of Holbein,of which Vertue has made an engraving forKnight's Life of Erasmus from the well-knownTabellcB Patience, published at Padua in 1691,folio *. This outline engraving accompanied onlythe large paper copies of the book, which werestruck off in a small but elegantly-executed quartovolume t. I have now totally forgotten the quantumof remuneration "for work and labour done"touching these two unassuming volumes ; but it hadlittle support from public patronage, and it eventuallyfound itself in a sort of Capulet family vault ofa large trading bookseller, on Mr. Miller's retirementfrom business t. The " Supplemental Notes"at the end of the second volume may be yet readIs it not really surprising, that an original picture of such a family,and by such an artist as Holbein, in which ah 1 the portraits are whole-lengths,and said to be of the size of life, should not be known to theBritish public when its destination is supposed to be in London?Where, but in the British Institution should such a picture have beenlong ago exhibited ? The whisper once was, that it belonged to theSociety of Lincoln's Inn.t Of these large-paper copies (of which 150 were printed) I oncereceived an urgent and unlimited request to ILLUSTRATE one, by theinsertion of every portrait mentioned in the fourth section of my Introduction.I did so. The copy was bound by Faulkner in a splendidgreen morocco stout, and was sold, on the death of its amiable andgenerous owner, for some threescore guineas, according to receivedinstructions. Perhaps I ought to add, that there are some curious andpretty wood-cuts interspersed throughout this edition of the Utopia.% To the best of my recollection, the late Mr. Stockdale, of Piccadilly(father of the present bookseller of that name) became the purchaserof several hundred copies at 2.9. 6d. per copy.Utopia.] PUBLICATIONS. 271with instruction * ; and the Analysis of More's EnglishWorks, published in 1557, folio, is at leastcreditable to the diligence of the analyser.The remainder of this same year, 1808, waswholly absorbed in the preparation of a new editionof my " Introduction to the Classics" which nowassumed a new form, and was greatly improved bycorrections and additions. I refer to a precedingpage for a more particular account of this secondedition t.In the ensuing year, 1809, there appeared a workfrom the pen of the well-known Dr. Ferrara, underthe title of " The Bibliomania, an Epistle to Rich.Helsor, Esq." in a thin 4to. brochure, which, fromthe bent of my then studies, made a very decidedAmong these " notes' is one embellished with a wood-cut of ahawker, in the act of carrying his hooded hawks upon a square-framedperch, which surrounds him. He holds a hawk upon his left hand orfist, and on his head is a feathered cap. This is taken from the DevisesHeroines de Parading, 1563, 12mo., fol. 173. My delight was excessive,some seven years ago, to observe a figure thus identically attiredin gay costume, in a hawking party belonging to Colonel Halls, in theneighbourhood of Newmarket. It was a sad rainy day, and frequentgusts of wind almost unsettled the birds from their perch. The lateMr. Castlewood was with me, who always seemed to be hawking mad.Great was that antiquary's delight on seeing the hood slipped from thehawk's eyes, on the putting up of a covey of birds, of which one becamethe victim to a beak strong enough to have upheld a hare. Then followedthe process of the lure, whereat my friend's joy was redoubled ;but one " tone, ton-tavern, ton-tavern, ton-ton-tarerne," from the hornof the huntsman (as set forth in that most extraordinary production,Handle Holmes' s Accidence of Armoury, 1688, folio,) seems to me to beworth a whole season's sport of hawking. This, however, may be thecriticism of an ignoramus in either sport.t Page 211, &c.272 PUBLICATIONS.impression upon me, and induced me to try myhand at the same subject but in prose : Dr. Fer-rear'sepistle being in heroic rhyming couplets.That epistle was doubtless a smart and clever performance,but was rather to be considered as a sortof dessert after dinner. I thought the subject mightbe more substantially treated ; and so I told myfriend, Mr. Heberr, in the sale-room of Messrs.Leigh and Sotheby, on the very day on which thework came into my hands. As he had accepted adedication in verse, I presumed he could not objectto one in prose. It was accordingly settled thatmy performance should be addressed to the sameindividual, in a small octavo volume, of a moderateprice. It was written " calais currentissimo, "within a lunar month, and had the effect of producingmuch innocent mirth, and exciting a generalcuriosity after rare and precious volumes. The profitsof the sale about covered the expenses of aweek's housekeeping*. I reserve further notice ofthis work till I come, in chronological order, totreat of the second edition of it in 1811 a volumeof an entirely different construction, and more fulland satisfactory under every point of view.The publishers were Messrs. Longman and Co. The book was soldfor 3*. 6d. ; the author and publisher dividing the profits. The advertisementsamounted to the astounding sum of 35/. ! " un resultant quifaisoit reculer!" (I believe this was one of Mirabeau's observations.)The ' ' SPOLIA Optima" were somewhat under 8/. ! of which I necessarilytook possession of half. Here was AUTHORSHIP !PUBLICATIONS. 273I now approach the notice of one of the mostarduous, elaborate, and perhaps useful of all thepublications to which my humble name is attached.The reader will perhaps anticipate the mention ofthe TYPOGRAPHICAL ANTIQUITIES OF GREAT Britain.I have just said that the " bent of my studies"at this time connected me much with researcheswhich had a reference to the illustration ofthe " Bibliomania." All the articles in the " Director,"under the title of Bibliographiana, hadsomewhat initiated me into the mysteries of CarbonicLORE. I looked upon our venerable firstprinter, William Caxton, as a sort of hero in hisway, to whom no common homage ought to be paid ;and with the assistance of Lewis, Ames, and my immediatepredecessor, Herbert *, I thought that Imight render him that justice which appeared to beonly his due. My plan was upon the most enlargedscale, for I resolved to devote my first volume entirelyto the productions of his press. I had beencollecting materials for this work during the threepreceding years, and felt disposed to make it a re-sertorius of English Literature, from the death ofChaucer to that of Shakspeare ; for what is a his-lewis'sLife of Caxton was published in 1737, 8vo.; Ames's TypographicalAntiquities' 1749; and Herbert's edition of the latter in 1785,3 vols. 4to. I resolved upon skimming all the cream from the milkyproduction of Lewis, and reprinting, with copious notes, the Prefaces ofAmes and Herbert : to which, Memoirs of the two latter, with theirportraits in mezzotint, were appended. These introductory pieces occupyninety pages of my first volume.T274 PUBLICATIONS. [Typographicaltory of the press but that of literature? It embracedevery department of human knowledge ; andeven the errors and crudities of science might becorrected by those discoveries which had markedthe progress of later periods. It must be confessedthat the plan was bold and grasping ; and had itbeen carried into complete effect, scarcely ninevolumes in quarto (a good companion, by the by,to the Harleian Miscellany) would have witnessedits conclusion. I also thought that the progress ofthe Art of Engraving might be exhibited in thesame work, and did in fact compose a " PreliminaryDisquisition" upon this subject, for the first volume *.Mr. Harris, of the Royal Institution, was, to thebest of my recollection, the first individual to whommy plan was communicated. It received his entireconcurrence, and most ardent wishes for success t.The title is this : " Preliminary Disquisition on the Early State ofEngraving and Ornamental Printing in Great Britain." The treatiseoccupies Lxxi pages, and contains about forty-five wood-cuts: many ofthem costly and curious. It is true that they are printed upon paperof an inferior quality, and have been abundantly eclipsed in beauty,singularity, and perfection of workmanship, by what appears of the samecharacter in the pages of the Bibliographical Cameron ; yet are theseearlier and ruder efforts in the " Typographical Antiquities" well deservingthe antiquary's close attention. William Savage was the printer ;and the workings in red do him great credit. In the large paper copies,where the paper is of an excellent quality, the effect is most effulgent.t This is not the first time that I have made mention of the meritsof the late Mr. JAMES HARRIS, who was admirably fitted for his officeas librarian to the Royal Institution. When he was appointed, I wasa rival candidate for the same situation ; and wrote expressly a " Dissertationon Bibliography," with plans of a public library, to submit toAntiquities.'} PUBLICATIONS. *J7.JAbout this time I was in the habit of paying frequentvisits to the Marquis of Bute (grandfather ofthe present marquis) at Petersham ; and that noblemanwas not only pleased to receive me kindly, butto stimulate my book-researches by begging that Iwould pay a visit to Luton, and examine the treasuresof his library there. I wanted not a secondinvitation to carry so congenial a plan into effect.Mr. Machel State (the amiable, the upright, theintelligent State), his lordship's bookseller, was requestedto accompany and attend me. I went Isaw and was enraptured*. What could possiblythe managing committee but unsuccessfully. This, I think, was somewherein 1804. My victorious opponent was backed by Sir T. Bernard,and had been a most able and trustworthy sort of henchman to the lateMr. Egerton, the bookseller. He was in all respects worthy of his office,which he filled for twenty years. This " Dissertation" is yet in mypossession. It is crude, as the work of a tyro ; but there were no bibliographerson the committee. The library of the Royal Institution richlydeserves all the commendation bestowed upon it in the Bibliomania, p.132; and since that period (twenty-five years ago) it has been enlargedby valuable additions.And who might not be, of a much maturer time of life than I thenwas, on his first visit at Luton ? I speak of the pictures and books.A library of large dimensions and pleasing form, intersected by twodivisions, in immediate communication with each other with coolingRysdaels, graceful Armenians, and glowing Reynolds enrichthe spaces immediately above the books. And then, a library whereinvery many of the copies were of the olden complexion and originalmarginal amplitude. I have now forgotten its chief characteristic ; butincline to the belief that Voyages and Travels, Antiquities and Topography,bear a proud pre-eminence among the 25,000 volumes of whichit may be composed. Who, however, " among the sons of men," shallventure adequately to describe some of the GRAPHIC TREASURES ofLuton ? Who can think upon a Raffaelle, a Guido, a Velasquez, aCuyp, and a Teniers, and not say that there is one of each master HERE,T 2276 PUBLICATIONS. [Typographicalfollow, but the dedication of my Typographical Antiquitiesto the nobleman who had thus inflamedmy fancy, and enlarged my knowledge, by this IterLutoniense? The marquis was pleased to acceptthe dedication, and a beautiful wood-cut engravingof his arms was placed at the head of it. Duringthe progress of the printing, I used frequently tomeet the present KING OF THE FRENCH at the Marquis'stable, and always found him an interestingand well-informed guest. He appeared to havetravelled considerably, and communicated his knowledgein a pleasing and unassuming manner. Hespoke our language with so deceptive a fluency, thatit would sometimes seem his vernacular tongue.The Marchioness, who was among the most amiableof her sex and rank, shewed him the most courteousattention and respect *.It was also during the early progress of printingthe first volume of these Antiquities, at Mr. Savage's,which may bid defiance to competition in England? It is due to thepresent owner of this lordly mansion to say, that he has completed thebuilding which had descended unfinished to his grandfather; but Iyet desiderate the softly-chiming, and sweetly-striking clocks,, whichare now mute, and which were placed here by the first Earl Bute,the prime minister, and rival of his master, George III., in this branchof furniture.During my visit to Luton, his majesty, then Duke of Orleans,had lost his younger brother, the Duke de Condenser, and he camedown there with his surviving brother to blunt the first pang of afflictionon such a loss. I retreated precipitately, and a little prematurely,on his arrival, for I was then deeply immersed in Bull's illustrated copyof Granger Biographical History of England. Bitter, but inevitableseparation,!Antiquities'] PUBLICATIONS. 277in Bedfordbury, Covent Garden, that I used to seethesheets of Mr. Fox's Historical Work hangingup in every direction through the dwelling-houseand adjacent yard. It will he naturally supposedthat five thousand copies of a quarto volume, withfive hundred more upon a larger paper, and yetanother two hundred and fifty of an elephantinesize *, were not likely to be carried through thepress, where the premises were small, without seemingto suffocate every passage and corridor of thebuilding. At length, by the aid of one of the mostzealous and intelligent correctors of the press towhom I was often indebted for an ingenious hintand a judicious emendation during the progress ofthe printing of the " Director," as well as of thisvolume t my book became in all respects ripe forpublication ; and my preface was finally executedIt was doubtless the boldest experiment ever made with a largepaper speculation : but it succeeded. In due course, what at first cameforth as a rapid and overbearing torrent, at a high price, subsided intoa quiet channel, and became obtainable on very moderate terms. Yet,considering the extraordinary number of copies printed, I do not considerthis book of the commonest possible occurrence. As the work ofan AUTHOR whose name can never perish, it must necessarily formpart and parcel" of every well-ordered library. Why is it not dressedin "rank and file" with the octavo Hume, ROBERTSONS, and GIBBONS?t I allude to Mr. Joseph Langton ; who, in his earlier days, had beeninitiated in typographic mysteries at the Clarendon press at Oxford.In later life, he has become more closely allied, by the filling of a stationof no mean notoriety in the parish of St. Mary, St. Marylehone, withequal diligence, fidelity, and propriety. A bachelor himself, he hasmore to do with children than any man in the same parish ; and althoughdevoutly silent during the utterance of prayers, no " Amen" isheard but his at their conclusion.278 PUBLICATIONS. [ Typographicaltowards the end of the year 1809. The ensuing-yearopened with its appearance before the formidabletribunal of the public. Cowper could not havebeen prouder of his list of subscribers to his Homernay, nor Pope himself than I was of mine *.* His Majesty George III., and their Royal Highnesses the Dukesof York and Kent, together with eighteen public libraries, were at thehead of the subscription. The names of two hundred and thirty privatesubscribers follow of which one hundred and forty are, to my certainknowledge, NO MORE. Of the existence of about twenty, I am doubtful.Of those DEAD, beginning with the three first above-named, are, Col.Barry, Earl of Bridgewater, Marquis of Bute (to whom the work wasdedicated), William Beloe, Dr. Andrews (Dean of Canterbury), CharlesButler, Rev. J. Conybeare, George Chalmers, Alexander Chalmers,John Dent, Samuel Dobree, Francis Douce, Octavius Gilchrist, JosephCastlewood, Richard Heberr, Dr. Jenner, Col. Johnes, Miss Fust Langley,Dr. Maton, Daniel Moore, Rev. R. Nares, Walter Scott, EarlSpencer, Marquis of Stafford, the first Duke of Sutherland Sir M. M.Sykes, Bart., Rev. Stephen Weston, and John Towneley, &c. Of theLIVING, I enumerate with peculiar gratification the following : JohnBarwis, John Bretton, Peter Brodie, Sir Benjamin Brodie, Sir S. E.Brydges, Rev. J. Collins, Miss Currer, Col. Drinkwater, the Rev. H.Drury, the Earl of Essex, Rev. Dr. Goddard, Jeremiah Herman, Chas.Hatchettt, Thos. Hill, Dr. Jameson, Rev. N. Kerr, Earl of Leitrim,J. H. Markland, Rev. Dr. Marsh (now Bishop of Peterborough), Geo.Ordered, Louis Hayes Petit, Rev. T. Racket, Sam. Rogers, W. L.Rogers, Rob. Southey, Rev. H. J. Todd, C. K. Tyne, Rev. Dr. Valpy,J. V. Uttersonon, and Charles Whittington, the Elzevir of his day.The reader is not to infer that these names (of the DEAD and theLIVING) are here introduced by way of a pompous record of the author'spatrons and friends ; but he is rather to consider the matter in a serious,moralising, and instructive point of view. He will first balance thedead against the living, and reflect how soon (if his name be among thelatter his own departure may add to the preponderancy of the formereven how soon the spirit which records these facts may be called awayto join those who have preceded him ! I consider a large " LIST OF Subscribers"as a sort of monumental tablet which marks the contemporaneousexistence of the wealth and intelligence the public and privatespirit of patronage of our country at a particular period. It is, be-antiquities']PUBLICATIONS. 270Sixty-six copies (I know not why that number) ofthe work were executed upon large paper of an im-sides,pleasing to find the name of an ancestor or a relation among thepatrons of such a work as that of Pope or Cowper, which does honour tothe country. The great BRIAN WALTON was among the first who recordedthe names of " the more leading patrons" the "Principes et Fau-toreeximii " of his Polyglottt Bible ; and it is a distinction as peculiar asflattering, that such names as CROMWELL and CHARLES II. are recordedas patrons to the same work and in the same preface. Even to thisday, my venerable friend * * rubs his silver spectacles with unusualenergy and excitement, before he sits down to the perusal of the list ofsubscribers to Pope's Homer. " I live, as it were, (says he) in thatidentical period, as I read these names and seem to shake hands byturns with Addison, Harley, Godolphin, and Sunderland." He mighthave shaken hands less clean than these. Pope may be said to havemade his fortune by the subscription to his Homer : but these " Fortunetelling"days have finally disappeared. And yet an honest pridemay be indulged and avowed, when the author of these " Reminiscences"contemplates a roll of subscribers which at least attests him tobe an " accredited agent!"One word more. I have mentioned the names of individuals not inthe bookselling trade, who supported the first volume of the " TypographicalAntiquities." Of those dead, who did so, were Bliss of Oxford,Collins, Nutshell, Dulau, Ford, Washington, Linn, Manson, Nicol,Bridge, Sancho, and White. Of the living booksellers, the followingare the names: Baxter, six copies; Booker, six copies; Carpenter,two copies ; Clarke, one large, and two small ; Evans, one large, andtwo small ; Hatchard, two small ; Leigh and Sotheby, one large, andtwo small ; Longman and Co., three large, twenty-five small ; Miller,five large, twenty-five small. In the whole (for Manson, Sancho, andWhite had twenty-four copies between them) there were 164 copies bespokein the trade ; these, added to those of private subscribers, madethe total number of small paper bespoke about 420 copies. If I rememberrightly, there were 500 copies printed. I therefore, at starting,pledged the public in a cup well-nigh filled to the brim ! All the LARGEPAPERS were engaged at 7/. 7*. per copy ; and I may in sober truthaffirm, that the public had not before gazed upon a volume of moresingular embellishments, and more enchanting luxury of paper andprinting. Still, in the latter department, it was eclipsed by the subsequentvolumes.260 PUBLICATIONS. [ Typographicalperil size, and I might have " challenged all England"at the time to produce a more magnificentvolume. The property also was entirely my own ;nor could that property he considered very despicablewhen I cleared six hundred pounds by the speculation*. I was as astonished as I was necessarily delightedby such a result. The toil, certainly, hadbeen severe and long-continued ; and the alternationsof hope, anxiety, and doubt had previously muchagitated my bosom t. But pain, and labour, andSuch is my present impression ; for no traces of an " accountcurrent" have survived. And yet I may over-rate it by a hundredpounds. The gross produce could scarcely have been much below1800. At all events, I had abundance of assets to cover the expense,if not to redeem the error, of having purchased an interleaved copy ofthe first Ames which had belonged to Ames and Herbert for 42 : asingle, chubby quarto volume ! My knowing friends laughed at my indiscretion,under the softer term of misplaced zeal ; and Mr. Douce hadthe provoking cruelty to call the book a sucked orange. But I defendedthe purchase on every ground, and would not hear of having doneamiss. It was made under early and strong impulses, when I startedwith a notion of my own similar work, and when the " sua clique Deusfit dira cupid." It seemed to me that such a " Deus," in its way, shouldnot be allowed to take up its quarters in any resting-place but my ownlibrary. It was purchased of Mr. Fiske, the bookseller, the corner ofMarylebone-lane, Wigs ore-street, and several years afterwards wassold by me to Mr. Pickering for one-fourth of its original cost.t These points are thus alluded to at the end of the ' ' Advertisement,"prefixed by way of Preface ; premising, that the " General Preface"is inevitably postponed to the " Greek Kalends"In fine, the Editor can honestly assure his readers, that neitherpains, labour, nor expense have been spared, in visiting the two Universitiesand other public repositories of books, and in the number andvariety of plates (which have increased far beyond the original design),to render this volume deserving of their approbation, and of the auspicesunder which it is published. A great deal of curious and appositematter has been thrown into the notes, in order to avoid swelling theAntiquitits.~\ PUBLICATIONS. 281dread of want of success, were all lost sight of andforgotten, as " order upon order" poured in forexecution. My little mansion assumed the appearanceof an office of great business ; and for the firstthree months, the postmaster-general had scarcely amore active and efficient supporter of his establishmentthan myself.Thus, the opening of the year 1810 was one ofpeculiar promise and gratification. I had establishedsomething like a legitimate reputation as asevere and active student in classical researches andthe literary antiquities of my country. I read earlyand late; and, like Casaubon*, spent most of myevenings in the society of amiable and well-informedbook to an unnecessary size. If the letter of the text had been moregenerally adopted, and the work had been printed in the modern broad-marginstyle, the reader need not be told that two volumes would hardlyhave contained the matter which is here submitted to his consideration.In the ' GENERAL Preface to be published with the last volume,the Editor will not fail to express the particular obligations he has beenunder to those literary friends and acquaintances who have assistedhim with information in the course of his arduous undertaking ; anundertaking, the nature and end of which he has endeavoured fully tocomprehend, and rationally to anticipate : towards the creditable completionof which much time, care, and labour are requisite, with nosmall portion of health and animal spirits. The latter are in the dispensationof PROVIDENCE : the former it is in human power to manageand apply. ' To worthy and impartial men in particular as Hernehas observed (John. de Trokelowe, prae. p. xvi.) this appeal, as wellas this undertaking, is submitted. ' Nos (continues the same amiableantiquary) in studio veritatis ac antiquities horns collocemus, nobis-cinqueprae clare agi piteous, si in hujusmodi nostrils conatibus utilequod sit inventing erudite.'Kensington, Dec. 23, 1809. " T. F. D."See page 222, ante, note.282 PUBLICATIONS. [Typographicalfriends. The distance of London (only two miles)was no consideration in the way of declining the acceptanceof invitations ; and the hospitable tables ofthe rich and the eminent were not infrequently asource of improvement as well as of venial pride. Atthis moment, too, I was quietly planning the secondedition of the Bibliomania. My two dear boyswould be trundling their hoops, or playing at trap,in the green fields of North End, and contiguous toGloucester Lodge, while I was seated upon a grasshillock, " under the beechen shade," with a volumeof Ballet in one hand and of Schelhorn in another.Spizelius, Bauer, and De Bure* would sometimesrelieve guard with the foregoing instructive sentinels.So flattering and so full of prospective comfort wasthe opening of this memorable year.It pleased, however, a gracious Providence to inflictupon me, about this time, a trial of the severestdescription. At the latter end of the month ofJanuary, my younger son he who would be alwaysmaking ancient MSS." and manufacturing fancifultitle-pages fell seriously ill. I carried him in myarms to his bed, from which, within three weeks,he was borne down a CORPSE. From being amongthe liveliest and most winning of his age, he sud-thereader will find the titles of the works of these authors,together with an estimate of their respective merits, fully detailed in thesecond part (" the Cabinet") of the second edition of the Bibliomania.At present, I fear that they must be pronounced old-fashioned or obsolete; but twenty-five or thirty years ago, their names were talismanicin lifting a volume off a bookseller's shelf..-l/ttiijuifies.'] PUBLICATIONS. 283deny collapsed into insensibility except that hiseye could not endure the light. The disease ofydrokephalo* (or water in the head) was evidentlymaking its fearful approaches. The usual remedieswore applied ; and the little sufferer, under torturewhich I will not attempt to describe, but which cannever be forgotten, was sinking every day. DoctorsAisle and Maton were in constant attendance,but held out not the slightest hope of amendment. . .and when they took their final leave, what agonycould exceed THAT which tore the hearts of bothparents asunder ! We may be said to have neverquitted his bedside ; and it was my destiny to behanging over him when his last breath escaped hislips. He died. . .as he had lived. . .with a SMILE !His image needed not the aid of art* to be perpetuatedin the memories of his parents ; and thougha deeper wound hath been more recently inflictedupon them, yet the voice and the action of " LittleTom" are still in their ears and before their eyes.QUALIS ES, SPES LOQUITUR;QUALIS ERAS, Lacrymal Tarentum."This inscription on his tombstone t was furnishedThe portrait which, however, it is our good fortune to possess ofhim, was executed by my friend, Mr. Masquerier, from instructionswhich my memory enabled me to impart. It is a faithful resemblance,yet wanting that vigour and vivacity which the artist's eye only canbestow when the ORIGINAL is fixed before him. It is a small head-landholders,in oil. A few years afterwards it was copied, in sepia, on ayet smaller scale, by Mr. Beings, the well-known sculptor. I shall haveoccasion to mention this artist in a subsequent pagetHe was buried on the west side of Kensington churchyard, by the284 PUBLICATIONS. [Typographicalby my old and sympathising friend, the Rev. H. J.Todd a man, whose moral and social worth yettranscends his literary attainments.Entreating the kind indulgence of the reader toendure this digression, I proceed with the detail ofReminiscences" more in consonance with the professedcharacter of this work ; and resume the threadof my present TYPOGRAPHICAL narrative.I have observed that the first volume of theseside of a broad paved walk, with a flat stone upon his grave, denotinghim to have died on the 10th of February, when he wanted about threemonths of completing his ninth year. I alone attended the funeral ;little knowing what a part I should have to perform. I thought I musthave sunk into the grave with him ! I possess a small volume, puttogether, of scraps which the deceased was in the habit of executingconfirmation of what is above said of " making ancient MSS. and manufacturingfanciful title-pages." He first exercise his pencil in his fifthyear, on the memorable election of Byng, Burnett, and Hellish. Theprocessions of the rival candidates used to pass our house on the Terrace,affording an inspiring moment for a predisposed genius. The kindheartedreader need hardly be informed that I have uniformly consideredthis volume as the most precious of which I have ever been inpossession. A word only, to draw the curtain yet closer down uponthe departed. My friend, Sir Benjamin Brodie, opened the head, andfound all the symptoms of the disease of which he had died, abundantlyverified a disease, which I understand yet baffles the power of skill,or which, if by chance removed, is likely to be succeeded by idiocy.Heaven in mercy allowed it to terminate, in my case, as it DID. Prolongedwretchedness is dying a thousand deaths. The sooner thatwhich " is sown a natural body" is " raised a spiritual body," thebetter ; and if, after the inspiration of the preceding passage, I mayavail myself of an earthly authority, I would add, in the impassionedlanguage of ONE whose son sleeps not far distant from him whose lossis thus deplored . . .Mount, kindred spirit, to thy DESTINED REST!"That " One" was the late Mr. Canning and the verse here quoted isrfrom his epitaph upon his eldest son.Antiquities'] PUBLICATIONS. 285Typographical Antiquities was eminently successful.It was, in fact, an attempt to awaken the love of theliterature of past days ; to set wealthy and well-educatedmen a-stirring to collect materials, which, butfor such occasional excitement, might, in the end,moulder in oblivion. It had, undoubtedly, a veryconsiderable effect ; and the second edition of theBibliomania in the following year (1811), helped togive this feeling a more general and glowing spread.In the year 1812, the second volume of these Antiquitiesappeared ; devoted almost exclusively to theproductions dLWynkynDe Worde and Richard Pinson*.This volume was sold at once to Mr. Millerfor two hundred guineas. In the year 1816 appearedIt also contains an account of the publications of the presses of LET-toi,MACHLINIA, and JULIAN NOTARY; the latter profusely embellishedwith extraordinary, if not horror-striking, fac-similes. Thisvolume was printed at the Shakspeare Press, by the late Mr. Buller,in a manner to be in all respects worthy of its precursor. I own it tohave been a proud day in the chequered calendar of my life, when Isaw a copy of these first two volumes, upon large paper, knocked downat the price of THIRTY GUINEAS, at the sale of the late Mr. Towneley'slibrary, in 1814. The late Mr. Price of Bristol wrote me, that " Mr.Barnes, his neighbour, was disposed to give any price for a large papercopy, which I might think fit." These were BRAVE TIMES !The conclusion of the Preface of this second volume (dated Kensington,Nov. 11, 1811,) gave the first public intimation of my comparativelyintimate acquaintance with the library of EARL SPENCER. Ithad been preceded by a privately printed tract, entitled " Book Rarities''" The privilege of an easy access to the collection of EarlSpencer enables me to promise the reader a more abundant account ofthe treasures contained in it than will be found in the present volume.Indeed, the ' Book Rarities' of this magnificent library, especially inworks printed abroad, are reserved for a distinct publication." Beholdhere, gentle reader, the dawn of the BIBLIOTHECA SPENCERIANA.286 PUBLICATIONS. [ Typographicalthe third volume, containing a wider range of information,and embellished with yet more strikingfac-similes. Mr. Murray having succeeded Mr.Miller, on his retirement from business, and havingremoved his Penates from Fleet-street to Albemarle-street,became the purchaser of this third volume onthe same terms as his predecessor had purchased thelast. I believe that I am justified in saying that hedid not repent his bargain ; although it was evidentthat the general bibliomaniacal thirst was somewhatabating*. Within three years afterwards, on myreturn from the Continent, the fourth and last beforethe publication of this third volume, the work mentionedat the close of the last note, had made its appearance before a most encouragingpublic. Such a work, in four ponderous and splendidly executedimperial octavo volumes, was no trifling parentheses between thesecond and third volumes of these Typographical Antiquities. And yetso swiftly and hotly was the bibliomaniocal blood at this time rushingthrough my veins that I more than intimated the publication of myBibliographical Cameron before the appearance of the fourth volume !Of this third volume, the leading features of its contents are thus delineatedin the Preface : " The volume now put forth will be found,from its variety and richness, to possess a more general interest thaneither of those which have preceded it. There is scarcely a departmentin the whole range of early English literature, but what may be said to beillustrated in the following pages. The Romances of the Copland, theDramatic Pieces of the Castella and others, the Poetry of Godfrey,Wye, &c.; the Philology of Berthelet, the Law publications of Red-man,and the valuable body of Theology published by Grafton andWhitchurchj may render the present volume a valuable acquisition tothe curious : especially as, in each of these departments, much additionalmatter has been introduced, and many corrections have been made.The Embellishments, also, it is hoped, will be found to keep pace withits intrinsic worth ; but of those which face pages 40 and 462, I mayconfidently bespeak the warmest approbation of the skilful. Their accuracyand felicity of execution are alike admirable."Antiquities'] PUBLICATIONS. 287hume was published, on my own account, by thehouse of Longman and Co. Alas ! this was the settingsun of the concern*. Whether nine years wastoo long a period for keeping alive the public curiosity,or that fashion in books be as variable andshort-lived as in dress, certain it is, that this fourthvolume fell almost still-born from the press. Itcame out, however, with no lack of original splendour,and the copies on large paper towered as high,and luxuriated as proudly, as their predecessors t.Perhaps, on a calm and impartial retrospection,the fault was my own. I might have watched andcounteracted the shifting and turnings of publictaste. The experiment, which was innocently madeby me, upon its patience, seemed to be trifling withthe better feelings of well-disposed purchasers.Of these " embellishments' one (traced by my own pencil) is a facsimileof the frontispiece of Reverie's reprint of W. de Worde's editionof the Polychronicon ; the other, of Henry VIII. and his Privy Councilin full assemblage, was executed by the late Ebenezer Byfield, and isscarcely equalled for its united brilliancy and fidelity. It is taken fromthe wood-cut at the end of Hall's Chronicle of 1.548, printed by Grafton.Surely, HANS HOLBEIN must have been the designer, and the group isa collection of portraits?I lack present courage to attempt even the casting-up of theledger-page, but the impression on my mind strongly is, that the publicationjust squared its own expenses.t The remaining stock in hand of the large papers were sold to alarge house in the Row for somewhere about I/. 1*. each. They hadhardly been sold, when my old friend, Mr. Snare, of Reading, thebookseller, expressed a readiness to give 3/. 13*. 6d. for one copy.Will Fortune never cease to play her slippery tricks with one who has, atleast not abjectly, never yet courted her smiles, or dreaded her frowns ?She should more justly and honestly estimate an independent spirit.288 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.There might seem to be no end to the undertaking.Meanwhile, death would be busy with his dart, andrepresentatives or executors might be indisposed tocomplete the fabric of which the deceased had laidthe foundation. These are obvious and weightypoints, and are only to be answered by the confession,that if they cannot be repelled, they may be softened :that the Sisyphus-like toil of rolling a stone up ahill only to recoil upon the roller, is evidently thework of a man in the last extremity of mental imbecility: that " the labourer is worthy of his hire;"and that, if profit and patronage be withdrawn, it isa little too absurd to expect self-immolation in thepursuit of it. I feel quite persuaded that an institutionsimilar only to the " Royal Society of Literature"can successfully complete such a work as thatof the recent edition of THE TYPOGRAPHICAL Antiquitiesof GREAT BRITAIN. By whatever meanscompleted, it will be a repertory of valuable information.I now revert to the second edition of the Bibliomania,which made its appearance in the spring of1811. But the reader will not fail to observe, that,about this time, the preceding work had been started,and a third work (the Bibliotheca Spenceriana) was,in fact, in contemplation. So that, just now, I seemedto be imbued with the very spirit or essence of Bibliography.I cast this second edition of the Bibliomaniain a new mould, calling it a BIBLIOGRAPHICALROMANCE, in six parts ; and designated the PartsBibliomania.] PUBLICATIONS. 289thus: 1. The Evening Walk. 2. The Cabinet.3. The Auction Room. 4. The Library. 5. TheDrawing Room. 6. The Alcove*. The whole romanceis conducted by certain Dramatis Persona,who are called Lysander, Philemon, and Lisardo, asthe male ; and Belinda and Albans as the femalecharacters. Numerous other characters are incidentallynoticed of whom hereafter. I flew to theexecution or completion of this work, as to a refugefor distress of mind on the loss of my younger son ; towhich, indeed, a sufficiently pointed allusion is madein the Preface t. It may he called in all respectsThere were also three INDEXES: Chronological, Bibliographical, andGeneral. Nineteen or twenty copies were printed upon large paper, at10/. 10s. per copy the price of those of this PRESENT WORK. The largepaper copies of the Bibliomania have attained the price of thirty-fiveguineas, and are yet I believe hovering about twenty-five. Let me hopethat they will have as lucrative companions in the " PRESENT." Therewere also some few dozen copies of the small paper struck off with theword " Bibliomania" in the title-page printed in red ink. These arenow classed among the Libri Rarissimi.t In the following paragraph : " It remains only to add, that thepresent work was undertaken to relieve in a great measure the anguishof mind which arose from severe domestic affliction : and if the voice ofthose whom we tenderly loved, whether parent or CHILD, could be heardbeyond the grave, 1 trust it would convey the sound of approbation forthus having filled up a portion of that time, which every hour bringsnearer to those from whom we are separated." The immediately followingand concluding passage contains an extract from Volt. (Cat.Libro. Rarior. ed. 1793, prsef. p. ix.) which may not altogether bedeemed infelicitous. " Quis non AMABILEM earn laudable Insanity,quae universe rei literary non obfuit sed profit ; historic literary doctrinainfinite locupletavit ; ingentemque exercitus voluminous,quibus alias aut in remotiora Bibliothecarum publican sardinia commiserat, aut plane pereundum, a cancerous et interior vindicate,exoptatissimaeque lucy et eruditorum usus multiplied feliciter restituit ?"The preface is dated "Kensington, March 25, 1811."U200 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.an original work. It was carefully elaborated ; andthe notes, which are exceedingly full, may be fairlysaid to abound with pleasing and curious information.From my earliest appearance as an author, Iloved " an honest pennyworth," and thus resolved tothrow the greater portion of intelligence into a smallspace. Yet the price of the volume (I/. 7*0 alarmedme on the day of publication ; as, comparatively withthe present work, on the score of paper, printing,and embellishment, it is infinitely inferior in merit.My application was as incessant as severe. Thecool summer evenings of 1810 were in part devotedto a reconsideration and correction of the labours ofthe day. My little study, or boudoir, was rathercrammed than well stored with implements of work.There was scarcely a reference but what I couldverify. Mr. Heberr, at that time in the high and palmystate of his celebrity, would be my frequent guest*,and his breakfasts were given in exchange for mydinners. At one of these breakfasts I read to him thecharacter of AiTicust, intended for himself. I toldAnd more than once, twice, or thrice, would I return with him, ofmoonlight nights, to London ; and he go half back again with me toKensington, discussing many curious points or characters which afresh proof sheet might involve. I remember in particular the greatsatisfaction expressed by him on my bringing forward Strype's splendideulogy upon Cranmer (Bibliomania, p. 328-9). "I did not think(said he) old Strype was up to such eloquence."t That character is as follows. It may now be read with a deeperinterest than heretofore.Lis. I am quite impatient to see Attics in this glorious group, ofwhom fame makes such loud report.Yonder see he comes, Lisan'o! 'Like arrow from the hunter'sBibliomania.] PUBLICATIONS.him, if he would have the courage to hear, I shouldnot lack the courage to read. "Go on," was hisbow' he darts into the hottest of the fight, and beats down all opposition.In vain Boscardo advances with his heavy artillery, sendingforth occasionally a forty-eight pounder ; in vain he shifts his mode ofattack now with dagger, and now with broadsword, now in plated, andnow in quilted armour. Nought avails him. In every shape and atevery onset he is discomfited. Such a champion as Attics has perhapsnever before appeared within the arena of book gladiators :Blest with talents, wealth, and taste,'and gifted with no common powers of general scholarship, he can easilymaster a knotty passage in Aeschylus or Aristotle ; and quote Juvenaland Horace as readily as the junior lads at Eton quote their ' As inpraesenti.' Moreover, he can enter, with equal ardour, into a minutediscussion about the romantic literature of the middle ages, and the drythough useful philology of the German school during the sixteenth andseventeenth centuries. In the pursuit after rare, curious, and valuablebooks, nothing daunts or depresses him. With a mental and bodilyconstitution such as few possess, and with a perpetual succession ofnew objects rising up before him, he seems hardly ever conscious of thevicissitudes of the seasons, and equally indifferent to petty changes inpolitics. The cutting blasts of Siberia, or the fainting heat of a Maltesesirocco, would not make him halt or divert his course in the pursuit ofa favourite volume, whether in the Greek, Latin, Spanish, or Italianlanguage. But as all human efforts, however powerful, if carried onwithout intermission, must have a period of cessation ; and as the mostactive body cannot be at * Thebes and at Athens-at the same moment;so it follows that Attics cannot be at every auction, and carry awayevery prize. His rivals narrowly watch, and his enemies closely waylayhim ; and his victories are rarely bloodless in consequence. If,like Darwin's whale, which swallows ' millions at a gulp Atticsshould at one auction purchase from two to seven hundred volumes, hemust retire, like the ' boa-constrictor,' for digestion: and accordinglyhe does, for a short season, withdraw himself from ' the busy hum' ofsale rooms, to collate, methodize, and class his newly acquired treasuresto repair what is defective, and to beautify what is deformed : thusrendering them ( companions meet' for their brethren in the ruralshades of II Hall ; where, in gay succession, stands many a rowheavily lichen with rich and rare productions. In this rural retreat oracademic bower, Attics spends a due portion of the autumnal seasonu 2292 PUBLICATIONS. IBibliomania.reply, " and fear nothing." I did so, unhesitatingly ;and as I read with as much emphasis as might he,of the year ; now that the busy scenes of book auctions in the metropolishave changed their character and dreary silence, and stagnantdirt, have succeeded to noise and flying particles of learned dust.Here, in his ancestral abode, Attics can happily exchange the microscopicinvestigation of books for the charms and manly exercises ofa rural life ; eclipsing in this particular the celebrity of Caesar Antoninus,who had not universality of talent sufficient to unite the love of hawkingand hunting with the passion for book collecting.* The sky is nosooner dappled o'er with the first morning sunbeams, than up startsour distinguished bibliomaniac either to shoot or to hunt; either torealize all the fine things which Pope has written about ' lifting thetube, and levelling the eye or to join the jolly troop while they chantthe hunting song of his poetical friend. 1*Meanwhile, his house is not wanting in needful garniture to renderThis anecdote is given on the authority of Gesner's Pandects, fol.29.AXX<M /LUV fouicy (says the grave Antoninus), axxot h ojvlwv, axxoi S^uuv Iguciv:f/oco i/ Bi^Xj'wy wnicrfwg Ix watZatptov if 00; VT&TJX 7i69og .t Waken, lords and ladies gay,On the mountain dawns the day ;All the jolly chase is here,With hawk and horse and hunting spear :Hounds are in their couples yelling,Hawks are whistling, horns are knelling ;Merrily, merrily, mingle they,Waken, lords and ladies gay."Waken, lords and ladies gay,The mist hath left the mountains gray ;Sprinkles in the dawn are steaming,Diamonds on the lake are gleaming,And foresters have busy been,To track the buck in thickest green :Now we come to chant our lay,Waken, lords and ladies gay."WALTER SCOTT.The remaining stanzas will be found in the Edirib. Annual Register,vol. i. p. 11, p. 28.Bibliomania'] Publications. 293his cheeks were occasionally mantled with a blushhis frame a little agitated and a " bravo I" at itsa country residence most congenial. His cellars below vie with hislibrary above. Besides the ' brown October,' ' drawn from his darkretreat of thirty years and the potent comforts of every species ofbarley broth,' there are the ruddier and more sparkling juices of thegrape, ( fresh of colour and of look lovely, smiling to the eyes of many,'as Master Laneham hath it in his celebrated letter. Wherein part ofthe entertainment unto the Queen Majesty at Killingworth Castle inWarwickshire, Sc. 1575, is signified, edit. 1784, p. 14. I shall leaveyou to finish the picture, which such a sketch may suggest, by referringyou to your favourite Thomson.Lis. Your account of so extraordinary a bibliomaniac is quiteamusing : but I suspect you exaggerate a little ?Nay, Lisardo, I speak nothing but the truth. In book reputation,Attics unites all the activity of De Witt and Dominie with the retentivenessof Magliabechi and the learning of Le Long ; and yet he hashis peccant part.Lis. Speak, I am anxious to know.Yes, Lisardo ; although what Echinus hath said of the library attachedto the senate-house of Leipsic be justly applicable to his ownextraordinary collections yet Attics doth sometimes sadly err. Hehas now and then an ungovernable passion to possess more copies of abook than there were ever parties to a deed or stamina to a plant. Andtherefore I cannot call him a duplicate or triplicate collector. His bestfriends scold his most respectable rivals censure and a whole ' mobof gentlemen' who ' collect with ease,' threaten vengeance against himfor this despotic spirit which he evinces ; and which I fear nothing canstay or modify, but an act of parliament that no gentleman shall purchasemore than two copies of a work ; one for his town, the other forhis country residence.PHIL. But does he atone for this sad error by being liberal in theloan of his volumes ?Most completely so, Philemon. This is the parsmetior of everyt Singular eus ac propensity, in iuvandam erudition studio insigneimprimis monumentum exstat, Bibliotheca instructissima, sacrariumbone menti dictum, in quo omne, quod transmitted ad potestatemmeretur, copies recondite est. De Orig. et Increment. Typog. Lij>-thetis. Lips. An. Typog. sec. iii. sign 3.294 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.conclusion, told me that I had hit off my man successfully.There were numerous characters introducedinto the work, under feigned names. Of these,the major part are now at rest in their graves. Theveteran Bentley was designated as Orontes*. Mr.book-collector, and it is indeed the better part with Attics. Thelearned and curious, whether rich or poor, have always free access tohis library :His volumes, open as his heart,Delight, amusement, science, art,To every ear and eye impart.'Marion, Introduction.His looks therefore are not a stagnant reservoir of unprofitable water, asare those of Pontenallos : but like a thousand rills which run down fromthe lake on Snowdon's summit, after a plentiful fall of rain, they serveto fertilize and adorn every thing to which they extend. In consequencehe sees himself reflected in a thousand mirrors, and has a right to bevain of the numerous dedications to him, and of the richly ornamentedrobes in which he is attired by his grateful friends." P. 171, &c.In reply to this delineation of his character, that venerable and respectable"Commissioner of Stamps" wrote to me in the followingplayful strain :"June bth, 1811.Orontes, duly sensible of the kindness of the author of the Bibliomania,in the very obliging mention he has been pleased to make ofhim in the new and highly interesting edition of that work ; after acontest between the fear of vanity in appropriating so pleasing a characteras is there given of him j and the imputation of inattention andwant of respect to the friendly though too partial intentions of thewriter ; trusts that his thanks may be thus indirectly conveyed, withoutsubjecting him to the charge of presumption ; a charge, however, whichhe would more willingly incur than that of being thought deficient in adue regard and proper sense of grateful acknowledgment for so unexpecteda mark of Mr. Dibdin's favourable opinion of him ; an opinion,which Lenses will be happy to improve by a more frequent intercourseand more substantial services than he has yet had an opportunity ofaffording ; and which he requests Mr. Dibdin to command, wheneverand in whatever manner they may be thought most likely to be of use.*' Inspire does carta ration?, modoqitc.'PUBLICATIONS. 295Douce as PROSPERO, Mr. jennie as ARCHIMEDES,Mr. Baron Bolland as HORTENSIUS, Mr. G. Chalmersas AURELIUS, Dr. Gosset as LEPIDUS, Mr.Castlewood as BERNARDO*. Malone was Marcellus.Orlando was meant for MICHAEL WOODHULL.On presenting my departed friend BERNARDO with a copy of thefirst edition of the Bibliomania, in which so severe a sentence is passedby me, on a certain volume of poetry mentioned therein, and also noticedin more than one page of this present work and on sundry allusionsin that same first edition to his collection of Chatterton's pieces, Ireceived from him the following letter in reply. The Arabic numeralsat the beginning of certain lines relate to the same number of the pagein the first edition of the work.Dear Sir,T hold like you, the deed of former times,p. 10 Dabbling in verse, 'midst idling folly's crimes;Nor with Pindaric ode (though thro' each ageSome Colles Gibber, creeping, spoils a page)Chaunt thanks, or sing of Bibliomanias praise,And join the general voice your name to raise.Yet why forsake the muse, whose friendly swayAids your distress ? Return, and homage pay ;For when old Hearne and Heberr roughly rule,p. 60 And both unite to e push you from your stool ;'She marks with scorn the half-inglorious feat,Bids the ' boy bard' devise new magic cheat,p. 65 And rice you for ever to your seat.To acknowledge the receipt of your very amusing work, which thereis little doubt will not be confined to the black letter circle, and suggestif you grant aid to the forthcoming Bibliographer in the first number;I could wish to have it about Tuesday or Wednesday. A wish to walkinto the world, sanctioned by a host of friends, is the reason for againsuggesting this byYours very truly,J. Castlewood."t This was the British Bibliographer, of which the professed editorwas Sir S. Egerton Brydges, but the real staff of its support was held bymy deceased friend. The first number was published in June, 1810.296 PUBLICATIONS, [Bibliomania.Sir Walter Scott at that time blazing into extraordinaryreputation, and the author of two poems, " TheLay of the Last Minstrel" and "Marion," whichcan perish only with our language was designatedunder the character of SIR,TRISTREM *. In MenacesHe was thus delineated : " Hence SIR Triste, embosomed in hisforest retreat,. . . down the sleepy linnThat hems his little garden in,I contributed towards it an account of a volume of some rare pieces ofpoetry found in the Selden collection in the Bodleian library. I afterwardscontributed a portion of a Catalogue Raisonne, of LearnedPieces. This latter was never completed. My materials are at anygentleman's beck who will promise its completion.On the publication of the second edition of the Bibliomania, I presentedmy friend with a choice copy of it, accompanied by a note, ofwhich the original remain?, together with Mr. Castlewood's copy itself,in the possession of my amiable and excellent friend G. H. Freeling, Esq.I subjoin the answer of the Donee. The observing reader will noticein it " a smack" of that racy phraseology which, in after times, was sopeculiarly the writer's own."June 5th, 1811.MY VERY GOOD FRIEND,Many apologies are due to you for my neglect to acknowledge yourdistinguished favour in the Bibliomania, to which I certainly paid moreimmediate respect by cutting every leaf within an hour after it came tohand, to duly examine its legitimacy by external embellishments ; andcertainly pronounced, with all the authority of an ancient nurse, the babewas well worthy of the father. Of the internal matter I must evadegiving an opinion at present. First, my name obtains more consequencethan merit entitles it to, through your pages ; and, second, if you willcompile a valuable volume most absolutely crammed with abundance ofmatter, you must have mercy on such a reader as myself, and give patienceuntil he gets out of the hands of three printers' devils visiting himin daily succession, before he can duly scan your excellent materials,and not expect that, under the slippery word ROMANCE, you are to entirelydelude the time ofYours, very truly,J. Castlewood.Bibliomania'] PUBLICATIONS. 297and ULPIAN were identified some of the leading portraitsof my excellent friends, the Rev. Henry Druryand Edward Vernon Uttersonon, Esq., "good heartedmen and true" whose affections wane not withwaning fortunes. But I desist from further mentionof living names, as it is possible I may be walkingper ignesSupposition cineri colos"And yet, why not conclude these sketches with theintroduction of the author himself under the characterof ROSICRUSIUS* ? Has its resemblance nowentirely faded away ?is constantly increasing his stores of tales of genii, fairies, fays, ghosts,hobgoblins, magicians, highwaymen, and desperadoes and equally acceptableto him is a copy of Castillo's elegant version of Homer, or ofSt. Dunstan's book, de Occulta Philosophia ; concerning which latterElias Ashmole is vehement in commendation. ( Theatre. Chem. sign. A 4.rev). From all these, after melting them down in his own incomparablepoetical crucible, which hath charms as potent as the witch's cauldronin Macbeth, he gives the world many a wondrous sweet song. Whothat has read those exquisite poems, of the fame of which all Britainrings from side to side shall deny to such ancient legends a power totocharm and instruct?" P. 179.It is for the knowing reader to compare the original, now, with thisrepresentation of Him. TIME has doubtless cooled much of that ardourwhich once might have led to the "breaking of doublets, crackingelbows, and overflowing the room with a murmur," as described byTom Coryiate ; but, as long as he does not make the same incisionsupon the heart as upon the countenance and as far as a laudableenthusiasm yet impels that heart to beat I am as keenly sensibleas ever of the charms of Caxtons, De Wordes, ffearnes, Guercinos,and Albert Durer, &c. But for the character of Rosicrusius as it appearedtwenty-five years agoLis. A truce to this moralising strain. Pass we on to a short gentleman,busily engaged yonder in looking at a number of volumes,and occasionally conversing with two or three gentlemen, from five toten inches taller than himself. What is his name ?298-publications. [Bibliomania.But there were two characters, designated asMUSTAPHA and QUISQUILIUS, to which a somewhatROSICRUSIUS is his name ; and an ardent and indefatigable book-foragehe is. Although just now busily engaged in antiquarian researchesrelating to British Typography, he fancies himself, nevertheless,deeply interested in the discovery of every ancient book printed abroad.Examine his little collection of books, and you will find that, as Popeexpresses it in his Duncan,There Caxton sleeps, with Wynkyn at his side,One clasp'd in wood, and one in strong cow-hide.'and yet a beautiful volume, ' printed at Basil or Heidelberg, makes himspine ; and at seeing the word Frankfort or Venice, though but on thetitle of a booke, he is readie to break doublet, crackle elbows, and overflowsthe room with his murmure.' (Create's Crudities, ed. 1776,vol. i. sign. 1. 5.) Bibliography is his darling delight, ' una voluptaset meditatio assidua' (Le Long's Bibl. Sacra, ed. 1788, p. xx.) ; and indefence of the same, he would quote you a score of old-fashionedauthors, from Gesner to Charles, whose very names would excite scepticismabout their existence. He is the author of various works, chieflybibliographical, upon which the voice of the public (if we except a littlewicked quizzing at his black-letter propensities in a celebrated NorthBriton Review) has been generally favourable t. Although the old-maidensparticularity of Tom Hearne's genius be not much calculatedto please a bibliomaniac of lively parts, yet Rosicrusius seems absolutelyenamoured of that ancient wight, and to be in possession of thecream of all his pieces, if we may judge from what 'he has already published,and promises to publish, concerning the same. He once hadthe temerity to dabble in poetry ; but he never could raise his headabove the mists which infest the swampy ground at the foot of Parnassus.Still he loves ' the divine art' enthusiastically, and affects, forsooth,to have a taste in matters of engraving and painting ! Conversewith him about Guercino and Albert Durer, Bergen and Woollett,and tell him that you wish to have his opinion about the erection of alarge library, and he will ' give tongue' to you from rise to set of sun.Wishing him prosperity in his projected works, and all good fellows tobe his friends, proceed we in our descriptive survey." 169, 170.t The " little wicked quizzing" here alluded to, related to the strictureswhich appeared in the Edinburgh Review upon my edition ofMore's Utopia.Bibliomania'] PUBLICATIONS.melancholy tale may be said to belong. And yet Ihave ever doubted that a secret knowledge of theDiffer, before the day of publication, hastened thedemise of Him for whom it was intended. Assuredly,that individual must have been composedof very tender or combustible materials, which couldhave broken down, or caught fire and have beenconsumed, from such a harmless strain of railleryas that which marks the pages in question * ! I cannotbelieve it. As to Mustapha, he returned thefire in right earnest, and shotted his guns to theirvery mouth t. He survived the contest scarcelythree years. But peace to his Manes !It is with feelings of a mixed, but not ungenialdescription, that, in dwelling upon the immediateresults of the publication under consideration, I callto mind the various flattering TESTIMONIES which Ireceived from the pens of eminent men, respecting itsBy Quisquilius, a Mr. GEO. BAKER, a wholesale dealer in lace, inSt. Paul's Churchyard, was intended to he represented ; a worthy,good sort of man in his way, but singularly thin-skinned and sensitiveeven to lateness in his beloved pursuit after engravings and pricedcatalogues, and crotchety copies of second-rate productions. His collectionof Woollett* was, I believe, unrivalled ; but he was also eminentlyrich in Shares, Halls, and Browns. And who has not heardof this TRIO ?t I am free to confess, that it was not, perhaps, in the very besttaste to have revived this topic, as I have done, in the third volume ofthe Bibliographical Cameron, pp. 9, 10. And yet, who shall readthe concluding paragraph, and view the sun (in the wood-cut) settingupon Gardiner's tomb, and deny to its author at least the merit ofChristian sympathy ? I had no " vengeance" to wreak ; and if I hadpossessed it,, itwarred not with THE DEAD."300 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.intrinsic worth, or its means of affording entertainmentand instruction. I now regret that I did notpreserve the entire correspondence upon this subject; for surely, what is more soothing in after-lifethan the remembrance of such testimonies, coupledwith the conviction that nothing has been since doneto forfeit all claim to their continuance ? These areamong the treasures which best adorn the cabinetof a studious man. Pictures, books, busts, gems,coins, engravings, may enrich the elongated corridor,or irradiate the well-proportioned diningroom.Narcotics may enjoy all these to his heart'scontent ; but it shall be the solace of ROSICRUSIUS,to his dying hour, that, in the sardinia of his limitedreading-room, he possesses the " testimonies'' ofsuch heads and hearts as those with which thereader is about to be made acquainted. The imputationof vanity may be attached to their exhibition.Be it so. I am proud of such vanity.I will begin with the effusion of a very old friend,attired in a poetical garb, to which the reader is notaltogether a stranger. It is that of the Rev. JohnHorseman, rector of Peyton, near Boston, anddated August 29, 1811.How many years have past,Since at St. John's and Corpus last,At Baliol and at Queen's we met,A learned, philosophic set ?Or, beauty smiling, danced with glee,To needle dum and needle dee?Bibliomania'] PUBLICATIONS. 301Eccentric once, I 'm now a staid one ;Married, and Rector hight of Hereon :Of Little Chisholm also rector.Double preferment ! I might hector.No pluralist however ratedMy livings are consolidated.What changes both in men and thingsEach quick revolving morning brings ?Still I remain, and wish to be,Addicted to philosophy.Yet never cease to trust in God,Though men and things seem often odd.I, BIBLIOMANICAL,Fancy my stock of books too small ;My desperate case I state with sorrow,I cannot beg, nor steal, nor borrow ;But Emma more than once has said,I 've books enough to turn my head.Book-learning hereabouts is parish :I 'm thought a scholar in my parish.For in the village where I dwell,Not one can read, and few can spell.# # # * #If books you '11 lend me, then your cardDirect in this way, ' By George Ward,Catherine Wheel, Bishopsgate Street;'His cart is sure, though not so fleet :And in a box, or in a sack,Whate'er you lend, I '11 send safe back.And if at any time you '11 come,With Madam, to our humble home,My wife and I will try our bestTo entertain so rare a guest.But you must lay your wisdom by,Or you will be " too much for I."802 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.Though I shall get up scraps of laming,To suit a german so discerning ;And talk as big as I am able,When I Ve an author at my table.' "A common college friend and contemporary, ofwhose talents and reputation the preceding pageshave made no slight mention I mean the presentDean of St. Paul's and Bishop of Llandaff was thenpleased to acknowledge the receipt of a copy sent tohim by way of the revival of an old acquaintanceship.Oriel College, 2Qth June, 181 J."DEAR Slimybest thanks are due for the kind manner in whichyou have called our former intercourse to remembrance,and for the valuable present which has been conveyed tomeby the hands of your friend Mr. Heberr. The subjectis a curious one, and I have already read enough of yourvolume to promise myself much entertainment from it in aseason of greater leisure. Your notes are always interestingwherever I have examined them, and I was particularlystruck with your account of poor old A. Wood, whose zealandservices certainly entitled him to a better fate. HowI wish you, or some one like you, could be prevailed on tocontinue his HISTORY OF THE UNIVERSITY-}-. If someSee two pleasing specimens from the same pen at pp. 99, 100.t It is not a little curious, that some eighteen years after this letterwas written, I issued " Proposals" for publishing such a History of theUniversity as that to which the Bishop, in the above letter, calls myattention, and about which the future pages of this work will disclosesomewhat. Meanwhile, it is but justice to the kind and honourablefeelings of the Bishop to annex a portion of his answer to my letter respectingthe intended History of the University. It is dated Lansan-freed) Aug. 26, 1829. " My dear Sir It will be a great misapprehensionPUBLICATIONS.one does not soon set about collecting for it, we shall knowless of the state of things in the beginning of the eighteenthcentury than during many centuries before it.I remain, dear sir,Your faithful and obliged servant,E. COPLESTON."In the order of time, perhaps I ought to have previouslynoticed the following short note, written bythe late Colonel Johnes, the owner of Hafod, on receivinga copy of the first edition of the Bibliomania.Simple-street, June 19, 1809.MY DEAR SIR,I beg you will accept of my best thanks for your kindremembrance in sending me Bibliomania, and for the greatpleasure it has afforded me. It came to me late on Saturdaynight, and I could not resist breaking in on theSabbath to read it. You have treated us Maniacs veryof my motives if you should unfortunately think me deficient either indueattachment to Oxford or in respect and regard for yourself, when Isay that I cannot appear in the character of PATRON to your projectedwork, although I shall be happy to add my name to the list of 51. 5s.subscribers. In doing this, I go as far as I can with prudence, havingendless demands upon me in this poor diocese, and not being able tomeet them all to the extent I could wish. I wish you a continuance ofhealth, strength, and spirits to carry you through your arduous undertaking,and am, my dear sir, very truly yours, E. LLANDAFF." Ishould add, that a " PATRON" was a subscriber to the amount of 100/. oncertain conditions specified in the " Proposals." And I may also, as injusticebound, remark, that my friend Dr. Bliss's edition of Anthony aWood's Athlete Condenses is a most satisfactory record of the personalhistory of learned men up to the death of its original author. What Ihave said of this work at the conclusion of the advertisement of the thirdvolume of the Typographical Antiquities, may be most conscientiouslyrepeated at this day. Will Dr. Bliss ever receive encouragement to continuethat work to the close of the eighteenth century ? NEVER.304 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.tenderly indeed ; but if you can believe a collector, I HAVEDONE. We set out this day s'ennight on our way north-abouthome, which I hope to inhabit* in October, andshall be very happy to have the pleasure of seeing youthere.I am, my dear sir,Yours very truly,As a brother bibliomanical writer, my courtesy orchivalry necessarily induced me to send a copy of thework to the distinguished individual (Dr. Ferrara)whose performance had been in a great measure thecause of my own. His reply was as follows :Manchester, May 30th, 1811.SIR,I beg you to accept my grateful acknowledgments forthe present of your interesting work. It would be mereaffectation to say that I have not derived much informationfrom it, as far as I have had leisure to proceed; indeedyour knowledge of bibliography has excited my surprise.You must also allow me to thank you for your kind noticeof my slight poem, which was intended to touch a respectablefoible with as much delicacy as possible.I am, sir,Your faithful and obedient servant,The word " inhabit" alludes to the destruction of the previousbuilding by fire.PUBLICATIONS.The following, from the veteran and brother autobiography,SIR S. EGERTON Bridges, is characteristicin very many respects of the temper andframe of mind of its author. It is quite a con moreproduction,"January 16, 1812.MY DEAR SIR,Whatever discourages the passion for literature, is notonly a sin against taste, but, in my opinion, against morals.There is no pleasure so pure in itself, nor so extensive inits virtuous influence. Whenever I am withdrawn from it,it is with regret and compunction. For my part, my passionsare too much of tinder to find any thing but disquietand perturbation in the world ; and I fly to BOOKS as tocompany, among which every delightful affection love,charity, content, and admiration is cherished.The discovery of an old book always seems to me likethe revival of some forgotten being from the grave; and I takeit to be among the strongest traits of intellectual exertion,to feel an interest in the past that predominates over thepresent.Can wealth be more nobly employed than in collectingfood for the MIND ? And can erudition be more usefullydirected than in exciting and directing that employment?To me, life would be a paradise did my fate permit meto pass my time at ease in the luxury of London literature,unrestrained in my passion for seeing and collecting books ;but I have been tossed and buffeted about upon the wavesof the world from the age of twenty-three.There is nothing which I hate like a cold, calculating,dissecting talent, which is sometimes called philosophic.We are not mere creatures of reason, we are intended alsoto be creatures of sensation. It is only an union of heartand head that come to right conclusions. Without thelight of fancy, what are all the other faculties of the mind ?x306 PUBLICATIONS. \ BiUwmania,Your books are no dead letters no mere dry transcripts ;but while they furnish beautiful ornaments, set the sensesall in motion ; exhibit a happy talent of re-assembling andnew-combining your wide-sought and infinite materials.To lead the dance of ideas, to race over such an immeasurablefield of literature, can only be given to one of themost elastic and vigorous powers."And, there is no doubt, you will have your reward.You have it already in extended and honourable acquaintancein the doors and libraries that are opened to you ; inesteem, respect, and admiration. Even I, humble as havebeen my services to literature, have experienced somesmall portion of these effects of Late years. Among thefriends I most prize, the consequence has acquired mesome I should not otherwise have had ; and I assure you, Ishall return yours of that number ; yet were it not querulous,(an epithet which has been applied to me), I could showthat the measure I have had altogether is somewhat of thehardest."Nor less gratifying in all its bearings, is the ensuingletter from the distinguished author of theCuriosities of Literature" written in that amenityof style, and with that occasional sparkling point,which characterise the prompt and pleasant effusionsof his pen.MY DEAR SIR,Will you excuse an intrusion and an impertinence?My letter and my commendation; but as I have not yetrecovered from the delightful delirium into which your6 Bibliomania? has completely thrown me, will you blameme for 'having eaten of the insane root?'Your book, to my taste, is one of the most extraordinarygratifications I have enjoyed for many years. Youhave glued me down to two hundred pages at a sitting, andPUBLICATIONS. 307I can repeat the pleasure without losing it. It has exceededeven my hopes, which were not moderate, afteryour former small tract. Your dialogue is always pleasant,and is something better than a mere frame to hold yourcanvass : your plan is perfectly original, and has been wonderfullycontrived to give cohesion and unity to such curious,yet heterogeneous matter. You have done more, and of ahigher nature. You have infused your feelings into thebreast of your reader, who is in the slightest degree infected;and while with the most exquisite inebriation he revelsamong your Book-bacchus, you contrive to sober him by atouch of the Thyrsus which I take to be in this case a pricedcatalogue.You will make me return with ardour to a favouritebibliographical scheme, at which I have long been labouring:amidst the darkness and difficulties which occur insuch subterraneous pursuits, you have thrown a beam oflight in the mine.Believe me, with great esteem,My dear sir,Yours truly,King's Road, Bedford-row, I. D'lSRAELI."MayWth, 1811.And here, let the effusions of a late common friendof Mr. D'Israeli and myself tell their tale, in displayingtheir author's peculiar habits of thinking andfeeling. Who that reads these pages will not be gladto peruse a letter or two from the pen of FRANCISDOUCE, the " Prospero" of the Bibliomania?"British Museum, June 19th, 1811.MY DEAR SIR, ,You have put an additional ten per cent, on my gratitudefor your friendship and kindness in all respects. 1wish all other taxes were as light and pleasant. You havex 2308 PUBLICATIONS. [ Bibliomania.given us another Morice Encomium, seasoned with a saltwhich that work has not with the united flavour of gaietyand good humour. Yet I fear that you, like many otherdoctors, will only make the disease worse. I have more totell you about the portrait of Pynson, that I trust will gratifyyou. I think you were kind enough to accede to mywish, that you would take a literally family repast heresome day ? I am vexatiously occupied this week ; but ofthe ensuing one, you will greatly oblige me by choosing aday for the above purpose.Ever yours, with great regard,F. DOUCE."Again : the description of reviewers, at p. 18, is admirable.They are the very bane of learning the per-letters of knowledge. The Catalogue raisonne of cataloguesis a most valuable article, and supplies a chasm in all thebibliographical works; but it will most certainly multiplythe number of Maniacs."There is nothing calculated to offend the most fastidiouscritic, and I had almost said cursed be he who wags hitongue against it.' It will afford me inexhaustible amusementin the country. Whether it will perfect the cure ofmy disease (I mean that of the brain, not of the bronchia),I know not. I say perfect ; for it had been almost curedby that grand ministerial antidote, the income tax. Yourremedy, like many other people's, will, I fear, prove tomany of the patients rather inflammatory than sanative.Adieu, my good friend, may you always prosper,QUOD " F. DOUCE.""Your book has much amused me the last week, andtransported me to scenes of imaginary pleasure, which is all1 expect in this world, where there is very little in reality.IHMiomama.'] PUBLICATIONS. 309I fear you will think me too sparing of commendation inthe enclosed paper *, but you courted my censure ; and asfor my praise, take it in the wholesale ; and I think youwill receive it from the world except from a few invidiousspirits of the Soils tribe.Go on in all your enterprises and prosper ;So wishes your affectionate friend,F. DOUCE."My friend having retreated into the country,wrote to me on his " concentration" (as he used tocall it, for he was a long time settling in the followingmanner characteristic, in all respects, of hisvery singular modes of thinking and habits of life.I should add, that the first part, referring to thelate Mr. Enrich, related to my going to Cambridgeto collect materials for the second volume of theTypographical Antiquities," and for the portraitof Dr. Askew in particular.Cambridge, 29th July, 1811.MY DEAR FRIEND,You have herewith a certificate of your good behaviourto pass you to KERRTCH, who is a friendly and worthy man,and likely to render you all the service you may need onthe subject of the portrait. He is himself very capable ofmaking a drawing of it, but as I know he does not nowlike these jobs, from the state of his eyesight, I have notventured to ask him. Should he, however, in some happymoment make you such an offer, do not scruple to acceptof it without hesitation, for he is accuracy itself.1 am truly rejoiced to hear of the favourable receptionx Which contained two pages of Corrigenda et Addenda.310 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.of the Bibliomania; which, in all respects, it most amplydeserves. It is a most happy combination of good-humour,agreeable amusement, and solid information. There is anomission that I hope will be very soon supplied in a newedition. It is this that the Auction Maniacs are very properlyshut up, or rather out, during the very warm weather.It would be impossible that in the dog-days, at least in suchas the present, Leigh's rooms could be approached withany degree of safety. The rabies (biblio-canina) would rageto such an extent, that the poor madmen would not onlybe snarling and barking, but absolutely biting each other,and whomsoever they met, whilst the chagrin at their disappointmentscontinued. It were well that at all timesMr. Leigh had a tub of salt water wherein the biddersshould be dipped on their departure.For myself, though my bibliomania is pretty well cured,thanks to Doctors Pitt, Perceval, and Co., I cannot say thatI am at present much better in other respects than when Ihad the pleasure of seeing you. I begin to despair of everrecovering the unimpaired use of my voice, which, if it bebetter one day, is bad again on the least accession of cold(rheum), or after any exertion in talking. I am, moreover,so excessively relaxed, that I cannot stir out when the sunshines,nor can I at present keep myself cool indoors. Iwas going to write at home but I recollected that I haveno home. My cottage is but two stories high, and the upperrooms are so heated by the solar rays in the day-time, thateven during the night I swelter with heat. I cry out withthe psalmist, * O that I had wings like a dove !' and thenI would fly to the sea-coast especially if I could meet youthere, and get a few of such pleasant walks as I had toDulwich College, opposite to which, at the old white woodenhouse, my friend Disraeli is now dwelling, and gleaningthe library for a new volume of ' Curiosities.'I am here a sad, solitary prisoner, almost without anysociety. There is not, so far as I know, a book worthBibliomania'] PUBLICATIONS. 31110^. 6d. in the whole parish whose inhabitants are the mostilliterate of all others. I sent a very civil, humble, and modestrequest to a very opulent* man, whose grounds are near me,that I might be indulged in the privilege of walking in ashady walk during his absence. To this I had no answer,and I sometime afterwards learned the reason, viz. that hecould not write. I took the liberty of observing to my informantthat he might at least have used his tongue, thoughhe could not his pen. My neighbours, with the exceptionof two friendly quaker bleachers of great opulence, aregenerally Saturday-tom Monday ?men gig fellows, that consumehalf their time of recreation on the road, and the restin soaking through the Sunday. There is, notwithstandingall this misery, no moving from this spot for a considerabletime. I am spell-bound, and therefore I know not how toget my Pynson to you. There is no getting to Londonand back again on the same day, and I have at present nohabitation or home to contain me for a week which I must,however, spend in London before September ; and then Iwill do what I can for you. It is quite impossible thatanybody can get at anything in my absence, as the roomsare all locked against the besiegers and their scaling ladders.In the mean time, I will answer your queries to the best ofmy power.1. ' Is it Pynson's edition of the Ship of Fools, 1509,on vellum, in the Bibl. Imperial ?' What I saw was, tothe best of my recollection, a quarto, and the edition byW. de Worde, 1517, translated into prose by Watson *the same as my copy lent you in the last parcel. I shouldbe very positive about this, if you had not embarrassed meby speaking of this imperial copy in Bibliomania, p. 90, asMr. Douce was under a mistake ; as the copy upon vellum in theRoyal Library of France was of the date of 1509. See the Tour, vol. ii.p. 103, second edition. His own copy, of 1517, is fully described in;h<- Ti/png. Antique vol. ii. p. 216.312 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.printed by Pynson, 1509 (i. e. the first folio), sam veryapt to confound Wynkyn de Worde and Pynson togetherwhen trusting to memory ; but to be certain of the matter,I must look at my Parisian notes, if I chance to have madeone of the said copy.2. My copy of Reynard the Fox, by Pynson, is veryimperfect. It was Herbert who supposed it the only specimenextant. But it is not unlikely that a keen houndlike yourself will unkennel such another. This you shallsee as soon as I can get at it.I have one vellum printed by Pynson.Did I shew you the beautiful < Orchards ofSyon?' (Ithink by Wynkyn, not Pynson). I should like to go withyou to the Sion Dames, at Walworth, with this book inour hands, and compare their crowns of thorns with the portraitof the abbess in the book. I have not many Persons,but they are all marked in my Herbert, which youwill also want again."3. I have two or three Julian Notary* One, a finecopy of the Golden Legend, afterwards made perfect in thelife of Thomas a Becket, that had, as usual, been cut out ;also a c Liber Festivals.'It is well there are no other queries at present as Isee that I have merely space left to say God bless youheartily, and prosper you in all your undertakings.Most sincerely yours,P. S. ELLIS promised to come down here. I wish youwould come with him giving a day's notice, that I maynot be absent. If either of you be a gig-man, it may bevery easily and pleasantly accomplished, being one and ahalf hour's drive ; and remember that Tuesdays and Fridaysare always fish-days not Elizabethan, with nothing besides;PUBLICATIONS. 313but in augmentation, not diminution. The Carshalton portis very good. I could not get my own down, because whenI sent to the Permit Office they said, 'the gentleman'sbutler (his footman won't do !) must come and swear theduty is paid.' This is liberty with a vengeance ! I expectwe shall be obliged, by and by,* to keep a librarian to swearthe duty is paid-on our 1470's, before we can use them atourcountry houses."But few of these gratulations epistles afforded meamore lively pleasure than that from my friend theRev. H. I. Todd who seems to have put all thewell-known warmth of his feelings into the followingImpromptu."Grosvenor-square, Thursday Morning.DEAR D ,I came to town yesterday afternoon, and brought upwith me (what herewith I return with sincere thanks),The pleasant, pithy e^ and delectable Romance of the re-owned knight of the Rosie Crosse ;" (Do you know him ?)I say renowned, which is the true reading ; not renowned, asyou applied the word to that mirror of literary knighthood,R. Heberr, in your note to me last week. I intended reprovingyou in your own house for not using gentle MasterSpenser's (and others) 'renowned I am glad I did not;for time has softened my indignation. I made about half-a-dozenremarks on the romance, which I intended shouldhave accompanied this letter ; but I find I have left themin my library. You shall have them, (if it be only to laughat me) next week, as I am to call on Beloe some morningearly, and will knock at your door in my way. As toMr. Donee's notes, they have been read by me in the truespirit of sub-rosa ; so, good friend Rosi-crusius> fare theewell.Yours ever faithfully,H. I. TODD."314 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.There was one communication which I* received,particularly agreeable to me, from the late Mr. Hamperof Birmingham ; in which the writer noticedthe palpable errors that had crept into, and defaced,the reprint of one of the most curious, original,and amusing volumes of other times. I allude toMaster Laneham's account of the Entertainmentgiven to Queen Elizabeth at Kenilworth Castle ; " avolume, which has evidently supplied the late illustriousauthor of the Novel of Kenilworth, with many appropriatematerials, and with many a characteristicdescription. This curious book was first printed in1575, and is introduced, in rather a lengthy note, atp. 349 of the Bibliomania. Hear, gentle reader,how the reprint of it, in 1784, is spoken of by onevery competent to pass judgment upon the same.Birmingham, September 17, 1811.And now for a communication of great importance.The ' perturbed spirit' of Dr. Farmer has been effectuallylaid by your good humoured amende in the Gentleman'sMagazine; but know ye that a certain 'sprightly figure,'4 clean trust, and gartered above the knee, and flourishingwith his ton sword," is calling loudly on you for satisfaction ;'and being very cunning in fens,' I shall advise you toappease the genial without delay. His name is CAPTAINCox, and he lives in pp. 349-50 of your Bibliomania. Thewrong he complains of, is, your representing him as possessorof only ' two more' ballads, besides Broom,, broom onhill, &c. ; whereas, his friend Laneham rightly tells us thatthey were a ' hundred more. 9 The fact, my good Sir, is,that you have copied from the vile reprint of Laneham'sletter (Warwick, 1784), one of the most incorrect PUBLICATIONS. 315lions that ever disgraced the press where two is stupidlyprinted instead of the numerals 100, though the original containsthe word hundred at full length. I have recently had anopportunity of correcting my copy by the first edition, a(12mo. of 87 pages) black letter, the title supplied in MS.by the late Rev. Josh. Greene, M. A., rector of Belford,county of Gloucester, formerly belonging to Mr. West,which (that is to say, my corrected reprint), shall be sentfor your examination, if you wish it ; and really I know nothow otherwise to give you an idea of the numberless variationswhich the blurred pages exhibit. Your extracts maybecorrected by it ; for instance, the " bye way to the Spitehouse," happens to be " the Thy wey *."In making some researches for the history of a neighbouringparish (Aston juxta Birmingham), I lately met with thewill of Roger Holden, dated June 4th, 1488, wherein he bequeathesto his curate (i. e. the vicar of Aston) his ' BESTBOOKS :' thus <y bequeath tho my curate 6 best books thathaue. y This information I have introduced, with the followingremark, (a la D n). ' Imagination readily pictures thishappy priest taking possession of his legacy, arid huggingthe dear delightful volumes to his heart with the ardour ofa TRUE BIBLIOMANIAC; then, hastening to his half-timberedvicarage, and carefully depositing them in an iron-boundoak chest, though not till he has looked them all over, andselected one of the choicest for his amusement after vespers.'With every good wish for your health and success,I remain, dear sir,Your much obliged and obedient servant,WILLIAM HAMPER."I presume this to be Robert Copeland's edition of the work inquestion, of which a particular account may be seen in the TypographicalAntiquities, vol. iii. p. 122, c.3 1 6 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.And, indeed, in reference to the quotation fromLaneham's book, my friend Mr. Utters, atthat time occupied in fitting-up one of the mostbeautiful book-boudoirs in London (to which a referencehad been made in the pages of my work) thuswrote to me upon the occasion.June 17, 1811.Many thanks for your acceptable present of the c Bibliomania,'which being once entered on, compelled me tobecome a ' borrower of the night for a dark hour ortwain' to finish it. I can truly say, that I was much amusedand interested by it," &c.Again : " From < the Cabinet,' of which the stained glasswas furnished full two hundred and fifty years ago, ( withother appropriate embellishments, when the evening sunbeamsthrow a chequered. light throughout the room, 'tispleasant' to address thanks to a literary friend whose researcheshave informed, and whose lucubrations have amused,our thoughtful and our idle hours. Such, I may with truthassert, has been the effect of your ' Bibliomania' of whichI have read as far as the note on < CAPT. Cox.' Would toheaven the Mason's stores could appear at our friend's(Lochs's) in King-street ! ! ! Even with Attics I wouldstrive for the possession of some (at least) of the Captain'streasures. On such an occasion alone, I should say to him,in the words of Tibullus, ' Vos quoque abesse procul jubeo.'I spoke, a long time since, to the master of Dulwich College,and have procured you a welcome to their library.Adieu, yours sincerely,E. V. U."My Harrow friends, Messrs. DRURY, BUTLER, andEDWARDS, were also prompt in their expressions ofcongratulation on the appearance and certain ']PUBLICATIONS. 317cess of the work. The latter, an experienced judgein such matters, " congratulated me on the growingardour of the public, as well as on the credit theygave to me on displaying the Bibliomania. Tenguineas for a large paper copy of an octavo volumewas beyond all former history of large paper octavosat the first publication, and deserved to be recorded!"JAMES EDWARDS, Harrow Grove, 21 Nov. 1811.Yet one more, and the last. It is from the late WAI.FORD, a bookseller of Manchester, of abating enthusiasmand diligence in his vocation : a man, whoselife had been chequered by many vicissitudes, andwhose heart I have understood to have been ultimatelybroken down by their pressure. I spoke ofhim in my book as a sense of truth, justice, and obligationtold me I ought to speak. Mr. Ford's letteris as follows.Manchester, June 16, 181 1.I have to thank you for the handsome manner in whichyou speak of me as a bookseller ; although it was my loveof books, not of lucre, which first induced me to becomeone, and I was a collector many years before I was one ofthe honourable fraternity. However, then I had not thepleasure of knowing you, or we might have done each othermore mutual kindnesses than it is now in my power, or indeedconsistent as making the book-trade my business**The sale of the work I should think must be very great.Pray give me some particulars, as well as of the charactersyou have introduced into it, many of which I am at a lossto make out.I have sold a good number of your * Bibliomania* here ;though, to my sorrow, the disease does not exist in anygreat degree. But indeed it may be very readily accounted318 ^" PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.for, from the prevalence of a more fatal disease, which hasabsorbed every other, and rages with a more extended influencethan was ever known before; I mean POVERTY ifit may be allowable to call it a disease, and which no ranksare free from. I assure you that I feel the effects of it mostlamentably ; but it is useless pining, therefore 1 will conclude,but not without assuring you that I am most sincerelyyourFaithful and obliged humble servant,W. FORD."Such are a few of the commendatory epistles whichI received shortly after the publication of this originalwork*. I might easily increase their number;I call it "original" simply as stating a very obvious truth. Theplan is carried on by " Dramatis Persona;" of whom the author mustof necessity be one j and therefore he may as well slip on the guise ofLYSANDER at once. Lorenzo was the late Sir M. M. Sykes, Bart. Theplan is slightly developed in the first three pages of the book. " It wason a fine autumnal evening, when the sun was setting serenely behind athick copse upon a distant hill, and his warm tints were lighting up amagnificent and widely extended landscape, that, sauntering midst thefields, I was meditating upon the various methods of honourably fillingup the measure of our existence, when I discovered, towards my left,a messenger running at full speed towards me. The abruptness of hisappearance, and the velocity of his step, somewhat disconcerted me ;but on his near approach my apprehensions were dissipated.I knew him to be the servant of my old college friend, whom Ichoose here to denominate LYSANDER. He came to inform me, in hisblunt and honest manner, that his master had just arrived with Philemon,our common friend ; and that, as they were too fatigued with theirjourney to come out to me, they begged I would quickly enter the houseand, as usual, make them welcome. This intelligence afforded me theliveliest satisfaction. In fifteen minutes, after a hearty shaking ofhands, I was seated with them in the parlour ; all of us admiring theunusual splendour of the evening sky, and, in consequence, partakingof the common topics of conversation with a greater flow of spirits.You are come, my friends said I, (in the course of conversation) ' tomake some stay with me : indeed, I cannot suffer you to depart with-publications.but the present is a sufficient portion of parasiticalextract. A more pleasing result followed, in theout keeping you at least a week, in order, amongst other things, to viewthe beauty of our neighbour LORENZO'S grounds, the general splendourof his house, and the magnificence of his Library' ' In regard togrounds and furniture,' replied Lysander, ' there is very little, in themost beautiful and costly, which can long excite my attention ; but thelibrary' ' Here,' exclaimed Philemon, 'here you have him in thetoils.' ' I will frankly confess (rejoined Lysander) that I am an arrantBIBLIOMANIAC that I love books dearly that the very sight, touch,and more, the perusal' ' Hold,'my friend, (again exclaimed Philemon)you have renounced your profession : you talk of reading books, doBibliomaniacs ever read books ? ' * Nay (quoth Lysander), you shallnot banter me thus with impunity. We will, if it please you said he(turning round to me), 'make our abode with you for a few days; andafter seeing the library of your neighbour, I will throw down the gauntletto Philemon, challenging him to answer certain questions which youmay put to us, respecting the number, rarity, beauty, or utility of thoseworks which relate to the history and antiquities of our own country.We shall then see who is able to return the readier answer.'' Forgive (rejoined Philemon) my bantering strain. I revoke myspeech. You know that, with yourself, I heartily love books: morefrom their contents than their appearance.' Lysander returned a gracioussmirk, and the hectic of irritability on his cheek was dissipated inan instant. The approach of night made us think of settling our plans.My friends begged their horses might be turned into the field, andthat, while they stayed with me, the most simple fare and the plainestaccommodation might be their lot. They know how little able I was totreat them as they were wont to be treated ; and therefore, ' taking thewill for the deed,' they resolved to be as happy as an humble roof couldmake them." Page 1 3.But Lysander had something else to do than to indulge in mereliterary chit chat for the amusement of his guests. Dry and dusty authorswere to be taken down and rummaged ; and I think that I speaksoberly when I say, that nearer three hundred than two hundred of suchauthors were pretty carefully examined. Including the various worksof these authors consulted and referred to, not fewer than/owr hundredmust be considered as the number. In regard to MORHOP in particular(him upon whom Johnson seems to lay a most emphatic stress) I mightat that time be said to have had his Polyhistor Literary at my fingers'end. Hard, dogged, fagging was the basis of all the vivacity of theBibliomania.320 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.consolidation of old, and in the formation of new,acquaintances and friendships. Among the former,the names of Dutch and ELLIS* are to he mentionedMr. Gutch, who has of late years worked his way to such honourabledistinction as the editor of one of the most flourishing provincialnewspapers in the kingdom, was then a bookseller of eminence at Bristol.I knew him from early life ; and knew and respected his excellent father,the late venerable Registrar of the University of Oxford. The son thuswrote to me, on the third of June, 1811, scarcely a fortnight after thepublication of the work : f ' May I now request, that if the large papercopy have not left Longmans, you will desire them to send it off by thefirst mail, without waiting for any parcel. I have this day made thema remittance (10/. 10s.) to pay for it; and I trust the precious book willsoon be in my possession. I have been devouring the contents of oneof the small paper copies, of which I have ordered ten to be immediatelyforwarded for I am sure it will take rapidly among my BIBLIOMANIACShere." May I ask, where be those "Bibliomaniacs" NOW? Let meadd, that one of these identical "ten" copies, bound in yellow calf, withgilt leaves, by Lewis, was afterwards sold for 6/. 6s., the highest pricewhich the small paper ever reached. Mr. Lowndes is wrong in sayingit has brought Si. 8s. Mr. John Da vies, a bookseller at Shrewsbury,now marks an uncut copy at 51. 15s. 6d. The original price was twenty-sevenshillings ! From Mr. (now Sir Henry) Ellis, the principal librarianof the British Museum, I received many friendly suggestions, and muchvaluable information, which I believe to be duly recorded. What dayswere those, when the writer could commence thus ! " Dear D., I havetaken a long sheet of paper, in hopes to obtain your pardon for such along neglect. My delay has been principally occasioned by my fruitlesssearches after the memorandum of the French book blotted and blurredby a princess. Where it is deposited, I cannot tell. H. E/' Alas ! betweenourselves, good Sir Henry, these "long sheet of paper" days areirrevocably past. " Double, double toil and trouble," becomes the lot ofthat man, placed, as my friend now is, at the head of a large and everlastinglyvisited Establishment !But shall we never see a continuation of his delightful " Letters, illustrativeof English History ? " Have we for ever ceased to walk intothe boudoirs, banqueting rooms, and bedchamber of our illustriousancestors ? to shake hands with the Henries, Elizabeth, Rameses, andCharles's of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries? Retain yourlamp, most renowned protomagister, and let us dance another cabrioletwith Hatton, and smoke another pipe with Raleigh. Let us untiePUBLICATIONS. 321with no trifling gratification : among the latter,those of the Right Hon. Thomas Grenville, SirMark Masterman Sykes, Sir Walter Scott, Sir FrancisFreeling, and the Rev. Henry Drury *. To these,another state-packet from Cecil, and see how Clarendon dips his pencilinto the imperishable colours of his pallet. THIS, this is HISTORY divestedof sonorous periods and distorted views. Retain the lamp.Where, but in the British Museum, is there an inexhaustible supply ofproper sperm oil? And then, my friend threads his pearls so prettilyand so dexterously ! Does he want more coaxing ? He will find it inthe unanimous approbation of every intelligent reader, and of everyright headed and right hearted patriot. So, to the lamp again !It will be difficult it will be impossible for me ever to forget myfirst, and indeed many subsequent, sensations of delight, on entering thelibrary, and examining the treasures of the distinguished individualFIRST above named. And, since that time, how have these treasures,both in number and intrinsic value, been increased ! What can I add tothe observations in the Introduction to the Classics and in the Biblio-phobia respecting this most extraordinary library ? And how beautifullyplaced and appropriately furnished ! This perhaps were common praise,except that the OWNER of these treasures has a thorough acquaintancewith their contents. " Intus et in cute" are they understood and appreciatedby him ; and I can conceive no more perfect catalogue of acollection of books than that which, in a ponderous green-coated volume,lies upon the table of its right honourable possessor, accompanied by thenotes, written on slips of paper, which are inserted in each book. Longmay that possessor YET retain his treasures, and long be in the occupationof his Adversaries!I have said enough upon all occasions, in and out of print, to expressmy entire and affectionate respect for Sir M. M. SYKES, when " he wasamong us ;" and now that he is " taken hence," I reiterate those expressionsof unmitigated attachment to his memory. He has left behindsuch a memorial of his ardour in the collection of BOOKS and PRINTS, consideredconjointly, as has not been equalled. The amount of both saleswas 36,436/. ; add to these, his coins produced 1,462/., and his picturesand bronzes 5,901/. Never did the owner of such treasures morethoroughly enjoy them ! Never was one more keen in their acquisition!Sweynheym and Pannartz, and Collar, were the gods of hisidolatry ! As to the THIRD individual above named, he wrote to methus, immediately on the receipt of a copy of the Bibliomania of whichy322 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.too, let it be allowed me to add that of my late honouredand illustrious Patron, EARL SPENCER. TheI had begged his acceptance. " A thousand thanks, my dear sir, foryour lively satire, from which I expect no small amusement in mynorthern journey, which I commence on Thursday. Wishing youevery success in your laborious and useful undertakings, I remain,dear sir, your obliged humble servant, WALTER SCOTT. Half moonsTuesday" This illustrious character will he more particularlyintroduced to the reader in a subsequent page. Meanwhile, where ishis BIOGRAPHY by his Son-in-law ? Surely that intelligent writer isduly impressed with the necessity of catching the attentions and fixingthe interests of the great mass of the public, before the nap of curiosityis allowed to be rubbed off, or the subject to become weaned from memoryby a succession of other objects ! " Oh, spring to life ! auspiciousBOOK, be born ! "With what gratifying sensations do I dwell upon the name of SirFRANCIS Feeling, Bart., the fourth individual above mentioned, whenI compare his brief note sent to me, at this time, with his innumerableLETTERS since transmitted letters, in which the good breeding of agentleman and the kind-heartedness of a friend have been equally anduniformly evinced. Sir Francis, just after the publication, writes thus:I have been revelling for the last two days in the delights of yournew edition of the Bibliomania." And few readers could enjoy thatspecies of revelling better ; for its author was just now beginning tolay the foundation of that curious and select library of which the followingpages will afford delectable evidence. The fifth name, and oneof not the least calibre, above notified, is that of my excellent friendthe Rev. HENRY DRURY, of Harrow ; whose attachment has been unvarying,and whose friendship has ever shone with a polar-star-likefidelity. I was indebted to the late Mr. Edwards, of Harrow, for myintroduction to this admirable scholar ; and the half pint of true classicalValerian quaffed in his oblong cabinet was the commencement of ourtaking sweet counsel together." Shortly after this introduction,having felt his pulse and exactly ascertained its bibliomaniacal pulsation,I sent him a beautiful copy of the Sermons of St. Chrysostom, printedin the Latin language by Laver, at Rome (see Bibl. Spencer, vol. i.p. 192), and was tempting him to do " a bold stroke of business" inthe way of collecting Hearne's pieces. Moreover, I apprised him ofmy intention of introducing him in the auction-room of the Bibliomania,under the character of Menaces. His reply, dated Nov. 16, 1810, isBiMwnuinta.'] Publications.visit paid to Al thorp, as described in the Biblio-graphical Cameron, vol. iii. p. 388, took placeshortly after the publication of the Bibliomania.My printer, Mr. Me. Creery, partook of the generaljoy diffused around ; and before the conclusion of hislabours, indulged in many whimsical effusions andoriginal conceits. Above all was he gratified at thestruggle to obtain a copy of it upon large paper. Ithink, upon the whole, I netted about 200/. ; butthis was considered by me the least part of theremuneration ; as in truth I had deserved it on thescore of " delving and digging" only*.as follows: "The glossiness of the Chrysostom is beyond all praise.I am much obliged to you for the offer about the Hearnes : but thoughI sometimes take a leap headlong, it is only when the shore is in view,and Hearne is an interminable abyss. Besides, I am so very muchbitten, that nothing but the old genuine Hearnes would now suit me.As for the apotheosis which you intend to give me in your auction-room,I fear I shall appear very ridiculous ; not having sufficient confidencein me to think myself worthy to tie the latchet of Dr. Gosset'sshoe. Thanks, however, for the immortality you will confer. Wheneveryou, or you and Uttersonon, will come and see me, I will put on mybest coat and waistcoat, and order the cradle spit to the fire. Evertruly yours, H. D." About a twelvemonth afterwards, on my havingpresented the school library at Harrow with a copy of this mischievousvolume, my excellent friend writes thus : " Nothing have I to plead indefence of my not having answered your letter, but the idleness of abusy man. I have read Bibliomania through most religiously, andhope I have risen from the perusal ' a wiser and a better man Thereare, however, still some wards of the key which I do not understand.What pleases me much, Heberr, though an enemy to large paper, hasdescribed to me the 1. p. Ames, which I shall so soon possess ; andB d's luck in being admitted to a copy. H. D."See the conclusion of the note at page 272. John Me. Creery wasthe printer. A few typographical MACREERIANA may not be PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.Its reception with the Literati (if the evidence ofReviews may be depended upon) was most en-acceptable,if it be only as a votive offering at the shrine of their author,who was carried off in the cholera which raged at Paris about three yearsago. After some twenty sheets had been worked off, he estimated thewhole work at about 4/. per sheet. The corrections had then reached17/. The next "missive" ran thus : a "fast day" have just precededits issuing.Fast and pray,"Come in the wayOf Bibliomania :No blame is mineIn the faulty line ;The deed is thine.H. swears he'll workLike any Turk.And in reply to the observations of a young and impatient author, hewrites thus : " I have done all in my power for the furtherance of yourwork ; and if it were to prevent heaven and earth from coming together,I cannot do more than I am doing. For mercy's sake, have a day's, orat most an hour's patience, and all will be right. Your anxiety anddistrust only serve to throw us into confusion, without at all furtheringyour work." His whole charge for a volume printed almost entirely innonpareil notes, and containing nearly 800 pages, was 29 7/., includingthe large paper copies ; and he agreed to receive, and did receive, apromissory note for the amount, at twelve months after the date ofbringing in his bill.Poor Me. Creery ! Who now shall "turn his glass?" See the Billing.Cameron, vol. ii. p. 410. He commenced a splendid career by theprinting of the " Life and Pontificate of Pope Leo X." (after the Biographyof Lorenzo de Medici), in four quarto volumes, under theauspices of its celebrated author, Mr. Roscoe, of Liverpool. He was apet amongst his provincial brethren ; and his movement to London wasprobably a questionable step.I have mentioned his anxiety about the large paper copies of theBibliomania. This was not confined to himself. Mr. Fry, a booksellerof Bris4tol author of Bibliographical Memoranda, 1816, 4to., and muchattached to bibliomaniacal mysteries not having been apprised of theseintended copies, wrote thus to me, in November, 1810, chiefly in consequenceof being applied to by Mr. Elliston, the celebrated comedian, whoBihliumtuiia.'] PUBLICATIONS.encouraging. The Bibliomania was reviewed in theCritical by * * ; in the British Critic, kindly andhad fixed a son as a bookseller at Bristol. " Mr. Elliston informs me bya letter received this day, that on application to Messrs. Longman for thepurpose of securing two large paper copies of the new edition of yourBibliomania, he learnt that they were all engaged. Now this is mostunfortunate. When you informed me last August of its being about tobe reprinted, you mentioned nothing of the 1. p. copies ; and till I sawthe notice in the Gent. Mag. I was completely in the dark. Do, if it bepossible, save two for me ; if that be impracticable, one." And Mr.Elliston himself wrote as follows. " I will only add, that should you beinduced to depart from your original intention (were it only to printtwo copies more), I hope you will consider the request of, dear sir,yours, &c."I forget the issue; but I perfectly remember that Rhadamanthushimself could not have been more inexorable than I was, in not printingtwo more copies to the nineteen resolved to be executed.Mr. Lowndes observes that a copy of this work upon large paper hasreached the sum of 52/. 10s. I question this; but I know it to haveattained 40/. The portrait of myself in canonicals, prefixed to thesecopies only, is of such rarity, that I doubt whether a stray impression of itever found its way into the author's portfolio. I never possessed onebut to give away. Let me close this note by an illustrating anecdote.In the town of Islington there dwelt a worthy wight, WILLIAM TURNERby name, a resident of Canonbury-square, within the said town. Of alllovers (I ought rather to say worshippers) of the Bibliomania, HE wasthe most ardent, the most constant, the most generous ; sparing nothingwherewith to decorate her person, or to add to the treasures of herwardrobe. Listen to his inventory :"Bibliomania, small paper, in two parts, illustrated with 211 prints.The same, bound by Lewis, not illustrated." The first copy was sold,on the demise of its owner, to a Mr. Town, of New York, for sixtyguineas ; but I believe I have seen a similar copy, on large paper, markedin a bookseller's catalogue at one hundred and twenty guineas. Thesame wight thus pursued his illustrating propensities :Cameron, large paper, 400 prints.Tour, large paper, in six parts, 961 prints.The same, small paper, 517 prints.The same, large paper, boards, uncut.326 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.cleverly, by the late Mr. Beloe ; and in the Monthly,smartly, saucily, elaborately, and, upon the whole,satisfactorily, by a reverend poet and translator ofJuvenal. The general, concentrated effect of these,and of other Magazines, Reviews, and Notices *,Biblioth. Spencerianaimd&desAlthorpian<z,laTge paper, 389 prints.Library Companion, large paper, in four parts, 593 prints.Now, casting-up the whole of these illustrations, we find that theyamount to three thousand and seventy-one in number !O RARE WILLIAM TlJRNEH !To talk of seeing " his like again" is mere visionary prattle : and yet,in the Cameron he has been " beaten hollow !" Wait, gentle reader.All things in due course.I must, however, be allowed to bring forward, in the first instance,the correction of an hippopotamus error of which I was guilty at p. 565of my work, in respect to the author of the " Essay upon Demoniac."This correction was conveyed to good old Sylvanus Urban in the followingaddress :GOOD MR. URBAN, June 17, 1811.I hasten to acknowledge a most ' grievous and lamentable' errorwhich has crept into the recent edition of the Bibliomania : an errorwhich was detected immediately after the publication of the work, andthe frequent mention of which by my friends, induces me, through thechannel of your Magazine, to give its correction as much notoriety asAt page 565 I have made Dr. RICHARD FARMER the author of anEssay upon Demoniac: and his perturbed spirit has not ceased toattack me, in the shape of the night-mare, ever since the publication ofthe volume. Be it known, therefore, sir, through the medium of yourMagazine, that HUGH FARMER (concerning whom there is a longaccount in the 5th volume of the last edition of the Biog. Britain.) wasthe author of that heterodox, if ' ingenious essay. This public confessionwill, it is hoped, sooth the angry manes of the Doctor in particular,and compose the rising bile of reviewers in general. Moreover,it is especially due to yourself, Mr. Urban ; for I have referred to yourMagazine, and indirectly censured it for the paucity of information itcontained respecting one of my favourite bibliomaniacal heroes. Andso I bid thee farewell ! Thine, with respect,T. F. D,"Bibliomania'] PUBLICATIONS. 0*27was, that I felt the earth firm and solid beneath myfeet : the circumambient air was clear, buoyant, andThe account of JOHN Radcliffe, at p. 521 of the same work, wasthus enlarged by an unknown correspondent :MB. URBAN, Feb. 12.Mr. John Ratcliffe, who is noticed as a collector of scarce books inpage 55, was neither a man of science or learning. He lived in East-lane,Bermondsey ; was a very corpulent man, and his legs were remarkablythick, probably from an anasarcous complaint. The writerof this remembers him perfectly well ; he was a very stately man, and,when he walked, literally went a snail's pace. He was a Dissenter, andevery Sunday attended the meeting of Dr. Flaxman in the lower roadto Hertford. He generally wore a fine coat, either red or brown, with goldlace buttons, and a fine silk embroidered waistcoat, of scarlet with goldlace, and a large and well-powdered wig. With his hat in one hand and agold-headed cane in the other, he marched royally along, and not unfrequentlyfollowed by a parcel of children, wondering who the statelyman could be. A few years before his death, a fire happened in theneighbourhood where he lived, and it became necessary to remove partof his household furniture and books. He was incapable of assistinghimself; but he stood in the street lamenting and deploring the loss ofhis Caxtons, when a sailor, who lived within a door or two of him,attempted to console him : ' Bless you, sir, I have got them perfectlysafe!' While Ratcliffe was expressing his thanks, the sailor producedtwo of his fine curled periwigs, which he had saved from the devouringelement, and who had no idea that Ratcliffe could make such a fussfor a few books."G."Mr. Sureties, the well-known and deeply-lamented author of theHistory of Durham," made the following communication to the sameauthority :MR. URBAN, Mainsforth, Jan. 8.In the very amusing and instructive Bibliomania, mention is made,as being in Mr. Heberr's possession, of a volume of Eustace's Froissart,which, it is presumed, from the arms, inscribed Henries DuxRICHMUNDI.-E, has formerly belonged to Henry VII. May not thisrare volume have been rather the property of Henry Duke of Richmond,natural son to Henry VIII.? A reference to the arms will atonce determine the point; as those of the duke (viz. France and Eng-3*28 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.bracing ; the sky blue, bright, and exhilarating. My"midnight watchings," and nightly perambulationsin all seasons of the year, were forgotten. I hadattained the summit, for which, for seven successiveyears I had unremittingly toiled ; and henceforwardgave my fancy an unlimited range, which led to thoseproductions to be now described in the chronologicalorder of their appearance. I turned a deaf ear toall entreaties to reprint my book*, although theland, a Bordure quartered Ermine and compony Arg. and Az., a Batunesinister of the 2d ; an inescutcheon quarterly, Gules and Marry, Or andVert, a Lion ramp. Arg. ; on a chief Az. a Castle between two Bucks'heads crossed Argent) are very different from those of his royal grandfathereither as earl or king.R. Surveys."Mr. Laing, the late highly-respected and well-instructed booksellerof Edinburgh, wrote me thus, in the April of 1813. "I wish youwould reprint the Bibliomania. I set a high value on this work, andregret it is beyond the purchase of money. No library should wantit." A writer in the Gentleman's Magazine thus treats the subject inasomewhat unceremonious, but on the whole sufficiently gratifying,manner :MR. URBAN, Dec. 2.In common with every lover of literature, I am willing to payMr. Dibdin that tribute to which his meritorious exertions in its serviceentitle him. The following remarks are dictated by the earnest desirethat those exertions should stand free from any appearance of vanity.The unexampled patronage which the present age bestows uponthe revival of ancient reliques has been acknowledged by all who havebeen engaged in that pursuit. Of this, editors appear to me to havetaken an unfair advantage ; a number of copies are printed, but justsufficient for those subscribers who may have been fortunate enough tohave transmitted their names to the publisher. The consequence ofthis is, that the reprint frequently becomes almost as difficult to be procuredas the original ; and the unlucky wight who shall have omittedsubscribing, must be prepared to pay an advanced price ; and even thenBibliomania'] PUBLICATIONS. 329tempting douceur of two hundred guineas was onceheld out to me *. A word, however, ere I enter uponperhaps be unable to procure a copy. Aware as I am of the expensesattendant on several undertakings of this nature, were but a smalladdition made to the original number, the great prices of many booksmight be reduced, and the cause of literature more effectually served.Mr. Dibdin mentions the little remuneration the labours of thebibliographer receive : this, no doubt, is true ; but if Mr. Dibdin hadindulged the public with a new edition of his ' Bibliomania,' those whoare anxious to possess a copy of that entertaining work, would not becompelled to pay the present exorbitant price demanded for a copy,and the author would have received an additional recompense for hislabour.'* If you honour these observations with a place in your Magazine,that author will, I hope, be able to refute a charge pretty generallycirculated, namely, that the plates of the above-mentioned productionwere destroyed, by that means giving to the book a degree of scarcityit could not otherwise have attained ; if this is the fact, it carries withit a charge of vanity, which will require all the ingenuity of the learned,author to overcome. [How so ?]We are informed, in your last Number, that there will be no secondedition of the ' Bibliotheca Spenceriana' May I be permitted to inquirethe reason of this ? I cannot understand why there should not,if the success which it will most probably deserve demands a freshimpression.These observations have arisen from the honest desire of seeing thelabours of bibliography divested of all affectation, and with the earnestwish that Mr. Dibdin may continue to reap the reward due to his indefatigablediligence.Amatory BIBLIOMANIA."It is, however, but due to truth to say, that some eight or ten yearsago, there was a setting-up of pages 166-7, by way of an experimentas to bringing forth a new edition of the work in the same type as thatof the Cameron. But the thing never went beyond this. Some veryfew impressions only of these pages were struck off, of which one wasin Mr. Castlewood's copy of the work, sold to G. H. Freeling, Esq. Notone remains with myself.But of all my reviewers, few "shewed me up" more gallantly, spiritedly,and kind-heartedly, than OLD SYLVANUS himself; who, whenhe chose, could write a brisk and pungent article with admirable dexterity.HE, Eke the greater number of correspondents just mentioned,is GONE. I have essayed to embalm him in the "Museum" See post.330 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.a wide and new field. It is but due to the memoryof ONE, whose eyes have been but very recently closedupon all earthly scenes, to make honourable mentionof the constant and valuable aid I received from him,my near neighbour as well as affectionate friend,during the whole progress of the work now underconsideration. ROBERT WATSON WADE was thatindividual in question. He had seen other andbrighter days ; but in his secretaryship to the StockExchange he found something like a comfortablesubsistence in his latter years, as well as an enlargedcircle of generous friends. His mornings were necessarilydevoted to the mysteries of Cocker. Hisevenings were as regularly devoted to Petrarch*,and for a time to the proof sheets of the Bibliomania.His knowledge of the Italian language was, I have understood,minute and critical; and his attachment to Petrarch ardent and incessant.He was always at work upon the Sonnets ; and yet scarcelyever satisfied with his translations, which were rhythmical. What heaimed at was, the strictest literal version. In consequence, the original,as is the case with Cowper's version of Homer, always appeared in acold, drab-coloured, Quaker-dress; or it was the countenance of Petrarchwithout blood in his cheek or inspiration in his eye. And whata Calligraphist was my friend ! How ingenious in perfecting copies, andhow ready to render his services on such occasions. He once amused himself,and infinitely obliged me, by making perfect a miserably mutilatedcopy of <( Recreations for Ingenious Head Pieces, or a Pleasant Grovefor their Wits to walk in" 1667, 12mo., a curious and mirthful volume,from which may be seen some interesting extracts in Mores Utopia.vol. ii. 266, 273-6 ; and where I have observed that ft perhaps there isno clean copy of it in existence." The first of the extracts here referredto, contains a wood-cut of the morris dancer, which marvellouslypleased my late friend Mr. Douce. My friend, Mr. Wade, (who hadbeen the bosom friend of Italian WALKER, of Dublin, as he was called)was also singularly happy in his fac-similes of the ornaments, love-knots,capriccios, &c. of the curious little volume here referred to.I't HU( Allons.But in the German language my friend was scarcelyless versed than in the Italian ; of which abundantproof is afforded in the third volume of the BibliothecaSpenceriana* . For thirty years our connexionwas more or less strengthened ; and duringthat period (and it is no short one) not one angryexpression ever fell from his lips or was recorded byhis pen. Old age (he was turned of eighty whenhe died) had latterly enfeebled his carriage and indentedhis countenance ; but his heart's beat wasyet as affectionate, his intellectual ardour as keen,and his judgment as unclouded as ever. His playfulfancy, not long after the publication of the Bibliomania,concocted the following jeu d 9 esprit, whichappeared in the pages of the Gentleman's Magazine,for December, 1811.See vol. iii. p. 348 377, in the description of a curious Germanedition, with wood-cuts, of the HISTORY OF THE HOLY CROSS, 1483,4to., where not fewer than sixty-three stanzas of the original (ratherDutch") text are metrically translated, line for line, and almost word forword. Another equally surprising specimen of the literal version ofan old German colophon may be seen in the first volume of the workabove referred to, p. 98. Concerning this latter, my friend thus expressedhimself in one of his characteristic notes :MY DEAR D**. Nov. 20, 1813.I have done all I could with this abominable piece of stuff but canmake nothing better of it than what you see, which, to say the truth, isbad enough. Surely you do not mean to publish it? for heaven'ssake, if you do, don't mention my name, as I should be sorry to behanded down to posterity as the writer of such nonsense. As I saidbefore, from morning till night, I but write, write, and write.Ever affectionately yours, R. W. W.You have the precious morceau enclosed."It was published without his name. My excellent friend fell as ripefruit from the tree of life ; passing into eternity, " in sure and certainhope" of the life wlu'ch is to come, without a bodily pang or a mentalreproof. " HAIL AND FAREWELL !"332 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.o mg rggjjte foortfjft jflftatster the $Uftmn&e masterDYBDYN fits trefoe ffcnto WYLLYMCAXTON sentyrtfi gr^tpnge fogssfinng Jnm alle fjeltfieante prosperityFare sonne grande mercy for the mickle paineBy the bestowed tauaunce my nameWhiche by the labour of thy pen shall gaineEternal records in the Boke of FameFor folks yet unborn enfourmd by theShall gaine a knowlege of my werkes and me.Here in this happe region as I siteFro alle my former yer the lye cares unbentI often reuewe in myn intendmentThe daies spent below, and reken itTo me grete laude and hyghe renounce that IIn England fyrste the printers arte dede true.The werkis whiche by me enpryntid ewerWhan I recal into my remembranceAnd wel conspire my small sufferanceMoche doth it me astounded my utmost careShuld in these dayes whan mente ben grown so niceBy them be ualewed at soe haute a prise.And moche I mervayle that my types rudeAnd homely pourtraits whiche my bones adornedAnd paper by the mother and worse ytorneSwyche length of tyme have their assures withstoodI could nat hope soe many yere pastOne parte boke of myne til now shulde haste.But yet I heare (for sothlye here perchanceBy Goddis grace some of my brethren comThough Christ's blonde redeemed fro the domeDue to maunys sin and disobedience) 'bibliomania'] PUBLICATIONS.That in your lone one Attics doth dwellWho passeth moche my werkes as men me tell.And others some ther ben who moche delightMyne werkis to collect and keepe wyth careAlbeit thei ne fruytefulle ben ne rareNe fro tymes blemysshe fre ne yet parteYet to purchase them alle their thoughts they bendNe ree thei of the cone whiche they therein dispense.Here as wyth WYNKYN, Personne, MachineIn some communion I trewe pleasure tasteDevysynge of oure yer the lye laboures pastWe cal to mynde the dayes of yore and sayeFul ly tell dede we thinke whilst yet on ,ly veThat these oure werkis shuld so longe survive.Wherefore to hym and them we merely prayThat they accepte oure harte thanks condignFor their gode wylie to us which soe doeth shineAnd oure remercimentes they take in ogreFor soothe to saye to them we ben moche boundenFor alle the faveur wee fro them haue founded.And moche thi labeur do we take in ogreWhiche hath fro dare forgetfulness reskewdeSoe manie of oure auncyente werkis rudeAnd thus comedy to posterityWhereby oure faire renome shal haste for ayeNe blemyshde be ne never knowe decay.Wyth these, here GUTENBERG and Fist uniteIn thanks ryghte herty unto the oure frondeBeseeching me I them to the commencePrayer we alle that leven maye the requiteFor this thy travail and thy were of loueAnd that we may embrace the here aboutWhan fro the lower worlde thou shalt reniooue.334 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.33- Sb. Sonne of m# loue 5 page tfje tfiott forgetfoorto uncoutfje in fojjgcje to tjje 31 forgetcoupe 31 get m better style etrtrgtefootsore nat, to sentence tfxm mote parcefbefull fcnofoe ante sgfeerlg ententet Jfs myne auncpente specie tfe berar centre,W. C.A few, and but a few, more straggling anecdotesbelong to this portion of the "Reminiscences." Thework under consideration produced a most bulkyCorpus Epistolographicum, from which I fear Ihave selected too freely for the reader's patience toendure a further specimen* : and yet I must beindulged in one more extract. At page 293 ofthat work, I made a sort of call upon the late Mr.Roscoe to favour the public with a Life of Erasmus.Some three years afterwards, on the establishmentof a correspondence between us, connected withthe Bill. Spenceriana (of which hereafter), Mr.Roscoe alluded to the circumstance thus :I am too well acquainted with your entertaining volumeof the Bibliomania to be ignorant of your recommendationto me to undertake the Life of Erasmus. That such a workis much wanted, I admit ; and I think it one of the finestsubjects that could be undertaken : but you do me too muchhonour in thinking that I am competent to it. To executeAmong those specimens previously published, the reader may consultsome interesting extracts from the letters of my late friend, Mr.Daniel Me. Neville (of Edmonstone, Ireland), which appear in theBlbliog. Cameron, vol. iii. 376-388.bibliomania.'} PUBLICATIONS. 335it properly, a knowledge of the German language and ofGerman literature, would be indispensable. Much, I believe,has been done in Germany in elucidating this importantperiod of their literary history, and I trust it willnot be long before some of our countrymen, fully qualified,will repair the defects of Knight and Fortin, and give ussuch a view of the subject as may gratify reasonable expectation,&c. Believe me, with real attachment and respect,Dear Sir,Most faithfully yours,May 6, 1814.There is one little circumstance connected withthis work, which has ever given me the sincerestpleasure to think upon. It is, that of its havingbeen the first public channel of making known thetalents of a most ingenious and worthy family of thename of Field, of whose performances (as Engraverson wood) I have been ever since in thehabit of availing myself. The present work yet bearsevidences of them ; but when I tell the reader thatthe wood-cut fac-simile of the portrait of John Bale,at page 327 of the BIBLIOMANIA, is the performanceof an artist of the age of sixteen *, he will scarcelyIt was, I believe, the sister, Mary Byfield, who executed this head;and in the second volume of the Typographical Antiquities will be seena fac-simile of a large wood-cut portrait of Richard Pynson, King'sprinter, temp. Hen. VII., executed when the artist was only seventeenyears of age. Ebenezer Byfield, who died many years ago, was the336 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.venture to question the propriety of encouraging afamily in which such merit was paramount. Sincethat period, the art of wood engraving has wonderfullyincreased and flourished amongst us ; andlatterly the Penny and Saturday Magazines havegiven birth to such specimens as, a few years hack,the most sanguine could scarcely have ventured toanticipate*.And now, with permission of the reader, we willsomewhat digress and recreate ourselves ; and yet itcan scarcely he called a digression. In the chronologicalorder of these " Reminiscences," we arebrought to the period of the SALE OF THE Rox-BURGHE LIBRARY ; and, with that, to the establishmentof the Roxburgh CLUB. As there can beno doubt of the publication just dwelt upon havingbeen largely instrumental to the increase of theprices of this sale by having fevered the blood andsharpened the weapons of the respective combatant-eldestbrother. The only remaining brother, John Byfield, is an artist,whose gratitude is equal to his ability, and whose ability is strengthenedby his care and integrity. I owe chiefly to him and to his sister all thewood embellishments in theBibl. Spenceriana, and Tour; and the greaterpart of those in the Cameron, and the whole of those in the presentwork, are from the same quarter.A curious little history may be said to belong to the stupendousundertakings here alluded to ; but not being quite sure of my ground,I do not venture upon its occupation ; only that I learn that the wood cutsto the work first above named are to be borrowed or hired for the productionof a similar work at Paris. What trunk, or rather coveredcart, is large enough to contain them ?t This opinion is undisguisedly avowed in the Cameron, vol.iii. p. 50.Bibliomania.'} PUBLICATIONS. 3(37purchasers it may be as well to give an account(however " a thrice told tale") of that importantevent in the BIBLIOMANICAL WORLD and thus diversifythe dry detail of the " Publications" of theauthor. And yet, one word only in regard to afeature in the work just dismissed, which deservessomewhat to be dwelt upon. It is, that of an interiorview of the Library at Hafod, at page 648,which was etched by the late Thomas Stothard, R. A.I am not acquainted with any other specimen of theburin of that incomparable artist. Yet it must bedeemed a failure. It wants solidity and distinctness.It was etched for 5l. 5s. ; and I believe the originalreceipt to be now in the possession of G. H. Freeling,Esq.POSTSCRIPT.Behold me, gentle reader, at the close of the year 1811,with no mention made of two privately circulated brochures :the one called "Specimen Bibliotheca Britannicce," printedin 1808 the other, "Specimen of an English De Bure"printed in 1810. Of these performances, the latter is unquestionablyin all respects the better. About fifty copiesof each were printed ; of which the united expenses wereabout 807. They were distributed by me gratuitously, buthave averaged nearly 2Z. per copy at book-sales*. Suchwas my zeal in THE CAUSE.I am free to confess that I had well nigh forgotten these slightproductions, and it is only at the " eleventh hour' as it were, of thischapter that they are introduced. They have brought, however, ashigh prices as 3/. 3s. each containing only some fourscore pages. Ofthe first, there were eight copies only struck off in a quarto form ; andof these Mr. Pickering's last catalogue presents us with a very curiouscopy. See No. 1062. A copy of this sort brought 3/. 10$. at the sale ofMr. Bracket's library.Concerning the latter, and by much the preferable work (althoughnow rendered nearly useless by the Library Companion), I present thereader with a not incurious letter by the late John Fry, bookseller, ofBristol:Rev. and dear Sir,My thanks are due unto you for the elegant and excellentSpecimen of an English De Bure,' which I perused with pleasure ;it was a pleasure, however, mingled with much regret. Although Icannot avoid acknowledging that such a work may be very useful, andis doubtless much wanted, yet, Sir, does not it tend to make Bibliographicattainments too cheap? I myself am young in the science, andmight therefore wish to ascend the rock by an easy path ; but I mustever think that knowledge too easily procured is sure to be the less permanentin the recollection : at any rate, if such a work must appear, thenominal value of the books should never be mentioned. The ignorantand undiscerning bibliopolist who chances to see your work will mostsurely make the student smart ere he becomes possessed of a bookwhich may be registered therein. To strengthen my position, I canassure you that one bookseller in particular, who has seen the specimenPOSTSCRIPT. 339Mr. COLERIDGE. See page 257. Mention is here madeof what is considered to be the most brilliant gems of the lateMr. Coleridge's muse : the Ancient Mariner and Christabcl :and of these I am not sure whether the former be not themore generally received favourite. The first appearanceI ought to have said the Edition Princeps) of that wondrousproduction came forth in 1798, in a small volume, entitledLyrical Ballads, with a few other Poems." The publisherswere "John and Arthur Arch, Gracechurch-street :" and Iam not sure whether this tiny yet substantial volume be notamong the earliest of their publications. It is said in theshort preface prefixed (it is presumed from the pen of Mr.Coleridge) " THE RIME OF THE Ancient Mariner wasprofessedly written in imitation of the style, as well as ofthe spirit, of the elder poets ; but, with a few exceptions, theauthor believes that the language adopted in it has beenequally intelligible for these three last centuries." The " Argument" is thus : " How a ship, having passed the line,was driven by storms to the cold country towards the SouthPole ; and how, from thence, she made her course to thetropical latitude of the Great Pacific Ocean ; and of the&c., has in consequence added to the price of his quarto Froissart(Johnes's edit.) several pounds! whereby a friend of mine has been preventedfrom purchasing it, from the most enormous price asked.Quaere. I presume the department of POETRY forms a portion ofyour intended publication ?Is the second volume of your splendid ' opus magnum' (Typog.Antic.) yet committed to the press? and when may we expect thenew edition of the ' Bibliomania ? 'I was sorry to see the last number of the Bibliographer did notcontain a continuation of your very useful Cat. Raison of ( honestTom Hearne's editions.' (See p. 296, ante.)I will now conclude my rambling letter with requesting you toaccept the assurances of my esteem,And remain your obliged servant,10, Gay-street, Bristol ; JOHN FRY.""Sept. 19, 1810."Z 2340 POSTSCRIPT.strange things that befell ; and in what manner the AncientMariners came back to his own country." It occupies 46pages of the volume.The poem of CHRIST ABEL was largely and fiercely, andI will add unjustifiably, criticised in the Edinb. Review,vol. xxvii. p. 58, by, it is said, a poet of no mair calibre,and with most vivaciously fanciful powers. But there wasnothing in the poem to elicit that style of criticism, if quizzingbe deemed a style. Coleridge complained in a reply to it,in his Biographia Literaria. The editor of the Reviewjoined issue ; adding, that HE was not the reviewer : and sothe matter dropped. I know enough of the warm Irishheart of the reviewer to affirm, that, " were the thing tocome over again," he would have reined in his prancingsteed ; divested himself of his spurs ; and used a band ofroses for a whip. Am I wrong in supposing that Coleridgehad a hand in a periodical (octavo) publication called theWatchman? In this publication there were occasionalpieces of poetry, of which he had the credit of being theauthor.Dr. JENNER. See page 109-202. When this brief account,and most inadequate tribute to the memory, of thisillustrious character was written, it did not occur to methat I had drawn up a little memorial of him, on his death,in The Museum of February, 1823. I do not know thatthe recollection of that memorial would have done away thenecessity of writing what is said in the pages above referredto ; but I feel persuaded that the addition of what followswill not injure the effect of that which has preceded it, orbeconsidered altogether as superfluous.DEATH OF DR. JENNER. It is not fitting that such aman as JENNER should sink into the grave, without somegeneral attestation of his merits and worth. Whatever bethefeeling of the public, there is nothing which can, orshall, prevent the writer of this brief memorial from an un-postscript.341equivocal declaration of the virtues of the deceased. I hopehis country will show a sense of his claims to immortality,by employing the chisel of Chantry, or Westmacott, orBailey; and that we may see the statue of JENNER in St.Paul's Cathedral, by the side of that of Howard, and othergreat benefactors to their country.When all the prejudices, clamors, misconceptions, andabsurdities, about the efficacy of VACCINATION shall cease,then will the pre-eminent and undisputed merits of Jennerbe estimated as they ought to be. With a mind, the freestpossible from quackery and every thing bordering onselfish views, he devoted the strength of that mind to anaccumulation of FACTS, carefully ascertained, and carefullyregistered, from which he drew inferences, with all the confidenceof an original and powerful intellect, that mightoperate to the benefit of mankind. He always lost sight ofhimself of individual aggrandisement in the prosecutionof his celebrated studies on vaccination. He matured everythingas far as his own experience enabled him beforehe gave it to the public; and he thought exclusively ofthat public good. He did not, as too many clever mennow living (with a little dash of selfishness and quackery inthe composition of their character, nevertheless,) have done,think how soon and how widely his reputation might bespreadabroad ; but he thought, exclusively, how safely andhow permanently that reputation might be secured.Hence his very first publication on the Vaccine lefthardly any thing to be added. The system was scarcelyannounced when it was perfected. His trials, his experience,his experiments, all proved the mind and the handof a master : and he told the author of this memorial that,on the night preceding his first trial of inoculating onehuman being with the vaccine virus from another, the leastof the miseries he endured was the total privation of sleep.It was to make or to mar his whole system : but his triumphwas complete. No one ever looked into nature, in all her342 POSTSCRIPT.varieties and subtleties of form in all her changes, gradations,or majorities with a keener or more original eye.Naturally, Jenner loved seclusion, and a small circle offriends. He was singularly cheerful among those to whomhe could freely unbosom himself; and was ' a very boy '(like Wykeham) at the age of sixty. He was fond of musicand when some one, in company with the writer of thisarticle, urged him to be favoured with a sight of the magnificentdiamond ring, which the Emperor of Russia's latemother had given him Come, come,' replied Jenner, 'letus take a stroll in the garden, and hear the drowsy hum 'of the beetle.' He did so, and played at the same time oneof his favourite airs on the flute which he blew with asingular felicity of embouchure. He was as philosophical anornithologist as Buffon. His essay (yet in MS.) on themusic of the birds is perfectly original ; and his 6 Dissertationon the Cuckoo 9 is one of the richest gems in the collectionof the Philosophical Transactions.While you were conversing with him, or staying inhis house, you could not imagine that he was a MAN withwhose fame ' all Europe rang from side to side.' He nevertalked of his success of his reputation of his numerousand great friends of his correspondence or encomiastletters ; but would much rather converse on the fruits of theearth, or the properties of animals. He had the true testof greatness of character inasmuch as he was SIMPLE andNATURAL.He died, somewhat suddenly, on the 25th of January,and in the 74th year of his age; leaving a son and adaughter to inherit his name and fortune."I had omitted to notice Dr. Jenner's passion for premising;for so he would designate it. He wrote a number of littleaddresses, odes, and ballads ; and if I mistake not there isONE COPY in existence of these rare and original effusions,printed under the superintendence of our late commonfriend, the Rev. Thos. Pruen. I remember a very prettyPostscript. 343poetical address by him to his cigar; and his ballad ofHannah Ball may be seen in the pages of the Museum,vol. i. 255-6.REPRINT OF THE BIBLIOMANIA, p. 328. It did not occurto me, at this place, to annex the following warmly-pennedepistle from an unknown correspondent, upon thesubject of this Reprint. It is rarely that an anonymousletter produces such satisfaction. The date is Dec. 3, 1832,and the post-mark is that of Portsmouth.REV. SIR,When I state that I have passed very many happyhours in the perusal and study of some of your interestingwritings, I trust you will excuse the liberty I have taken inaddressing you these few lines which is, to ask one simplequestion only why is not the literary world favoured witha new edition of your BIBLIOMANIA? From the frequentreferences in your writings to that work, I am so besetwith the desire of obtaining or perusing it, that (to usean expression of your own) I am * unable to rest quietly inmy bed.' When in London, a few months since, I madeenquiry from one end of the metropolis to the other, to endeavourto procure a copy at a moderate price ; but everybookseller who had one (and they were but few) would notpart with it under 57. 5s. or 51. 15s. 6d., which was considerablybeyond the strength of my purse. I believe it isnow several years since this work of yours was first published,and I cannot but think that a new edition wouldprove highly acceptable to the literary world, and by nomeans a bad speculation. At page 179, vol. iii. of the lastedition of your Bibliographical Tour, you say that you areagain haunted by a vision of publishing a third editionof your Bibliomania;' and I am almost wicked enough topray that this vision may continue to haunt you and allow344 POSTSCRIPT.you no rest by night or day until you have fulfilled its commands.I cannot for a moment suppose that you intendyour writings for the wealthy only and as the number ofreaders in all classes has increased of late years to so greatan extent, you would most assuredly be conferring an essentialservice on hundreds of readers by a republication ofthe work referred to. If printed uniform with the last editionof your Tour, and sold at the same price, I am perfectlyassured you would have no cause to complain.Trusting shortly to see this work announced in thepublic literary journals,"I am, sir, with much respect,Your humble servant,A BIBLIOPHILE."Perhaps the only way to solve this momentous question,or untie this knotty point, will be to call a " counsel ofelders" of the bibliopolistic fraternity; and to receive tendersin favour, or admonitions in disfavour, of the proposedmeasure. At all events, it is my own property ; and trespassersshall be punished " as the law directs." " Steeltraps and spring guns" are not wanting in the preservationof the game.CHAPTER VII.ROXBURGHIANA.. . . "let it be said that JOHN, DUKE OF Roxburgh, hathdeserved well of his country and of the Book-Cause."BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DECAMERON, vol. iii. p. 69.I MAKE no apology for availing myself of my ownproperty in the way of quotation ; simply because itmay be asserted with strict truth that in no workdoes there appear so full and faithful an account ofthe Sale, and of the Club, about to be noticed, thanin that to which a reference is above made. Yet Ishall retread, as little as possible, the ground beforetrodden ; reserving myself chiefly for such mattersand anecdotes as are connected with those heroeswho fought in the book-fight, or regaled themselvesat the annual banquet. Of the guests at theirsof these " banquets," more than One-third (includingvery recently the illustrious President) havepaid the DEBT OF NATURE.And first comes the caterer of the first t)0ofe=fcisf),or the manufacturer of the Catalogue of the RoxburghLibrary, the late Mr. GEORGE NICOL : booksellerto His Majesty George III., and no trivial assistantin the formation of that Royal Library which1,346 ROXBURGHIANA. \ Roxluryhehas been lately deposited within the walls of theBritish Museum*. Mr. Nicol was a singular chastransportation of the library of George III. to the BritishMuseum, by the eldest son of the father who had made the collection,struck the public with a mixed sensation of regret and admiration:regret, that a library so extensive and so precious the result of theunwearied application of half a century in its formation should leaveits old and natural quarters, and become merged in a collection alreadyfilled to the brim ; and admiration, that a gift of such stupendous magnitudeshould be made from a sovereign to his people ! But the matterresolves itself into a very simple point. Was there, or was there not,space for the retention of that library within the alterations then projectedat Buckingham Palace ? Or was that space wanted for a differentobject? " That" seems to me to be "the question." But, under noaspect, no view or consideration of the matter, should a volume of thePATERNAL LIBRARY have been moved. Had I been King of England,half of my EMPIRE should have been wrested from me ere I had partedwith a BOOK of my sire. Nor is this exactly a question of taste. Somehowor the other, a moral feeling seems to be mixed with it, of whichI shall not pretend either to determine the nature or to fix the amount.The absurd reports of the day respecting the number of the volumes,were absolutely laughable. By some they were fixed at 150,000 ;by others at 90,000. The truth was, and is, the number is about60,000. A most sumptuous catalogue of the library, in nine foliovolumes, printed at the Shakspeare Press, accompanies the books. Thiswas executed in imitation of the catalogue of the Royal Library ofFrance. Surely, this plan might have been improved upon ? A moreinconvenient and uselessly extravagant one could not have been devised;but it was doubtless REGAL. And yet, if fame be true (howmore frequently is it false?) there are SOME FEW PRECIOUS volumesremaining, which have not taken flight with their brethren and theseare the Psalter of 1457, the Hebrew Bible of 1488, the Mop fromCaxton's press, and the Doctrinale Sacerdotal, from the same press,upon vellum. As to the room itself where the royal library is nowplaced, it is at once splendid and appropriate ; but I desiderate a statueof the ROYAL COLLECTOR in the centre and the placing of two of thoseexquisite Scotch granite pillars at right angles with the sides, both forthe purpose of breaking the continuity of a long straight line, and ofgiving the appearance at once of beauty and support on entering theroom. As these pillars are at present placed, they escape the eye till youSale'] ROXBURGHIANA. 347dacier, and his singularity is at once a theme ofcommendation and regret. In his long and closealliance with that Monarch, who, whatever were hisfailings, has the glorious distinction of having collectedthe finest and largest library of any monarchin Europe, he (Mr. Nicol) might, in the exercise ofhis vocation as a bookseller, have amassed what iscalled a FORTUNE. Had the " dulcis odor lucri"been as grateful to his nostrils as it was to sundryother bibliopolists, he might have done anythingcome close to them, and are so near the wall, that they seem unnecessaryas props to the ceiling. Why were not the capitals gilt ? What! destroythe identity of the pillar, which is composed of one unbroken block ofgranite? Even so. EFFECT is what you want in these matters. It isnot asked to knock off the capital. The iniquity of the column is untouched: and he who has seen the effect of gold ornament in the librariesat Mock and Vienna, need not shrink from its introduction here. Thegallery round this three hundred-feet-in-length room is delightful. Icannot choose but smile at the manner in which the gift of this librarywas noticed in the Museum, a weekly paper, of 1823, as thus callingon the reader to admit the verification of the plan about the NationalGallery. Of this notice I may as well confess myself the author. Apart runs thus : "But what is to be done with the gift? The sale ofduplicates implies the sale of some portion of collections already bequeathedor purchased. Will a Cracherode copy be allowed to quit itshallowed precincts ? Should a Burney copy be permitted to leave itsreceptacle a copy, of which the margins may be probably charged withprecious MS. notes ? And, more imperative than either, can a Royalcopy be allowed to go astray, and thus break the charm of such a trulyregal donation ? What, therefore, we would propose, with all due respect,is, that the Curators of the Museum should be permitted to selectevery work from the Royal Collection of which there is no copy in theMuseum ; and that the residue should be sold by auction, in order tofurnish a fund for a NATIONAL GALLERY OF PICTURES, in the centre ofwhich a statue of his present Majesty should be placed ; and let theMEWS be the site of this Gallery."348 HOXBURGHIANA. \ Roxburghand everything in the way of business, so as tohave realised a large capital. But his personal attachmentsled him to serve " two masters," and tooverlook his own individual interests. Althoughhis may he said to have been a divided allegiancebetween the King and the Duke of Roxburghee, yet,not only did he neglect neither, but won and securedthe attachment of both. He always seemed to me tolove his dusty retreat * better than his boudoir-shop ;and I am not sure whether the securing of a Caxtonfor his royal master, or a MS. volume of Old BalladPoetry, or Table Ronde adventure, for his ducalmaster, were not more congenial to his feelings,than even a lusty order for some of the magnificentworks of which he was the publisher t.With the latter, Mr. Nicol may be well said tohave maintained the most familiar intercourse. TheDuke and his Bookseller " rolled it" very .Nicol had a sort of veneration for the DUST which had settledround about him, and upon his books, in this quiet back-retreat. Hetold me, he once caught the maid servant bringing in the whole apparatusfor a resolute dusting bout: but enjoined her, on the penance of"peine fort et dure" not only to retreat, but never to think of enteringthe room again in her dusting accoutrements.t Among these works were the Shakspeare and Milton, in folio,printed at the Shakspeare press by the late Mr. Buhner. The latter isprobably the most beautifully executed volume of the British press.Flinders' s Terra Australis was also one of Mr. Nicol's publications;and he had more than a common share in the Voyages of Cook andHawkesworth. Had he taken all the advantages which his prominentposition might have enabled him to take, he had left a huge harvest ofgolden guineas to his family. He was, in this instance, a very markedexception to his northern fellow-countrymen.&//.] ROXBURUIHANA. 349saintly together in their purchases of rare and preciousvolumes : the former evincing throughout athorough-bred bibliomanical feeling a right propertact the evidence of one who was ever " keen uponthe scent," and wretched when off it. Thus, onone occasion, the Duke writes as follows in referenceto a scarce old Romance, entitled Le ChevalierDeliverThis seems to be an allegorical Romance. I cannotfind it in the Villiers Catalogue ; but you will see it mentionedin Debure, No. 2993; also in Gainst's Catalogue,No. 1787, which was sold for 270 livres; and No. 1788,which sold for 50 livres. This copy, however, does notseem to be either of those mentioned by Debure or inGainst. Nevertheless, I should like to have it at a fairprice, provided it can be soon decided whether I am to haveit or not. If I can call on you tomorrow at any early hourI do not mean before you have eaten your breakfast, butbefore you sit down to dinner I will settle all business relatingto Ravenna's sale. Looking over my memoranda,I read the following: April 4, 1789, Hist, of Pr. Arthurand his Knights of the Round Table, Lord. 4to. bl. lett.,left with Mr. Geo. Nicol to be bound. I have found anaccount of Buffon's Birds, which I will bring with me,therefore you need not hunt among your papers to find it."In the following note allusion is made to thethundering price at which a copy of the first folioShakspeare had been obtained by Mr. Nicol for hisNoble Employer*. "After the pleasant trick youOf this celebrated purchase there are two versions extant ; both insubstancetrue, and both worthy of being again recorded; for I know350 ROXBURGHIANA. \Eoxburglieserved me with regard to Swinburne 9 s Travels intothe Two Similes, I think that you cannot decentlyof no achievement encircled by a brighter halo of BOOK GLORY. Thefirst, which I received from the mouth of Mr. Nicol himself, is thusdescribed in the Bibliomania, p. 701, note. " A singular story is extantabout the purchase of the late Duke of Roxburghee's copy of the firstedition of Shakspeare. A friend was bidding for Him in the sale room :his Grace had retired to one end of the room, coolly to view the issue ofthe contest. The bidding rose quickly to twenty guineas a great sumin former times ; but the Duke was not to be daunted or defeated. Aslip of paper was handed to him, upon which the propriety of continuingthe contest was suggested. His Grace took out his pencil, and with acoolness which would have done credit to Prince Eugene, he wrote, onthe same slip of paper, by way of reply,lay on, Macduff !And d d be he who first cries hold, enough !'Such a spirit was irresistible, and bore down all opposition. The Dukewas of course declared victor, and marched off triumphantly with thevolume under his arm."Mr. Martin, in his Catalogue of Books privately printed, 1834, 8vo.,p. 460, thus describes the event in question. " The two following notesto Mr. George Nicol, printed from the original, in the possession of Mr.William Nicol (son of Mr. George Nicol), evince the ardour and anxietyof the Duke of Roxburghee as an indefatigable book-collector.Having slept upon Shakspeare, I feel more determined to have thetwo editions to be sold this day. If I am not present, I desire you willbe excessively bold. And if I should be present, your courage need notfail you till you see me turn my back and walk out of the room."Again : " Pray, rise early tomorrow. Reed's sale will be over alittle after two o'clock. I have seen the Shakespeare.May on, Macduff!And damned be he that first cries hold, enough ! 'I wish you could write to Paterson for the catalogues. I am really inwant of them. Yours, R."I cannot charge my memory with the sum given by the Duke forthis copy when obtained, but probably not exceeding 351. At the saleof his own library it produced 100/., in opposition to a commission inmy own pocket to go as far as 80 guineas, for Sir M. Sykes. Yet itwas by no means a " first class copy." See the Cameron, vol. iii.Stile'] ROXBUROHIANA. 351avoid doing one of three things : viz., either in personto attend the sale of books in the enclosed catalogue,on Saturday next, and purchase for me (notat a Shakspeare price /) lot 102 ; or to deputesome trusty person to do it ; or to return the catalogueto me, saying, * you are going out of town tokeep holyday : * in which case, * rest you mercy.'No. 119, Hawkesworth : if the plates are bound bythemselves, I would not willingly miss it." Onceagain, and for the last time.It is really wonderful how little some persons know oftheir own business. You told me that you meant to attendthe first day's sale of books in the enclosed catalogue. Itake the liberty to inform you that it is the second day's saleyou are to be at. I have added some notes to the cataloguewell worth your reading. I wish you would let me knowif you purchased Amadis de Grace, No. 4280, on my account,at Pinelli's sale. If you did, I need not purchase acopy which Edwards has sent to me. I wish, before youp.61 ; and Library Companion, edit. 1825, p. 819. It was purchasedby the Duke of Devonshire; and it measures 13 \ inches in height, by%\ inches in width. Of ALL copies of this most estimable volume (whichis supposed to have been published " at the cost of" ONE POUND only),that in the library of the Right Honourable Thomas Grenville is unquestionablythe finest. What the shepherd says of Rome in Virgil'sfirst Bucolic may be applied to this Exemplar Grenvillianum :Verum haec tantum alias inter caput exult urges,Quantum lent solent inter viburna cypress."But it was not obtained under the "thundering price" (vide supra)of ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY ONE POUNDS sixteen shillings. Supposethe copy to attain the height of thirteen inches and half, and thewidth of eight inches and half, what THEN would be its cost ? Let theMember for Newcastle, whose name begins with an M, answer this exceedinglydifficult and important question.352 ROXBURGHLANA. [Roxburghgo out, that you would answer this part of my letter, and Iwill send for your answer when I am at St. James's ; or, ifyou are at home (which, if it is a fine day, you had betternot be), I will call as I come from court."It was to Mr. Nicol that his Majesty was in agreat measure indebted for the acquisition of thePSALTER of 1457 the " cheval de bataille" as itwere, of the royal collection and which I rejoice tounderstand has not yet quitted head-quarters*. Atthe sale of West's library in 1776, our bibliopolistlaid it on heavily" in the purchase of Caxtons forhis royal master t, and as late as the year 1812(thirty-six years afterwards) this concentration ofUpon this identical volume, in the earlier period of my biblio-graphical career, I wrote an essay, which was embellished with a woodcut,in a monthly magazine called the Athenaeum, vol. ii. p. 369^-400.Mr. Barnard, the librarian, took me to task for this essay, and for theaccount of its binding. This was very natural ; for he had scarcelystirred one foot" himself in the composition of a catalogue of the collectionunder his care. The pith of this account, or essay, was republished,together with a fac-simile of the text of the Psalter, in theBibl. Spenceriana } vol. i. p. 107, &c.t The fact is thus recorded in the Bibliomania, p. 508. " Mr.George Nicol, his majesty's bookseller, told me, with his usual pleasantryand point, that he got abused in the public papers by Almon and others,for having purchased nearly the whole of the Caxtonian volumes in this[West's] collection, for his majesty's library. It was said abroad thata Scotchman had lavished away the king's money in buying old black-letterbooks."ROXBUROHIANA.affection possessed him as ardently as ever ; for hethus wrote to me, just before the publication of thesecond volume of the Typographical Antiquities : " Ihope you do not forget a large paper copy of yourmagnificent work for my BELOVED MASTER'S LIBRARY,which I will with pleasure pay for when required * "Such, too, was his love of scarce and fine books, andof the fascinating mysteries attached to the History ofEarly Printing, that he maintained a strict allianceand correspondence with Mr. Alexander Horn, theThe whole of this letter may as well find its place at the foot of theabove extract, for it affords " proof positive" of the writer's thoroughbredbibliomanical taste and propensities.Pall Mall; Nov. 11, 1812.DEAR SIB,I can, without consulting the Royal Library, inform you that hisMajesty's copies of Ratdolt's Euclid, 1482, is UPON VELLUM, and thatthe vellum is very beautiful. It came from the library of consul Smithat Venice, which his Majesty purchased entire. I have at present abeautiful copy of it upon paper, so large that some of the leaves areuncut. It has been always a favourite book of mine, though not sowith the French connoisseurs. It is the most beautiful specimen ofthe semi gothic typography which I know. The beautiful capital lettersare a great ornament to the body ; and the diagrams, executed on themargin of the book, are as useful as they are neat. I know of noneearlier do you ?Considering what a good customer you was at the RoxburghSALE, I am quite ashamed you have not had a catalogue with the prices.This neglect has arisen entirely from the multiplicity of things that gothrough my miserable head ; but I now can tell you it is in the handsof the bookbinder, and will of course be soon sent to you."(Then follows the passage in the text).Believe me, my dear sir, with great regard, yours most sincerely,A A354 ROXBURGHIANA. \ Roxburghcelebrated book-explorer upon the Continent, untilthe period of his death*. Personally, I have noobligations to express to that bibliographer, whowas undoubtedly a man of no common calibre in hisway. Learned he was, most indisputably, in thecognizance of ancient types, and especially of thosefrom the early German presses. He knew at firstglance a Ther-horned from an Ulric Sel a Bech-termuntze from a Gutenberg and an Eggesteynfrom a Ketelaer and De Leapt ; but he had no enthusiasmor rapture on a contemplation of the bookitself. He had done wonders in his way ; for tohim the late Mr. Edwards was indebted for many arare book-gem, and among others, for the first Virgilof 1469, now in the Spencer library. Mr. HornIt was through Mr. Horn's instrumentality that Mr. Nicol wasenabled to place in Lord Spencer's library two of the very rarest, andamong the most desirable, book-treasures which that nobleman hadbeen so long anxious to possess. The one was the edition of the Turrecre-mata of 1467, so fully described with fac-similes in the Des Althorpi-ante, vol. ii. p. 272-6 : the other, the early pieces of Cicero printed byUlric Han, and collected into one (contemporaneously bound) volume,by the printer himself, and his own property as the subscription atthe end (of which a fac-simile appears in the Bibliographical Cameronvol. i. p. 388) abundantly testifies. Lord Spencer gave two hundredguineas for the first, (but " WHAT a copy !") and one hundred guineasfor the second volume, although he had previously possessed everypiece in the latter. But then, again, " WHAT a copy !" It is thus thata wise and a liberal collector should build a LIBRARY. Through thesame channel, and along with the old books of Mr. Nicol, sold byauction in 1825, there appeared a copy of the Mazarine Bible of 1455,printed UPON VELLUM, of transcendant beauty and dimensions, whichwas purchased by Messrs. Arch, for Henry Perkins, Esq., for 504/. TheHon. Mr. Grenville is also in possession of the Psalter of 1457 (from thesame quarter) made perfect by the incomparable skill of Mr. Harris.Sale'] ROXBUROUIANA. 355always appeared to me to consider a scarce book asamere piece of goods or article for sale the soonergot rid of the better. He never parted from itreluctantly. He never struggled a moment for itsretention. No tear moistened his eye, no sighconvulsed his bosom, as he took leave of it forever! He was copious but dry in his details, andwould have described a Giulio Clovis and an UlricHan with the same methodised sang-froid. Helived so long abroad, that his conversation andwriting were latterly affected by a foreign idiom ;and, what is curious, although he knew himself tobe among the facile principes of living Bibliographers,he yet preferred discoursing upon politicsto belles lettres, and was always sputtering short andtart tirades against Prince Metternich.But what becomes of the ROXBURGHIANA all thiswhile? Mr. Nicol is a fitter introduction thanMr. Horn, and the latter is thus finally dismissed.Sitting down at this comparatively remote period,not only from the Roxburgh SALE itself, but fromthe description of it in the third volume of the De-cameron,I can scarcely refrain from the expressionthat " the whole looks like a dream' " seeing thatis past as a watch in the night." Were the samelibrary to be now resold, undoubtedly the same resultswould not follow. For thus it was. The publicappetite had not only been whetted for seven* oreight preceding years, by the knowledge of Mr.Nicol's well-digested catalogue of the library, and aA A 2356 ROXBUROHIANA. [Eoxlurghepreface describing many of its more precious treasures,but the war was raging furiously upon the Continent,and there was no chance of getting such treasuresfrom abroad. The stream of the Bibliomaniahad been also strongly setting in for the eighteenmonths preceding*. It was well, therefore, for theinterests of the property, and of all the parties concerned,that the lawsuit respecting the destinationof the library, (and which had well nigh reached theperiod of the length of "Troy's siege") terminated atthe moment that it did. Another circumstance isworth especial notice. The Duke of Devonshire, themost resolute, constant, and princely purchaser at thesale, had just then come of age, and in possessionof a magnificent income. His book-propensitieshad been scarcely developed to the public knowledge,but his more intimate acquaintance were wellaware of his zealous attachment to the pages ofDebure, Renouard, and Herbert. How frequentlyhe would turn his back upon the gaieties of theflaunting town," and consume the midnight oil inI must repeat that my own humble work, so designated, had materiallycontributed to the book-effervescence. If I am asked to whatextent, the answer must be necessarily vague ; but I am uttering whatI conceive to be only a sober truth in asserting that I believe the saleto have been benefited to the amount of 5000/. by the publication herealluded to. A year or so before, the late Mr. Payne had purchased avery pretty collection, chiefly topographical, of a gentleman whose nameI have forgotten. At the Roxburghee sale my person was pointed out tothat gentleman. " Hang him, (he observed) why did he not publishhis book in the year 1810 ? My books would have brought double theprices." This was amusing but not to him.ROXBURGHIANA. 3;>7making himself acquainted with such libri dcsidcrafias might at once add to the splendour and value ofthe library left him by his ancestors ! Upon so greata scale were his purchases at this sale, that it was atfirst surmised that Mr. Granville, (the booksellerwho bid for him) was the deputed agent of Bonaparte ;and that the clusters of Caxtons which were knockeddown in the name of the former, were, in fact, to beshipped off for the imperial library at Paris. Nothingcould exceed the dexterity and success of theconcealment of the Duke's name on the occasion*.But it was also well known that other book-championswere sharpening their weapons for theexpected contest. Lord Spencer and the Duke ofMarlborough (then Marquis of Blandford) were theavowed rivals for the Boccaccio of 1471 1. Sir MarkMasterman Sykes was sure to be a large purchaserThe result of these purchases or the mode of revealing the fact oftheir belonging to the Duke is told in the Bibl. Cameron, vol. iii. p. 68.t Of all EXTRAORDINARY RESULTS, what could exceed that of theBoccaccio of 1471 coining eventually into the possession of the formernobleman, at a price less than one HALF of that for which he hadoriginally contended with the latter, who had become its first purchaserat the above sale ? Such, however, is the FACT. At the sale of theMarquis of Blandford's library in 1819, this volume was purchased bythe house of Longman and Co. for 91 8/., it having cost the Marquis2260/. Lord Spencer was present at the sale, and bade frequently. Mr.Watson Taylor had a strong inclination to put in a bidding ; but as hetold me, " from respect to Lord Spencer, he desisted' On its beingknocked down to " the House in the Row," amazement seized the bystanders.A new GIANT was supposed to be starting up in the country,for the book was professedly bought " for a gentleman in the country."It is only necessary to add that, in a few days, the precious volumebecame Lord Spencer's property for the very sum at which it wasknocked down ; and on the day of its acquisition, he carried it with358 ROXBURGHIANA. \ RoxburcjJieof the old English poetry and ancient classics ; andwho could stand in the way of Mr. Heberr in theseand other departments * ? Nothing more stronglyproves the unexpected turn which the bidding took,than that the exertions of the latter bidder were absolutelyparalysed at the first effort. His fire notonly slackened, but was silenced at the sale ofthe early English Romances. The noise of such acoming-on sale would necessarily spread far andwide ; and thus other unknown combatants would, inall probability, be desirous of some share in the booty,and thus add to the fierce collision of the whole. Arace of giants seemed to spring from the earth onthe occasion.As to the sale itself, I have no desire becauseit would be wholly a work of supererogation toenter upon further particulars. The reader will findit so elaborately and faithfully (and I hope spiritedly)him triumphantly to a large dinner party at Mr. George Hibbert's,where the volume and its owner were received with acclamation. . HisLordship afterwards clothed the book in a magnificent manner, by theskill of Charles Lewis having the arms of the Duke of Roxburgheewithin, and his own without, the dark green morocco in which it iscoated. For a particular account of the edition, see the Supplement tothe Btbl. Spencer, p. 53, &c., published with the JEdes Althorpianae.Sir Mark Sykes might have purchased to the amount of a thousandguineas. For one book, the first edition of the Epistles of Cicero toAttics, printed by Sweynheym and Pannartz, in 1470, I gave for him178/. Los. ! One day, on returning home in a hackney-coach, with somepurchases to the amount of about 200/. for the same amiable baronet, Iwas apprehensive of having lost the Pastyme of Pleasure, printed byW. de Worde in 1517, in a small quarto volume, for which I hadgiven 18/. ! On that same day I held between my extended middlefinger and thumb, about 400J. worth of SLIM QUARTOS !Sale'] ROXBUKUHIANA-*.">!>detailed in a previous work, that I have only to referto its pages for a lounge, I should hope, to hisheart's content. One thing is most remarkable.When Mr. Nicol invited me, the year preceding, tohave a long morning's gossip with him in the libraryof the Duke*, to examine some of the " Book Rarities"in the collection, and when he shewed me theinkstand which the Duke used the table on whichhe read, wrote, and dined and the bed in which hebreathed his last every thing seemed to me to beso simple, retired, and unobtruding, that I could nothelp feeling something like astonishment at thelimited circle in which a Knight, at once of theGarter and of the Thistle, chose to move ; and thatall his " migrations," like those of the Vicar ofWakefield, seemed to be only " from the blue roomto the brown." I could not help afterwards com-Mr. Nicol's note, in my possession, is dated July 6, 1810. It is in acknowledgmentof a copy of the Bibliomania, of which I had beggedhis acceptance. He says in it, that he " professes himself a Biblio-maniac promising himself much pleasure in the perusal of it, whichhis endless avocations have not yet permitted him to enjoy." This firstvisit to the Roxburgh SHRINE was followed up by several more : andit may be said to have supplied the materials, or rather furnished thehints, of what appeared in the Cameron. But it was also carried tosomething like a substantial account, in the very minute and extendeddescription of the Boccaccio which appeared in the brochure of the BOOKRARITIES (of which only thirty-six copies were printed), and which wasreprinted in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iv. p. 7579. The late EarlSpencer was at one of these visits, and he paid a most marked attentionto this Boccaccio taking elaborate notes. That seemed to Him, naturallyenough, to be the great absorbing object of the Collection. Littlecould he anticipate the being one day, in the manner in which he /**been, its POSSESSOR.360 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghparing and contrasting the tranquillity then reigningaround me, with the bustle and din which afterwardsprevailed in the same apartment and howperfectly opposite to each other had been the modeof collecting and of dispersing such a library. Notan individual but Mr. Nicol, and perhaps the King,seemed to have known the former not a town inEurope but what, more or less, has had a knowledgeof the latter.Every man pretending to some information aboutbooks, was set a-hunting for the Valdarfer Boccaccio*.From the half-ruined mansion on the summitsof the Vosges to the castellated heights alongthe Rhine, a search for this indescribably rich treasurewas immediately instituted. It might be evensupposed to be the tenant of a Swiss cottage andBerne, Basle, and Zurich, were examined with thesedulous pertinacity of an excise-officer. Italy wasransacked for this same jewel. All the towns wherethe art of printing had been exercised in its earlierstages, were explored. A stray copy might be stilllurking in the Soubiaco monastery. Perugia, Brescia,and Bologna places of comparatively rare visitationwere minutely examined, in vain. The copiesin the Magliabechi and Vatican libraries t, wereSome curious anecdotes connected with this subject are related inthe Bibl. Cameron, vol. iii. p. 75, note.t I speak hesitatingly of these copies ; but that in the Royal Libraryat Paris, wanting one leaf, has been described in my Tour; and of thatin the Blenheim Collection, wanting five leaves, a good description isfurnished by the Reverend Vaughan Thomas, as it appears in Mr.Sale'] ROXBURGHIANA. 361public property, and could not be removed. TheBook Knight sighed as he gazed upon them andwith a heavy heart turned his horse's head in a differentdirection. The Valdarfer Boccaccio, in aperfect state, is doubtless a most rare book ; but theedition of 1472, in the same state, by Adam deMichaelis, is, I think, a rarer one*. From myown individual, as well as from national, feelings, Ishould have preferred the acquisition of the oldBallad Poetry, in three folio volumes t, in the RoxburghCollection, to all the Boccaccio in the world !It cannot be denied that the Duke of Roxburgheewell merited the possession of such a library. Hisexertions, although silent, were incessant. He knewhow to estimate all the treasures over which his eyewas in the constant habit of roving. His passionevinced all the warmth of a lover, and all the fidelityMartin's beautifully executed Catalogue of Books privately printed, 1834,8vo. p. 405. Mons. Van Tract wrote me word " there were severalcopies besides that in the Royal Library at Paris." But WHERE ?*" There is no perfect copy of it in England, unless it be that in theBlenheim Collection. Will my friend Mr. Thomas exercise his skill bya comparison of that copy with my account of the perfect one at Paris ?But what a MARVELLOUS COPY of this marvellously rare edition is thatin the public library at Nuremberg ! An anecdote of some little interest,touching this latter copy, may be seen in the Tour, vol. iii. p. 431,second edition.t The volumes to which I allude are designated in No. 3210 of thecatalogue, as being " A curious Collection of some Thousand AncientBallads, bound in three large volumes." They produced the sum of47 7 1. 15s. at the sale. Of their present destination I am ignorant. Addto these, the two yet more extraordinary volumes, of like character,which were sold at the sale of Mr. Heberr's library in 1834, and ofwhich the contents of one volume are so delectably set forth in theBibl. Ifeber, pt. iv. No. 200 and you have an entertainment of itskind through a score of wintry months.362 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghof a husband. But, had he risen from his grave onthe conclusion of the sale, and peeped over Mr.Evans's shoulder to examine the amount of its produce,he would scarcely have believed the evidenceof his senses.Many things, in addition to those before noticed,have operated to render it extremely improbablethat there should ever again be that state of publicfeeling which should lead to such a result as thatwhich marked the Sale of the Roxburgh LIBRARY.The English public were, within four years afterwards,glutted with book-sales *. Collectors nosooner started up, than they seated themselves downsatiated in the chace. But the example of theDuke of Devonshire is one of the most singular andsplendid upon record. His Grace was the largestpurchaser at the Roxburghee sale, in regard to theamount of purchases. These volumes were hardlyarranged upon his shelves, when the Bishop of Ely(DR. DAMPIER) died, and he became the PURCHASEROF THE LIBRARY OF THE DECEASED ; a library, whichhad long been distinguished, from the skill, learning,and enthusiastic bibliomaniacism, of its collector.This purchase was made for a sum little short of10,000. Lord Spencer was a competitor with hisnephew, the Duke, for this prize. So closely wasthe race run, that the breath of one antagonistmight be said to be felt upon the shoulders of theI allude to the Stanley, Alchorne, Willet, Towneley, Edwards,,Duke of Grafton, and Macarthy sales ; to 'say nothing of many others-andthose of Talleyrand, Dent, Hibbert, North, and Sykes.Sale'] ROXBURG11IANA. 363other. Twenty-four hours' hesitation on the partof the duke would have carried the BIBLIOTHECADAMPIERIANA to Spencer House *.I speak on good authority. Lord Spencer's note to me, of thedate of the 19th June, 1812, runs thus: u I am much obliged to youfor your letter, and the kind anxiety you express on the subject of theBishop of Ely's library, under the suggestion of its coming into myhands. I should have had little hesitation in agreeing to the termswhich you hint at, but the duke wrote to me yesterday evening to saythat he had determined to accept the offer." At this period I cannottake upon me to specify the particular articles of which his lordshipstood in need ; but I can safely vouch that there was not a dozen whichhe and Count Reviczky used to designate as " de premiere necessity."Of its COLLECTOR, another word may be here allowed me plentifulas has been the notice of him in the Biographical Cameron, vol. iii.p. 345-353. As my acquaintance ripened into intimacy, the Bishopwould show me his earlier memoranda books, when the PASSION wasbeginning to take fast hold of him, and he begged my acceptance of one(still in my possession), in which I find the following valuation of hisLibrary, in his own hand, of the date of June, 1781 amounting, in thewhole, to 1455/. 7*. no mean collection for an Etonian Master, as theBishop was at that timesd. s. d.Theologian 173 Biographia 28 4Poet. Gr 136 1 Libri. Misc. Lat. . . 14 8Poet. Lat 96 4 Miscall. English . . 18 18 6Poet. Lat. Mod. . . 34 9 6 Geography 23 19 6Poet. Mod 60 9 Epistola 2 14 6De Re Poet. Mythol. . 14 18 Critics 40 9 6Hist. Univ. Chron. . 806 Bibliography 20 8Hist. Lib. Misc. Gr. . 72 1 Botany 29 10 6Hist. Lat 62 3 Livres Fran. . 32 6Hist. Britain. . . . 164 19 6 Libri Ital 2 16Hist. Mod 30 5 Emblematic 520Orator. Gr. & Lat. . 46 10 6 Physic, Law, &c. . . 15 4 6Philosophy. Gr. Lat. &c. 71 8 De Re Typog., &c. . 2313Voyages, Travels . . 51 9 Lexicons, &c. . 69 1Antiquities . . . . 106 14This memorandum book is a curiosity of its kind, bearing evident marksof what its owner was pleased to say (see p. 206, ante) of my first editionof the Introduction to the Classics. It shews a keen curiosity, and a364 ROXBURGHIANA. [EoxlWgheThen came the sale of Colonel Stanley's books,in which, for one article alone the De Bry Voyagesthe Duke of Devonshire gave five hundred guineas.Who could resist the force of such a competitor?patient spirit of enquiry in its first possessor. There are lists of variousbooks in various collections j and among them, one of the " EditionesPrimaries" in the library of the EARL of PEMBROKE, in which familythe Bishop had been once a tutor. This catalogue will be given in asubsequent page. There is also a very minutely written list of suchbooks as are considered rare in the obsolete work of Volt; but theBishop wisely stopped when he reached the article ' f Bartamantinus ! "I find, too, an account of the spurious (Corelli) first Pliny Junior ; ofwhich Dr. Askew's copy was offered to the Bishop for 2/. 2*. ; but hesays " the forgery was so very manifest, that he would not purchase it,"Osborne had marked this book at 15/. 15*. I also find lists of theBishop's books, valued, on large paper, in which one now smiles to findthe folio Hesiod of Robinson marked by him at 131. 15s. about one-sixthof its present value !A concluding word touching these DAMPIERIANA. On the first visit,after my first residence at Exning Vicarage, which I paid to the Cathedralat Ely, I met a short gentleman, habited as a clergyman, and welladvanced in years, approaching the western entrance. We saluted eachother ; when, taking a key out of his pocket, he offered to conduct methrough the cathedral. I thanked him ; and the first place which westopped at was the LIBRARY. " Perhaps (says he) you are fond ofbooks?" I replied, " Rather so." " Let us enter," said he. Oncasting a quick eye over the shelves, I observed, " Here are not exactlythe kind of books which the learned in these matters the hellenesLiberum seek after. Ah, sir ! you once had a Bishop who knew thesematters as well, if not better, than any man in England ; and his namewas DAMPIER." My guide stood still : the tears gathered into his eyes;and, squeezing my hand, he exclaimed, st Sir, HIS BROTHER is beforeyou." And, indeed, the resemblance was sufficiently manifest. Ourcolloquy then became brisk and confidential ; and I told him, as indeedhe knew, what was said of that brother in the Bibliographical Cameron.He invited me to meet an elite clerical party (with the Bishop at itshead) of sixteen, at dinner ; and on a subsequent visit, he had preciselythe same party in kind and in number : but I could accept neither invitation.Mr. Dampier was a Prebendary of Ely, and died about sevenyears ago.Sale'] ROXBURGHIANA. '*<>.">Who could not fail to admire such courage andwell-applied zeal ? And this, too, at a period of life,in the purchaser, when the passions are in full swayto be worked upon by every artifice to which highrank and great wealth in this country are alwaysexposed*. Not many years afterwards the library ofhis uncle, the illustrious CAVENDISH, was bequeathedto him ; and Chatsworth at this day is the only rivalof Althorp't. There is great delight in recordingthese things. These are among the evidences ofTRUE NOBILITY. I have selected perhaps an exitshould, however, be remembered, that, as by these repeatedpurchases the Duke would necessarily possess himself of Duplicatesof great value, so it would behove him to part with the same ;in order that the cistern might be regularly supplied by the water runningin at the top as it ran out at the bottom. Accordingly, in the year1815, his Grace had a sale of duplicates, many of them being in thefinest condition, and fetching large prices : prices which, I fear, duringthe present generation of human beings, will never again be brought.The reader will see a plentiful sprinkling of these prices in the Biblio-graphical Cameron, vol. iii. p. 127-131.t The whole of the SPENCER LIBRARY is now at Althorp, measuring,I should think, " from stem to stern," about 250 feet. A Shetlandpony might be conveniently kept, in ready caparison, to carry the moredelicate visitor from one extremity to the other. It is a little journeyof its kind. The whole of the DEVONSHIRE LIBRARY (with the exceptionof the Drama) is now concentrated at Chatsworth ; and it is notalittle singular that two first cousins should take the lead of the nobilityof the land as possessors of fine libraries. The reserved dramatic portionof the Duke, in London, comprises the entire library of the lateJohn Philip Kemble, Esq., the celebrated tragedian. It has also onevolume of a most extraordinary character and rarity (the Hamlet of1603), about which the reader may disport himself at his convenience,in the second edition of the Library Companion, p. 813. It may bedoubted whether the dramatic portion of the MALONE COLLECTION, atOxford, equals that of His Grace, who has lately materially enriched itby some purchases made at the Caldecot Sale.366 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghtree case in the illustration of my position ; butthis very selection proves the general truth, byproving that there were Rivals and Competitors inthe field. Add to this, the never-ceasing influx ofrare and precious volumes from abroad ; the emulationamong booksellers to put forth elaborate andwell garnished catalogues ; to say nothing of subsequentbook sales and we can easily account for thepresent state of torpor and satiety in the BOOK-trade.Not fewer than eighty thousand volumeshave been recently circulated by the seven differentsales of the late Mr. Heberr's library: and moreare to follow *. In dismissing the notice of the RoxburghSale, it may be only necessary further to remark,that its total produce amounted to 23,000/. t.The Hodnet Library and the Manuscripts (among the latter, someof a very choice and tempting description) are to be sold in the ensuingyear. Of the seven parts already sold, consuming 144 days, the numberof articles in each, with the amounts of the respective sales, stands thus:No. of Articles. Gross Amount.Part 1 7486 5615II 6590 5958III 5055 2116IV 3067 . ' . . 7248V 5693 2623VI 4666 6771VII. 6797 403539,354 34,366Of all these "parts" separately considered, the fourth is doubtless themost attractive both from the character of the books (chiefly poetry)and the copiousness of their description.t There were copies of the Catalogue of the Roxburgh Libraryupon large paper. Of these I possessed one, PRICED, with the purchasers'names, by a young friend, in a manner so entirely beautiful andClub.'} ROXBUROHIANA.It had not cost its owner one fourth of that sum.The cause or causes of such a surprising resulthave been sufficiently stated.I am now to touch upon the second branch ordivision of these Roxburghiana, namely, the Rox-BURGHE CLUB. Bear with me, ye uninitiated ! Andbe present, "spirits of the departed!" for thetheme is neither ignoble nor uninstructive. Theorigin of this Club, or rather Symposium, has beenalready before the public*, and may be repeated infew words. On the evening before the sale of theBoccaccio of 1471, which took place on the 17th ofJune, 1S12, a few enthusiastic and resolute Biblio-matchless, as to have brought, at the sale of my own books, in 1822, thesum of 9/. 10*. If it be asked how I could have parted with such atreasure, I fear it must be answered, that, in <f the pride and the naughtinessof my heart," I consented so to do, in order that my collection mightnot be deprived of one of its most attractive ornaments. It was purchasedat the sale by the late Mr. North of Acton ; at the sale of whose libraryin 1819, it became the property of Lord Granville, for III. I had lefta stiff commission in order to become its owner again for it had noordinary claims upon my affectionate respect. Its calligraphy, manifestand surpassing as it was, was a secondary cause of my regard for it. Ithad been the performance of female hands, attached to a heart as warmand tender as could beat in the human breast. It was the gift of ONEwho always found a ready and cordial reception in the bosom of myfamily ; whose worth was always duly estimated, and whose memorywill be always embalmed in the tenderest recollections. Some twelveyears agone, she passed to her "long account" of which she need notfear the delivery into the hands of a merciful Judge. A sweeter spirit,united to a more cultivated understanding, could not pass from earthto HEAVEN ! All that was left for her survivors to do, hath been done ;and I may with truth say, that every sod of her grave has beenmoistened by a MOTHER'S and a SISTER'S tears.See the Sidling. Cameron, vol. iii. p. 69-74, and Martin's Catalogueof Books, privately printed, p. 4G2, &c.368 ROXBURGHIANA. {Roxburgliemaniacs (in the number of whom was the writer ofthese pages) dined with Mr. (now Mr. Baron) Bolland,at his house in the Delphi Terrace. All was joy-ounce,and as became possessors of fine copies ofRobinson's Auncient Order, Societies, and Uniteof Prince Arthur and the Knightly Armoury of theRound Table, printed in 1583, 4 to. : a book, whichtakes undisputed precedence of all the quartos *upon this momentous subject. Among the guests,was my especial good friend, the late George Iste,Esq. who once had the temerity to dispute withme the PARENTAGE of the Club. After dinner wePerhaps the finest (ought I not always to say one of the finest?)copy of this rare and curious book in existence belongs to my friend SirFrancis Freeling, Bart. In the preceding year was published anotherwork by Robinson, called the " True Assertion of the Life of PrinceArthur, &c." Of both these works a very full and particular accountappears in the British Bibliographer, vol. i. p. 109-135, from the penof the late Mr. Castlewood. Never were the convexities and concavitiesof genealogical research and disquisition more strikingly exhibited thanin these curious volumes ; of which I have known a copy of the secondsell for 15/. 15s. in smart trim. Of course, as I am not forgetful of, soam I not insensible to, the celebrated quarto of our old friend Arthur'sfeats, of the date of 1634 ; of which the finest copy I have ever seenwas that in the library of the late Colonel Stanley, bound by RogerPayne in russia leather. It produced, I think, 13/. at the saletMr. GEORGE Iste was originally a bencher of the Inner Temple,and died a bachelor. In later life he became a tenant of Earl Spencer,in St. James's Place. His intimacy with that nobleman, and moreespecially with Mr. Roger Wilbraham, was considerable. He was theyounger brother of the late Samuel Istedd, Esq., of Eton Hall, in Northamptonshire; and at one time in the " olden days" it has been said,that the TWO BROTHERS had such influence at Boodles' club, that a candidateran some risk of being black-balled if not previously introducedto, or recommended by, this par nobilefratrum. To me, uniformly,Mr. George Istedd was kind and communicative ; and both at AlthorpHOXBURGHIANA.discoursed upon the eventful business of the morrow,for the Boccaccio was not the only article of "pithand moment" to be disposed of. It might be saidto be embedded in a dense stratum of romantic lore.As each day's sale was usually protracted to a latehour owing to the vigour and pertinacity of thebidders and as the Boccaccio was among the laterlots of the day, it was resolved, at my suggestion,that, after witnessing the knocking down of thatmagical article, we should dine together, by way ofcommemoration of the event, at a neighbouringtavern, and the St. Alban tavern, on the site of thefirst Athenaeum Club-house, was selected as the spot.V hereupon Mr. Baron Bolland ordered his butlerto extricate an elongated bottle of burgundy fromdank saw dust and cobwebs, in order therewith tocelebrate the glories of the coming day. The time,and Eton we have passed many a pleasant day together. He ratherdabbled with, than took lustily to, the black-letter craft. He buzzedabout, rather than settled upon, the object of his choice the favouriteflower in the book-parterre. He did me a kind service in negotiatingwith his late sister-in-law for the loan of the celebrated MS. of oldballads, and in the possession of that lady's father, the Bishop of Promote: concerning which there may be tf enough and more than enoughsaid," in the Cameron, vol. iii. p. 336. Will no inducement withdrawit from its present retreat, for the benefit of the lovers of genuineold ballad poetry ?A great number of the romances which were sold on the memorableBOCCACCIO DAY are specified in pages 66-68 of the third volumeof the Bibliographical Cameron just referred to. It has been said thatthe amount of that one day's sale equalled what had been given for theENTIRE COLLECTION.B B370 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburgheedoubtless, was short, for the increase of our numbers; but I was not only fortunate enough to procurethe attendance of several other choice bibliomanicalspirits, but to find Lord Spencer disengaged, anddisposed, at our united entreaty, to take the headof the table, and become President on the occasion.That day that important day from its commencementto its close, is now fully before me. I have avivid recollection of all its material features. I waspretty well aware of the probable result of the Boccacciobidding ; for the Marquis of Blandford, nowthe Duke of Marlborough, meeting me in St. James's-streeton the day preceding, asked me " if I thoughtfour thousand pounds would fetch it?" to which Ianswered, unpremeditatedly, "half" A propheticreply. It has been said that the Duke intended tohave given only sixteen hundred pounds if LordSpencer had not personally opposed him. It wasalso said that the Duke of Devonshire meant tohave gone as far as fifteen hundred pounds*. I believethere is no truth in either report.In the Gentleman's Magazine of the day appeared the followingskit not undeserving of repetition here in reference to the two volumes sold at the Roxburghee sale. I have forgotten thename of the author : " Will my friend, Mr. Dibdin, allow me to hintthe surprise of many of his readers, at his expressions in your last regardingthe Roxburghee sale ? we expected that he, whom we all saw alittle while ago carrying a torch to the pyre, would have continued, byhis good-humoured irony, to have fanned the flame, which he nowseems so desirous to damp. I suppose, Mr. Urban, I am an incurablemaniac, for I really can see nothing but GOOD to literature in this .The morning lowered,And heavily with clouds came on the dayBig with the fate ofthe respective combatants. I had prevailed upon afew friends to breakfast with me, that we might talkover " the coming event," which seemed to " cast itsshadow before." Mr. Lang of Portland-place wasone of them : a gentleman, loving books, and possessingthem in great store. His West India concernsusually took him daily into the city, but onsuch an occasion he "threw his bonnet into theair" and resolved to give himself a holiday or two*.balance ! What if a book, which for a century has been the mark ofall the bibliographers of Europe, has fetched upwards of 2,000 ! I cannotbring my mind quite to think that it will ruin the Marlborough fortune.I suppose if such a sum had been given for a race-horse, with agreat many heavy engagements upon him besides, that fell lame thenext hour, it would have been NOTHING ! And what if DevonshireHouse or Chatsworth is to be adorned with Queen Elizabeth's Wood-ville'sown splendid copy of Caxton's earliest and most interesting workat the price of 1060/. ! Is it quite frightful for the princely property ofCavendish ? Away with these puling complaints of a generous emulation,which exalts the national character, and makes the fruits of intellectualindustry the noble contest of the rich !Yours, &c.A BIBLIOMANIAC."His letter, now in the possession of his son-in-law, Mr. Freeling,runs thus : " I shall with much pleasure breakfast with you on Wednesdaynext, at ten o'clock, or any other hour that suits you ; and wecan fix that when we meet, which no doubt we shall, in St. James's-square,on Monday and Tuesday. I shall keep myself disengaged onTuesday and Wednesday from all business but the speculations in St.James s-square. Perhaps it will suit you to breakfast with us on Tuesday,at ten o'clock, and look over my books ? for when I get you andmy friends together at a more serious time of the day, for eating anddrinking, looking over the books, as we have experienced, is quite outB B 2372 ROXBURGHIANA. [RoxburgheeSir Egerton Brydges and Mr. Freeling the younger(the latter just then beginning to open his biblio-of the case." I have always unfeigned pleasure in dwelling upon thememory of the writer of the above letter. " Would to heaven (saysone intimately acquainted with him) that I had the ability to do justiceto the memory of that good man. There was a simplicity and singlenessof character about him such as I have never fallen in with, in anyman mixing so largely with the world as himself. His mental powerswere of the highest order, and to an extent beyond that for which creditwas usually given him ; and this, for the most part, from a natural indolencewhich prevented him from claiming that weight to which hewas justly entitled, and which I have often seen arrogated to themselvesby men immeasurably his inferiors in every respect, save presumption.Those only who knew him as I did, could justly appreciate him. Hewas a gentleman, in its most extended sense ; and the blank which hisloss has occasioned to me, never has been, and never can be, supplied."Mr. Lang had not only one of the most curious and beautiful librariesin the kingdom thoroughly sui generis but he was intimately conversantwith their contents. He mastered with facility the old French,whether in print or in manuscript ; and he would chuckle with delightover his unique Mystery of ST. CHRISTOPHER.Mr. Lang's earlier French poetry was matchless in quality and condition; and it is no small commendation of their owner to say, thatMr. Douce affirmed he had a more intimate knowledge of early Frenchliterature than any individual (not even excepting himself) with whomhe was acquainted. Many of the volumes were as brilliantly clean as ifthey had just issued from the press : and Charles Lewis vehemently delightedin giving them a good suit of clothes. I purchased for him theYsaie, at the Roxburghee sale, for 15/. 15* It was printed by Galliot duPre. He was the Melius of my Cameron : and what a manuscriptromance, so ENTITLED, (from the Roxburghee collection) did he possess !What variety, what splendour of embellishment ! Damsels, knights,heralds, kings, queens ! and a world of thronging courtiers, prancingsteeds, hawks, hounds, pages, and pursuivant! How often has thegolden glow of his " well-trimmed argand lamps" (see Cameron, vol.iii. p. 86) streamed upon the ivory-tinted vellum of this incomparabletome .which is now the property of his Son-in-law, to whom it wasbequeathed. His beautiful house and beautiful book-cases have witnessedmany a scene of delightful conviviality, when the choicest wineshad only a secondary flavour in a society more especially formed to placeSale"] ROXBURGHIANA. 373maniacal petals) met him. Mr. Uttersonon bewailedthat as it was the last day of term, it would preventhis attendance at the breakfast. The carriage ofSir Egerton conveyed us to the scene of action,which need not be again described as the pages ofthe Bibliographical Cameron have probably furnisheda description to satiety.I may, however, briefly recapitulate, that my ownpurchase at this memorable sale scarcely exceeded26/., while those for my friends amounted to 640/.Of this sum 470/. was furnished from the treasury ofSir M. M. Sykes*. That amiable baronet was ofall men among the most sensitive and anxious abouthis book acquisitions. Some of his notes to me areyet in existence ; and they breathe of true biblioma-nicol ardour. The first is marked with a delicacypeculiar to himself. The Roxburgh CLUB met,Gerard above Johannisberg, and Michel Le Noir beyond Champagne.What happy hours yea, days and nights were spent by many a Roxburghunder the hospitable roof of Melius! Never were thedomus et places Uxor" more thoroughly calculated to delight theunderstanding and to charm the heart of every visitor ! M r. Lang'slibrary was sold by auction, by Mr. Evans, in 1828, and produced thesum of 283 7/. The more intrinsically precious and curious articles werepurchased for the Royal Library at Paris. There is a private print aportrait of him of the most surprising resemblance. Would it mighthave faced this page of the " Reminiscences !"See page 321, ante. Sir Mark's purchases might in the whole havereached the sum of a thousand guineas. For Lord Spencer 1 had purchasedtwo books of the united amount of 83/. 4*. 6d For Mr. BaronBolland, the Thomas of Reading (the Baron was educated at Dr. Valpy'sschool) for 51. 15*. 6d.; for my late friend Mr. Neunberg, about 13/.worth ; for Mr. Gutch to the amount of 351. ; and for others about 3'J/.t One of his earlier notes, evincing his great anxiety about a rare374 ROXBURGHIANA. Roxburgh?for the first time, at the St. Albans* Tavern, onWednesday, the 17th June, 1812, composed of thefollowing membersEARL SPENCER, K. G.Earl Gower, now Duke of Sir M. M. Sykes, Bart.Sutherland, Roger Wilbraham, Esq.Mr. Baron Boll and, Richard Heberr, Esq.Sir S. E. Brydges, Bart. George Istedd, Esq.Sir F. Freeling, Bart. John Dent, Esq.Edw. Vernon Uttersonon, Esq. Robert Lang, Esq.John Delafield Phelps, Esq. Rev. T. C. Heberr,William Bentham, Esq. Joseph Castlewood, Esq.George Henry Freeling, Esq.classical volume, is as follows : " My dear Sir, I was in hopes to havefound you at home yesterday. I have sent my servant for the books.Perhaps you will send me the Aldus to look at, and if 1 already possessthe volume 1 will return it. I am going amongst the lawyers thismorning, but if possible I will call upon you on Thursday. I fear LordSpencer was my opponent for the Attics (Epistola ad Attica, 1470),but it was such an object to me, I could not give way, though it alwaysgrieves me to oppose his lordship." My friend need not have been thusanxious, for Lord Spencer was in possession of the volume, though not ofso fine a copy of it ; and at the sale of the Macarthy library he becamethe purchaser of it UPON VELLUM. In some of his subsequent notes tome,Sir Mark betrayed all the agony of a man keen upon the scent.He says, ' f The Paradise of Dainty Devises and the Pastyme of PleasureI would not lose at ANY PRICE." Perhaps he was not singular inthis avowal. Again : " the two Spenser (earliest editions of the minorpoems) I would on no account lose ; and for Shakspeare Sonnets goashigh as 20/." The third note (they were all written from his countryhouse, at Sledmere) runs thus : " As I have not heard from you, Ifear you have not been successful. May I thank you to purchase formethe first folio edition of Shakspeare ? I would go as far as 70 or 80guineas for it. I hope the day will be more propitious to you, and thatyou will have purchased for me the few articles I have SET MY HEARTUPON. (Sic !) I am happy to find by a note from Lord Spencer this('////;.] ROXBUROHIANA. 375with myself at the bottom of the table, as Vice-president.Those members, with the names to theright, printed in the italic letter, have CEASED TOBE. To these may be added our illustrious President: by which it will appear that death hathrobbed us of the better half of those who sat downto the first symposium. Our object in this meetingwas not so much for convivial, as for belles-lettres,or, if the reader pleases, bibliomanical, purposes.Most of the members were in possession offine libraries ; and the TOASTS* , which seemed ashieroglyphical characters to the public, were allunderstood and cordially greeted both by those whogave, and those who received, them. The 01morning, that the book arrived safe, and was the one which he wanted.Pray let me hear the event of Wednesday the sale of the Boccaccio."Sir Mark obtained all the articles which he wanted, with the exceptionof the folio Shakspeare, in which he was distanced by the Duke ofDevonshire. See page 351. But the prices at which they were obtainedwas something frightful, as it is now, to think upon. The year followingthis memorable sale I visited him, at his earnest and repeated request, atStedmore, and there renewed my acquaintance with the Roxburgheegems, and rioted and revelled for awhile in Faithhornes, Dollars, andWoollens. See the Cameron, vol. iii. 405, &c.The toasts are usually as follow: 1. The immortal memory ofChristopher Valdarfer, printer of the Boccaccio of 1471. 2. The immortalmemory of John Duke of Roxburghee. 3. The same of Gutenberg,Fust, and Schoiffher, fathers of the art of printing. 4. The sameof William Caxton, founder of the British press. 5. Of Dame JulianaBarnes and the St. AlbansVpress. 6. Of Messrs. Wynkyn De Worde,Pynson, and Notary, the successors of Caxton. 7. The Aldine familyat Venice. 8. The Giunti family at Florence. 9. The Society of theBibliophiles Francis at Paris. 10. The prosperity of the RoxburgheeClub: and, in all cases, as the last toast, THE CAUSE OF BIBLIOUAMAALL OVER THE WORLD.376 ROXBURGH! AN A. [Roxburghhad nothing to do with our " sittings" whether theywere short or protracted. The indulgence of asocial feeling, and of pleasant conversation respectingrare and curious and valuable hooks, mightsurely have escaped the severest inquisitorial visitation,and set both ridicule and censure at defiance.On our second meeting, or first anniversary dinner,the Club was enlarged to the number of twenty-fourmembers ; and the Duke of Devonshire, theMarquis of Blandford (now Duke of Marlborough),Lord Worketh (now Earl of Carlisle), Thomas Ponton,Esq., Peregrine Towneley, Esq., and JamesHeywood Markland, Esq., constituted the additionalmembers. On the third annual meeting* a furtherBy this time the public journals had "caught hold" of us; andspecimens of their mode of handling us may be seen in the Cameron :but among them, none was so full and veracious as that in the Gentleman'sMagazine, signed Temporis, which is also reprinted in theauthority here first mentioned. I cannot, however, resist finding a placefor the following original and humorous effusion in the Gentleman'sMagazine for December, 1813, which has ever since been embedded inahuge pile of papers and memoranda touching these ROXBVRGHIANA.I am ignorant of the author.To Bibliomaniacks in general, and to their Lordships and Worshipsthe Members of the Roxburgh CLUB in particular.' P on V quoth Time to Thomas Hearne,Whatever I forget, you learn ; 'How blest the BIBLIOMANIAC'S lot !He learns what even Hearne forgot.MY LORDS AND GENTLEMEN,Permit me, without loss of time in ceremonious preface, to lay beforeyour Honours my pretensions, my services, and my misfortunes. I amdescended from a very ancient family. My ancestors of both sexeshave, from the earliest ages of literature (even long before the inventionClub.'} ROXBURGHIANA. 377increase took place by the addition of Lord Althorp(now Earl Spencer), Mr. Justice Littledale, Edwardof the art of printing) been renowned in every magnificent library fortheir attachment to books; and numbers of our race have greatly distinguishedthemselves, so lately as within these last hundred years, bytheir assiduous and truly indefatigable labours in all kinds of works onthe abstruse parts of general science, in ponderous folios, bulky quartos,and solid octavos, on Polemical Divinity, the Mathematicks, Algebraiccomputations, the Hebrew, and the higher order of Greek and Roman,of French, Italian, Spanish, German, and English classics. Theircritical acumen in numberless tomes of grave controversial treatises, has,at all times, been publicly acknowledged and attested ; although neveradequately rewarded. And yet it cannot be denied by their bitterestadversaries, that their silent toil like the powerful ' still small voice' ofTruth itself has conduced more to suppress dull Tracts, and to compelnew editions of good ones, than all the Edinburgh and Quarterly Reviewsput together.Sed genus, et proves, et quae non dedimus ipsi/my Lords and Gentlemen, I beg leave to assure you, in the words of aGrecian warrior, translated into blank verse by Ovid for the amusementof school-boys ' vix ea nostra voce.'I, too, am a Critic ! To my strong powers of argumentation, farmore than to the reasonings of any Bishop on or off the Reverend Bench,is imputable die hopeless state of oblivion into which Priestly, TomPaine, Home Tooke, Brothers, Huntingdon, and Joanna Southcott,have fallen. I have fairly EATEN them out of the field, and out of houseand home in any valuable Library. Such are among my services andpretensions. Let me, now, alas ! turn to my misfortunes.How shall I begin ? As a certain trusty Trojan is by Virgil madebeautifully to sing or say, ' Quis aliquando' ah ! my tears ! mytears ! ' temper et a lacrymal ?' Cruel, barbarous * Bibliomania !'Ever since the Rev. Thomas Frognall Dibdin's elegant publicationunder this all-imposing title has appeared, like a Comet, blazing andilluminating the regions of occult studies, my hopes are sunk, my occupation'sgone ! Had I a thousand mouths, arrayed with ten thousanddouble and single teeth, I could not regain the ' spolia optima ' thatgentleman (with a head under his hat) has triumphantly taken from meand mine, for ever ! ! !The British Museum, " A BOOK-WORM,"Attic Story. W. B**R."*.378 ROXBURGHIANA. [RoxburghLittledale, Esq., the Rev. William Howell Carr,James Boswell, Esq., and the Rev. James WilliamDodd. This acquisition fixed the number of members,irrevocably, at Thirty-one. There have beenmany attempts to enlarge it, but unsuccessfully.These three Symposia were held at the St. Albans'tavern (chiefly, it was thought, from an affectionaterespect to the memory of the ST. ALBANS' Press),and Mr. Nicholas, the master of the hotel, alwaysfilled up his printed circular by inviting us "to dinewith the Roxburghee dinner ( t."When resident in the neighbourhood of St. Alban's, in 1833, Istrove in all ways to satisfy myself about the probable identity of thespot, in this once magnificent abbey, where THE PRESS might have beenerected; but could come to no satisfactory conclusion. Doubtless, Ishould say, within a side chapel, or the monastery itself more probablythe latter. Of the books which have issued from the early St. Albanspress, a particular description will be found in the Bibl. Spenceriana,vol. iv. p. 368392. Of these the Chronicles of England (1483), andthe Book of Hawking and Hunting (1486), are considered the "greatguns." The latter is so excessively rare, that I know but ONE PERFECTcopy of it, which is in the Spencer Library. That copy was purchasedat the sale of the library of George Mason, the poet, in 1796, for 751.an astounding sum in those days : but had it been purchased by theDuke of Roxburghee, and sold at the sale of his library, it MUST havebrought 500/. I say this deliberately. There is one thing which strikesme about these early St. Albans' books, which may be worth slightlynoticing. I have doubts of the Rhetoric Nova of my old friend LaurentiusGuileless de Sana, of 1480, being printed in or at \heAbbey;and for three reasons. 1. The type (though of the same family isso much more beautifully CUT and printed. 2. The colophon says,apud Villa Sancti Albans. 3. The distance of time between thedate of this book and that of Juliana Barnes's upon Hawking andHunting. But then, where in the village was it printed ? It is a puzzle.t A sort of pardonable pleonasm on the part of the master of thehotel, which has given occasion to an anonymous writer in the Athenaeum(lub.'] ROXBUROHIANA. '379At this third meeting, Mr. Baron Holland producedthe first Roxburghee Club Boke, it being areprint of Lord Surrey's poetical version of thesecond Book of the Aeneid : a book, which hasalmost the scarcity of a manuscript. In the prefix,the names of the members were alphabeticallyprinted ; and that of the individual, to whom the copybelonged, was uniformly printed in red ink : so thathis identical copy was immediately ascertained :an ingenious thought, which has been always sinceacted upon. In this first Roxburghee publication,the names of the members stood thus :EARL SPENCER, K. G. PRESIDENT.The Duke of Devonshire, Sir Francis Freeling,The Marquis of Blandford, George H. Freeling, Esq.Earl Gower, Joseph Castlewood, Esq.Viscount Worketh, Richard Heberr, Esq.Viscount Althorp, George Hibbert, Esq.Sir M. Masterman Sykes, Bt. George Istedd, Esq.Sir Egerton Brydges, Bart. Robert Lang, Esq.William Bentham, Esq. Joseph Littledale, Esq,William Bolland, Esq. Edward Littledale, Esq.James Boswell, Esq. James H. Markland, Esq.Rev. W T william H. Carr, John Delafield Phelps, Esq.John Dent, Esq. Thomas Mouton, Jun. Esq.Rev. T. F. Dibdin, V. P. Peregrine Towneley, Esq.Rev. James William Dodd, Edward Vernon Uttersonon, Esq.Rev. Henry Drury, Roger Wilbraham, Esq.(of whom in due course) to flounder in certain mirthful vagaries, andto fasten it upon the late Mr. Castlewood, who was as innocent of itas the writer himself. Poor Castlewood! he need not have thissin " heaped upon the mountain of those which that cold-blooded andtrenchant writer has piled upon his grave.380 ROXBURGHIANA. [RoxluryheThe first vacancy in the club was occasioned bythe death of the Rev. Thomas Cuthbert Heberr,whose place was filled by that " right singular, andmuch approved good" member, GEORGE H IB BERT,Esq. This vacancy occurred before the fourthanniversary meeting. The next. vacancy occasionedby the death of the Rev. Mr. Dodd, a "right merrier,"but somewhat heterodox member, who once took itinto his head to carol Robin Hood "ballades" at alate hour of the meeting, when the wine had doneeither its best or its worst.* This midnight chauntinghas never been repeated.As death continued to thin our ranks, the gapsmade by his unerring dart were regularly filled upby those who were in all respects worthy, from situation,talent, and taste, to fill them effectually. Butone wide gap, made by the deaths of two brothersand to be filled at the same time merits more thanapassing notice. I speak of the TWO Bos WELLSSir Alexander and James. It is but too well knownThe Rev. Mr. Dodd was one of the Masters of Westminster School,and son of the celebrated actor of that name, who had amassed a verycurious dramatic collection, of which mention is made in the Bibliomania,p. 536 ; and where we learn that " Mr. George Nicol (for theDuke of Roxburghee) kept up a tremendous fire at this sale." Mr. Doddwas well versed in the " Robin-hood Garland," and I was once privy toa brisk " set-to" between him and the late Mr. Castlewood, touchingdie mysterious lore connected with this Nottingham outlaw. Castlewoodwas right in his premises, but his adversary drew a conclusion whichappeared to foil him sadly, and which indeed was radically fallacious.It is one thing to have a well-stored armoury, and another to possessthe knowledge or art of using your weapons dexterously.('///A.] ROXBUKGHIANA. 381how the former found his end. Political heat hadgot the ascendancy of bibliomanical fervour. SirAlexander, with all his passion for, and love of,literature, books, and printing*, happened to be anSufficient evidence of the deceased's attachment to these objectswill be found in the Cameron, vol. iii. p. 453, &c., where may beseen a copper-plate vignette of his press the Auchinleck Press inAyrshire, where his privately printed books were executed. Sir Alexander'sown account of it may be also seen in a letter addressed to me, of thedate of 181 7. By the favour of my friend, Mr. Markland, I am enabledhere to add another letter, from the same quarter, of the date of Feb.20, 1822, within a very short period of the writer's premature decease,written at Auchinleck. The conclusion of it refers to his meditatedcontribution to the Roxburghee Club.MY DEAR SIR,******As to agriculture, there is no spot in his majesty's dominions moredistressed than this county, as it has been the will of Providence thatwe should have three successive failures of crop, with all the commonevils of low prices. The " transition from war to peace" had its effect,but that was quadrupled by the importation. Farming stock in thiscountry fell above 50 per cent. Then the unionists at a most happymoment had their triumph, and all obligations were by their own shewingraised 30 per cent., and the source from which they were to havebeen liquidated was reduced as much.In short, there is, comparatively speaking, now neither capital norcredit. I see some men, whom I have seen going to church at the headof their families in decent attire comfortable sort of people breakingstones in the high roads. And you know we are political economistsenough to have no rates to help them.1 expect no relief from parliament the disease is beyond their skill.Although the time was ill chosen for the cash payment resumption, wecannot retrace our steps. It could only do evil, and no good. Theefforts of the humane society could not revive our drowned men. Theprospect is for another generation. I am waiting with curiosity, butwithout hope, for Lord Castlereagh's motion. There is a rumour of aloan to the agriculturists : who would borrow that could avoid it? andwhat must be the amount to give such a relief? It is too absurd to betrue. Prospectively, something may be done, by rendering the presentcorn-bill more secure in its operation. The present system of exclusion,382 ROXBURGHIANA. \JRoxburcjlic"out and out" Tory; and was one of those whohelped to establish a most determined Tory paper,called The Warder. This paper was to Scotland asthe John Bull is to England. It should seem to bewith politics, as with gastronomy ; that there aresome palates which can never endure any but hotand high-seasoned dishes. Ryan and capsicum onlyfor them! A wise man, be he Whig, or be heTory, will prefer a cooler regimen ; for in a fewyears this Alicia lava* will destroy every duct andup to a given point, and a fraction more the signal for inundation, andcoupled with the warehousing system, which renders it an object toovertop at considerable apparent loss the flood mark may surely beamended. I, situated as I am, would wish a more strict surveillance onIreland ; for I am almost converted to the belief that we receive moregrain than Ireland can afford. We had capital oats ' the food of manin Scotland, in England of horses' from Ireland last year to an immenseamount, at twelve shillings per quarter.If, under all this pressure, I must go to press, my respected friendsof the Roxburgh must accept of a composition of a shilling in thepound of the debt I owe, and one per cent, of my inclination.I am, my dear Sir,Your's sincerely,ALEXANDER BOSWELL."The Ancients peppered everything. The roofs of their mouthswere doubtless in due course " fire proof." The gentle reader will turnhis eye for one minute towards as peppery a specimen as need beselected; from the editio princeps of Apicius in Re Coquinaria asgiven in the Bible Spencer, vol. i. p. 244 : or rather from the secondedition of that fiery author. It is doubtless in every edition. But themarked difference between natural and artificial (whether political orpolemical) pepper, is, that the former preys only upon the Individualhimself: the latter may fire thousands.Dulce et decorum est pro PATRIA mori.But let us keep to our " Country:" norto party give up what was meant for mankind.C.V///A] ROXBURGH I ANA. 383integument of the abdomen. So fares it with themind from party excitement. To such an extenthad this paramount feeling prevailed with our deceasedBaronet, that, perhaps unwittingly to himself,and with the best possible dispositions towardshis native country, he was giving vent to his feelingsby personal vituperation. He was in fact unconsciouslysitting upon a barrel of gunpowder, andigniting the fuse which was to blow him up into theair. Wife little ones property all seem to havebeen lost sight of ! He had unquestionably insultedan individual who "called him out :" and although,as it is said, that individual had never before pulledthe trigger of a pistol, yet death winged thebullet.*I shall never cease to think that his Brother, mymore particular friend, James Boswell, was carriedoff from sheer neglect in timely application for medicalassistance, and yet more from improper nursingor rather, from no nursing at all. He livedand died in chambers, surrounded by the library ofhis late friend Malone His illness, which was anI have heard that, on being struck, Sir Alexander turned quiteround with a frightful velocity. The ball struck and shattered theshoulder, and afterwards lodged in the spine. He died within twenty-fourhours.t This library was bequeathed to the Bodleian on the death of MrJames Boswell. What it must be, may be judged from an analysis ofsome of its treasures in the Library Companion, p. 791, &c. (secondedition) furnished me by my friend the Rev. Dr. Bliss. What it is,the public vehemently desire to know ; as seven years have run theircourse since it was deposited on the Bodleian shelves. Good Dr. ROXBURGHIANA. \ roxburghulcerated sore throat, was short, but severe. My friendMr. Markland tells me, that, after making an effort tospring from his hed and shut the outer door of hischamber, he retreated precipitately, and buryinghis head within his pillow, expired. He lived tosee his edition of his friend Malone's Shakspearerising gradually into distinction ; but was alwaysa little peevish at no notice being taken of it ineither of the two leading Reviews. If you spoketo him of any criticism upon it in the other reviews,or in magazines, he used to say " Ay ! but whatare they about in the Quarterly?" He seemed tohave always had a presentiment that " some mischiefwas brewing in that quarter" such was hisvery expression. The fact was, the late Mr. Gifford,its Editor, was his personal friend ; but Mr.Malone, the editor of Shakspeare, happened not tobe the personal friend of Mr. Gifford ; who, in hisvery able and almost perfect edition of Ben Jonson'sWorks, seems to have travelled out of his way inorder to bestow castigation upon Malone for everydine will doubtless soon give motion to the machinery whereby allgood and true Bibliomaniacs may revel in a knowledge of suchtreasures. Only judge gentle reader from the tone of my friendDr. Bliss's letter, just referred to, and now before me ! " I fearedtiring you or your Readers, or 1 could have sent double the quantity.As to the Poetry, I dared not touch it or every other collection youhave noticed must have been thrown into the back ground. When Icame to look through them, I was perfectly astonished. There is hardlya single poem printed in the reigns of Elizabeth and James, not to befound here: and the Greens, Nash, Dealers, Rich, Braithwaittt tRowland, and Bretons, exceed belief!"ROXBURUHIANA.trifling slip and venial error. Gifford's jealousy ofevery one who presumed to measure the height ofOld Ben, by instituting comparisons between himand Shakspeare, assumed at last quite a frantic air ;and Boswell's reply, in which he nobly vindicated thememory of his departed friend, was to the full asable as the attack*. His death in all probabilityprevented a meditated explosion ; for it was underis thus " But since his death, a work has come forth of such acknowledgedexcellence in other respects, and proceeding from a writer ofsuch literary eminence, containing remarks of such a nature, that I cannotfeel myself justified in passing them over in total silence. Mr. Maloneentertained a very high regard for Mr. Gifford, he admired his talents,but he respected him still more for the principles congenial with hisown, which directed him in their application : it was with singular satisfaction,that he availed himself of an opportunity of affording himliterary assistance, when he had certainly no reason to complain of theterms in which his courtesy was acknowledged ; and during his intercoursewith that Gentleman, I know he flattered himself that they viewedeach other with sentiments of mutual esteem. How then would hehave been mortified and chagrined, if he had lived to peruse the lastedition of Ben Jonson, in which not only his critical opinions are frequentlytreated with contempt, but even language (I trust hastily) employed,which might seem to cast an imputation on his moral character.It is to this point I speak : and Mr. Gifford, who, himself knows no coldmedium in his attachments, would probably despise me, I should certainlydespise myself, if I did not come forward, and attempt, at least,to show that such charges are altogether unfounded." xxx-i. p. 30, &c.If there be any one passage in his own writings to which, more thanany other, he can look back with unmingled delight, I will venture topoint out his high, but not more high than merited, eulogium on thepresent very excellent DEAN OF WESTMINSTER. Let him recall to hisrecollection the feelings with which that tribute was penned, and hewill know what I also must feel in defending the character of ONE,whom I have loved and honoured from my infancy MINE OWN and MYFATHER'S FRIEND.C C386 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghstood that the late Mr. Octavius Gilchrist was regularlyfurnishing the Editor of the Review withhall-cartridges, whereby to render the explosion moreterrible and deadly*.I pass " to the order of the day :" in other words, tothe Roxburghee Club OBITUARY. And yet it is preciselyin "the order of the day" to make some mention(which in strict chronological order ought to havebeen earlier) of the MONUMENT TO THE MEMORY OFCAXTON, which the Club caused to be erected withinthe church of St. Margaret's, Westminster. The originalintention was to have fixed it within the Abbey,from the fact of Caxton having erected the FIRSTThe late Mr. Octavius Gilchrist, of Stamford, in Lincolnshire, wasdoubtless, considering his education and limited society, a very extraordinaryliterary character. He was a Grocer, on a large scale ofbusiness, and always appeared to me to love books very much betterthan the material of his trade. He had a good library, and somecurious volumes. Among the latter, was Caxton's edition of Lydgate'swretched metrical " Life of our Lady" of which 1 was instrumentalto its being placed in Lord Spencer's library for the sum of 100/. Mr.Gilchrist was a great ally of Mr. Gifford's, whom he appeared to me atonce to fear and to respect. He had furnished materials, if he did notconcoct entire articles for the Quarterly Review although at totalvariance with that publication in political principles. He was a quick,sharp sighted, critic with a real love of poetry ; and, if I remember,contributed an article to, if he were not the Editor of, a periodical Magazinecalled the Registrar in which there was a brilliant comparisonbetween Thomson and Cowper as delineators of rural scenery and countrylife. Mr. Gilchrist's fault lay in an affectation of classical knowledgein an ambition of quoting Greek where its introduction wasmanifestly inapposite. But his " great horse" to ride upon, was Shakspeare; and I had good reason to know that he was sedulously employedin furnishing the " raw material " for Mr. Gifford's intendedreview of Boswell's edition of Malone's Shakspeare.f '////>.] ROXBURGHIANA. 387PRESS in ENGLAND within those walls. At a meetingconvened on the occasion, Mr. Markland, and oneother Member (whose name I have forgotten), withmyself, were deputed to look out, and to fix upon,an unoccupied spot within the abbey, for the purposeof such erection. We found the dead not onlythickly bestowed below us, but their monuments soclosely elbowing each other above, that, to the bestof my recollection, no space whatever presented itselfexcept in the immediate vicinity of the monument ofMrs. Pritchard and the grave of Geoffrey Chaucer.Our venerable friend, William Caxton, could nothave disliked such neighbours ; but we found thefees of admission for our humble mural monumentwithin the Abbey so heavy, that it amounted to aninhibition to have it placed there : and accordinglywe looked out for an eligible situation within St.Margaret's church, where, in fact, Caxton and hisrelations were buried. Very much to the honour ofthe Vicar and Churchwardens of that parish, themonument was admitted to be erected FREE of allcharges. All that I choose further to say upon thissubject is, that if any monument might have beenallowed a gratuitous entrance within the walls ofthe Abbey, it was surely that of the FATHER OF THEBRITISH PRESS who first exercised his art there.There could be but ONE Caxton.A neat vignette wood-cut engraving of this monument,inclosing the inscription, will be found withinMr. Martin's Catalogue of Privately Printed Books,c c 2388 ROXBURGHIANA. [Ro.rlurghetogether with the inscription itself. The latter is asfollows :TO THE MEMORY OFWILLIAM CAXTON,WHO FIRST INTRODUCED INTO GREAT BRITAINTHE ART OF PRINTING,AND WHO, A. D. 14<77> OR EARLIER,EXERCISED THAT ARTIN THE ABBEY OF WESTMINSTER,THIS TABLETIN REMEMBRANCE OF ONETO WHOMTHE LITERATURE OF HIS COUNTRYIS SO LARGELY INDEBTEDWAS RAISEDANNO DOMINI MDCCCXX,BY THE Roxburgh CLUB.EARL SPENCER, K. G. PRESIDENT.The idea of the thing itself, and the execution ofthe monument, doubtless did credit to the Club. Itwas executed by the younger Westmacott, of Vaux-hallRoad ; and was exhibited at one of our dinnersat the Clarendon Hotel, previously to its erection.The circumstance is probably unique of the introductionof a monument to give zest to a convivialmeeting ; but so it was. Poor Boswell (the younger)was not a little happy in his jests and gibes upon theThe younger Boswell had a happy vein of the broadest humour ;in which, to the best of my recollection,, nothing like impending ever('/ah.] ROXBURGHIANNThe gap occasioned in our society by this <luul>U>stroke of death, in the demise of the two Bos wells,mingled itself. He was a fair good classical scholar and was usuallysmart and happy in his repartees. He loved good society, and he keptit : and for a man who was constantly embedded in the magical tomesof Malone' library, he must perforce become a BIBLIOMANIAC. I referthe reader to a well-penned account of him, by one who was equally hisneighbour and his friend, in the inst part of the Gentleman's Magazinefor 1822. Here, by permission of the author of that memoir, Iam empowered to present the reader with the LAST NOTE ever penned byhim, and only two days before his death ; written in fact, as my friendsays, "upon the bed of sickness and of death." It related to a meetingto be held at the Clarendon Hotel on the 23d February, 1822, toelect a new member on the demise of Mr. George Istedd when GeorgeWatson Taylor Esq., M. P., was chosen. The note is as follows premising,that under the word " Polyglot," is designated George Hibbert,Esq., who had purchased the Complutensian '* Polyglot," UPON VELLUM jat the sale of the Macarthy Library, for sixteen thousand one hundredfrancs a price comparatively less than that given for it at the sale ofthe Pinelli library. But for the note :MY DEAR Maryland,Make my apology at the roxburgh tomorrow, as I am so ill with asore throat I cannot go out. Shew the accompanying book with itsfrontispiece to POLYGLOT. I had a query from Cohen, which I cannot*at least at present, answer. Let me know the Roxburghee result.J. BOSWELL."But the harmless sportiveness of Bowels fancy, as connected withour Club, was best evinced in a pretty little volume, by way of jeuesprit, which he presented to each member, and in which was exemplifiedthe Boswellian love of a generous glass and a social feelingIt bears for title A Roxburgh GARLAND, and was printed by Bentleyin 1817. Three fourths of it (and the whole are but sixteen pages) aret Viz. The frontispiece to an Edition of Joe Miller's Jests of theOxonian, who has metamorphosed himself into the Countryman's Ass.Mr. B., when here referring to it, alludes to the " Tales of The Cordeliermetamorphosed;" translated by Mr. Hibbert, and presented bythat Gentleman 4to his friends in a beautiful 4to. vol. with plates.M.I may add, that I believe, in this rare volume, the extraordinarygraphic powers of CRUIKSHANK were first developed.390 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghwas filled up by the election "of two members whowere in all respects worthy to be the successors ofextracts ; one, entitled " A Pleasant Pint of Poetical Sherry" fromPasquins* Palinodia, of which poem I possess the entire transcript. Theother, the Coronation of Canary, from Jordan's Fancy's Festivals. HisOWN contribution is as follows entitledEnvoy.To Boccaccio in Heaven, as he chatted one day,With' Chaucer and Caxton, and two or three more,The news of our Meeting went up, as they say,And it set the Celestial Bard in a roar :Says he, " well I weanWhen these fellows convene,My laurels look fresher, more lively their green ;So myself from this hour, I exultingly dub,The Patron and friend of the Roxburgh CLUB.But since they of me as their origin boast,I shall storm, like King ' Herod,' as drawn by than Parfre* ;Unless, as their first Anniversary toast,They drink in a bumper, my printer Valdarfer :"Quoth Wyriken de Worde,'Twill be vastly absurd,Unless Caxton s their second, and I am their third ;Then the whole will go smoothly, unchecked by a rub,And we all shall be pleased at the Roxburgh CLUB.Let the poor plodding pedant our revels despise,Who would cover this dulness with gravity's cloak ;Cui bono ? What brings them together ? he criesWhy to eat and to drink, and to laugh, and to joke:With the joys of old wineFrom France or the Rhine,Old friends, and old books, at our wassail combine;While the butterfly fop, and the miserly grub,Are excluded alike from the Roxburgh CLUB.That our social enjoyment of rational mirth,Is an evening well spent, e'en a cynick might own ;t See Candlemas Day; or, the Killing of the Children of Israel, bythan Parfre.ROXBUROHIANA.the deceased : I mean, the venerable ArchdeaconWrangham and John Arthur Lloyd, Esq. Theformer was proposed by the present Earl of Carlisle,and the latter by his tutor, the Rev. Henry Druryof Harrow. Of the former, the preceding pageshave borne testimony to talents of no ordinarycalibre. That notice of them was confined ratherto the earlier effusions of his manhood. It is pleasantto observe a certain gaiety of heart and elasticityof spirits still accompanying his later lucu-If Diogenes' self could revisit the earth,He would soften his manners, and alter his tone :Alexander the GreatHe contemned, and his State ;But on D****** I'm sure he would civilly wait;And beg that he'd try to make room for his Tub.As he longed for a frisk t with the Roxburgh CLUB.But it is not alone, that good humour d and heartyMirth Goddess admits us to join in her crew;That we shine, both distinguished Mercuric et Marte,To our Chief and our Founder the honor is due :Old SPENCER, a nameThat for ever shall claimThe loftiest place in the Temple of Fame ;And MARLBOROUGH, who France could, like Wellington, drub,Are emblazoned at once in the Roxburgh CLUB.From your humble Servant,June 17, 1817. A MEMBER.Is it necessary for me to add, that both the Boswell were Sons ofTHE Boswell ? And will the reader allow me to recommend him to aperusal of the Review of the Biography of Johnson by the Father, inanumber of the Edinburgh Review of 1833? of which Mr. macaulayis the reputed author ? a review, which abounds with all thestrength, daring, originality, and power of thought and expression ofthat extraordinary writer.t You dogs, " I'll have a. frisk with you." JOHNSON.See Boswclfs Life.392 ROXBURGHIANA. \ Roxbiiryheorations ; for there is, methinks, an enviable youthfulnessof mind, as well as of body, as we approachlife's extremer confines The Archdeacon yet continuesto woo his muse* in his miscellaneous and" Ecce Signum-premising, that the first of these specimens is takenfrom his poems published in 1795. It is as chaste as it is beautiful;and in both languages his skill is equally felicitous.SONG.In times so long past (though I still am but young)That I scarcely their transports can trace,Enraptured I caught the soft lisp of thy tongue,And totter'd for then I but totter'd along,To clasp thee in childish embrace.As we grew up together, each day I beheld,With feelings unkindled before,Thy yesterday's beauties by new ones excelled;For, boy as I was, from these beauties withheldMy heart : could I offer thee more ?Even now, when the fever of youth is gone by,And I glow with more temperate fire,Delighted I dwell on thy soul-beaming eye ;And, heaving perhaps still too ardent a sigh,Survey thee with chasten'd desire.Oh ! come then and give me, dear maiden, thy charms ;For life is, alas ! on the wing :Our summer ere long will be fled ; in these armsLet me shield thee, my Fair One, from winter's alarms ;Oh ! listen to love, while 'tis spring.IDEM LATINE Redditus.Sin modo adhuc juvenis, vix vix tarn en ipse recorderQuae lux prima mihi te, mea Mira, deditInfant infant : at, gemini, te verba trahentemDulce audire, ulnis dulce tenere fuit.Atque una seisin concretions, et tibi pinxitGratia quotidian pulcrior ora, genus ;Cor totus tibi ego potui quid pleura ? vovebam :Scilicet et paros paulus writ amor.T/W/.J ROXBURGIUANA. 393wide-spreading library. He is yet as rapturous asever over the charms of BIBLIOMANIA; and stretch-atqueardor nimis, effervescence juveuta,Fugit, et Invenit mitior ossa calor :Sed tamen usque tuis nimis haeres tractus cells !Suspiro tenere sed tamen usque nimis!Ah ! tandem, mea Mira, veni ! properantibus alasVitae mox 8estas est abitura ; simulBruma aderit. Posset, en ! qua defenders frigusBrachia ! Dum floret ver, mea Mira, veni !With a Muse so pliant, Mr. Wrangham needed not have recourse tothe poetical effusions of others : but since he has lately thought lit soto do, I subjoin two beautiful specimens the first, of his powers oftranslation, from Thomas Haynes Bailey, Esq. ; the other from theclassical pen of the Archdeacon himself.SONNET ON ECHO AND SILENCE.In eddying course when leaves began to fly,And Autumn in her lap the stores to strew,As 'mid wild scenes I chanc'd the Muse to wooThro' glens untrod and woods that frown'd on high ;Two sleeping nymphs, with wonder mute, I spy :And lo ; she's gone in robe of dark-green hue,'Twas ECHO from her sister SILENCE flew,For quick the hunter's horn resounded to the sky :In shade affrighted SILENCE melts away,Not so her Sister hark ! For onward stillWith far-heard step she takes her hasty way,Bounding from rock to rock, and hill to hillAh ! mark the merry maid, in mockful playWith thousand mimic tones the laughing forest fill.Sm S. E. Bridges.Translation.ECHO ET Taciturnity.Iliac arbour atque iliac ferebantur comaeAutuinnus et bruges sin colleges :394 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghing himself at length in his Elizabethan chair, in themidst of his Planting and Elzevirs as he sees theSylvestribus Musa in lochs per devilsCalles vagus nemorumque noctem dum sequor,Somno graves Nymphs student video tuasEnsue avolavit ! viridis amicta teeming,ECHO soror TACITUBNITATEM desert:Venantium namque vit ad coelum fragor,Umbrisque terra liquefied TaciturnitySeeds ac soror, properantibus quite partibusRupesque per colleague pernix emicat,Audita longe, celery precipitant iter.Jocose namque virgo voces millesImitate factum relict, audit' ? per nemus.Few.THE HOSE.Round my own pretty Rose I have hover'd all day ;J have seen its sweet leaves, one by one fall away :They are gone they are gone but I go not with themNo, I linger to weep o'er the desolate stem.They say " If I rove to the South, I shall meetWith hundreds of Roses more fair and more sweet : "But my heart, when I'm tempted to wander, replies ;Here my first love my last love my only love lies."When I sprang from the home where my plumage was nurst,'Twas my own pretty Rose that attracted me first.We have loved all the summer ; and now that the chillOf the winter comes o'er us, I'm true to thee still.When the last leaf is wither'd, and falls to the earth,The false one to southerly climes may fly forth :But Truth cannot fly from his sorrow j he dies,Where his FIRST LOVE his LAST LOVE his ONLY LOVE lies.T. H. Barley.IDEM Latin Redditus.Cellular mean rosa circumvolitoTotus diem, et folia sparse gems :Adhere adhere last ego non una ;Fens caul nudato aside : " Eia,Club.'} ROXBURGHIANA.last glimmer of day tipping the Cheviot-hilltophe exclaims, with his beloved Horace,Sit BON A Liberum et promise frugis in annumCOPIA, ne flutter curiae spe pendulum horae."He must not, however, pass off the disk of myAd austria volitato ; ibi pulcrioresRosasque, et rosetta content ceres : "Incassum momentous cor responded,Hie amata prima, ultima, sola janet."Reverent ubi nascent! mi alae,Percussion ibi mea bella me :Visit sestas amantes ; mine bruma right,At baud meus amor brutal fright.Paris folios, fugax amusiveAd austria volitarit obvious suaeFides mea vel moribunda quaere,Ubi amata prima, ultima, sola janet.Few.One more, and the last.ON A VERY TINY ANGLE ENCLOSED AND PLANTED WITH SHRUBS.This little garden little Jowett made,And fenced it with a little palisade.A little taste hath little Dr. Jowett :This little garden doth a little shew it.Exiguum hung hortus fecit Jowettulus isteExitus, valle et muriit exiguo :Exiguo hoc horton forsan Jowettulus isteExitus mentes prohibit epigram.But a word at parting. The Archdeacon hath graver achievementsto boast of. " Non omnes augusta juvat burlesque myriad." Hehas republished Langhorne's translation of Plutarch's Lives, with notesand corrections. If he will not undertake the Life of Erasmus (" I Hesi quis alius," see page 139), now that Mr. Roscoe has gone from us, lethim give us a BRITISH PLUTARCH although there be a work with thattitle extant upon a comprehensive scale, and involving sound ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburymirror without receiving something like a smart admonition.His contribution to the Club (" TheGarden Plot") was unworthy of the " Elizabethanchair" and its adjuncts.The "hiatus valde defends" occasioned (asbefore intimated) by the death of James Boswell,was filled up by the election of JOHN ARTHURLLOYD, Esq., of Seaton Knolls, near Shrewsbury*;a gentleman in all respects qualified by his scholarshipand attainments and, above ah 1 , by his unweariedand incapable attachment to the Bibliomaniato fill the seat which he occupies at theClarendon's Anniversary. I scarcely know, for itslimits, so choice and so enviable a collection t as his ;stitutional principles. What work, to BRITISH YOUTH, could be at oncemore attractive and beneficial? Only conceive what a portion of fictionad captandum vulgus ' is mixed up in the pages of Plutarch !while we positively HAVE our Solon, Miltiades, Scipio, and Caesar.The mighty wand of Niebiihrh as disenchanted the first four centuries ofthe Roman History of all its previously received FICTIONS for facts !The mansion of Mr. Lloyd, recently erected on his own plan (forhe is his own Vitruvius), and situated some three miles distant fromShrewsbury, overlooks the rushing Severn, which may be said to washits base. It has a Tusculum-like look, which accords well with thepossessor of it ; who considers his Elzevir Cicero as among the finestset of volumes of that description in his library.t These are not idle or merely complimentary words. They are basedupon truth : for thus stands the account. Mr. Lloyd may well boast ofthe following, among other, scarce and precious books. The MazarineLatin Bible, 1455 Archer's copy. The Bible 0/1642, upon vellum:made up out of two copies by the late Mr. Edwards. The Aldine Bibleof 1518, thick paper. The Constitutions of Pope Clement V. 1467,upon vellum. The first Homer of 1488, large, in original boards andclasps; with two leaves of the Odyssey upon vellum. The Acanthus of1465. The Apologies Rhodes of 1496. The Thomas Aquinas ofClub.'} ROXnrRfHIIANA. 397nd when tliodny lowers, and the outlines of the distantMerionethshire mountains become more andmore dim and indistinct and at length the . raintails, and all is damp and misty without thentrimmed Mr. Lloyd his wood fire .ligna super locoLarge deponent ! "and regale and revelled one hour midst his bibles,another midst his Aldine classics, and a third midsthis Table Ronde lore. That Prince " ARTHUR"should hold the first place in his chivalrous affections,is exceedingly natural.Mr. Lloyd's book-contribution to the Club was asome what quaintly devised volume; entitled as below*.I am now to record a very singular event. Thedeath of one of our members, and among the mostamiable of men and splendid of Bibliomaniacs (SirM. M. Sykes, Bart), caused a vacancy which wasfilled up by the election of the most distinguishedwriter and author of his day, and in Europe. It1467. And the Aldine Editiones Principes of Herodotus; Thucydides,and Pausanias : to which add, the Aldine Theocritus of 149.5. Butenough : I will continue the ALDINE THEME in a future page." The Cuck-Queans and Cuckolds Errants ; or, The bearing downthe Anne, a Comedy. The Faery Pastoral, or Forrest of Elms, byW. P. Esq. From a manuscript folio volume containing six dramaticpieces ; formerly in the library of the Duke of Roxburgh. The authoris supposed to have been William Percy, third son of Henry the eighthEarl of Northumberland, who died 1648. Thirty-seven copies wereprinted, of which two were UPON VELLUM. The reprint was superintendedby Mr. Castlewood, in whose possession the manuscript latterlywas and which was sold at the sale of his library in 1834.398 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxlmrghewill be supposed that I can allude to no other personthan SIR WALTER SCOTT, Bart. who, albeit, was notto be elected in his own name, but under the cognomenof the AUTHOR OF WAVERLEY. The circumstancesare few and simple which led to this election.In the month of February, 1823, at my ownsuggestion, but with the concurrence of our NoblePresident, and of several influential Members, Iwrote to Sir Walter Scott to know if he would makeknown our electioneering wishes to the Author ofWaverley ? This was not the first time I had adoptedthe same ruse. I had done so on the publicationof my TOUR in the preceding year. I had sent hima copy of that work, expressly to place it, " with theauthor's respects," on the shelves of that unknownGentleman's library. His answer to my letter (whichwill be found in the ensuing pages) is perhaps oneof the most curious on record. I now resumed mycorrespondence on something like the same basis, byrequesting Sir Walter to tell me whether he thoughtthe Author of Waverley would like to become aMember of the Roxburghee Club ? His answer wasas follows :MY DEAR SIR,I was duly favoured with your letter, which proves onepoint against the Unknown Author of Waverley, namely,that he is certainly a Scotsman, since no other nation pretendsto the advantage of the Second Sight. Be He whoor where he may, he must certainly feel the very highhonour which has selected him (Nominis Umbra) to a situationso worthy of envy.Club'] ROXBURGHIANA. 399As his personal appearance in the fraternity is not liketo be a speedy event, one may presume he may be desirousof offering some test of his gratitude in the shape of a reprint,or such like kickshaw ; and for that purpose you hadbetter send him the Statutes of your learned body which Iwill engage shall reach him in safety.It will follow as a characteristic circumstance, that theTable of the Roxburghee like that of King Arthur will havea vacant chair like that of Banquo at Macbeth Banquet.But if this author who ' hath fern-seed and walketh invisible*should not appear to claim it before I come to London,(should I ever be there again) with permission of the Club,I, who have something of adventure in me although { aknight like Sir Andrew Aguecheek dubbed with unpackedrapier and on carpet consideration would, rather than losethe chance of a dinner with the Roxburghee Club, take uponme the adventure of the siege perilous, and reap some amendsfor perils and scandals into which the Invisible championhas drawn me by being his Locum tenens on so distinguishedan occasion.It will be not uninteresting to you to know that afraternity is about to be established here something on theplan of the Roxburghee Club but having Scottish antiquitieschiefly in view. It is to be called the Bannatyne Clubfrom the celebrated Antiquary George Bannatyne whocompiled by far the greatest manuscript record of oldScottish poetry. Their first meeting is to be held onThursday, when the health of the Roxburghee Club will notfail to be drankI am always my dear Sir,Your most faithful humble ServantEdit. 25 Feb?. 1823" WALTER SCOTT"Accordingly, on the 19th of April, in the sameyear, the election of the Author of Waverley tookplace ; and as Vice-preside, and a previous KOXBURGHIANA. \ Roxbnr correspondentupon the subject, I considered myselfin duty bound" to apprise Sir Walter of the result.His answer is sufficiently characteristic.MY DEAR SIR,I am duly honoured with your very interesting andflattering communication. Our highlanders have a proverbialsaying founded on the traditional renown of fingersdog. ' If it is not Bran' they say it is Bran's brothersNow this is always taken as a compliment of thefirst class, whether applied to an actual cur or parabolicallyto a biped, and upon the same principle it is with no smallpride and gratification that the Roxburghee Club have beenso very flatteringly disposed to accept me as a locum tenensfor the unknown author whom they have made the child oftheir adoption. As sponsor I will play my part as well asI can ; and should the Real Simon Pure make his appearance,to push me from my stool, why I shall have at least thesatisfaction of having enjoyed it.They cannot say but what I had the crown.Besides, I hope the Devil does not owe me such a shame.Mad Tom tells us that the Prince of Darkness is a gentleman,and this mysterious personage will I hope partake asmuch of his honourable feelings as of his invisibility, andresuming his incognito permit me to enjoy in his stead anhonour which I value more than I do that which has beenbestowed on me by the credit of having written any ofhis novels.I regret deeply I cannot soon avail myself of my newprivileges, but Courts which I am under the necessity ofattending officially set down in a few days and hei mihi donot arise for vacation until .July. But I hope to be in Townnext Spring, and certainly I have one strong additionalreason for a London Journey furnished by the pleasure ofmeeting the Roxburghee Club. Make my most respectfulClub.'} ROXBURGHIANA. 4(Hcompliments to the Members at their next merry meetingami express in the warmest manner my sense of obligation.I am always, my dear Sir,Very much your most obedient ServantAbbotsford, list May, 18*23 " WALTER SCOTT.Rev. Dr. Dibdin, Kensington, London."It will be seen that the worthy Baronet, as in thepreface to his Question Durward, has doctored me ;at a time when I had not the slightest possible notionof because there was no reasonable ground forsuch a distinction. On our first meeting at the Clubin 1828, which he never afterwards attended, SirWalter observed to me, " You see, I had the gift ofsecond sight." In regard to these Letters, ananonymous writer in a weekly Journal infers thatone fell to the lot" of the late Mr. Castlewood, andthe other to myself. I hardly know what is meant bythis inference ; but I do know that both letters wererightfully my property, as being addressed to, andreceived by, myself: and as such, that I had therightful disposal of them. One was given by me toMr. Castlewood not for the dishonourable purposeto which that writer has thought fit to apply it;and the other was placed by me in a quarter whenceI am sure it can never be withdrawn from anysinister or mercenary motive. A copy of this secondletter was, I think, taken by Mr. Castlewood andhence found its way into his too memorable "Revels."Sir Walter Scott's book-contribution as a member ofthe Club is, strangely enough, among the least in-D D40Q ROXBURGHIANA. [Eoxlurgheinteresting and valuable in our GARLAND*. It may beas well to add, as the concluding sentence connectedwith Sir Walter Scott's admission into our Club,that in the preface to his Several of the Peak andafter he had thrown off the mask of his disguisehe says, that " he has pride in recording, that hehad the honour of being elected a Member of theRoxburghee Club merely as the author of Waverley,without any other designation ; and it was an additionalinducement to throw off the mask of ananonymous author, when it gave him a right to occupythe vacant seat at that festive board." In his book-contribution,his own name first appears in the listof members: before it was inserted as " the Authorof Waverley" On his death in 1833, BenjaminBarnard, Esq., was elected as his successor.As the work of death went on amongst our Rox-burghers, it was necessarily the wish of the survivingmembers to fill up vacancies by the electionof fitting successors. The demise of Mr. LANG isthe next to be recorded ; and as I have devotedsome space to the mention of his worth in a precedingpaget, it may be here only necessary to add,What I mean by the word " Garland' is the Collection of theRoxburghee Pieces or of the Book-Contributions of the respectiveMembers. Sir Walter Scott's contribution was entitled, " Proceedingsin the Court Martial held upon John Master, of Sinclair, Captain-lieutenantin Preston's Regiment, for the Murder of Ensign Shaw of thesame regiment, and Captain Shaw of the Royal, 17th October, 1708.With Correspondence respecting that Transaction." 1828. 4to.t See page 371.CliiL.'] ROXBURGHIANA.that his book-contribution to the Club was Le Livreda Falcon; reprinted from a scarce black lettertract in his own library, originally printed by Gerard.This contribution was hardly in accordancewith the calibre of his library, and a better thingmight perhaps have been expected from him. Thevacancy occasioned by his death was filled by theelection of VISCOUNT CLIVE, the heir apparent ofthe Earl of Powys. Lord Clive, putting his rankapart, was in all respects worthy of our choice.His amiable manners, and his quick Aldine sensibility,pointed him out to be " tali dignus honor e "and this feeling, upon the recent death of our incomparablePresident, has led to his succeeding toEarl Spencer's chair. Lord Clive is the ruralneighbour and the intimate friend of Mr. Lloyd ;and these Roxburghers, in their castellated retreats,compare copies, and revel over their rival Accuseswith a sort of enthusiasm which none but thoroughbredRoxburghers can comprehend or appreciate.One thing may be considered as somewhat remarkable.It has been only in this present yearseven years after his election that Lord Clive hasfavoured the Club with his book-contribution. Itis, however, a most valuable and curious one, beingEnglish metrical Lives of the Saints, by a Monkof Clare, in Suffolk, written in 1443 and firstprinted from a MS. in the British Museum. Ithas been edited with great care, and is doubtless asubstantial acquisition.D D 2404 ROXBURGHIANA. \RoxburylieI am next to record the demise of no commonmember of the Club the late ROGER WILBRAHAM,Esq. Mr. Wilbraham (as will be seen) was amongour earliest as he was among our most constantassociates. He loved books and with reason ; fornot only had he a very curious and valuable library,but he was a good scholar and " understood whathe read." In the Italian language, few Englishmenwent before him ; and what rare and capricious, butinstructive and valuable volumes, did he possess inthat department of literature! Mazzuchelli andTiraboschi were considered by him, and rightlyconsidered, as sheet anchors of bibliographical erudition.Not that he despised Harm, or disdainedPanton. He was the Petronius of my Cameron; and the character and complexion of hiswell-stored library, together with the mention of hishospitality, will be more than once found in thepages of that work*. I have met society at Mr.Wilbraham's table, such as I cannot hope to meetagain ; and Sir Joseph Banks, Sir Harry Englefield,Mr. Payne Knight, Richard Heberr, and Foscolo,were of the number. The latter was the petted andspoilt marmot of the upper circles in London.He had undoubted genius, but he had as undoubtedvanity which at times bordered on insolence. I haveseen him return a rude Yes or No to a question verycivilly put to him, from one, to whom, in the earlierSee the note, vol. ii. 530 ; and vol. iii. 38.Club'] ROXBURGHIANA. 405part of his sojourn amongst us, he exhausted theeloquence of his native tongue in expressions of thedeepest gratitude ; while, upon others, I have seenhim turn his back, and scarcely vouchsafe an answer,as he was complacently contemplating his physiognomyin the glass, and elongating his fierywhiskers*. Dandled by Duchesses, and caressedby Countesses, he at last became giddy, and lost bothhis balance and position in society. I fear he addedingratitude to his other more than peccadillos t.It is time to return to my departed friend. ToHis personal vanity was intense and immeasurable. His portraitto the Letters of Ortiz (a very strange and wild publication put forthunder that assumed name, but in reality Foscolo's), was a very flatteringresemblance but the Original could not endure ittThe example of Foseolo, if any such were wanting, is anotherproof of that prompt and generous credulity in the English to bestowlavish patronage upon a foreigner, when native talents, to the full asobvious and commanding, are pining at the outer gate, and demandingonly the shelter of the vestibule where the foreigner is regaling himselfupon the ottomans of the interior. It was the fashion to make muchof Foscolo. His very oddities, which in a native are sometimes hardlyendured, were considered tests of originality and genius. Hisbrusquerie, and I will add, his gaucherie, were even set down to the accountof superior talents. Of the interior of the man, few took the pains toexamine for themselves, or to inquire of others. A general acquaintanceis easily obtained in London. No one thinks of perforating the cuticleof character. The same facility which secures a young man with adecent exterior, smart dress, and fluent prattle, into half the drawing-roomsof " distinguished fashionables," will secure a lettered foreignerinto circles of a graver import. And thus it was with Foscolo ; buthappening to be trod upon, he turned his tail upwards, and that tailproved to be armed with a penetrating sting. His contributions to theEdinburgh and Quarterly Reviews upon the early Italian Poets andWriters were doubtless masterpieces of their kind, and cannot be toofrequently read, and too gravely reflected upon. O si sic omnia !406 ROXBURGH! AN A. [Rob archiefew literary characters was Mr. Wilbraham moreattached than to our common friend, Mr. Douce ;and at no other table than his (except three or fourtimes at my own) was I in the habit of meeting thelatter. The connecting book-link between them waslexicography in which department of a library ourRoxburgh was as eminently rich as he was confessedlylearned. It was pleasant to see these twochampions, each sensitive, and at times rough ofspeech*, battling it away over Palsgrave's Clairede la Langue Franchise, 1535, folio ; abook, as remarkable for its intrinsic worth as for itsAnd indeed so were Mr. Wilbraham and Foscolo. I once witnesseda skirmish between these resolute champions of Italian literature,which had well nigh ended in a pitched battle when the former observed,with admirable presence of mind, and good breeding, " Mr.Foscolo, this is my house. I cannot insult any one while he is in it ; buttomorrow we may speak our minds a little more freely without it.Meanwhile be pleased to fill your glass, and pass the bottle." Foscolosulkily pushed on the bottle without filling his glass. " Why (saysMr. Wilbraham), I thought you were fond of this wine ? It is my bestBurgundy. At any rate, you will allow me to drink your health in it?"Instead of brimming his glass which a warm-hearted and well-bredgentleman would have done the Italian sloped himself into an inclinedplane posture twirled his whiskers gave one grunt, and afterwardsmaintained a dogged silence. I never saw the eye of "mine host"light up with a more kindling fire. It emitted scintillations ! And yet,within twenty minutes Foscolo had risen from the table (leaving theother guests sitting), stood with his back to the fire, and seemed to treatthe company as if they were only so many drivers of viterines. Allthat the host said the next day, when I called upon him, was, " Foscolois an extraordinary man but he sadly wants judgment ; nor is he overburdenedwith courage." " I hope you have not heard from him, Sir ? "Pol pol Fcscolo knows me and himself too well to risk a duel.Our combats must be confined to Dante and Machiavelli dissertations."Club'] ROXBURGHIANA. 407extreme rarity*. But I should say that the strengthof Mr. Wilbraham's library lay in his Voyages andTravels. In these he had some very rare pieces ;and upon the Geography of Berlinghieri I have seenhim hold forth as a lecturer, while a forest of greenbottles and glasses, upon his thoroughly hospitabletable, were suffered to be immoveable for sometwenty or twenty-five minutes. There was onething eminently distinguishable about him. He was,in his general bearing, the gentleman of the oldschool to every guest at his tablet. The humblestA very particular account of it, with copious specimens, will beseen in the fourth volume of the Typographical Antiquities. I do notpretend to know its present pecuniary value ; but no good library canbe perfect without it. I think I have seen nearly a dozen copies of itand all in good condition. What is rather extraordinary, the printerof it (Henry Hawkins) is not yet known to have executed any otherwork.t Especially at his country house at Twickenham of which I rememberthe first taking about twenty-three years ago. Here the mostconstant inmate was my old friend the late George Istedd, Esq., of whomsee page 368. But Mr. Wilbraham had a keen relish in Horticulturalpursuits. I see him at this moment in his broad straw hat, with hisspud in his hand, now superintending the management of a cranberrybed, and now the pruning of a pear tree. His dinners, which alwaysbore evidence of a culinary artiste, were usually succeeded by a tastefuldesert ; in which he liked to outvie his neighbours in the size, fineness,and flavour of his fruits and while the table was richly garnished withpears, plums, peaches, and nectarines. I have heard him " discoursemost eloquently" in praise of the first named fruit urging his gueststo partake of it. His guests did not quarrel either with the premisesor conclusion of his speech; but regularly left the pears untouched,and reduced the numbers of the peaches and nectarines, which generallywere indeed of extraordinary size and flavour. He loved society, andkept much. His constitution was that of adamant. In the pleasuresof the table he was temperate ; in those of social colloquy, and generous40 8 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxluryheor comparatively unknown, received as much attentionfrom him as the most distinguished. No starpleased him more than that of rising genius. Mr.Wilbraham, in early life, had been a member ofparliament, and the associate and friend of Mr. Fox.As he approached his " threescore years and ten,"his political excitements cooled, and Dante andAriosto made him forget the Regency and the Frenchrevolution. His admiration, however, of his oldleader, continued unabated to the last. He died abachelor, at his house in Stratton-street, in theeighty-seventh year of his age ; being, with the exceptionof the late Rev. Mr. Norris, the oldest memberof Trinity College, Cambridge. He left hislibrary to his nephew, his brother's eldest son, oneof the present members of Cheshire ; who, with hisuncle's fine fortune, inherits his unadulterated principlesof whiggish.The successor to Mr. Wilbraham in our Club,was the EARL CAWDOR : a nobleman of high tasteand literary 'attainments, and a member who soonentertainment,, he was liberal to excess. He was the kindest and mostgenerous of masters. His servants, indeed., " had a fine time of it;"for his establishment was liberal, and his hours, when in the country,were almost primitive. A portion of his library was sold by auction by Mr.Evans in 1829, and produced WOO I. It may be as well to add, that hisbook-contribution to the Roxburghee Club, was called Diaphanous, orthe Passions of Love; being a reprint from an original which could nothave been published before 1604, as an allusion is made in it to Shakspeare'sHamlet of which the first legitimate edition was of that date.What led a half-way Septuagenarian and Octogenarian to the productionof such a work as " Diaphanous," it were difficult to conjecture.-H.;Heir WEJLBJKAMAittClub. 1 ] ROXBURGHIANA. 401)gave substantial proof of his zeal in " the cause,"by the contribution of a 33ofce called (KEKUtam anttf)C <5<3tcrfoolf it being an ancient English Romance,from an unique MS. in the library of King's College,Cambridge ; and put forth under the editorial careof Mr. (now Sir Frederick) Madden, of the BritishMuseum. It is printed with singular fidelity to theoriginal text , and the able Introduction by SirFrederick is succeeded by two letters upon the subjectof Werwolves, written by the Hon. AugustusHerbert. The subject is indeed inexhaustible ; foraWerwolf is a Man-wolf; one, who will break downfences and destroy property where the quadruped isunable to make an entrance. The death of Mr.Dent followed that of Mr. Wilbraham ; and theHon. and Rev. NEVIL GRENVILLE became his successor*.Mr. Grenville's contribution was an heroicThe library of Mr. Dent (the BAROCIO of the Bibliomania and theCameron) was sold by Mr. Evans in 1827, and produced the sum of15,040/. The GREAT GUN in the library was the first Livy of1469, upon vellum which had been successively in the libraries ofMr. Edwards and Sir Mark Sykes and when the hammer fell upon thatbook, how fell its price too ! It had been obtained by Mr. Dent at thesale of Sir Mark's library for about the half of its original cost to thatBaronet namely, 903/. ; and it was sold for little more than onequarter. On its sale the purchasers being Messrs. Payne and Fossit was offered to the late Earl Spencer at a moderate premium ; but thatNobleman declined the purchase for reasons which I endeavouredanxiously to counteract, and which I have never since ceased to deplore.In his library it would have been in its proper element, as a companionto the Pliny of 1470, by the same printers, also upon vellum. But whoshall say it is not now " merely reposing" in the splendid cabinet of theHon. Tho.Grenville?410 ROXBURGHIANA. [RoxluryheLatin poem (from a MS. in the Cotton Collection)by Geoffrey Arthur, Archdeacon of Monmouth, andafterwards Bishop of St. Asaph, on the Life andProphecies of the Welch Merlin ; and was printedin 1830. The transcription was made hy Mr. Black,who wrote a preface of some twenty pages, whichwas afterwards cancelled ; and an analysis of thepoem by Ellis was substituted*.The knell of our Club continued to be tolled withno very long intervals between the strokes of thebell, for in 1833 died the Rev. WILLIAM HowellCARR who has left a name behind which entitles himto be ranked among the most liberal of his country'sbenefactors t. His place was supplied by the Rev.In Mr. Castlewood's copy of this book there also appeared a copyof this cancelled preface, which he says " was never delivered to Lewisthe binder." What occasioned the suppression he had never been ableto ascertain.t I allude to his donation or bequest of his fine collection of picturesto the NATIONAL GALLERY ; among which his Leonardo da Vinci shinesforth with an unrivalled lustre. It was purchased by Mr. Carr of theEarl of Northwick ; and I met him on the very day of the purchase. Itwas in Bond-street. After the usual salutations,, and on enquiring abouthis health, he answered, " as well as a man can be, who has just put hishand to a three thousand five hundred pounds cheque for a PICTURE."It was for the " Christ among the Doctors," by the above artist. " Onnepeut pas disputer pour les goats ;" but in my humble judgment atleast in my estimation (and I had the cruelty to say so to him) theSt. Catharine by Raffaelle, in the same nobleman's collection, was thefiner performance was a gem of a purer and more ethereal touch andcomposition. My brother Roxburgh laughed at my graphical heresy,and sought his home in apparently the highest spirits. " Another suchvictory," said he, " and I am undone." " Obtain the Raffaelle," I replied," and you are richer than before." This Raffaelle is now in thecollection of Mr. Beckford, and, in my apprehension, it was a muchcheaper purchase at 2000 guineas, than the Da Vinci at 3500/.ROXBUROHIANA. 411EDWARD CRAVEN Hawtrey, now Dr. Hawtrey, andHead Master of Eton School. A more judiciouschoice could not have been made ; for I know offew libraries which compete with that of our newlyelected member*. It is at once choice and copious,learned and resplendent ; and I am well pleased tohear (as indeed I anticipated) that its owner hasrecently enriched the Biblical department of it bythe purchase of a few desirable volumes at the LossSale, rendered valuable by the MS. notes of melancholy.Dr. Hawtrey's book-contribution toThat library has been in part, and sketched, described in theJSibliophabia, where its owner is introduced under the appellation ofPBISCIAN. As that description is short, a repetition of it may be endured." Priscian, the classical and the accomplished. Books are hisdear delight :' and Bibles, among those books, the primary object ofattraction. The owner has a rare set of them such as, in a privatecollection, are eclipsed only by those at Kensington and Althorp. Thereare also belles-lettres in abundance, in the German, Spanish, andItalian, as well as in the French and English, languages. But oh ! thatsplendid MS. of OVID ! approached with delicacy, unlocked with care,and surveyed with ecstacy ! " Ao$ S'or/^aX/xoicny Ma-Oat " exclaimedI, as, on turning my eyes in an opposite direction, I essayed to see thenumerous folios and quartos some of which were impervious to theglorious sunbeam." P. 59. Since this feeble and inadequate descriptionof Dr. Hawtrey 's book-treasures has been penned, their owner has attainedthe dignity above mentioned in the text : and long may he wieldTHE SCEPTRE of such a dominion ! Multiplied as his cares and anxieties,and absorbed as his whole time must doubtless be, in consequence, I willyet hope he thinks much and often of his library, and will lose no opportunityof a judicious addition to its treasures.t The Bible purchased by Dr. Hawtrey at the sale of Dr. Loss'slibrary was that of the date of 1557, enriched by numerous MS. notesof Melanchthon. What an extraordinary collection was the BibliothecaKLOSSIANA! and with what admirable talent and success hasthe catalogue of that collection been ushered into the world by Mr.412 ROXBURGHIANA. [RoxlurgUethe Club is entitled the Private Diary of Williamfirst Earl Cowper, Lord Chancellor of England :it being an early transcript of the original Diary inthe possession of the late Earl of Hardwicke, 1833,4to. The supplementary notes are 4to follow : andI can only say, in common with my brother R ox-burghers," the sooner the better."The next funereal stroke struck upon the bell,was one which sent forth a dismal sound not onlyamong the members of the Roxburghee Club, butthroughout Europe at large. I mean the death ofSotheby the Younger. When I take the introductory matter of thiscatalogue into consideration, I may conscientiously say that I scarcelyknow such a debut; which does equal credit to the author's acumen,diligence, and gallantry of spirit for the PLATES accompanying thecatalogue are at once curious and abundant. I consider the MelanchthonPOINT as fairly and fully established by the framer of the catalogue: throwing, thereby, a new light upon the marvellous talents ofthat most learned, most amiable, and most enviable of the ProtestantReformers. Dr. Loss, in addition to the remuneration in the shape ofargent comptant," should send over the handsomest gold snuff-boxthe town of Francfort can produce, to be deposited in the Sotheby Archives.Had such a collection been sold twenty years ago, the producehad been threefold. It amounted to 226 IL It had escaped Mr.Sotheby to notice the extraordinary rarity of the Edition Princeps ofBede's Ecclesiastical History, No. 655, which appeared to be printed byEggesteyn, about 1473 ; and which was well and wisely bought by myfriend Dr. Bandied, for the Bodleian Library, at the stiff price of 20/.My learned friend Mr. Petrie is vehement about the rarity and importanceof this book. How the British Museum missed No. 4637, inthe same collection, is painfully incomprehensible ! And how that NationalLibrary, attached to the most knowing and the richest set ofhuman beings upon earth, can let so many opportunities slip of essentialaggrandisement to their book-treasures, is as unaccountable as lamentable.Can an establishment like that plead poverty ? Forbid it, everysucceeding Prime Minister. Reverting to Dr. Loss, I anticipate withconfidence the " GOLD SNUFF-BOX."Club.'} ROXBURGHIANA. 413Sir Walter Scott of whom, at this present moment,I will say no more than what has been advanced inapreceding page. My Scottiana will appear inmore correct chronological order in the pages tocome. Indeed, Sir Walter may he said to havebeen the common property of thousands ; for, inone sense, he was eminently distinguished for thepatriotic motto non sibi sed toto.The order of these memoranda of defunct membersof the Roxburgh CLUB has at length brought us tothe notice of another Double Vacancy occasioned bythe deaths of two Members, whose names, althoughupon very different grounds, are not likely to bespeedily forgotten. I mean JOSEPH HASLEWOOD andRICHARD Hebe, Esquires. It is a melancholy truthto state, that they lay in their coffins at the same time,before burial. I wrote to Mr. Heberr, conceiving himto be at Hodnet, announcing to him the death ofour common friend Castlewood. That letter was returnedto him at Pimlico, but on reaching him hehad himself paid the debt of nature. The first objectthat presented itself to me, on visiting themansion of my departed friend at Pimlico, was, theletter in question which I necessarily claimed asmy property. How little can human foresight calculateupon contingencies ! In that letter, of thedate of Sept. 27, 1833, I described our commonfriend as being " above ground, in his winding-sheet,and as having died on the preceding Saturday, inhis sixty-fourth year." I afterwards added, " the414 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburgh*Chronicler of the Club is no more." In a letterfrom our Noble President, on my having announcedto him the double vacancy, his lordship replied thus :Death has been rather busy among the Rox-burghers of late ; and if I am not mistaken, I thinkwe have now four vacancies ; but as I am not surethat I am correct, I inclose a list of the Club as Isuppose it now to stand ; and shall be obliged byany corrections you may afford." His lordship wasmistaken for we had only three vacancies at thetime that of Sir Walter Scott's making the third.But the next vacancy which occurred, was occasionedby the demise of our Noble President HIMSELF ! ! Iproceed in the order before laid down.And first, of " the Chronicler of the Club: 9Mr. Castlewood had been known to me from thetime of Reed's sale, in 1808, when we used to meetunder the smiling countenance of poor Lochee, andI concluded thus : " I suppose Sotheby will dispose of his booksin December, and that you will have the final fingering of the rarerlocalities of his whimsical collection. Again I say, peace to hisspirit." Mr. Sotheby did not have the disposal of my friend's books :but it is justice to Mr. Evans, who did have the disposal of them, tosay, that it came into his possession not only without his knowledge (forhe was at Paris at the time) but without the slightest intervention ofwhat may be considered the efforts only of a fair and admitted rivalry.How and why the Castlewood Collection did go to Mr. Evans, is quiteanother question. It were enough to have brought the owner from hisgrave if he was serious in what I have often heard him say upon thissubject. Mr. Sotheby was his very old and confidential friend and< f what will Sam Sotheby make of this, and of that, after I am gone?"was constantly in his mouth. But, as is above remarked, " how littlecan human foresight calculate upon contingencies ! "Club.] ROXBURGHIANA. 415when I found that he was an occasional indeed theprincipal contributor to the Censura Literary, ofwhich Sir S. E. Brydges was the nominal editor. Iam not sure whether we had not before exchangednotes of a common literary gossiping nature ; hutin1809, when the first edition of my Bibliomaniaappeared, I found myself justified not only in begginghis acceptance of a copy of that slight performance,but in introducing him into the work itself, as oneof those bibliomaniacal worthies who, assembling allthe known pieces upon CHATTERTON, and collectingworks upon Hawking and Rural Sports, evinced atleast a book-passion which could not be consideredcontemptible. His poetical reply, on accepting thecopy in question, appears in a preceding page*. Inmy second edition of the Bibliomania, after our acquaintancehad ripened into intimacy, I introducedhim into the " Auction Room" of that Biblio-graphical Romance, under the character of Bernardot; and at this distance of time (for twenty-seepage 295.t That character is precisely in the following words.Lis. Who is that gentleman standing towards the right of the Auctioneer,and looking so intently upon his catalogue ? "You point to my friend Bernardo. He is thus anxious because anoriginal fragment of the fair lady's work which you have just mentioned,is coming under the hammer, and powerful indeed must be the objectto draw his attention another way. The demure Prioress of SewellAbbey is his ancient sweetheart, and he is about introducing her to hisfriends, by a union with her as close and as honourable as that of wedlock.Engaged in a laborious profession (the duties of which are faithfullyperformed by him) Bernardo devotes his few leisure hours to theROXBURGHIANA, [Roxburghfive years have elapsed since the composition of thatwork) I look back upon the character there givenof my departed friend with the most entire satisfaction: for it was hated upon truth. I presented himwith one of the very earliest copies of this secondedition also, and his answer to a note of mine, accompanyingthe hook*, will he seen in the page im-investigationof old works, thinking, with the ancient poet quoted byAshmole, that. . f out of olde fields, as men say the,Cometh all this new come fro yeare to yeare,And out of OLDE Bores in good faytheCometh all this science that mene heare.'Or, with Ashmole himself, ' old words have strong emphasis ; othersmay look upon them as rubbish or trifles, but they are grossly mistaken ;for what some light brains may esteem as foolish toys, deeper judgmentscan and will value as sound and serious matter.'If you ask me whether Bernardo be always successful in his labours,I should answer you as I have told him, No : for the profit and applauseattendant upon them are not commensurate with his exertions.Moreover, I do verily think, that, in some few instances, he sacrificeshis judgment to another whim, by a reluctance to put out the strengthof his own powers. He is also, I had almost said, the admiring slaveof Ritsonian fastidiousness ; and will cry pish ! if a u be put for a v, orasingle e for a double one; but take him fairly as he is, and place himfirmly in the bibliographical scales, and you will acknowledge that hisweight is far from being inconsiderable. He is a respectable and everyway a praiseworthy man : and although he is continually walking in athick forest of black letter, and would prefer a book printed before theyear 1550 to a turtle dressed accordingly to the rules of Mr. Farley, yet hecan ever and anon sally forth to enjoy a stroll along the river side withIsaac Walton in his hand, when ' he hath his wholesome walk andmerry, at his ease, a sweet air of the sweet savour of the mead flowers,that maketh him hungry" P. 1 65. His collection of WALTON'S brought70/. at the sale of his library in 1833.My friend Mr. Freeling happening to purchase this copy for(5/. 18.) at the sale of Mr. Castlewood's library, I find the note in question(which I had never seen since it was written) to be thus : and I give itClul.~\ HOXBURGIIIANA. 417mediately following that referred to at page 295. Ithink that I may add, from this period till withinsome few months of his death, Mr. Castlewood foundat my house not only the heartiest reception on thescore of hospitality, but on that of a warm and sympathisingfriend, in many extremities. At no oneseason was my door even half-shut against him.He never looked upon my table-cloth withoutfinding a knife and fork placed there for himself.He had seen my family grow up from childhood tomaturity. He had caressed them when living hehad mourned for those who had taken their departures.He may be saide have had no home forhimself ; which only served the more to press him tomake my house, at all times, his resort : and at Ex-kingas well as in London, he invariably found sucha reception as induced him often and often to numberthe hours and days spent there as " among theeider-down ones of his existence." These were hispublicity, not so much as a test of early and cordial attachment, as of adifferent destiny, to that indirectly anticipated in it, having awaited itsauthor."Kensington, May 11, 1811.MY DEAR FRIEND,The child is just born ; and I throw it, with all its swaddlingclothes, into your lap. May you find it rather smiling than frowning.Cut open the leaves carefully, as they are yet damp. I need hardlyadd that this is a pick'd copy, for so choice a bibliomanical wight as yourself.If you survive me in this troublesome world, fail not to think,when you open the volume, that the author was one who subscribedhimself cordially yours,T. F. D."E E418 ROXBURGHIANAi. \ Roxlurcjlieown words. Unfortunately, there was nothing " incommon" between him and his Uncle with whom helived, and who was graciously pleased to allot to hisnephew two rooms (of the size of a housekeeper'schina-closet), on the second and third floors, at theback of his house, and to which the occupant ascendedby a back staircase, precipitous and circularenough to destroy the equilibrium of any visitor.But all this discomfort only endeared Castlewoodthe more to his books, when he got among them,and which were attempted to be set-off by the mostcapricious nick-mockery (in the way oft. furnitureornament) that ever presented itself to a critical eye.Of the harmony of colour, my deceased friend hadno notion. His stained glass windows exhibited nothingbut flaunting yellow and flaming red. His book-illustrationspartook of this glaring discrepancy ;the prints being too often " lugged in neck andshoulders" with a very slight attention to size, subject,and condition. But all this seemed perfectlynatural in its way, and was as a sort of reflex onlyof the character of the owner about whom therewas neither guile, nor presumption, nor insolence,nor ill-nature. To see him sit doggedly down to"a batch of quartos and octavos," as they camefrom Charles Lewis's manufactory, was a treat ofno common kind. He seemed to hug the volumesas his eye sparkled upon their exterior splendour ;and he was sure to grumble at the charges, while heexulted and expatiated upon the skill of that re-Club.'} ROXBURCHIANA. 4 1 i)owned Bibliopegist*, as he placed the tomes uponhis shelves. Had the menage of his Uncle's housecorresponded with the comfort of his book-closets,Joseph Castlewood had been comparatively a happyman. It was more than negative pleasure for me topresent him occasionally with proof impressions ofbook-plates, curiosities, and a picture or two. Howoften has he returned home from Kensington, orAVyndham Place, with some extra subject, wherewithto embellish the Tour, the Cameron, or theJEdes Althorpiana ! I speak not these things vauntingly; but it is necessary that they should be"Confound that extravagant chap, L , if he were not so capitala binder, he should never receive a stiver of my money" was his frequentexpression. I have known him return home prematurely froman evening party (and he was a pretty good sitter when he expectedone of the " batches" above alluded to. Latterly he had given up thetheatre ; but he may be said to have brought the theatres to himselfin that strange and interminable farrago, entitled " COLLECTANEA DramaticA" which brought 24/. 10*. at the sale of his library. He affectedgreat indifference to Kean, being attached to the Kemble school althoughhe was as noisy as any man, against that renowned tragedian, inthe memorable O. P. row. What he did, he usually did upon a sort ofprinciple. He was a great Robin Hood man, and an indefatigable explorerof old ballads and dramatic fragments. When he accompaniedme, some six years ago, to the public library at Cambridge, there wasno getting him out of Bishop More's black-letter closet. I thought Mr.Lodge, the public librarian, must have had recourse to " the strongman"to pull him away from the editio princeps of " The blind beggarof Retinal Green." And at Al thorp, when I set him down to thatunique tract called Gamaliel Ramsey, it was quite evident that his bosomwas labouring with leavings such as could not be exceeded in force andfrequency by those of a Sibylline prophetess!! Of what importancethis tract is, may be seen from Mr. Collier's extract from what Mr.Castlewood has given of it, in his very recent and most interesting littlepamphlet, entitled, New Facts regarding the Life of Shakspeare, 1835,p. 30-31.EE 2420 ROXBURGHIANA. \ Roxburghspoken : and if his collection of my humble workswere well sold" at the sale of his library, it is onlycommon justice to add, that these gratuitous contributionswere greatly instrumental to such a sale.He received all my "privately printed" tracts as amatter of course, without even the trouble of askingfor them*. I have said, that our intimacy continuedtill " within a few months of his death." Hadhe not lived latterly a good deal under the influenceThese tracts were, 1. Specimen of an English Debure; 2. SpecimenBibliotheca Britannicce ; 3. Book Rarities; 4. Bibliography, aPoem ; 5. The Lincoln Nosegay ; 6. La Belle Marianne ; with presentsof many single volumes of publications, besides my own : amongthese, was the scarce pamphlet by the late Mr. Malone, privately printed,upon the Tempest of Shakspeare. Not to have given him these things,would have been depriving myself of a positive gratification; andtherefore I assume no extra merit upon the occasion. Many of ourcommon friends can attest the truth of this remark. His collection ofmy works, including private pieces, and the Malone pamphlet, produced,I think, about 707. They were all upon small paper. The last presentwhich he received from me (knowing his passionate attachment to booksof sports) was an English translation, by a Graduate of Medicine, ofthe Greek of Arran upon Coursing, &c., 1821, with 24 embellishmentsfrom the antique on India paper : a book, so sweetly adorned,and so admirably executed in its literary department, that I see withdelight my own brief commendation of it (from the Bibliophobia), selectedby Mr. James Bohn, in the most seductively printed, and well/flt<f-out catalogue, which I have seen a long time from a bibliopolistictyro. My friend Castlewood's reply on receiving $ie volume is socharacteristic of a kindly feeling, and of his own peculiar vocabulary,that I hesitate not one moment to lay it before the reader. If I am notmistaken, it was the LAST LETTER which I ever received from him.Conduit Street, July 2, 1832.MY DEAR I)***,e I am certainly ah' ve ; but from the time of losing an excellent well-wisherand good client in Sir J. Harrington, I have been fighting withthe severest spasmodic attack of rheumatism I have ever had ; and waswrapt in flannel when your splendid, heart cheering present arrivedClub'] ROXBURGHIANA. 4*21of one vulgar, domineering spirit, it had continuedto his dying hour. I am free to confess that I yetMISS my departed friend in many a solitary moment,and on many a social occasion. But we shallmeet again.The foregoing from the indulgence of mere personalfeeling is the manifestation of a sincere desireto scatter at least one unsullied flower upon thetomb of my departed friend.His saltern accumulem dons, et fungar inaneMunere."Something more, however and perhaps of greaterweight may be expected from me in reference tothe Deceased with THE CLUB. In consequence ofa public attack, by an anonymous writer, upon thewhich absolutely revivified my spirits. To ME, the acquisition is invaluable.I do not know, of my two hundred volumes on the sports,one to compete with it. The chaste and spirited embellishments provethe author no trifling amateur in the arts; and for the subject, poor SirJames Mansfield, the most noted and enthusiastic courser and breederof long-tails I recollect, would have doffed gown and wig to make himjudge of the leash. Had T seen the book by chance, and found it ,1 believe the parish bell might have tolled my funeralknell. In venturing to treat myself with a volume of Riding's Animals,out of younger Bohn's catalogue last week after several twitchesfrom my poverty-struck conscience to add to my collection, I fanciedit was adding something of value ; but it is a cypher to your article.I hope it will not keep me from church tomorrow, as I do not meanto bend to the spasms, if resolution can rebut the seme. Accept my verybest thanks, which is too trite an acknowledgment ; and I therefore wishI had another pen for five minutes to speak more enthusiastically.Yours truly,J. HASLEWOOD."42*2 ROXBURGHIANA. \ Roxhirghememory of the former combining, in that attack,something stronger than indirect censure of thelatter for its admission of him as a Member of theirSociety it may be expected that I should offer a fewremarks at least in behalf of ONE whom the silencethe grave has cut off from all means of reply.There cannot be the slightest wish or desire of justifyingthe Club which can only treat such an imputationwith the contempt that it merits. Mr.Castlewood was a solicitor, and an honest one intothe bargain. As his business was limited, his gainswere small. His education had been exceedinglycontracted, which only rendered his attachment tobooks, and to antiquarian research, the more surprisingand commendable. His contributions to theCensura Literaria, and to the British Bibliographer,shewed that he had " the proper stuff" withinhim to which must be added, the splendid andmost accurate reprint of Dame Juliana Berne's Bookof Hawking and Hunting, published in 1811, ofwhich he had the editorial superintendence and towhich an " Introduction" was written, proving atleast the very singular and patient spirit of investigationof its Editor. To these qualifications wasadded a moral and upright character, with manners,which, although a little blunt and unpolished,were never calculated in the slightest degree towound the feelings of the most fastidious. His ownparticular vocabulary might be called Haslewoodianbut it was neither vulgar nor offensive.UOX13URGIHANA. 423With these qualifications, I considered my departedfriend as no unfit Associate for the RoxburgheeClub ; and Lord Spencer, Mr. Baron Bolland, andothers, confirmed the recommendation :Me, me ! aclsum, qui feci ! in me convertite ferrum."If there were impropriety or disgrace in the nominationof such a man, I desire to take it exclusivelyupon myself. His admission to this Society,or Club, proved one of the greatest comforts of hisexistence. He felt elevated by the circumstance.It was a feather (a small red one, perhaps) in hisbonnet ; and his zeal, diligence, and enthusiasmwere alike kindled to pursue his favourite bibliographystudies to their utmost extent. Hence, inthe following year, 1813, came out his most admirablereprint, with a preface, of Painter's Palace ofPleasure, 2 vols., 4to. This was rapidly followedby Baldwin's Mirror for Magistrates, a reprint ofequal accuracy and elaboration, in the same formand number of volumes. These were, in all respects,not only excellent works in themselves, but the rarityand value of the original impressions had renderedsuch reprints of absolute importance to the Studentof early English Literature. They were accompaniedby accounts and analyses of all the knownprevious editions. I remember the late Mr. Giffordto have said of these publications, " these aresomething like ; this is bringing your black-letterpursuits to some intelligible and useful issue." But424 ROXBURGHIANA. \ Roxlurg7iethe crowning result of my worthy friend's bibliographylabours (for I do not pretend to enumeratethem all) was, the discovery of the Author ofDrunken Barney and who should that author bebut RICHARD BRATHWAIT? Mr. Castlewood'sedition of this humorous, and of its kind classicalproduction, gave unqualified approbation to theknowing in these matters. The discovery, of itself,was not of much importance ; but the key which ledto it was very ingeniously and successfully introducedwithin all the wards of the lock*. Butenough. This tribute of respect to departed friendshipmay not be without its use, if it Convince theliberal and the kind-hearted that accusation is atall times easier than proof \ and, as on this occasion,that the apparently meditated suppression of truthassumes the cowardly aspect of falsehood. Accordingto the inferences drawn by the anonymous writerin question, it should seem as if my departed friendhad been introduced into the Roxburghee Club as adriveller and a dolt. I hope to have successfullyWhat more particularly led to the discovery was, that in Bathsavowed pieces, the errata were usually designated thus : on theErrata. The same designation appearing to the errata of the firstedition of the " Drunken Barney," led the Editor to the discovery inquestion which was abundantly confirmed by collateral evidence. Mr.Castlewood's reprint of that first edition was one of the prettiest andhappiest efforts of his editorial labours. Of Brathwait's numerouspieces, Mr. Castlewood had nearly a perfect collection. Some of themwell merit republication. The author was a most extraordinary man inpoetry and in prose, and yet we scarcely know any thing about him.Club'] ROXBURGHIANA. 425proved that he was as remote from, as he was undeservingof, the application of either of these opprobriousterms*.I might here leave my departed friend to fight his own battle withposterity, did not a sense of duty enjoin me, as well for the sake ofothers as myself, to trespass upon the reader's patience for a few furtherminutes, in the notice of what has been alluded to at the foot ofpage 379, &c.'A\yeivct n'tv poi xat Herein t^lv race'AXyoc 8k Span. Prom. Vinctug.Lest " silence" however, should be construed into impotence, or aninability to meet the charges, direct or implied, which are contained infour successive articles upon the late Mr. HASLEWOOD and the Rox-BURGHE CLUB, written in the Athenaeum of January, 1834 and inwhich articles the characters of others, as well as of my own, may besupposed to be more or less impugned I will take leave to submit afew remarks in the shape of a REPLY to the articles in question. Butfirst, I beg to say a few words upon the transaction itself, which led tothe communications in the Athenaeum. I agree with the writer of thosearticles in thinking that such a MS. volume as that intitled the Rox-BURGHE REVELS should never have seen the public light. As therewas nothing to call for so there was nothing to justify such an exposure.Mr. Castlewood died a bachelor, in comparatively easy circumstances.The whole produce of his library, whatever that might be,was to go, unburdened, to his heirs, relations, or legatees. He hadoften told me, in the earlier part of our acquaintance, that he wouldrefuse a thousand guinea cheque for his books. They produced at hisdeath about 2,500/. : the WHOLE being so much more than any personor persons could reasonably expect for themselves, as their owner mighthave sold his books in his lifetime, and put the amount of the sale intohis pocket, without there being the shadow of a right to call him to anaccount for such a proceeding. This point is, I think, as clear as thesun at noon-day.However, it is too well known that Mr. Castlewood did not do so ; butdying, he left two executors one of whom, who was his brother, declinedto act. The acting executor, an old and intimate friend of the deceased,resolved to shew his affectionate respect for his memory, by sellingthis volume with the whole of the library. There is no accounting fortastes : and one has heard of being " defended from friends, and takingcare of one's self against enemies." Poor Castlewood was in no conditionto do the latter ; and accordingly THIS VOLUME the concoction of426 ROXBURGHIANA. [RoxburgheeIt is now in course that I should say somethingof the OTHER deceased member of the Roxburghone in his gayer and unsuspecting moments the repository of private,confidential communications a mere memorandum book of what hadpassed at convivial meetings, and in which ' ( winged words" and flyingnotes of many gentlemen and friends were obviously incorporated thisvolume it was resolved TO SELL. Something like an unctuous balm tosomething like a misgiving conscience was also resolved, in the firstplace, to be administered, by putting in the book at such a price as it wassupposed would beat down all opposition ; and I have reason to believethat TWENTY GUINEAS was the sum in contemplation. The modeadopted to accomplish that end was singular enough. It was as ifpouring oil into a fire should extinguish the flames.Long before the sale, the book became almost public property. Itwas allowed to travel eastwardly and westwardly. Not only was thesubstance of the greater part of its " C. Mery tales" noised abroad, but itbecame stripped of portions of its contents. Never did spoliationassume a more praiseworthy character. Never was an act of robberymore to be commended. The only subject of lamentation is, that itdid not go FURTHER. If the executor, in the just exercise of what hethought to be a discretionary power, suffered A, B, C, to receive backtheir contributions, why, I ask, did he not extend the exercise of that powerto D ? If the genuineness of the entirety of the volume be invaded,upon what principle is the trespasser to stop ? Of ALL the contributorsto that unparalleled olla podrida, I think that the writer of these pageshad as great a right as any one to receive back his own. Above all, shouldI have desired the letter of Sir Walter Scott which was given to thedeceased as a document per se, and not for his family to enjoy its proceeds.As to the letter of Lord Althorp to me, and my note to thedeceased, which have served the purpose of indiscreet,, if not indecentremark, it was, perhaps, not to be expected that an executor, so whollyabsorbed in doing JUSTICE to the memory of his departed friend, shouldthink of restoring either. The volume was bought at the sale by Mr,Thorpe for 40/., and by him offered, through me, to the purchase ofthe Roxburghee Club. Of course, no gentleman would think of puttinghis hand into his pocket with a view, as it might have been said, ofhushing up any strictures advanced upon SUCH an association. The-charactersand rank in life of the members placed them far above it.In consequence, the Roxburgh REVELS became the property of onewho " resolved to purchase it at any price, that he might gratify curiosity,and give the readers [of the Athenaeum] its principal contents." AndClub'] ROXBURGHIANA. 427Club who was lying, at the same time with myfriend Castlewood, in his coffin. That I shouldfurther, he " hoped and believed he should execute his task withoutgiving offence in any quarter." The proof of this friendliness of dispositionis remarkably verified in his fourth and last communication,when he hopes to be able " to give the Roxburghee Club its COUP DEGRACE ;" and that he " shall be happy to have done with, as well asdone for, both Mr. Castlewood and the Club." To be sure, there is no"giving offence" to people when they are DEAD. Again, in the samecommunication : " the Club is extinct, and Castlewood has eatingit." A little further: " the anniversary dinner of 1833 is thelast it will ever celebrate." And the concluding sentence runs thus :We have now finished the Roxburghee Revels and finished the RoxburgheeClub. jNJr. Castlewood has finished himself." I place thesepoints in front of this reply, to shew the quo animo of the writer ; andhow very strange and startling it is, to see a man going about with adrawn sword or bludgeon in his hand, in order to transfix or knockdownindividuals as he meets them, by way of gratifying curiosity, andnot giving offence in any quarter."Renewing the expression of my entire accordance with this writer inthe unpardonably bad taste to give it no harsher name which couldhave sanctioned the sale of the " Roxburghee Revels," I must be allowedto ask the censurer of such a measure, upon what plea or principle HEcould have contributed to give a more extensive publicity to the contentsof the volume in question ? To have been instrumental to thegibes and jeers of a sale-room, were sufficiently indefensible ; but, withthis conviction of the gross impropriety of such conduct in the writer'smind, to have deliberately spreads and wide, by means of an ably-conductedhebdomadal journal, the whimsicalities and harmless absurditiesof the book now under consideration, is utterly irreconcilable toreason and honest dealing. It is quite evident from the beginning, thatthe anonymous writer was determined upon the measure of exposure :he was resolved to have the book, conte quit couteau gave the purchaserat the sale five guineas for his bargain. He seems to have rushedforward as a vulture upon his prey. The dead body of poor Castlewoodis mangled with his talons and yet all this is undertaken, as he complacentlytells us, " to gratify curiosity," and with the hope of beingable to execute his task without giving offence to any one." If thedeceased had been the weak, harmless, ignorant, and puzzle-headedcreature described by this anonymous libeller, why take so much pains to. draw his frailties from their drear abode? "428 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghapproach the subject with mingled sensations, willbe sufficiently intelligible to those who, with myself,And why, on dramatic points, betray such unusual sensitiveness andacrimony of feeling and expression? There seems throughout thewhole to be something like an under current of rivalry in the histrionicdepartment.To descend to a few particulars. The spirit or principle of thisattack upon the memory of my departed friend, is to me sufficientlyrevolting. To kick a man when he is down to kick him when he islying upon his back IN HIS COFFIN is so thoroughly englishman andunchristianlike, that I have no words to express my mingled contemptand abhorrence of such a proceeding. Mr. Castlewood is no sooner atrest in his grave, than this writer tells us who and what he was : whereand how he was born. What does it matter " where and how" a manis BORN ?Honour and Shame from no condition rise :ACT WELL YOUR PART there all the honour lies."In what sort of homes were Shakspeare, and Milton, and Newton born ?To be sure, my friend must not be mentioned in the same sentence withthese illustrious names : but the principle or position is confirmed bysuch an illustration. Horace tells Maecenas, that when he comes to payhim a visit, he must not expect to find " ivory ornaments or a gildedceiling under his roof:" nor anything but (what might be translatedinto) the vin ordinaire, or vin du pays, when he comes to dine withhim*. When I call to mind what I have heard, and believe, of theearly manhood of the deceased, the wonder may be that he lived to theprotracted period of his life (sixty-four years), and was allowed, througha merciful Providence, to attain the little comfort and comparative distinctionwhich latterly awaited him. Is a man to be pointed at, orhooted at, because, late in life, he has associated with gentlemenwhen his evil stars, at an earlier period, had driven him in an oppositedirection ? Throughout the whole of this writer's strictures he boldlyaffirms, although necessarily he was never present, that the Members of" Non bur neque aureusMea render in domo lunar."Lib. ii. Ode 18.Vile potabis medicis SabineCantharis. Lib. i. Ode 20.Club'] ROXBURGHIANA. 429knew RICHARD Hebe, in " the high and palmystate " of other days ; when his constitution was un-theRoxburghee Club were shocked and disgusted with the conversationof the deceased. The assertion is CONTRARY TO TRUTH. Never wasspeech more harmless than that which fell from his lips. As above observed,it was only Haslewoodian.As to the allusions to, or express mention made of, myself, I desirenot to receive the standard of good breeding at the hands of this writer.In other respects he may as well be informed that I am not the Secretarythat I receive no emolument that the office of Vice-president is one ofno trouble and of no indignity : further, that I have no Journal, or RIVALbook of REVELS, to bequeath for the benefit of such as, like himself,hope to give no offence" by trampling upon the dead and indirectlytraducing the living. So short-sighted were this writer's views, orrather so consummate his vanity, and audacious his prediction of theextinction of the Roxburghee Club in consequence of his anathemas,that, on the vacancies occasioned by the deaths of Mr. Castlewood andMr. Heberr, and after the Athenaeum articles had appeared, our venerablePresident, although in indifferent health, came to town expressly to fillthose vacancies : when the elections of Mr. ARCHDEACON BUTLER andSir STEPHEN GLYNN, Bart., M. P., gave no signs of morbidity in anyportion of the body corporate of ROXBURGHERS ! So much for a littletoo much confidence in the exercise of unrestrained scurrility.It is necessary to correct a few ERRORS in this memorable attack. Iwish I could call them, in the language of Quintilian, " dulcis vita."On the death of Mr. Dodd, it is said that application was made to " Mr.Bliss, son of a bookseller at Oxford," to become his successor. Applicationwas made to Mr. Bliss ; and I felt as anxious as my departedfriend for his election : for his talents (evinced by his edition of Wood'sAthena Condenses) would have done credit to the choice. But theapplication was made to the Rev. Philip Bliss, of St. John's College, andnow Dr. Bliss, Registrar of the University of Oxford. The father ofDr. Bliss was a clergyman, and not a bookseller. But what if he hadbeen ? The late Rev. Peter Elmsly, Principal of St. Alban's Hall, wasthe nephew of a bookseller of that name in the Strand : and when didOxford boast a more perfect ATTIC-GREEK SCHOLAR than that excellentman ? The writer further says, that application was made byMr. Castlewood, on the death of Sir Mark Sykes, for the admission of anindividual into the Club, whom he chooses to designate as a sort of literaryPaul Pry and whose admission, he implies, would have disgraced if.I can only say, that, leaving the individual here knotted, to fight his own430 ROXBURGHIANA. \ Roxburghimpaired, and his intellectual vigour undiminished.But, remembering this brightness of his meridianbattle, which I presume him to be capable of doing, I do not believe thestatement. It was most likely to have come to my knowledge ; but itdid not. The amount of the contribution to raise a monument to thememory of Caxton, is so loosely stated by him, that one would think itwas only 2/. 2*. The members never objected, for one moment, to advancethis sum per head, with equal readiness, as their quotas for theanniversary dinners. What they did object to, was this : to contributetowards the payment of 120/. for the fees of erection of the monument.As above intimated, the parochial officers of St. Margaret, much to theirhonour, allowed this Roxburghian tribute of respect to the memory ofour first English printer to be placed upon the walls of the church, orrather over the vestry-door, in the vestibule, as you ascend the staircase,FREE OP ALL CHARGES : forming, in this instance, a striking and honourablecontrast to their neighbours.It is time to make an end. In what has been here advanced, I havehad neither selfish nor sinister views to gratify. There is a dead as wellas a living reputation both to defend and to substantiate ; and I trust thatI have effected this for my departed friend. In so doing I have notheld him up as the mirror of literary or antiquarian knighthood. Farfrom it : but there is a difference between the charge of almost drivellingidiocy and an uneducated understanding; especially, too, as in thisinstance, the former seems to be accompanied with an imputation ofdisgusting vulgarity. As to the factitious titles attached by my friendto certain volumes of minor poetry, such as " Garlands of GravityEleemosynary Emporium Noddy s Luncheon Poverty's Pot-pourraMumper s Medley Nutmegs for Nightingales" &c. which bringsdown the terrible wrath of the critic, I see nothing so formidably repulsivein these titles. A man has surely a right to call his books, as tocall his dogs, by what titles and names he pleases ; and we should nomore quarrel with Mr. Castlewood for the former, than we should forhaving called one dog Pincher, another Boxer, and a third Blucher :with this difference, that Blucher was at times a very troublesome, ifnot dangerous, animal; whereas "Nutmegs for Nightingales" mighthave continued harmless, as well as untasted and untouched, upon theshelf, for centuries. Mr. Evans has well and sensibly designated theRoxburghee Revels' as " a very curious and whimsical record." It isnothing more.I admit, freely admit, that my friend's style was, in short, $ui generis;delectably original ; and at times irresistibly laughter-provoking. Yet heROXBURGH1ANA. 431sun, let us contemplate with a deeper sympathy itsdeclension in the emaciated frame, flurried discourse,and uncertain movements of his later years.Under this impulse, it will be no unworthy exerciseof an honourable feeling to bear in mind, when, atthe Roxburgh, as well as at all other tables, he wasone of the charms of society and the rallying pointwhen conversation flagged : or rather, wherever hewas, conversation never became stagnant. And thenhow varied that conversation ! He would mootGreek metres with my friend Mr. Drury, and fightover derivatives and etymons with Roger Wilbraham.With the Boswell he would quote long passages oftheir father's biography of Dr. Johnson ; and withDodd or Castlewood ring changes upon Robin HoodGarlands. His memory was only exceeded by thatof Porson ; which I have often heard him call " almostdivine." To a thorough facility in quotationsfrom the ancient classics, I have heard him at onceoften seemed to be " near a good thing." He went " about it and aboutit," and was within " an ace" of its discovery. Then, all at once, hewould strike off in a wild and unsearchable path. But enough. Thedeceased was capable of something like "good stuff:" and had he beenallowed to concentrate his COLLECTIONS with a view to a new edition ofWantons History of English Poetry, with its enlargement to the presenttime and of which it was in contemplation, some dozen years ago, topropose the Editorship to Mr. SOUTHEY we had received an invaluableacquisition to our national literature. Moreover, had Mr. Castlewoodfound encouragement to give us anew edition of Reasons BibliographyPoetica (to which his additions were very considerable), and which Ibelieve he would have done with a very slender remuneration, we shouldhave sincerely thanked him for his toil, and considered him in any lightbut that " of a driveller or a dolt."432 noXBURGHIANA. \Eoxburglieready and copious in long quotations from those ofthe middle-ages such as Position, Sannazarius, andVida : and bringing this passion down to later times,my friend Mr. Drury and myself once heard himrepeat Canning's Iter ad Mecca from beginning toend, apparently without a single trip. He was alsomuch attached to the lower school of the old Latinpoets, such as Lucan, Claudia, and Silius Italics.Of the latter, he published a small edition whenhe was only twenty years of age. Of Claudia, anew edition, very nearly perfected some twenty-twoyears ago was discovered on his decease *. Itshould he remembered that, in all his conversations,not one vulgar word nor passionate expressionwould escape his lips during the most animateddiscussion.It is foreign to my feelings and habits to gainsaywhat, in this and other works, I have deliberatelyand conscientiously said of THE DECEASED. Hemerited all the commendation which it was in mypower to bestow. His love of BIBLIOMANIA wasstrictly his " ruling passion strong in death." Hehad visited Mr. Road, the bookseller, but the eveningbefore ; and on the next morning (that of hisexpiration) had sent his servant to him to come andreceive additional instructions in regard to somebook-commissions to be executed abroad.This impression, of which one copy only appears to have beenprinted upon VELLUM, is hinted at in 384, vol. ii. of the Cameron,Might it not be perfected with advantage ?Club.] ROXBURGHIANA.My knowledge of his death was purely accidental,and obtained of our common friend, Mr. Douce ;now also among the departed! On hearing it, Ithought that my friend had committed a mistakeand as poor Castlewood was lying dead at the moment,I observed, " You mean Castlewood ? " " No : " emphaticallyrejoined Mr. Douce, " I mean Hebe!"It is anything but affectation to affirm, that for a briefminute I lost my consciousness of every thing aroundme. My friend perceived my distress ; and after theopening of a window had let in air, and restored recollection,I retired abruptly. Within half an hourof this communication, I stood by the side of thecoffin of RICHARD Hebe. I gazed upon that countenance,marked with the waxen rigidity of death,which had never been turned upon me but with serenityand in smiles. I was not prepared for suchan alteration*Hei mihi, QUALIS ERAT ! quantum Mutatis AB ILLO"whom I remembered, flushed with his OXFORD Conquestsurrounded by congratulatory friends andthe envied object of admiration and applause * !Among the letters of congratulation received by Mr. Heberr on hishaving gained the election as Member for the University of Oxfordagainst Sir John Nichols (both candidates being of the same politicalprinciples) was one from his then intimate, and always powerful, friendDr. Copleston, at that time Provost of Oriel College, and now Bishop ofLlandaff. Mr. Heberr shewed it to me, with a conscious triumph onreceiving so admirable a letter from so respected a quarter. I have aperfect remembrance of the ability of its execution. Shortly after myF F434 ROXBURGHIANA. {Roxlurglie.Hector could scarcely have appeared less changedto aeneas than was the countenance of my departedfriend to myself. And then the room in which hehad breathed his last! It had been that of hisbirth. The mystic veil, which for twenty-five yearshad separated me from this chamber, and which thefriend's electron, on having paid his Oxford visit of thanks, I received aletter from him, written at Shrewsbury, full of exuberance of spirits,felicitous expression, and cordiality of sentiment. It was also writtenin the height of his Shrievalty, or being high sheriff for the county ofSalop.Shrewsbury, Lion Inn. Nov. 21, 1821."MY DEAR i> * *,I thank you heartily for your nice, chatty, and gossiping letter ;which caught me at this place, where I have been passing the day partlyfor the purpose of shrievalty-business, and partly to superintend the embarkation(by the coach) of a Cheshire cheese, from a certain senatorialdairy in Shropshire, addressed to a certain bibliographical friend atKensington. As it weighs about 60lbs., I .wish you would divide itwith our common friend PETRIE, as it will then have a better chance ofbeing consumed when in good order. And if you think this shabby,remember the adage of Hesiod " ocrw-rrXeov rjpiav Travloe" and callupon me again on a future occasion. Observe, the said cheese was onthe road before the arrival of your letter ; and shall be followed, beforethe close of the season, by a sample of Hodnet birds and beasts free ofall expense except porterage concerning which you may consult yourneighbour DOUCE, whom I wish well out of the jaws of the dog. [Inow forget to what circumstance this alludes.] I lament to find youcan give no better account of your profits on the Tour. You sufferyourself to be led away by your artists. I sincerely trust you may havebetter luck with your JEdes Althorpiana.My Oxford visit of thanks went off remarkably well, as I flatter myselfHARRY DRURY will vouch for : but you are under an entire delusionabout a certain PRINCIPAL [Hudson of Brazen Nose Mr. Heberr'sown college] and his disposition to you-ward. He himself assures methe whole must have originated in a mistake; as he is perfectly unconsciousof any unfriendly or unfavourable opinion respecting you, andwould at any time be most happy to see you. Nevertheless, he ROXBURGHIANA. 435deceased would never allow me, nor any one else,to enter, was now effectually drawn aside by thehorses me to call you over the coals for being overseen in the post-chaisefull of three voters, under convoy of Hulk (was it not?) of St.John's, who appear at least he the said Hulk to have taken a wrongbias on the journey. I think it was Mr. Barnet who was their sponsor *.After my Oxford gaieties, I retired with Hudson to his parsonage atEwelm, near Benson, where we made a Christian of his young son andheir, not without much of classical libation; and from thence I adjournedto Dropmore, and, during my stay there, drove over, with Hartand Baron Fagel, to Eton, and had a long gossip and fly ting with thatlearned conchologist, PROVOST GOODAL, in the library. Since my returnto Hodnet I have had a week of much provincial jollity and compotation,at Shrewsbury, where good cheer and Sneyd's claret abounded :to say nothing of parties of eighty, and healths "five fathom deep"the whole crowned with a gay ball. HASLEWOOD never heard such carollingor such madrigals in his life, as those which were then and thereproduced. My subsequent employment has been chiefly among mywoods and trees ; BOOKS being at present quite in the back-ground.Thank you for your account of SCOTT'S Pirate, which I have notyet seen. Your correspondent's sketch t is interesting. I rejoice tolearn that you have reason to think dear Frank my son, then in India]is rising in his profession. Pray remember me kindly to Mrs. D. andyour daughters ; and as to Boxer [jny son's dog, left behind], I amcommissioned by Regent, Rector, Malpas, Dash, Jack, Fly, Frisked,Don, and sundry other greyhounds, harriers, and spaniels (" quos nuncdescriber longus est") all dogs of excellent worth to offer him theircynical gratulations. Adieu, my dear D. ; I still hope we shall meetboth before and soon after Christmas. Remember the dictum of theI cannot satisfactorily decipher the name of the Johnson : but Ican satisfactorily vouch for the Sensorial fidelity of my friend Mr.Barnet, then Member for Rochester.t This sketch is from the able and ready pen of Dr. James Browne,of Edinburgh ; a late correspondent of some years standing, whose lettersit was always a pleasure to receive and a yet greater pleasure to peruse.I have never seen their Author. Our intercourse was established andcontinued from literary sympathies. The reader will thank me for thesketch in question, which is as follows :I have read the first two volumes of the " PIRATE," and 200 pagesFF 2436 ROXBURGHIANA. Roxburgheeiron hand of Death. I looked around me withamazement. I had never seen rooms, cupboards,passages, and corridors, so choked, so suffocatedSchola Salernitana : " Si vis te reddere sarum, cures tolls graves." Alas,poor GEORGE Iste ! Ever affectionately yours.,The concluding expressions relate to the death of our common friend,of whom mention is made at page 368, ante. Those who have knownthe writer of this letter as long and as intimately as myself, will agreewith me, that it is strongly characteristic of his ordinary style of conversationand epistolary composition ; while, to ME it is in many essentialsmost dear as incorporating the names of those whom I cannot cease tolove and to respect ; and of FOUR, passed, with their writer, to theirlong account." It also marks my friend's career, when at the height ofits distinction.of vol. iii. The scene is laid in Shetland, and it is as unlike any of thepredecessors as Waverley is unlike Tom Jones. The hero is Cleveland,the beau-ideal of a buccaneer of the first order : the heroine, MinnaToil, daughter of Magnus Toil, an old Norseman, and a sort of Zetlandchief, who is drawn to the life, as well as an Angushire Scotswoman,called Mrs. Baby Yellowley, with her brother Triptolemus, aneleven of St. Andrews, and a speculating idiotical farmer. An old sorceress(not a Meg Terrifies) called Lorna of the Fitful Head, is a grandfigurante in the drama of the piece, and quite a Rembrandt painting.The inferior characters shew an immense acquaintance with human naturein all its varieties and forms of existence. A scene between twopirates is perfectly unparalleled. You think you overhear their quarrel,and their language, as furious as that element on which they caught theirprey and made their boisterous homes. I thought these particularswould amuse you, and 1 have scrolled them half blind from weak eyes.I may add, which I do from personal knowledge, that the localities ofultima Thule are given with a truth and effect perfectly wonderful. Ido not think the Pirate will be so popular as some of its predecessors,but it will probably strike the judges as more remarkable than anyof them. It is as unlike Kenilworth as Kenilworth is unlike OldMortality"C/Hl*.~\ ROXBURCIItANA. 437with books. Treble rows were here, double rowswere there. Hundreds of slim quartos severalupon each other were longitudinally placed overthin and stunted duodecimo, reaching from oneextremity of a shelf to another. Up to the verycieling the piles of volumes extended ; while the floorwas strewed with them, in loose and numerous heaps.When I looked on all this, and thought what mightbe at Hodnet, and upon the Continent, it were difficultto describe my emotions. " Vox faucibushsesit!" My friend Dr. Bliss had talked of theDeckers, and writers of that author's time and description,which were in the Malone Collection*but here there were two Deckers and three DeckersSee page 384, ante. By Mr. Heberr's bed-side, upon a small table,was several of Green's Pieces. The first I opened was entitled Greene'sGroat's Worth of Wit bought with a Million of Repentance, 1592, 4to.With a profligate character, it might have been a curious coincidenceto have found such a book, in such a place, on such an occasion. Seea list of Greene's innumerable pieces in the Censura Literaria, Beloe'sAnecdotes of Literature, vol. ii., pp. 168. 196. 261 ; and Censura Literaria,vol. viii. p. 380-391 : the latter furnished by the late Mr. Castlewood.My friend Sir Francis Freeling (see Library Companion, p. 598,second edit.) possesses the largest collection I know of the very fancifulyet pungent and not uninstructive pieces of ROBERT GREENE. I wishMr. D'Israeli would take this author up, and " give him a good shaking."There is more to be learnt of the EXPRESS CHARACTER of the times inthe pieces of Greene, Harvey, Decker, and Nash, a, than in the elaboratedisquisitions of learned historians. And yet, after all how singular !in none of these contemporaneous productions is there the slightestmention of SHAKSPEARE who was not only living, but in high repute.One would have thought that his very " hose, doublet, and jerkin,"would have been described by some of this vivacious and talkativetribe. Win) would wish to " lose one drop of that IJIMUHTAL MAN ?"438 ROXBIIRGHIANA. [Roxburghfor every Frigate that floated in the Bodleian oceanof books !I turn to more generally interesting topics. Myfirst visit to this hermitage of death was renderedthe more mournful and impressive by the presenceand expressions of grief of an old and faithful servant,who had known the deceased from infancy ;and when I mention the name of John Newell Ishall obtain ready credence from all who know him,that his affectionate fidelity to his master was as unwaveringas it was important. On my recovery ofthe first shock from the affecting and yet wondrousscene around me, I learnt, from this faithful servant,that the body of his master was to be forthwith conveyedto the resting place of his ancestors, at Hodnet.I had a sudden strong disposition to attend the funeralof my departed friend. It seemed to me, perhapsoddly enough, to be a debt even due to theextraordinary Library left behind, that its ownershould be followed by me to his grave. I knewthat by no possibility could I receive the slightestadvantage in the shape of testamentary " Reminiscence; " and, while many older friends and closerconnexions seemed to "leave the dead to bury theirdead," I solicited and obtained a ready permissionto accompany the last remains of Richard Heberr tohis " FAMILY VAULT." It was not a little singularthat I went down to Shrewsbury in the same conveyancewith Mr. Wrightson, the member for NorthAtherton, and cousin of the deceased ; nor till withinClub.] KOXBURGHIANA. 409the last stage did we communicate to each other thecommon object of our journey to attend his funeral.The day of interment was in all respects sad*.It was a walking funeral. The sky lowered ; therain fell. The procession necessarily moved slowly,for the six men who carried the body (in a leadencoffin) were obliged to be frequently relieved ; andthe distance from the hall to the church was considerable.The bell tolled heavily. The churchwalls and the interior of the church were crowdedwith sobbing spectators. The pulpit, the reading-theaccount of this funeral in the Salopian Journal, of the dateof Oct 23, 1833, was as follows :It was our mournful duty, in a late number of this journal, to noticethe decease of the above distinguished gentleman. It is now ourmournful duty to notice his interment. This event took place at Hodnet,on Wednesday, the 16th instant. It was strictly of the most privatecharacter, and a walking funeral from the hall to the church ; a distanceof some five hundred yards. The tenants, about thirty-six in number,preceded the rector and his two curates : then the body, immediatelyfollowed by the four Master Cholmondeleys, nephews of the deceased ;the Messrs. Wrightson, his first cousins ; the Rev. Dr. Dibdin, his oldfriend and literary associate ; and Mr. Macaulay, domestic tutor to thefamily ; R. Fisher, Esq., solicitor ; and John Newell and John France,each upwards of forty years the confidential servants of Mr. Heberr.Notwithstanding the untowardness of the morning, the churchyard andthe church were crowded with sympathising spectators. The servicewas read by the Rev. Oswald Leicester, the rector, with a most peculiardistinctness, power, and propriety. We notice this with the more surpriseand gratification, as we are given to understand that the reverendand worthy gentleman is in his eighty-second year.By the death of Mr. Heberr it may be truly said that the poor havelost an active and bounteous friend, his tenants a liberal and kindheartedmaster, and the world a book collector such as before had neverentered upon the arena of the fascinating and intellectual pursuit ofBlBLIOPHILISM."440 ROXBURGH I AN A. \ Roxburghdesk, and the altar, were hung with black. Theservice concluded, we all returned as we had left themansion ; but the SPIRIT, which once gave that mansionvitality and animation, was LEFT BEHIND. Indeed,from sunrise till sunset it was " a sad day."But although the master-spirit had fled, it seemedyet to speak in the LIBRARY left behind immense,widely scattered, unparalleled in variety and extent* !A sketchy, and I hope spirited, account of this library appeared inthe Literary Gazette, of which it would be affectation, as well as falsehood,to deny myself to be the author.Bibliotheca HEBEBIANA.If ever a library merited an ample detail in its description, it is thatwhich belonged to the late RICHARD Hebe, Esq., of Hodnet Hall,Shrewsbury, and of Pimlico Lodge, Westminster ; and yet pages uponpages were scarcely sufficient for the adequate execution of such a task.But if we cannot be copious, we may be correct ; and if every featuremay not be, just now, minutely described, the complexion or generalcharacter of the countenance may be spiritedly and faithfully impressedupon the attention and remembrance of the reader.In the first place, it may be as well to correct a few flying errors,which the public is at all times sufficiently prone to adopt ; and which,in sober minds, may produce an impression that ought to be as speedilyas possible modified or effaced. Vacant heads and flippant tonguesthink and talk of the number and value of books, as if there were noend to the first, and no limits to the second. We have heard veryworthy folks declare, that Mr. Heberr had a quarter of a million of books,which had cost him scarcely a less sum in pounds sterling. For madnesslike this, nothing short of a statute of lunacy ought to have beenthe corrective. It was not so with the deceased. He was, in truth, anearly and a late collector ; but as his fortune was not boundless, so hisrepository was not illimitable. The great and strong passion of his lifewas to amass such a library as no individual before him had ever amassed.But such a passion, unless guided by judgment and tempered by prudence,might have led to the most ridiculous and deplorable results.Accordingly, that judgment and prudence were not only called in, butKOXm UClll ANA. 441How was it to be disposed of? Where was theWILL ? For four successive days, every escritoire,eminently exercised, in the stupendous collection left behind as an imperishablemonument of his fame.Mr. Heberr's early attachment to the lore of ancient Greece and Romegave a tinge or bias to the character of his early spirit of book-collecting ;and so strongly did he feel this, as well as evince his passion for purchasingat auctions, that, even in his tenth year, in one of his letters tohis father, he suggests his purchasing for him a set of books at a certainsale, in which, as he is given to understand (so he expresses it), ' therewould be the best editions of the classics.' His private habits, or studies,partook of this characteristic ; for, as early as his eighth year, the authorof this article had seen a ' Catalogue of the books belonging to RichardHeberr.' In this catalogue, the prices of the books, as well as directionsfor the binding of several of them, are to be found. The history of hisprogressive attachment to books, illustrated by some curious anecdotes,must be reserved, with a great quantity of similar matter, for the ' literarymemoir' of him, which we hope may one day be given to the world*.But those who imagine that this book-mania was composed of the ordinaryelements of such a passion, are little aware of the transcendent tasteand skill evinced in the lore itself, by which the pages of his belovedDolphins and Variorum were enriched. There are metrical versions ofOvid, Virgil, and Horace, by our Heberr (in his eighth and ninth years),which would have tasked the courage and equalled the skill of some ladsin their fourteenth year. He died in his fifty-ninth year.But our immediate object is not the pursuance of this theme, howeverdelightful and varied. Youth has merged into manhood manhoodhas approximated to the grand climacteric and the grave is now thedepository of Him who once gave life and animation to the republic ofliterature. Our business is with the character and destination of THELIBRARY which he has left behind. Of its character, not much mustbe expected within the necessarily confined limits of this article. It isperfectly indigenous; but the predominance of some classes, accordingto the taste of the collector, must necessarily be anticipated. Of theseclasses, those of ancient philology (including all the brightest names ofantiquity) and of modern poetry and romance, probably predominate.Wide, varied, and luxuriant as are the latter, there is nevertheless to befound an immense body of Grammatical and Critical learning, from theThere is, now. NO HOPE of the kind.442 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghdrawer, cupboard, and recess, was diligently searchedin the family mansion but in vain. It must be inpregnant brevity of the Stagyrite, to the pointed canons of the author ofthe Diversions of Pur ley. And this love of languages was evinced byour collector in almost all the ramifications in which it could be extended: in the Celtic,, Breton, Spanish, Portuguese, Modern Greek, andother European dialects. From Suits to Jameson there is scarcelythe deficiency of one link. In poetical lore, from the days of Homerto those of Byron, the same surprising continuity may be observed. Invoyages and travels, and county history, it is more than probable thatthe palm may be conceded to the Hon. T. Grenville ; while in theologyand ancient classics, Lord Spencer's collection can never be even slightlyshaded by a comparison with that of any private individual, past, present,or we had almost said to come ! Comparisons are, to be sure,usually vague, and seldom establish any one point satisfactorily ; butthe object of Mr. Heberr was that of a general library and it has oftenbeen observed by him to the author of this article, that the catalogue ofthe Harleian library and that of Thomas Rawlinson (the Tom Folio ofthe Tatler) exhibited the most surprising collections of books at thattime known. As to the number of volumes contained in the libraryunder consideration, that may be safely estimated at 85,000 in England,and about half that number abroad. From the latter such a selectionwill be made as may probably swell the number for sale, in England, toan additional 5000 volumes. Let the reader pause for one moment uponsuch a stupendous mass of intelligence as these volumes must contain ;and let him marvel, as he well may, at the unconquerable diligence, activity,and zeal, by which they have become the property of one man,whose life fell much short of the prescribed Scripture limits of mortality!As to the Cost at which so many thousands of volumes have beensecured, it may be premature and unnecessary to give even a vagueguess ; but the sobriety of truth will not be much violated when it isplaced at little short of 100,000/. A contemplation of the returns, froma public sale, may probably fill the minds of surviving friends withanxiety ; but, comparatively sluggish as the public pulse may now beatin the cause of Bibliomania, an honourable and even a prosperous issuemay be anticipated. It is no common event that now awakens the attention,and speaks to the heart of every spirited and discerning collector.An oak of no ordinary size has just fallen, to afford almost everyman a faggot for his fire. Apvof irtoovorje TTUQ avrjp ZvXsvtral. SeeClub'] ROXBURGHIANA. 443town, at the Pimlico Hermitage. In the PimlicoHermitage the same diligent search was instituted.Drawers without number, and boxes without end,were emptied of their contents. Bills, notes, memoranda,letters, communications of ever* kind anddescription but still NO WILL. It must be abroad,in some book-depot of the deceased. An agentat Paris was appointed, and another in the LowCountries to no purpose. A confidential solicitornext left the country expressly to search in thoseplaces for the will. He tarried abroad three weeks,and returned. . .as he went. The will was not to befound.For myself, I had never but one idea about its locality.Although I had been almost interdicted frommaking researches amongst the books at Pimlico,I yet persevered; and one morning, when all hope,Bibliomania, p. 480. Let the timid take courage, and the experienceddirect their energies to one laudable object that of completing the severaldepartments in which their libraries exhibit melancholy proofs ofhiatuses. The veteran will not fail to be found grasping his spear inthat day, when the spoils of such a library can be acquired only by theintrepid and persevering ; and it may with confidence be predicted, thata new race of book-knights will be found, entering the lists at such atournament, when the prize to be won will be often of unprecedentedbrightness and beauty.Pimlico Lodge, January 8, 1834. D."I may here add, that the sum first considered in this communicationas that of the cost of the library, was 150,000/. From the result of thesales of three-fourths (see p. 366, ante) I am disposed to cut down theoriginal cost to 100,0007. But I know of nothing certain upon the subjectbeyond this that whether it were 150,000/. or 100,000/. it was anIMMENSE SUM.444 RQXBURGHIANA. [Roxburgheewith those likely to be eventually benefited by itsdiscovery, was about to take its departure, I FOUNDTHE WILL * ! And to reward me, as it were, for myAn account of this " finding" . . . thus appeared in the Literary Gazetteof January 18, 1834. " Few things, in what is called the republicof literature, have excited more attention than the supposed existenceand discovery of the will of the late Richard Heher, Esq. To thosewho were intimately acquainted with the character of the deceased, andwho had examined documents whereby his decided intentions as to thefuture destination of his property could be matter of not even theslightest doubt, the existence of such a will, with a knowledge of its materialcontents, was a matter as clear as the sun at noon-day. Its discoverycould be left only to time and accident.On failure of finding it, after an extended search, in the first instance,at Pimlico, and after a very careful and elaborate one at Hodnet,the different rendezvous of Mr. Heberr at Paris, Brussels, Antwerp,Louvain, Leyden, the Hague, &c., were diligently examined ; but withno fortunate result At length, on the return of the sister of the deceasedto Pimlico, for the purpose of taking out letters of administration,a more strict, particular, and extensive search was instituted ; and Dr.Dibdin, the old and anxious friend of Mr. Heberr, was so fortunate asto alight upon it, in the act of moving some duodecimo, on an uppershelf, for the purpose of re- arrangement of the library. A prognostic,of no very sinister complexion, was the precursor of the discovery. Inremoving a set of grammatical works, for the sake of classification, onebright, solitary sovereign dropped upon the floor ! This was hailed asan auspicious omen ; and about an hour afterwards, the WILL itself followedthe course of the sovereign.It bore every mark of unquestionable authenticity upon its envelope;and its interior fully corroborated this external evidence. The wholewording of the will, strictly conformable to professional instructions previouslyreceived, was in the handwriting of the testator. The attestation,by three witnesses, was in all respects perfect. The date wasSept. 1, 1827. The will was so short as to occupy only one side of acommon sheet of letter-paper. The curious will be probably disappointed.No mention whatever is made of the library ; and of courseits bequest to any particular corporate body is quite out of the question.The exigency of the case demands the bringing of the library in question,with all possible convenience, to the hammer. The property atstake, as we notified in the last number of our journal, is immense ; and'I "l>. } ROXBURGH! ANA . 445perseverance as well as yet to connect me with mydeparted friend I found it lying behind some hookswithin a few inches of my Cameron and Tour.On the 8th of January, in the year of our Lord,1834, I FOUND THE WILL . by which property to theamount of upwards of 200, OOO/. was to be disposedof. I was necessarily both proud and happy at sucha finding, and wrote immediately to those commonfriends whom I thought the more likely to be interestedby a knowledge of the discovery ; namely, toEarl Spencer, Sir Robert Harry Inglis, Sir FrancisFreeling, the Rev. H. Drury, Mr. Petrie, Dr. Bliss,and Mr. Foss. I preserve all their answers*. Forthe individual who, in the end that is, for her lifewas to be benefited by the sale of the property, realand personal, (after the discharge of very heavyincumbrances), I felt as if she had been a nearwe wish the issue of the sale to be as prosperous as the most ardent admirerof the talents of the deceased, or the most interested of his relationsin the distribution of his property, can desire."Although these answers are short, and are particularly characteristicof their authors, I will not even venture to transcribe the shortest, thatof Mr. Foss. It might be stigmatised as bad taste. It is not necessaryto prove, on the one hand, the sincerity of my joy on finding the will,nor, on the other, the sympathy of my friends on my being the instrumentof its discovery. I remember, on the evening of that discovery,having a long and particular conversation with my neighbour andfriend, Sir F. Freeling, about it. He said that " he knew of nothing,out of the pale of his family, which had given him a livelier satisfactionwere it only to put an end to the idle tales and absurd surmises whichhad gone abroad upon the subject." He was quite right. The supposednon-entity of the will was a common topic of discussion at club-housesas well as private tables.446 ROXBUROHIANA. roxburghrelation . my Sister. But enough. The sequel isMATTER OF HISTORY."The Newspapers were full and particular in theirnotices of the deceased * ; and in the ensuing springAmong them was the following notice in the Atlas, (conducted withgreat ability), a weekly paper of January 25, 1834.Let not the reader be alarmed. We are not about to introduce himto the interminable mazes of Mr. Hebe's library, which sparkles, fromone extremity to the other, with the richest lore of by-gone and ofmodern days. Our present object is rather the MAN than his books.Of him we would speak somewhat in the gentlest spirit of Christiancharity with sentiments at once warm, generous, and grateful. Altogetherhe was among the most singular and prominent of the literarycharacters of his day. In company, ready, cheerful, instructive, andwinning, almost beyond any man. He was never sarcastic ; never bearingdown the weak, or crushing his victim when the victory was obtained.The captive seemed to be hardly conscious of the fetters imposedupon him.From circles of the first respectability, as well as splendour for weby no means consider these substantives as synonymes Mr. Heberrshrunk into his privacy at Pimlico as if unconscious of the impressionmade by his colloquial powers. He betook himself to his first editions,his chronicles and romances, with an increased zest, as if there werenothing in life comparable with these treasures. To an active mind likehis, and with such inexhaustible stores at his command, there was alwayssomething, and much, to do at home. His correspondence was necessarilygreat ; because, having the book-means of assisting scholars andcollectors, he possessed also the inclination for his good-nature wasequal to his ability. Accordingly, there was scarcely a scholar or authorof distinction, in his own country, but what readily applied to him, andas readily found his wants supplied. Of the former class, his escritoirebear evidence in the collection of letters from PORSON, MATTHEW RAINE,WAKEFIELD, Gifford, and ELMSLY. Of the latter, the names ofSCOTT, SOUTHEY, MACKINTOSH, CAMPBELL, CRABBE, and especiallyLEYDEN, are constantly occurring. SCOTT had, indeed, truly, as well asfelicitously observedHis volumes, open as his heart,Delight, instruction, science, art,To every ear and eye impart ! 'But it must not be supposed that these volumes were merely printedClub.~\ ROXBUROHIANA. 447it became necessary to fill up the gap in our Clubby the election of two new Members. Our President,although in an infirm state of health, came upexpressly from Althorp with a view to this election ;being anxious, in so doing, to let the Members seein what thorough contempt he held the late attackslevelled at our fraternity. Accordingly, the electiontook place at an extra meeting, at the ClarendonHotel, when the VENERABLE ARCHDEACON Butler,D.D. (Head Master of Shrewsbury School), andSIR STEPHEN GLYNN, BART., M. P., became the successorsof Mr. Heberr and Mr. Castlewood. This electionevidently gave general satisfaction, as I know itdid to our President in particular. I now proceedto the notice of what may be considered the heaviestsound of the funeral bell of the Roxburghee Club.treasures. They were frequently M SS. of great cost,, as well as antiquity.In the correspondence of Mr. Heberr, some of the most illustriousnames are also to be found as those of SPENCER, GRENVILLE, HOLLAND,LIVERPOOL, and CANNING, c. There was no circle, however choice,from rank or talent, in which the presence and conversation of the deceasedmight not have been considered in all respects an acquisition."In regard to the darling passion of his heart, we should say, Mr.Heberr was BORN a bibliomaniac. There has been lately printed evidencethat he commenced forming a library in his eighth year, and that hethen wrote to his father to purchase classical volumes at a book sale inthe country. After completing his seventeenth year, he entered Brazen-noseCollege, Oxford, as a Gentleman Commoner. Bishop CLEAVERwas at that time the principal. The bishop received, on his entrance,that testimony of the talents and character of the Freshman, whichmight be considered only a repetition of what, on the completion of hisschoolboy education, the father of Hebe had received at the hands ofhis son's tutor, the well-known Dr. GLASSE. It was a character, of whichthe principal and the parent might have been equally proud. Mr. Heberr's448 ROXBURGHIANA. \ RoxburghWhen our venerable President last dined with us,in 1833, it seemed to several of the Membersthat he took leave of us with a sort of presentimentthat he might not meet us again. He retired early,and bade us adieu in few words, and in a low tone ofvoice. On retiring to Althorp, with increasinginfirmity, and a fixed resolution to abide there*,it was not expected that we should see him againat the head of our table.talents were immediately appreciated, and his society courted in consequence.In his stature he was tall, robust, active, and of a most pleasingcountenance, with a highly-raised forehead."It is not a little extraordinary that the last book which I saw thelate Earl Spencer open during my last stay at Althorp, in the Christmasof 1833, was the Funeral Sermon upon the FIRST BARON SPENCER,preached at Brington church (called Brandon in the title-page of thebook) in November, 1627. The preacher was Richard Parte, Rector ofBrington, and a Fellow of Brazen Nose College, Oxford. The sermonwas published in 1628, 4to., and is entitled, "The Ende of the PerfectMan." Prefixed are some commendatory verses of which His Lordshipread the following with a marked emphasis. He might be said tohave been in part reading his own epitaph : for, most assuredly, in manyof the points here delineated, he might have discerned the reflex of hisown bright character.(t What warmth his beams of goodness did impartTo the distressed, sad both in face and heart ;What an unwearied, large, and open handHe stretched out to the Poor, and how his landWas by their backs and bellies blest, while theyLike rounds in Jacob's ladder, sate each dayIn troupes about his hospitable gate ;Whence, laden with his alms, early and lateThey parted to their coates, and timely fedTheir bedrid mates, and infants with their bread ;What bounteous entertainment, and how freeAnd hearty welcome, every guest might seeROXBURGHIANA. 449His intellectual faculties continued undiminishedto the last. His birth-day was on the 1st of September; and it was always with the sincerest pleasure,whenever I had occasion to write to him aboutthat time, that I congratulated him upon its recurrence.On the last occasion, he happened to beon a visit to his son-in-law, Lord Lyttelton, at harley; and on receiving my letter (in which I tookoccasion to announce to his lordship the prosecutionof the PRESENT WORK), his answer (Sept. 3, 1834)began thus : "In return for your kind letter of congratulationon my having been permitted to pass theformidably-sounding period of three quarters of acentury, I send my good wishes that your projectedBoth in his face and house ; which for resortAnd entertainment was a STANDING COURTWhere every honest man, though nere so plaine,As welcome was, as if a scarlet trainOr silken sail had ushered him . . .******How just he was in all his actions,How free from racking or oppressions ;How far^from causing any poore man's gone,How prone to hear, and right the meanest one ;What large rewards and means of livelihoodHis servants had from him, who understoodAnd loved the service : and how firm a friendHe was, how ready goodness to defend ;What progeny he left, how trained and bredTo SERVE and STAND THE COMMONWEALTH IN STEADIn any course it steer'd, and how he shoneWith Piety and true Devotion ;Which op'd and clos'd his each day," &c.G G450 ROXBURGHIANA. [RoxlmryheReminiscences' may, when concluded, contain asfair a proportion of satisfactory matter as mine might,were I disposed to record them ; for though the conditionof mortality must necessarily he accompaniedby a chequered aspect, the general result will ofcourse depend on the comparative number of whiteand black squares on the board." I anticipate thereader's concurrence with me, that few points couldhave been more neatly touched.Towards the middle of the following month a reportwas prevalent that his lordship was no more.Indeed few noblemen had been so frequently killedas the late Earl Spencer, by the conductors of newspapers.I read that report when at Cambridge, andwas on the point of quitting the place for Northampton,when I was undeceived by a contradictory statementin a paper of one day's later date : . . .but to theend of my career I shall not cease to lament thatI was not beyond the reach of that counter statement. for I should then have seen my excellentPatron . . . who, 'ere another month had passed, wasGATHERED TO HIS FATHERS." His last letter tome,noticing the misery and mischief oftentimesarising from these false reports, was of the date ofOct. 26, 1834*. Within a fortnight of its beingwritten, the writer of it was no more.I have above made mention of the date of a letter, which happened tobe THE LAST I ever received from my noble and revered correspondent.Club"] ROXBUROHIANA. 451There could be but one feeling throughout the Empireupon the death of SUCH A MAN *. In a thousandother bosoms besides my own, were excited the mingledemotions of respect, admiration, and regret.Mine were precisely of that description. Whateverthey prompted me to do, I did itWarm from the heart and faithful to its fires."My sincerity must have been beyond all suspicion.I had lost my best friend and earliest patron j and whatwas transmitted by me on the occasion to the amiableand able Editor of The Bury and Norwich Post andEast Anglian (one of the best constitutional papersin the kingdom), was at least evidence of a fearlessand honest appreciation of the public and privateIts writing was as clear and legible as anything which I had ever receivedfrom him as a fac-simile of its conclusion may testify.I received the first intimation of Earl Spencer's decease from thepen of Mr. Appleyard, his secretary. His letter commenced with theannouncement of the probably speedy approach of death, and concludedwith that of its having actually taken place. He had "just seen himbreathe his last," at twenty-five minutes past two o'clock, on the 10th ofNovember, 1834. Meanwhile, a too correct report of this sad event hadreached London ; for on the following day my excellent friend Sir F.Freeling wrote to me thus : " I fear it is too true that our dear LordSpencer has left this world for a better. You may not hear this from anyother quarter by this post, but I consider it a duty to you, who knew andloved him so well, to apprise you without delay of this afflicting andlamentable event."G G 2452 ROXBURGHIANA. \ Roxluryheworth of THE DEPARTED. The Editor, on receivingmy communication*, emphatically remarked, "Alas!I fear Lord Spencer's departure will prove a widersorrow than to his family and friends." The testimoniesreceived hy me, from private quarters, of hisunsullied reputation . . . the high sense entertained ofhis unshaken integrity, as well as of the whole courseof his incorruptible public life . . . may, in part, speakfor themselves in the subjoined extracts t. His nameMy communication extended to about a column and a half, in threeconsecutive papers. To the best of my recollection, copies of thesepapers were sent by me to Sir F. Freeling, Dr. Bliss, Mr. G. Baker, andmy heartily sympathising friend, Mr. Major, the bookseller. I possessonly two spare copies of this communication.t The historian of the county cf Northampton, Mr. George Baker,to whom the deceased had, in so many instances, been a kind and patronisingfriend, led the way in this threnodiacal correspondence. Hisexpressions of respect and admiration for the departed, were as warmas unqualified. Dr. Robertson, the leading physician of the town ofNorthampton, having occasion to write to me upon some topic of business,thus concludes, in reference to the deceased. " We are in a stateof gloom and depression here from the death of your venerable friend,Earl Spencer. It is impossible for any one to be more generally lamented,or more deservedly ; for his was worth of surpassing excellence."Nov. 15, 1834. Lord Spencer's neighbour, Serial Botfield,Esq. (who a few years preceding had served the office of High Sheriff,and whose BOOK-SYMPATHIES were attested by his possession of a finelibrary and the interchange of visits) thus mentions the mournfulsubject in a letter from St. Leonard's, of the date of 12th Nov. 1834.I write to thank you for your kind letter of the 7th inst, and tojoin my deep condolence to yours on the death of that truly noble andestimable man, and erudite bibliographer, THE EARL SPENCER. Ishall never forgive myself for having allowed pressure of business toprevent my riding over to Althorp during the few days that I spent atNorton, QMr. Botfield's residence, near Coventry]. His Lordship'suniform kindness and great consideration for so humble an individualas myself, will ever be by me most gratefully remembered." It mayClub.'} ROXBURGHIANA.will be mixed up in the records of some of the brightestperiods of our country ; and while that task is leftto the pen of the historian, it may be permitted anhumble individual, like myself, to notice his love ofletters and patronage of learned men ; his pure politicalprinciples as a constitutional whig ; his unbendingattachment to church and state ; his loveof order ; of moral w r orth ; and of all those endearingqualities which move in the train of CHRISTIANCHARITY.Then, again, the very admirable manner in whichhe fulfilled all the duties of w r hat may be called aCountry Gentleman. As a Magistrate, he had fewequals ; having filled the office of chairman of theQuarter Sessions thirty years, with singular tact,be no trifling gratification to the writer of this epistle to know, thathis Lordship's opinion of his collection and bibliographical labours wasfar from being inconsiderable. In a note of the 5th of May, 1832,Lord Spencer observes, " I paid a visit to my neighbour, Mr. Botfield,a few days ago, and was much pleased, as well as surprised, at the sight"of his books, some of which out of a very large collection, packed up incases, and filling almost the whole of his house he shewed me Healso shewed me the Catalogue Raisonne' upon which he is employed, indescribing them a very extraordinary undertaking for so young anamateur."Nor must the honest and warm ebullition of feeling of my friend Mr.Petrie the Keeper of his Majesty's Records in the Tower of Londonbe withheld on this occasion. He writes thus on the 14th of November.The shock occasioned by the unexpected death of our excellent friendbrought on a slight attack of gout, which is still lingering in my ancle.How much I honoured him while living, and now cherish his memory,I need hardly tell you ; nor how readily I should attend the last melancholyceremony of his funeral if I could suppose that there was theslightest wish on the part of the family that I should do so."454 ROXBURGHIANA. [Rcxhurglieurbanity, and discretion. Whatever he undertook,he undertook zealously, conscientiously, and with adetermination to be correct as well as punctual inthe fulfilment of all its concomitant duties. At theNorthampton Hospital (one of the largest and bestconducted institutions in the kingdom) his attendancewas as important as it was exemplary. He wasthe Chairman to act as well as to preside. Even inthe minor department of the Savings Bank, heregularly took his turn of attendance, when at Althorp; and in London he was not less regular inattending the great similar establishment in Panton-street.He was also, till of late years, Colonel ofthe Northamptonshire Yeomanry ; and I have seenhim charge at the head of his troops with all theprecision and energy of a commander of regulars.Among the last noble acts of his protracted life, wasa most liberal donation towards the erection of an.Asylum for Lunatics, in the same county. As aHUSBAND, PARENT, FRIEND . but no more.His funeral, according to his expressly written instructionsfound after his decease was on themost private scale : none but those of the household,and relations and friends present at the time of hisdecease, together with the tenants, being allowed toattend*. Had it been otherwise, half the countyHis FUNERAL SERMON was preached by the Rev. Henry Rose, A. M .,Rector of Brington, and formerly Fellow of Clare Hall, Cambridge. Thesermon was preached in the parish church of Brington, on Sunday,Club'] IIOXBUKGHIANA. 455would have followed the Body to the grave. Noparty feelings, nor petty distinctions, would, I amNovember 23, 1834, and printed by E. Dicey, Mercury Office, Northampton,in the same year. It bears for title, "Time MEMORY OP THEJUST is Blessed." It is dedicated to the Parishioners in the followingaffectionate address.DEAR PARISHIONERS,I known not to whom I could better dedicate the following Sermon Ithan to you, who both heard it preached, and have since, in a mannerso flattering to my feelings, desired to have it printed. Should the perusalof it by the blessing of God, cause any one to become wiser andbetter, I shall indeed be thankful and rejoice; for to promote yourhighest interest is not only the duty, but the chief desire and aim ofYour appointed Minister,HENRY ROSE."I feel persuaded that I should receive no excuse as I ought to receivenone at the hands of the reader, if I withheld from him the concludingportion of this most unaffected and thoroughly christian-hearted discourse.And I also feel persuaded, that, there is not a point which ittouches upon or a feature which it developed that finds not a responsiveemotion in the breast of every one who was as thoroughly acquaintedwith THE DECEASED as myself.As to his CHARITIES in this place, I hope it is unnecessary to remindyou, my poorer Brethren, that there is scarcely one among you who hasnot been entirely educated and nourished by his bounty, in sickness andin health, year by year, continually, from your cradles to the presenttime ; and many of your fathers before you, from their cradles even totheir graves. Neither did he forget to reward those faithful, aged, andinfirm labourers, by weekly pensions, who had spent their best days inhis service. Some of you, perhaps, have not known exactly who yourbenefactor, under God, was ; but none of you, my Brethren, I trust,have been without gratitude ; and with regard to those who have knownhim, perhaps some have never had an opportunity in person to returnhim thanks for his kindness. If, however, you have only wished to doso, it is enough ; and remember that he was not anxious to be known,or to be thanked. He did you good, both out of good will to you, anda desire to please God ; but he loved the praise of God more than thepraise of men ; and the praise of God will be his ' exceeding great reward.'As to the richer sort in this place, it would be difficult to findone who has not been benefited by him in some way or other, either*456 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghpersuaded, have stood in the way of the collectionof an assemblage of mourners, where pomp woulddirectly or indirectly ; and, with regard to Myself, I must pass over themany favours I have received, and the unceasing and undeserved kindnesswith which I have been always regarded by him, lest I should becomeunable to utter all that remains to be said on on this part of thesubject.If then he was rich, he was also ' rich in good works ' ready togive, glad to distribute.' Of a truth, it may be said of him, u he hathdispersed abroad, he hath given to the poor, his righteousness remainethfor ever, his horn shall be exalted with honour Some of his rewardhe received in this life, for he lived to a good old age, he saw much ofthe ' goodness of the Lord in the land of the living* ' he came to hisgrave in a full age, like a shock of corn cometh in, in his season helived to see his children's children ; and peace upon our Israel. Therest and greatest part of his reward he will receive f at the resurrectionof the Just.'Yet he had troubles, many and great ; some of an ordinary, some ofa more than ordinary, grievousness. ' Great are the troubles of therighteous says the Psalmist; but, then he adds, 'the Lord deliversthem out of all Troubles are not to the righteous signs of God's anger,but of his love ; they are the trials of faith and patience, to perfect us inthe fear and love of God, and are therefore good for the righteous.But I will not venture to particularise any of his troubles, lest, fromthis cause also, I should render myself unable to pay the remainder ofthis poor tribute of respect to the memory of my departed and highlyvalued Patron. On this head it will be sufficient to observe, that, Iknow, he bore his trials like a CHRISTIAN ; and that he had troubles,which nothing but a religiously instructed mind, and a heart exercisedin daily devotion to God, could have enabled him to endure. The thingswhich have been already brought before you, Brethren, are enough toendear the memory of THE DEPARTED to us all, and to call such MEMORYBLESSED. How worthy then is he of our imitation in all these particularsof his duty to his fellow-creatures ! As far as it may be in ourpower, let us be careful to follow his example.Let us now proceed to consider that example as regards our dutytowards God. Constant in the use of Private Prayer, family Worship,and of Public Worship, as far as health and other circumstances wouldpermit ; constant also in the practice of daily readings of the Scriptures,and a never-failing guest at the Lord's table, to remember his love inClul.~] ROXBURGHIANA. 457have merged into sympathy, and ceremony beenforgotten in sorrow.dying for the sins of the whole world : In all these things he is ourexample indeed, and in all these respects we may each follow that exampleto the fullest extent. With regard to the last mentioned dutyto God and our Saviour, Christ, never shall I forget never will theywho had the happiness to be present at the same time, forget his LASTAPPEARANCE amongst us at that heavenly feast. It was a pleasingand a painful sight painful on account of the difficulty with wlu'ch heperformed this duty, and pleasing to see one so resolved to do it notwithstandingthat difficulty. Yes, Brethren, it was an edifying sight tosee one, struggling with age and infirmity, and scarcely able with theassistance of two attendants to reach the spot where he desired oncemore to bend his feeble knees in humble adoration of the Lord of allLords, and to receive the consecrated elements of bread and wine, aspledges of that Lord's love, and in remembrance of his death, to his owngreat and endless comfort. This happened only just three weeks beforehe was called by the same Lord to sit down at his table with ' the spiritsof just men made perfect,' in the kingdom of heaven. Surely, if anybeliever in the Lord could make excuse for absence from his table withoutoffence, he could have done so under these circumstances, especiallywhen we consider that from youth to age, he lived in the habit of beingpresent at it ; but age and infirmity could not keep him back. I beseechyou, Brethren, then to consider how their conduct must appear bythe side of this, who from youth to age neglect this ordinance of theLord without even the shadow of an excuse for such offensive behaviour.But what are all his duties, however regularly performed, both toGod and man what are his unceasing prayers and alms unless offeredup, not only in the faith of Christ, but in the spirit of Christ? Theyare nothing ; for ' if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is noneof his.' Now this spirit was manifest in everything which the departedsaid and did, and became more and more visible continually. It is thiswhich endears his memory to us more than all the rest, and makes ittruly blessed. And what is the Spirit of Christ? It is unfeigned loveof one another, springing from the fear and love of God. In cultivatingthis spirit, we may all follow his example ; and if we have nothingto give, we can love, and desire to give we can sympathize with ourbrethren in their troubles, and so comfort and refresh a sufferer, whennothing else can when silver and gold, if he had the world full of it,would be of no avail. This Christian spirit made him regard ALL with458 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburgh?The death of our venerable President may be saidto have caused a two-fold vacancy in our Club : theequal love, however they might differ from him in opinion, in matterseither of Church or State. Conscientiously and firmly attached to thatform of Christ's religion established in this kingdom, he neverthelessviewed with respect and esteem some of the many different communionsof Christians who dissent from us ; and where he could not esteem, hewould pity and compassionate. He felt that the Christian religion,under any form, however fanciful and scrupulous, was incalculablybetter than no Christian religion at all ; and though he could not respectthe scruples and fancies of some religionists, he could and didrespect their consciences, when a quiet and peaceable life was the result.He felt that opposition was not consistent with the spirit of meeknessand brotherly love enjoined by the GOSPEL. He knew that when it hasbeen resorted to, it has always made matters worse, and can never promotethat unity among Christians which should be their desire and theiraim, and which is so strongly insisted upon by our Lord and hisApostles. If, therefore, any one denomination of Dissenters opposedthemselves to any other, or to the Established Church, his respect forthat denomination would cease ; because the Spirit of Christ was evidentlyin that case gone from it, however correct their faith, and howevercorrect their lives might be in other respects.The CHURCH, then, brethren, cannot help being satisfied with SUCHA MEMBER AS THIS. And if a strong mind, highly cultivated by allmanner of useful learning, well versed in the Bible, and daily exercisedin devotion to God, is to be no guide to the consciences of others inmatters of religion, it should at least cause all manner of persons torespect a church which can boast such members as these; and, if anystill feel themselves bound in their consciences, notwithstanding suchexamples, to differ and to separate, to do so with modesty and regret,with humbleness of mind and charity such charity towards the church,as the church and all good men in it feel towards them : and such,moreover, as HE had in an eminent degree, whose departure from us wedo, with so much reason, lament.But he is gone to join the company of those, who, since the worldbegan, have departed this life before him in the faith and fear of God.Let us prepare to follow him, for we know not how soon we may becalled upon to give up our accounts to the great Judge of quick anddead," &c. &c. &c.The church of Brington was thronged to excess on the memorableClub'] ROXBURGIIIANA. 459one, to be filled up by the election of another Presidentthe other, by the election of another Member.The choice of the former fell upon Viscount Clive, ofwhom it is but justice to say, that he had previouslyconsulted the present Earl Spencer and the Duke ofDevonshire, in regard to what might be their wishesor feelings as successors of the late Earl. The newMember was the DUKE OF BUCCLEUGH AND QUEENS-bury,a young nobleman most especially qualified byhis love of Large Paper Hearnes*, and of Greek andday of the delivery of this discourse. The deepest silence, disturbedonly by the sobs of those upon whose hearts these truths fell with a resistlessforce, attended its delivery ; while the preacher seemed through thewhole to be sustained by a peculiar energy. It must be admitted, Ithink, that few Discourses for the occasion, and for the congregation ofa village church, could have been more judiciously and more effectivelycomposed. Of ALL the baronial bodies which sleep beneath themonumental marbles at Brington, there is NOT ONE that merits aMORE SPLENDID CENOTAPH than that which has been recently entombedthere.The Duke of Buccleugh is now the possessor of the magnificentset of HEABNE's PUBLICATIONS, printed upon large paper, and bound inred morocco, which had once been Dr. Mead's, and was purchased athis sale, by an ancestor of German, for some fifty guineas. It continuedat the Hague, with German's library, till the sale of the latterin 1822, when it was purchased by some London booksellers for 200/.Mr. Pickering obtained possession of it, and sold it to Mr. Hanrott for500/. At the sale of Mr. Hanrott's library in 1833, this set was purchasedby the Duke of Roxburghee for 400/. Works and volumes likethese are the very buttresses which adorn while they prop up the noblestcollections. With all his whimsicalities, bitter and foolish prejudices,and arrant-mad credulity, it will be long before we look upon such aman as TOM HEABNE again. In the Bibliomania and Library Companionmay be seen perhaps more than enough about him. The RE-LIQUID HEARNIANJE of my friend Dr. Bliss have vanished like themorning dew. Wherefore ?460 ROXBURGHIANA. [RoxburgheeRoman Classics in their most towering forms, to doample justice to the election. I calculate upon theClub's receiving from His Grace a rich and rarebook-contribution ; he being now in all respects aRoxburgh having become the purchaser of Mr.Heberr's set of our GARLAND. And more his contributionof the Chartulary of Morose to the Club, may be considered only as a forerunnerof a yet greater achievement in regard to ourselves.And here I close these Roxburghiana in respectto the Club which has induced me to adoptthat title . . . adding, by way of corollary, an account1. Of the Publications of the Club forming whatI choose to designate as the Roxburgh GARLAND.2. Of the Brother Clubs, or Book Fraternities,which have sprung up from our own and whichmay therefore be called GRAFTS.I cannot however look back upon the last hundredpages of these Reminiscences, without perceivingmyself unconsciously, as it were, to have performedthe part of a Geologist in the obituary detailswith which these "ANA" abound. How soon, orhow late it may be, before the whole of the presentexisting Members may be gathered to those whohave preceded them, it belongs not to finite intelligenceto pronounce ; but that the period of tarryingamong them, with ONE, who is advancing byswift strides towards what is called the grand climactericof existence, cannot be very considerablyGarland'] ROXBUUGII1ANA. 461protracted, may be pronounced as sufficiently certain.In the mean time, let it be as it is some consolationto that " ONE," to have stepped forward, unsolicitedand untired, in the achievement of a Recordwhich can never be displeasing to the man ofliterature and taste : which makes known an associationof gentlemen united by one common tie of book-ardourin other words, of the Bibliomania* forthe diffusion of at least interesting intelligence.That it has hitherto not held its meetings in vain,is palpable enough from what immediately follows ;and that it may accomplish yet higher and moredesirable objects, is the fixed conviction of Him bywhom this Record has been executed.Some idea may be formed of the BOOK WEALTH of a few of theMembers of the Roxburghee Club when the Libraries of only Jive of themproduced the sum of upwards of 100,0001. : as thusMr. Heberr's (not completed) . 34,366Mr. Hibbert's 21,700Sir M. M. Sykes's 18,700Mr. Dent's 15,000Duke of Marlborough's . . . 14,482104,248The residue of Mr. Heberr's library may produce 10,0007. ; althoughI speak from little better than vague conjecture. Now, to the foregoing,add the supposed value of the Libraries of EARL SPENCER and theDUKE OF DEVONSHIRE alone, and you may then safely add (as I shouldconceive) TWICE THE ABOVE AMOUNT. It would be difficult throughoutEurope to find three times seven individuals (the foregoing numberbeing only seven) whose united book-property would produce thesum of a THIRD of a MILLION STERLING.462 ROXBURGHIANA. \ Roxburgh1. The Roxburgh GARLAND ; or List of Booksprinted for private distribution by the Members ofthe Roxburghee Club.Author, VISCOUNT. Interlude of the World and theChild (Munus et Infant). From a unique copy printedby Wynkyn de Worde. Reprinted 1817, 4to. Thirtycopies : one upon vellum.BENTHAM, WILLIAM. Ceremonial at the Marriage ofMary Queen of Scots with the Dauphin of France. Fromthe Original (1557, 4to.) in the British Museum. 1818,4to. Forty copies printed.Holland, Mr. BARON. Certain Bones of Virgil's.ZEnaeis [only the second book] by the Earl of Surrey.1814, 4to. Sixty copies. See page 379, ante.BOSWELL, JAMES. Poems by Richard Cornfield : includingRemarks by the late Edmund Malone. 1816, 4to.Thirty-four copies.JAMES. A Roxburghee Garland. 1817, 12mo.See pp. 389, 390.Bridges, SIR S. E. BART. Hawthorne Revived; orSelect Specimens of a Forgotten Poet. 1817, 4to.A beautiful volume, printed at the Lee Priory Press.SIR S. E. BART. Lselii Peregrine Oratio inobitum Torquatus Tasso. . Edit. Sec. Hurd. Allow. [Geneva]1822, 4to. Second Contribution.BUTLER, Even. ARCHDEACON. Sidneiana: being a collectionof some very scarce, and in some instances uniqueTracts, relative to SIR PHILIP SIDNEY. This contributionis now in the course of being printed. Sir Philip Sidneywas educated at Shrewsbury School, of which Dr. Butler isthe Head Master.CARR, Rev. WILLIAM Howell. Astoria NovellamenteRitrovata di Due Nobile Amant da Lurgi Post. Theoriginal of Shakspeare's Romeo and Juliet. 1817, 4to.Garland.] ROXBURGHIANA. 4G:3CARLISLE, EARL OF An elegiacal Poem on the Deathof Thomas Lord Grey of Wilton, by Robert Marston.From a MS. in the library of the Right Hon. ThomasGrenville. 1822, 4to. Thirty-six copies printed.CAWDOR, EARL. The Ancient English Romance ofWilliam and the Wer Wolf. From a MS. in the libraryof King's College, Cambridge, of the fourteenth century,by one of the Earls of Hereford. Edited by Sir F. Madden.See page 409, ante. Fifty-three copies printed.CLIVE, VISCOUNT. Metrical Lives of the Saints. By aMonk of Clare, in Suffolk. From a MS. in the BritishMuseum. Written in 1443. 1835, 4to. Fifty-five copies :and two upon vellum.DENT, JOHN. Solemnities and Triumphes toon andmade at the Spouses and Marriage of the King's Daughter,the Lady Mary, to the Prince of Castile, Archduke ofOutrage. 1818, 4to. From a unique Tract in the BritishMuseum. Thirty-six copies : and one upon vellum. SeetheArchaeology, vol. xviii. ; with observations by Sir HenryEllis.DEVONSHIRE, DUKE OF. The Life of St. Ursula. Guiscardand Sigismund. 1818, 4to. From two exceedinglyrare pieces of early English poetry, printed by Wynkyn deWorde. In the library of His Grace. Thirty-two copies :two upon vellum.DIBDIN, THOMAS FROGNALL, V. P. The Complaint ofa Lover's Life. Controversy between a Lover and a Jay.1818, 4to. Thirty copies: and one upon vellum.DODD, REV. JAMES WILLIAM. The Funerals of KingEdward the Sixt. 1566. Reprinted 1817, 4to. Fortycopies.DRURY, REV. HENRY. The Metrical Life of St. Robertof Knaresborough. 1824, 4to. From a MS. formerly in thelibrary of the Rev. Mr. Drury, but now in that of the Dukeof Newcastle. It was superintended by the late Mr. HastesROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghwood, and has received some annotations by the late Mr.Douce. St. Robert (or Robert Flower) was son of theMayor of York, and lived as a hermit in his cell at Snaresin the time of King John. Thirty-Jive copiesprinted ; of which the extra four are now placed in publiclibraries.DRURY REV. HENRY. Cock Lovell's Boat. A Fragmentfrom the original in the British Museum (Garrick'sCollection) : considered to be unique. Thirty-four copies :two upon vellum.Feeling, SIR FRANCIS, BART. Blarney's Primrose.1606, 44to. Reprinted 1816, 44to. From the original rarevolume in Sir Francis's Collection. Thirty-three copies.GEORGE HENRY. News from Scotland.159J, 44to. Reprinted 1816, 44to. Thirty-six copies: oneupon vellum. Mr. Martin, in his somewhat particular accountof this book, which is devoted to the "DamnableLife of Dr. Finn," notices an allusion to this unhappyman's fate (by having undergone the punishment of " theBoot") in Sir Walter Scott's Demonology and Old Mortality.He might have referred us to a wood-cut representationof this horrible torture given in Mr. Douce's Illustrationsof Shakspeare.GEORGE HENRY. La Countenance de laTable. 1816, 12mo. Thirty-six copies: one upon vellum.This was not a regular Roxburgh if I may so designateit. See a mirthful history relating to it, in the Biblio-graphical Cameron, vol. iii. p. 73; and a spiteful noticeof it, irrelevantly introduced, in a number of the QuarterlyReview for 1825.GEORGE HENRY. Information for Pyl-grimes unto the Holy Lone. From a rare tract in thelibrary of the Faculty of Advocates at Edinburgh. 1824,4to. Tliirty-Jwe copies printed. Second Contribution.GOWER, EARL, now DUKE of SUTHERLAND. Balades.and other Poems, by John Gower. Printed from theGarland'] ROXBURGHIANA. 465Original MS. in the library of the Duke of Sutherland atBentham, in Staffordshire. 1818. 4to. The OriginalBook was presented by Gower the Poet, about the year1400, to Henry IV., and came into the library of theDuke from having been presented by Lord Fairfax, one ofCromwell's Generals, to his friend and kinsman. Sir ThomasGower, Kent. and Bart., in the year 1656. These ballads,in the French language, are here printed for the first time.GRENVILLE, HON. AND REV. NEVILLE. GaufridiArthur Monemuthensis Archdeacon postea vero EpiscopiAmanuensis, De Vita et Vaticiniis Merlin Caledonia CarmenHeroic. From a MS. in the British Museum. Seepage410, ante. Forty-four copies were printed, of whichthre were upon vellum.HASLEWOOD, JOSEPH. Two Interludes; Jack Jugglerand Thersites. From a unique copy of each Interlude.1820, 4to.Hatred, REV. EDWARD CRAVEN, D. D. The PrivateDiary of William, first Earl Cowper, Lord Chancellorof England [Supplementary Notes to follow.] See page412, ante. Fifty copies printed.Hebe, RICHARD. Caltha Poetarum, or the BumbleBee, by T. Cus4tode, Esq. 1815, 4to. Thirty-two copies.A singular history attaches both to this Original and to its reprint.According to Ritson, the Original " was staid at the press by order ofthe Archbishop of Canterbury and Bishop of London ; and such copiesas could be found, or were already taken, were to be presently broughtto the Bishop of London to be burnt." The cause of the above reprintwas this. A bet was laid (the winner of the bet to give the RoxburgheeClub a dinner) between Sir M. M. Sykes and Mr. Dent, whether theAnniversary Meeting of 1815 were the third or fourth of the Club? Mr.Dent was the loser ; when Mr. Heberr promised to present the Club witha reprint of the above poem at the extra dinner in contemplation. Onlynine days intervened ; but within that period the reprint was transcribed,superintended at the press by Mr. Castlewood (without a single error),bound by Charles Lewis, and presented to the Members on sitting downto dinner. Mr. Castlewood was reported to have walked in his sleep, witha pen in his hand, during the whole period of its preparation.H H466 ROXBURGHIANA. [RoxburghThe original, 1599, 4to., from which this is printed, isnow in the Collection of Sir F. Freeling, Bart.*Herbert, GEORGE. Six Books of Metamorphoses,in which ben contemned the Fables of Ovyde. Translatedout of Frensshe into Englysshe, by William Caxton.From a Manuscript in the Persian Library at Cambridge.With a fac-simile of the original text, and a woodcutrepresenting Orpheus. 1819, 4to. A curious and splendiddonation to the Roxburghee Club*. About forty copieswere printed, of which two were upon vellum.Iste, GEORGE. The New Notborune May. TheBoke of May Emlyn. From copies in the collection ofthe late Thomas Caldecott, Esq. 1820, 4to. Thirty-eightcopies : one upon vellum.LANG, ROBERT. Le Livre du Falcon. A reprint ofan exceedingly scarce tract in the black letter, printed byGerard without date, from a copy in Mr. Lang's ownlibrary. See p. 403, ante.LITTLEDALE, MR. JUSTICE. Magnificence, an years have now elapsed since a notice of the veryextraordinary ORIGINAL of the above printed volume was given by mechiefly through the kind intervention of the present Bishop of Peterboroughto the public, in the first volume of my Typographical Antiquitiesof Great Britain, p. 83, together with a fac-simile of itsinscription. It is a little singular, that this should not only be the onlyMS. with which I am acquainted, incorporating the name of Caxtonas " Translator and Finisher," but the only presumed performance ofthat venerable Printer of which no printed copy is known. HowCasimir Odin, in his Commentary upon the Ancient Writers of theChurch, got intelligence of its existence, in any shape, is to me somewhatsurprising. At the close of this account I had said thus : " Icannot dismiss this curious article without indulging the hope that thelabours of some more successful bibliographer may bring a printed copyof the book to light ; none of the kind has hitherto, I believe, been seenor heard of." Little could I have anticipated, at the period of makingthis remark, of the treat afforded to all lovers of curious literature bythe publication of Mr. Hibbert to which I must again have recoursein the ensuing pages.Garland.] ROXBUROHIANA. 467lucre. By John Skelton, Poet Laureat to Henry VIII.(1553.) From a copy in the British Museum, and anotherin the University Library at Cambridge. 1821, 4to. Fiftycopies printed.LITTLEDALE, EDWARD. Diana, or The excellent Con-deceitfulSonnets of H. C. [Harry Constable.] 1818, 4to.Fifty copies.LLOYD, JOHN ARTHUR. The Cuck-Queanes, andCuckolds Errants. The Faery Pastoral, or Forest ofElves. From a MS. in the Library of the late Mr.Castlewood, which had been previously in that of the Dukeof Roxburghee *. See page 397, ante. Thirty-seven copiesprinted ; one upon vellum.Maryland, JAMES HEYWOOD. Chester Mysteries, DeDelusion Noe. De Occasion Innocently. With a frontispiecerepresenting the Abbey Gate of Chester, drawn byTwins, and engraved by Robinson ; a beautiful specimen ofunited graphical elegance. Fifty-three copies, and threeupon large paper. 1818, 4to. The introduction 4to thiswork upon our earliest dramas, and which does so muchcredit to Mr. Markland, was reprinted in Mr. Boswell'sedition of Malone's Shakspeare.MARLBOROUGH, DUKE OF. Selections from the Worksof Thomas Ravenscroft, a Musical Composer of the timeof King James I. 1822, 4to.PHELPS, JOHN DELAFIELD. The Glutton's Feaver, byThomas Bancroft. 1633, 44to. Reprinted, 1817, 44to.PONTON, THOMAS. Le Morte Arthur. The Adventuresof Sir Launcelot du Lake. 1819, 4to. First printedfrom a MS. in the Harleian Library ; with a fac-simile ofthe original text by Mr. R. Thomson, by whom the workwas superintended at the press. Thirty-one copies printed.Roxburgh CLUB. Printed at the Joint Charges of.Havelock the Dane. 1828, 4to. Sixty-two copies printed ;of which Earl Spencer purchased six. Intrinsically con-thismanuscript was sold at the sale of Mr. Castlewood's libraryfor 12/. 12*.HH 2 '468 ROXBURGHIANA. [Eoxlurgheordered, this is perhaps the most valuable, as well as curious,volume among those of which the Roxburgh GARLANDis composed. A whisper is abroad, that, with permission ofthe Club, and of Earl Candor, it is the intention of SirFrederick Madden, the able editor of this work and of theWerwolf, to reprint them, with notes-and an index, in anoctavo form, as a companion to his forthcoming edition ofthe Brut of Wace a rare treat for the lovers of early Englishromance and history.SCOTT, SIR WALTER, BART. Proceedings in the CourtMartial held upon John Master, of Sinclair, &c. (Seepage402, ante.) 1828, 4to. Fifty-two copies printed.SPENCER, EARL, K. G. PR. The First Three Books ofOvid de Tristibus, by Thomas Churchyard. 1535, 4to.Reprinted, 1816, 4to. Thirty-six copies ; one upon vellum.From the Original in the Library at Al thorp, and theonly copy (which had been Farmer's) hitherto known.EARL, K. G. PR. La Cotta di Franchisea Terroana Novarnente facta. La Cotta di Scores. Reprintedfrom two rare Italian poems on the battles ofTerrovane and Flodden Field. 1825, 4to. Forty copiesprinted. Second Contribution.SYKES, SIR MARK Waterman, BART. The Chorleand the Birds. First printed by Caxton, and afterwardsby Wynken de Worde. Reprinted in 1817, 4to.SIR MARK Waterman, BART. The Hors,the Shape, and the Ghoos. From the presses of Caxtonand Wynken de Worde. Of excessive rarity. 1822, 4to.Second Contribution. Thirty-five copies.TAYLOR, GEORGE WATSON. Poems written in English,by Charles Duke of Orleans, during his captivity in Englandafter the Battle of Agincourt. From a MS. in theBritish Museum, and printed for the first time. 1827, 4to.Forty-four copies printed, of which four were upon vellum.Of these vellum copies, one, splendidly bound in morocco,was destined for Charles X. late King of France ; a secondis in the library of Earl Spencer; a third in the BritishROXBUROHIANA.Museum ; and the fourth, in the possession of the Contributor.A curious, singular, and most acceptable volume.Townley, PEREGRINE. Judicium, a Pageant. Fromthe 4towneley MS. of Ancient Mysteries. 1 822, 4to. Thepreface was written by the late Mr. Douce. Fifty copiesprinted.Utters, EDWARD VERNON. Chevelere Assigne. Froma MS. in the Cotton Collection in the British Museum.[18*20] 4to. Fifty copies printed.WILBRAHAM, ROGER. Diaphanous, or the Passions ofLove. By An4tony Scoloker. (1604.) 1818, 4to. Seepage408, ante.WRANGHAM, ARCHDEACON FRANCIS. The Garden Plot.An Allegorical Poem, inscribed to Queen Elizabeth byHenry Gillingham. From a MS. in the British Museum.With a Reprint of the Author's Masque performed beforethe Queen at Norwich in 1598. 1825. 4to. See page 396ante. Thirty-nine copies printed.%* It ought to have been observed that, of the copiesprinted upon vellum, ONE was always reserved for our President,.Such are the Flowers of which I consider theRoxburgh GARLAND to be composed. Theseflowers doubtless vary both in colour and in quality ;and the Garland is as doubtless more picturesque inconsequence.But considering these Forty-fourvolumes as the production of a society of noblemenand gentlemen of only twenty-three years standing,put forth without the slightest probability of anyprofit but that of the satisfaction arising from addingto the Archaeological Curiosities of their country,they ought to stand well in the estimation of allhonourable minds. Whatever may be the ultimate470 EOXBURGHIANA. \ EcylurgUesway" of fashion, the Roxburgh CLUB if it restonly upon its present oars of distinction will havedeserved well of the Republic of Literature. Thereare yet a few volumes in arrear and there is yet astrong feeling among several Members to redeem, hya second contribution, the comparative inferiority ofthe first ; but after every Member has contributedhis quota, I adhere to the opinion expressed in aprevious page, that it will be better to contribute ourrespective quotas to the supply of some such otherperformance as that of Havelock. It will be observed,from the foregoing list, that during one year,1818, not fewer than six volumes were contributed.Well might the guests at that annual symposium takelittle heed of the amount of the bill of fare, when suchtreasures were to be borne away to their homes * !I am now to make brief mention of what I chooseto consider as Grafts from the Parent Stock ; orother BOOK-SOCIETIES formed upon the plan of ourThe symposium in question took place at the Albion Tavern, inAldersgate-street, during my absence on the Continent, on the day onwhich I gave a sort of brother-festival, or banquet, to eight distinguishedliterati at Paris ; the whole of the expenses of which were considerablybeneath the charge for one guest at the Albion festival. Thereader may remember. my notice of this piece of naughty extravagancein the second volume of the Tour ; little supposing that the proceedingsof that day, together with the items and charges of the dinner,were to be dragged to public view in the pages of a weekly journal, andafterwards in those of a newspaper. Poor Castlewood (whose skin, likethat of John Ziska, is doomed to make more noise after death thanduring life) with his incautious " Revelry" or rather the utterly incomprehensibleconduct of his executors has been the source of suchunwarrantable exposure : although I have heard the deceased, more thanonce, say, that " for such a bumper of BOOKS he would cheerfully havepaid double the costs of the bumpers of WINE."ROXBUR011IANA. 471own. And first in chronological order, if not inintrinsic importance of THE BANNATYNE CLUB. Itwill be seen from a previous page (399), that in aletter addressed to me by the late Sir Walter Scott,this Club was then (1822) in contemplation on theplan of our own. Sir Walter became the first President.On his decease, Thomas Thomson, Esq.,before Vice-president, succeeded to the presidingchair. A fitter selection could not have been made.Mr. Thomson is a zealous and learned antiquaryin matters relating to law as well as to manners andcustoms : to constitutional history, as well as todusty records ; and is alive, at all times, to the bestinterests of civil and religious liberty. A crumblingarch or a decayed charter is equally interesting tohis feelings ; and the song or the speech of otherdays, warmed by patriotism, or pointed by wit, issure to meet at his hands with a ready and graciousreception. Many years have passed away since wemet at the truly hospitable table of the great CaledonianHistorian, the late GEORGE CHALMERS . ofwhom in a future page. Our conversation at thatmeeting cannot be easily forgotten.." manet alta mente repostum"To Return to the Bannatyne Club. It derives itsname from one GEORGE BANNATYNE, a worthy wightor gentleman, born about the middle of the sixteenthcentury, of whom, in fact, we know nothing. Itshould seem that, in his youth, this George BannsROXBURGHIANA. \ Roxluryhetyne led a sedentary and secluded life. Indeed, Ifeel persuaded that he was in possession of some intellectualreservoir which received the precious depositof past wit and bygone genius, through afiltering process of which no particulars have survived.Equally persuaded I am that he was in thehabit of receiving, in early youth, certain victoriaperchance odd heads and tails of rhyming balladsfrom some hoary headed sage who had been a carouserat the " merrier court" of James V. of Scotland.Bannatyne, in fact, appears to have done forthe poetry of his age, what the unknown transcriberand compiler did for that of a later age, in the manuscriptconsulted by the Bishop of Promote for hisReliques of Ancient English Poetry * . He filled 800folio pages with transcripts of Scottish poetry, duringthe sixteenth century. Some few of these transcriptshave the value of originals, as their prototypes havenever been found. Others are copies of what wereconsidered to be exceedingly scarce pieces. Thewhole appears to have been carefully and neatlytranscribed by Bannatyne for the purpose of publication.This truly precious NATIONAL RELIC, in twovolumes, is now inlaid and splendidly bound in morocco,and deposited in the library of the Faculty ofA very particular account of this curious manuscript, together withfac-similes of its scription, may be seen in the third volume of theBibliographical Cameron; while in a preceding page (369) a hint isthrown out that the manuscript may be yet made more substantiallyserviceable to the interests of OLD SONG by a more copious selection ofits contents.Grafts.] ROXBUROH1ANA. 473Advocates at Edinburgh *. That Library is tbc firstshrine at which I should kneel, if fate ever carriedme to that most interesting capital. My friend DavidLaing, Esq., the erudite and able secretary, would,I feel persuaded, help me up in case I fell or wastaken with too long a swooning fit of deliriousrapture.I must refer the reader to the copious and instructivepages of Mr. Martin t for an account ofall the publications of this most respectable Graft,or Brother Club. The number of impressions ofwhatsoever they print is limited to one hundred andthirty-six. The subjects chosen for publication areusually well chosen, from their being generally interesting.In diligence the Bannatyners have faroutstripped 'the Roxburghers / for, considering theirstanding only about a dozen years they have alreadyequalled the latter in the number of publications.This Fraternity is at present in high repute.All classes of society are incorporated as members ;and each member pays a contribution of five guineasper annum. High and gallant names glitter in theirmuster-roll ; and he who would enter the lists withThe whole of the first volume, in two parts, and the first part ofthe second volume, have been already published by the Club, under theeditorial care of Mr. Laing, the secretary.t Pages 358378 : with a beautiful wood-cut of the assumed arms ofthe Club. But of all the beautiful wood-cuts with which this beautifulvolume abounds, not one reaches the lovely heraldic vignette by way ofprefix to the books printed at Newcastle upon-Tyne. On large paper,the effect is dazzling. I rejoice to see the name of Byfield as that ofthe artist by whom it was engraved.474 ROXBURGHIANA. \ Roxburgha view of being a candidate, ought to look well tohis Glass especially if he be a Sexagenarian lestincreasing inroads upon the surface of the cuticlewarn him that, at the probable period of his election,he may be. . . sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans every thing."I now come, in the order of narrative, to noticeanother vigorous shoot, or promising Graft, from theparent Roxburghee Stem in the formation of theMAITLAND CLUB. But before I send my readersto the copious and instructive pages of Mr. Martin,whose book is a sine qud non in every collection ofelegant literature, I must be permitted to detailthe origin and progress of this Book-club in thelanguage of its efficient Vice-president, John Kerr,Esq., of Glasgow; from whom I received the followingaccount in a letter of the date of Nov. 16, 1829 ;and by which it will appear that SCOTLAND hascaught the blaze of antiquarian lore kindled by thetorch of the ROXBURGHERS.15, Blythsward Place, Glasgow,16th Nov. 1829.MY DEAR SIR,I think it will be gratifying to you to know, if you arenot already informed, that upwards of eighteen months agoa Club was formed here, on the model of the Roxburgheeand Bannatyne Clubs, for printing works illustrative of theHistory, Literature, and Antiquities of SCOTLAND. As oneof the founders of the Club, the members did me the honourof electing me their Vice-president; and in that capacity Ihave one copy of their first work at my disposal, of whichGrafts'] ROXBUROHIANA. 475I request your acceptance. You will find it chiefly thecomposition of Sir RICHARD MAITLAND*, whose name wechose for our Club, and whose MSS., therefore, became afitting object of our first use of types. I trust the volume(at least in its external appearance) will please you. Onehundred copies were thrown off for the Bannatyne Club, ontheir own paper, and another hundred were thrown off forthe Maitland Club. Of the last, fifty copies were distributedamong the members ; one was retained for the Club library;thirty were laid aside in the event of an increase of membersbeing resolved upon at a future period ; and of the remainingnineteen, four were presented to Mr. C. K. Sharpe,(who presented the Club with two of the three plates whichillustrate the volume), for the Marchioness of Stafford, himself,and two other friends. One was given to each of theVice Presidents and Secretary of the Bannatyne Club, andanother Edinburgh gentleman for services rendered. Onewas given to the Earl of Eglintoun, the descendant of theSeton family ; six were allotted to the Editor, Mr. Fullerton; one is now presented to you ; and four still remain inthe possession of the Club. That I may not tire you withIt is entitled " the HISTORY of the HOUSE OF Seton, to the year1559. By Sir Richard Maitland of Lexington, Knight. With theContinuation by Alexander, Viscount Kingston, to 1687. Glass. 1829,4to. This Richard Maitland was born at the end of the fifteenth century,and is the parent stem of the noble house of L Alder ALE. He wasan active, inquisitive, and industrious man ; and seems to have stoodalone, in the very interesting period in which he lived, in collectingliterary, and especially POETICAL, RELICS. His daughter, about themiddle of the sixteenth century, was his amanuensis in copying out hisCollections of the early Scottish Poets now in the Persian library atCambridge. He was Keeper of the Privy Seal in the reign of QueenMary; and died in his ninetieth year in 1586. He was in Francewhen the unfortunate Mary Stuart was married to Francis II., thenDauphin : perhaps a spectator of the ceremony. I wish he had givenus his " REMINISCENCES." One might have parted with much antiquatedlore for SUCH a work.476 ROXBURGHIANA. [RoxburylieMaitland details, allow me to refer you to the regulations,of which you will find a copy sent herewith."For a minute list of the pieces or volumes alreadyput forth by this Rival Club, the reader must consultMr. Martin's seductive volume. Only six years appearto have elapsed since their incorporation, andtheir diligence has been amazing. Twenty-fourvolumes have already appeared \ and eight more areannounced by Mr. Martin as in preparation. Thegeneral object of these volumes is admirable ; andboth the Bannatyne and Maitland Clubs must beallowed to have outstripped our own, not less in therapid succession, than in the instructive complexion,of their publications. We have been too indolent orcareless. Where we have gathered a flower ', theyhave brought home a nosegay. But competition isthe very spur to excellence ; and our Havelock andWerwolf may always raise their heads without thefear of being overtopped.I now pass on to the notice of another graft fromour parent stem, planted in & foreign soil. 1 alludeto LA SOCIETE DES BIBLIOPHILES Francis, establishedat Paris about fifteen years ago, chieflythrough the influence and exertions of my friendsthe Marquis de Chateaugiron and Durant Deans; gentlemen, of the true bibliomanical breed;keenly alive to all the glories that encircle the venerableheads of Aldus, the Giunti, Planting, Elzevir,Barbour, Jonson, and Baskerville. The very mottoGrafts'] ROXBUHOHIANA. 477upon their banner shews of what proper materialsthe Bibliophiles are formed. They avow their objectto be " pour mourir, recover, et faire maitre mime lapassion de la BIBLIOM ANIE. Thus recalled to recollection,it is impossible for me ever to forget thewarm and generous manner in which the greaterportion of this PARIS-roxburgh CLUB feted ourvenerable President and myself at Paris, in the year1820. The respect of this Club for our late Presidentinduced them not only to elect him an HonoraryMember, but to offer his vacant seat to his Son,the present Earl ; an offer which was graciously andpromptly accepted. And here I must take leave tomake my best bow to the whole Corps BMiogra-politique of this Society for the honour conferred uponme also, in having elected me an Honorary Memberof the same : the more so, as the books which theypublish in a royal octavo form are very limitedin number, and of the most beautiful description inregard to paper and printing ; each volume having,in the title-page, an admirable wood-cut, in profile,of DE THOU, the ever-popular Collector of Franceunder every shifting and changing of book-fashion.In point of splendour, the three English Clubs mustdoff their bonnets in readily admitting the superiorityof the productions of the Bibliophiles francis.In some other respects that fraternity may alsoclaim a superiority. Their pieces are usually takenfrom manuscripts : but the question is, are thesemanuscripts, or the portions which they selectROXBURGHIANA.[RoxburgheeGrafts"] ROXBURGHIANA. 479from them, of importance? Doubtless they haveerred more than once or twice in their selections*.The literature of the ages of Louis XIV. and LouisXV. has been sucked to its very dregs. There isscarcely one more drop of its juice worth the suction.The Pompadour, the La Villiers, the Mon-trespass,and Maintenon together with the Voltairesand Diderot may now as well be left to,an undisturbed dormitory. It is even questionablewhether, of the enchanting Se* vigne*, one letter be nowleft deserving of publicity ? But of Iron let ushave no more : he has had his day and a long oneit has been. The wit of one age is not the wit ofanother. Rabelais is beginning to be loathed ; andno Englishman of a well-ordered mind can read asecond time the filth of Swift, or the equivoques ofSterne. It is SHAKSPEARE alone that lives for allages and all countries.But the French Bibliophiles have done very muchdeserving of the most unmixed commendation. Theyhave brought to renascence, as it were, many a curiousfragment in the shape of the drama, a morality,or a mystery. They have favoured us with old poetry,and with historical anecdotes, personal and local ;and now that they have set themselves resolutely toembark upon an ocean of black letter lore, we mayOn the OPPOSITE PAGE appears a fac-simile of six AUTOGRAPHS ofthe Members of the Club of the Bibliophiles Francis, who have doneme the honour to become Subscribers to these " Reminiscences." Fourof these Members, as will be seen, are of the French INSTITUTE. Thenames of all the Members of the Club in 1829, will be seen in thesecond edition of the Tour, vol. ii. p. 275.480 ROXBUROHIANA. \Uoxburglieexpect great things in the natural order of time*.They cannot be insensible how closely and intimatelyallied the destinies of BOTH COUNTRIES have been intimespast yea, are, in times present : and thatany narratives connected with their Louis XII.,Francis I., and Henri IV., must of necessity meetwith a ready sympathy among ourselves. And then,what STORES these enterprising French Bibliophileshave to resort to ! What a LIBRARY be it regal,national, or both immense, inexhaustible, and ofendless variety I Long may these rivalries continuebetween two such countries as England and France :between all countries ! Without the slightest tingeof an irreverent feeling, be it permitted me to indulgethe fond hope that spears may in due time beturned into printing presses, and swords into volumesof instruction ; and that a desire to developedthe literature of past ages, as a spur to that of thepresent, mayGrow with the growth, and strengthen with the strength"of ALL civilised countries, which have the "peaceand good will" of their fellow-creatures at heart.But it is time to draw the curtain upon theseROXBURGHIANA which have, I fear, been elongatedThey have now published six or seven volumes ; and on any publicsale of them, they unite vigorously in keeping them from the touch ofvulgar hands : and so scarce is the first volume become, that at a salein Paris, in 1829, a copy of it could not be procured under the sum of20/. sterling. See a list of the contents of these volumes in Brunet'sNouvelles Recherches.Grafts'] ROXBUROHIANA. 481to an unconscionable extent. If, however, they serveno other purpose than a demonstration of right andhonourable feeling towards the living and of respectand attachment towards the memories of thegreater number of the deceased Members of theClub, they will not have been penned in vain. Inwhatever way as the accidental Founder, and ananxious Vice-president, of this Association I mayhave been mixed up with its labours, it is neitheraffectation nor insincerity to avow, that such intermixturehas been productive of some of the mostpleasurable, and, I will hope, not unprofitable, momentsof my existence. Whatever be the ultimatedestiny of that Vice-president, he can have but onestraightforward and kind-hearted feeling for the prosperityof THE Roxburgh CLUB.1 1CHAPTER VIII.THE SPENCER LIBRARY.NOT all, that sit beneath a golden roof,In rooms of cedar, O RENOWNED LORD !Wise though they be, and put to highest proof,To the sweet Muses do their grace afford ;Which, if they did, the like would them accord,The mighty Poets to eternity,And their wise acts in living verse record,And build them up, great heirs of Memory ;Which else shall in oblivion fall and die.But THOU that like the Sun, with heav'nly beamsShining on all, dost cheer abundantlyThe learned heads, that drink Castilian streamsTranscendant Lord, accept this verse from me,Made for all time . . . but yet unfit for THEE."LORD THURLOW.IF the late LORD THURLOW, author of the abovemasculine sonnet " To the Right Honourable THEEARL SPENCER, Knight of the Most Noble Orderof the Garter " had not written one single verse inaddition, he should have been gladly and gratefullyincluded by me in the Corpus Poetarum AngliaIt is some fifteen years ago, as I seem tothink, that this very sonnet, incorporated with otherpieces of poetry, by the same noble hand*, andThe above sonnet is taken from Lord Throw's " Defence ofPoesy" p. 3. The noble author, who was the nephew of the first Lord,THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 483beautifully printed in a slender duodecimo volume,u as deposited by me as a sort of Christmas gift tothe noble owner, in the library at Althorp.But my design." I must now trespass upon theindulgence of the reader to go back with me sometwenty-three years ; namely,' from the date of thedemise of the above illustrious nobleman, to theyear 1811, when my more familiar intercourse withhim began, and when my first visit to Althorp tookplace. Ever since the publication of the first editionof the Introduction to the Classics, I had vehementlydesired an acquaintance with THE SPENCER Libraryin all its wonderful varieties ; and moreespecially with that portion of it then deposited atSpencer House, in St. James's Place. There couldbe no question of the most entire admiration on mypart for the character of the Owner being mixed upwith an attachment to his Book-Treasures. Thepages of the Bibliomania* bear decisive proofs ofwas passionately addicted to old books and to old English literature.Indeed, in many of his pieces he seems to have unnecessarily trammelledhimself with the style of our old Masters so as to have clogged hisfreedom of thought. Very many of his smaller poems were printedabroad; and very many are distinguished for delicacy of sentiment andpurity of diction. His " Althea" and his " Moonlight " the formeraddressed to his Wife, and the latter, descriptive of his uncle thefirst Lord Throw are perhaps among the best of his productions.t The lapse of twenty-four years has not tarnished one featureone lineament in the representation : and I envy not the pencils ofReynolds, Copley, Phillips, and Clint, in what the walls of Althorpdisplay in another department of portrait painting connected with thesame distinguished character. The whole passage is as follows.We raise the column to the hero who has fought our battles by seaI I 2484-MJ H SPENCER LIBRARY.this. Within a month of the publication of thatwork, I cast about me to accomplish a design ofpublishing an octavo volume of some 500 pagesunder the title of BOOK RARITIES which mightcontain a good descriptive " Catalogue of curious,rare, and valuable Books of an early date," in thelibraries of several eminent collectors, but chiefly inthat of Earl Spencer ; and it seemed to me thatsome Italian books, of great rarity and cost, stood inespecial need of a careful and elaborate description.or land, and we teach our children to look up with admiration and reverencetowards an object so well calculated to excite the best sympathiesof the human heart. All this is well : and may it never be neglected !But there are other characters not less noble, and of equal glory to agreat nation like our own ; and they are those, who, to the adventitioussplendour of hereditary rank, add all the worth and talent of a privatecondition, less exposed to temptation, and Suited to the cultivation ofpeaceful and literary pursuits. Such a character is GEORGE JOHN, EARL'SPENCER. A Nobleman, not less upright and weighty in the senate,than polished and amiable in private life : who v cool and respectedamidst the violence of party, has fii^.v" i .-, ;> of the most important officesof state, in a manner at one por;:Jai and effective; and who, to hisgeneral love of the fine arte* and acquaintance with classical literature,has superadded the nr/ble achievement of having collected the FINESTPRIVATE LIBRARY sin EUROPE. The reader has already met with sufficientmention of this collection, to justify what is here said in commendationof it In the deepest recess ef Althorp Park where thelarch arftl laurustinus throw their dark yet pleasing shade and where. . . " pinus ingens, absque populusUmbra hospitale consecrate amantRamis "let the Doric temple be raised, with its white marble columns, sacred tothe memory of this ILLUSTRIOUS NOBLEMAN! Let his bust, in basso-relievo,with appropriate embellishments, adorn the most conspicuouscompartment within : and peace and virtue, and filial affection, will, Iam sure, be the guardians of so cherished a spot ! " Edit. 1811, p. 702.SI'KNCER LIBRARY. 485With this view I wrote to His Lordship to allowme to introduce myself to some of his rarer Italianbooks imparting to him my design of instituting aclose examination into the Valdarfer Boccaccio of1471, then quietly reposing on the shelves of theRoxburghee Library. His Lordship observed inreply, that whenever I liked to call for the purposeof inspecting any of his books, Mr. Ocheda (hisLordship's Librarian) would with pleasure attendme. " If (continued he) you treat of the earlyNantes in your proposed work, you must not omitthe three editions printed in the year 1472, all ofwhich you may see here ; and all of which are extremelyrare. My Boccaccio without date, and theDuke of Roxburghee's, by Valdarfer, in 1471, are, Isuppose, the two to which you allude ; and an accuratedescription of them, taken from the looks themselves,will be a valuable Bibliographical document."Accordingly, I availed myself of this privilege ;and within a month from the date of His Lordship'sletter, had completed my brochure of thirty-fourprinted pages, entirely devoted, with two exceptions,to an account of the early printed Nantes and Petrarchat Spencer House. This brochure was entitledBook Rarities ; and its object is best unfoldedby a transcript of the brief and quaint " Address"prefixed to it*.It may be as well to prefix the title at length. Book Rarities* ; <>ra Descriptive Catalogue of some of the ino*t curious, rare, and valuable486 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.It was no sooner printed, than, as in duty bound,Books of early date, chiefly in the Collection of the Rt. Hon. GEORGEJOHN, EARL SPENCER, K. G., &c. &c. &c. Thirty-six copies only wereprinted. The title-page is followed by theADDRESS,THE preceding and subsequent pages will give my friends some generalidea of the work, a specimen of which is here presented to them.With the exception of the first and last articles, all the editions describedare in the library of the distinguished Nobleman whose name stands inthe opposite leaf.I have presumed to think that a volume of about 500 pages, devotedto a description of some of the rarest books of early typography,and of which no similar description has been yet published, may beconsidered an useful acquisition to the general stock of bibliographicalknowledge : especially if such a work be executed from actual inspectionof the volumes described. In the present instance this rule will be invariablyfollowed ; and I indulge the hope that the possessors of rareand precious books will have the kindness to permit me to add a descriptionof their treasures to those in the collections at Spencer House andat Althorp.The present work will be adorned with fac similes of ancient cuts,printers' devices, and other curious and beautiful ornaments ; whichrelieve the dryness of catalogue composition, delight the eye of thereader, and impress upon his memory a more durable idea of the booksdescribed. No pains, as this specimen evinces, will be spared in renderingthe typographical execution worthy of the celebrated press fromwhich it issues.Those who know the importance of describing rare and curiousworks with exactness, will not be offended with the minuteness of detaildiscoverable in the ensuing pages. Such have been my efforts to becorrect, that I am almost inclined to hold detection of errata at defiance;at least, those of my friends who discover my vulnerable parts, will domethe kindness of pointing them out to me, over a home-cooked beefsteak,lightly sprinkled with snow-white horse radish, and flanked withthe best lettuce my garden can bestow. More sumptuous fare mayeasily be procured ; but a more cordial reception shall no where be experienced.Kensington, Aug. 19, 1811. T. F. D.I now forget whether my " note of defiance" brought any combatantsTill: SPENCER LIBRARY. 487I sent one of the very earliest copies of it to theNoble Owner whose library had furnished me withsuch copious and accurate descriptions. Lord Spencer'simmediate reply to my letter was one of themost gratifying and interesting which I had everreceived : partly, of course, from personal considerations,and partly for the very curious intelligencewith which it concluded.Wimbledon Park, Oct. 6th, 1811.DEAR SIR,I RETURN you many thanks for the very beautifulspecimen you were so good as to send me with your letterof the 1st inst., of your intended work, which if continuedin the manner in which you have begun it, cannot fail tobe an acceptable acquisition to the curious in Bibliography.I have looked over it with great pleasure, and as far as aperusal without verifying by a comparison with the articlesdescribed, can enable me to pronounce, I think it appearsto be the best example of Bibliographical description Ihave ever seen. You do me great honour in annexing myname to it in the manner you have done ; and I beg youwill believe me when I assure you, that so far from needingwithin the arena; or how many "beefsteaks" were cooked to meet theself-invitations of critics and annotators ; hut it may be as well to observe,that the first article, the Valdarfer Boccaccio of 1471, was incorporatedinto the Supplement of the Bibliotheca Spenceriana, 1822, p.53, c. ; it having become the property of the Noble Earl by a somewhatsingular train of events briefly recorded at page 357, note. Inthis Supplement, the collation of the Valdarfer Boccaccio with that ofNeo Gratis and the Mantua edition of 1472, occupies not fewer thantwenty pages ; a perusal of which cannot fail to be interesting to thelearned in Italian Bibliography.488 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.any apology for so doing, I am much flattered with thecompliment you have paid me.I regret to hear that your health had suffered by yourapplication to study, but I hope your excursion into thecountry has re-established it. I shall be glad to have thetwo books you mention at the price assigned for them, andam much obliged to you for pointing them out, as well asfor sending me the thick paper RastelVs Chronicle*.I have had a great piece of black letter fortune withinthese few days, having added to my collection of Caxtonsthe three following, viz., the first edition of the Game ofChess, a perfect and very fine copy; the History of Jason,perfect and pretty good as to condition ; and the History ofReynard thefoxe, perfect and very fine. All acquired fromthe same quarter, and at the same time. I think you willallow this to have been a PROUD DAY for the library. Thebooks are in Herring's hands at present, to be new bound,but I hope you will call in St. James-place, and see themas soon as they come home.I remain, dear Sir,Yours truly,SPENCER."Of course I could not long debar myself from thetempting gratification of examining such Caxtoniantreasures, and within the same month of October IThis was a reprint of the very rare and curious book published byJOHN Russell, the Printer, under the title of The Pastyme of People:The Chronicles of Divers Realms and most specially of the Realme ofEngland, &c. 1529, folio, of which a long account appears in the Typog.Antic., vol. iii. p. 91-97. Fac-similes of the large, coarse cuts of theKings of England, were also given in the reprint of which I was theEditor. There were (to the best of my recollection) only six copiesupon fine or thick paper. See a curious anecdote about this book in theBilling. Cameron, vol. i. 205, note.THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 489held the three volumes in my arms ! They were,and are, most delectable copies of most rare impressions; and, as is now pretty generally known,were purchased, through the instrumentality of thelate Mr. Edwards, of the Dean and Chapter Libraryof Lincoln Cathedral. It was an immense stride tohave made in the Caxtonian arena; and had suchcopies of these books been sold in the RoxburgheeLibrary, a thousand guineas had been the least sumthey would have produced. Meanwhile, I continuedsedulously to enlarge my "Book Rarities" and onreporting my progress to His Lordship, he waspleased to observe, in a letter of the 3d November,1811, dated from Holkham, that "he was delightedto find that his Library had afforded me so muchoccupation and amusement ; and that he had nodoubt he should be much gratified in seeing the resultof my labours in it." The year 1812 was enteredupon, and I still continued in the fixed resolution tomake one volume of my work, under the title so frequentlymentioned. Mr. Buhner had printed theSPECIMEN in a style of surpassing beauty, and it wasbut fair that he should be consulted upon the Volume.His reply was as follows.Cleveland Row, Fast Day, Feb. 1812.DEAR SIR,I HAVE devoted an hour towards making a calculationof the probable expense of printing your BOOK RARITIES,490 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.and the following conclusions present themselves ; viz. supposingthe 8vo. volume to make 450 pages, thePrinting and hot-pressing 500 copies will be 168Dit4to, for 75 copies in 4to 51But you must " beware of steel traps and spring guns;" for,in the above calculation, there is no reservation made eitherfor alterations printing in red, Hue, or yellow or indeedany extra or fanciful propensity which a gentleman of fertilityof genius may be pleased to indulge in, by way ofbothering the poor printer. That you may have furtherdata to go upon, the paper for the 8vo. (supposing thequantity of pages above stated to be correct) will taketwenty-eight reams, and the seventy-five copies of the 4to.will require about nine reams.I am, dear Sir,Yours very truly,It should seem from Mr. Buhner's estimate, thatthe work in view was still to assume the name firstannounced ; or that, had it been otherwise, I had notimparted to him the altered title. I cannot, therefore,expressly say at what precise point of time itwas that I had finally determined to concentrate allmy researches within the Library of Earl Spencer,and to devote my intended work exclusively to thecomposition of a descriptive Catalogue of the breatheSPENCER LIBRARY. 491sures of that matchless collection. Certain it is,that within a month after the receipt of his Lordship'sletter, just laid before the reader, I was exceedinglybusied in the library at Spencer Houseamongst the theological books ; and received someinstructions from His Lordship as to the directionof my labours*. And not less certain it is, that,within little more than a month after the date ofMr. Buhner's estimate, it was finally determinedbetween the noble owner of the Library and myself,that the work should assume that title under whichit afterwards came forth before the world.Accordingly I was not long in making the publicIn a letter dated Althorp, Nov. 28, 1811, his lordship thus observes,When I see you, I must talk to you about another Bible which I have,but which, as the copy is imperfect, it is probable that Mr. Ocheda didnot show you ; but in a list of my ancient Bibles it ought not to bepassed over. It is in a larger Gothic character than that usually knownby the Mazarine Bible, and the same as was used by Albert Pfister ,at Bamberg. Another very curious book in my possession, containingthe histories of Joseph, Daniel, Esther, and Judith, with wooden cuts,printed in 1462. As this latter book is a sort of extract from the Bible,it might, without impropriety, be included in the class you are nowabout ; and when I return to town (if you have not already seen it), Ishall be happy to show it to you, together with the Letters of Indulgenceof Pope Nicholas F., and the Block Books."It is gratifying to be enabled to add, that, within a twelvemonthof the date of this letter, ALL these articles, added to many others,were described in print with a fidelity and minuteness aided bynumerous fac-similes such as the Public had not before seen, andforming the earlier portion of the first volume of my work. At thistime his Lordship's copy of the Pfister Bible was not complete ; but itwas afterwards perfected by means of a copy of the third volume inthe library of the present Earl of Liverpool, which had been graciouslyconceded, in exchange for some other book, with this view.492 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.announcement of it which will be found in the subjoinednote * ; and I devoted all my energies towardsThat announcement thus describes the nature of the work. " ThisWork is intended to be a Catalogue Raisonne of that portion of theEARL SPENCER'S Library which comprehends Books PRINTED IN THEFIFTEENTH CENTURY, and FIRST EDITIONS of many distinguished Authors.It will commence with an account of Books printed, fromWOODEN BLOCKS, about the middle of the fifteenth cen turn ; from whichmany extraordinary Specimens of Cuts will be given, as tending to illustratethe HISTORY OF ENGRAVING during the same period. Thisdivision will be followed by THEOLOGY : comprehending a list of someof the scarcest Latin, German, Italian, and Dutch BIBLES printed in thefifteenth century ; with notices of the first Editions of the Polyglottt,French, English, Polish, and Slavonic Bibles. These will be followedby an account of some celebrated PSALTERS, MISSALS, and Breviaries,executed within the same period. The INTERPRETERS OFSCRIPTURE, and many of THE FATHERS, will close the department of-Theology.CLASSICAL LITERATURE will succeed. The Authors will be arrangedalphabetically, from JEsop to Xenophon ; and the notices of rare andvaluable editions, in this most extensive and most valuable departmentof his Lordship's Library, will be found more copious and interesting,it is presumed, than any with which the reader is yet acquainted.MISCELLANEOUS LITERATURE, in the Latin Language, includingDidactic and Moral Works, Writers upon the CANON and CIVIL Law,HISTORIES, and CHRONICLERS of the MIDDLE Ages, will form thefourth division.ITALIAN BOOKS, including some remarkably scarce early-printedvolumes of Poetry, will compose the fifth division.ENGLISH BOOKS printed by CAXTON, WYNKYN DE WORDE, andPinson, as well as the ST. ALBANS BOOK of Hawking, Hunting, andCoat Armour (of which latter, the only known perfect copy is in thisCollection) will form the sixth and concluding department.Neither pains nor expense will be spared in the execution of theWork. It will be printed with a new type in the Elzevir-form, and in thebest manner, at the SHAKESPEARE PRESS, upon paper manufacturedpurposely for it ; and no difference will be made in the press-work, orquality of the ink and paper, between the Small and Large PaperCopies. In regard to the intrinsic value of these volumes, it is hopedTHE SPENCER LIBRARY. 493the execution of a plan, which, of its kind, seemedto me to be the most splendid and complete thathad yet been devised. I had just then launchedthe second volume of my Typographical Antiquities ;at the end of the preface of which (dated Nov. 1811)I had in a measure announced the probability of thethey will be found deserving of the approbation of the Public. Manyrare and valuable ancient publications will, for the first time, be madegenerally known ; and the deficiencies and errors of preceding bibliographerssupplied and corrected where found necessary. By means ofcuts, and fac similes of types, a number of books will be more satisfactorilydescribed than heretofore ; and, consequently, will make a morelasting impression upon the memory of the reader. Of the extraordinaryvalue of the Library here described, it is hardly necessary toapprise the classical Student and Collector. It is the wish of its NobleOwner, that a collection, which has been obtained, at a very greatexpense, during a series of twenty-two years, should be faithfully madeknown to the Public : and if either his Lordship, or the Public, experienceany disappointment at the present attempt to carry such a wish intoexecution, the Author is exclusively responsible for such failure.Kensington, March 31, 1812. T. F. D.To be published in Three Volumes, Super-Royal Octavo. Priceto Subscribers, 71. 17 s. 6d. Fifty-five Copies only will be printed uponLarge Paper, at ISl. 18*. each Copy. The impression of the Small Paperwill be limited to 550 Copies." It should however be noticed, as a literarycuriosity in its way, that the work was first announced as coming outin TWO VOLUMES, as the following advertisement in the Gentleman'sMagazine for April 1812 proves.BIBLIOTHECA SPENCERIANA. A Descriptive Catalogue ofthe early printed Books, and of many important First Editions of theLibrary of George John Earl Spencer, K. G. &c. &c. &c., accompaniedwith copious Notes, Plates of Fac-Similes, and numerous appropriateEmbellishments. To be published in Two Volumes, super-royal 8vo.,price to Subscribers, 5/. 5*. Fifty Copies only will be printed uponlarge paper, at 127. 12s. each Copy ; nearly the whole of which latterare already subscribed for. The impression of the small paper will belimited to 500 Copies.494 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.appearance of the Bibliotheca Spenceriana* . I nowbegan to work in right earnest. Sleeping or waking,the library in St. James's Place was always beforemy eyes. My visits there were daily. My occupationsduring those visits were severe and of longcontinuance. One part of the day I was tracingwith my crow-pen, or camel-hair brush feeling myway through crowds of demons, winged spirits, monsters,and non-descripts, with which the pages ofthe Block Books abounded t : at another part of thesame day, collating, transcribing, comparing lostand at times bewildered in the wonderful varietiesof editions of the same work . . . were it a Bible or aClassic. The very spirit of Bibliography seemed tobe brooding within the walls of the room assigned" My dream at night" appertained to THIS LIBRARY. When intenselybusied with the earlier Bibles, I contrived so to dream,, that Ifancied myself to be Fust at one time, and Pester at another. For manymonths, sound sleep fled my pillow j and when I reached the articleCICERO, among the " Ancient Classics," I seemed to be busied in draggingCatiline out of the senate-house at one time and helping to seizeVerres, to bring him to public justice, at another.t To the best of my recollection, the^rsZfac-simile which I executedwas that at page 19, from the Ars Moriens, among the block books:sufficiently appalling to unstring the most tightly set of nerves. TheWHOLE of the embellishments in the first volume are from my OWNtracings ; and, where the originals have been free from colour or stain,I think their general fidelity may be safely relied upon. Thoseof St. Christopher and the Angel, between pages 2 and 3, have scarcelyone inaccuracy; and they are fine, as well as extraordinarily early,subjects into the bargain. In the whole, including those of types, thereare NINETY fac-similes in this first volume. Some of those connectedwith the block books were of excessively toilsome execution.% See page 285, ante.THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 495to me for my operations. That room, which isbackwards, and looking upon the stables, had beenthe Nursery. Not an echo of a child's foot wasnow heard in it. All that had ever trotted along itsfloor were occupied in traversing a larger and moreperilous arena. Lord Althorp, now Earl Spencer,had not then very long taken his seat as a Memberof the House of Commons. His lordship's two elderbrothers, under the gallant Sir Benjamin Hallo well,were ploughing the salt seas. His youngest brotherwas in a junior form at Eton. A few pleasing littleprints, such as both nurse and children love to gazeupon, yet maintained their original position on a largescreen . . . but in other respects the room was divestedof every living creature but myself, from sunrise tillsunset. A few shelves, filled with books of ordinaryreference, skirted the upper extremity of it ;where, for three successive years, I was more orless in the habit ef concentrating my operations :having ready access to all parts of the Library below*,where I was in the frequent habit of pursuingmy researches in the autumnal months stealing asidelong glance through the window, which opensupon the terrace t, upon that beautiful verdureThe KEY, which opened all the book-cases, was given to me by thelate Earl Spencer, when I began my researches in 1811, and it is YETin my possession. His ancestor, Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough, couldnot have been more reluctant to part with her gold key of Queen Anne'scloset, than I should be to part with this very simple, and worn key ofiron.t A view through this window forms the copper-plate vignette at theend of vol. i. of the Bibliotheca Spenceriana.496 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.which by day is covered with cattle, and towardsevening is more plentifully sprinkled with humanbeings.I have said that for three successive years, duringthe progress of the Bibliotheca Spenceriana, I wasin almost constant attendance at Spencer House.If the supplemental volumes of the JEdes Althorpi-once and the Cassino Catalogue be taken into consideration,another year must be added to the foregoing.I cannot look back upon the years thus devoted,without the most unmixed satisfaction : notso much from their having brought me in contactwith some of the choicest BOOK GEMS in the world,as from the necessarily frequent presence and conversationof HIM who called them his own. Duringthose conversations, I derived as much instruction(especially in the earlier part of my career) as I didgratification in other respects ; and more than onceor twice, did I gather the noble owner's firm determinationto possess himself of certain volumes,with a view to the completion of his library, at anyprice should an opportunity present itself. Amongthese Libri Desiderata, I remember to have oftenheard him name the first Hebrew Bible, the German Bible, the Italian Bible of September1471, the Greek Aldine Horce of 1498, the RomanVirgil and the Adam Virgil, each of the date of1471 ; the Boccaccio of 1471 ; and above all Classics,the HORACE of 1474, printed at Naples byArnoldus de Bruxella. Among CAXTON'S, he desideratedchiefly the second Chaucer, perfect ; theTHE Simon( i:i{ LIBRARY. 497Morte D* Arthur, and the JEsop*. He lived to seethree-fourths of these wants supplied ; and it wasEventually he became possessed of the Morte d' Arthur, wantingeleven leaves, by the purchase of Mr. Lloyd's copy at the Wygfair sale,in 1816; but not under the sum of 320/. I have been insane enough,in the Cameron, vol. iii. pp. 140-2, to call this "a not inordinatelyextravagant sum ;" I beg leave to retract that expression ; and to say,that, considering four years had then elapsed since the sale of the Roxburghlibrary, it was a frightfully disproportionate sum ; for an hiatusof eleven leaves, although now supplied by the unrivalled skill of Mr.Harris, is still a huge hiatus ; nor could that supply have been yieldedunder an additional sum of fifty pounds sterling. This acquisition wasmade too late for its appearance till the fifth volume of the Bib. Spencer,(or the second of the JEdes) had been published. Of the second editionof Caxton's Chaucer a very smart correspondence ensued betweenhis lordship and Mr. Hatchard, the bookseller, who possessed an imperfectcopy which would have materially contributed to the perfection ofLord Spencer's. Mr. Hatchard sold it to Mr. Heberr, but whether belowthe price offered by his lordship, I know not. It produced 79/. at thesale of Mr. Heberr's books, and I do know that his lordship would havegiven 84/. It was in the year 1814, that Lord Spencer became the purchaserof the first edition of Caxton's Chaucer (described in the BibliothecaSpenceriana, vol. iv. p. 288), wanting only five leaves ; but at asum little below that given for the Morte d' Arthur. I believe two ofthese desiderated leaves have been since supplied by duplicates found inthe copy of this rare book in the library of Merton College, Oxford.Of the JEsop his lordship was never fortunate enough to obtain evena fragment. How extraordinary, that the only known copy of this,doubtless once popular, and therefore, in consequence, abundantly scarcebook, should be entirely perfect I It is in the private library of hismajesty.My noble patron's anxiety to increase the number of his Cantonswas incessant. In a letter, of the date of Sept. 27, 1813, he thus observedto me, in reply to my notification as to the number of Caxtonswhich the famous Lord Oxford possessed : " Your extract from LordOxford's letter is curious; I think (if you allow the Siege of Rhodes tobe by Caxton) that I already beat his lordship ; for I think, from memoryalone, I can reckon up Forty-three in my collection, and I havesome little idea that one has escaped my recollection." This letter isdated from Ryde. But in this number must be included a very recent.K K498 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.my happiness, as well as good fortune, during myContinental Tour, to be instrumental to the supplyacquisition (indeed only a fortnight before) made by His Lordship of aCaxtonian volume, containing ANOTHER TRIO (see p. 88, ante), fromthe press of our venerable first typographer. His account of it fromLondon to me, (when I was on a visit at Stamford), is exceedingly interesting; as betraying all that liveliness and satisfaction of feeling soperfectly characteristic of himself in all book-researches. It forms thelatter part of a long letter, dated lath Sept. 1813.Though I am a good-deal pressed for time, I cannot conclude withoutacquainting you of a most valuable acquisition I have made thisvery day. Mr. Cochrane, of Fleet-street, brought me a volume, thecontents of which surpass, by a good deal, that of the volume you mentionto me in your last : no less than the Curial of Alain Charter, byCaxton, the Cato Parus, by the same Printer, and, what is still moreextraordinary, the Book for Travellers all bound together with someother books of no value, printed in the 17th century. Unfortunately,these other books were in quarto, and the Procrustes of a binder has cutdown all the Caxtons, to accompany them, so unmercifully, that theBook for Travellers is actually cut close to the bottom line of the page.The condition is also rather dirty ; but upon the whole the leaves aresound. You will probably anticipate what I have done with thisvolumes but I must premise, that the Alain Charter wants the firstleaf; the Cato is perfect; and, alas! the Book for Travellers, on collatingit with mine, appears to want the five last leaves, having twentyleaves only. The two first I have lodged safely in the BibliothecaSpenceraina, the last I have offered to my nephew, the Duke of Devonshire,for one-third of the price I have given for the volume *. Thus Ihave had the satisfaction of erasing two articles out of the little list ofCaxtonian desiderata, which you once wrote out for me. This I lookupon as a good morning's work in BIBLIOMANIA ; and I hope it willencourage you to add to it, by getting Mr. Gilchrist's Life of our Ladyfor me t. I must also mention, that I have received the Apocalypse from.Mr. Home see p. 353, n. ante], and, on comparison, find it perfectlyHis Grace readily assented to this proposition.t See mention made of this book in a note at p. 386, ante. Iteventually became His Lordship's, and was procured of Mr. Gilchristduring my visit at Stamford, his place of nativity and his residence.THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 499of the second, fourth, fifth, and sixth of the wantshere specified. How well do I remember on quittingthe boudoir, or inner apartment of the library,and taking leave of his Lordship his farewell wishesand instructions as to the Greek Horce and the twoVirgil: and yet more vividly is impressed upon mymemory his language in the correspondence whichensued when I w r as at Munich upon this subject !But it was not only from frequent personal discussionsthat my path sometimes doubtful, and atall times hard at foot was cheered and renderedmore encouraging. The numerous letters that passedbetween his Lordship and myself confined to Booksubjects exclusively proved the very deep interestwhich he was pleased to take in my pursuits connectedwith his library. Although he was usuallydifferent from mine, which you have so accurately described in the Bibl.Spencer. I shall therefore keep it for an article in the Supplement.I forgot to say that in this said volume above-mentioned, there is avery curious MS. note, apparently of a very old date. It appears to bealist of books ; and if it means a list of books printed by Caxton, wouldbe very interesting indeed to a typographical antiquarian. It is on therecto of the blank leaf, preceding the Cato, and I have copied it as wellas I can make it out, on the inclosed piece of paper. You will immediatelyknow how much might be inferred from this, provided it be genuineand cotemporary ; of which, I cannot help thinking, there is every appearance; but, as I have no more time or paper, I will leave you tomake your own reflections upon it, and am, dear sir, yours, &c."These Caxtons will be all found described in the 4th vol. of the Bibl.Spencer., where we may observe not fewer than Forty-eight Cantons ;a number, never before possessed by any collector. To these must beadded the Four Sons ofAymon, described in vol. vi. p. 298, mentionedin the very curious MS. memorandum noticed by His Lordship, and towhich I shall call the reader's attention in a subsequent page.K K 2500 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.seven months out of the twelve in London, yet, whenaway, not fewer than one hundred and fifty letterspassed between us, from the year 1811 to the closeof the year 1816, chiefly upon the same subject. Onecause of frequent communication was, the transmissionof packets of MS. copy of the work for hisinspection and correction. This was a great sourceof advantageous help. His Lordship not only lookedforward to the arrival of these packets with an apparentlykeen relish, but returned them quickly,delivering his opinions with frankness and delicacy ;pointing out errors, and suggesting improvements,with equal regularity, zeal, and discrimination.Early, late in his carriage, in his yacht in hisbook-room, and in his bed-room these packets werefrequently received, and instantly perused*. AndI select a few specimens from the correspondence of his Lordshipin proof of the above remarks, with which the reader cannot fail to begratified.Althorp, 1st Dec. 1812. That you may not be uneasy for a momentas to the safety of the valuable MSS. you send me, I trouble youwith a line to inform you of the safe arrival of the packet, containingfrom Justin, without date, to Livy, 1478 [vol. ii. p. 109-28], which packetI hope to be able to return speedily, as the weather is at present bettercalculated for bibliographical than for sporting researches."Within four days of this letter came the following, also from Althorp.I have now to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of yesterday ;but as no MS. packet has arrived, I suppose it was not sent in time forthe post. I shall now not get it till Tuesday, or rather, as I shall be outon a visit all Tuesday, I shall not get it till Wednesday evening. Iwill attack it as soon as I receive it, and return it with as little delay aspossible' In a Pes. it is added, " You must not be alarmed if you donot receive an account of your Lucretia packet till Friday, when it isnot improbable that I may be able to return the packet itself." In theTill: SPENCER LIBRARY. 501when " the points at issue" between us were gonethrough, the noble writer would institute inquiriesletter immediately following, of the 10th inst., his Lordship says, "Onmy return hither [Althorp] last evening, I found the Lucretia packetand perused it last night with great pleasure and satisfaction."On the 13th of January following, from the same place, " I hope youreturned safe to town, and shall be very glad soon to receive anotherMS. packet from you. I am now confined to the house by a severe coldwith rheumatism, so that I shall have leisure to peruse it."I was but too happy to receive from him the following testimony,written accidentally on my birth-day: " Ryde, 30th June, 1813. Ienclose you by this day's post the last MS. packet : a most interestingand satisfactory one it is. I think this division of the Bibliotheca willmake a capital feature of the work ; and I am happy to see that youhave buckled to it with such zeal and spirit, and (as it is needless toadd) success, which invariably attends on works executed, like yours,con more." But one more extract of this description : " London,lath Sept. 1813. I arrived here yesterday from Ryde, on my waytowards Northamptonshire, and in the chaise I beguiled the tediumvia* very agreeably by going through your MS. packet, containingBelial, Breydenbach, &c. |~see vol. iii. p. 181-228]. I have carefullysealed it up, and left it here in my room for you on your return totown." I was then at Stamford, as noticed in a preceding page ; andthe latter part of this very interesting bibliographical letter containedthe intelligence imparted at page 498, ante.It is now but due to the memory of my Noble Patron to afford evidenceof his competency to impart useful instruction, of his retentivememory and his general acuteness, and of the interest taken in the pointsagitated between us. I begin with ones, of the most striking confirmationsof this position."Althorp, 3d Dec. 1813. In going through the manuscript packetThe travelling carriage of His Lordship was, however, occupied attimes by reading matter of greater " pith and moment" than my MSS.In a letter of the 27th Sept., the noble writer says " Mr. Walcot (lateof Bundle) brought me a small volume of the Homilies, by Christchurch(I think), which is in very pretty condition, and admirably printed (inthe black letter) for the period. I brought the book with me in mypost-chaise, and read part of the Homilies on the journey; and I neverread in a pleasant type."-502 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.respecting approaching book-sales ; importations ofrare books from the Continent ; or, if there happenednow in my hands, I perceive that you have fallen into an error, in which,it seems, by an observation in Brunet, you have not been singular; viz.,that of taking the Codex of Justinian for his Institutions. They are,however, quite different works ; and though I am not quite enough of acivilian to explain to you the exact nature of their difference, a verycursory look at them will convince you of the fact. The edition of theCodex by Scoffer, 1475, is the first; and as this article will want recasting,I thought it best to send it you separate, which I do by thisday's post, under another cover ; and as the weather is not very favourablefor out-of-door sports, I do not despair of being able to send youthe rest of the packet by the same post ; but, at any rate, it shall go bythat of Monday next."P. S. I perceive in the Merleyy Catalogue, at No. 150, a copy ofSt. Augustin de Civitates Dei.Spira.14,70. I do not find that edition inmy alphabetical catalogue; and I see that, in page 254, note of the Bib.Spencer., you say it is wanting in my collection. Yet I have some ideathat I have a copy of it ; and I think it was one of the few Latin Al-charleswhich were accessions to my series. If so, nothing need bedone ; but if I am mistaken in this, which you may easily ascertain, Ithink the circumstance of its colophon would make it advisable for meto get it, if I can at a price not too extravagant say about 10/. or 12/.I mention this to-day, as it is in the first day's sale. The Duke ofDevonshire has a copy of this edition of St. Austin upon vellum, andanother upon paper ; so he will not be a competitor for it."His Lordship was quite correct. He possessed it among the Alchornebooks ; and it is described at vol. iv. p. 447. In the immediately followingletter, of the 5th hist., he again observes upon the Codex Justinian:On the si object of the Codex of Justinian, you will find it describedin sect. 3 of the introduction of Blackstone's Commentaries. TheCorpus juris civilis, collected by Tribonius, by order of the EmperorJustinian, was composed of four parts. 1. The Institutions, of whichthe edition of 1468 is the first; 2. The Pandects ; 3. The Codex, or newCode, as Blackstone calls it of which the edition 1475 is the princeps;and 4. The Novella, of which I possess the first edition in Greek, butI have it not in Latin."There are few of his Lordship's letters which afford a more correctTHE SPENCER LIBRARY. 503to be a fine library in the mansion whence he wrote,he seemed to take a pleasure not less in describingspecimen of his bibliographical sensibility and good judgment, than thefollowing, dated 13th July, 1813, from Ryde.DEAR SIR,By this day's post I return the manuscript packet, containing theeditions of Lascars, &c. pee vol. iii. p. 76, &c.], which makes a veryinteresting class of the GRAMMARIANS. I have ventured a few remarksmore particularly relating to the French and Breton Dictionary, towhich I am inclined to think you have given more distinction to scarcenessthan it merits ; and I believe you will find it in Debure and Brunet;most probably also in Panzer*. I am not sure whether I am rightabout Isidore, as it is possible that the works I allude to are not in hisEtymological ; but if they are, their omission must have been of someconsequence in this class.I have lately been so much upon the water, that I have not hadmuch time for writing, and have consequently delayed answering yourlast letter thus long. I will now avail myself of a few minutes beforebed-time, to run over its contents, and notice what may occur upon them,as I go along. The Speculum Human Salvation has, if I mistakenot, occurred once at least, if not oftener, since I have been a Collector ;but till of late I was very indifferent as to the acquisition of BLOCK-bookst; and even now I should be much more tempted by articlesHis Lordship afterwards retracted his doubts as to the supposednon-rarity of the volume under consideration. On reading my enlargedaccount of this most curious and intrinsically valuable book, in theB. S. vol. iii. p. .55-8, he admitted that its " scarceness" was indisputable,,in feet, neither Debure, nor Panzer, nor Brunet, had ever seen a copy.,t But his Lordship afterwards became possessed of a famously rareblock-book in the Chiromancy of Dr. Hartley obtained by him at thecost of 100 guineas ; and fully described in the Bibliographical Cameron,vol. i. p. 143-7. He afterwards obtained three block books, boundin one volume, with the date of 1462 upon the exterior of the binding :a volume of extraordinary value in more senses than one and of whichthe early date of its binding caused the noble owner to retract much ofhis former doubt as to the early period of the printing of these books.504 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.the book rarities in that mansion, than in anticipatingmy gratification on reading his descriptions. Hemore in my genuine line of collection. I have some notion of therebeing a copy of it (or perhaps some other of the block-books) in Mr.Willet's Library' "I had before had some intimation of the probablesale of Mr. Willet's books. I have not an exact recollection of thecatalogue of them, but I know there are many curious ones. My duplicatePsalter of 1459 is among them, but it is a very indifferent copy*.The Orologium Sapientite, if really printed by Caxton, is indeed a Surpriseto me, as I do not remember having read anything about it. Whateverit is, I conclude it will follow , as I despair of getting any moreCantons except by private contract.Believe me, dear Sir,Yours very faithfully,SPENCER."There were few books, in any approaching sale, which excited so much"sensibility" with the noble lord as this Orologium Sapientite; theDuke of Devonshire having expressly made it known to him that hewould certainly become a competitor. ' ' As the day" of sale approached,(Dec. 1813) his Lordship observed, that "he really trembled for theOrologium; and wished much that Mr. Leigh's alphabetical arrangementhad admitted of its coming on earlier in the sale, as he knew byexperience how these high prices inflamed the ardour of the buyers, andwhat an accumulation of mania there was in the latter part of theconflict. He still, however, should adhere to his original price." Thebook was, in the end, purchased by me for his Lordship for 194/. 5s.How could it be otherwise ? In the last letter received from his Lordshipon this exciting subject, his request was peremptory. It is writtenfrom Holkham " Since I wrote, I have looked into Herbert's Ames,which is in the library here, and on perusing his account of the Orolo-glum Sapientite, I have determined in my own mind that not only 160/.,but not even 200/., or still more, shall carry it off from me." Book-chivalrylike this must, and DID, necessarily bear down ALL OPPOSITION.On acquainting his Lordship with the result, he observed, with hisusual urbanity and disposition to be well satisfied with all his purchases,<e that he was well-pleased to possess it, even at such a price."And in a letter from Althorp, soon after its acquisition, he said, " heIt produced, however, 551. at the sale of the Merleyy library.THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 505has one or two notices of Mr. Coke's library whichmay find a place in the note below*, to the certainentertainment of the reader. There was also onething eminently distinguishable in my noble patron'smanner of endeavouring to secure such rare andprecious books as he seemed to stand in need of,and which might enrich the pages of the work thenunder execution. He would never miss the objectfelt very desirous to see this famous Orologium before anything wasdone to it, and therefore he should beg the favour of me to bring itdown with the Cato Parus (see p. 49 8, ante) when I came there, thatwe might then have a consultation upon its mode of binding' &c. Itis a small quarto volume of some 300 pages, of most excessive rarity ;and will be found fully described in the B. S. vol. iv. p. 329, &c., underthe title of Divers Fruitful GHOSTLY Matters.In especial was His Lordship so good as to describe to me thebeautiful Pliny, of 1476, in the Italian language, printed by Benson,UPON VELLUM, and decorated with coeval illuminations, of great beautyand propriety. This very book it was afterwards my good fortune tosee and to handle, at Holkham, in 1832, when, in company with mylate dear friend, Capt. Selden, I spent an entire day there, with thevenerable and hospitable owner of the mansion. Then too I saw thefamous Boccaccio MS., of which I hoped that a good use had beenmade in my Cameron ; and upon the engravings from which, as Itold Mr. Coke, upwards of 100 guineas had been expended by me. Ialso saw the famous vellum MS. of the Chronicle of the Counts ofFlanders, justly described by Lord Spencer as having " most beautifulilluminations, exhibiting the costume of the times." " Its date (continuesHis Lordship) must be soon after 1477, at which time the prefaceto it mentions it to have been undertaken at the command of theDuchess of Burgundy, the same, I presume, who was the patroness ofCaxton." See also Mr. Roscoe's brief account of it in the second partof the second volume of the Transactions of the Royal Society of Literature,p. 374. Of the valuable copy of the famous book of ArchbishopParker, De Antiquity Ecclesia Britannicce, 1570, folio, in the libraryat Holkham, Lord Spencer was so good as to furnish me with one of themost particular accounts of that very curious book which I ever saw.It may appear in a subsequent page.506 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.in view by giving a stinted commission. In manyrespects he was bold and generous to excess ; forwhen I received my final instructions respecting suchbooks as he was most desirous to possess from thesale of the Merleyy library*, I was astonished at thebravery of his commissions which could not fail,as it did not, to secure the treasures that he was soanxious to possess. And in the course of our correspondence(after, as he said, he had received amost satisfactory," as well as plentiful supply ofMS., describing the early editions of Horace), heobserved, " though these articles are as ample as toDuring the composition of the BIBLIOTHECA SPENCERIANA manyimportant sales, abroad and ashore, were going on : among the former,those of Macarthy and Archer were the most prominent among thelatter, those of Mr. Willet (from his residence at Merleyy), ColonelStanley, Mr. Towneley, Mr. Edwards, and the Duke of Grafton. Addto these, the acquisition of the Lincoln Nosegay. In all his commissions,as the reader may have been already induced to conclude, his Lordshipwas most liberal. Even for an imperfect copy of Castors Royal Book,of 1484, His Lordship says, in a letter, " I think I must allow you to goasfar as 120/. though it ought to be recollected how much the price ofbooks is fallen since I gave that sum for the Dictes and Sayings."This in Dec. 1815. And his anxiety for the completion of his ownlibrary, from the breaking-up of such collections, was intermitting.Not only on public occasions did this anxiety betray itself, but on allprivate occasions where there was an opening to become possessed of adesirable or costly book. His propositions to the late Mr. Heberr, in theway of book-exchange, to obtain possession of his very imperfect copyof Caxton's Pilgrimage of the Soul, were liberal to faultiness. Nor, tohis dying day, was this exchange ever completely ratified on the part ofthe owner of that Caxtonian volume. His purchase of the pseudo OxfordBook of 1468, for 150/., and of Mr. Wilbraham's Dante of 1481,for the same sum (through a private channel), are splendid evidencesof his spirit and generosity in the acquisition of similar objects !THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 507bibliographical research (strictly speaking) as canbe wished, perhaps, in such an author as HORACE, alittle more room might have been afforded, had therebeen more time, for the critical department ; by whichI mean notices of the existence of disputed or doubtfulpassages in these ancient editions which would,in regard to the principal Classics, be a most interestingpart of such a catalogue as that which youare making." This is most true. The articleHorace," however, has been subsequently fully investigatedby the Rev. Mr. Barrington, and a foreignerof the name of Partner* ; but the execution ofthe work, upon the plan suggested by his Lordship,would scarcely have terminated at the present day.Thus I continued my labours at Spencer House ; andwith such diligence, that, scarcely within a twelvemonthof their commencement, I had completed theThe reader may see the fruits of Mr. Barrington's collations of theearly editions of Horace, with that of Arnoldus de Bruxella, 1474, inmy Introduction to the Classics, vol. ii. p. 75-84, edit. 1827. Of thefruits of the above mentioned German's collations (I fear I am inaccuratein his name) perhaps the following year may give us substantial evidencein the most elaborate edition of Horace ever likely to be concocted.I can never forget that foreigner's fag at Spencer House overthe Horatian tomes. It was unceasing : it threatened to be illimitable :he seemed to devour all those editions primaries as he spread thembefore him. Of the ponderous labours of Aero and Porphyry a tomewhich perhaps no single pair of eyes had ever before perused from beginningto end he made absolutely nothing : running through the volumewith the same delight as children devour " Robinson Crusoe with cuts."Wherever there was an old edition of Horace, there was Mr. Partner.At Blenheim, at Oxford, at Cambridge, at Edinburgh, at Glasgow . . .but at SPENCER HOUSE his spade went deepest into the earth, and turnedup the most abundant fruit.508 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.printing of the first volume, and a portion of thesecond. My plan was this. To apply closely andvigorously to the old editions to extract line hyline what seemed to give a better notion of theircontents to count leaves and lines, and signatures,with scrupulous accuracy ; and to note well the conditionand size of every hook which I examined.Then, bringing home my materials, I encountered awhole phalanx of bibliographical writers in my ownlibrary. I detected their errors, or confirmed theirfidelity ; expanded what appeared in them to bemeagre, and compressed what seemed to be unnecessarilydiffuse. But my health had undergone asevere shock in consequence of the severity of myapplication. My whole frame was, in a manner,shaken to pieces. The body had yielded to the mind.I could walk but a sort distance, and that in themost crabbed and snappish state of mind imaginable.I abhorred salutations, for to reply was a task.I was still dreaming of the printing presses at Mente,Bamberg, Rome, and Venice ; and once awoke withthe thorough conviction that I was Prior of theMonastery of Soubiaco, and had at last got a copyof the Donatus pro Puerulis, which I was in theact of packing up for Spencer House . when thefootsteps of my children on the staircase dissipatedthe delusion. It was evident that I could not longhold together in this state, and immediate rusticationwas peremptorily insisted upon by my friend Dr.Maton. I was too prompt to obey ; for, in additionTHE SPENCER LIBRARY. 509to the foregoing miseries, I was suffering under anelongation of the uvula, which, for the fourteen followingmonths, continued to impede my breathing, towear down my spirits, and at times to render existencescarcely supportable. The article CICERO, at theend of the first volume, might have broken downstouter mental energies than mine*.In the month of September, 1812, I left home forthe sea side. I had visited Ramsgate some dozenyears preceding, and was resolved to renew my acquaintancewith that most interesting of all wateringplaces. I longed for a stroll upon its sands, and forthe night breezes, by moonlight, upon its pier. ButI was resolved not to leave London till I had correctedthe last proof-sheet of the first volume atSpencer House, by a comparison with the originalsmy usual plan of operation. This finished, I tookmy departure. But I was several weeks before I wasconscious of returning strength. There had beensuch an unstringing such a prostration, as it were,of mind and body that it required much calm andquiet, with a cessation from all labour, to be evenconscious of approaching convalescence. Idlenesswas my horror ennui had been an entire strangerThat article occupies fourscore pages of the volume in question ; andnot fewer than thirteen Ciceronian articles are carried into the fourth,sixth and seventh volumes : some of them of excessive rarity. Thereare, in the whole, SEVENTY EDITIONS of CICERO described in the B. S. :editions, of absolute rarity and value; leaving nothing of choice orof scarcity to be desired. If a man set his heart upon having ALL theeditions of Cicero printed in the fifteenth century, he may as well at oncehire a house to receive them.510 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.to me from boyhood. The weather was mild thesky was blue and serene. I strolled abroad, nowwith Pope, now with Dryden, and now with Miltonas my companion. I sometimes diversified this lineof reading by the instructive page of Roscoe'sMedici, and the dramas of our immortal Shakspeare.I would sit whole hours under an hawthorn tree ;remembering how Burns had stamped the impressof his genius upon that humble, but picturesqueshrub and would gaze upon the near or distantvessel, pursuing its noiseless course on (what Priorhas so prettily described)the smooth surface of a summer's sea : "its white or ochery sails gleaming in the sun-beam !This was very sweet soothing and refreshing ;and in due course I became conscious of increasedstrength.I was resolved to put that increased strength tothe test. Within a stone's throw of Powell Bay,the residence of Mr. Baron G arrow for the lastforty years, I seated myself beneath my favouritethorn, and taking a blank copy-book and pencil withme, I achieved, in five morning-sittings, a certainpoem in a sort of mongrel blank verse entitledBIBLIOGRAPHY ; comprising some five hundred andfifty verses, or rather lines. My plan was, to makethese verses mere pegs for the hanging of notesupon. The reader will see a long extract from thispoem in a preceding page, which describes much ofTHE SPENCER LIBRARY. 511my early college life*. It was afterwards printedalone, for the sake of private distribution, at themere sum which it had cost ; but I have known acopy of this original performance sell as high asI/. Is. Only fifty were printed t. Thus, even forSee page 83, &c., ante.f I will merely introduce the " Advertisement," and the first six linesof the poem as it is called to the reader's attention. The originalwas throughout first written, as above intimated, in pencil.ADVERTISEMENT.In the rough and rapidly executed sketch of PALERMO, the authorhas drawn a picture (partly from the life) which enables him, in fivesucceeding books, to lay down certain rules respecting BibliographicalLiterature. Much of the matter here detailed, will be repeated in theensuing books ; but so completely modified and enlarged, that while thenecessary connexion between these books is admitted, the reader willperceive that very few points relating to Bibliography have been leftwithout illustration. The remainder of the work must necessarily,therefore, assume the character of a Didactic Poem. In regard to theversification, I am willing to admit that the ensuing pages contain anythingbut Poetry*. The 554 lines here submitted to the frank criticismof a few friends, were composed with extreme facility, and are therefore,in all probability, very careless, meagre, and unpromising. Notsuch, I trust, will be the character of the NOTES. They will be the resultof much pleasurable toil and research, and will disclose some factsand anecdotes productive both of utility and amusement. It was necessaryto raise a scaffold to build the superstructure of these Notes; andwhen the reader has got within the latter, and is pleased with what hesees about him, he is at perfect liberty to knock away the materials bywhich they have been reared."Kensington, Nov. 1, 1812. T. F. D."The first six lines are these :Of BOOKS I sing. Of all that greets the eye,And warms the fancy, and delights the heart,And touches, by a thousand secret springs,Congenial, the enraptured soul, in shapeOf folded leaves imprinted, the coy MuseWilling, yet anxious, now essays to sing."" I am ill at these numbers." HAMLET.512 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.the purpose of mental relaxation, I considered Bibliographyas the only fitting occupation or amusement.Nor was this a singular instance of suchoccupation by the sea-side ; for when I had retiredto Brighton, in the year 1810, to diversify my pursuits,and renew my spirits on the loss of a youngerson*, I contrived to put together that long note ofa " Catalogue of Catalogues of Libraries" whichoccupies forty-eight pages of the second edition ofthe Bibliomania. If idleness and ennui assume theirfrightfully legitimate forms in any one spot morethan another, it is at a sea-side watering-place.Having in a measure become reinstated in health,I returned to town ; and re-assuming my Spencerianlabours, I transmitted to His Lordship a fresh packetof manuscript or copy, beginning with the editionsof " Isocrates" His reply, on the completion of itsperusal, was very gratifying to met. Meanwhile, ISee page 282, ante.t On more accounts than one do I feel an extreme gratification incopying a portion of Lord Spencer's letter to me of the date of Nov. 24,1812 : . . . " the packet of manuscript beginning with Isocrates, whichI found to-day with great satisfaction. The articles contained in it arevery interesting, and admirably drawn. I have ventured, as usual, tomake a very few trifling suggestions; and in one place I have proposedthe substitution of the word subscription for imprint, merely becausethe passage referred to, in that instance, does not mention when thebook was printed, and therefore I conceive can hardly be correctly designatedby the term " imprint ;" which I look upon as a technicalname for the colophon of any edition designating the printer or placewhere printed, or both. I cannot, however, return this packet withoutexpressing in strong terms the pleasure I derived from observing therefreshed vigour with which you have resumed your labours ; for I doTHE SPENCER LIBRARY. 513had resolved upon having a very few copies of thefirst volume put into boards, that I might see how myprogeny was likely to appear when in proper clothing.I will frankly and perhaps foolishly as well asfondly avow, that I had never before seen a bookwhich so entirely possessed and delighted me fromits typographical and graphical beauties of every description.It was also a grand octavo volume inpoint of size : being of an imperial form and thepaper was as good as the printing*. Gay has observed,Where yet was ever found a MotherWho'd give her booby for another?"It may be so : in fact, it is so. But as the Biblio-not think you have sent me any articles more full and copious than thosecontained in the packet : and the ' Josephus, sine anno will he a fineaddition to the decorative part of the volume." The reader may seethese articles in print, vol. ii. p. 96, &c. The fac-similes in the Josephus,p. 105-8, were executed by myself; and I believe they are mostaccurate.What gave an occasional beauty, as well as brilliancy, to the bookgiving to it also the impress of truth, by bringing the originals in ameasure before the reader's eye was, the intermixture of BED INK ; asin the Bibles of 1455, 1462, and the Greek Psalter 1486, &c. &c. (seepages 4, 11, 70, 92, 127, 137, 139,264, 281); and in the head pieces.Mr. Bulmer, the printer, and the Jenson of his day, thus triumphantlyalludes to it, at the end of a note, in which he promises to take meinhis carriage to dine with him in the country where he resided. " Thered ink shows its brilliancy in a most beautiful manner. I have steppedout to look after your dirty brown." This was for an impression of theoriginal woodblock (I believe in p. viii. and ix.) of an edition from theApocalypse, and eminently happy it was. Of all the specimens of red inkprinting in this first volume, that at p. 264 is the most striking andbeautiful. The attempt to introduce the red and black in the greatletter B, facing the Psalter of 1457, p. 107, after repeated trials, failed.Nor has it succeeded with the copper-plate printer. The " S" in thatL L514 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.graphical Cameron was not then in esse althoughin posse I would soberly and safely challenge anyproduction, in the same department of literature, toequal this first volume for the qualities just enumerated.Of its intrinsic value, I had yet to collectthe suffrages of the learned. Among the first towhom I sent a copy on loan, was the late Mr. Edwards,then living at Harrow-on-the-Hill *, and wellknown as having been a bookseller in Pall Mall, ofgreat tact and taste in his vocation. Few men hadseen so many, and such lovely treasures, in the formand character of a BOOK, as he. He merited allthe celebrity, and all the fortune, which he had acquired; for his daring was great, and of the truekind. He is said, on more than one occasion, tohave followed in the rear of Bonaparte's armiesand leaving that renowned warrior to the capture ofcities, and the discomfiture of armies, Mr. Edwardspreferred a conquest over a vellum Livy and a Capodi Monte Vase.The answer of that distinguished Collector andBibliographer was most gratifying to me ; and mayprobably be well received by the reader. It is asfollows.Harrow, Dec. 12, 1812.MY DEAR SIR,Your splendid volume of the Bibliotheca SPENCER-ranaarrived safe on Monday night. It is undoubtedly thefac-simile, and the whole of the text, was executed at the printing office,the other part by the copper-plate printer.See Bibliographical Cameron, vol. iii. 14, 111, 127, 439, &c.THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 515ne plus ultra of typography ; and as far as I have yet seenit (for a family have been staying with me last week) youseem to have very judiciously referred to all extant authoritiesin the notes. Had it been less important I should haveimmediately returned you my most hearty congratulationson your success in producing such a monument ; but whenan object makes so near an approach to perfection, like atrue Englishman, I am disposed to criticise microscopicallynot for any public or private display but merely out offriendship to yourself: that, if you thought any one observationworth attention, you might avail yourself of itbefore the book came before the public.It may show you how trifling are some of my notices,when you hear that the print of the old man with 6 BibliaSacra,' and the other at page 220, would, in my opinion,be better left out. Before the end of the week I shall bringback the volume to Mr. Payne's, and write you the few,and perhaps very trifling, observations I may have madeupon it. Thus far, however, I must say the Bibliographicaland Bibliomaniacal World will owe you their best bow andgrateful praise for this truly magnificent production.Ci I am, dear Sir,Yours very sincerely,I adopted the suggestion of my laudatory correspondentin the withdrawing of the first ornament,but adhered, author-like, to the insertion of thesecond : which, at the end of the article on Theology,represents Death as the stem of the tree fromwhich our first parents are plucking the forbiddenfruit. The conception, drawing, and composition,L L 251G THE SPENCER LIBRARY.are good ; the execution is indifferent. Mr. Edwards'slist of errata were accompanied by the subjoinedletter*. Within a month after this (perhapspremature) launch, I sent the volume to my friendMr. WILBRAHAM, (of whom honourable mention hasbeen made in a preceding page, 404), and to theRev. WILLIAM HOLWEL CARR just elected a Roxburgh,and whose collection of Pictures had givenhim a distinguished position as a Pictorial Amateurin the metropolis. I annex their answers below t.The note is without date, but it will be readily supposed that iwas almost simultaneously with the above letter."DEAR SIR,From the adjoining list of trifling observations, you will see I havegone through the vol. of Bib. Spenceriana ; and to your praise I mustown, it is filled with the most careful investigation, and the further Iproceeded, the more I was gratified. Your block leaf of the Apocalypse(p. viii. ix.) is very curious, and well struck off as to colour,&c. &c. If you think that a plate from my original picture of AldusManutius, by Giovanni Bellini, would be a proper enrichment, you arewelcome to the use of it. I suffered Mr. Roscoe to have one from itfor his Leo X., but it is very imperfectly executed. Pray let me havethis volume as soon as it is given to the public, and the following volumesas they appear. I am, dear Sir, yours very faithfully,"JetAt the risk of the imputation of hardly pardonable vanity, I subjointhe short notes of these once well-known individuals; reserving the moreparticular " TESTIMONY " of commendation from Mr. Wilbraham for afuture page.Twickenham, Jan.21, 1813.MY DEAR SIR,Our friend Mr. Istedd will come to me next week, and if you canspare me a day, for instance Friday, I shall be particularly happy in yourcompany. I will endeavour to call for you, though am not quite certain; but will let you know in the interim. I am sorry to delay even foran hour the production of the Spencer Catalogue of books, whichTHE Pencil LIBRARY. 517But my greatest satisfaction arose from carrying acopy of this volume, and a portion of the second,down with me to Althorp, at my Christmas visit of1812 ; when, on my return to town, I received aletter from the noble owner of the mansion containingthis notice. " Dr. Charles Burney has been perusingthe first volume, and a fragment of the second,of the Bib. Spencer., which you left here in print ;and has expressed very great satisfaction with thework." This was, indeed, the " lauder a laudatoryvero" and I not only resolved to push onmy operations with unabated vigour, but to live inamanner " mihi carior" in consequence.Thus the year 1813 was one of the most intenseinterest and arduous occupation of any which I re-cannot fail of doing you great honor, as one of those few Writers whocan enrich the dull matter of a catalogue with solid instruction andentertaining discourse.Yours truly,R. WlLBRAHAM."Devonshire Place, March .DEAR SIR,I return you the Book, which has more charms, and is of greaterinterest to me, than the one so called, and which is soon to be before theHouse of Commons*. I must beg also to return with it my best thanksfor the favor you have done me in lending it. All the notes that I couldmake on it would be notes of admiration. Lord Spencer's library will,I hope, be an antidote to the poison your two volumes have infused ;and as there is no possibility of rivalling him, I shall content myselfwith being his superior in another department, and shall have greatpleasure in shewing my PICTURES to you whenever you pass this way.I am, dear Sir, very truly yours,W. II. CARR."In the matter of Mrs. Clark.518 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.member to have entered upon. It was also full ofhope and anxiety: for, strange to say, although Inever delayed for a week the progress of my Spencerianlabours, yet I was collaterally occupied inseeking embellishments for a work which at somefuture day I was resolved to bring forth under thetitle of " THE BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DECAMERON;" andfor three consecutive years was the preparation ofthe materials for that work silently, but sedulously,carried on. The greater part of my gains from thesecond volume of the Typographical Antiquities,was devoted to the payment of artists for wood-cutsfor the Cameron ; while the very high price atwhich large paper copies of the two volumes (allthen extant) of the " Antiquities" were sold *,served secretly and certainly to assure me that myfuture labours were not likely to be in vain. I nowtherefore set resolutely to work to make the remainderof the Spencer volumes worthy of that whichhad been submitted to the notice of a few privatefriends. I braved what the world might say, if Icould only carry my intentions into effect. Myprinter went hand in hand, gallantly and vigorously,with me. He put all his " best men " upon thework ; but " the man of men" to whom I waschiefly indebted for many an ingenious conjecture,I own it to have been a proud day in the chequered calendar ofmy life, when I saw a copy of these first two volumes, upon largepaper, knocked down at the price of THIRTY GUINEAS. See page 285,ante.Till: SI'fiNCER Library.as well as for the most careful correction of the text,was the late Mr. Thomas Turner* well known to,The late Mr. THOMAS TURNER, a native, like Mr. Bulmer, ofNewcastle-upon-Tyne, was the principal corrector of the ShakspearePress. He was a man admirably adapted for the office which he so ablyfilled, being a fair good linguist in the French, Italian, and even Germanlanguages ; and by no means slightly informed in the Latin and Greek.I am doubtful whether there were two correctors of the press in Londonbesides himself, who could have seen through the reprint of Richardson'sPersian Dictionary. My friend Mr. RICHARD TAYLOR, " Typographydoctissimus," as Erasmus designates his friend Frozen, (seeBilling. Cameron, vol. ii. p. 170-5), shall yield to no living printerin a knowledge of the dead languages. He equally rejoices in Chartulariesof crabbed Latin contractions, and periods of the full flowingeloquence of Livy. To return to my departed friend. There havebeen better furnished heads than mine, which have owed him muchduring the progress of their labours at press. My own obligations havebeen very considerable. Ever since the year 1808 (during the printingof More's Utopia at the Shakspeare press), my intercourse with himwas as incessant as it was sincere and gratifying. But he had the mostsorry lodgment or quarters, imaginable, at the office of his employers ;which I believe in a great measure to have helped to hasten hisdeparture.He eat up one pair of stairs, in a cupboard-like room " lulled bysoft zephyrs through the broken pane." But in winter, these zephyrswere converted into whistling gusts which made his flesh creep ; for therewas no fireplace, and the holes in the panes were patched up withproof-paper. Then his table or desk was covered with proof-sheets,some wet and some dry ; of which the fetid odour was enough to convertred blood into black. With what a calm temperament did he endureall this ! How punctual, early and late, in the fulfilment of his duties !and what lovely books, in his time, had passed under his eye ! Knowingso much as he did, and being perhaps in three instances out of fivebetter informed than the " poor author," upon whose talents he wascalled mechanically to exercise his own, he was among the most modestmen whom I ever knew. He was in fact, till the later years of hislife, kept down in his situation. If any man especially encumberedas he was with a large family merited, from his talents and worth, agood 500/. per annum, with a four-story house to live in, it was myamiable and well-informed friend Mr. Turner. To be sure, his laterdays were soothed much by the friendly attentions, and the more liberal520 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.and justly appreciated by, abler judges of his talentsthan myself. He answered all my queries satisfactorily,and endured all my sallies of impatiencewith the calm intrepidity of a philosopher. Frozencould not have been more patient or better informed.Add to this, I rose in the summer months with thelark, to execute the fac-similes, so that the pressmight not be delayed for want of them ; and LordSpencer always permitted me to take home suchvolumes as were necessary for their execution. I haddone with demons ; and turned my attention almostexclusively to types, devices, and more interestingembellishments *.remuneration, of Mr. Bulmer's successor. Nor since the grave hasclosed over him, have those attentions and assistance, from the samequarter, been withdrawn from his depending family. The deceasedhas left behind him ONE SON, at least, to my own knowledge, who willnot suffer the name of his father to go down to later times with undiminishedreputation. I preserve somewhere a note from this " deceased'*touching one of the very heavy sheets of the Cameron, in which hesays, " Pray, dear sir, send me no more such sheets, for they will breakmy heart as well as turn my head."Among these embellishments in the second volume, the fac-similesfrom Horace and Terence, of 1496-8, are profuse to excess. They are,doubtless, too lavishly selected, especially in the Terence. What pricesthese editions brought about this time ! perhaps a good deal in consequenceof this notice of them. I have known a dozen guineas refused for acopy. Now, a fourth of that sum will readily obtain one. In the thirdvolume there is more variety, as well as a greater abundance of ornament,in the way of fac-similes, than in either of the two preceding ;but, not corrected by the errors of the Horace and Terence in the secondvolume, I became yet more extravagantly lavish in the treatment of theNuremberg Chronicle, and called forth such an assembly of Monstrosityout of its rarely-opened leaves, as induced the curious to rushwith avidity towards the acquisition of any copy of that most marvellousvolume which presented itself for sale. To the best of my memory,THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 521The manuscript copy continued to be regularlysubmitted to the Noble Owner of the volumes underdescription ; and his anxiety to receive it, and alacrityin the dispatch of it, continued unabated.Every inch of canvas was now spread before thewind. The year was verging to its close, when thesecond volume being finished, the third was far goneinto and I thought myself justified in announcingthe progress of my labours in the Gentleman's Magazinefor November, 1813, in the subjoined manner*.It will be seen that more than an obliqueMr. Grenville gave not less than sixteen guineas for his beautiful copy ofit. Lord Spencer's copy is uncut, and so is his copy of the German text,with the same cuts, of the same work. Presently it seemed as if thisbook were brought upon our shores in herring-shoals. Copies, once rare,appeared everywhere : and I will venture a trifling wager, that, at thismoment, LONDON possesses more copies of it than Nuremberg did at theexpiration of the first year after its publication. How my late worthyfriend, Mr. Douce, loved to open its leaves, to read its arid text, to smileand growl alternately at the credulity of the historian, and to gaze, withunmixed satisfaction, upon its THOUSAND AND ONE grotesque embellishments! But the articles Brant, Breyderibach, Hyginus, and Alterius,in this same third volume of the B. S., are, questionless, very curiouslytreated, in the way of graphic illustration, in this third volume.I will trust to the reader's kind patience to endure this notificationof the work, altered and abridged, with a view of giving a tolerably fairnotion of its contents. It will be seen, from its conclusion, that & fourthvolume was pretty strongly hinted at, at the time. This "notification"appeared hi the pages of my excellent old friend Sylvanus Urban, inNovember, 1813.BIBLIOTHECA SpENCERiANA. The Rev. Mr. D. has finished theprinting of the two first volumes of his Descriptive Catalogue of theEarly Printed Books, and of many Valuable First Editions, in theLibrary of Earl Spencer; and is considerably advanced in the presswith the third Volume. This Work is divided into the following heads.I. Block-Books, or Works executed in the infancy of printing ; whichcompartment comprises not fewer than twenty-eight fac-similes and522 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.hint was thrown out that the work might extendto a, fourth volume. Indeed, in that same month,which may be considered both a supplement to, and correction of, Heine-ken'sdisquisitions upon the same subject. Among these fac-similes, isan impression, executed in bistre, from an original block of a portion ofan edition of the Apocalypse. II. Theology; comprising embellishments,or fac-similes, from most of all the scarcer Bibles, Psalters, TheologicalDisquisitions, and the Fathers. The Mazarine Bible of 1455-6,and the Psalter of 1457, are among the books thus illustrated. III. AncientClassics, in alphabetical order. This division comprises a portionof the first, and the whole of the second volume, and may be fairly saidto contain the most copious descriptions, and curious embellishments,connected with the history of scarce and early printed books, which haveyet been submitted to the Public. IV. Collections of Writers, agricultural,military, &c. V. Grammar and Lexicography ; involvingperhaps the most difficult, but not the least interesting and useful questionsrelating to bibliographical literature. VI. Miscellaneous Authors,chiefly in the Latin language. This will probably be the most amusingdepartment to the generality of readers; and is accordingly enrichedwith an unusual number of fac-similes. It comprehends, also, all thescarce and early-printed books in the canon and civil laws ; and thosewho love splendid decoration, will be gratified by the embellishmentsbestowed upon the Translation of Breydenbach, the Nuremberg andCologne Chronicles, the Stultifera Navis of Brant, and the earlier editionsof Hyginus, Turrecremata, and Alterius. This sixth department(forming the third volume) is much more extensive than the fourthor fifth ; which may render it doubtful whether the third volume maycontain the whole of the ensuing divisions. VII. Books printed in theItalian Language. Among these will be found the most copious descriptionsyet extant, of the scarcer volumes printed in the fifteenth century; and the works of Dante, Petrarch, and Boccaccio, in particular,will not fail to be noticed with proportionate minuteness and accuracy.The decorative fac-similes bestowed upon the Hypnerotomachia of Polyphemusalone, renders the disquisition upon that curious and beautifulvolume, a Commentary not less amusing than instructive. VIII. Thelast, but not least in estimation, is this eighth department devoted to theaccount of Books printed by Caxton, and to those executed by Wynkynde Worde and Pynson, in the fifteenth century. The St. Albans andTavistock presses are also to be included in this division ; which willreceive additional illustration, both in the way of ornament and description,as the Collection here described is the most perfect in the king-theSPENCER LI1HIAUY. 5'J:3having imparted this hint to Lord Spencer, his Lordshipobserved in reply : " I am rather afraid of afourth volume, but I suspected it might he so." Theevent] proved this fear to be but too well founded.However, the entire manuscript copy for the completionof the work, in three volumes, being nowfinished*, and sent to head-quarters, at Al thorp, Ireceived a letter of the date of Jan. 9, 1814, inreply, in which was the following consoling paragraph." I congratulate you sincerely on the completionof the * Miscellanies which was a verytough jot ; and make you my compliments on theestimation to which your book is already arrived.dom. The whole will be terminated by very copious and particularIndexes.The Work is executed in a delicate but clear type, having a fullpage and ample margin ; and neither pains nor expense have been sparedin the ink, workmanship, or paper. As it is, on no account, the Author'swish to hurry any article, or to give an hasty or superficial descriptionof any volume which may merit an ample or a particular detail (especiallyas there will be no second edition of the Work) he does not pledgehimself to confine the Work to three volumes although the three volumeswill certainly be published in the ensuing Spring. A fourth (ifneedful) will succeed, as other avocations may enable him to completeit."His Lordship was thus pleased to express his opinion upon thesubject. " The MANUSCRIPT of the Bibliotheca Spenceriana will be avaluable and interesting deposit in the Althorp Library, and forms atestimony, which cannot but be highly satisfactory to you, of the industrywith which you occupy yourself. With the sincerest wishes for yourcontinued success in such occupations, and for your being enabled topursue them without injury to your health, I remain, dear sir," &c.The MS. of the fourth volume was subsequently deposited by the side ofits companions ; and ALL FOUR now take up their permanent residenceat Althorp.t The third volume concludes with the article " Miscellanies."524 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.I do not see why you should he so vexed at it, asevery one must of course know what the originalprice was." The fact was, that the original price,7/. 17$- 6c?., was obliged to he raised to 8/. Ss. : butthe last 150 copies were all subscribed for at 9/ 9s.per copy; and on quitting Mr. Buhner's printing-office,not one copy, large or small, remained un-bespoke.The large paper were charged at 18/. 18s.per copy. The delivery took place in the secondweek in April, 1814.But in the furtherance of perhaps this most importantevent in the literary annals of my humblelife, it was essential to see that the whole of the introductorypart, by way of Preface, was worthy ofthe materials of the work. I had at first meditateda sort of Precis of the library in London and atAlthorp ; but this plan was abandoned, partly becauseI seemed to have a presentiment that a daymight come when more deliberate justice might berendered the latter, and partly because such anavant propos" might invade too much of the volumeand of the reader's patience. I resolved, therefore,upon the composition of a short, terse, unostentatiousPreface, such as the reader now sees prefixedto the work ; and may fairly say that few compositions,of such limited extent, ever gave me half thetrouble and anxiety in its execution. A portion ofit (the four concluding paragraphs) may not unfitlybe reprinted in the present place.THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 525Of a Library justly considered by one of the mostcelebrated of modern Bibliographers to be the richestprivate collection in Europe *, it was proper that the Catalogueof so material a portion as that contained in thesevolumes, should be equally splendid and accurate. If Ihave failed in the attempt to render it justice, it has notbeen from a deficiency of zeal in the cause of Bibliography ;since one-third of my life has been devoted to this congenial,and, I will add, useful, although laborious, pursuit. In thepresent instance, the Noble Owner of the collection has uniformlyaided me by an examination of my manuscript, bysuggesting many improvements, and by supplying manyimportant corrections. The freest access to his library, andthe most liberal use of the volumes described, have beenalways granted. The failures, therefore, are entirely myown.I have other obligations to acknowledge. The manuscriptmemoranda of the late COUNT REVICZKY, and thoseof the late BISHOP OF ELY, (the former supplied by EarlSpencer, and the latter by the late learned author of them),have been occasionally of material service to me. Theobservations of the Count, although less luminous and concisethan those of the Bishop, are more extensive ; and wereintended, by their author, to form the chief materials of anew edition of the Catalogue of his own library.But I should be wanting in a due regard to the memoryof a distinguished character, if I omitted this opportunity ofpaying a feeble tribute of respect to that of the late Dr.THOMAS DAMPIER, Bishop of Ely ; a prelate not less belovedfor his frank and affectionate disposition, than respectedfor his classical and philosophical attainments. Inbibliographical knowledge he had few superiors : his discernsBibliotheca probablement la plus belle et la plus riche de toutescelles quepossede actuellement aucun particulier." Renouard: Annalesde rimprimerie des Aide, vol. iii. p. 8.526 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.ment being quick and accurate, and his conclusions correctand instructive. His Lordship lived to examine only a fewof the printed sheets of the present work; offering his friendlyaid to superintend the whole of the remainder. What,therefore, has been lost to me, in this respect, by his decease,can be easily conceived ; but the remembrance of his goodopinion, and of his encouragement to proceed as I hadbegun, has constantly served to cheer me in the progress ofmy labours.My acknowledgments are due to the ingenious Artists*who have so effectually contributed towards the splendour ofthis publication; and still more so to the celebrated Printerin whose office it has been executed. Those who are ableto appreciate the care and skill requisite to render volumesof this nature beautiful and accurate, will readily admit thatthe present are executed in a manner worthy of the highreputation of the Shakspeare PRESS."Two splendid copperplate decorations accompaniedthis introductory part : one, the quarterings(one hundred and thirty-four in number) of theSPENCER SHIELD of Coat Armour ; the other, theDEDICATION within the Cotta of the Order of theGarter to the Noble Earl himself, in the followinglines :Mary, Ebenezer, and John Field.THE SPENCER LIBRA 1!Y 527TO THERIGHT HONOURABLEGEORGE JOHN, EARL SPENCER,KNIGHT OF THE MOST NOBLEORDER OF THE GARTER,ONE OF HIS MAJESTY'S MOST HON. PRIVY COUNCIL,A TRUSTEE OF THE BRITISH MUSEUM,A GOVERNOR OF THE CHARTER HOUSE,PRESIDENT OF THE ROYAL INSTITUTION,LL. D. F. R. S. F. S. A.ETC. ETC. ETC.THIS WORKIS Respectfully DEDICATED,BY HIS FAITHFULAND OBEDIENT HUMBLE SERVANT,THE AUTHOR.The Spencer crest, cut in wood, is in the centreof the title-page, thus :The day of publication, or rather of delivery,arrived in due course ; and never did the biblio-maniacal pulse of the British public beat with a livesTHE SPENCER LIBRARY.lier throb. The Allies had just then, in a manner,taken possession of Paris. The bells had scarcelyceased to ring, and the guns to be fired. A dozenhackney coaches, in all directions, were filled withthe Spencerian tomes. Even the young men at No. 39in the Row seemed to be speculating in the concern.They gave their nine guineas, and would have givenanother to boot, readily and cheerfully, regrettingthat I had no more to dispose of. Before sunset onthat same day, I have reason to know that a copyof this work although obviously in an imperfectstate was sold for 12/. Ins. ; and before that daythree months a copy had reached the sum of 15L 15 s.As to the Large Paper, the price galloped upquickly to Forty Guineas ; just double that of thepublication. Had I listened to the suggestions ofone individual of all men among the most subtleand hotheaded I had realised a large profit*.But I shut my ears upon the voice of the charmer,charm he never so wisely;" being resolved to avoideverything which bore the semblance of mystification.I can with the solemn truth aver, that themost profitable, as well as the proudest, result tomewas, that I had put forth such a Catalogue ofsuch a LIBRARY.The expense of printing these three imperial octavo volumes, inlargeand small paper, was about twelve hundred pounds sterling.THE SPENCER LIBRARY.The success of mv three volumes was naturallythe great spur to the commencement and completionof the fourth ; and by the end of May, 1815, thatvolume was also ready to be launched upon the oceanof public opinion*. It is the bulkiest, and ought tohave been, to English feelings, the most acceptableof the whole. The first 60 pages are devoted to thecompletion of the Miscellaneous Department ; thenext 110 pages to the Italian Books; the following260 pages to what may be called the History ofPrinting in England during the fifteenth Century,by such specimens of the presses of CAXTON andof others as were in his Lordship's library t. ThenWhile this " launch" took place, the announcement of the BI-biographicalDECAMERON, on the yellow coat of old Sylvanus Urban,was made public in June 1815, in the following manner. The readerwill observe that, as in the instance of the Spencer Library, my FIRSTintention was to publish the work in two volumes.To be printed in Two Volumes, Royal Octavo, in the first style ofelegance, at the Shakspeare Tress, price 71. 17 s. 6d.THE BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DECAMERON; or, TEN DAYSPLEASANT DISCOURSE upon the Early State of the Fine Arts, Antientand Modern Typography, and Bibliography. Embellished with numerousEngravings. The same Characters will be introduced as in theBIBLIOMANIA ; and the Scene will be varied at the respective residencesof the Parties. The impression will be limited to the same number ofcopies as were printed of that Work ; and will also NEVER BE REPRINTED.Gentlemen desirous of subscribing are requested to advance OneThird of the Subscription Money to be paid into the hands of thePublishers, or of the Author, Kensington, free of expense of Postage.t There is in fact almost every book of importance printed in thiscountry, during that period, most particularly described. But while Iadmit the very copious extracts from the Caxton volumes to be singularlycurious and interesting to the Antiquary, I am free to confessthat it had been better had they occasionally suffered amputation.M M530 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.ensue 150 pages of Supplement, Additions, andEmendations. Two copious Indexes of Authorsand Printers close this elaborate volume*. I haveventured to lay before the reader a good portion ofthe preface prefixed to the first volume. I will heretake leave to lay before him the concluding sentenceof that of the fourth volume.I cannot terminate my present labours, or shut the doorof the Library in which I have passed so many hours withequal instruction and delight, without addressing its Ownerand chief Ornament in the language of a distinguishedBibliographer towards a Nobleman f, whose treasures werelaid open to the grateful Eulogist with the same readinessand liberality as those of EARL SPENCER have been tomyself.Tu primum (says the author to his Patron) stimulusaddidisti ; in frequenters quae tecum nunquam habuit, quininstruction abirem, colloquies saepius me submonuisti, undelucubrationibus mens plurima moment et lucas accederet:crebro tua, quod nescio an in ulla ali repererim, suggestbibliotheca ; ad TE, et ad Hand, families semper patuit aditus."The immediate sequel to the publication of thisfourth volume, and thus to the completion of mySpencerian labours, is of a mixed nature; but perhapsThe embellishments, by way of fac-similes, are very abundant;but those which, in the Italian Books, accompany the JBcrlinghieri Dante,1481, Monte Santo di Dio, 1477, Poliphilo, and Ptolemy of 1478, areof essential importance in illustrating the volumes themselves.t Attire to the EARL of PEMBROKE, in the Dedication of hisAnnales Typographical, 1719, 4to.THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 531not the less interesting on that account. Pleasureand pain are amalgamated in all our pursuits. I willbegin with the former. I had resolved to mark soimportant an era in my life, by the assembling togetherof a few Roxburghers, who had uniformlyafforded the most indisputable proofs of their bestwishes for success during the progress of my labours.They were summoned by an especial invitation tocluster round my limited table on the 6th of June,to commemorate the day of the publication. Theinvitation ran in the following strange language :Right trustee and mine hertygoode French,Ye shal knowe that sundry e choice Spirits andcommon Frances intend to dine with me on Tuesday the 6th dayeof June, at aboute 1 7 minutes after 6 of the Clock : tocelebrate ye Finishing and publishing of a certain wereycleped BIBLIOTHECA SPENCERJANA. Ye are hereby requestedand desired to find yourself in ye nombre of such daintyFrances on paine of incurring our wrath and sore displeasure: And so I do commence me right lovingly into you :being.Without feigning,Thy Friends and ServantsMay, 1815.Kensington; the Top ofThornton-St. (North End thereof).P. S. Ye shal Inde homely fare, but a herty welcoming*M M 2532 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.therewith : Dan Horace having described the nature andmethod of the drink of our table in this following metre :Vile potabis medicis SabineCantharis : [Lib. i. Ode xx.]Yet a wiser and more ancient Clerke than Horace hath said :Setter is a dinner of herbs where love is, than a stalled Oxand hatred therewith. 9 \ Prov. xv. 1 7.]I cannot recollect to how many this invitationextended ; but I am pretty sure that my kind andapproved good friends, Sir Mark Sykes, Sir S. E rBrydges, Sir Francis Freeling, and Mr. Baron Bol-land,were of the number together with Mr. GeorgeHibbert, Mr. I. D. Phelps, Mr. George Istedd, Mr.Wilbraham, and Mr. Castlewood. I now possess avery few only of the characteristic Replies ; of whichthe following two may afford amusing specimens.First, for that of Mr. Hibbert :My Singular good and lernidd Friend.After my most hertye commendations, this shal be toadverse of the recept ofyor right welcome lyre, the sight whereof,w* the advertisement therein that you have finished that nobyllwere ycleped Bibliotheca Spenceriana hath so comfortedme, that I pray God to gyve mee some occasion to doo yousome such pleasure as ye doo to others ; and I shall waste onyou, God willing the 6th of the moneth coming and, untilthat daye, most lately fare you well ! from Clapham this28 of Maye.Yor most assuredGEORGE Herbert.To my very good FeintThe Reverend Thomas Frognatt Dibdin.THE SPENCER Library 533The second is that of the late Mr. Castlewood. Itwas topped by a wood-cut, representing two oxenlooking back upon the countryman as he is about tounyoke them from the plough ; and, like its copyhere, was printed in the black letter.p^usbantremann trelgtetje, as tje oxegne loofcebacfce to be ungofcettr, that !)gs laboure gs at enfce ? p?eopgnm't!) Jgs hj|)^ presse anlr calleth pn ses ntpboures tobe merge, ^o rggfjte fcoel trotter tje ^utjoure of rijatt mochefoutfe, W$t 23Hi3H3I<^|^^aD^ SpcN-note, on bejotognge the curious colopftouneof 6gs printer, to statute Jjg* reels, tjerebge fenofcognge6gs ogle ceacftfie. Nor fcogll ante true Bibliomaniac incurfcoratfie anlr sore Msplesure bte not being realme for tete ban-quitnib moments ere tee trial pogritftj xbif emits afterbt of tfje clock upon tfje b{ bate of 3(une: (So to turenne,annei3ee large in mgrt&e : anon, foe'Il trrgnlie a mesuretable rofonfce.fagtfifullfe,tfjgs impress,mtacxb/ JOSEPH HASLEWOODThe following, from the late ROGER WILBRAHAM,Esq., of whom so much has been said in a prestTHE SPENCER LIBRARY.ceding page *, although attired in the modern garbof phraseology, is not the less gratifying on that account; as it is directed to the general character ofthe work, and supported by his own very particularcommendation.Stratton-street, May 29th, J815.MY DEAR SIR,IT is unfortunately not in my power to obey your verykind and friendly summons for the sixth of June. I am notthe less sincere in congratulating you upon the occasion ofyour festivity, most heartily wishing that the termination ofthis labour of yours may be attended with as much solidadvantage as it will do you real credit as a literary performance.If Lord Spencer's Library may vie with any privatelibrary in the world, it is most certain that no Catalogue ofany private or even public library, can at all compare withthat which you have just published, in beauty and splendourof every kind. Here it is facile princeps ; and I have nodoubt it is equally so in useful information and correctness ;but to judge accurately of these points would require thelynx's beam of a Heberr, and not the dull curtain ofYour very faithful and obedient humble servant,^w^/^^^I believe we assembled to the number of some tenortwelve. It was a day throughout of heart-felt joy-ounce; " dies iste albo lapide notandus" There arefew " REMINISCENCES" in life's thorny path moreSee p. 404-, ante.THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 535gladsome, and let us hope more rational, to dwellupon, than those of the present description.But of all the attestations to the creditable executionof my work, few none pleased me morethan that of Mr. ROSCOE at home, and of COUNTD'ELCI, abroad. I seemed to be pretty fully impressedwith a notion that the Bibliotheca Spencer-ranawas not precisely that sort of dainty dish tofurnish matter for Reviews and especially for theEdinburgh and the Quarterly. True it was, that Mr.Maurice, of the British Museum, had furnished theTimes Newspaper with rather a spicy, as well aseloquent notice of the work commendatory to excess*.But a thoroughly raisonne Review, in whateverjournal, must necessarily have claimed greatattention and exacted great labour. These volumescould not be dispatched as whip-syllabus. They requiredtraining in the individual who would grappleI will extract only the commencement and conclusion of thisnotice ; adding, that all the commendation bestowed upon the late Owneror Possessor of the SHAKSPEARE PRESS., may honestly be transferred tothe present, Mr. WILLIAM NICOL. That I may not seem to " reckonwithout mine host' in thus comparing the Successor with the Predecessor,of the Shakspeare Press, I refer my reader with infinite satisfactionto the typographical execution of the JEdes Aithorpiance, and theCatalogue of the Cassino Library : being supplemental volumes to theabove executed " Nicol Remnant." The Press in question hasbeen recently grafted upon a soil which seems to be more congenial withits growth I mean its immediate contiguity to what is now known asthe British Institution, but formerly as the Shakspeare Gallery. The"oratio paracinetica" of Mr. Maurice begins and concludes thus:BIBLIOTHECA SPENCERIANA. A Phenomenon of a verycurious and interesting kind has just made its appearance in the literary536 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.with them. No off-hand touches ; no strokes ofwit ; or flashes of merriment. And although the lateworld under this title, being a display of the rarest and richest portionof the treasures, of inestimable value, contained in the library of EARLSPENCER ; a library certainly unrivalled by the collection of any individual,under the rank of a crowned head, in Europe. Whether wecontemplate the lucid arrangement of this surprising work, the beautifuland spirited execution of the ornamental part, or the fidelity andaccuracy of the historical narration, we are alike struck with admirationat the ingenuity that planned, and the patient perseverance that completedit. In a regular series of elegant illustrations in these elaboratevolumes are exhibited all the wonders of the typographical art, from therude letters and uncouth figures engraved by a barbarous age on WOOD,in the early period of the fifteenth century, to the richly finished andhighly varied characters and designs, in METAL, of improved taste andskill in later periods, collected at an immense expense by the nobleowner from every quarter of lettered Europe. The classical reader heredelighted traces the gradual progress, in refinement, of that DIVINEART, which has proved the means of preserving from oblivion all otherarts, and of consigning to immortality the most illustrious names inevery walk of science and fame, that, otherwise, might have perishedamid the wreck of time, and the revolution of empires. From everyquarter collected, we say but principally gleaned from MONASTERIES,those august and venerable fabrics, erected in ancient times by piouszeal and princely munificence throughout Europe ; but in this countrydesolated with such unsparing vengeance by the atrocious despot,HENRY VIII., under the plausible pretext of religious reformation, &c.We cannot conclude our strictures on these volumes without observing,that by a publication of such pre-eminent beauty and splendour,immortal honour is reflected on the SHAKSPEARE PRESS, whence it issued,and of which it may justly be denominated the CHEF D'CEUVRE. It isequally honourable to our country, and gratifying to the learned, thatin the metropolis of the kingdom a press exists, where works of unrivalledmagnificence and expense, though attended in the executionwith the greatest difficulty, yet can be brought to completion by theenergy and spirit of him who presides over it. On this subject, however,it is wholly unnecessary to dilate, as Mr. Buller's fame in typographicalmatters is so widely diffused, and as the highly finishedspecimens of the SHAKSPEARE PRESS have long been the admiration ofbook-collectors in every quarter of the world. M.THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 537Bishop of Ely, in the early warmth of his encomiastfeelings, had pronounced the work to be in a mannera NATIONAL one, yet it was allowed to pass by withoutthe slightest notice*. I cherished, therefore,the opinion of Mr. ROSCOE with redoubled delight.That opinion was communicated at the commencementof a long letter of ten pages in which many interestingcritical remarks and bibliographical quaerewere embodied ; and a most pleasant little controversywas in consequence superadded respecting thePazzi Conspiracy, as noted by Position in his Miscellanies,of 1478. Mr. Roscoe's good opinion is expressedin the following language.DEAR SIR,I had the pleasure of receiving, on Tuesday last, from iMessrs. Arch, the three volumes of your Bibliotheca Spentam called upon in gratitude to except the lengthened, and reallydissecting, review of the B. S. which appeared in the pages of the Gentleman'sMagazine for September, 1814 ; of which it strikes me that myold friend Sylvanus Urban himself attired in his favourite suit ofLincoln-Green" must have been the author. It was carried on (as Iseem to remember) through three consecutive numbers of that reallygentlemanly journal. I have unfeigned pleasure in transcribing theopening compliment to the late Noble Possessor of the Library. " It isa circumstance of proud exultation to this country that, in the person ofone Illustrious Peer are united taste, wealth, hereditary honour, and,above all, old English probity and liberality. That such a Nobleman,with skill and discernment to appreciate their value, and generosity togive for them a liberal remuneration, should possess the most choicecollection of early printed books that has hitherto fallen to the lot of anyindividual, is, we repeat, an honour to that country of which EARLSPENCER himself is so bright an ornament."538 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.mariana ; a pleasure for which I had waited for some timewith the true bibliomaniacal anxiety. My expectationswere at length amply gratified ; and I have ever since hadthe work almost constantly in my hands. To say that it isthe most splendid and most interesting work of the kindwhich the world has hitherto seen, is only a part of its commendation.Independent of the elegant arrangement of thevolumes, the accuracy of the fac similes, the beauty of theengravings, and the excellence of the paper and printing, itexhibits a diligence of research, an acquaintance with previouswriters, an acuteness of observation, and a liveliness ofstyle, which give it substantial and permanent value, andrender legitimate those ornaments by which it is so highlydecorated. Undoubtedly you have been peculiarly fortunatein having so fine a subject for your researches ; but thiscould only be an advantage to one who was capable of availinghimself of it. The descriptions of the rare and numerousbooks from wood-blocks are peculiarly interesting ; andthe original print of the Apocalypse is inestimable, andstamps a great additional value on the work. The short timethat I have had to peruse the descriptions and referenceswith the attention necessary on such a subject, prevents mefrom entering into very minute particulars ; but I could notrefrain, even at this early moment, from stating to you thegeneral impression which the publication has made on mymind, and I have no doubt but similar sentiments will becommunicated to you from other quarters of much greaterauthority, and in much warmer terms, &c.WM. ROSCOE *."The above criticism relates to the first three volumes. On the publicationof the fourth, and on the announcement of the BibliographicalCameron, Mr. Roscoe wrote thus :Atherton, <2Gth June, 1815.MY DEAR SIR,I have been much gratified by the fourth volume of BibliothecaTHE SPENCER LIBRARY. 539But great as my respect was, and ever has been,for the good opinion from such a quarter, yet mygratification was rendered still more complete by thetransmission, from Earl Spencer, of the commendationof the First Bibliographer upon the Continentin his Lordship's estimation I mean, the lateCOUNT D'ELCI ; who, in matters relating to thehistory of foreign printing, in the fifteenth century,had certainly no equal*. That erudite and ,which is not less beautiful, and is more interesting to me,than any of its predecessors. What spots it has, and there are no humanproductions without, are few in number, and of less importance, perhaps,than in the former volumes; and would scarcely deserve notice inatable of errata. On the whole, as you have had the FINEST SUBJECT,so you have certainly produced the finest and most interesting biblio-graphical work that the world has hitherto seen.What is yet wanting to bring us acquainted with the rest of therare and splendid works of the fifteenth Century will, I presume, be foundin your Bibliographical Cameron ; to which I must beg you to putme down as a Subscriber for two Copies of the common paper : and inclosedis a 51. Bank Note, being as near as I can remit, one-third of mysubscription. And I assure you I shall cheerfully comply with anyfurther calls you may find it convenient to make on your Subscriberstowards completing your work."Earl Spencer and the late COUNT D'ELCI were, for a series of years,pretty active correspondents on topics almost entirely bibliographical,carried on in the French language. Perhaps they were at the time thetwo first Bibliographers in Europe. Their respective resources, uponwhich they fell back in case of doubt and need, were always sure tosupply them with abundant materials for a vigorous renewal of thecontest. The Count, a Florentine by birth, lived a good deal at Vienna;and between Vienna and Florence his sojourning and routes wereusually directed in the accomplishment of one particular object thepossession of the parent-texts of every classical author. He was indefatigable,and upon the whole fortunate. All his strictures, both in hisletters to Count Reviczky and to the Noble Lord, were written witha close severity of research and fidelity of description which could not540 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.extinguished foreigner had given great praise to thefirst three volumes ; but on the receipt of the fourthbe surpassed. But, in the extent, variety, costliness, and splendour of alibrary of early printed books, his was not to be mentioned in the samebreath with that of his Noble Correspondent. See an interesting letterof Count D'Elci to Lord Spencer, in the Cameron, vol. Hi. p. 197.When Lord Spencer was in Italy, the Count unluckily happened tobe at Vienna but, apprised by His Lordship of his intended trip, theCount desired that the key of his Library might be put unreservedlyinto his Lordship's hands. Among the first uses made of that privilegewas one, for which I was most unfeignedly thankful it being nothingless than the transmission of a particular account, by the Noble Visitor,of some of the treasures of the collection visited. The reader will, Ifeel persuaded, be in a measure thankful, if I place before him a portiononly of the banquet with which I was myself treated.DEAR SIB, Naples, Feb. 1, 1820.I SHALL now proceed, according to my original plan, of extractingfrom my memorandum book, such intelligence as may be interesting toyou ; but instead of keeping the regular order, as I at first proposed, Iwill go immediately to Count ELCJ's collection which unquestionablyis that which to me appears the most interesting I have seen, althoughothers may contain some few detached articles of greater beauty andmagnificence. But as a collection of Editiones Principes made with aperfect knowledge of the subject, with a sufficient degree of selection asto fine condition of copies, and with opportunities cf acquiring what hewished to have such as no other collector can possess the view of itis certainly one of the highest treats that a bibliographer, curious in thatparticular branch of the science, can enjoy.It is not easy in the compass of a letter to describe his library. Iwas nearly four hours looking it over, but I had not time to see halfenough of what I should have wished to do, being necessarily occupiedin observing most particularly those articles which are wanting in myown collection. With regard, however, to the Latin books, the Dukeof Cassino has furnished me with the means of being more minutelyacquainted with them, as he is possessed of a MS. catalogue of them,given to him by D'Elci himself, and that recently. He was so good asto lend it to me, and I have extracted from it all those books whicheither were not in my collection, or which I was uncertain about. InGreek, first editions, I apprehend he is complete, as far as Classics go;but the only book in that language which I noted in my memorandaTHE SPENCER LIBRARY. 541lie writes thus to Lord Spencer, from Vienna, Nov.4, 1815.was, the A Dine Septuagint of 1518, of which his copy is uncut, and, asI believe, on large paper. In the Latin classics his great strength liesin TERENCE and JUVENAL*. In Juvenal 1 have nothing to envyD'Elci, except one, which is certainly most enviable. It is a small 4to.,containing that poet alone, in the small character used by Ulric Han inhis Cicero de Orator e. This is, without question, the real Edition Princepsof Juvenal, and it is the only copy I have seen or heard of, exceptone in the Duke di Cassino's library here, which the duke boughtunder the idea that it was printed by Sixtus Messenger at Naples ; but,on possessing, he ascertained that it was by Ulric Han which factD'Elci, who had it not, stoutly disputed ; but having got a copy forhis own collection, he now allows it to be so. I have no scruple insaying that I should much prefer this little volume even to the NaplesHorace t.His two Virgil, by Sweynheym and Pannartz, have been a gooddeal doctored, and smell very strong of the shop. He has a most beautifulcopy on vellum of the Spira Virgil, 1470, and another of thecommon paper, so large, that it would almost appear like large paper.His Azzoguidi Ovid is fine, as far as it goes, but it wants several leaves.Just before I heard from Mr. Grenville that he had bought one, I hadreceived from D'Elci a letter, inviting me to join him in purchasing thatvery copy of Tripoli, at Venice, which he asserted would complete bothour copies. Among other things, D'Elci has a most magnificent copyof the Socio Bible, 1488, and a very fine Complutensian PolyglotHe has also a Hebrew Testament, without date, but which he says wasprinted in 1476, and esteems as the greatest rarity in his collection, andThis is followed, in his Lordship's letter, by a list of fifteen editionsof Terence, of an early date, but without any indication of year,and of the greatest rarity ; among which there appears to be only one,that in the type of J. P. de Lignite, which is not in his Lordship'scollection. He describes the Count's copy of the Mcntelin edition,the real first edition of Terence," as a very fine one.t It will be seen, eventually, that his Lordship, by the PURCHASE ofthe entire collection of the Duke di Cassino, became necessarily in possessionof both the Juvenal and the Horace here designated.542 THE SPENCER LIBRARY."Enfin, extant retourne a Vienne, la premiere chosequej'ayfaite a etc de parcourir le Catalogue de voslivres. Je nay jamais vu rien de plus magnifiquequant a V execution typographical ; rien de pluschoisi et de plus riche quant aux articles qui y sontcontenus ; et rien de plus savant et de plus instructifquant aux notices qui sey trouvent"So much of the " SEQUEL," just alluded to, of agratifying result. I now come, in few words, tonotice a very singular, if not painful, issue. Thefourth volume of the B. S. had not been publishedmany days, before symptoms of a refractory spiritas quite unique. The condition of his books, as far as I had time toobserve them, is wonderfully good ; and what most surprised me, whenI saw them, was, I think I have no where seen so magnificent a suiteof the books printed by Sweynheym and Pannartz, both for soundnessof paper and breadth of margin : many of them being as it were onlarge paper. They are all (with few exceptions) bound at Vienna, and inabetter style than you would expect, but still a allemande ; and eachvolume has a pasteboard case of its own, in the shape of a book, letteredat the back, with all the particulars of the editio, as editio princeps,editio forsan princeps, editio primary, sine anninotd, &c. &c.His plan is to have all the doubtful first editions, and all the firsteditions with a date, and he has carried it to a degree of detail andminuteness which is surprising ; and makes a morning, passed in hislibrary, quite a study for a bibliographer. So much for D'Elci at present.I observed to you above, that he has had opportunities whichnever could occur to any other collector. Besides being constantly onthe spot, during the dispersion of all the monastic libraries, he has, bymeans of his interest at the court of Vienna, procured orders to beallowed to make exchanges in all the public libraries of their dominions,"THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 543betrayed themselves in a quarter whence anythingbut a mutinous disposition could be supposed to prevail.Orders were counter-ordered ; the seal wasessayed to be torn off the bond ; and nothing remainedfor me but protestation and submission*.In consequence, very many copies, actually bespoke,were thrown back upon my hands. I summoned upall the courage of which I was master. Dreading theissue of law proceedings as involving a terrible expenseat every step taken and resolving that my propertyshould not be debased by a paltry sacrifice to apetty gain I announced (I forget now in which paperor magazine) that certain copies of the fourth volumeshould be BURNT . by such a day, if not claimed.Count Rostopchin could not have been more determinedon the burning of Moscow, than I was ofsome sixty or hundred copies of my favourite volume.This announcement roused the spirit and kindledthe generosity of ONE bookseller, who stepped boldlyforward, as he informed me by letter, " to preventthis BURNING SHAME." That spirited individualwas Mr. JOHN MAJOR, then living under the gatewayof St. Bartholomew's Hospital enamoured ofa select collection of really sterling articles, whichwere always sure to meet a ready sale. His replynecessarily led to a personal conference. We wereThis subject is more than indirectly hinted at in the Cameron,and is again alluded to in a note attached to the Preface of the CassinoCatalogue.544 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.not long either in discussing preliminaries or drawingconclusions. It was evident that two kindred spiritshad met for the first time ; and a bargain was madeon a basis so liberal and satisfactory, that Mr. Majorbecame possessed of all the remaining copies of thefourth volume, with the determination of not sellingone copy under the price of its publication. I believethat not more than half a dozen copies nowsurvive this determination.Thus, on the arrangement of this business, I sawmy Spencerian labours fairly launched, as beforeobserved, upon the ocean of public opinion ; andimmediately turned my whole attention to the productionof the BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DECAMERON; awork which, for the next two years, engrossed allmy time and attention, and absorbed all my " floatingcapital." But of that work, in an ensuing chapter.Yet, at the end of the year 1816, I contrived tobring out the third, and most generally interesting,volume of my Typographical Antiquities ; of whichmention has been made in a preceding page*. In theyear 1818, 1 went abroad ; and there, having been ninemonths incessantly occupied in the examination ofpublic and private libraries for the collection ofmaterials for another publication, I returned home,resolving to bring forward that publication underthe title of a Bibliographical, Antiquarian, andPicturesque Tour. While this work was in con-page286. 'THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 545temptation, Lord Spencer went abroad, with his Countess,to France and Italy*. Meanwhile I had laidIt should seem from His Lordship's first letter to me from Naples,Dec. 20, 1819, that the sound of his " chariot-wheels" had preceded hispersonal appearance in Italy. The u good folk" had not only imaginedthat everything which he wanted must be of excessive scarcity, but thathis means of acquisition were inexhaustible. Nothing was more ridiculouslyabsurd than, in some instances, the prices demanded and theconclusions drawn. It was, however, singular enough that, in the firstbooksellers shop which his lordship entered at Rome, he found theSwynheym and Pannartz Martial of 1473 u a book not be to found inany of the libraries in Italy, with the exception of that of the Duke diCassino, which Audiffredi had never seen, and which had been inquiredafter in vain at Paris and at Milan." I believe he gave 20 for the copy ;but on its becoming a duplicate, on the acquisition of the duke's library,it was disposed of to Mr. Van Prae, on his return, in exchange for someLibri Desiderata. In this letter Lord Spencer speaks also of the acquisitionof a few other subordinate articles ; but in his last letter, after thepurchase of the Cassino collection, he dwells with particular satisfactionon having got "a Petrarch by Aldus, of 1501, ON VELLUM; the verycopy which I should find described by Renouard in his Annales, &c.as having belonged to Cardinal Bembo, with all the curious notes hementions, and the epigrams in Bembo's handwriting at the end of it."In one of these letters, I was much gratified by Lord Spencer'saccount of the library of COUNT MELZI, at Milan. He mentions havingseen those of the Marquis de Trivulzio and Signor Regna, at the sameplace, but dwells only upon the former, thus : " Since I left Paris (sayshis lordship) nothing worthy of mention offered itself till I got to Milan.There I was much pleased with several fine and curious books in threeprivate libraries [those of the individuals just mentioned.] In CountMelzi's I saw some very beautiful copies, but as a complete collection ofthe valuable editions of the fifteenth century, it is not to be spoken of.The only articles which I think I should have much coveted were, anedition of Ovid's Epistles in 4to., without date, in the character ofLaver at Rome ; and the owner very provokingly shewed me two copiesof it, one of which had been very recently promised to Count D'Elci,otherwise I might have had it ; Claudia de Rapt Proserpine, in thecharacter of the Lucretius of Ferandus; Juvenal per Jacobus Fi-vinum;Euripides, List. Majusculis, Forest. UNCUT; Livy, VinN546 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.the foundation of the jades Althorpiance-, and of aSupplemental volume to the Bibl. Spenceriana. Iwent over to France again in 1820, and met my Lordand Lady on their return, at the Hotel de V Empireat Paris. But, in the mean time, " A DEED OF NOTE"had been done by my Noble Patron. He had purchased,at Naples, the whole of the CASSANO Collection.His correspondence with me upon thatsubject, is among the most particular, instructive,and gratifying of his letters.delia de Spira, ON VELLUM ; Biblia Italics Mense August, ON VELLUM,magnificently illuminated; Virginius Ali, 1505, ON VELLUM; CiceroExist. Familia res A Ici, 1540, ON VELLUM; Boccaccio Delamere, genuineedition of 1527, Large Paper; Dante, 1481, twenty plates. Hehas also lately purchased the first Virgil, by Swynheym and Pannartz,a fine copy, with one leaf manuscript, and wanting the Priapeia;also a perfect copy of the Brescia Lucretius, printed by Ferandus.This last I did not see, as it had not yet come home. The Count hasbesides a great collection of very fine books in all classes, and a greatmany of the rarest large paper classics of the English, Dutch, andFrench editions, and many very rare Italian books which I had nottime to examine."It is pleasing to add, that Count Melzi's books (with the exceptionof all those printed in the Italian language) were purchased by the lateMr. Payne, the bookseller, and of him by Frank Hall Standish, Esq., ofLuxury Hall, Leicestershire. I had often the pleasure of examiningthis limited but precious collection when it was lodged at Mr. Payne's.The vellum Livy was indescribably beautiful and sound. Since thisacquisition, Mr. Standish has become the owner of the ComplutensianPolyglot, upon vellum, purchased at the sale of Mr. Hibbert's library.But of all the books above described by His Lordship, I feel persuadedthat the Italian Bible Mense August, 1471, was THE ONE of which hewould mostly covet the possession. That edition is, indeed, necessaryto render the early biblical series complete in the Spencer library. Tobe sure, the Aldine Virgil of 1505, upon vellum, would be a gloriousaddition to the Aldine Vellums in the same collection.THE Spencer UHKAIIY. 547I mention thus briefly these important events inmy life, that the reader may see that it is with theview of introducing methodically the subject-matterwhich immediately follows, as connected with thepreceding. I therefore propose to myself to say afew words upon the Supplemental volume above alludedto, and upon the Cassino Catalogue, as beingpart and parcel of " THE SPENCER LIBRARY." Ofthe JEdes Althorpiance, in the ensuing chapter. Itwas during my preparation of the supplemental volumethat Lord Spencer was at Naples ; and it wasfirst thought questionable whether the Cassino Booksmight not be incorporated in that volume. But therew r ere peremptory reasons why this plan should beabandoned: and I heartily rejoice that it was so*.As it appears to be somewhat difficult, if not im-hisLordship's words (Naples, 7 April, 1820,) are, " I think thatyour idea of making a supplement, entitled 'THE CASSANO Catalogueswill be a good plan, particularly as it will enable you to postponethe completion of it till the last thing of all before your book goesto press ; as I should very much wish that you could read with attentionthe duke's manuscript Catalogue Raisonne of his books, before youdescribe them. It is done with great care, and especially in the partwhich consists of books printed in the kingdom of the Two Similes,which contains a great deal of curious and interesting bibliographicalerudition, much of which was before quite unknown to me, and will, Ibelieve, b6 new to the generality of bibliographers. It is of course alittle more laboured than is necessary, and puffs off the condition andrarity of the copies rather too much like a sale catalogue ; but the realmatter in it is very valuable, and makes an interesting branch of typographicalhistory of the fifteenth century." In the formation of myCatalogue of the Duke of Cassino's collection, I did, of course, as I wasrequested to do; but found very little material assistance in the notesalluded to.N N 2548 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.practicable, to notice any particulars connected withthis Supplemental volume separately from that ofthe JEdes, with which it was published, I proceedat once to the account ofTHE CASSANO LIBRARY.Of this Library, how little could the Noble Ownerhave entertained the idea of its possession, when, inaletter from Al thorp, of the date of Dec. 11, 1814,he seemed fearful that his nephew, the Duke ofDevonshire, might become the eventual possessor ofit. It will be seen, in an extract from one of HisLordship's letters to me, in a preceding page * (respectingCount D'Elci's collection), that he had atthat time seen two of the most tempting classicalvolumes in the Duke di Cassino's Library. Thesewere the Juvenal, printed in the first and smallroman character of Ulric Han, without date, butpublished in 1468 ; and the far-famed Horace of1474, printed by Arnoldus de Bruxella, *at Naples.The first idea of Lord Spencer was, to obtain thesetwo books only for which, he says, he actually didoffer the Duke 3000 ducats (equal to about 5001.sterling), which was declined. Of these two booksit seems that the first had greater claims upon hisattention, and upon his purse, than the second.This surprised me : as, of the second, no other copyis at present known ; of the first, two other copiesSee page 541, ante.THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 549are known*. However, my surprise and my delightwere equally indescribable, when, early in 1820, Ireceived a letter from his Lordship, dated Naples,4th Feb. 1820, beginning thus :DEAR SIR,"THOUGH I think you will have considered my lastletter of the 1st of this month rather interesting-]-, I cannothelp flattering myself that the present will be more so. Ipromised you to appropriate it to a description of theQuattrocentisti (as they are called here) of the DUKE DICASSANO's LIBRARY, and I fully intended to keep my promise; but (whether fortunately or unfortunately I will leaveyou to judge) I am precluded from literally keeping it forthese, like all riches, are so liable to make themselves wingsand fly away, that between the writing of my last letter andthis present date, they have ceased to bear the above-mentioneddenomination ; and tired, I suppose, like the otherresidents of Naples, of the unpropitious weather we havehad here this winter, they meditate an emigration to morenorthern skies and before this letter reaches you, will, Ihope, be on their way to England, on board of H. M. S. theRochford, of 80 guns, from which they will be landed atPortsmouth. But what is to be their ULTIMATE destination? You naturally anticipate it and therefore, withoutpreface, they are now ALL mines!"The Noble Writer might well immediately add :I fancy I can see your astonishment when youread this ; and conceive the eagerness with whichBoth volumes are particularly described in the Cassino Catalogue,pp. 55, 63.t The latter descriptive of COUNT D'ELCI's LIBRARY : see p. 540,ante.550 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.you will be writing to impart this important fact inthe history of the BIBLIOMANIA, to all your friendsin London ; hut I must desire of you to check yourardour, and must absolutely insist upon it that youwill keep this intelligence within your own breasttill I shall permit you to divulge it or at least tillthe said Books are safely lodged in Spencer Houses'Then follows a long list, in three pages, written inhis Lordship's smallest hand, descriptive of the GEMSin the Collection . . . and designated with a precisionand accuracy peculiar to the writer. On the verynext day of the date of this letter, his Lordship wasso good as to continue the congenial subject by anenumeration of such duplicates as would necessarilyoccur in consequence of his purchase. He prefaceshis letter of five pages by the following exordium.Though I wrote so lately, I am anxious to pursuethe interesting subject of my last letter ; and thereatwas not a little singular that, on my first call at No. 81, PallMall, after the receipt of the above letter from Lord Spencer, I foundMr. Payne alone, and extremely disposed to ask many questions respectingLord Spencer's book acquisitions, actual and in prospect,during his stay in Italy. " I learn (added my amiable inquirer) thathe has got scent of the Duke di Cassino's library, and will certainly bethepurchaser of it at least they say so at Paris." I felt the bloodmantling upon my cheek, and just as I was about to stammer a vagueanswer, some gentleman entered the room, to whom Mr. Payne thoughtit necessary to pay immediate attention. This afforded me the opportunityof sidling out, and of making a shabby but timely retreat.When I was at last authorised to communicate the fact, Mr. Paynerose up, as if astounded, from his chair dropped his snuff-box in theact of rising and ejaculated, in a deep, but long-drawn tone, the emphaticmonosyllable " Z ds!"THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 551fore avail myself of a leisure evening, between tworoyal shooting days*, to complete my account, as faras appears at present to be necessary, of the Dukedi Cassino's late Library, by enumerating the principalarticles which will be Duplicates in consequenceof the transfer, of which my letter of yesterday's datewill have informed you."In due time the CASSANO TREASURES arrived ; andwithin a twelvemonth of their arrival a sale of theDuplicates took place at Mr. Evans's containingvolumes of such rarity and value, that a few of themore curious articles, with the sums which theybrought, may be seen below t. In due time, also, myThis was at Casenta; a regal villa, a short distance from Naples. Iremember hearing the late Countess Spencer describing a small Psalter,shewn her by the late King of Naples, from the royal collection, ofwhich the embellishments or illustrations were really and truly by thehand of GIULIO Clovis. She observed, that nothing which she hadever seen (and her ladyship was no indifferent judge) could pretend torival those exquisite embellishments for smallness of subject, minutenessof touch, and extraordinary lustre of colour.t Before the coming on of the sale indeed before the embarkationof the books on board the Rochford his Lordship was fully aware oftheir general condition, and induced to put a proper estimate accordinglyupon their probable produce at Mr. Evans's. He observes, " Ifear that, on their first appearance, they will look a little rough to eyesaccustomed to the handiwork of Charles Lewis."The sale took place on the 1st of March, 1821, occupying fourdays. A few of the rarer articles, above alluded to, together with theprices they brought, may be thus briefly noticed :Ausonius, 1472, editio princeps . . . ^. &4> 12Biblia Latina, 1462, Mount. folio, 2 vols., a most beautifuland magnificent copy, UPON VELLUM, with illuminationsof the time. Purchased by H. R. H. the Dukeof Sussex . . . . . . 94 101476, printed by Jenson, folio, UPON THE SPENCER LIBRARY.Catalogue of the Library made its appearance inone volume, to the full as beautifully executed as anyLUM, slightly defective in the first and third leaves. Abeautiful book . . . . . 21Boccaccio la Theseide, Ferrara, 1475, folio, prima edition.Of excessive rarity*. . . 117 12Catholicon, 1460, folio, two leaves wanting . . 15 15Cicero de Orator, Ulric Han, 1468, folio. A very finecopy of an exceedingly rare book . . 27 6TusculancB Questions, 1469, folio . 22 1Dante, la Comdoeia, 1472, folio, prim. edit. . 19 8 6Col. Comment di Landing 1481,folio . . . . . 52 10Hist. August Scriptures, 1475, folio, edit. prin. . . 12 17Horatius, edit. prim, sine anni nota, 4to. . 49 17Juvenal, Ulric Han, list. major, folio . . 24 13 6Lucan, 1469, folio, edit. prin. . . 25 4Manilius, Reiogmantus, Nuremberg, 4to. . 12 12Martial, V. de Spira. folio, edit. prin. . . . 18 18Sw. and Pannartz, 1473, folio (see page 546,note, ante) . . . . . 10 5Monte Sancti di Dio, 1477, folio. A fine and completecopy . . . . . 28 7Ovidii Opera, Sw. and Pannartz, 1471, folio, editio secundo.Purchased by the Rt. Hon. Thos. Grenville. 73 10de Arte Amanda, Gainer, 1471, folio . 14Pinus, I. de Spira, 1469, folio, edit. prin. A fine andperfect copy . . . . 39 18Jenson, 1476, Ital., UPON VELLUM, wanting oneleaf . . . . . 32 6Silius Italics, Sw. and Pannartz, 1471, folio, edit. prin. 31 10This book was bought in by His Lordship, to present to Mr. Hubert,in exchange for that very rare edition of the Boccaccio, withoutdate or place, described in volsci. p. 299-301, of the Des Athorpianee,which had been presented in turn to Lord Spencer by Mr. Hibbert. Mr.Hibbert had obtained it of Mr. Singer at the price of 100 guineas; butthe above volume, which he received in exchange, produced, at the saleof his own library, the sum of 160/. It is of most tremendous rarity.See Bibl. Spencer* vol. iv. 84.THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 553of its precursors ; but destitute of all embellishment.It concludes with a copious Index of all the " Authorsand Editions" described in that and the sixpreceding volumes. It was published at the priceof I/. Is. ; and Messrs. Payne and Foss and Mr.Evans were the publishers. A short preface of eightpages pointed out the leading features of this extraordinaryCollection. The commencement and theconclusion of the Preface may not be irrelevantlyintroduced in the present place. The former is asfollows.For the fourth and last time, I present myself to thePublic as connected with the MAGNIFICENT LIBRARY, thetreasures of which are in part disclosed in the present andsix preceding volumes. The Noble Owner of these treasuresmight have been well satisfied in setting all competitionat defiance even before he had made himself master of thecollection, which now, under the title of the CASSANO Library,for the first time claims the public attention. Buthis zeal, taste, and liberal spirit, in the prosecution of thatpursuit to which he has devoted the last thirty-Jive years ofSuetonius, I. P. de Lignite, 1470, folio, edit. prin. . 15 15Sw. and Pannartz, 1470, folio . . . 15 15Tacitus, sine anni nota, folio, the supposed edit. prin. . 10 10Valerian Flaccid, 1474, folio, edit. prin. . 25 10Valerian Maximus, Mentelin, edit. prin. . . 12 16Virginius, Sw. and Pain., 1469, folio, edit. prin. fourleaves wanting, with the whole of the priapeia. It wasotherwise in a very tender condition. Purchased forthe Bodleian Library . . . 63Upon the whole, considering the drooping state of the market, theserare and valuable books brought fair round prices. Some of them,such as the Ausonius, Horace, the second Ovid, and Silius Italics,were exceedingly well sold.554 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.his life, forbade him to decline the acceptance of an offer,by which the riches of his collection might be said to be increasedeven to repletion."The latter runs thus :On thus taking a final leave of these magnificent andtruly precious productions, of which the description has occupiednearly three thousand pages (including the present orseventh volume), I might be allowed to indulge a feeling ofno ordinary or irrational triumph, were not that feeling embittered,in some measure, by a consideration of the capriceof public taste, and of the poverty of public patronage. Atthe termination of nine years labour (more or less diversifiedor interrupted) upon ONE WORK of which I will fearlesslypredict its duration for the ordinary limits of human famethe principal consolation left me, is, the conviction that mytime and occupations have been honestly and usefully devoted.When the STUDY of BIBLIOGRAPHY shall be moregenerally cultivated, its uses will be more generally acknowledged.It will be found to rank among those branches ofantiquarian research which are as conducive to correct tasteand useful intelligence as any other ; nor can that departmentof literature be considered as mean and unprofitable,which has been dignified by the publications of such men asMORHOF and Patricius names, that rank among the mosteminent of those of foreign Bibliographers.But mixed as may be my feelings on a reflection of thisnature, they are, in another point of view, gratifying andpure. I have done everything in my power to establish, ona firm foundation, the celebrity of a LIBRARY of which theremembrance can only perish with every other record ofindividual fame. I will say nothing of the high and honourablecharacter of its NOBLE OWNER, either in his public orprivate capacity ; but I may be permitted to remark, thatit is even possible for the names of COLBERT and HARLEYto be forgotten, as Ministers, while they will be for everTHE SPENCER LIBRARY. 555remembered as COLLECTORS of MANUSCRIPTS and ofPRINTED BOOKS. Kensington, May 1, 1823."A note is subjoined, chiefly in observing upon thestrange and groundless attack of a foreign bibliographerand critic, the late Mr. EBERT, upon thelow state of Bibliography in Great Britain. PoorEbert perished untimely ; but in his vocation and,as it were, "on the field of battle." The coldphlegm of the German critic may be well contrastedwith the warm eulogy of another foreigner amongthe most diligent, exact, and distinguished of livingBibliographers t. That eulogy is in part as follows :"get ouvrage, imprime magnifiquement sur tres beaupapier vflin, est sans nul doute le Catalogue le pluscurieux qu'on ait jamais public". . . " Ainsi, que1'atteste ce Catalogue, la bibliotheca de LORD Spencewas mounted very high upon a ladder in the library, andstretching out his arm to replace a book, he lost his balance, and fellprecipitously upon the floor, and, as I learn, scarcely breathed a secondtime. His death was undoubtedly a loss, in its way. Ebert came fromDresden to Wolfenbiitel, where he was librarian of the public library.Here he must have often had within his hands the Book of Fables,with coarse wood cuts, printed by Pfister ; of which most curious anduncommon book, replaced there, from Paris, by the victorious armiesof the allies in 1815, no other copy was ever known to have existed.Ebert was of all gropers among books, rather than of bibliographers,the most incessantly diligent and active ; but he was a snarler at heart ;and may be classed among those doggedly and mechanically movingbipeds, among his countrymen, whose shoes are always hobnailed,and whose food is invariably sour-trout.t BRUNET : Manuel du Libraire.556 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.CER, est la plus riche, peut-tre, qu'ait jamais formeraucun Particulier."It remains to add, that the whole of the SPENCERLIBRARY is now concentrated at Althorp ; and I canonly, and most cordially, renew the expressionbefore committed to the publicEst PERPETUA!"