BIBLIOPHOBIA.REMARKSON THEPRESENT LANGUID AND DEPRESSED STATE OFLITERATUREAND THE BOOK TRADE.IN A LETTERADDRESSED TO THE AUTHOR OF THE38ibliomania.BYMercuric Rustics.WITH NOTES *BY CATO Parvis.Fear is the order of the day. To those very natural andlong" established fears of bailiffs and tax gatherers, must now beadded the fear of Reform, of Cholera, and of Books." p. 6.LONDON :HENRY Born, 4, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.1832.Of this Pamphlet there are 100 Copies printed uponLarge Paper — for the sake of " those whom it may concern."i\ADVERTISEMENT.The ensuing pages would never have seen the light,hut that, on shewing them in MS. to a neighbouringfriend — who lives just across the moor — he waspleased to express a very favourable opinion oftheir probable good tendency, if given to the world;adding, that a few notes,* which he would cheer f idlysupply, might perhaps help to promote the object inview. As I knew him to be well versed in the arcanaboth of black-letter and of modern publications,and most regular in his annual visits to theMetropolis, I thankfully accepted his offer, I hopetherefore that the text and notes together mayprove acceptable to the kind-hearted reader, whocannot but sympathize with their author in the presentmelancholy prevalence of the disease of ; which is altogether ?hew in its characteristics,and ominous of the most direful results.The first two notes of my friend bear his name: CatoParvus, or the Initials: afterwards, they have neither namenor initials. My own few notes bear the initials M. R.71 RdfLRA LETTER, &c.Laurel Lodge.Oct. 31, 1831.Reverend Sir,It is now, I believe, upwards oftwenty-years, since you kindly undertook theuseful task of making the public acquainted withthe symptoms or characteristics of the dreadfuldisease called the Bibliomania. With thesymptoms of the disease, you also furnished themwith the means of its cure. But, strange to say,the very opposite to the effect predicted tookplace. The mania increased in fury. Its ravagesspread far and wide, and its victims were numerous.Men seemed to judge by " the rule ofcontrary'* They hunted hole and corner forblack letter J and large paper ^ and uncut ^ copies ofthe several works they were in search of; and,with the palpable evidence of astounding factsbefore their eyes they rushed infatuatedly forwardto embrace the very causes of self-destruction.Such heart-rending cases oi felo-dense hadnever been before recorded.Things are strangely altered of late: and passionsand tastes have taken a very opposite tone.Objects, which formerly rivetted attention, andbegat attachment, are now considered almost asthose of horror and alarm. In shorty fear is theorder of the day. To those very natural andlong-established fears of bailiffs and tax-gatherers,must now be added the fear of Reform, ofCholera, and of Books.I am induced to trouble you with a few remarksupon this melancholy but highly interestingsubject, in consequence of a visit recently paidto a friend in town; whom, in the osgood oldtimes " of Bibliomania, I used to accompany tobook-sales: — from whom I learned to ^Miit mybird" with unerring dexterity, and, in consequence,to store my larder with a profusion ofgame. In other words, to make my book-purchaseswith discrimination, and to enrich myshelves with a due sprinkling of choice copies.I staid with my friend during the three lattermonths of '' the season," as it is called; andwhen I returned to my solitary rural residence,and cast an eager look over those '' preciousgems," which, in former times, seemed tosparkle with unrivalled lustre, somehow orother they appeared to fall flat and dead uponmy notice. Ill-humour, vexation, and wrath at thecapriciousness of public taste, all united to makeme retreat precipitately from my book-room —for it aspires not to the dignified appellative of a'' LIBRARY." However, after a few short, heavybreathing's, I returned to my once favouritehaunt of retirement. I carried with me all myformer kind and warm-hearted feelings towardsthose objects of silent but eloquent instruction;and throwing myself into my walnut-tree curiaarmed chair, read to myself a sharplecture on the absurdity of yielding to the veryfeelings which I had deprecated. I then seemedto breathe freely again : and signing a tacit contractwith my beloved, resolved that nothingin future should ever cause me to bate one jot ofmy attachment towards my Dugdales and myLearned.It is true — living in a village as I do — thereis little inducement from without to cause mybook-passion to increase in ardour. The Squirehas not the smallest notion of the value of largemargins or rough edges : and when I took downthe Fructus Temporis printed by Machine, asthe ne pins ultra of my book-gems, he declaredthat he had " never seen anything, in the shapeof a book, half so frightful in his life !"* TheThe Squire may be forgiven for this brusquerie in passing-judgment.It is, typographically speaking, a ** frightful" book.A good deal of puzzle belongs to the identifying of the Chronicleprinted in the Abbey of St. Allan, and of that printed byMachliiiia, See these books fully described in the Bill.Spenceriana, vol iv. 360-73; 393. Cato Parvus.Clergyman, in all other respects a most exemplarycharacter, has no idea of the worth of myduodecimo black regiment of Latimer, Fox, andGrant ; * but obstinately adheres to his Barrow,Tillotson, and Canterbury. I pity, from my heart,such a circumscribed range of taste : and givingup the Squire as incorrigible, hope yet to teachthe Vicar better things.I confess that one of the principal motives fortroubling you with this epistolary address, is, theexcessive astonishment and chagrin which I experiencedat the sale of the Autograph Novelsof the renowned Author of Waverley. What,Sir, is it come to this ? Are the fire and spiritand emulation of our young nobility and gentryquite extinct? Is the love of legendary lorewholly defunct? Are the gewgaws of jewellery,the tardiness of furniture, the trickery ofhorse dealing, the brittleness of Dresden andSevere ware and '^ such-like," to form paramountobjects of purchase and speculation, by those,Copious and curious specimens of the pulpit eloquenceof Latimer, Fox, and Grant, will be found in the Library,Companion, p. 66-81 ; to which add, as there adduced, specimensfrom a contemporary of the name of EdgeworthWhen I quote from the Library Companion, I wish it to beunderstood that I quote from the first, or as some booksellerscall it, the Breeches Edition of 1824. The second is howeverthe more valuable. Will posterity ever be made acquaintedwith the mystery belonging to this small-clothes designation ?C, P.whose purses are usually well lined with pistoles?In what an age of effeminacy amon men,and of utter nonchalance and apathy among women,do we now live! At the sale in question,scarcely '' Three Gentlemen of Verona" werepresent. Mr. Evans eyed his auditory withevident marks of surprise and discomfort. Heexpected to have found — with the Campbell andMoors, the Gaits, Rulers, and Wards, of theday — half-a-score of Roxburghers^ with the eliteof the Athenaeum, and even a due sprinkling ofthe fashionable Bas Bleu, He found no suchthing. One or two authors, and a brace of M.P.'sonly were present. The rest were booksellers ; ofwhom Mr. Thorpe, as usual, occupied a good portionof the foreground: and, to his credit it mustbe added, became the largest bibliopolistic purchaseron the occasion.Continued omnes intention ora tenant,as Mr. Evans commenced his " prologue to theswelling act." It was evident, however, that anunder current was running pretty strongly againstthe audible tide of speech : at times, even " voxfaucibushaesit." Still it was a good earnest harangue— well timed — and to those, who did notremember the "oratioparainetica" preceding thesub hast sale of the Valdarfer Boccaccio and thevellum Livy of Sweynheim and Panriartz,* theeffort was creditable and effective. But oh! Sir,what language can express the surprise of bothauctioneer and company, when the Monastery, thefirst article in the sale, produced only the sum of£*18. 18s. !| Where where ye, ye pains-taking, ,indefatigable collectors of Franks —ye threatens of autographic scraps — yeAlbum-ites,^' et hoc genus omne?" — where were ye " in thatSee a very full and particular description of the sales ofthese celebrated volumes in the Ninth Day of the Biblio-graphical Decameron, vol. iii. pp. 62-117. A sequel, of someinterest, belongs to the narrative there disclosed. EarlSpencer, in the year 1819, at the sale of the library of theMarquis of Sandford, (now Duke of Marlborough,) whohad purchased the Boccaccio at the Duke of Roxburgh's salefor £2260., became possessed of that treasure for less than halfthe sum. The vellum Livy of 1469, which the late Sir M.Sakes, Bart, purchased at the sale of Mr. Edward's libraryin 1815, for £903, was purchased by Messrs. Payne and Foss,at the sale of Sir Mark's library in 1824, for £472. 10s., andsold by them to the late Mr. Dent for 500 guineas. At the saleof Mr. Dent's library in 1827, this book, for the third time,was disposed of by public auction, by Mr. Evans, to Messrs.Payne and Foss, for £262. 10s. It is now — and long may itthere continue— in the very fine library of the Rt. Hon. Thos.Grenville. Could its first English possessor have survived theintelligence, that his darling Livy would one day droop itswings so low ?t The lots, with their respective prices, were as follows : —1. The Monastery, perfect, £18. 18s: 2. Gny3Iannering,wmn-ing a leaf at the end of vol. 2, £27. 10s: 3. Old Mortality,perfect, £33 : 4. The Antiquary, perfect, £42 : 5. Rob Roy,perfect, £50: 6. Several of the Peak, perfect, £42: 7.hour V One would have thought that the originaldrafts of those master-pieces of human wit,eloquence and passion — struck-off by the greatKNOWN UNKNOWN — would have attracted crowdsof competitors within the arena of Mr. Evans'sauction-room ; that scarcely breathing-space,much less standing-room, would have been afforded: and that Scotland herself would havefurnished champions to carry off the richer prizesat the point of the claymore !I own, that I was bewildered with the scenebefore me. I was, indeed sorrow-stricken —chop-fallen — and evidently depressed. My friendperceived it. He essayed to sooth and to cheerme: but melancholy, as black and deep as anydepicted by Bright or Burton,* had taken entirepossession of me. I slunk quietly behind one ofthe square pillars, at right and left of the rostrum,and resolved to be a mute, but not watchfulspectator of all around me. '^ What " (said I tomyself,) 'not one specimen for Bodley — for theBritish — for the London — for the Royal — for theAdvocates — for Dublin ?"t Then again for midi"Waverley, imperfect, £18: 8. The Abbot, imperfect, £14:9. Ivanhoe, imperfect, £12 : 10. The Pirate, imperfect, £12:11. Fortunes of Niger, impeded, £16. 16s. 12. Kenilworth,imperfect, £17 : 13. Bride of Lammermoor, only 61 pages,£14. 14s.Bright's treatise on Melancholy was first published, I believe,in 1586— Burton's, in 1621.t I presume, for the sake of brevity, the adjunct of *' lingualcompanionship. Where was Mr. D. T.and Mr. A., and Mr. U.? All asleep — as well asfaraway? It should seem so ; for the produceof the whole lots did not amount to quite ^ fifthof what was expected.**'Excidat ille dies aevo, neu postern creditSecular!"It will scarcely be believed, that the spiritevinced at the previous sale of the late Mr. Hamper'sManuscripts should have become, as ifstruck by some benumbing talisman, paralysed atthis. The man whose genius had supplied suchabundant food for delightful recreation and in-bray," has been purposely left out in the above designations.There is, I fear, a sad state of torpor — a chilling indifferenceto the genuine book-feeling — possessing many of theguardians of the above several public repositories. Howhesitatingly, and how rarely, are purchases made !The fact, as I understood it, was this. The proprietorsof the MSS. were offered by the trustees of the Advocates'Library, £1000. for the whole. This offer was not thoughtsufficiently liberal ; and the proprietors stood out for anotherthousand. This contre-projet was not listened to for a moment: and the hammer of Mr. Evans was in consequence todecide the matter irrevocably. The MSS. came to town; andthe result of the entire sale of those that were put up was, asis above stated. We know there are such things as "outstandingone's market." The general impression was, at theoutset, that they would average £50. a lot.t The sale of Mr. Hamper's printed books and MSS.took place in 1831. There was a most interesting melange:and the last day's sale of MSS. and autographs, producedabove £1100.destruction, for the last thirty-years had the mortificationto learn that the autographic taste of hisvaunting Southern neighbours was a mere capriciousimpulse — a childish and fickle conceit —without intelligible motive or object. Givingmy friend the slip, I stole sulkily away; resolvingto bid adieu to book-sales and book-purchases, ofevery description, for one season. This unexpectedresult expedited my departure from town ;and I found myself at Laurel Lodge, a thoughtful,disappointed inmate — when I had hoped to haveentered it with alacrity and glee. At first, Iwas not only disconsolate, but absolutely peevishand irritable. As before intimated, I seemed toloathe my library. I even shunned society. Isought only my alcove and sweet-briar walks ;but the blossoms had lost their hue and fragrance.The sky was never clear. The heavens werenever blue. The throstle had learned the chatterof the jay. The nightingale was always in Flat.Another consideration has somewhat dampedmy spirits, and helped to give the leaves of thebeech and the oak (in my lower-meadow-walk)a premature '' sere and yellow'' tinge. Just beforemy departure from town, I made a fewbook-pilgrimages from one end of it to the other.Starting from the corner of Cornwall, where thosemost respectable brothers — the Gemini of theeastern hemisphere — reside, I leisurely strolledtowards St. James's Palace ; calling, as my customever was, upon several bibliopoles in my way.To begin with my start. Time was. Sir, as youknow full-well, and better than myself, when morethan one British merchant would let his carriagedrop down a few paces towards the London Tavern,(for the racket and roar of the four crossing-roads,or streets, put the wheels of a gentleman'scarriage in great jeopardy ) and its inmate wouldstep into the shop of Messrs. J. & A. Arch — andafter a little pleasant interchange of literarygossip, take down — ay, and forthwith take upand away with him, into his carriage — more thanone portly folio, or wide-spreading quarto. Ihave known a whole row of a choicely colouredBuffon, in the former shape — and a whole seriesof the Chronicles, in the latter shape — disposed ofin a trice, by a customer, who not only knewwhat he was about, but who loved, as regularlyas the January dividends came in, to stand squareand firm upon the credit side of the booksellers'ledger.* " How comes it'' quoth I, '^ gentlemen,that there is nothing now stirring in this way? —that over the gilded tops of these volumes there isa somewhat dense layer of dust? and that, acrossyonder set of Gravis and Gronovius, the spiderhath been allowed to spin his subtle web ?" Theanswer was prompt, and too well founded. " Bib-thelate Mr. Rennie used to say — ** I am upon goodterms with all the booksellers, and there is one thing for whichthey ought to like me — I never go to a Sale for any thing thatI can get at a shop." M, R,romania was no more. The canons of Dr. Dibdinwere no longer assented to. A frightful heresywas abroad. The wished for Reform in Parliament,like Aaron's serpent, had swallowed upevery other interest and pursuit; andbookswerenow only the shadow of what they were. However,let but a perfect Coverdale's Bible turn up,and we shall see whether the strong box cannotafford a settler — to the tune of £100. — for its acquisition!"The Row was the next quarter to be visited :not, however, without giving a look-in at Messrs.Legate, and Jennings and Chaplin, in my routethither. I will own, that this " look-in" rathergratified me. I love to see human beings rubbingtheir hands, and, in the quick movements oftheir eyes and tongues, giving demonstration thatjoy was touching their hearts. I found Mr. Leg-gatenot only in high feather, but in high glee.His prints had met with a prosperous sale. Gentlemennow and then got a little breathing timefrom that Pandemonium of speculation (theS. E. ) and passing a few minutes with him, frequentlyscribbled a cheque for a Wilkie or aTurner. "We shortly expect (said Mr. Legate,raising his voice and arms simultaneously) theChelsea Pensioners oni*,^ and then the town will beThe '' Chelsea Pensioners" ARE out— emblazoning numerousshop-windows — delighting the looker-on, and makingthe purchaser supremely happy. I learn that, already, up-quitealive." Mr. Jennings received me evidentlyunder the impression that Annuals' werelikely to become Perennials, The " LandscapeAnnual," was to be eminently successful. Mr.Rogers' "Italy " had proved a mine of wealth toall the parties concerned. Books, tc be sure,were rather on the wane ; but Engravings, whenwards of £8000. worth of this print are disposed of — and thatthe French paper proofs are not yet delivered. Rare doingsfor Pall Mall ! — making the face of the ^' soon" to shinelike that of the sun. 1 remember the painting of this picture :how carefully, how laboriously, how anxiously, the greatartist pursued his toil. I see, at this moment, the light-horsemanand his charger introduced into the little garden, behindMr. Wilkie's house in Fillmore Place, Kensington — and,yet more interesting objects, I see the old pensioners flockinground the artist's easel, and marking their several physiognomyto the life! It is a glorious production of art: athoroughly national picture : — but Mr. Wilkie knows that Inever shall, or can, forgive him, on account of the Oyster Hei'esy. iso woman was ever seen opening oysters in June.She might just as well have been selling cherries and currants.I hope yet to have the good fortune to possess an Indiaproof of this interesting composition : but every time that Ilook at it, I almost heave a sigh that the engraving had notbeen of such extent as to admit of the faces being a fifthof an inch larger. The Blind Fiddler, by the same engraver(Mr. Burnett,) is to my eye beyond all praise. But . . . whatan Original !I am at war with the Annuals; because they are sovery beautiful, and, like beauties of almost every description,are so likely to be seductive. Will they not — may they notin the long run, be ruinous to the best interests of theGENUINE SCHOOL OF ENGRAVING? Some of the cleverestArtists in the kingdom are engaged in them — engaged, notmerely to plough the copper, but in an expectancy of a cereembedded in printed text, promised well. Athousand delicious objects of art were already inpetty. The Heaths, the Finding, and the Pyes —tain share of profit arising from the sale. This year has seenthe birth of two new adventurers, under the titles of Mr. Heath'sPicturesque Annual, from the designs of Cranfield, and theContinental Tourist, The former of these is transcendentlybeautiful ; such silvery skies, and pellucid waters, and deliciousarchitectural accompaniments, have been rarely beforeseen. But no subsequent attempt can ever efface from mymemory the extreme gratification I felt on opening the leavesof the First Keepsake. Like " first loves," the impressionisindelible. Much as I admire graphic art, in almost everyErratum.Page 17, note, last line but 3, for " Wallis," read " Goodwill."gratings form by no means its exclusive charm) was enough,at first sight, to take the judgment captive, and to waft thespectator, in imagination, to the several spots delineated.Never were text and embellishments so successfully — so happilydovetailed. The book rose rapidly in estimation and price:and it is now at £l. lis. 6d. a cheap volume. But if the magicalpencil of Turner, in these condensed and minute efforts,appear marvellous, look at the grand Engravings— the one byWallis, the other by Pye — from the pencil of the same Artist !The latter almost makes me forget Woollen. This is theSchool of Engraving — the style of Art — in which I hope yet tolive to see a cento of competitors.Bquite alive." Mr. Jennings received me evidentlyunder the impression that An7iiials^' werelikely to become Perennial, The " LandscapeAnnual," was to be eminently successful. Mr.Rogers' 'italy " had proved a mine of v\^ealth toall the parties concerned. Books, tc be sure,were rather on the wane ; but Engravings, whenwards of £8000. worth of this print are disposed of — and thatthe French paper proofs are not yet delivered. Rare doingsfor Pall Mall ! — making the face of the ^* 3Ioon'^ to shinelike that of the sun. 1 remember the painting of this picture :how carefully, how laboriously, how anxiously, the greatartist pursued his toil. T see, at this moment, the at it, I almost heave a sigh that the engraving had notbeen of such extent as to admit of the faces being a fifthof an inch larger. The Blind Fiddler, by the same engraver(Mr. Burnett,) is to my eye beyond all praise. But . . . whatan Original !I am at war with the Annuals; because they are sovery beautiful, and, like beauties of almost every description,are so likely to be seductive. Will they not — may they notin the long run, be ruinous to the best interests of theGENUINE SCHOOL OF Engravings Some of the cleverestArtists in the kingdom are engaged in them — engaged, notmerely to plough the copper, but in an expectancy of a cerein printed text, promised well. Athousand delicious objects of art were already inpetty. The Heaths the Finding, and the Pyes —tain share of profit arising from the sale. This year has seenthe birth of two new adventurers, under the titles of Mr. Heath'sPicturesque Annual, from the designs of Cranfield, and theContinental Tourist, The former of these is transcendentlybeautiful ; such silvery skies, and pellucid waters, and deliciousarchitectural accompaniments, have been rarely beforeseen. But no subsequent attempt can ever efface from mymemory the extreme gratification I felt on opening the leavesof the first Keepsake. Like " first loves," the impressionisindelible. Much as I admire graphic art, in almost everyway, and regularly as 1 present my family each year with thetwo works mentioned in the text, I must yet throw out the suspicion,introduced at the opening of this note, — will not theseAnnuals injure the *' genuine school of Engravings"' Messrs.Raimbach, and Burnett, and Pye and Robinson, do not desertthat path, which, in due time, will lead them to rival theJohn Hunters or the Doctors of the Church, by the illustriousSharpe. On a great scale of Engraving, the Continent beatsus : but the French are absolutely stark mad about our graphicBIJOUTERIE.Doubtless the '' Italy " of Mr. Rogers (of which the Engravingsform by no means its exclusive charm) was enough,at first sight, to take the judgment captive, and to waft thespectator, in imagination, to the several spots delineated.Never were text and embellishments so successfully — so happilydovetailed. The book rose rapidly in estimation and price :and it is now at £1. lis. Gd. a cheap volume. But if the magicalpencil of Turner, in these condensed and minute efforts,appear marvellous, look at the grand Engravings — the one byWallis, the other by Pye— from the pencil of the same Artist !The latter almost makes me forget Woollen. This is theSchool of Engraving— the style of Art— in which I hope yet tolive to see a cento of competitors.Bthe Watts, the Does, and the Cousins — had morework on hand than the life of a centenarian couldaccomplish : and folks might croak at the West-endof the town, but with the prospect of SirJohn Key's second mayoralty before them, theCity was never in a more healthy and flourishing"condition." This was the substance of what Igathered from that most seductive of City repositoriesof graphic art, of which Mr. Jenningsbrandishes the baton of chief command.I next entered the Row; and calling in atthe well-known No. 39, mounted, according tocustom, to the upper regions, where the " Janitoralee " received me in his usually kind andsubdued manner. Mr. Reader was not, however,as I remembered him in "the olden time." Block-booksformed no longer his moveable bodyguard.Editions Principes, Spanish Chronicles,and Portuguese Romancers, had ceased to becomehis shifting companions. Every thingvenerable and curious seemed to stick with glue-liketenacity. But to compensate, there were'' brisk doings " below stairs. A whole army ofLilliputians, headed by Dr. Larder, was makingglorious progress in the Republic of Literature.Science ^ History ^dindi Art, each and all contributedto render such progress instrumental to the bestinterests of the body politic — nor, as it becamethe credit of such a bibliopolistic fraternity, asthat of Messrs. Hangman, Trees, Orme, Brown,and Green, (there are no more, I believe) wasReligion ahseni: for when I descended, I foundyour " Sunday Library " as a flank companyto the " Cabinet Encyclopaedia." Will you forgiveme, if, in running over the pages of thisuseful little Corpus Theological, I remark, thatyou seem to have stepped out of your ordinaryhabits, and to have turned a '' deaf ear " to thetheological "charmers" of the seventeenth century? I suppose, however, you have good reasonfor this deviation from your hitherto establishedcustom.*It is but right to add, that the Editor of the Sunday-librarydefends himself, were any defence needful, againstany censurable charge on this head ; — by the following remarksin the preface to the sixth and last volume of the work.*' Another consideration, of no secondary importance, has^' also had its weight with the Editor. While he has felt aconviction that the sermons of Barrow, South, Tillotson,Canterbury, Seed, Sherlock, Fortin, and many others, arealready before the public in numerous forms — and moreover,'' that the spirit and style of the greater part of these Sermonsmay be said not to be in exact conformity with the tastes of'* the majority of hearers of the present day — (for it should*•' seem that there is a fashion in Pulpit Divinity, as in everythingelse) — while the Editor has been influenced (justly ornot) by a reflection of this nature — he has been also in-'* influenced by one, which he deems to be of a higher cast of'' character. He has been urged to make this selection, as the'* Reader has it before his eyes, from a conviction, that moderndays are not exempt from the display of great talents^* in almost every department of clerical labour; and that, ifour present Sermons are less learned, less elaborate, lessdivided and subdivided into various branches of enquiry,I continued my route westerly. Could I passthe Publisher of Walton and Walpole, De Foeand Hogarth* — without looking in to see how'* they are eminently distinguished for strength, compactness,'* and perspicuity of style, with earnestness and even eloquence** of persuasion. There is also, generally speaking, moreunction — more spiritual consolation — in the majority of them.If, on the one hand, there be nothing in the range of*' modern divinity, as it respects Sermons, comparable withthe magnificent imagery and prodigal copiousness of Jeremy*' Taylor, or with the acute reasoning and energetic diction ofBarrow, or with the solid learning and masculine vigour of*' Sherlock; so, on the other hand, may we challenge the* olden school' to produce compositions more sweet, more*' winning and instructive, than those of Horne and Porters;or more luminous and convincing than those ofHorsey and Paley. And if a spirit of meekness, and*' of almost apostolic primitiveness of character, added to deeplearning and harmonious style, be sought for, who, in timesgone by, shall we place above the late gentle and lamentedHabere'' It were bad taste, perhaps, to eulogise the living;** but the Editor is much deceived, if, in the pages of this*' ' Selection,' there be not found specimens of sound scripturalanalysis, accurate reasoning, and powerful declama-*' tion, which yield to no productions of a similar nature that*' have preceded them." p. vii.Walton's Angler and Lives, — as they are technically called,and as they are put forth by Mr. Major — will continue tofind, as they have already found, thousands of purchasers.They are the cheapest, prettiest, and completest editions extant.The neatness of the printing, and propriety of the ornaments,are in perfect harmony. When these attractivevolumes (and especially the Angler) first appeared, there weresome indirect and clumsy attempts at impugning the H umanit Yof that most gentle of all earthly creatures, Isaac Walton!- — and this, forsooth, because he had given minute instructionsmatters in the way of trade, were going on ?I could not : and learnt, with no small gratificationfixing the fro(/ and ivorm-ha.its ! Our publisher's indignationvented itself on the occasion in the following manly sentiments,and vigorous couplets:Go hypocrite ! indulge thy secret hate.Of all that's open, manly, good, or great ;For slight obliquities affect remorse.But act enormities as things of course :Spare the blunt insect from thy just controul.And save thy tortures for the human soul !Strike at man^s heart, and then serenely sleep,Assur'd the wound is exquisite as deep!"The Lives of the Painters, by Walpole, with Notes by theRev. Mr. Galloway, form five perfectly resplendent volumes.The coarse, hard, metallic effect of the heads in the old editionsis here transmuted into a natural tone of flesh. Several portraitsare engraved from original pictures for the first time : and thenew matter, supplied by the tasteful Editor, can leave nodoubt of the gradual disappearance of the earlier impressions.In the good old times of Bibliomania, this work would havewalked, of its own accord, into the mahogany book-cases ofhalf the Collectors in London.The Robinson Crusoe, with cuts from the master-hand ofCruikshank, to which are prefixed some thoroughly beautifulstanzas by Bernard Barton, contains the purest text of theauthor extant — from a collation of the edition of 17 1^, withthe subsequent ones. This publication forms two prettilypaired duodecimo: — sparkling with wood-cuts. How diversified— how powerful — the talents of the Artist by whom theyare adorned ! Look at the cut of Robinson Crusoe (vol i.p. 135,) clasping his hands in extasy, as he throws his eyes toheavcH over the treasures first disclosed to his mind in theBible — opened before him ! Then look at his man Friday (vol.II. p. 45,) capering on the discovery of his Father among somecaptured Indians ! Was ever such wild joy before so delineated ?tion, that the wheel of fortune had not turnedround so capriciously, as, from the general pressureabroad, might have been expected. The robinsonCrusoe was '^ looking up " in the market ;and now that the moralising Hogarth was per-fected^ the Publisher was on the eve of bargainingfor a good set of morocco skins, to consignnumerous copies to their appropriate clothing.I then made a slight deviation into Chancery-lane— for the purpose of enquiring how theAldine Poets were going on? — how soon the lordlyedition of Walton was likely to blaze abroad inthe open day?— and whether the old regiment ofbody-guards still kept their stations upon theshelves? It gratified me to receive rather a comfortinganswer to these quaere; and when Iobserved that the large paper copies of your Bib-theHogarth Morc/isec? is, to my fancy, among the most winninggraphic volumes of the day. The text is that of Dr. Truss-her;but instructive notes are frequently added, the printsare not mere re-engravings from the wretched exhibitions ofart in Dr. Trussler's book, but are of a larger form, and executedby some of our best artists. I remember when Dr.Trussler's book once brought the sum of £11. lis. : so muchwere the public enamoured of the name of Hogarth ! andloved this epitome, woefully as it was executed, of his largerprints. Trussler's old edition now struggles hard, as many aone who has purchased it may, to find a guinea.The Angler of Walton is here alluded to. It is an editionblazing with the choicest graphic art, and likely to becomepermanently stationary amidst the more costly volumes of awell-furnished library. M. R.romania, Tour, Decameron and Classics, had notyet met with a bargainer of mettle sufficient to removethem from their present position, I own thatI was well pleased to hear their present possessordeclare, that nothing short of "a good round sum"should tempt him to part with them — should theyeven linger there till doomsday ! Mr. Pickeringhad however disposed of his Caxton's Golden Legend;which had been carted away as one of thehuge stones to help to build the book-pyramid ofEuPHORMio.* " But the Jenson and Frozendays (said Mr. P. with a sub-tremulousnote) are gone — never to return ! Who, in thesetimes, looks at o/c/ vellums or young vellums?^"Sympathising sincerely in these ejaculations, Itook my departure for the newly establishedRepository of Mr. Henry Bohn — who, to hisIf Euphormio finish the Pyramid which he is erecting,as scientifically, and with as good materials, as he has laidthe foundation, N** Hall will be the second Book-Lionin Northamptonshire. It is needless to say which is the first.M. R.t Of the modern publications lately put forth by Mr. Pickering,tito have been printed in a very beautiful and highlycreditable manner upon vellum : one, the Holbein cuts, inone volume, being illustrations of the Old Testament — of whichthere were six copies: the other, the reprint of Tyrwhitt'sChaucer, in 5 volumes 12mo. of which there were only two.The former were published at £10. 10s. ; the latter at £52. 10s,the copy — elegantly bound in morocco. They are tomes,which, in the genuine times of book-orthodoxy, would havecaused the eye to sparkle and the heart to rejoice.credit be it spoken, a long time allowed his vellumSforziada to divide his affections with hisnewly espoused Bride. Mr. Bohn was as downcastas some of his neighbours; attributing theparalysis in books to the agitation of the questionof Refonji in Parliament — and adding, mostjustly, that "now — or never — was the moment tomake extensive and judicious purchases. Consideringhis short career, as a trader on his ownbottom, he was thankful for the support whichhe had received, and was perhaps as well off asthose about him — but it could not be denied thatthere was, at times, sore sighing from the bottomof the heart."From Mr. Bohn's it was little more than a hop,step, and a jump, to Mr. Thorpe's. I found thatredoubled Bibliopolist recumbent upon his sofa —embedded in his books — nothing daunted at thepenury of present, compared with former, pricesstill concocting catalogues, with a zeal andcelerity quite unparallelled* — anxious for theirdistribution — a Manuscript here, a Giunta thereLines, the Gryphon — broadside ballads andA collection of all these catalogues would be a curiousone; were it only to mark the progressive depreciation ofprices frequently attached to the same article : but the possessionof all the articles themselves would be a more curiousresult — and infinitely more gratifying to their vendor !t It was late one evening when I caught a glance, and butaglance, of a collection of Ballad-Broadsides, verydainty devices — a "groat's worth of wit," withthe " Seven Sorrowful Sobs of a Sinner " — Grolier,Maioli, and De Thou copies : — a grove ofsapling duodecimo — a forest of towering folios!Our discourse turned chiefly upon the late sales,and particularly upon that of the Waverley MSS.of which I have before " poured my plaint inyour ear." " Would that I had purchased themall' exclaimed the animated Bibliopolist. "YesSir, all. They would have quitted my shelveswithin a week of the purchase." But in oiliermatters: — tell me, do the "dear Fifteenths " wagtheir tails, as if about to take a prosperous flight?^^ Alas, Sir, (replied my informant) they seem,on the contrary, to be tied down by the stifFestbirdlime that ever was manufactured. Therestand my early Jerome, and Austin, and .There slumber my Jenson and SpireLatin Classics. No nimble-footed, liberal-hearted* * * as of old, to visit my retiredboudoir and to tempt me with a "fell swoop!"Everything lingers: everything stands stock-still.The dust on yonder set of Acta Sanatorium willsoon produce me a good crop of carrots — fromthe seed sown there about two-years ago. Lite-recentlyobtained by Mr. Thorpe— in a condition, perfectlysurprising, and with cuts, occasionally the most grotesquewhich can be imagined. At the sale of the Roxburghee Library,such a handful of oddities would have brought a great-coatpocket full of guineas. M. 11.rature is perishing. The country is undone."Here the post entered with a letter from a greatEtonian Collector, to know if the Vellum Aldushad arrived ? Mr. Thorpe's eyes sparkled — foran instant only. There was no chance of its arrival.And if it did, ought it not to go to SpencerHouse, or to Cleveland Square ?'' Le bon terns viendra" — quoth I to myworthy informant — and some three-hundred stepsbrought me to Mr. Ackermann's. I found thatever-green Veteran with a mind as active as heretofore.His forthcoming '' Forget-me-not "* — ■the parent of that numerous offspring of Annuals,which seem very much disposed to run riot, andto rebel against that parent — was just then preparingto put on its gilded wings to fly abroad;together with its younger sister, the '' JuvenileForget-me-not,'^^ Mr. Ackermann's Prints, hisPictures, his materiel for Drawing and Painting,his publications of fashion and taste, were displayed,on all sides, as radiant as the banners inSt. George's Chapel. His activity of mind — hisThe real parent of the Annuals is the Chandler oi theGermans : a duodecimo, printed not very beautifully, uponpaper of a second-rate quality. The engravings are the chiefattractions. 'upon this hint," Mr. Ackermann *' spake "^ — in hisForget-me-not:" a pleasing and instructive manual, thicklystudded with plates, and of which a good lusty impression ofabout 16,000 copies is regularly struck off. " The JuvenileForget-me-not," a comparatively recent publication, may becalled a younger brother of its precursor.courtesy of demeanour — his thorough germanebon-homme — were as conspicuous and pleasantas ever. Still things were horribly flat. Nomoney was stirring. The young ladies hadslackened in enthusiasm. The roses and liliesand lilacs were shedding their lustre and perfumesin vain. Parents drew in their purse-stringstighter than ever. The Reform hadfrightened away everything. The foreign marketwas glutted to the very throat."I then dropt down a few paces to Mr. Cochrane,whom I found as zealously as ever attachedto his old Divinity: especially to large paper, orsingularly clean, copies of the seventeenth century.The beautiful old morocco folios of JeremyTaylor and Isaac Barrow, and Chillingworthand Mede, had but recently — after tarrying somenineteen-months — taken their departures. TheActa Sanatorium had been courted in vain. Thirteenbeneficed clergymen were in the habit ofeying it askance — of first taking up one volume,and then another. But no wooer's ardour hadyet mounted to the courage of directly " poppingthe question." The Reform was the real or pretendedexcuse for holding back. Retracing mysteps, I steadily paced onward to the Castor andPollux of Pall Mall : — and there entering a suiteof book-rooms, in which, in former times, I waswont to see assembled some of the more eminentLiterati of the day — Archbishops, Bishops, Earls,Doctors in Divinity and in Physic, Academics,renowned in either University — Senators, Judges,Lawyers, Wits, Poets, and Punsters — I gavemyself up to profound reverie. Not a mousewas stirring — in other words, the managing Partnerwas alone, pacing the quarter deck. . . .And started back, he knew not why . . .E'en at the sound himself had made !The master-spirit had departed to a better world.In imagination, I embodied him, seated in hisarm-chair — his favourite Sessce cat purring by hisside : one leg duly balanced across the other: apinch of snuff in his right-hand : his spectacles,now raised to his forehead — now resting tranquillyupon their wonted seat. The gentle salute. . . the kind enquiry . . . the desultory,cosy gossip . . the retreat to the brill and beefsteak*— the Boracic-flavoured sherry, the full-bodiedport, the fragrant Souchong, the departure" au revoir!" Then again, as touchingstock in trade." Vellums large papers, un-cuts:— Jenson reposing here, Mentelin slumberingsoundly there. Azzoguidiand Aldus — Giuntiand Giotto, — Wykyn de Worde and Wye . .all intertwined in somnolent embrace. Long setsand short sets — great Councils and little Councils— Decretals and Dictionaries — Chronicles andCautioners, and poetry without end !See Bibliographical Decameron^ vol. ill, p. 152-437. — Mer.IAll these things, as I remembered them in formertimes, came across me in my late autumnalvisit ; and I had almost " dropped some naturaltears," had not Mr. Foss, seeing my distress,placed before me their last importation from theContinent. MSS. of the Greek Gospels, andLatin Bibles of the twelfth century: — large paperAccuses — vellum Planting — crackling Elzevirs.The folio Robinson's Hesiod, uncut — the HomericEustathius of 1542, in similar condition — and thefirst Odyssey of 1488, upon vellum!*But where are your expected purchasers, gentlemen?" Alas, Sir, with the exception of theEustathius all these lovely tomes are likelyto become stickles. Modern books and ancientbooks — the Row and the Via Appian — are equallydestitute of attraction. The Reform, Sir, theReformer perhaps booksellers, like the Romans,have had their day. Whenever we see cases ofold books arrive from Milan, or from Paris, weThis truly beautiful book was bought at the sale of thelibrary of the late Mr. Dent, for £142. : but alas! it wants its«' better half." Together, bad as are the times — and epidemicas may be the Cholera — they would bring hard uponthe half of a thousand-pound.t This Eustathius — with a first Homer, of first-rate qualitytoo — is now the property, as I have been given to understand,of the Rev. E. C. Hatred of Eton College, ^n the StorerCollection, in the same college, there is a copy of this Eustathius,of which the first volume is of a dazzling whiteness —scarcely to be exceeded by that of the snow on Himalaya'sloftiest peak !absolutely lack the courage to open them. Notso in former times. The chisel and the hammerthen went merrily to work — and ere you couldsay '^^ Jack Robinson' the lovely book-treasures,membranaceous or otherwise were arranged ininviting order upon the floor. Within forty-eighthours, up started a tribe of contendingpurchasers — and the articles seemed to march offin double quick time, as if set in motion by thetap of the drum. How long will it be ere wehear the sound of that tapping again?" ^^ Mygood friend, ( rejoined I — gradually receding towardsthe small intermediate room, and there becomingstationary), you must be well acquaintedwith the character of public taste in this country.The moon is not more changeful than that tasteis fickle. Things cannot long remain at this verylow water-mark — there will soon be an ealing,to be succeeded by a full flowing tide of patronageand brisk trade. Let but the Reform Billpass — and only let Marcus break the shell of hisminority — and you shall see what a broadside ofgolden balls will be poured into the ranks of yonderclosely wedged octavos and duodecimo — allsparkling in their red coats, furnished from themanufactories of IDescuil and De Rome, Takecourage. A reaction must take place'*I essayed to comfort my friend, but foundhim with difficulty to be consoled : and with aspirit of dejection, which had now gradually increasedsince I had quitted the corner of Cornwall,paid my eleventh, and last, visit to the renownedPublisher of the Quarterly Review. I have longconsidered Mr. Murray as the greatest " family "man in Europe ; and was therefore not surprisedto find him surrounded by an extensive circle oflittle ones. A family man is usually a cheerfulman: but the note of despondency was to beheard even here, "• The Quarterly " was, however,in full plumage — winging its way, and stillcommanding the attention of an unabated crowdof admirers. Lord Byron was also to come forthin a new dress — shorter, and less flowing — butwell-fitting, brilliant and attractive. So far, sogood : yet the taste for literature was ebbing.Men wished to ^^i for five what they knewthey could not formerly obtain for fifteen, shillings.The love of quartos was well nigh extinct,in spite of the efforts of a neighbouringforty-eight horse power engine, to restore thatform to its usual fashion and importance. It wasall in vain. There was no resisting the tide offashion, or the force of custom ; — call it as youmight. Clear it was to him that the dwarf hadvanquished the giant — and that Laputa was lordingit over Brooding.Such were the sententious remarks of this discerningand high-spirited Bibliopolist.* On .Murray, like the best of us, may have his capriccios ;but I KNOW him to possess as warm a heart, and as mutilatinghis premises, I observed palpable proofs ofthe absence of those "goodly quartos," which, informertimes, the public used to anticipate withsuch eager curiosity — and which, as containinga Body of Travels, were the ornament — andwill long continue to be the ornament — of everywell-furnished Library.Sir, I am among those old-fashioned fellowswho love a quarto "to the heart's core." Gentlemenlook more like gentlemen, when such tomesare spread out in rich magnificence before them.The whole is more in keeping. There is greaterbreadth in the picture : and if a folio or two —historical or topographical — Mr. Sharp's Williamof Malmsbiiry, or Mr. Bakers History of Northamptonshire— be seen as accessories in such astudio, I think this may be considered as thesumrnmn boniim of bibliomaniacal felicity. Thereis neither symptom nor apprehension of . . . here.cent a spirit, as ever actuated mortal man. He was amongthe very first booksellers of his day who treated authors, ofcharacter and connection, with the respect due to gentlemen.Soft words and civil speeches are one thing — and generallymean little or ?io-thing ; but a prompt and spirited remuneration— not the result of minute ledger-like calculations — isanother thing : and such a thing as Mr. Murray has, in anhundred instances, manifested. As this testimony comes fromone who has not received author's remuneration from Mr. Murray,it may possibly be worth that " renowned" Bibliopole'sacceptance.Before I returned home I thought I wouldjust step in and see what was going on amongst theforeign Booksellers. Accordingly I paid a hastyvisit to Messrs. Treuttell, Wurtz, and Richter,Messrs. Bossange and Lower, and Mr. Dulau.Here I learnt that, at Paris, booksellers weretumbling down like nine-pins. The presses ofDidst, Bracelet, and Renard were all paralysed.Scarcely a tympan or a frisked was flying. Mr.Richter groaned in spirit, when I asked him " howHuMBOLT was going on?" " No, Sir, we are allnow for the fugitives — pasquinades, revolutionaryrockets and squibs. Not a solid folio stirring.Even Bouquet's immortal work seems to be sputteringin the socket. And here — Reform andCholera make misers put an extra lock upontheir iron chests, and keep even adventurousspirits within doors. I have lived twenty-yearsin England, and never saw the like of these days."I felt half heart-broken as I descended Mr. Richter'sflight of steps.After such a bibliopolistic pilgrimage as thatwhich I have described, I returned to my hotelwith a heavy step, and in mournful spirits. Iought however, in common justice, to add, thatthe book picture here delineated — and perhaps alittle surcharged with gloom — may be said tohave a somewhat counteracting effect if I noticewhat usually takes place on Almanac and Magazinedays. Mere accident put me into possessionof a fact, which may be worthy of your notice.Meeting a leading partner of one of the greathouses in the Row, as he was threading his waytowards Stationers' Hall, I was induced by himto come and witness the dispersion of the Alma-necksfor the ensuing year — it happening to be thelast Monday in the month. As we approached theHall, I saw a crowd of merry scramblers, somehatted, some paper-capped, and more withouteither hat or cap, pressing the large outer foldingdoors of the Hall — and joyously clamourous foradmission. My guide obtained me an entrance bymeans of a private door, and mounting one ofthe tables of the Hall, I saw piles and pyramidsof these Almanac — ticketted according to theirrespective owners — and to be carried away bythe many applicants without. The clock of theHall struck three; the folding doors graduallyexpanded — and in rushed the importunateclaimants! running in all directions — zig-zag,straight forward, and oblique — pouncing uponthe bundles of their respective masters. Allwas laughter and good humour. Within threeminutes, I saw an eight-feet cubical pile of theseannual lucubrations — belonging to the house ofMessrs. Hangman & Co. — disposed of, and takenhome; and Vas informed, by one of the partners,that, before St. Paul's clock would strike eight,every country bookseller's order would be despatchedto him by the coach! On further enquiries,I learnt that in this article alone, onehouse ( I think it was that of Messrs. Pipkin andMarshall ) paid £4500. for the amount of its traffic.It was also, I learnt, within this same housethat the monthly publications were chiefly collectedfor dispersion — when a scene of equal bustleand good humour might be witnessed.But I return to my narrative; and with it tothe hotel of which I have made mention above.That hotel ( Cooper's, in Bouverie Street, FleetStreet) was wont to be the place of resort forOxford men, for a series of years. It is delightfullycentral; and well calculated for the gratificationof most of those pursuits, for the sake ofwhich, English gentlemen leave their comfortablehomes, and fancy that, without a Spring inLondon, their characters stand in jeopardy of being"called over the coals." For a book-lovingman, this street has, from the force of early reminiscences,a peculiar charm for me. At its corner,old Benjamin White, the Thomas Payne of theEast, once lived, and caused all his noble foliosand quartos to be displayed in skilful and meetarray to attract the curious eye. But why do Idwell upon Coopers Hotel? Simply to tell youthat, on the very day of my return from mymelancholy book-pilgrimage, I had invited anold Oxford friend — domiciled in one of the narrowstreets of a City-living — to give me the meetingover a brace of trout and a roast fowl, andto discourse as long and lustily as he pleasedupon the topic of Bibliomania, as it respectedBook Collectors, How the Roxburghee Club wenton ? How libraries had been disposed of, or purchased? Who continued '' true to their guns?"And what havoc had been lately made in theranks of the more eminent Bibliomaniacs, by thatresistless and '' insatiate archer," Death ?*I collected from my friend the following details.'' To hegin^^'' says he, "• with the end — ofall things. Death hath swept away Lenses,Baroccio,Sempronius, Archimedes, Melius,and Palermo.! They were six brave book-warriorsin their day ; men who, at sundry saleswhich need not now be named, used toFlame in the front, or thunder in the rear !They are now at rest —their libraries all dispersed— their symposia at an end!" Perceiving" Insatiate Archer! would not one suffice?" — Young.t Under these names were designated the late James Bentley,Esq., John Dent, Esq., Roger Wilbraham, Esq., John Rennie,Esq., Robert Lang, Esq., and John North, Esq. Their librarieswere all sold by auction; the first and the last being by muchthe most costly in the produce. Of the illustrious engineer,Mr. Rennie, I possess, by the favour of his son, an impressionof a mezzotint (private) plate, of the portrait of his father,from the never-erring chisel of Chantry. There is also a privatelithographic print of Mr. Lang, exceedingly like ; andMr. Douce possesses a drawing of the ate Mr. Wilbraham — asmall-whole length — done to the very life. " Ver Ipsissimus."my friend's voice to be getting tremulous, andsomething like a tear to be gathering in either eye,I bade him fill his glass again — which he did, requestingtheir memories to be drank ^' in solemnsilence." '^ But for the living " — resumed I —"and to begin with Attics."'lattices" (replied he) "having exhausted thelibraries of his own country, is gone to rifle thesweets of many of those abroad. Already have theNetherlands, France, and Bavaria, furnished himwith the means of making mighty acquisitions.Already are houses and tenements in Brussels,Paris, and Nuremberg, crammed with thesetreasures : — and what further conquests of thiskind he meditates achieving, it were perhaps vainto enquire. Hortensius, now elevated to theBench, still deigns to look with complacencyupon his ^ parchment-covered ' old quarto poetry ;and the Library of Lice us is yet as full oi witcheryas ever : but both these Collectors, eminent in theirway, appear to me to be a little influenced bythe Bibliophohia — for they seldom or never evensend commissions for purchases. To be sure, thelove of numismatic lore hath of late had a stronginfluence over the mind of the Baron — producinga sort of divided attachment between books andcoins: . . and long may he indulge both . . toany extent or excess he pleases ! I think thathis correct taste and fine feeling will, in due time,lead him to sacrifice a little of his love of BritishCoins and Medals for a few acquisitions of Greekand Carthaginian workmanship. When I saythis, I do not wish him to part with his PekinWarbeck's Groat; Henry VII/s Shilling, EdwardIii's gold quarter Florin, Henry Viii's GeorgeNoble, or Edward VI. 's Double Sovereign — allin such very precious condition — to say nothingof the Mary's Royal, Charles I.'s Oxford PoundPiece, and the Medallion of George I. on beingmade Elector of Hanover. These he may keep,and welcome: and Simon's Petitioning Crownpiece*into the bargain. But a few specimens ofthe purer Greek, and the winning Syracuse, maynot be ill bestowed : although he must despair ofa Mithridates, and if he even step over into Egyptwill explore in vain for a Ptolemy Philopater ,'\It has been my peculiarly fortunate lot, to hold in eachhand one of these " Petitioning Crowns" — concerning whicha long gossipping story is extant. Simon was about to be intriguedout of his place in the Mint; and to shew Charles II.to what a state of perfection his numismatic talent had attained,and how little he feared a rival on the score of skill,he struck this medal — " petitioning," round the rim of it, forthe retention of his place. To my eye, the device (the headof Charles) wants breadth and boldness, and the hair has awiry minuteness. The reverse is, I think, very tame andunmeaning,f Perhaps the rarest gold ancient coin in existence. Thereare fit-oPtolemies — but that, with the adjunct oi*' Philopater, ^^is, T believe, only in England : in two collections. Francehas long languished for it — and the late Mr. Payne Knightalmost died for it. The British Museum has it not. The^* Wearied in his pursuit after Ever-greens, anddeeming his quiver of old poetry to be as completeas he can reasonably expect it to be, Lucius'^ rests upon his oars " . . the more so, as he findsthe vessel of life gently dropping down to thelee shore — where all similar vessels must, induecourse, be locked up in the inner harbour.Years, my friend, (exclaimed my guest in amore animated tone of voice, and with considerableexpression of excitement) — upwards oftwenty-years have passed away — since the authorof the Bibliomania described the heroes ofhis first auction-fight: and more than a goodround dozen of these twenty, since the Decameronof the same author contained his account of thesecond auction contest. Great changes mustoccur within such a period. Men not only cannotlive for ever, but must be prepared for alterationsin their habits, as well as in their looks.Catalogues are not opened with the wonted activityof earlier life ; and the countenance betraysmarks of picturesque indentation. But this caseis not peculiar to Lucius — who bears his life's cam-ptolemy,ivithoutihe adjunct, is also of such rarity, that it wasnot lately in the Museum ; although Mr. Young, the coin dealer— the gentle, the urbane, the well instructed and upright Mr.Young — shewed me a specimen, which he valued at fourscorepounds. 1 have handled the Philopatcr Ptolemy — in thesame collection from which I was supplied (for a moment,only!) with the two Petitioning Crowns — mentioned in thepreceding note : and what a collection that is !pain bravely ; considering what an over anxious,buffeting, and even agitated life that is. Thereis Bernardo — turned his Sexagenarian corner —who now lets hawks and buzzards fly unheededover his head . . all forsooth, because a copy ofhis beloved Juliana Burners was knocked downat the freezing price of thirty-five shillings!The report was, that he fainted* — and was carriedout speechless from Mr. Southey's well garnishedauction-room — that this fainting was succeededby a good, solid, roaring fit of the gout,which kept him six-months within doors — duringthe whole of which period, the only benefit orcomfort he derived, was, from mixing nine-grainsof Ritson^s tartar with three table-spoonfulsof Brathwaifs emollient! The Bibliophobiahas seized Am, too — for he scarcely ever judgesabroad into a bookseller's shop, and has latelybetrayed a very whimsical taste in buying oilpaintings, of piscatory subjects, to illustrate hisWaltonian Chamber. I do not however accuseeither of these book-champions oi nothing 'trueto their guns.'There is another version of this story. It was said, thata bookseller had marked his editorial labours upon this curiousold work at thirty-five shillings, in his catalogue — labours, whichin better times, used to bring the sum of £12. 12s.! Bernardotook this as a direct insult — and a challenge was sent forthwith:the field of battle, Little Britain! On a very carefulenquiry, 1 find no truth in this report — although I am not disposedto question the accuracy of the anecdote recorded in thetext.What a change in Honorio! — who has nowturned his Septuagenarian corner. His gloriouslibrary has vanished like the morning dew : — hispictures, finding the separation insupportable,resolved to share the fate of their beloved companions— and they too are dispersed, never to bereunited. Meanwhile, their late master resortsagain to his Floral recreations —-to his beds ofdahlia and banks of rhododendron. He rises betimesto sniff the crisp air of the morning, tohear the lark warble in mid-sky .The cock's shrill clarion, and the echoing horn IHe is yet firm of foot, ardent in imagination, joyousin discourse . . and, to his eternal praise itmust be added, still keeps a delicious specimenof his once beloved Jenson, to cheer his heart anddelight his eyes. This is a redeeming trait ofcharacter which cannot be too much commended.But his LIBRARY was indeed, in many respects, of amost commanding cast of character. To think ofCardinal Menes' own vellum copy of his Com-pretension Polyglot being now buried in the vicinityof the Melton Mowbray hunting Club ! HisVellum Didst Horace — unique in all respects —and lately clad in the exquisite garniture ofCharles Lewis* — is well placed in its present si-charlesLewis lavished the whole mystery of his art uponthis capacious and exquisitely got up folio. See it noticed intuition. Euphormio makes it a sort of book-shrine,of which he most religiously keeps thekey. But if I look back at the sale of any onearticle, out of this extraordinary collection, withmore satisfaction than another, it is in the acquisitionof the Luther Bible* by the BritishMuseum."Finding my friend's voice here beginning togrow a little rough and wiry I begged he wouldreplenish his glass — and proposed " the health ofHonorio — as honest a whig as ever quaffed Rut"ersheimer in the genuine green embossed glass" —by way of a sweeter to the draught. He drank itwith enthusiasm, and continued. "Pamphlet,the nephew of Honorio, is unflinchingly true to hisguns. He throws out his lead, to sound carefullyas he goes — but when he gets into water shal-theDecameron, vol. iii. p. 139. It cost Mr. Hibbert £140. inboards — in which state it was purchased by Messrs, Payneand Foss, at Mr. Hibbert's sale, and sold, as above mentioned,to Euphormio. Charles Lewis, latterly, had open days forcompany to come and gaze upon it. The unrivalled Willeddepicted the coat of arms of the present owner, on thevellum fly-leaf, and drew the patterns for the silver-gilt clasps.I should pronounce this to be the most tasteful, as well asmost gorgeously bound, volume in Christendom ! M. R.This had been the property of Mr. Edwards, and is fullydescribed in the Decameron^ vol. iii. pp. 123-4. It was purchasedat Mr. Edwards' sale for £89., and was sold at Mr.Hibbert's sale for £260. I saw it carried triumphantly intoa hackney-coach; and within twenty minutes of its departure,it was deposited in the British Museum. M. R.lower than " quarter less five' he puts the helmabout and makes directly for port. I can scarcelymention so virtiiousli/ seductive a book as his illustratedcopy of Mr. Ortnerod's Cheshire I haveknown a large party kept in perfect good humour,full twenty-seven minutes after the dinner hadbeen expected to be announced, by turning overits leaves, emblazoned with heraldic embellishmentsby the skilful and indefatigable Thomsonand I think you will allow this to be a prettysevere test ; as no crisis of human existence putsmen's patience so sharply upon the tenter-hooks,as that which precedes a dinner — when the partyis all arrived. You may try a Chronicle printedby Gerard or Gratian's Decretals by Eggesteijn,but it is dull work : it won't do : the ladies throwa freezing glance; the elderly gentlemen yawn.No, my friend, it is at such a crisis that we wantembellished volumes — missals, radiant with burnishedgold — or topography illustrated like theOrdered's Cheshire of Pamphilus. Still, I understandthat nothing hath been stirring of latein the library of Pamphilus — no additional weightto try the strength of his shelves: neither folios,nor quartos, nor octavos. All remains in statu quo :and content to rest on his oars, as a successfulEditor of Mysteries, and archaeological expositorof Elizabethan Carriages, he shrinks from the taskof any farther development of British Antiquities.It should seem as if the fear of Reform, orof Cholera, had been at work here.Philadelphus has lately accomplished a singularlybold achievement. Unwilling or unableto throw out his net to entice more fish, he haschosen to trim and adorn, and make much of,those that remain in his custody. Of your friendDr. Dibdin's Decameron, he possesses a copybound in ten volumes, ornamented to suffocationwith embellishments. Charles Lewis had a carteblanche to do the needful in his way ; and such aseries, or congeries, of graphic illustrations —comprising everything remote or capricious —was surely never before concentrated or broughttogether. A party might be kept in good humourfrom dinner to supper-time by a studiousexamination of its contents. But it is time tomake mention of Crassus and Prospero. Theformer is still wedded to his Topography andEnglish History — and has lately made himselfmaster of a copy of Vicars Religious Ceremonies jfor which no cost was spared to render it an acquisitionof the very first water. There Bi^e^QW spreadsequal to that of the spread of these volumes. Iknow of no parallelogram-shaped library whichhas a more joyous, yet chaster aspect, than that ofCrassus; — and although he, like his friend Pamphilus,rarely ventures into deep water, still it ispleasing to see how gaily he trims his wherry,and always contrives to keep the wind setting ' inthe shoulder of his sail'*" lenis crepitans vocat Auster in altiim."Acn. lib. III. 70.It will delight you, I am sure, to hear thatProspero is yet ia the full exercise of his 'enchanter'swand ' — yet ' true to his guns ' — whichhe sometimes double shots and treble shots. Hismaple-wooded bookcases rejoice the eye by thepeculiar harmony of their tint, — with the richfurniture which they enclose. Here a bit of oldbright stained glass — exhibiting the true long-lostruby tint: — there, an inkstand, adorned inhigh cameo-relief, by the skill of John of Bologna:— a little regiment, pyramidal piled, ofthe rarest China cups, out of which seven successiveEmperors of China quaffed the essence ofbohea. Persian boxes — Rafael-ware — diptychsand chess-men — the latter used by Charles V.and Francis I., on their dining together, tete-tete,not long after the battle of Paria. Koran,Missals, precious Manuscripts, Marc Antonio,Albert Durer, Roman Coins — the very staff withwhich Regiomontanus used to walk on his housetopby moonlight, after making certain calculationsin his calendar!! Magic lore, and choiceMadrigals sung by Queen Elizabeth's privateband : brave prick-songs! — and the parchment rollwhich Handel wielded in beating time on the firstrepresentation of his Messiah. But his belles-lettres— facetiae — old poetry — and rare prints,form a combination which hath no compeer! —and. Septuagenarian as he is, I wish him a goodscore of years yet to shot his guns, and to firethem off with effect.^' Palmer, whose hermitage is described insuch glowing language in a certain work, is yetenamoured of his Romaunt Lore — though he hasbade a long adieu to hisrural residence at Stanhope.London and Ride now alternately receive him.His gothic taste yet finds a snug corner to developeditself: his drawings, paintings, old-furniture:cabinets, replete with curiosities — armour — noddingplumes, breastplates, halberds and quarter-staves— two-handed swords — billets and battle-axes! It were idle to attempt a catalogue raisonneof such a picturesque melange — but his books stillpreserve their wonted ascendency: — and long-maythey continue so to do ! Menaces mustnot be forgotten : — though his books cease tomaintain their original position. A truer Roxburghnever toasted Christopher Valdarfer.Heavy were the groans that announced the resolution— arising from high and honourable motives— of parting at once, and for ever, with thetreasures which were contained within his celebratedparallelogram-shaped library.* Certesthere was no fear of Reform or of Cholera operatinghere. Ah, my friend, manuscripts andOver the door, on entering, of this long-cherished book-retreat,was the following inscription — in capital letters.'' Ervta Pontifical rabbis penetrative olimMirere antiques weller passa man'sAetatis decimal species industria vitaeQvani pvlcra archetypes instruct arte ducesAlias aegis ingens et limina JvntaeQvosqve svo Stephens velvet habere Lares.printed volumes alike put on wings and flyaway !Books as well as sovereigns become locomotive.Your decanter, however, is stationary,''''This reproof was perhaps merited ; as my attentionhad been wholly absorbed by my friend'snarrative. Replenishing his glass, I requestedhim to give me a brief outline of the status in quoof the RoxBURGHE Club since the last notice ofit in your Decameron. willingly ;" replied he.To begin with the venerable and illustrious President.I rejoice to learn that he presided withhis wonted vigour and effect at the last meeting.A few gaps, made by that resistless trespasser,death, have been filled up since the publicationjust alluded to;* but the literary labours of theClub proceed languidly. Havelok was the lastperformance of any note; and I am not singular inthe expression of my regret that the jo/a/z adoptedwhich led to that publication has not been rigidlyThe more recent grafts upon the old stock have been asfollows: — The Earl of Candor, Viscount Clive, the Hon. andRev. Neville Grenville, Sir Walter Scott, Bart., John ArthurLloyd, Esq., Archdeacon Wrangham, and the Rev. CharlesEdward Hatred — " good men and true " — in ALL theirbibliomaniacal bearings !t That Publication was edited by Frederick Madden,Esq. of the British Museum — at the united expense of theClub; which, at the moderate charge of £6. 6s. the copy, obtainedpossession of probably the most intrinsically curiousbook it had ever put forth. Nor is Havelok of meagre dimensions.His form is portly, and his garb is attractive.The preface and the glossary are equally creditable to thefollowed up in subsequent efforts. The BannsClub seem, in this respect, to be very muchshooting ahead of the parent-Society.* Thetalents of the Editor. Report says, the same able hands arenow employed upon a very interesting old English metricalromance, called The Wer Wolf, written by an Earl ofHereford, from an unique MS. of the fourteenth century, in thelibrary of King's College, Cambridge : — as the first votiveoffering to the Club from the Earl of Candor. A fundof entertainment is expected from its perusal. Havelok hadone fate attendant on its publication. It provoked a littleetymological controversy between the Librarian of the RoyalInstitution and its Editor: men, both of too amiable a temperto take delight in literary fifty-cufFs. Mr. Madden stoutlyreplied to the attacks of his Critic. As stout a rejoinder wasthreatened — but never appeared. Of late, however, bothAssailant and Defender were seen cordially shaking handsacross the same MS. in the British Museum. Si sic omnia!M. R.The publications of the Bannatyne Club, which aremore numerous than those of the Roxburghee, confirm an opinionwhich I have long entertained from earliest manhood — namely,that the narrative of an eye-witness of events is worth all theup and down, and rambling, and frequently contradictory, conclusionsof the most ingenious historian upon record. Onesimple fact is worth one hundred conjectures ; for, in the absenceof fact, what mad pranks are sometimes committed bythe most sober historians! Inventories, also, of goods andchattels — be the same wearing apparel, jewellery, or books —are infinitely amusing, and sometimes instructive. But theBannatyne Library has other pretensions to notice and commendation:essays, disquisitions, reports, records, and othersuch materials, form a rich store of information deserving alikethe attention of the antiquary and historian. Cato Parvus.While upon this topic, my friend might have noticed theHousehold Books of Expenses of Henry VIII. and Queen Marysymposium of the Roxburghers now takes placeon the second Thursday in May, owing to thelateness of the season when the anniversary ofthe first sale of the Boccaccio happened.* Atthis symposium, there is less protracted revelrythan heretofore. The ^albescens capillus' has amighty effect in making men keep orderly hours.No dawn-of-day retirement, as in times past, for* and * * * The toasts are now confined toChristopher Valdarfer and William Caxton : towhich add, 'the cause of Bibliomania allOVER THE WORLD.' When that sentiment ceasesto be given from the chair, good-bye to the Club!The triumph of Bibliophobja will then be complete."Here my friend raised his voice to an unwontedpitch, and vehemently struck the table as he pronouncedthe last sentence. It might have beenin consequence of the last replenished — but heproceeded, collectedly, to say, " there is yet goodhope that the gallant breed of Roxburghers isnot likely to be speedily extinct. Vigorous shootsare springing up, and making way promising tobecome sturdy branches as the old timber falls toas edited by Sir Nicholas Harris Nicholas and Mr. Madden.They are very curious volumes, and based upon thatof the famous Northumberland Household Book, of which thewell-known Bishop of Promote was the Editor. These lattervolumes are also published in singularly good taste, as respectsbeauty of exterior. M. R.On the 17th of June, x\.D. 1812.Ddecay. Why will not Ulpian hold himself inreadiness to start at the first opening? He iseminently entitled to present himself as a candidate.His collection of books is at once choice,costly, and copious; and no man loves to emberhimself more thoroughly amongst them . . . Hispillow case, Columbits^s Letter of 1493, stitchedto the original Challenge crichton: his counterpane,all the large paper Learned, formerly in Dr.Mead's library, still glittering in their primitivemorocco attire : his mattrass, large paper Dug-dales:his bed curtains, slips of the OYigmdlBayeuxtapestry ! When he takes to Illustration of anyparticular work, he takes to it in right earnest, andwith a glorious, yet appropriate, prodigality ofembellishment. I conclude that he prefers hisLettou and Machine Littleton to every otherbook in his library — with the exception of hisJenson'^s Bible, To his credit also be it spoken,he is a great encourager oi booksellers ; and is notemulous of entering the lists of bidders, when hecan secure an article at a quiet price in ChanceryLane, or in the vicinity of Covent Garden. Nofear of Reform or of Cholera ever depresses hishopes, or slackens his progress in the genuinestraight-onward course of the Bibliomania. Russialeather is, with him, the charm and protectionagainst epidemic miasmata of every description;and give him but the treble-rowed entrenchmentof his library, he snaps his fingersalike '^ at the arrow of fate and the canker ofcare." Moons wane or enlarge without his notice,so long as a Piranesi is to be perfected, or a DeBryn to be rendered complete.Report has pronounced the copy of De Bry, in possessionof the above gentleman, to be the fruit of incessant toil,for a series of years — at an expense, little short of hundredsupon hundreds. It is said to contain the first editions of theGrands et Petits Voyages, as well in Latin as in German,throughout — also, the second editions in Latin, and the marianedition — with the original and reprinted Elenchus —the English edition of the Virginia (the first part of the GrandsVoyages)— the Abridgments of the Grands Voyages, threeeditions-p 1617, 1631, 1655 — and three volumes in quarto, inGerman, published by the family of De Bry, and the workof Las Casas, edition 1598 : — also, nearly a complete set ofall the first and original editions of the voyages from whichthe De Bry formed their collection. To these are added acomplete set of the Collection published by Julius in Germany,twenty-six parts, second editions — and a fine set of the^rs/ edition of that Collection, except parts 11, 12,13,14,15, 16, 17, 24, 25, and 26. The third edition of the Abridgmentof the Grands Voyages, 1655, contains, besides thefourteen parts, two additional voyages, which are not in DeBry, but are included in the Russian Collection. It alsocontains every variation and peculiarity mentioned by DeBure, Camus, or De La Serena, except in the Grands Voyages,Latin — part 2, one leaf, containing on it, Frankfort, 1591 —part 4, the twenty-four plates, without the numbers engravedon them — part 5, the frontispieces to the Text and Plates,without the word *hia" interlined — part 6, frontispieceto plates, with pasted table ; in the centre, *' SequunturIcones," &c. — part 10, frontispiece. Vessels Sinking, not aNaval Combat. M, R.I will not presume to undervalue the copy of De Bry thussummarily described ; as, living remote from the Metropolis,'and why may not Decius aspire, in clue time,to a similar honour of becoming candidate on avacancy among the Roxburghers ? Far off betheday which may occasion that vacancy — but,as come it will, let Decius then mount his courser,all covered with membranaceous housings,and spring into the arena — a champion to winthe fight ! He hath pretensions of no commonkind. He loves books, and he knows all theirbearings, within and without. The dappledcalf, and the red sprinkled edges of one compartmentof his library, are duly relieved by themorocco tint and diamond gilt tooling of theother. He revels in bindings of Padaloup, DeRome, Roger Payne, Montagu, and Baumgar-ten. His French folios of archaeological lore andgraphic embellishment, stand proudly pre-eminent;— and for Greek and Latin Classics, who,for an beneficed Divine, shall step in beforeDecius? To my fancy and peculiar taste, howstand no chance of ever seeing or handling it. But thepages of the Library Companion, (pp. 372-6, Breeches Edit.see p. 8, note, ante) furnish me with such a description of acopy of the same work, in the possession of the Rt. Hon.Thos. Greville, as seems to set all competition (and peradventurenone may he intended) at defiance. If I were inclinedto break in a young book-collector, by giving him rough andhard exercise to perform, I would set him upon the completionof what may be called the ordinarily perfect copy of thePeregrinations of Messrs. De Bry : — but, even here, I mustbargain for the true Elenchvs. Cato Parvus.ever, his Manuals of Ethics and of Divinity, in theseventeenth and eighteenth centuries, exhibitspecimens of a rare and happy coincidence in thepursuit of the Bibliomania. Let Decius, I say,be ready to start at the first sound of the trumpetwhich gives notice of a vacancy to be filledin the Roxburghee Camp."Here, my friend ceased from his narrative ;which, as it had occupied a considerable time,and had embraced a variety of topics extremelygratifying to my feelings, called forth my heartiestcommendations. '' One glass more," —quoth he — " and we part. I drink to the health,happiness, and longevity of the illustriousPresident of the Club of which I have beendiscoursing: — the founder, as well as the possessor,of the finest private library in Europe. Godbless him !" So saying, he dispatched a copiouslibation of sparkling sherry, and sprang forwardto seize his walking staff — to make good hisretreat homewards — but, as if something of importancehad suddenly come across his recollection,he turned round upon me, and enquired,'whether I purposed quitting London on thefollowing day." " Assuredly so " — replied I."Be it so then" — resumed he — '^ but promiseme faithfully, ere you start, that you will stepacross the water and take a peep at the newLibrary of Lambeth Palaces' I pledged myselffaithfully so to do — when my friend hurriedaway, under the impression of being too lateto attend a vestry meeting, which had been especiallysummoned for that evening. On thefollowing morning — which happened to presentitself with the least possible portion of a Londonfog, or mist — I made haste to carry my friend'sparting request into execution ; and taking boatat the Temple Stairs — the tide serving — I glidedquickly under the two bridges of Waterloo andWestminster, (of which the first will long continueto be the world's wonder ! ) and was dulyput on shore opposite Lambeth Palace.As, however, I had never seen it under itsnew aspect, I was for a little time lost in reverieon its approach : so much so, that the boatmanasked, ^'^ whether I wished to go on to VauxhallStairs ?" There was indeed good cause for suchabstraction or reverie. I could scarcely creditthe evidence of my own eyesMiraturque novas frondes, et non sua pomp !exclaimed I, as I caught the first full glance ofthe entire range of the building. But the Library— is alone our business now. You, Sir,may have probably seen it again and again — andI think I may challenge at once your admirationand thorough approval of its plan. What agoodly garniture of antiquated tomes ! Howharmoniously all the architectural accessoriesblend with the precious treasures which theyenclose ! We have all the characteristics of agenuine University library — transplanted on thebanks of the Thames ! " And can this be ( saidI to myself) the old Oxonian hall,* throughwhich the winds used but lately to whistle, andof which the pavement was dank, and the lightdoubtfully transmitted? It is even so." Myguide seemed to enjoy my moody raptures exceedingly;adding — (probably on the supposition,from the trim of my dress, and fashion of myhat, that I was a thorough rustic gentleman)that " my admiration might perhaps be easilyaccounted for, when I was informed that Mr.Bore was the architect of the whole concern."'' I heartily wish" — rejoined I — '' that all concernsof this kind were managed in the samesensible and satisfactory manner. I am delightedyea, more than ordinarily delighted — at thehappy transformation before me. I could gladlylinger in such a book-domain through the foursuccessive seasons of the year, and gather fruitThis Hall was built by Bishop Juxon. Its principalexterior beauty is, the boldness of the buttresses; but there appearsto be, near it, a beauty of no ordinary loveliness in myantiquarian eyes. I mean, a vane or weathercock — broad,bold, with elaborate, openwork, yet light and picturesque. Ihonor to see it resided — and the whole surface of the Lollardtowers, and of the side facing the Thames, restored — as Iknow how it is capable of being restored — by the correct of the architect above mentioned.^6at every quarter." Here, I thought my guideseemed to eye me as if I were a gentleman subjectto occasional aberrations of reason, andpressing me towards the door, seemed to desiremy egress. I thanked him very heartily forhis civility, and, much as I wished to becomeacquainted with other portions of the building,was obliged, from the pressure of time, to maketowards the water's edge, and to seek my boatman— who was in attendance, expecting myreturn. As I resumed my seat, I could not helpcasting frequent glances upon the glorious pileI had just left behind — and which confirmed meinthe truth of w4iat I had often heard of itspresent Most Reverend Occupier ; namely, thathe had exhibited the talismanic art of a certainRoman Emperor, in leaving behind him " inar-hle^'' that, which on his first possession of it, hefound to be only '' hrick.'^Urging my boatman to make his best exertionsI returned in time to my hotel — to prepare for amid-day departure from London: not howeverwithout a previous call upon my opposite neighbour,Mr. Abraham John Valpy; — before I gotinto the Windsor Coach to make a little detourthrough that place, Reading, and Oxford, in myreturn to Laurel Lodge : resolving to see, in thoseseveral towns, Vv4iether the BibIio7nania or theBihliophohia prevailed. Mr. Valpy was in anymood but that of in alt. His Thesaurus had runits course — nobly, but not productively. Thescoffs, gibes, and jeers which it had endured inits progress, were now forgotten : the rubbishwas swept away — the scaffolding removed — andthe building, a Pyramid in size and durability,stood out complete. As the work of one editor,and as the labour of one Printing Office, it mightchallenge, as it would be sure to receive, theapplause of posterity. ^' But the Dolphins — tellme truly — how do they go on?" Mr. Valpywas silent. He need not have been so. If thework had expanded immensely, it was not froman exclusive wish to enrich himself, but to renderit the more serviceable to students in classicallore. There was an elaborate collation of theearlier editions — an 'ordo" — notes, grammaticaland illustrative — a critical commentary — copiousindexes together with a carefully correctedtext — all deserving of the most decided commendation.But fashion had had its sway here as inother matters. At starting, it was the fashion tosubscribe — at the present day, it was the fashionto strive to throw up the subscription: yet thework had gone on as zealously and honestly asever. After all, it was the best octavo set ofLatin Classics extant; and a day would comenot improbably in that of its publisher — whenits general merits would be acknowledged by anincreased price, as well as by the warm eulogiesof the learned. To have planned such a work,and to have carried that plan into such extensiveeffect placed the Publisher in the very foremostrank of his class.With observations like these I strove to cheermy old acquaintance; advising him to take courageto his heart, on the completion of the Herculeantask which he had undertaken. His elementarypublications were 'Going on swimmingly;'^and many other works, on hand and in prospect,seemed to augur well. " He had braved the tempestsof the years 1825-6, when his Brethren werewrecked by dozens; but such a dead palsy in thebookselling line, as that in the/)rese/2^ year, he nevercould have brought himself to believe. The verysight of a book — especially of a subscribed book —threw some men into a delirium of horror. It was'^<J)fvy£ fia\,"^ with Homer— or ^' a vaunt, quit mysight!" with Shakspeare Oh, Sir! (added he inatone of no ordinary feeling) let the Reform Billonly pass — let the vessel of state only once getwell trimmed, and it will go gallantly over thewaves ! Men will return to their lares, and to theirordinary pursuits — speculative or active. Therewill be chasms to fill with books, which had neverbeen before discerned : walls to cover with pictures,which had never before come under contemplation.Commerce will then put on herIliad, lii. i, 173.t Macbeth.hundred wings, and fly to every quarter of theglobe."Being unwilling to damp the ardour of myfriend's imagination, and by no means disposedto dispute the premises upon which his conclusionswere drawn, I wished him a good day —observing, as the deliberate conviction of my understanding,in accordance with the best wishesof my heart, that '^ I felt persuaded a very palpableRE-ACTioN would take place in the courseof the year 1832." Within the four ensuinghours, I found myself walking upon WindsorTerrace. The day was fine. The breeze wassoft. The landscape, as all the world knows,luxuriantly picturesque. My object, however,was BOOKS — or rather Literature and the Book-trade,After a turn or two in that fairy landof a sunk garden, at the eastern extremity ofthe Castle, I retraced my steps, and, catching apeep of the '^ antique spires," (so sweetly celebratedby Gray) pushed on towards EtonCollege. There, was the Storer Collection — andthere Priscian was domiciled : Priscian, theclassical and the accomplished. Books are his'^ dear delight" — and Bibles, among those books,the primary objects of attraction. He shewedme a rare set of them — such as, in a private collection,are eclipsed only by those at Kensingtonand Author. There were also belles-lettresin abundance — in the German Spanish, andItalian, as well as in the French and English, languages.But oh, that splendid AIS, of Ovid — ■approached with delicacy, unlocked with care,and surveyed with extasy ! — '' Aug §'o(|)0aX^oi(Ttvif^iaOai^^* — exclaimed I, as, on turning my eyes inan opposite direction, I essayed to see the numerousfolios and quartos — some of which wereimpervious to the glorious sun-head.Having lost my list of memoranda, taken onthe spot, I grieve to say that my account of thisclassical retreat must be thus superficial. But itis only the performance of an act of commonjustice to add, that the Valerian and MarkBrenner of Priscian crowned the evening's hospitalityof his abode. I quitted such a residencewith reluctance; especially as 1 had so many inducements,unconnected with my passion forbooks, to make a longer stay. But my time waslimited. To say nothing about the laurels, growingwild and unseemly about the 'lodge " — andstanding in daily need of their master's pruning-hook— (for I allow no one to trim them but myself)I had, in fact, undertaken the execution ofa somewhat arduous task in accomplishing thejourney in contemplation.By eight in the morning I was stirring — visiting,before my final departure, the book-shop,which under the mastership ofFote, once boastedHomer's Iliad, lib.xv'n. 646.of no contemptible reputation. Here, in theheart of the town — and at mere arm's-length, asit were, from the college — ^I expected to havefound an early Lilly ^ Holt, Tunbridge, or WhittingtonBut no such good fortune attended me.Even the edition princeps of the Eton Grammar,as now in general use, was not to be laid hold of.Abruptly retreating, I made towards the highroad,and found myself in due course upon the topof a Reading stage. On reaching that town —the abode of my earliest boyhood — I hurrieddown London Street, into the Market Place, andMinster Street, to pay an immediate visit toMessrs. Rusher & Son, and Mr. Smart — the renownedbooksellers of the place. The latter Ihad known from my twelfth year: and twentyyears ago we had done a stroke of business together— when books were run after, and a briskand liberal circulation of cash afforded the meansof catching them. Mr. Smart sighed heavily asour hands were conjoined. " You come, Sir,(said he) at a sad, sad time — when my books arehanging down their heads, and there is nobodyto pat and to cheer them. Mount my great Repository,backward. What will, or can, you seeAn account of the works of these illustrious men — thegreat Luminaries of Grammar in the earlier half of thesixteenth century — will be found in the second and third volumesof the Typographical Antiquities of Great Britain:Edit. 1810, c^c.worthy of a moment's notice-much less of carryingaway as a trophy ? Customers are aliveonly to Reform-discussions. There is a knot ofthem, assembled here of a market day, whichdoes not disperse till nearly dark. They turntheir backs upon my books : and my History ofReading y of which your old friend and first schoolmaster,John Man, was the author, is allowed toremain in statu quo upon my choicest libraryshelf." I expressed great sorrow at this intelligence,but the only comfort I could impart, was,that he partook of " neighbours' fare."Mr. Rusher and his Son received me rightcordially : but here, again, all was dark and disheartening.Their love of books was as greatas ever : their enthusiasm, unabated : but theircustomers — those best feeders and supporters of^' love " and '^ enthusiasm "■ — were graduallyfalling off: — and as for Bibliography (with theexception of the staunch Collector on ForboreHill), there was not a creature that cared apin's point for Dr. D.'s multifarious labours inthat department. " Look you Sir" — addedMr. Rusher, jun. — " we have tracts out of number,appertaining to the period of the two Charles'— but who vouchsafes to open them ? Whoreads them ? Who regards them ? Who bearsthem away ? And then for Topography, and theGentleman Magazine — you may as well expectto catch a sturgeon in the Bennett* as tosecure a customer in these formerly highly favoureddepartments of book-collecting** I sigh and lament me in vain ;These walls do but echo my moan:Alas, it increases my painWhen I think of the days that are gone !"At this instant — and producing a sort of magicaleffect — in walked the " staunch Collector " justalluded to — the classical and bibliographicalNestor of the borough town of Reading. Acordial salutation followed the first expression ofsurprise ; and we had almost entered upon adiscussion of the relative merits and demerits ofSchedules A and B, when young Mr. Rusherobserved, that, " as the day was getting on fast,we might possibly like to take a little refreshmentin his father's back parlour ?" This,however, was courteously, but firmly objectedto by Nestor ; who insisted upon my accom-Pope, in his Windsor Forest, has recorded the renownof this river for its *' silver eels." It runs, in a bright andrapid course, nearly through the centre of the Town — andreceives, I believe, several tributary streamlets in its way.In early youth — when summer suns were warm, and summerskies were clear — 1 have often dotted my garments with myschool companions, to plunge into its "translucent wave." Ofthese companions, two only survive, to my knowledge ! M. R.paying him home, to his boudoir of belles lettres— whence the Thames was seen, winding itsbeauteously picturesque course — margined bymeadows, upon which hundreds of cattle weregrazing — the lordly domain of Carrack (oncethat of Cadogan,) crowning the neighbouringmountain-height . . .A happy rural seat, of various view !I instantly obeyed the Octogenarian's summons;and a few hundred yards brought mewithin that library, which, in the happy days ofBibliomania — some fifteen years ago — I had enteredwith greater glee of heart than at present.Wherefore was it so ? The books were the same.The bindings were the same. The former hadnot grown either taller or shorter : the latterhad obtained still greater beauty of tone, by thecourse of time — in an atmosphere, not teachableby a London fog. But my dejection continuedin spite of the urbane upbraiding of " minehost." " What care I 'quoth he— ^^ for thecapriciousness of public taste ? Shall my firstfolio Aldine Demosthenes and Retires be lesscoveted — less embraced — than heretofore ?Dear as the ruddy drops that warm my heart,shall be, to me, my Elzevir and Olivet Cicero!Nor let old Scapula and Facciolati droop theirtowering heads — and, shew me the man, whoshall dare to undervalue my large paper Barnes'Euripides, West's Pindar, and Potter's Lyco-chron ? Will any creature, short of a confirmedidiot, presume to " write me down an ass,"because I have over and over again tossed upmy head at the pitiful offer of three-score andten sovereigns for my large paper Grenville Homer? Perish all these dear delights ! — perishtheir owner with them! — sooner than he shalllend a helping hand to the dissemination of thathydra-disease — Bibliophobja ! Welcome typhus— welcome scarlatina — welcome even Cholera!Pitch your tents, and mark out yourvictims as ye please. Number me among them,if it be your good pleasure — but let me die . . .hugging my Homer !My friend here became momentarily breathless.His action had been " suited to the word :" —and he sunk exhausted upon the soft waddingof a chintz arm-chair. I hurried him as he fell !On recovering, he smiled placidly, asking meif " I thought he had been wanderings'' " Wandering!"— replied I, quickly — "quite the reverse ;you never spake more to the purpose: nevermoredirectly to the point. All your remarkswent strong and straight forward . . . like thearrow to the bull's eye of the target. Give meyour hand — and with it possess my heart ! Whilesuch sentiments as these possess an Octogenarian ^shall I listen to the puling plaints of a cow-hearteddabbler in book-purchases? Shall I endurea lengthened, and perhaps torturing, negotiationabout beating down the prices of Vellum Spiresand closely cropt Cantons ? Can I suffer the Al-uses,the Giants, and the Frowns, with ourdearly beloved Wynkyn De Worde, Pynson^andJulian Notary, to be shoved quietly ' to the walland make no effort to rescue them from such ignominyof treatment ? Never : while I have thepower to wield an arm or plant a foot. I takea lesson from your gallantry of spirit —and amwell-nigh ashamed at my querulous sympathyamong the Metropolitan bibliopoles. Yoursweet air and bright skies make me feel and seeas I ought to feel and see — ^ I am a man again!' "Forgive, Reverend Sir, the dramatic air ofthis part of my narrative; but the whole incidenthas been so vividly impressed upon myrecollection, that I know not how to dispossessmyself of it — and I give it you with a most literalveracity. In essaying to take leave, I foundthere was no escaping a Nestorian Symposium,My friend having scribbled hasty notes of invitationto the Rectors of the three parish churches,to partake of this symposium, we then strolledabroad— and were drawn insensibly towards theruins of the Abbey. Just at that time, there wasa great ferment in the town — whether these ruinsshould be preserved, or not, by subscription, fromtheir meditated destruction by the owner of theproperty on which they stood: — and this subjectformed one of pretty brisk and incessantdiscussion during our dinner. The Vicar of St.Mary became frequently poetical (no veryunusual thing with him) in his deprecation ofsuch a meditated act of vandalism. " Certes'said I, ^' it is the principal and proud feature ofyour town; and it is moreover the palpable linkwhich connects you with the twelfth century.Give me the russet tint of the flint stones ofwhich these ruins are composed — the ragged andpicturesque forms into which time and accidenthave now cast them — and I care not a rush forall the flaunting brick and bath-stone structuresof which the town and its neighbourhood mayboast." There was, in fact, not one dissentientvoice among the guests. Even books were forgotten— while we dwelt, in imagination, or indiscourse, upon the '' by gone days," when thismagnificent structure was reared.* Now, itsThis abbey was " reared " in the time of Henry I; and isperhaps more than eight centuries standing. Like many of theedifices of those days, the walls of this Abbey seem to havebeen built for eternity. There are views, out of number, oftheir picturesque character and position ; but those whichrepresent them before the building of the present gaol upontheir site — about forty-five years ago — exhibit them in largermasses; as a great portion was compelled to be destroyed forthe building in question. In digging the foundations of thisgaol, human skeletons out of number were found — said to haveruins seem comparatively, but ^*the shadow of ashade! " " Tempus edax rerum — observed ourhost, in a sort of '' sotto voce'' — bidding us notspare his port of 1811 ('' Vin de Come ) as anantidote to the melancholy which such a subjectwas likely to engender.We broke up at ten. The moon was at full :unobscured by vapour mist, or cloud. The meadowsseemed to be sleeping beneath her softlustreAnd drowsy tinkling lulled the distant folds!We made a little circuit, or detour, by the sideof those ruins which had elicited such ardour ofdiscussion. We paused before their " grey andbattered sides" — now softened by the pale tintof the moon-beam. We became instinctivelymute listening to the 'stilly sound " of everythingabove and below ! Not even the note ofbeen buried there in the time of Cromwell, from a battle whichtook place in the neighbouring meadows. Some of the existingfragments are from six to nine feet in width — and defy destruction,except from the force of gunpowder. If the town andcorporation of Reading suffer these fragments to be destroyed,from the lack of public spirit, they affix the seal of indelibledisgrace upon their corporate character. There is certainlyno saying to what extent individual cupidity may go — but forthe sake of all their past glories, I hope the Inhabitants willmake a noble fight for the preservation of these adamantinerelics ! I feel well persuaded that Mr. H., the senior Alderman,will be " fetlock^in blood " ere he relinquish the contest!the inhabitant of the '' ivy-mantled tower '* washeard. Every-thing seemed . . .Insensible as those that slept beneath !What a night !— What a spectacle ! " Notanother word was spoken : — such Talus-likebrevity being infinitely more natural and impressivethan the circumlocutory periods or speechesof Livid. We parted, therefore, convinced thatour eloquence had suffered no diminution by theuse of the interjections only just uttered. The nextmorning, I had some thoughts of taking a rundown to Bath and Bristol — to see how Mr. Uphamat the former place, and how Mr. Strong at thelatter, were carrying on their bibliopolistic speculations.But I wanted courage. In spite of theeffort made in my reply to the book-veteran,Nestor, I found that the failings of Messrs.Snare and Rusher were yet tingling in my ears,and depressing the barometer of my spirits. Itis towards Oxford therefore (said I to myself)that I will set my face, and direct my instantcourse — and for that venerable City I secured aplace on the roof of an Abingdon and OxfordCoach, which was to depart about three in theafternoon. Parley, Pangbourn, Straitly, andAbingdon, are the villages and towns in the routethither.Doubtless, Sir you have, in your Oxford days,made a similar trip — or at any rate have bowleddown the hill, which, 'twixt Abingdon and Oxford,gives you the first full view of the towers andturrets of the venerable Alma Mater. Thirty-eightyears have passed away since I first madethis descent — but never, even in the warm glowof youth, did the objects before me appear moresplendidly striking. The sun was sinking rapidlyupon what seemed a pillow of molten ruby andamethyst, fringed with burnished gold. Lightstreaky clouds of alternate pink and opal, canopiedhis couch. The high arch of heaven " wasin a blaze with his descending glory"* Thetowers of Christ Church, All Saints, St. Mary,All Souls, and the Schools — with the dome ofRadcliffe — were vividly spangled with the generalradiance; while portions of the several buildingsbelow,, were embroiled in a dark, soft,warm shade. Towards the extremity. Queen's,and the tower of Magdalen, carried on the line ofpicturesque beauty and grandeur; and the hill ofShooter, in the distance, was enveloped in amagical hue of purple. The meadows and theelm-roofed walks of Christ Church — the Char-welland Isis commingling into one bright, broad,and gently gliding stream — upon the surface ofwhich, boats and sailing vessels were swiftlydarting along, and interchanging positions —Burkecatching the departing sun-beam upon their sides• — ALL This and much more which escapes minutenessof description — presented itself to myview as I descended the hill in question. Oxfordis perhaps no where seen to greater advantage.*But, I was not so light of heart — so buoyant inspirit— as at the period before alluded to. Lifehad had its realities. The mind had had itsSHADOWS. There had been sorrow and grief anddisappointment, and death! As I reached thebottom of the hill, and neared the City, methoughtI heard the chimes of the several Collegesand Churches — when the beautiful lines of Mr.Bowles's Sonnet " On Revisiting Oxford'' cameimmediately to my recollection.I never hear the sound of thy glad bellsOxford ! and chime harmonious, but 1 say,(Sighing to think how time has worn away)Some spirit speaks in the sweet tone that swells,Heard, after years of absence, from the ValeWhere Charnel winds ! "fBut I hasten to more matter-of-fact detail.The present venerable Dr. Huntingdon, Bishop of Hereford,used to say, that " he never came down this hill withouttaking off his hat — as a respectful salutation to Alma Mater."I believe one of the very best views of the University,by the magical pencil of Turner, is from this spot.t The remainder may as well be here subjoined : for thewhole is eminently sweet and touching. Indeed, after all, itWithin an hour, I was in Broad Street with Mr.Parker — the Corinthian pillar of Heliopolis atOxford. But our meeting was not as of old. Thenotes of wailing soon got the better of those ofcongratulation. There stood Remark Dion Cassius,Differs Thucydides, Hudson'' s Josephus —all in the portly forms of large paper, and inthe princely garb of red morocco but whowere likely to be the purchasers? The Cicero,from Leyden, Paris, Geneva and his own Oxford,*all long standing dishes getting coldto be looked at, and not tasted ! Even the ClarendonPress productions, in their peculiarly attractiveoctavo forms allFallen from their high estate —as if paralysed by Cholera or the Reform Billmay be questioned whether the Rev. W. L. Bowles be not thefacile process of living Writers of Sonnets? The remainderis as follows : —*' Most true it speaks the taleOf days departed, and its voice recallsHours of delight and hope in the gay tideOf life, and many friends now scattered wideBy MANY FATES ! Peace be within thy walls !I have scarce heart to visit thee ; but yet,Denied the joys sought in thy shades— deniedEach better hope, since my poor **♦*•• died.What I have owed to thee, my heart can ne'er forget."C. P.That of 1783, to. 10 vols. See a tale, connected with thisedition, in the Library Companion, p. 579, Original Edition;and p. 586, Second Edition.Advancing towards a comparatively obscure corner— in which, in former days, I used frequentlyto stumble upon a crackling Elzevir or an uncutAldus — I took up a very handsomely printedProspectus of a work of which I had never beforereceived the slightest intimation. Judge,Sir, of my surprise when I found that you wereonce meditating a Literary and Local History ofthe University of Oxford Mr. Parker beggedAs, in after times, — when the Reform Bill and the Cholerashall have worked their good or evil — and men's passionsshall have pretty generally subsided, by giving way to theirreason, — if such an " after time," in this ever-agitated country,(" cet isle, plus enrage que les mers qui Environment,"observes Montesquieu) shall arrive — a brief mention of thisSecret History in Literature, may be as pleasing to a few othersas to my friend Mr. Disraeli, in particular. Happening topossess a copy of the Prospectus in question, I think thereader may not be disinclined to be put into possession of aportion of it.*alma MATER OXONIEXSIS. A HISTORYOF THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.Address. — It cannot have failed to strike every loverof his Country's Antiquities, and every admirer of its GraphicArt, that there exists no Publication which can be deemedworthy, in all respects, of transmitting to posterity, a correct,as well as an enlarged, account of the Antiquities, architecturaland literary, of the University of Oxford. Thesecret indignation " felt by Loggan, nearly a century anda half ago, may be yet felt, with some slight modification, atthe present day : namely, that, *' while rural mansions andobscure villages have found Chroniclers and Artists, theUniversity of Oxford remains without any adequate representingI would carry it home with me. " It willat any rate amuse if not instruct, you" — saidtatioii of its numerous architectural attractions." This is thespirit, if it be not the literal version, of Loggan's observations.*&c. &c.^' To the lover of Picturesque beauty, it is impossible tobehold the many-turreted buildings of the University— thesolemnity of its retired cloisters, and the grandeur of itsAcademic Groves," — without a wish that such interestingobjects might find an adequate record by the hand of Art :—while, to the meditative understanding, such objects areclothed with additional splendour from the recollection thatOxford has been the '' Nursing Mother" of Statesmen,oaf Legislators, of Divines, Philosophers, Poets, Historians,Scholars, and Philologists : of illustrious charactersWhose honours with increase of ages grow,As streams roll down enlarging as they flow!"Pope.Nor is the interest attached to such a publication likelyto be purely local or even national : — for where is the civilisedquarter of the Globe in which the fame of this distinguishedUniversity is not established ? To give therefore to posterity,and to the learned of all Countries, AN adequate idea ofthe variety of interesting objects to be combined in a well executedHistory of the University of Oxford, — aswell as to afford delightful reminiscences to the former InmatesLoggan's remark is as follows: " Occasioned hic Instituteprsehuit tacit quaedam indignation, cum videre rustica passim tu-guerilla,et ignoble pages, summum Artifice carlo et pencilledinc lares cere, Oxonium interim, celiberrimum Musaeum concilium,quo pulchrius aut beatus quidam Sol non conspicit, intactpraeterea," &c. Oxonian Illustrate. 1695, Folio f" SpectatorIngenno'\)he. "What encouragement (replied T) did theplanner of the work receive?" " None (re-of her classic Walls — it is proposed to publish Three FolioVolumes, which shall embrace the following departments ot*art. 1. Picturesque Views of the University, under differentaspects. 2. Views of the several Colleges, Halls, and PublicBuildings — in whole, or in part — as the subject may require.3. Interiors of Chapels, Halls, Libraries, &c. 4. Gothic Architecture: Figures : Niches : Screens : Entrances, &c. 5.Modern Sculpture : Figures and Busts of Eminent Men. 6.Portraits of Distinguished Characters, ancient and modern ;including several which have never been before engraved. 7.Curiosities, Belies, &c. 8. Book-Illuminations.*' Engravings of these, and of similar subjects,* — executedfrom Original Drawings— by Artists of the first celebrity intheir respective departments — will, it is presumed, give a distinctivecharacter of excellence to this Publication which willbe in vain sought for in its precursors. It is intended that eachVolume shall contain at least six large and elaborate Platesof Landscape or Architecture, or of a union of both; six Portraits,engraved in the first style of excellence: eight CopperplateVignettes, of a large and finished description — and numerousWood-cuts. But, in proportion to the desire whichevery affectionate son of Alma Mater will feel for the existenceof such a splendid memorial as is here submitted to hisconsideration, must be the anxiety that its execution be certainwhen once it be determined upon ; that every requisitemeasure be adopted to protect it from casualties, as well as todistinguish it from the characteristics, of an ordinary undertaking.The plan will be so matured, and the number of LiteraryCoadjutors, engaged in its execution, will be so wellThe fronts of such Colleges, Halls, &c. as have been rebuilt,or have undergone material alterations, will be engraved as theyapical in their original forms, from the views of Loggan, or frontthose prefixed to the earlier Oxford Almanacs.joined he) but what appears on the face of theProspectus ; and of the names there recorded,acquainted with that plan, that, if set on foot according to theanticipations of its Author, scarcely any supposable contingencycan frustrate its completion. In accordance with a justanxiety on this important point, each volume, as delivered,will be considered as complete within itself — in regard both tothe text, and the decorations by which it will be accompanied.The name of Anthony a-Wood has been long andjustly popular among the lovers of Oxford Antiquities. Thelabours of that Antiquary were doubtless both arduous andmeritorious ; and the Public have been recently put into possessionof the most valuable portion of them, as connectedwith the Lives* of the more eminent characters of the University.Wood's Collections, or Annals, relating to the differentColleges and Halls, have also their peculiar advantages; but,under both points of view, as a Biographer and Topographer,that author's researches were too miscellaneous; and, at times,too trifling and unimportant. He chronicled the minute andthe marvellous, with the same assiduity and degree of goodfaith as he did the important and the veracious; and a resulthas followed which might have been naturally expected : — hisworks are a Repository for occasional consultation, in whichhowever the reader cannot obtain the more valuable matterof which he is in search, without wading through toilsomepages, encumbered by puerilities, and defaced by unconquerableprejudices. Yet, as a Substratum whereon to buildfirmly, let no Oxford Antiquary disdain to avail himself ofmany of those materials, which, but for Wood's unremittingperseverance, would have irretrievably perished. Nor mustthe name of Hearne, a zealous disciple, as well as enthusiasticadmirer, of Anthony a- Wood, be forgotten among those• "The Athens Condenses: edited by the Rev. Dr. Bliss,Public Registrar."not THREE were obtained at Oxford. I believe,Sir, the affair never proceeded beyond this announce.The author, with his usual characteristiczeal, was sanguine to excess. He counted upona large muster-roll of subscribers — but the daywas Gone by! An angel from heaven couldscarcely effect such a work nowJ^''I slowly folded up the Prospectus, casting asorrowful glance at its contents — of which Iresolved leisurely to make myself master at myInn — the Kings Arms, I will fairly own to youthat I was, at first, alarmed at the magnitude ofthe design ; but what will not a union of heartsand hands — consolidated by a liberal remuneration—effect ? The next morning I visited Mr.Talboy's ; and we had a good long gossip together.On groping 'midst the volumes in the rear of hisWriters who have treated of the Antiquities of Oxford. Theincidental notices of the University, scattered throughout themultifarious publications of Hearne, will be carefully investigated,and duly appreciated : and where the information appearsto be authentic, it will not fail to be recorded. To saythat the notices of Hearne are free from the imputation of credulity,would be to assert what is foreign to the truth."The price of the work was to have been £7. 17s. 6d. thevolume, small paper; the large paper, £12. 12s. the volume.Only thirty-two names were received ; of which six were putdown for large paper. May more fortunate hands accomplishthe execution of such a splendid — and, in more than onesense, national — undertaking! To hare failed, in suchtimes of literary torpor and fatuity, can be no disgrace to itsAuthor. Cato Parvus.shop I stumbled upon a dingy little tome, entitled'' Elogia Sepulchralia^^'' &c., of which oneP. F.* was the author — and was mightily pleasedwith the motto in the title-page, which runs thus:Murmur pelisse Homines ? Monument fatiscunt."Arson.'' Nescio Musaeum sed Monument mori."Ovid.'' English by a Wit of the Age:*' Men timely die, and Princes day by dayMoulder to dust: but Books will live for Aye,And re-embalm us in the coldest day! "On reading it, I could not but be struck with itsapplication to your projected History of the Universityof Oxford: — and was almost horrified tofind a copy of the Prospectus on Mr. Talboy'scounter defaced and rendered scarcely legibleby dust and ashes. That energetic Bibliopolesympathised sincerely on its failure: adding, that,although the said Prospectus had been depositedat every common Room, and with everyHead of a House — many of them also with theleading Tutors of the University — yet, the impressionof his mind was, that only one assenting** Types impression Author P. P. [Payne Fisher] ExEquestrian Familia Generous : necnon tam Collegii, quamCampi, Graduates. Lord. 1675. 8vo, Impends Authors, etin Authors sum solum Types errata." By no means anevery-day book. M. R.voice, in the way of subscription, had been transmittedto its Author." " Whose might that be?"observed I. " Dr. Routh's '* — replied myInformant.At the mention of that name, a thousand agreeablefluttering took possession of my breast. Ilearnt, as I am sure you will too, with no commonsatisfaction, that the intellectual buoyancy of thateminent scholar was unabated; that years had notenfeebled the powers of his mind, nor dimmed thelustre of his eye : and that he was yet as awakenedas ever to all that was precious and instructive inthe lore of the primitive Fathers. A visit, paid tohim — shortly after leaving Mr. Talboy's — confirmedthis good account. I found him as courteousand as communicative as ever : correcting, ifI may so speak, a proof sheet of his beloved Lac-xanthuswith one hand, and the pages of a new editionof his favourite Burnet with the other. Hishall staircase, corridors, dining room and drawingroom, contained the same goodly book-furnitureas of old — outlying, in intrinsic worth, all thevelvet and silk and chintz hangings of the proudestpalace in Christendom. Mr. Chantry was,atthe moment, on a visit in the University ; and awhisper was current that he was not to leave itwithout carrying the head of the President ofMagdalen College in his travelling carriage withhim to London. As this could easily be accomplishedwithout decapitation of the Original,1 expressed the heartiest wishes that it mighttake place. Still I had doubts and fears.My next personal object of visitation, was myold friend the Public Registrar: whom I rejoicedto find hale, hearty, active — and as obligingas ever. I had known him in the times ofthe Book-Fever — symptoms of which I rejoicedto observe yet hanging about him ! His area issmall, but it is well filled : — and no man is so littledisposed to let apprehension of Cholera or theReform Bill upset his bibliomaniacal felicity.But when, my friend, (remarked I) do yourHearniana appear? Horace's precept has beendoubly observed — for more than twice nine yearshave stolen away since you announced the publicationof that interesting work." He replied,that ''he could not help himself — his business, aspublic Registrar, was so intermitting, and ofsuch essential importance, that he feared he mustbid it an eternal adieu." The latter words felltremulously from his lips — and it was clear to methat, at heart, he was as " sound as a roach " inthe legitimate cause.On quitting, I made instinctively for the BodleianLibrary: for that dear, old, favouriteabode, yet haunted by the spirit of all thosegreat Book Collectors who have figured away inthe pages of your Bibliomania. The master-livingSpirit of the Library was, as usual, promptto receive me , and to receive me cordially. Wewalked, and sat, and stood, and walked again —in that interminable forest of printed books andMSS. of every description. Dr. Bandied gaveme a sketch — necessarily a rapid one — of theacquisitions which had been more recently made;and, among them, placed before me the stupendouslysplendid monument of the spirit and liberalityof one individual — in the Mexican Antiquities— of which Lord Kingsborough was the Patron.The copy before me was upon vellum — apresent from that Nobleman. It was justly arrangedamong the Lions, yea of the roaring lions,of old Bodley : and for my part, I wish the noise ofsuch roaring may extend to the uttermost parts ofthe empire. A similar copy (as I learnt) had beendeposited in the British Museum, also a presentfrom the same munificent quarter. I confess thatI was transported at this intelligence; and whilesuch liberal and noble blood was glowing in Britishveins, I would not despair of the revivificationand ultimate triumph of the Bibliomania.Dr. Bandied then shewed me a variety of book-curiosities,of which I could not help wishing thatyou had been also a spectator. At five, in companywith the Public Registrar, I found myselfat his table — well garnished — and stimulant ofthe " feast of reason, and the flow of soul." Atfirst, we were rather flattish. It could not fail tobe so. I had communicated my conversation withFMessrs. Parker and Talbot :— the tenor of whichfound sympathy in their bosoms: but " the healthof my Lord Kingsborough" — (^'totocorde et to-tisvarious") made the heart-vessels dilate; and inatrice we were all in an overflowing glow of sentimentality!The hock had a more racy flavour:the peaches, a more juicy distillation. The decliningsun had a mellower lustre — and thebreeze of the evening wafted a more delicatelyaromatic fragrance to our senses. We forgotthe Cholera — and even the Reform Bill; andresolved never to forego, or even to cause to bemitigated, our attachment to Valdarfer and toCaxton ! Night came on — and, with it, a moonof equal amplitude and splendour with that witnessedat Reading. We strolled in the Gardensof St. John — those gardens, in which Brown declaredthat the whole strength of his genius hadbeen concentrated. They give indeed " amplespace to narrow bounds " with so much happyart, that I know of nothing which must be mentionedin the same breath with them — consideringthe nature of the site, and the limits within whichthey are formed.Here I parted with the worthy head Librarianof Bodley, and pursued my course homeward,in company with my friend the Public Registrar.As usual, I went to take a peep at that matchlessquadrangle of Public Edifices, of which St.Mary's and the Schools form the opposite sides,with the Radcliffe Library in the centre.* Iwent, as usual, to visit this spot of enchantmentby moonlight . . . and found it, if possible, moremagnificently impressive than ever ! You mustbe wearied with description, and therefore I shallonly say, that, strolling backward and forwardwith my friend for some half hour, we talked ofdays gone by, and of days that now were — sincerelybelieving, in our hearts, that a reaction,equally bold, decisive, and beneficial, wouldwithin a few months take place : that not onlythe hearts of Messrs. Parker and Talbot wouldthere be made to dance with delight, but thehearts and reins of every deserving Bibliopolistin the empire also. My friend was firm in action,and loud in voice, when he made this declaration. so much so, that he awakened theechos of the place . . . and I thought that I onceheard the re-echo of " Re-action " dying awaywithin the cloister of the Divinity School. Thenext morning I paid a hurried visit to the " richand racy tomes " of Caxtonian lore, which areduly locked within the press of the first Libraryat St. John's; and did not fail to cast an interested,but not longing, eye upon the peculiar,but limited, treasures of the black-letter kind,They have lately put an iron railing, of an oval form,round this building — an adaptation, as infelicitous as unnecessary.C. P.which they possess at Exeter College.* I wascompelled to tear myself away from all thesebook-felicities, as the various College-chimes remindedme of the hour of setting out for " LaurelLodge. ^'In my way hither, it was but natural to museupon all that had taken place in the spot justquitted. I candidly own that it strikes me that avery great improvement in the education ofyoung men at Oxford and Cambridge, might beeasily effected. The undergraduate, who firstloves his Pliny or his Propertius from the cut ofits coat — alias the ;fashion of its binding — may,in a happy moment, by looking into its text,love the author for his own sake. The youngmind should be directed to new objects. Thatperpetual system of Herodotising^ Thucydidising,and Eclipsing, is enough to render the sharpestintellect obtuse in the long run. AndSanderson and Watt can these Genii do anythingtowards awakening the fancy and refiningthe tastes of young men, verging towards theirtwentieth year? Consider, with what high ex ■petitions, and sometimes high capacities, youngmen are sent to College; and how much itmay be in the power of the Tutor to apply thesecapacities and expectations to their most obviousWhy will not the Magnates of these two Colleges put theirbook-treasures, of this description, into secure and appropriatebindings ? M. R.and honourable uses. Teach young men — especiallythose who are heirs to large properties,and to a splendid ancestry — where the noblefeats of their forefathers are recorded in thepages of the County Historian — and they willbecome lovers, and peradventure collectors, inthat branch of the Liter ce Humanities, The nameof DuGDALE is equally proud and imperishable.Should they love Poetry ? Tell them how Miltonaltered both thought and word in his firsteffusions, and they will buy all the varietiesof the early impressions of that great man'smuse. For Shakspeare, there will be no end tothe chasse in the eternally varied field connectedwith the earlier editions of his Plays. An accidentalvisit to Suffolk made the public acquaintedwith a Prompter's surreptitious edition of Hamlet,a year earlier than any known edition of thatplay.*The library of Sir Henry Banbury, Bart. Map., (at BurtonHall, near Bury St. Edmoud's) contained an edition ofHamlet, of the date of 1G03 — unknown to all Commentatorsand Collectors. It had belonged to Sir Thomas Hammer, hismaternal grandfather ; and was bound up in a volume ofchoice rarities in the Dramatic line, and other early editionsof Shakspeare. This volume — light in weight, but ponderousin value — was disposed of to Messrs. Payne and Foss, in exchangefor a number of useful publications; and by Messrs.Payne and Foss was sold to the Duke of Devonshire, thepossessor of the finest dramatic library in Europe. Beforeparted with, Mr. Payne caused a literal re-print of the Hamletto be published, of which 500 copies were struck off. It madesome noise at the time— but the text was evidently not theBut, above all things, when the generality ofyoung men can wade knee deep into the streamsof Grecian lore, without the fear of catchingcold — in other words, when they can masterGreek and Latin sufficiently well for the ordinarypurposes of philological research — imbuethem with a love of antiquities; of antiquities,including the passion for gems, coins, and architecture— and this will lead to the acquisition ofthe best works relating to such an essential featureof a library. See also that the study of nationalantiquities be duly inculcated ; so that, in travellingthrough a country, every hillock of earth,and every fragment of stone, may be taught tobe viewed with an eye of no ordinary interest.I hold this to be a species of Patriotism in its way.Anything and everything that recals to us thepast periods of our country — that re-peoples thetemple of the Druid, or the castle of the Baron — ■is of immediate and direct use, by teaching us toweigh, and to estimate accordingly, the presentpositive blessings which we enjoy. And as wearecareful of thee past, so may we be attentive tothe future. Not a coin, not a gem — not an inscriptionupon a stone tablet, however time-eatennot a frieze, not a capital, not a pedestal, inthe architectural pile — will ^^e;2 be contemplatedoffspring of Shakspeare's brain. Amongst other oddities, theGhost is made to enter in his night gown and slippers! SeetheLibrary Companion, p. 813, Second Edition.with indifference : and, with this, a most zealousattachment to those Written Records by which atrue knowledge of history is mainly upheld. Thusa new sense, as well as a fresh impetus, is givento the human understanding; making all thedifference between the vacant gaze of an ordinarytraveller, and the intelligent remarks of aninstructed observer. Thus, Philander, oncedeeply versed in the tragedies of Aeschylus andSophocles, on a sudden dispensed with the servicesof those Dramatists; sought no longer pleasurein choruses, semi or full ; but became smittenonly with Pausanias and Dion Cassius — and,from them, by a natural transition, sought hischief solace in Montauban and Piranesi, Camdenand Cough : resolving to devote the remainderof his life (yet wanting many years of itsgrand climacteric !) to the study and acquisitionof our National Antiquities. And thus, to adduceno other instance does the Master-spiritwhich yet inhabits and adorns Stairhead, pursue,indomitably, his enthusiastic course ! The snowsof age sit lightly upon his brow; and bodily infirmitiesneither damp his ardour nor enfeeble hisexertions: whileSummer suns roll unperceiv'd away,as the spear of the Aboriginal Briton or themystic urn of the Druid, find entrance within hisStudio,Is the Collegiate Pupil destined for the Church ?let him not only construe freely the Bible, theApostolical Fathers, and the Antiquities of Eusebius,Solomon, and Theodore, in their originaltongues, but let him feel an equal anxiety andpride to possess himself of the best editions of theoriginal text. From the dead, he will naturallycome to the living, languages — and among these,his Tutor will, as naturally, tell him to cherishthat which is his own. What a prospect thenawaits him ! You anticipate what I am about tosay. You anticipate the acquisition of MSS. ofWillis Version of the Sacred Text*— the Tyndalland Coverdale printed Versions — headingIt is a joyful note of intelligence to impart, that, atlength, we are about to receive a most carefully collated, andI will add, GENUINE printed text of the MS. version ofthe Old Testament, by Wiclif : the New Testament havingbeen published by Lewis, some fourscore years ago, in folio,and reprinted by the Rev. Mr. Saber, of the British Museum,in to. 1810. The Rev. Mr. Marshall and Frederick Madden,Esq. (see p. 47 ante) — both of the British Museum — are alsothe Editors of this forthcoming ^;s^ edition of the text of theOld Testament; and these are names which justify every reasonableexpectation of complete success. The ClarendonPress, to its immortal honour, prints it gratuitously. Of thevarious MSS. of the original, that copy in the library of theBritish Museum (formerly belonging to the Royal Society) isperhaps the most intrinsically valuable, as well as splendid :and that, in the library of F. Douce, Esq. is probably thefacile princeps of those in private collections. I think I haveseen nearer twenty, than twelve, copies of the original MS. ;all about the commencement of the fifteenth century. C. P.the folio set of Matthews, Taverner, Cranmer, andParker Anon, for our earlier Rituals, Prayer-books,and Sermons ! The race is set before himin all its fascinating varieties; and PoRTiusstartsto reach the goal of a never-dying renown. Thelongest life is too short to gratify his inextinguishablepassion: the largest room, in his father'smansion, too small to admit of his marshalledtreasures . in the black-letter departmentonly. He sighs for an hundred feet gallery;in which to arrange his busts of our earlyReformers; and his day dreams and his nightdreams run riot upon the acquisition of choicecopies of Latimer, Cranmer, and Fox.t TheIt may be as well to refer to the summary, but spirit-stirring,account of these Bibles, to be found in the Library Com"pardon, pp. 30-32: and if the reader (such an one as fortisprobably is) chooses, to the other larger authorities therereferred to. But of all these early English Bibles, place meinthe front of the copy of Cranmer's (1540) upon vellum,which is usually kept in the Lodge of the Master of St. John'sCollege, Cambridge ! ! " Obstupui, steteruntque come, et voxfaucibus heesit ! " This has occurred more than once— to me—and to more than one Roxburgh ! Of the first edition of theCovERDALE Version, I believe it is hopeless to think of everobtaining a perfect copy. That, in the library of Castle Ashy,belonging to the Marquis of Northampton, approaches thenearest to perfection of any with which I am acquainted. Wellmay my friends Messrs. John and Arthur Arch, muster up theircourage to proffer £100. for an entirely perfect copy ! See p.1.5. In a more or less imperfect state, I should say few of ourearlier Bibles are of such common occurrence. M. R.t 1 presume that the Sermons of the first, the Catechism andEcclesiastical Chronicles stand also prominentlyconspicuous to his mind's eye — and for a perfectParker, De Antiquity Ecclesiae Brittanmcce,^ hewould cut off the entail of nine roods of the bestarable land upon the paternal estate! Everystick, every stone, every relic — once belongingto that illustrious Archbishop — is an object approachingalmost to adoration with Fortis; andshould he ever see, as it has been my good fortuneto see — in the archives of Corpus College, Cambridge— the sacrament cup, and the salt-cellar(of Milanese workmanship) which once adornedthat great man's altar and table, I am notquite sure whether the President of that Societymight not require the aid of two lusty Universitybeadles to prevent . . . something like an actof sacrilege ensuing !Such was the general and perhaps ramblingcertain devotional pieces of the second, and the Martyrology oithe third, are here alluded to. Of these desirable publicationsto a student in our English Theology, the first edition of thelast work — in 1563 — is the GRAND object of seulement. Theonly thoroughly perfect copy of it, with which I am acquainted,is that in the library of the late Philip Hurd, Esq. and to besold by auction, with the entire collection of his books, underthe hammer of Mr. Evans. I hear with pleasure that the Sonof the deceased will at least equal the book-celebrity of theparent. C. P.There is no end to discussions touching the materia bibliographyconnected with the work here mentioned — first publishedin 1572, folio. Those copies in the collection of LordSpencer, Mr. Grenville, Mr. Coke, Mr. Douce-to say nothingtrain of ideas which occupied me on quitting*tiny beloved Anna Mater, till I reached this secludedspot. Behold me, then, back again atLaurel Lodge : embedded 'midst my books ; withno sound but that of the choristers chattering inthe grove, and " the low of distant kine " — whilethe village spire, peeping over the slope of thehill, every now and then affords a sort of comfortingexhilaration of spirits. Sir, I will hopethat this little Tour has not been made in vain.I will hope that, if I have commenced this epistlein the strain of despondency, I may concludeit in that of comparative exultation. There isdoubtless a frightful falling off in the " good oldcause," amongst the many : but amongst the"gallant few" — of which the number is notvery small — we see spirited resolutions followedup by unabated energy and liberality of conduct.Nor is it a hopeless symptom of the times, thattwo rival English Versions of Richard de BuriesPhilohiblon are, I believe, at this momentin the press. If ever a man should revive thespirit of his great Predecessor, De Bury, it isTHE PRESENT Lord Chancellor: who, I make nodoubt, would do all in his power to go beyondhim. In regard to the Patronage o{ Literature,what can exceed Lord Kingsborough's patronsthe Cambridge and Lambeth copies — are the most perfectwhich I have seen. In fact, it might be doubted whether <tt;ocopies were ever found alike. C. P.age of the Antiquities of Mexico * a work put forthby Augustine Alio? There is hardly any conceivablecase, more likely to challenge and toobtain the applause of posterity than that towhich I allude. We have here a gallantry ofspirit which puts all precedent at an incalculabledistance behind. It may be thought indelicate tomention more names; but I may make allusionsio persons. The libraries of St. James's Placeand Author, can hardly receive any acquisition.If not full to overflowing, they lack nothingessential. The honourable and high-mindedowner of the library in Cleveland Square, suffersnot one jot of attachment to abate towards hisbooks — and it is but the expression of mere commonjustice to say, that such books merit all theintensity of devotion by which they have beenThis magnificent performance consists of seven large foliovolumes, of which the first four are plates, and the remainingthree text. The author, or editor, is Augustine Alio.Lord Kingsborough is reported to have devoted £25,000. toits execution, in the successful manner in which we now viewit, and in which posterity will not fail to appreciate it. SuchLordly munificence is so rare, so splendid, so deserving ofperpetual praise, that i know not how to express myself as Ifeel upon the subject . . .In freta dum fluvii current, dum montis umbraeLustrabunt convex, solum dum sidera pascet,Semper honos iiomenque tuum landesquemanebuntQuae mecunque vacant terse . . .Vir. ^u. lib. i. v. 60r.See p. 81. ante. C. P.acquired. Years neither damp the ardour, norslacken the exertions, of their owner; whosejudgment is yet as ripe, and whose taste yet asrefined, as ever. On its scale — and of its class —(and the scale is far from being a stinted one) itputs all competition at defiance. I observe, however,that you have said pretty nearly the samething, in your last edition of the Introduction tothe Classics J^You will be pleased to refer to that part ofmy Letter in which the name of Attic us is mentioned.f I learn that the book-appetite of thisgentleman is of the same cormorant-capacity asever : nay, that a return to his native land hasrather sharpened than subdued it — that CharlesLewis has been obliged to lay in such a stock ofrussia and morocco skins — to bind only his black-letterromances in the Italian, Spanish, Frenchand English languages— as may appear incredibleto those not having ocular demonstration of itstruth. Such a set of tools also has been manufacturedfor the binding of them as is altogethermarvellous ; and as to the extent of his library,to save trouble, you had better say, at once, thatit reaches from ****** to Nuremberg ! Forproof of an intermediate link in a chain of suchextension, stop at the Rue not a stone'sthrow from the Quai Voltaire — and casting yourVol. I. p. xi. t Pf^ge 37.IImaaeye up at a huge mansion in which 30,000 tomesare deposited — and which has been recently called" Grand Hotel Bibliomanesque''^ — learn, that.What was Bullard^s once, is * * * * *'s now.But if the days of youth with Attics are over,his early example has found more than one imitator.Look back also, Reverend Sir, and see ifthe name of Euphormjo, and mention of his meditatedbook-pyramid,* be easily to be found.When a lad at Eton I learn that this Euphormiowas always ^^ strange and prying' like HenryTyson of old,-) into book-recesses which were butlittle haunted ; and that an uncut copy of theLac Puerorum, printed by William Jaques, orAndrew Shot, first caught his eye and fixed hisaffections. Those affections have been steady asthe polar star, ever since; and now, midway'twixt his twentieth and thirtieth year, he lordsit, without controul, over such a domain of booksin the hall of his ancestors— as would inducean ordinary man to distrust the evidence of hissenses. But Euphormio is something, and a gooddeal, more than a mere Collector of costly andprecious volumes. He is a Bibliographer, of nocommon calibre ; and volunteers a world of labourin the specification of the worth and rarityof his several treasures. He is meditating suchPage 23. f Bibliomania, p. 398.a Catalogue Raisons of these treasures, as mayastound even yourself. These be glorious examplesto the young — and ought to excite the rivalryof half the Country Squires and Sheriffsthroughout Great Britain.Nor are other examples wanting of biblio-maniacal ardour in early manhood. I have mentionedthe name of Marcus as one entitled to noordinary respect ; and have surmised that, whenthe trammels of non-age are cut away, the saidMarcus will spring at once into distinction amongthe Collectors of a first-rate class of books. Thefuture will, I am persuaded, prove the truth ofthis prediction. Again — behold the heir apparentof a Ducal Coronet, sedulously sittingdown to master volumes, of which his schoolfellows,and perhaps University comrades, hadnever heard even the titles. While others arecoated in red garments, scouring the plain, orleaping the fence, in pursuit of Reynard's brush —while as many more, or double the number,are levelling the tube of death, and the *' whirringpheasant " drops lifeless into the brake —behold our young Bibliomane seated tranquillyin his study, with the Treasures of the Greekand Latin languages before him : now reading,now digesting, now writing, and now indulginghigh thoughts and brave resolves, touching hisfuture destiny in life. His morning tijffi/i is.alternately, Delian and Thomas Magister : hispetit souper Porphyries and Terentianus Taurus:while of Sidonius Apollinaris, Manilius, and Mer-curiousTrismegistuSj he has sundry little pocketeditions, wherewith he delights himself as he wandersalong the butter-cupped meadows. O rareand felicitous combination of mental labour andmental recreation ! O example, greatly to beadmired — and deserving of imitation, especiallyamong those whose wealth and situation are atonce great and influential !But, whatever may be the result of the ducalheir, we have, in the example of a Duke himself,no common illustration of the steadiness and spiritwith which an early attachment to Books hasbeen followed up. To the other, almost innumerable,attractions of Chatsworth look at its library: the beauty of the room, and the yet greaterbeauty of its furniture ! If the Libraries ofthe Houses in London, Chadwick, and Chatsworth,be put together, they will not easily besurpassed by the similar treasures of any mansion,however lordly and however vast. To books(of which the purchase of the celebrated libraryof the late Bishop of Ely might only be consideredas a graft on the original stock ) add Pictures,Statues, and Gems and you have the mostglorious frame work in which a living portraitcan be encamped ! Nor are such treasures idlydormant in their several receptacles. When St.Ethelwold makes his appearance,* it will be seento what good and useful purposes antiquarian volumesmay be devoted. I anticipate a generalstir on the occasion, in the upper book-circles,equal to that on the arrival of an ambassador fromPersia among the fashionable corps — whosemany twinkling feet" produce such a feveredatmosphere at Alack's.But there is yet a prouder boast to record.The genuine bibliomaniacal blood is now runningat high tide in Royal Veins; and no marvel.Who, that has paced the library of GeorgeIII, now deposited in the British Museum, hasnot been well-nigh " dumb-founded " at the gloriousvista of interminable book-treasures beforehim? What Englishman, on such a visit, hasnot been astonished that these books were thecollection of one man — and that man, the MonarchOF His Country! ! Can it be a matter ofsurprise, then, that the mantle of the parentshould have descended upon the shoulders of atThe very amiable and accomplished Mr. John Gage is atpresent occupied in making this " appearance " effective.Mention of this most curious and ancient volume is made inthe Bibliographical Deca7neron,\o\. I. pp. Ive-lxiii.: bnt shortly,under the patronage of the Antiquarian Society, (here wiselyexerted) all its charms and all its worth will he made palpableto the public gaze. M. R.least ONE of his sons? You will instantly catchmy allusion; and already we are arm-in-armexploring within the elongated library in KensingtonPalace. Lately, great acquisitions, inapartments as well as in books, have added tothe comforts of the Royal Inmate; and a nobleroom, just completed, forms a sort of La go Mag ^gore, into which the contents of the neighbouringcorridors and boudoirs (crammed with lore ofevery philological description!) empty themselvesas tributary streamlets. Nor has His RoyalHighness less ground of receiving congratulationupon another score. His Biblical Treasures havebeen laid before the world in the sumptuous Catalogueof them put forth by Mr. Pettigrew,*adorned with fac similes, and abounding in curiousas well as correct intelligence. Such aBiBLiOTHECA SussExiANA: A Descriptive Catalogueaccompanied by historical and biographical notices of the 31 SS.and printed books contained ti the Library o/H. R. H. theDuke of Sussex, &c. in Kensington Palace, 1827, 2 vols.Imply. 8vo. The first volume is devoted to the MSS. — thesecond to the printed books, — in Theology only. Mr. Pettingcomputes the number oi manuscript volumes in the libraryto be 12,000 : o{ printed books, 38,000 — five years ago ! Thefac simile of the ornaments in some of the Hebrew MSS. areexceedingly beautiful — and many of them of a very ancientdate. Nothing has been spared in decorative attraction ofpaper and printing to render this work in all respects deservingof the Patronage under which it was given to the world.Cato Parvus.monument of the good taste and gallant spirit ofthe OWNER of these treasures, is deserving of allpraise, and is at once splendid and imperishable.I am not solitary in the expression of a ferventwish that the Author of this opus magmnn mayfind encouragement to resume his promised laboursof continuance. At present, the departmentof Theology ( in which the greater and lesserPolyglots cut a most distinguished figure)only is executed.But it is time, Reverend Sir, to bid you adieu:and I do so, with the frank avowal that the recollectionof all the Worthies, here recorded,puts me into a genial flow of spirits, and more thancounterbalances the dejection which I felt on takingup my pen to address you. In some measureI believe this must be attributed to the sightof an elegantly got up volume, being an Englishversion of the Cynogeticon^ or Book of Hunting,by Arran, which has been sent down to mefrom London since I commenced this Epistle.The translator is anonymous; but he is clearly anintelligent, learned and tasteful man; and Iwould rather see this volume upon my table,than witness the longest burst that ever was recordedin the synoptical annals of Leicestershire.The book is absolutely a " dear delight,"and may be consulted again and again with instructionand entertainment. Like a true Bibliomaniac,the author printed but a limited Yiumhevof copies.* But a truce to this rambling. Gravelyand honestly speaking, I would hope that theexamples of bibliomaniacal eminence just broughtforward, may have a beneficial effect in the longrun. Men will in time become tired of the insipidity,fickleness, or worthlessness, of those pursuits,which leave behind neither tangible nor visibleproofs of their worth. The Tz^r/ cannot alwaysbe soft to its frequenter's foot. The dice-boxcannot always disgorge its doublets of sites. Thebagnio may conceal the accomplice as well as thevictim of seduction. Tavern orgies tear asunderthe stoutest constitution, as well as impoverish theweightiest purses Jaded and distracted inthese exhausting pursuits, the votary of them returnsto his private haunt — of loneliness, discomfort,and vexation of spirit! He sees no object tocheer him — he hears no friendly voice of sympathy— his pillow is stuffed with thorns, and he is'' tossed to and fro" 'midst the snatches of doubtfulslumber which that pillow may induce. Whereare the dicta of Epictetus, or the morals of Seneca?the golden opinions of Antoninus, or the poesy ofI believe only 250. It is sold by Messrs. Bohri and Son,and will I hope be out of print before the next Novembercoursing begins. The embellishments are sweetly appropriate.Prudentius? Every shelf is bereft of books —and it is not here that we must expect the inspiredWORD of heaven! I will not draw theconverse of such a picture. It may be inferredfrom what has preceded it.Let the honest trader, therefore, in book merchandise,cheer up his spirits; and if his heartdo not beat quite so high as it hath been wont tobeat, let him be assured that better and brighterdays are at hand. Let the illustrious subhastalianCorps— Messrs. Evans, Southey, Wheaten, andHodgson — take good courage, and polish up theirebon-truncheons for a prosperous Spring campaign.Above all, let my old and learned friend,W. Y. Motley, Esq. no longer hesitate to bring hisCistercian labours before the anxious eyes of thepublic.* He will reap a more abundant harvest,in every sense of the word, than he at present maydare to anticipate. Let the word RE-ACTIONbe inscribed over his inner porch ; and for those,who are watching the ebbing and flowing ofchances — who are reluctant to untie their closelyThis book, to my certain knowledge, will be equally acuriosity and a treasure in its way. Old Laurence Costernever before had such honor paid him ; and Harlem has foundin Mr. Motley a champion which may almost justify her forgetfulnessof German. The volume, which will be in 8vo., iscrowded with embellishments, both asfac-similes and illustrations.M. R.knotted purses — who freeze or burn as a fewshillings preponderate — for such, my motto isNOW OR never!" But, ^' I have done"*Claudius jam rives pueri, sat praia biberiint.fI am always,Reverend Sir,Your " Constant Reader,"And devoted Servant,Mercurial Rustics.Cicero, passim. f Virgil, Clog. iii. v. 111.Wm. Davy, Printer, Gilbert-street, Grosvenor-sua