REMINISCENCESOFA LITERARY LIFE;WITHANECDOTES OF BOOKS,AND OPBOOK COLLECTORSBY THE REVERENDTIIOS. FROGNALL DIBDIN, Dad.PART Tick SECOND.LONDON:MAJOR, 71, GREAT RUSSELL-street,Bloomsbury.MIX ( ( \\XVI.CHAPTER IXAuthor.Wisdom lovesThis seat serene, and Virtue's self approves.Here come the Grief a change of thought to find,The Curious here, to feed a craving mind ;Here the Devout their peaceful temple choose,And here the Poet meets his favouring Muse.'it. visit K. The Library.IN the third volume of The Bibliographical De-cameron,and in a note at the 388th page of thatsame volume, will be found the following passage :It was quite at the end of the month of May, in theyear 1811, that I paid my first visit to the Noble Owner ofthe residence under description. The day had been excessivelyhot, and I reached Althorp, from London, betweenthe hours of six and seven, to a late dinner. The sun wasthen beginning to decline, so as to cast a breadth of shadowfrom the long avenues of elm and beech, and lime, withwhich the back front of the house is adorned*, or enfiladed.Sitting on a seat beneath one of these elms the cawingof innumerable rooks from the adjoining avenues thetranquillity of the approaching evening the calm, clear,You approach the front of the house through avenues of oak, ofwhich some are indisputably proved to have been growing towards thelatter rnd of the reign of Henry VII.558 Author.and almost cloudless sky and (shall I dare avow it?) morethan either of these causes, or the whole of them collectively,the near and immediate view of a suite of rooms in whichwas contained the FINEST PRIVATE COLLECTION OF BOOKSPERHAPS IN EUROPE could not fail to produce emotionsof no ordinary occurrence, to one, who, for several previousyears, had vehemently sought after such a gratification.After a due time devoted to musing, I entered the aforesaidsuite of rooms, and more especially rested in that whereina fine Raphael was over the fire-place, and a French clockwas ticking upon the marble mantle-piece. The cloth waslaid, and the exemplification of the good old maxim (theusual theme of our school days) nil prater ordines wassingularly manifested to view. The sun was now sinkinglower and lower, and the shadows became proportionablybroad and massive. No sound was heard from without,save the nibbling of the deer, who quite peeped intothe windows of the apartment. His Lordship arrived atsevenI will conclude this i View of the Interior' (as theFlemish painters designate such subjects) by adding, thatthat congenial visit was the prelude to the many subsequentones which have taken place since the said 'year 1811.'But the mansion the library rejoins the impetuousreader ! I must be briefer than I could wish in satisfyingsuch impetuosity. Yet know, cultivator of bibliomanicalantiquities, that the name of SPENCER or Despencer (formerlythe same) is far from being barren in the annals ofbook-collecting ; for in the ancient time, Hugh Despencerhad a Son, Thomas, Earl of Gloucester, who, in 21 Rich.II., by petition in Parliament, obtained the revocation ofthe judgment of exile against his great grandfather, HughLe Despencer. In this petition it is stated (inter alia) thathe, the said Hugh, had at that time, Plate, Jewels, andready money better than 10,000/., xxxvi sacks of wool, anda LIBRARY OF Bores.' Collins, in his Baronetage, vol. i.SI/THORP.p. fl<)9, edit. 17'20, refers to Hot. Purl. *J1 Hie. II. n. .T>,60, 64,(*Now, if the reader pleases, he may contrast thissomewhat quaint, but " drawn on the spot," pictureof Althorp, with that which has been recently publishedin the pages of one of the most celebratedfemale writers of the day. Mrs. Jamieson's out-of-doorwinter view of Althorp shall speak foritself in the subjoined note*. Mine is a summer" It was on such a clay as I have seen in Italy in the month ofDecember, but which, in our chill climate, seemed so unseasonably, soominously beautiful, that it was like the hectic loveliness brighteningthe eyes and flushing the cheek of consumption, that I found myselfin the domains of Author. Autumn, dying in the lap of winter,looked out with one bright parting smile; the soft air breathed of summer;the withered leaves, heaped on the path, told a different tale. Theslant, pale sun shone out, with all heaven to himself: not a cloud wastin if, not a breeze to stir the leafless woods those venerable woodswhich Evelyn loved and commemorated. I was much struck with theinscription on a stone tablet, in a fine old wood near the house: ' thiswood was planted by Sir William Spencer, Knight of the Bath, in theyear of our Lord, 1624' on the other side, ( up and lee doing, andGod will prosper.' It is mentioned in Evelyn's ' Sylva.' The finemajestic old oaks, scattered over the park, tossed their huge bare armsagainst the blue sky ; a thin hoar frost, dissolving as the sun rose higher,left the lawns and hills sparkling and glancing in its ray ; and then ahare raced across the open gladeAnd with her feet she from the plashy earthchaises a mist, which, glittering in the sun,Runs with her all the way, wherever she 'doth run.'Nothing disturbed the serene stillness, except a pheasant whirring froma neighbouring thicket, or at intervals the telling of the deer, a soundw> peculiar, and so fitted to the scene, that I sympathised in the tasteof one of the noble progenitors of the Spencers, who had built a huntinglodge in a sequestered spot, that he might hear the harte bell.' Thiswas a day, an hour, a scene, with all its associations, its quietness, and560 Author.view. It is pleasing to tread the same ground, andto gaze upon many of the same objects, with a writerof the charm and power of Mrs. Jamieson's pen ;but at the expense of having my principles of chivalryquestioned, I must be permitted to break a tinylance with that " fair Lady," in commenting upona few defects of omission and commission whichseem to me to be involved in her description. Inthe first place, it is to be regretted that Mrs. Jamie-sonsuffered her agility of limbs, or buoyancy ofspirits, to carry her up the "great staircase" beforeshe had made the Tour "of all the rooms below ;"and most marvellous, or at least incomprehensible,to me, it is, that of a mansion, in which the FINESTPRIVATE LIBRARY IN EUROPE is contained andwhich library may be said to be nearer three thantwo hundred feet in length NO mention whateveris made !beauty, { felt in the blood, and felt along the heart.' All worldly caresand pains were laid asleep ; while memory, fancy, and feeling waked.Althorp does not frown upon us in the gloom of remote antiquity ; ithas not the warlike glories of some of the baronial residences of our oldnobility ; it is not built, like a watch tower, on a hill, to lord it overfeudal vassals ; it is not bristled with battlements and turrets. It standsin a valley, with the gradual hills undulating round it, clothed withrich woods. It has altogether a look of compactness and comfort, without pretension, which, with the pastoral beauty of the landscape, andlow situation, recall the ancient vocation of the family, whose grandeurwas first founded, like that of the patriarchs of old, on the multitude oftheir flocks and herds." Visits at Home and Abroad.A beautiful copper-plate vignette of this " UP AND BE DOING" Woodmay be seen in the Des Althorpiance, vol. i. p. 18, which had doubtlessescaped the recollection of Mrs. Jamieson.Author. ~>I51It is doubtless very possible that Mrs. Jamieson'slove of pictures and of portraits may be so muchthe ruling passion," as to " swallow up" everyparticle of interest or curiosity in the matter of1 JOKES ; and yet SHE, who has added to all ourLibraries by the production of one of the cleverestand most interesting " bones" of its kind*,ought, methinks, to have dropped more than onepassing courtesy as she glided by the interminableand glorious volumes of science, art, philosophy,belles-lettres, and Divinity, with* which the shelvesof Althorp are at once loaded and adorned. Butlet us keep to PICTURES. Let us suppose that, foran object not apparently developed, it was Mrs.Jamieson's exclusive wish to notice only the productionsof the pencil at Althorp. By not "gliding"through the library and by not beginning "atthe beginning" in the Dining Room she hasin fact lost the opportunity of exercising herivady and eloquent pen upon the best pn-t'trrsin the House. Nor when she has ivachril theCharnrtrrixtirg of Women, 3 vols. 8vo.t To the above assertion I here add the proof. In the Dining-roomwill IK? found the Elder and Younger Corner, by TITIAN ; Madonnaand Child, by CABAVAOOIO; a Boy's Head, an antique caustic painting;Descent from the Cross, by Sebastian BOURDON; Fragnu-ntof a Cartoon, by II \i i \i MI ; IK-ath of the Stag, by SNYDKBS , St.Charles Borrowed celebrating Ili^rli Mass, by UO.MIM. HIND. In tlu-I)rniri>i</-room, & Head of a Blind Harpi-r, ley I.n.v ; Daedalus andIcarus, by Vandyke so particular notuv.l ley walpole; a sketch, byKi IJK.NS admirable Two \Yiu tim Ladies. ley Ti 1 1 \N ; < K .i| lira an.!Lucretia, each by Cii n.i. In tlu- /./// library, a dusu-r .f U-autiiulO O562 ALTHORP-PICTURE GALLERY above stairs a spot which Walpolehas designated as " one of those enchantedscenes, which a thousand circumstances of historyand art endear to a pensive spectator" has sheselected objects so much on the score of art, as offurnishing matter for historical or personal anecdote.But a copy, as well as an original, will furnishmaterials for reflections of this nature. It shouldseem as if she came and went away full of the Gram-montMania and for fear of its abatement, had leftthe place (undoubtedly well calculated to produce it)without even visiting another room. Now, althoughI readily admit that the Gammon Annals furnishinstances of as terrible domestic tragedies as can beadduced furnished by means of poison, pistol-bullets,enamel portraits, of the time of Louis XIV., over the mantel-piece,surrounded by a number of pleasing little Flemish pictures, several ofthem by Teniers. The Raffaelle library, so called from a picture ofthe Holy Family, by that great master, over the fire-place ; and alludedto in my description of Althorp in the text. The Billiard library containstwo beautiful SIR Joshua the one of the present Earl Spencer,when four years of age ; the other, of the late Marchioness Camden :both these portraits were admirably engraved for my work. The Marlboroughlibrary contains a most extraordinary portrait of John, Dukeof Marlborough, also engraved for the work in question. I mention afew of the principal pictures in these rooms, of which a glimpse onlymight have rewarded the toil of a little extra locomotion. Mrs. Jamie-sonhas well and warmly noticed the REMBRANDT'S MOTHER, paintedby the son ; but might she not have also just dropt the fact of thesplendid engraving of that matchless portrait to be found in ' the workwhich is briefly mentioned by her as if it had been an eighteen-pennyGuide to a Watering Place ? And the Sophonisba Angosciola, uponwhich she descants with her usual cleverness, will be found not onlybeautifully represented by the burin, but particularly and largely noticedin certain Althorpian pages.Al.TIIORP.and broadswords or arising from protliu.-n \the most reckless, and a want of public and privateprinciple the most notorious yet, if Mrs. Jamiesonhad only gone a little onward, into one or tworooms, she would have found some of the most promisHIM it ladies and gentlemen, who were especialfai/rtt/ift's in the courts of that "par nobile" of1 Bench Monarchs, Louis XIV. and Louis XV.I should like to have had her opinion of the splendidportrait by Mignard (in the room immediately following,or in that ensuing it) of the famous Duchessede Montpelier*, encircled by flowers, which, intint and lustre, seem to yield only to the cheeks andeyes of the Lady.But in the Gallery itself, we desiderate yet furthernotices ; and may gently inquire how it comesto pass that Anne of Austria (by Mignard), andPhilip II . undoubted originals are overlooked ?Then, common courtesy might have led to the mentionof the haire whole length portrait of the NobleOwner of the Mansion, in his robes of the (garter,bv Copley, at the top of the room ! How came thend Lady Spencer, by Vandyke ("a SpencerThis |iirimv was purchased for a comparative trifle at the sale ofQuintain (Sanford's collection at Paris, and is particularly descried inmy Tour. Mr. NVriu'ht, then ; :ravrr, was so struck with it, that h.-i.iii.l readily ohtainctl) permission to cop it in water-colours;and for thirty r\i|iii.itcly and pi-strictly finished in i-vrry particular,he asked tlu- sum of unity ;:U!iu-av. I know not its pnMOt institution: luit I d know that a more extraordinary performance can rarely\\c \\564 Author.by Vandyke is a treasure") to be overlooked ? Andof the Henry VIII. , and several of the Lely andVandyke portraits, together with the Lady JaneGrey and Diane de Poictiers, it might as well havebeen observed, that all these interesting objects havebeen engraved, in the very best manner, chiefly inawork exclusively devoted to an account of theMansion in which the originals are placed*. I waswell pleased to read Mrs. Jamieson's spirited noticeof the portrait of the third Due de Guise, by Porousnot so much because I was instrumental to its acquisitiont as to its being matter of astonishmenthow such a magnificent portrait of such a magnificentPersecutor of the Huguenots should have beenLet me not be misunderstood. I desire nothing in the shape ofoffensive obtrusiveness ; but it should seem to have been obvious, as amatter of useful information, for such as have little chance of seeingthe originals, to mention, that they have a very good chance of seeingfaithful representations of them, most admirably engraved. This doesnot apply so much to the DIANE DE POICTIERS, because there was onlya very limited number (75 impressions) taken off, and the plate wasafterwards destroyed. I learn that 31. 13s. 6d. has been given for asingle impression of this most original and fascinating portrait.The Anne of Austria and the Ninon de Enclose were offerings atmy hands as gifts. Of the latter, a beautiful engraving, in stirling, onsale, is the property of Mr. Pickering, the bookseller.t It was obtained, as well as two small and very curious heads ofFrancis II. and Marie Stuart, of Mr. Carman, from the Question Crawfordcollection. I think that seventy guineas were given for the Due deGuise ; and not above sixteen for the two small heads which I believeto be thoroughly, if not EXCLUSIVELY, genuine. I refer the reader, withconfidence, to a short, but interesting account, of the bold and extraordinarycharacter of the Due de Guise, which appears in the SedesAlthorpiance, vol. i. p. 251-2.Author.allow CM! to leave the Kingdom which had been thescene of his too successful persecutions.I take leave of Mrs. Jamieson, and of her " Visitsat Home and Abroad," with perfect complacency andgood humour ; and had desired nothing better thanto have been "a fellow visitor" with her at AlbertDurer's House "abroad," and at Hardwicke*, asHer sketch of Hardwicke is more elaborated than that of Althorp.She says, to enjoy the former thoroughly, you " ought to sleep thereone night." It has been my lot to sleep there two nights : in the depthof the winter of 1818, when on a visit to the Duke of Devonshire at'chatsworth. I have made mention of this visit at Hardwicke in theLibrary Companion, p. 596-7, second edit. His Grace drove me overfrom Chatsworth, and left me, at my particular request, to soliloquisetwo days within the spacious and deserted walls of this, his most ancientancestral residence. In my bed-room were the old silver-toppeddogs ; and a huge fire was blazing upon the hearth when I retired to rest(The particulars preceding this retirement may be sought for in thework just mentioned). Opposite the foot of the bed, over the entrancedoor of the room, were some small leaden casements, which caught theflickering light of the expiring flame. The walls of the room werecovered with tapestry of some century and a half standing. The windowwas a large bay one, of the early time of James I. On retiring torest I locked my door ; and, after my first short slumber, I started up,thinking I heard a noise. The fire was yet burning, and through thecasements, just mentioned, I thought I discerned human faces, lookingat me some in anger, some in sorrow, and some in laughter. I fixedmy eyes upon the tapestry. I fancied I heard the huntsman's halloo,the dogs yelling: and the very trees, like those of " Birnam Wood,"seemed to be moving towards me. I leaped from my bed, and sprungto the door : unlocked and opened it. The whole delusion was dissipatedin an instant. There were no human faces ; the trees, and tin-huntsmenand the dogs were fast fixed in their worsted trammels; andon drawing the window curtain aside, to look abroad, I gazed only uponthe leads of the building, bristled with a hoar-frost, upon which t he-coldclear moonbeam seemed to love to be sleeping.I hid Urn rummaging among some old black-letter books, beforeretiring to rest, which may account for this "fantasia." I preserve a566 Author.well as at Althorp, at home. Her work is full ofpoint and vivacity. Perhaps it is too sparkling andabounding in quotation ; but it is the work of a wellcultivated understanding, and of a practised hand.Retournons a nos moutons."In the exact chronological order to be observed,an account of the publication of the BibliographicalCameron should have preceded that of the sedesAlthorpiance : but to keep those works in connectionwhich have an exclusive reference to the name andproperty of my late Patron, I deem it best to speakof the latter in the present place. I took up myground quickly and boldly. The " Cameron"was scarcely sold, and beginning to be very generallycirculated, when I issued proposals for the "jades ;"and at this very moment, too, I meditated my Bi-biographicalTour upon the Continent. The beginning,therefore, of the year 1818, was full ofexcitement and occupation. Within the first threemonths of it, I had satisfactorily ascertained thatmy projected work of the " JEdes" would succeed ;and that I had only to make the necessary arrangementswith Artists under favour of the Nobledrawing (now much injured), made by me, of this identical bedroom ;not forgetting the key of the door, which is silver, and of the prettyworkmanship of the seventeenth century. But of HARDWICKE let thereader regale himself with Mr. Shaw's magnificent engravings, recentlypublished in a folio volume, as the second number of the History ofour National Domestic Architecture that of HATFIELD being the first.This publication is beyond all praise.\mmiu'.Owner of the Mansion as to what subjects were tobe selected for their pencils. The Original Lint ofPORTRAITS stood thus:First Baron Spencer.Earl Spencer's Grandfather and Father.Earl Spencer in the Robes of the Garter. Copley.Earl Spencer when a Lad at Harrow School. Reynolds.Viscount Althorp when a Child. Reynolds.Georgianaa, Duchess of Devonshire. Reynolds.Marchioness Camden. Reynolds.Sir Kenelm Digby. Jansen.Cardinal Pole. Pereno del Vnira.Henry VIII., Queen Mary, and Will Somers.Countess Spencer. Reynolds.Lady Ann Bingham. Reynolds.Earl of Lucan. Reynolds.Duchess of Marlborough. Kneller.Rembrandt's Mother. Rembrandt.Cardinal Dorromeo performing Mass. Domenichino.Philip II. King of Spain. Sir A. More.Algerian Sidney.Duchess of Portsmouth. Lely.Unknown Portrait with a Dog. Sir A. More.Sophonisba Angosciola. By Herself.Mrs. Middleton. Lely.Nell Gwynn. Lely.Georgianaa, First Countess Spencer. A. Kauffman.The Portraits printed in Italics were afterwardsaltered for the following :Marl Spencer. Phillips.Henry, first Earl of Sunder land.Anno, second C\wntes> of Sunderland.John, Duke of Marlborough568 Author.John, Marquis of Sandford.Georgianaa, Earl Spencer's Mother.Sir John Spencer, Kent.Colonel John Russell.To these Portraits were added the followingSUBJECTS.South West View of Althorp.Archway.Dairy.Hawking Stand.A Calm, by Cuyp.Cartoon from Raffaelle, a fragment.Masked Ball, by Orbits*.The Staircase.I do not now remember how many, or how few,of these Portraits and Subjects were selected by meinmy PROPOSALS for the publication t; but I pre-forthis accurate name of the artist by whom the above beautifulpicture was painted, I am indebted to Mr. WILLIAM SMITH, of Bond-street; the most knowing judge of the Flemish school in the kingdom.It will be seen, from the account in vol. i, p. 14, that I had my doubtsas to the legitimacy of its being a picture by Cornelius Polemberg : itbeing so unlike, in subject arid manner of handling, to the productionsof that artist. It may be well said, that " it deserves to be held in veryhigh estimation for its enchanting delicacy, silver-toned brightness, andextraordinary finish." It came from the Sunderland collection. A wordupon Mr. Twin's beautiful copy of this picture, anon.t The proposals for the publication did not at first comprehend thewhole plan, or entire list of portraits and subjects ; and yet, at the timeof issuing them, all the large paper copies were bespoke. The onlycopy of these proposals which I possess is worded thus :des ALTHORPIAN^; OR,A descriptive Catalogue of the Pictures and Library of Althorp, Northamptonshire,the residence of the Right Hon. George John, EarlAuthor'.si nunc them to have been sufficiently numerous andseductive ; since, before I started for the Continent,the Trade were thus responsive to my call.Messrs. Arch - 12 Large Paper 50 Small.Mr. Evans 10 do. 25 do.Mr. Major IP do. 50 do.Mr. Triphook 10 do. 50 do.Messrs. Longman and Co., 6- do. 30 do.Messrs. Payne and Foss 6 do. 12 do.These were the Great Guns. The Howitzers\\vre, however, well shotted ; and I had every reasonto be satisfied with Bibliopolistic Patronage. TheEdinburgh and Glasgow Booksellers (Messrs. Laing,Black wood, and Smiths) had not suffered theirDecameronic ardour to be much cooled, and myProvincial Correspondence was as flattering as couldSpencer, K. G. &c. This Publication will form two handsome volumes,in imperial octavo, printed with a new type, at the SHAKSPEARE PRESS,upon paper < I the finest quality. It will be embellished with engravings,executed Ly artists of the first eminence. Among these engravingswill be the portraits of the First Baron Spencer (never engraved), SirJohn Spencer, Knt., obit 1580 (never engraved), John, Duke of Marlborough(not engraved), John, Marquis of Blandford, his son ; EarlSeem > i K . ( i. (from a portrait by Phillips, not engraved), late DowagerCountess Spencer (not engraved), Margaret, Countess of Lucan (nottyed), and Georgianaa, Duchess of Devonshire (from Reynolds).To these will be added, ten fine historical or other portraits, from paintingsof equal merit and interest, in the Gallery at Author. Therewill also be exterior and interior views of die house, with vignettes,characteristic of the place, c.Tin work to be published by subscription, at 6/. 6*. the small, and1'2/. V&i. the large paper. All the larjc j><ij>cr copies are Spoke.570 Authorbe reasonably expected. My Noble Patron tookfour large, and eight small copies. My PrivateFriends were still staunch to "THE CAUSE." TheRoxburghers, to a man, gave me their patronage ;and, from quarters which were strange to me, Ireceived demonstrations of support of the mostgratifying description. Yet it might in some measurebe considered an experimental effort. I was persuadedthat, not only must the work necessarily be ofa totally different complexion from its Decameronicprecursor, but that nothing on the score of art (ofwhat may be called a distracting variety) would befound in it at all comparable with such a precursor.The latter might even with sobriety be designated asoverwhelmingly splendid. It remained, therefore, toexcel in quality if it could not be done in quantity.Some of the replies to my letters were written withgreat characteristic spirit. The reader will probablyrather thank me than otherwise for the perusalof a few of these answers. That of the late JamesBoswell of whom see p. 383, ante shall leadthe van.MY DEAR Cameronian,Many thanks to you for your very handsome present.I should have been glad to have detained your messenger ;but as I was not at home, he could not have taken my gratuity.I start this evening for Ireland, from whence Iproceed to Scotland, and shall not return till November. Ibeg my most respectful remembrances to Lord Spencer.ALTIIOKI*. 571ley the way, I forgot when we met ton-quest that you wouldput down my name lor tlu- BSdu Althorpianae.Yours very truly.The late Mr. Surtees, flu* admirable Historian ofCounty of Durham, replied thus :DEAR SIR,The Cameron is safe on my shelves in Lewis's admirableneat binding he having just hit my taste and not madethem so fine as to shame my dusky volumes. I have rapidlydevoured the prints with my eyes. Such an assemblageI never saw, and whatever were my expectations theyhave been surpassed. I do bite most greedily at sedesALTHORPIAN^E. I beg my name may be placed on thelist. You have a little error about Toby Mathew*.This was Sir Toby Mathew, the son of the old Bishop, ' al>u/y.er and whisperer at court:' see Suckling's Session ofPoets. Godwin (alluding to Toby's turning Jesuit) says, heini^lit have done well had he thought Mathew better thanToby.Bishop Cosin's daughter, whom Tom Blakester ran offwith, was not Miss Burton Cosin, the widow Ladi/ />////<>// ;(slu undertook four husbands in her day) but herrranee Cosin, a maiden.Believe me yours,Ever truly,Cameron \ol.iii.572 Author.P. S. I wish to send Lewis a few tomes to bind ; beforeyou leave London give him a hint that they are for a plaincountry collector. I want the excellence of his bindingwithout the variety of rainbow colours."My amiable friend, the late Rev. John Eyre,Archdeacon of Nottingham, was pleased to meetmy wishes in the following sportive strain :"Bosworth, Feb. 24, 1818.MY DEAR SIR,Calling on Mr. Holmes* yesterday, he shewed me yourletter, and civilities to me ; the effect of which was, that Iacknowledged it was only some suggestions of that squeamishJade, Prudence, which had prevented me subscribing to your^Edes Althorpianse. He chimed into the same tone : theresult you will easily conceive. If women are lost by deliberation,what will become of two old men with bibliomaniacalpropensities ? In short, the temptation gained strengthby collision, and we agreed to sacrifice our virtue together ;and I am authorized to specify the surrender, and to requestyou to place our names amongst the List of Subscribers.Of course it must be the small paper.Very sincerely yours,JOHN EYRE."JOHN HOLMES, Esq., of East Retort, " a thorough-bred andthorough-paced" Bibliomaniac as sensitive in his 78th year, as I rememberhim to have been in his 58th year, in all matters appertainingto BOOK RARITIES. This Veteran has just published or rather printedfor private distribution the fourth and last volume of a DescriptiveCatalogue of his Library with his portrait (" Vir Ipsissimus") prefixed.I have to acknowledge many favours from him in the course ofour mutual pursuits, and especially a good deal of nibbling criticismupon some of the later volumes of the Bibl. Spenceriana. It is delightfullyto me most gratifying to see a man, at Mr. Holmes's time oflife, thus plunging about his library with all the frolic and vigour of aNewfoundland in the Serpentine.ALTI10H1'. .~>7:>From my \\;mn-lie;irtrd friends, George,ui(l diaries Hatchet, Esqrs., I was favoured withthe following responses.Clapham Common, 20tf* Feb. 1818.MY DEAR SIR,Many thanks for the impressions of Cardinal Sforza.I have not thought it necessary to reply to your precedingletter, because I think I have assured you that you may considerme as a candidate for a Char. Mag. copy of any thingyou commit to the press. I have, however (in candour I muMtell you), heard some of your friends express their doubtsabout the general popularity of this intended splendid work ;and perhaps they are tacitly making it matter of comparisonwith the DECAMERON, which many have rashly pronouncedyour " ne plus ultra" For myself, I feel a sufficient interestin the suljn't (for surely it is worthy of record and of illustration),and am sure of the excellence of the execution. I sawtlu- two specimens at Arch's, and beautiful they wereKnubrandt, I presume, or Titian for Arch could not say.As he expected to see you that day, he promised me to tellyou that I must be a subscriber to the new work, ami thatI must take my copy from yourself.Yours ever,G. HlBBEKT."Mount Clare, Southampton, Feb. 9, 181 aMY DEAR SIR,You deserve well of all Bibliomaniacs; and although Iam not so outrageous as some of our friends, yet (being,as you say, " in for a penny, in for a pound") I HUM requestyou to insert my name in the list of your .subscribersto the Tides Althorpiana?, for a large paper r< />//.As it is possible that 1 may be able to shoot a bird ortwo tor you. pray send to me by the post two or tluvi enpu-of tin IVospretus of your new work. I hope you do noi574 Author.forget your old friend Ames and Herbert, as I should besorry that they should suffer any paralytic affection ?Jt is a pity that the books of De Thou were dispersed ;for, from veneration for his memory, I wish his library hadpassed entire into the hands of some Bibliomaniac. Twoof De Thou's books are in my possession : one of them is abeautiful edition of that trumpery author Sigonius ; it is hisHistorian de Regno Italia. The other is a beautiful smalloctavo copy of Les Poesies de Jacques Thoreau : de Mons,mises toutes ensemble et decrees au Reverendissime Cardinaldu Guise, printed at Paris, 1574. This book is very scarce,and I am not sure if Lord Spencer has it. I believe, however,that Mr. Hebe has a copy. May success attend you,and believe meYours, most truly,CHARLES Hatchets."Thus fortified (for the answers of very many wereof the same encouraging description) I sought forthe best copyists of old pictures which I was able toprocure ; and as about this time the magnificentand splendidly successful work of Mr. Lodge's Portraitsof Illustrious Characters, was making greatway, and eliciting much talent in the same department,it was rather difficult to catch hold of whatmight in all respects suit my views. I was, however,particularly fortunate in the selection of twoartists, who did ample justice to the subjects undertakenby them. When I mention Mr, Twins* as:: " Mr. Uwins had already proved the delicacy of his touch, thevariety of his fancy, and the accuracy of his taste, in the initial capitalletters to the " Ten Days" of my " Cameron ;" to say nothing of thesweetly composed vignette to the " Introduction" of that work whichlatter was murdered in the engraving. With what sincere pleasure,Thorp.one, and the laic Mr. S ATCIIWI F.I, as the other, andire the reader to look at the cn;r<irin;x fromtheir /;r//r//x, it may be allowed me to challenge hiscongratulations on the issue. Poor Mr. Satehwelldied when 1 was at Vienna*.Seeing matters thus methodically and smoothlytherefore, do I witness his continued progress towards perfection in hisart. Since the very humble employment afforded him at my hands, bycopying a few of the Althorp subjects, Mr. Uwins has visited Italy ;has enlarged his knowledge, and improved his taste; and has enrichedthe walls of our annual exhibition by specimens of art in oil colours,which breathe of the classical air of the country in which they wereconceived and executed.It may not be unacceptable to the reader to be made acquainted withthe subjects at Author which were copied by Mr. Uwins for the publicationin question :Sophonisba Angosciola, Fragment of Cartoon, Raffaelle,Viscount Althorp, A Calm, by Cuyp,John, Duke of Marlborough, A Masked Ball,John, Marquis of Blandford, Georgianaa, first Countess Spencer,Colonel John Russell, Nell Gwynn,Henry VIII., Q. Mary, and W. Lady Dunham,Somers, Mrs. Middleton,Sir John Spencer, Knt., Sir Kenelm Digby,Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough, Robert, first Baron Spencer.If I remember rightly, Mr. U win's charges, including the expenses oftravelling, did not exceed Iso.Mr. Satehwell was among the most obliging, industrious, and skilfulof his fraternity. His copies of Rembrandt's Mother and of EarlSpencer's portrait, from Mr. Phillips, are of very prime quality. I possessthe latter as my constant study-companion. Besides these, Mr.Satchel copied Anne, Countess of Sunderland ; the Duchess of Porte-mouth;Georgianaa, Duchess of Devonshire; and the Marchioness:en. With the t exception just mentioned. AM. nu-i .i-n:strein the possession of Earl Spencer, and a most attractive cabinet collectiondo they form. It may be as well to mention, that Mr. Satehwellinvariably used gum Mr. Uwins never in the cop576 Author.arranged, I packed up my portmanteau for the Continent: and returned at the end of the year, witha Cornucopia of Flowers and Fruits of which Ithought the public might one day be well disposed topartake. I was not disappointed in this expectation; but our present business is at Althorp. Inthe summer of 1819 my Noble Patron and hisCountess went abroad ; and in the autumn of thatsame year I took up my position to commence immediateoperations at Althorp. The late Mr. Vigorous,Rector of Great Brington a village or parish whichskirts the western boundaries of the Park goingalso abroad at the same time, was so obliging as toallow me and my family to inhabit the Rectory : ashort mile from the House.The village of Great Brington lying upon highground, you descend considerably in your approachfrom thence to the mansion. An avenue of elms,of some two hundred and fifty yards in length,planted by the mother of the late Earl, is the connectinglink, as it were, between the church* andthe private western park gate. Along this route,and from thence to the mansion, was my regulardaily walk, to and fro, in the execution of my labours.Some account of this church, and of its double chancel, of whichone is filled by the MONUMENTS of the SPENCER FAMILY, will be foundin the earlier pages of the Mes ; together with a small plate of two ancientand grotesque ornaments upon the tops of two pews. The lateEarl contributed two plates of the monuments of his ancestors to Mr.Baker, for his History of the County of Northampton. Their unitedexpense was 120/.During the November and December months, tin*<la\liL:ht was necessarily scant. Of a sharp frostymorning, on my arrival, I have found the lower partof the house, for a considerable time, involved inhoar mist. Towards five o'clock, the light failing,I would wend my steps homewards to theRectory, and before reaching the extremity of theUp-and-be-doing" avenue of beech and oak*, (itThis is the spot briefly mentioned by Mrs. Jamieson. There isno spot in the park at Althorp so familiar to me. It lies upon a gentleascent, in the direction to the private western door leading to the church ;and a beautiful vignette-engraving of it, by George Cooke, from thepencil of Mr. Bore, graces the tenth page of the ^Edes. Why it is calledthe Up and be doing avenue," is there thus explained : " To the rightof the walk, on quitting the house, there is a stone tablet, perpendicularlyerected upon a stone pediment. On one side of this tablet are thearms of Sir William Spencer, Knight of the Bath, with the date of1 624. On the other side is the above inscription, thus arranged :Vp AND BEEDOING ANDGOD Swim.Prose It. "The reader may not be displeased with a part of the note subjoined,in the work here referred to. " This is a scriptural phrase, see 1 Chron.xxii. 16. The earlier versions of this passage come closer to the languageof this inscription : thus, in Coverdale's Bible, of 1535, it is ' Get,get the up and be doing, and the Lorde shall be with the.' In Matthew'sBible, of 1537, it is, ' Up therefore and set upon it, and ye Lordeshal be with the,' In Grafton, 1540, ' Up therefore and be doing,and the Lord shall be with the,' In Barker's, 1607, * Up thereforeaud be doing, and the Lord shall be with the;' and in Barker, 1611,Arise therefore and be doing, and the Lord shall be with thee ;' whichis the present RECEIVED TEXT. It appears to have been a current expressionof the day. Thus, in Cromwell's time, in an original letter ofthat celebrated man, in the possession of my friend Mr. Dawson. Turner,As if God should say, /;> and for dm-inijc, nn<i I trill lic//> /., <m<1stand by you.' The letter was written on the capture of Gainsborough "p. vol. i. p. 8.I- r578 Author.being nearly dark) I have been often and often regaledby a concert of owls whose long-continued,tremulous notes, would re-echo among the old oaksplanted by the SPENCERS of the sixteenth century.Before reaching the end of the elm avenue, theshades of approaching night increased ; and yet, notso dark as to prevent me from frequently seeing a finespecimen or two of Minerva's bird flitting across thegloom. The faint cawing of the rooks, together withthe scarcely heard flutter of their wings, proved alsoanother source of pensive meditation. There wasa melancholy pleasure yea, a sort of intellectualluxury about all this, which I know not how to describe.And then, how grateful how joyous inthe bosom of a quiet and united family, with theyule log thrown upon the crackling fire, to think thatthe day had not been passed IN VAIN. Oh ! howfrequently and at this composed and smiling periodof my life especially have I been struck with thebeautiful lines of that most beautiful of all lyricalpoets, HORACE :Ille potent suiLaetusque beget, cui licet in diemDixisse, Vix" Care. lib. iii. ode 29.And thus for awhile " I LIVED : " envying nosportsman the joys of the chace or the gun. Mygame was always sure, and always plentiful. Infact, the only difficulty lay in the choice of the object.What preserves ! What covers ! To a mind consttutor like my own, it was " Embarrass DE RichEsse." I could put my hand upon nothing butwhat was choice in quality, as well as in exteriorsplendour. The tale may be told in few words. Letthe reader and especially if he be a reader knowingin books throw his eye over the two hundred andsir teen pages of which the running title " THELIBRARY" is composed, in the first volume of thesedes Altlmrpiana and ask himself first, whethera better choice could, or could not, have been made ?and, secondly, whether the books chosen be not generallymost desirable and even enviable copies ? Takethe department of the SACRED TEXT, alone, as a mostinteresting specimen ; and adding the number ofBibles described in the preceding volumes but ALLnow deposited aiAlthnrp and you have the followingwonderful result.Latin Gibbs, before the year 1500 .h;n<i- - 1 TOOGerman Bibles . . . 1500 .1 7ftOItalian Bibles . . . 1500 .Dutch Bibles, in 1477, 1788J^'lj/ylot Bible*Including those of Plantin and Walton upon LARGE PAPER ; theformer, I)e Thou's copy of wonderful dimensions and condition ; thelatter the Lamognon copy, in blue morocco binding magnificent, andno where eclipsed.pp580 Author.Greek Bibles 15French Bibles . . . . . .15English Bibles, including Welch, Scotch, andIrish 65Hebrew Bibles . . . . . .14Spanish and Portuguese 4Polish (1565) 2Slavonic* (1581) 1Then go to the articles TESTAMENT, Pentateuch,PROPHETS, &c. and admit, in these departmentsalone, how few Public Libraries even canventure to compete with that at Althorp. As rivalprivate collections in this department, there is nodoubt of the superiority of that of H. R. H. theDuke of Sussex ; who has yet, however, great essentialwants in the earlier Latin and Italian Bibles.At a humble but not despicable distance, must bementioned the biblical collection of the Rev. Dr.Hawtrey, the present head-master of Eton school.The departments of Topography and Biographyreadily supplied me with materials for an account ofthe HOUSE, PARK, and FAMILY t, which occupies theThere are also twenty-three more Bibles (and perhaps of late stillmore) in all the other languages of Europe. , Be it remembered, too,that these Bibles have been selected, not with a view to number, butto critical importance and rarity. Intrinsically considered, I am not surewhether they be not preferable to the countless collection which I sawat Stuttgart distinguished for the multitude rather than for the choiceof its volumes.t Of the FIRST BARON SPENCER, an interesting account will be foundfrom p. xiii to xxiv in the first volume of the work under consideration.He was created a Peer of the realm in 1602, and died in 1622, havinghad four sons and three daughters. On his death he had been a WidowerAuthor. 581first sixty pages of the volume. Be it also permittedme to remark, that my professional duties were onno account neglected. They lay within a narrowcompass, as the population of Great Brington wassmall and healthful. The church-services, especiallyof an afternoon, were well attended. The congregationwas well conducted ; and out of doors the villageseemed to wear the general aspect of good orderand sobriety. A secret feeling or persuasion shouldseem to have invaded the whole population that,as they were under the protection, so would they heguided by the advice or regulations, of ONE BenevolentMASTER. What Mr. Rose has said ofthirty years. His Wife is designated as THAMYRA, by Ben Jonson, inhis Masque played at Althorp being an entertainment given to theQueen and Prince Henry "as they came first into the kingdom," onthe 25th of June, 1603. The compliment paid to the First Baron, onthe constancy of his Widowhood, is thus neatly turned by the Poet :Who, since Thamyra did die,Hath not brook'd a Lady's eye."See also Gifford's Ben Jonson, vol. vi. p. 475. Ben Jonson was a learnedman as well as a great Dramatist ; but (not having Gifford's edition atthis moment before me) may I ask how and whence the word THAMYRAwas used ? I see that same word masculinised in an address to the readerprefixed to an edition of Catullus, Tibullus, and Propertius, printed atVenice in the year 1488 thus:TIIAMYRAS ad lectures"Quisquis ab insane nimium cruciatur more :Aut perdit stable temporal long fide:Hos legat ardentes ammo trrpidante cares:FuiKkri-quos capitis dura puella sole:Discat i-t him nostri trliri ludi-rc canto : "&c. &c.582 Author.that Master*, I experienced abundantly in my frequentvisits and communications with the parishionersof Great Brington.But it is time to quit these autumnal shades t, andto take the reader up with me to London, to superintendthe necessary steps for the publication of the^Edes. And yet I must detain him some few minutes; first, merely to inform him of the publicationof the third volume of the Typographical Antiquitiesof Great Britain about which my friend Mr.Hatchet expressed his fears ; and, secondly, to givehim some little account of the progress and cost ofthe engravings for the work under consideration. Itcannot be denied that the highly finished copies ofthe original pictures at Althorp, by Messrs. Uwinsand Satchel, required the hand of a master fortheir successful representation upon copper: but Iremembered what Dr. Johnson had said in referenceto the plates of a projected edition of the HerculaneumAntiquities by Messrs. Lattice and Martin.Sir (said Johnson to Bos well), they don't knowwhat they have undertaken : THE ENGRAVERS WILLDRIVE THEM MAD ! " Most assuredly I had my patienceas well as generosity frequently put to severetrials during my intercourse with the Sons of theSee page 455, &c. ante.t A curious spectacle phenomenon-like presented itself on themorning of the 9th of October in that autumn. There had been a deepfall of snow during the night; and in the morning, the bunches of grapesin the vine trailed against the Rectory-house, were laden by a heavyburden of snow.ALT1IOK1'.Burin. But I had also some experience to guide me.Although by far the greater number of the embellishmentsin the Cameron are upon wood,, yet thereare a great number upon copper ; and some of themof very beautiful and costly execution. At all events,I was resolved not to " starve the concern" andli n ally agreed upon the following terms.tOSTKarl Spencer, byW. Finden*, 157 10The same, H.R.Robinson, 126Ma>keil Ball, . . . Mi tan f, . 15710I have been always given to understand, that the extremely ablemanner in which this Engraving was executed led to the choice of Mr.Fiiulen, by Sir Thomas Lawrence, for the execution of the great plateof the late King sitting on a sofa. If this be so, it led at once to profitand to fame. And yet, methinks, a little memento (not savouring ofmoney) might have been transmitted to the Individual, by whose means,not very indirectly, such a result ensued ? Mr. Finden well knows howfond I am of art, and of his talents as an artist.t It was originally intended to have secured Mr. C. WARREN uponthis enchanting little drawing. He was at that time sitting on the tree-topof his art ; and he would doubtless have executed it in a style verysuperior to that in which it now appears ; although, as will be seen, thesame sum was given to Mr. Milan, who certainly does not appear tothe same advantage in this plate as in many of those in the Tour. Itwas a matter of equal anxiety and distress to me to be obliged (from thepressure of time) to take it out of Mr. Warren's hands; but his familyafflictions at once distracted his attention and engrossed his time. Hisson-in-law, Mr. C fennel, was one of the most promising artists of theday, and his death produced a deep sympathy among his graphicbrethren. It strikes me that the two following letters by Mr. Warren,upon the beautiful picture here alluded to, will be read with some interest,as the effusion of a mind sensibly touched with the conflictinganxieties which beset him.Con *t it ttt ion Row, Gray's Inn Road, Jan. l 26, 1819.DEAR SIR,I called on Mr. Arch on Saturday, and saw the exquisitely finishedDrawing you referred me to. From the nice execution requisite to do584 Author.COSTDuke of Marlborough, . . Worthington, 75 OMarquis of Blandford, . . Ditto, . . 52 1it justice, its size, and the quantity of figures, &c. in it, I find it impossibleto decide absolutely on the price for the engraving at one viewof it. I should therefore like to have it to estimate on at more leisure.But from the impression I felt on the first view of it, the price certainlycannot be under One Hundred and Twenty Guineas. If you couldindulge me with the Drawing at my own house for half a day, it wouldenable me to come to a direct conclusion. From the character of theDrawing, I should like to engrave it, and I doubt not in such a way thatwould give all parties satisfaction. In the hope of hearing from you, orseeing you on the subject,I remain, dear sir,Yours respectfully,C. WARREN."Constitution Row, Grays Inn Road, Feb. 16, 1819.DEAR SIR,The serious illness of my only remaining daughter, with whom Ihave been out of town, must plead my apology for not sooner answeringyour letter. I have now attentively examined the Drawing, which possessesso many difficulties, as well as beauties, that it will require a greatportion of time, and the utmost exertion of the talents I possess to doitjustice. I certainly wish to make it (as the Drawing deserves) theFINEST PLATE I have produced ; and to enable me to accomplish thisobject, I have resolved to submit to you, as the price for the engravingof it, the sum of One Hundred and Fifty Guineas. After the frankoffer you made, I should not have pressed an advance on it ; but froma full conviction that to execute it in the way you will expect from me,it is worth every shilling of the sum. With respect to the mode ofpayment, I wish for no advance till the plate is finished; but contemplatingthe length of time it will occupy, and the trying situation I amplaced in by the afflicting state of my son-in-law, Mr. Clennell, and thedeath of my daughter (having him and his family to support), I shouldbe glad to receive half the amount in Cash, on delivery of a. finishedproof, and the remainder by Note as you propose. Should you agree tothis arrangement, it will be a great convenience to me. It is my intentionto commence as soon as I hear from you ; and in the interim,I remain, dear sir,Yours respectfully,C. WARREN."Ai/niour.Rembrandt's Mother, . . ScrivenDuchess of Portsmouth, . Freeman,Algerian Sidney, . . . Ditto,Duchess of Devonshire, . . Ditto,First Countess of Lucan, . Ditto,Marchioness Camden, . . Agar,Sea Piece, or Calm, . . Fitter .Sir Kenelm Digby . . Ditto,Man with a Dog, . . . Scott,Furl Spencer's Mother, . Freeman,Henry VIII. Queen Mary, &c. Hold, .Sophonisba Angosciola . . Thomson,:ment of Cartoon, . . Worthington,Sir John, Spencer, Knt., . Ditto,First Baron Spencer, . . Skelton,Ann, Countess of Sutherland, . Picard, .Mrs. Middleton, . . . Wright,\ "i.soount Althorp, . . . Fry,Colonel Russell, . . . Worthington,Interior of the Long Library, . WoolnothGreat Staircase, . . . Ditto,View of the House . . . Ditto, .Nell Gwynn, Scriven,Lady Dunham, . . . FreemanSundry Vignettes . . . Various,-\-252 10:>.-> o52 1052 1042 1052 1036 1547 1573 10There can be no doubt that these subjects mightnow have been executed at two-thirds of such a cost,which was little short of 2000/. : to which add theexpenses of copperplate printing and French paperfor the impressions (amounting to 350/.), and youhave a total, on the score of ART, which had neverbeen before devoted to the history of one Family,;md to the furniture of one House.586 Author.I will frankly own that my very pride in themaintenance of a particular reputation for beautifulworks stimulated me, equally with my affectionaterespect for the Noble Owner of the mansion, to "dothe thing well and handsomely": and so it wasdone. If the success was not commensurate withthe pains taken, and the sums spent, it may andmust be attributable to the " .Sedes" not comingout as a single volume. To speak the truth, thesecond volume was a sort of drag-chain to the first.The public " 'gan tire" of Fifteeners ; by which Imean books printed in the fifteenth century : or,were the second volume necessary, it might make itsappearance, at a future period, with an account oftreasures subsequently acquired. Had not the proposalsbeen absolute and irrevocable, by the advanceof one-third of the money due upon the two volumes,the second might have more judiciously made itsappearance with the Catalogue of the Cassino Library: but in 1817-8, who could have presumedto dream of the acquisition of that extraordinaryCollection ?Taking, however, the SPENCER LIBRARY, as consistingof seven volumes, I think that I have a rightto say that the errors are those of commission ratherthan of omission. Much must be allowed to the absoluteimpossibility, at starting, of comprehending allthe features of a work, developed by such an extraordinary,and almost endless, variety of materials.If merely dogged diligence or dry detail were necesse587cary, I could with ease have walked in the steps ofAudiffrrdi, Seem i Her, and Braun ; but I wished todobetter things. I looked on an old volume as athreefold object of art, curiosity, and intrinsic worth ;and, therefore, I strove immediately to bring it underthe reader's eye, by a faithful tracing of some of itsembellishments, and as faithful a transcript of itstext. In the mode of extract from the latter, thebook itself may be said to be in a manner sub oculis.Tin 1 Catalogue of the Royal Library here, and ofthat in France, is yet more extensive ; but each hasasort of stately aridity, in presenting us with themere titles of books, undiversified by fac-similes, andunaccompanied by disquisitions. Never were paperand print less usefully devoted. I admit that, in theBIBLIOTHECA SpENCERiANA, very many articles areboth needlessly and injudiciously extended ; and thatfac-similes have been somewhat profusely bestowedupon descriptions of volumes of a secondary importance.But much must be allowed to the fashion andfeeling of the day. On the other hand, in the accountof valuable and scarce works divested of em-helli>hment, there has been, on no one occasion, tothe best of my recollection, any shrinking from ai-lnse and vigorous grappling with the articles described.Cicero, Horace, Terence, and Virgil, aroexamples of this fullness and fidelity of description.Undoubtedly, if opportunity and inclination served,nothing would be more acceptable to the biblio-graphical world if not to the public at la rue than588 Author.an ABRIDGMENT of these seven volumes in one ;divested of all ornament, and containing the descriptionsof such books (and they are many) which havebeen acquired subsequently to the original publication.But it should be of the same size, and in thesame beautifully executed stile of printing. It istrue, the chamber would be the same ; but the arrasand the rich hangings would be gone.I return to Althorp. Two things will ever continueto console me in some of the results which followedthe publication of the "sedes." I had exertedmyself to the utmost to execute with fidelity andability the task assigned to me. I had, in turn,erected a Monument to the name of SPENCER . . .quod nee Jovis ira, nee ignes,Nee potent ferrum, nee edax abler vetustas."Whatever of careful research, minute description,and varied detail made public in a form unprecedentedfor its splendour could contribute towardsthe substantial materials of such a Monument, maybefound in THAT . to which I allude. Of course,it is understood that I also include the six othervolumes devoted to the account of the LIBRARY.Civil wrath, rather than "the wrath of Jove " "fire,sword, or time," may and will, in the end, level theproudest structures which have been raised ;but BOOKS will live for aye."This quotation has been before the Public in the Bibliophobia,p. 78. It is a translation " by a Wit of the Age' from the followingOriginals :Author'.The other source of consolation is, that if I havebeen occasionally generous at the expense of pni-rA'y/rr, in the remuneration given to Artists, I havein many instances done good by having cheered asinking heart, and excited a praiseworthy spirit ofemulation.Two years may be said to have elapsed in thepreparation of those materials for the work whichrelated to the Engravings. During that time theBiographical Tour was almost ready to be started.1 had originally intended to have incorporated, inthe first volume of the "^Edes," an account of suchbooks in the Althorp Library as had been in the collectionof DE THOU*, and of such as had been printedMurmur pelisse Homines? Monument fatiscunt."AUSONM s.Nescio Musaeum scd Monument mori."OVID.The entire English passage runs thus :Men timely ilk 1 , and Princes day by dayMoulder to dust; but BOOKS WILL LIVE FOR AYR,And re-embalm us in the coldest clay."The following particulars, drawn up at Althorp some sixteen yeanago, relating to the library of this Great Man, may be acceptable to manyof my readers.THE LIBRARY OF DE Tirol"..standing the particular account given of the collection anddispersion of this Library, in the Bibliographical Cameron, vol. ii. p.476-481, I cannot but suspect that we are still in the dark relating tosome particulars which seem to have intervened between the disposal ofthis library by the last descendant of De Thou, and the acquisition of itby the Piusim N i Mix wus. It is, however, a well authenticated fact,that the manuscripts were purchased by COLBERT, and, with the rest ofthat great Minister's manuscripts, were bequeathed to the Royal Library.590 Author.at the presses of the ALDINE FAMILY. My lists ofthese two classes of Books, which were of consider-thequestion is, in regard to the PRINTED BOOKS. Did they go entire tothe President, or did he only become the purchaser of the greater partof them at the sale of the library by public auction ? It is ascertainedthat Du Puy and Queene drew up the catalogue of the library for theexpress purpose of public sale by auction.These doubts have arisen in consequence of casting an eye over thosepieces relating to De Thou's library, which are to be found at the endof the seventh volume of Burley's edition of De Thou's History of hisOwn Times. The principal evidence is that of the learned and irreproachableHurt. He says (ex Commentary de rebus ad eum pertinacious.Aught. 1718, 12mo. p. 390, &c.) : " A few years ago, De Thou,the descendant of the illustrious family of that name which has deservedso well of literature returned from Holland. He was our ambassadorin Holland, where he lived with the greatest splendour, andmaintained the dignity of the French name most gallantly and successfullyagainst the wiles and contumacy of the Spanish ambassador. Helived, however, in so liberal and sumptuous a manner as to injure hisprivate affairs ; which could only be redeemed by the sale of his ancestor'slibrary of that LIBRARY (continues Hurt) which had cost theoriginal possessor full forty years of diligence and expense in the collection; and of which, that it might be preserved entire for the benefitof his family and the literary world, he had strictly forbidden the dispersion,by any means, in his last will and testament. Notwithstandingthe operation of the law had sanctioned this testamentary disposition, itwas nevertheless resolved, from the pressure of domestic necessities, thatthe library should be parted with. I had been somewhat intimate withyoung De Thou for a few years past. He came to me one day, in avery dejected manner, and prefacing something about the difficulties ofthe times, asked me whether I thought I could persuade the king(Louis XIV.) to purchase this library for the use of the Dauphin ?Hurt was the Dauphin's head preceptor] adding, that it was not lesschoice than extensive, and particularly distinguished for the eleganceand splendour of the books. I told him that his wishes should be communicatedto the king and to his minister Colbert.The proposal was unsuccessful. The king answered, that his ownlibrary was already sufficiently large, and that the dauphin might havethe use of that. De Thou, dejected and disappointed, turned round inpursuit of other purchasers : but these he found so callous and parsimonious,that, not agreeing upon a price, the books continued in theirALTIIOK1'.able extent, had undergone the revision of myPatron ; but on second consideration it was thoughtoriginal state, and in the mean time the possessor of them died. Hisheirs reaped so little emolument, that although the bindings, ornaments,and illuminations, &c., had cost little short of 100,000 livres (so DeThou told me himself), the books were absolutely sold for little morethan one-third part of that sum. I bought some of them at the publicsale, and consider them as the greatest ornaments of my library." How,therefore, can we reconcile this statement with the purchase of thelibrary by the PRESIDENT MENARS?Perhaps the noblest specimens in the world of what are called DE'liii or BOOKS, are the Polyglot Bible of Plantin, at Althorp, and theeGrffici of H. Stephen, 1566, folio, at Paris. The latter has beenbriefly, but warmly noticed in the Tour ; the former merits a more expandeddescription than what appears in the James, and is here subjoinedas a specimen of the execution of any of the articles in the Listabove alluded to.This wonderful set is upon LARGE PAPER ; with the exception ofthe three last volumes, which probably were never printed of the samesize, or they would have unquestionably found their way into the libraryof DE THOU. The sacred text is complete in the first five volumes,upon large paper. To say that this is the finest copy of any workwhich belonged to its first illustrious owner, is to say little or nothingwhich can convey an idea of the extraordinary beauty of the types,press-work, and paper. Yet the form is perhaps a little whimsical, itbeing evidently too broad for its length. The praises bestowed uponPlantin, in the fourth page of Montague, 'preface to the reader,' areonly what that incomparable printer merited. De Bure confines hisdescription of this edition to the last three volumes ; but it may be aswell to know, that after the half title of the first volume, three copperplateembellishments (of which the first is the general tide) ensue,and that the title to the cornu cement of the Pentateuch is cut inwood. 'I' In- two prefaces of Montague are followed by three royal< s or admonitions, preceding the Pentateuch title. It is also surprisingthat De Bure mentions no copy of it upon \i Hum, or uponlarge paper. Hrunet notices the vellum copy formerly in the royal libraryranee, now restored ; but says nothing respecting large paper. Isthe present tin only kiu,\m copy of this latter description? For an accountof another vitium copy, consult die Biog. Cameron, vol. ii.p. 1 M."Hut resort, gentle reader, to No. 81, Pall Mail and as " seeing is592 Author.advisable to withhold them both on account oftheir probable want of general interest, and of expandingthe volume to an unnecessary size. Atlength, on the first of April, 1822, I put a finishing-handto the preface ; and, ere the expiration of thatmonth, THE WORK APPEARED.However, I look back upon the pleasures and gratificationswhich, for twenty-two succeeding years, Ihave derived from my visits at Author, withoutmore than a common sigh at the changes whichhave marked the lapse of that time : and more especiallyat those from the last visit to the presentmoment. Mortality is the destiny of man. Ourmeetings are short : our separations are long. Ithink upon those " ATTIC NIGHTS " of Christmasmeeting and Christmas merriment to which an allusionhas been made in a preceding note*, and askmyself whether the deceased, or the survivors of theseattic nights, be the greater number? I scarcely knowhow to respond to the question. I well call to mindmy own "Reminiscences" of these Christmas symposia.Beauty, wit, taste, goodness, on one sidelearning, science, art, eloquence, public distinction,on the other and rank in both. In more ancienttimes, here was Reynolds, and Garrick, and Gibbon,believing' contemplate the copy UPON VELLUM in the rich binding ofCharles Lewis and wonder how this copy has not been pounced uponby the Brandishes and Botfields of the day !See page 238, ante.Author.and Major Rcnnell, and Sir William Jones ; in latertimes, the Right Hon. T. Grenville ; Drs. Burneyand Elmsly ; Bishops Blomfield and Cohesion ;Mackintosh, Tierce, Davy, Wollaston, Auckland,and more whom I may not name. How the hoursof evening used to fly swiftly away, while the blastwas howling, or the snow was falling heavily, without!But in this galaxy of intellectual splendour, let menot omit the notice of ONE, of a meek spirit, of peculiarhabits, of deep learning . a foreigner, longdomiciled in this Noble Family . with whom I waswont to have much familiar and pleasing discourse.MR. OCHEDA*, like the greater number of those justOn rising from table, after dinner, it was almost my constant practiceto resort to the " Raffaelle Library" for the purpose of half anhour's agreeable chat with the above worthy gentleman. I used to drawhim insensibly into a long discourse, and copious off-hand quotations fromLucretius and Virgil. Mr. Ocheda's memory was great. I used ordinarilyto find him close to a lamp, with one of the " FATHERS" beforehim. lie had read them ALL twice through. His reading was prodigious;but I do not think that his intellectual receiver digested the enormousquantity of food introduced into it. He read walking, sitting, andstanding. He was a native of Morton, and his recitations of the Italianpoets especially of Dante and Tasso were beautifully impressive, tyeloved the English School of metaphysics, but suffered himself to beensnared in the subtleties of Hume, or bewildered in the vagaries ofHartley. When Gibbon was in the habit of visiting Althorp, Mr.Ocheda (as he told me) would now and then have a resolute intellectualconflict with him ; but he was fighting with a giant in his way whosegrasp would sometimes shake him to pieces* The conversation wasalways carried on in the French language. He, Mr. Ocheda, hada pretty income during his domicile with Lord Spencer uponQQ594 Author.mentioned*, is now beyond the reach of this frankand honest tribute of respect. We once had someskirmishes together, relating to the B. S. but thesevery slight, and were therefore easily forgotten. Inow consider him only in the light of an intelligentand amiable person and I throw this floweret uponhis tomb (serve sepulchral") in the perfect spiritof Christian sincerity and benevolence. And thus,FAREWELL TO Author !which he retired to Italy to die in his native province. I subjoin a facsimileof his autograph from one of the only two notes, or letters,which I ever received from him.Of " those just mentioned' let me be allowed to observe of Dr.Elmsly one, especially qualified by deep learning, and great experienceof foreign libraries that, speaking of the library at Al thorp, I heardhim more than once remark, that, " even at Paris he could not get thebooks he found there upon ordinary subjects of science and philology."CHAPTER X.PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED.venit unda supervene tundam;as in a rolling flood,Wave urges wave. . . .FRANCIS'S HORACE.SUCH frequent mention has been made of theBIBLIOGRAPHICAL DECAMERON, and the BibliographyTOUR UPON the CONTINENT, that not onlyin the order of time, but with a view to give thereader some notion of these two opposite, but equallysplendid, publications, I sit down to the Office ofChronicler of my own deeds ; interspersed with collateral,but not extraneous intelligence of a yetmore interesting nature. I look upon the wholeperiod of the conception, concoction, and publicationof the Cameron as the sunniest period of my1 i tac. I scarcely know how its precise plan originated ;but the sale of the Valdarfer Boccaccio * seemed toli;i\v wilt < patronised every thing else. I thought ifI could bring together a few ladies and gentlemen ofa less equivocal character than those introduced byII Maestro Joanne Boccaccio" and make themSee page 360, ant?.596 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Billing.discourse upon subjects decidedly less equivocal thanmany of those started by that most original Italianwriter I might do good: the more especially if Icould bring certain topics to bear upon the fine arts,typography, and bibliography. It seemed, however,in the first instance, that I was bound in honour toresuscitate the Dramatis Persona in the Bibliomaniaof which, about this time, a copy wasscarcely to be procured " for love or money." Ifound that I could easily erect my scaffolding ; butof what materials the building was to be constructed,and how its furniture was to be supplied, seemed torequire repeated deliberation.An accident furnished a hint sufficiently strong toset me to work upon. I was walking one eveningwith my friend Mr. Wade*, in the immediate frontof Holland House, and seeing several carriagescoming up the avenue, to set down parties to dinnerwhile the lamp was beginning to shine decidedly inthe large front room on the first floor, which is infact the dining-room my friend jocosely observed,that " those ladies and gentlemen were, withoutdoubt, coming to talk about old pictures and oldbooks, while the lamp had been just trimmed to throwa better light upon the objects before them ;" thatthey had all got their night-caps and morning dressesin their carriages ; and that the Noble Owner of theMansion, with his accustomed urbanity and love ofSee page 330, ante.Decameron.'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUE > 597hospitality, meant to make it a sort^ visit." " Upon this hint," if Didn't "speak," I acted ;and within a week was closeted with Mr. Uwins to.naive instructions for that beautifully composed, hutbarbarously engraved, vignette, which is at the headof the " Introduction" of my work. By that time,too, the chief outlines of my plan as it now appearsbefore the public were sufficiently delineated. Ihad been for several years collecting typographicalcuriosities, in the shape of printers' devices, oldwoodcuts, and " id genus omne" and I had alsofilled several memoranda books with notices of thetreasures and illuminations in the British Museumas well as in very many private collections. Thesewere materials in abundance to which I would beof ten secretly wishing to give publicity in some popularshape. The moment, therefore, seemed to be nowarrived when I could bring all my scattered rays tobear upon one point, and to break upon the publicat tendon with a singularity as well as splendour of embellishmentto which it had been hitherto a stranger.The Spencer Library was sailing with a steady andprosperous breeze before the wind, when I first madepublic my intentions of giving existence to the BI-biographicalDECAMERON, by &slightavantpropos,in which the work was announced as likely to bein two volumes*. A sketchy account of the contentsof each of the " Ten Days" accompanied this publicannouncement ; but as my materials expanded, andSee page 539, tote.598 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. {Eibliog.my patrons increased, I ventured (as in the case ofthe Bibl. Spencer) * to extend the work to its presentform of three volumes ; and having bespoke someonehundred and twenty reams of that beautiful paperupon which the reader sees it printed, I set to workin right earnest by the issuing of Prospectuses, andannouncing its probable appearance, as in the notebelow t. The DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE was kindlySee page 493, ante.t The ensuing " Circular" was accompanied by a List of Namesincluding those of private friends and booksellers, to the number of twohundred and twenty. Of these, EIGHTY (upwards of one-third) to mycertain knowledge, have " ceased to be." The announcement was asfollows :The Bibliographical Cameron; or, Ten Days pleasant Discourseupon Subjects connected with the early State of the Fine Arts, Typography,and Bibliography.CONDITIONS OF SUBSCRIBING. The Public are aware that it was theintention of the Author to have confined his Work within two Volumes ;but, as is frequently and indeed generally the case, a quantity of matterhas been collected, the extent of which was not foreseen, and the natureof which is presumed to be too interesting to abridge or suppress. TheOrnaments have increased in the same proportion. It has thereforebecome absolutely necessary to encroach upon a third Volume, which,with copious Indexes, will certainly conclude the Work. This arrangement,however, is made with no view of increasing the original Price,which continues the same ; namely, 7 1. 17 s. 6d. for the small paper, and15/. 15s. for the large. The only method left for the Author to meet theserious increase of expense, unavoidably attendant upon such enlargementof plan, has been to fix upon every remaining copy, on the day ofpublication, an additional Guinea and a Half ; that is to say, 9/. 9s. forthe three volumes complete. In the mean time the price will continueas before. The Publication will unquestionably appear in the course ofthe ensuing Spring. The Subscription for the Large Paper Copies isfull : and of the Small, one half of the number is already engaged.The Work has been at the Shakspeare PRESS for the last ten months,and is executed in a manner which has never been exceeded by anyPUBLICATIONS CONTINUED-pleasedto accept the proposed Dedication to Him-melt';and artists numerous, ready, obliging, andcompetent were on all sides engaged in the fulfilmentof their duties. I must confess that I hadevery encouragement from my friends including thewhole Corpus Roxburghiunuin to prosecute thework with spirit. I would not readily allow a</<nnjtrr to operate, or I might have wavered a littleon the receipt of the following note from my amiablefriend Mr. Lang than whom I never had a warmerEncomiast upon the work itself, after it had madeits appearance. " You know best (said that worthylloxburgher), but I should doubt whether there were750 Subscribers for books, at 7 1. Ils. 6d. per copy,on literary subjects."Fortunately this prediction was not likely to bepublication from the same distinguished quarter. The Artists engagedupon the Plates, whether upon Copper or Wood, will be found to haveshewn themselves worthy of the reputation they have long enjoyed;and upwards of 2000/. already expended upon these embellishmentsmay give some idea of their number and excellence."It is particularly requested that Subscribers send their names (postpaid)to Mr. H. Triphook, Bookseller, Old Bond Street; or to Means.J. and A. Arch, 61, Cornhill ; or to Mr. Major, 18, Skinner Street, SnowHill. One third of the Subscription (2/. 12*. 6d.) to be paid at the timeof subscribing.\\ with what mingled pride and pleasure did I read my friendanswer, on his receiving his copy of the work. " Your book surpassesall expectation. It is beautiful and magnificent. I have been admiringit, and now shall read it from the he-inns to the end. I wish youevery success with it, and certainly do think it the CHEAPEST BOOK 1ever saw published. Lord Ashton is staying with us. His taste isgood, and it has his high approbation." This was dated from MoorVon the 10th Dec. 1817.600 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Billing.verified ; for the trade, as well as my friends, supportedme gallantly \ and I proceeded " right on"(as they say in Suffolk) with my Decameronic labours.So awful, however, was even the approach to theFirst Day" that I dared not attack it as in itspresent place \ but, to the best of my recollection itformed, in actual composition, the fourth day. Thenote in the last page will have informed the readerof the sum at that time spent in the preparation ofmaterials in the way of ART; but I find that, on thelast day of the year, 1816, I had received, by way ofadvance of thirds on subscription 1093/. Towardsthis sum the Trade had contributed in proportion tothe following copies taken.LARGE. SMALL PAPER.Mr. Major 6 36Mr. Upham, of Bath 6 24Mr. Evans - 57Messrs. Payne and Foss "2 4Mr. Triphook 1 25Messrs. Longman and Co. - 1 12Mr. Mason, of Dublin 1 6Mr. Nicol 2 6Messrs. Arch 1 6Messrs. Washington and Co. 12Messrs. Robinson, Leeds 2 6I mention only the more prominent Subscribersof the bibliopolistic fraternity on the announcementof the work, of whom several increased their numberson its completion. From the close of the year1815, to the summer of 1817, m y application wasDcctunrron.'] PUBLICATIONS Continued 601almost unremitting if the getting up of the fourthvolumes the Typographical Antiquities, in 1816, bealso taken into consideration. In summer I rose early,in winter I sate up to a late hour. Taking advantageof a short day light, I would postpone exercise tillevening ; when, as in the case with the Classics*, Iwould frequently walk upon a path as hard as marble,while a canopy of millions of stars was glitteringover my head. Once I reached Chadwick and backagain, by way of bodily as well as mental refreshment.But I never worked more thoroughly conmore. The first, fourth, sixth, ninth, and tenthDays tried my diligence to the utmost but especiallythe fourth : where, at one moment, in the endeavourto reconcile the conflicting evidences respecting theorigin of the Art of Printing t, I thought I musthave given up my task in despair : for indeed itwas traversing a country, " where (in the languageof Junius) little vegetation quickened, and few salutaryplants took root." Then came the incessantlyrecurring difficulties in the mechanical arrangementof the press so as to make just room for the " thousandand one" wood blocks with which it seemed tobe studded. What cuttings out, and cuttings inSee page 209, ante.t It will be seen, from the note in page 886 of vol. 1, that I washard at work with this "fourth day" on the second of May, 186; forhappening to notice Schoetfer's marriage with the daughter of Must,I say, that it was on that very day that " Prince Leopold of SueCobourglcd to the hymeneal altar the Princess Charlotte of W*k,"602 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Billing.now compression-now enlargement in all andevery way*Double, double, toil and trouble."There sat Mr. Bulmer here Mr. Turner ; whilethe more ponderous figure of the careful Batsfordtwas put into constant motion to manage, shift, andcontrive, as well as the subject might admit of. Thesteady Smith was the immoveable Compositor whowas principally engaged upon the work, and whowas as familiarly acquainted with every scratch andscrawl of the bizarre MS. of the author, as a shepherdis with every face in his flock of sheep. He, thesaid Smith, little imagined at that time that heshould one day become the " Historian of the parishof Marylebone t" and the successor of BatsfordThese "cuttings out and cuttings in" were attended with tremendousresults on the score of EXPENSE ; for thus discourse Mr. Bulmer inhis elongated bill, brought in upon the occasion, and penned by the lateMr. Senegal, his worthy, but most unfortunate foreman.To remaking up volume ii. frequently, two wood-cut pagesextra, Greek, Hebrew, matter struck out, and extra troublein working the numerous blocks 64 6To extra corrections and alterations, and various transpositions 39 4 "I may just add that the work was printed at 6 1. 6s. per sheet, "insmall pica, with brevier notes, very heavy, done very fine, includingvignettes and wood engravings."t An excellent, worthy, steady, invaluable workman, or overseer, wasgood old Mr. BATSFORD. He loved a dry joke to his heart's content;and had always a sort of hollow, half-grumbling, half-growling, notewhile he was saying and doing the kindest things. He died in his sendyear, having latterly encountered much domestic affliction and trouble.There are men in this world in all situations, whom we can ill-afford tolose . . . and RICHARD BATSFORD was one of them.^ Mr. Smith's debut as an author bears this title j " A TopographicalDe.cameron.~] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED, (50.3as foreman in the office of the successor of Mr.Burner. As to Mr. Turner*, his kindness, cleverness,and endurance were beyond all praise. " Sendme no more (says he, on the receipt of a subnote-upon-note-sheet), any more such as the last, or youwill break up my heart." How often have I beensuddenly called away from Kensington to RussellCourt, Cleveland Row, to smooth a difficulty, to solvea doubt, or superintend the first workings of a red\\and Historical Account of the Parish of Marylebone, comprising acopious description of its Public Buildings, Antiquities, Schools, CharitableEndowments, Sources of Public Amusement, &c., with BiographicalNotices of Eminent Persons, illustrated with Six Views and aMap. By THOMAS SMITH," 1833, 8vo., 7*. 6d. A cheap, useful, unpretending,and not inelegant volume. The map prefixed is worth halfthe money. There are copies upon large paper for the MaryleboneDons and Vestrymen . . . but not without " valuable consideration."See page 519, ante.t Some of the workings "in red," in these Decameronic volumes,are not only of the most exquisite, but most difficult, execution ; and itwere doubtful at the time whether there was another press in Europewhich could match them ? I know of nothing from the Paris or Viennapresses in the same line by which to institute a comparison. It willbe seen from a preceding page (513), that Mr. Bulmer was in high goodhumour with his achievements in this line; and I believe I ain theof living authors, who, in the year 1810 in the first volume of theTypographical Antiquities resumed, or restored, that good old diversityof colour in our printed volumes. The reader is about to be let into animportant secret. At pages 68, and 96-7, of the first volume of theCameron, he will see some of these " workings in red" let in into, ormixing up with, the dark surrounding ornaments. Now, he is to know,that the expense of the process of these workings, is, in each instance,equal to that of working the entire sixteen pages of text : Uv.mv tin-wholeform must be shifted, and a <//.-//;)<7 <>} ration, however minute,ensues. Now, for his advice and instruction he shall be let into anothersecret namely, nothing less than Mr. Burner's charge for there extra604 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Bibiioy.The distance seemed as nothing ; especially when,on return, I had been gratified by the successfuloperation of the press.But if there be one thing more agreeable than anotherto dwell upon in the preparation of materialsfor this costly and original work it is that of thepleasure and instruction derived, during my visitsconnected with it ; especially in the northern partsof England. What appears in it respecting York,Sledmere, Rippon, and Durham, was collected duringone of those visits. How prompt how kind howserviceable were the attentions of four in particular(Mr. Archdeacon Eyre, Sir M. M. Sykes, Mr. Surtees,and the Rev. J. Raine), of whom one only now survives! What pleasant, stimulating discourse andwhat a September was that of 1815 for its enjoyment! Can I ever forget Mainsforth, and the Historianof the County of Durham, its Owner, whenworkings and shifting, and cutting down, and propping up, in the firstvolume of the work under discussion.To red workings in two half sheets - - 3To extra, in working the numerous blocks, and having themfrequently to cut down, and repair Greek cutting downletters, remaking up 51 10To extra corrections and alterations, and repeated proofs ofeach sheet of the work 48A preceding note has given an account of the expense of some ofthose extra workings in the second volume ; but it was destined for thisfirst volume to put the patience of Messrs. Bulmer and Batsford to theseverest possible test ; inasmuch as the very great pressure required towork the block, representing the " mouth of hell," at page 218, BROKEDOWN THE PRESS (p. 490)./) Ltmeron.'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED.wo pjuvd together the old-fashioned terrace whichadjoins his mansion! and when he turned sharplyand pleasantly upon me with a quotation from theBibliomania, of which I had either forgotten, ordenied the existence of, the passage ! Here, if anywhore, wore the " Domus et Places Uxor :" andalas! for the Mistress, the " Linquenda tellus" inaddition! Few men united so many intellectualexcellences as the late ROBERT Surveys, the Historianof the county in question ; a work, in whichare happily combined the diligence of the Antiquary,the attainments of the Scholar, the courtesy of aGentleman, and the charity of a Christian. But theproudest attestation of his exemplary worth andtalents will be found in the establishment of a Societyat Durham, called THE Surveys SOCIETY, of whichthe object is mentioned below*, and to which someof the most respectable names in the kingdomare subscribed as Members. There is OM: living,who, justly proud of, as well as grateful for, such aFrom a printed Circular, explanatory of the views of this Society,furnished me by the common friend of the Deceased and myself, WilliamBentham, Esq. (a Roxburgherer " good and true") we learn thatit has for its object the publication of inedited MS., illustrative oftlu> intellectual, the moral, the religious, and the social condition of thoseparts of England and Scotland included on the coast between the I lumberand the Faith of Forth, and on the west between the Mersey andthe Clyde ; a region \vlm-h constituted the ancient Kingdom of ."The Circular concludes with a notification of theobjects immediately in con inflation to be made public; and I roustsay that these objects are of primary interest and importance. Thereader has doubtless recreated himself with a humorously originalfrom Mr. Surtees in a preceding page .57 i606 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Billing.glorious monument to be raised to the memory ofTHE DEPARTED, will I am persuaded vouchsafe toaccept this floweret planted at its base.Nor can I readily forget the generous hospitalityexperienced at Sledmere*, and the ever active andkind services evinced by the late senior Prebendaryof York, and Archdeacon of Nottingham ; and how,about the tenth hour of the night on my return fromSir Mark's, that excellent person and myself visitedthe venerable library of York Cathedral, in searchof "the Horse, the Sheep, and the Goose t." ToSee vol. iii. p. 405.t A very scarce metrical tract, printed by Caxton. See vol. iii. p.417, &c. The successful charge upon the library of the Dean andChapter of Lincoln induced a secret belief, on my part, that similarsuccess might attend a similar charge upon that of York Minster. Inother words, I felt extremely anxious to procure the above little volume,at the price even of one hundred guineas, for the library of Earl Spencer.Through the medium of my amiable friend, Mr. Archdeacon Eyre, anegociation was set on foot. It was conducted, and it concluded, mosthonourably : but my old friend William Caxton remained STATIONARYupon the shelves of the library. The two following letters upon thissubject, which, as they betray no confidence, and are exceedingly characteristicof the kindness and felicity of diction of their author, cannotfail to meet with the reader's gratification. I should premise, thatduring my visit at the Archdeacon's, we had, in conjunction with Mr.Dallin, the librarian, several very stiff and steady rummage in thelibrary, to find out curious, rare, and valuable volumes, which stood inneed of immediate attention as to binding, &c.te So powerful and so persuasive is your reasoning, that if I was thesole proprietor of those paltry leaves, Lord Spencer should have themimmediately ; and even if the rest of the Chapter proposed it, I wouldnot dissent, though contrary to our established maxim. But I thinkthere is no chance of it, as the same post which brought your letter,brought me one from the Dean MARKHAM], who, upon that subject/)Kiimcron.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. GO 7tin* Krv. James Raine of Durham, I not only owedmy introduction to the historian of that county, butwas indebted for many kind attentions and usefuland I rejoice that HE, as well as thesays, that ' though he should really be glad to part with such blackletter books in exchange for really valuable ones, yet he thinks it wouldbe quite inconsistent with right ; for as we have had many presents, andare in the custom of receiving them now, we should be very untrustworthyif we parted with any ; as persons may like to deposit them in asafe public library.' However, I have sent him your letter.Neither Dallin nor myself have had any time to make further searchesin our library, but I have no doubt we have many undiscovered treasures: ' Full many a gem of purest ray serene, the dark unfathomedshelves of Toby bear.' 1 was in time to stop the external view of theold chapel. By-thc-by, it was a ruin, serving as a stable and hayloft,when we began its restoration in 1806. There was sufficient of theoriginal to enable us to restore it to its exact primitive state, except theroof, which is probably lower, and the battlements, which we copiedfrom the oldest part of the Minster, being of the same era. It was achapel annexed to the Archbishop's palace, which was totally destroyedmany hundred years ago.I will send this letter under cover to my son-in-law, who will frankit forward to you ; if you write to me, you may as well inclose it to him,unless you are in a great hurry.Yours, very sincerely,"Reticence, York, Oct. 13, 181.5. JOHN EYM."The second letter disclosed the irrevocable decree of the Dean andChapter, in the following words.' DEAR SIR,I find at Bishopthorpe a portrait of Toby Matthews, in every respectsuperior to that in our library ; I intend, therefore, to stop Mr.Cave till I hear from you. He has a book open before him, on whichis written, ' Mors vitam nee aubert nee assert.' It is undoubtedly original,and not wholly without merit.I had a letter from the Dean to-day. He wishes, as well as myself,that we could let Lord Spencer have those Cantons, consistently withour principles. But of all obstinacies, a corucitntiou* obstinacy it themost invincible. So we must rest contented with the consolation ofhaving what Ld. S. in anxious to obtain : like children, derive enjoysPublications CONTINUED. [Billing.recorder of these matters, has been yet spared fromthe destiny of others to think and to discourse uponthese by-gone days. The Dean of Rippon, Dr. Wad-behove,is even at this instant with me in the libraryof Rippon Minster. I see his fine and beautiful octogenariancountenance his amazement on the discoveryof the " Book for Travellers" and of otherbook-rarities* : next, our trip to Fountains Abbeyby moonlight his dainty partridge-supper and vehementcondemnation of the whole book of Pharmacopeiafor the prolongation of life. All this is stillpresent with me. Dr.Waddelove died, I believe, inment from other's envy t. I mentioned it to-day to the Archbishop,who approves our conscientious scruples. Neither I nor Dallin havemade any farther examinations. I am afraid ; for it steals away time,and wearies both body and mind. It requires the spirits and mania ofa * * *. Write what you wish to be done as to TOBY, or ' not TO BE.'Yours, very sincerely,Residence, York, Oct. 16, 1815. JOHN EYRE."See vol. iii. p. 420.t Lord Spencer was very easily reconciled to his fate on this subject.In a letter dated Oldham, 12th Nov. 1815, he says : " Though I missan opportunity of adding to my Caxtonian list, by the final determinationof the Chapter of York, which you announce to me, I must own thatI cannot express much, if any, disappointment of their decision uponthe subject; which, strictly speaking, is a correct one."% There had been once an intention of having the portrait of this interestingcharacter (once Archbishop of York) engraved for the De-cameron; but I afterwards gave it up. See a good deal relating to himin vol. iii. p. 255, &c.They possess, in the fine library attached to the Cathedral of York,a most magnificent copy of the second edition of Erasmus's Greek andLatin Testament, 1519, 2 vols. UPON VELLUM. They have also somecurious and valuable manuscripts, of which several were sent to Londonto be appropriately clothed in the Lewisian garniture.n ////,T/>;I.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 609his ninety-second year. I should presume that thewhole arcana of medicine could scarcely have furnishedmaterials for carrying him into another year.But there were other visits, in a different direction,and in part recorded in the pages of my work,which are still remembered by me. The two daysand two nights spent at Stowe*, with the amiableand learned librarian there, Dr. O'Conor (now takenfrom us), in company with a common friend (yet,I thank God, preserved to me), are even amongthe Delicate Memorise of my present existence. Dr.O'Conor lived to complete his Herculean labour ofRerum Hibernicarum Scriptures Veteres, in fourquarto volumes. There was a singleness of heartand simplicity of manners about him, beneath whichhis deep reading and knowledge of ancient IrishHistory was in a manner hidden or buried ; butit you touched the note, the whole spirit of the manand of the historian was instantly kindled up ; andhis usually mild countenance was in an immediatecorrection of joyous delight. Shortly after thepublication of the Cameron, his warm heart inducedhim to address me thus. The letter has nodate ; but the allusion to the present Marquis ofChances coming of age, places it late in 1817, orearly in the following year.DEAR SIR,I THIS day received u letter from tin Marquis ol'\\^ satisfaction and commendablevol. iii, p. 399.n H610 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Billing.tons of your work ; and desiring me to write to you aletter of thanks for your kind mention of me, which he ispleased to say has given him very great pleasure.I have not yet seen that work, but I beg of you tobelieve that I am thoroughly grateful ; and that I will fulfilmy promise to you, as given in my last There isto be a great concourse of the first nobility here on the lathof February, to celebrate Lord Temple's coming of age *.I will avail myself of that opportunity, and let you knowthe result. Meantime I have written to Lord Carleton andothers. I wish you every enjoyment. The "mens sana"you have. The corpus sarum, after such a task as yours, isanother consideration.CHAS. O'connor."For the sake of juxta-position, and in strict chronologicalorder, I shall accompany the foregoing bythe following flattering testimony of my work fromthe NOBLE OWNER of the mansion which is describedin its pages. On the Christmas day of 1817 I wasmuch gratified by the receipt of the following letterfrom the Duke of Buckingham, who had a largepaper copy of the work."Strive, Dec. 24, 1817.SIR,YOUR < Cameron,' reached me last night. I havedipped into it, preparatory to a steady perusal of it ; and Ialready feel how much the learned world owes to you for thepublication. I am glad to find the Stowe Library affordedyou objects not unworthy of notice in a work of such literaryIn my visit to Stowe, 1815-6, I saw some of the MONSTROUS CASKSfilled with ALE, which were to be broached on this memorable anniversary.The ale had been brewed at the nativity of the Marquis. To thebest of my recollection, it was a regiment of barrels only exceeded ingrenadier height by those which I saw at Heidelberg in 1818.Decameron.'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. < 1 1importance as yours. I hope to have the pleasure of you personally here; and shall be much gratifiedby looking over with you some things which I trust will notprove uninteresting to you. The Sulphur, by Finisterre,mentioned by you, is in my possession now ; Mr. Grenville *dreaming it as more properly belonging to a classical collectionof prints than to his library, which does not includeany collection of that description. The first volume of Dr.O'Conor's Catalogue is all but finished, and will afford arare specimen of industry and learning. It will not be published,but I shall beg your acceptance of a copy of it.I have the honour to be, Sir,Your most obedient humble servant,Hands BUCKINGHAM."The last letter which I received from him wasthe following of which the fac-simile autograph ofhis name gives proof of the truth of its concludingsentence. The writer died in the year 1828t.Bath, S. Parade, No. 3, Aug. 24, 1823.MY DEAR SIR,I RECEIVED your letter requesting some information respectingIrish writers of the seventeenth century. In aboutten days after the date of this letter, I trust that I shall beenabled, by the Bath waters, to return to my studies andusual occupations at Stowe ; and I hope I need not assureyou that, if you will, in a few days after, remind me of thepromise I now make, I will send you all the information IThis exquisite specimen of FINIGUEKHA's talents is said to havebeen purchased of Mr. Woodbury, by the Right Hon. Thomas (Jion-illo, uncle to the Duke, for three hundred guineas.t I request the reader's attention to what is said of Dr. O'Conor, andof his labours, in the Library Companion, p. 268: second lit. Hewas in all senses of the word an HONOUR TO ins COUNTRY.R R 2612 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Billing.can upon the subject, in the abridged manner you mention.I shall be always glad to hear of the good health and happinessof a man who has contributed so largely to the stockof public knowledge, in so pleasing a shape as you havedone ; and I beg of you to attribute to my respect for youruseful and entertaining labours, and your valuable time, aswell as to my endless occupations in Stowe Library, that Ihave not often inquired for you by letter. I never omittedverbal inquiries when occasions occurred, and am sorry thatmy absence here deprives me of the pleasure of shakinghands with Mr. Payne and you on your intended visit toStowe*. A trembling hand forbids a longer letter.I have the honour to be,Dear Sir,With very sincere esteem and regard,Your obliged humble servant,to return, and to dispatch. The first volumeof my Cameron was finished printing on the 1stof February, 1817; the second, on the 13th of June;This alludes to a visit paid by Mr. Payne and myself to Lord andLady Spencer, at Althorp, in the autumn of 1823, when it was our intentionto have taken Stowe by the way : but the unavoidable absence ofDr. O'Conor diverted our intention. In the direct route to Althorp,we visited Woburn Abbey : and there I convinced my worthy travellingcompanion, when examining the old library of that magnificent mansion,that the fine paper copies of Leland's Itinerary, of which only twelvehad been struck off, were NOT upon large paper. And within the libraryof Christ Church College, Oxford, somewhere about the same time, Iconvinced the late Lord Spencer of the same fact : because these identicalcopies are inserted in Hearne's list of subscribers as " fine paper." Consultthe Lib. Companion, p. 225, edit. 1825, for a pretty full accountof this important matter to a thorough-bred HEARNEIAN.Cameron.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 6)3and the third on the 20th of November in the sameyear : a celerity of execution perhaps unparalleledwhen the very many delicacies and difficulties of thework are taken into consideration*. During thecourse of the printing I was induced to bind up afew copies of the second and third Days, to submitto a few critical and sympathetic friends. LordSpencer did me the honour to read and to commend t ;Mr. Grenville was prompt in expressions of a warmand friendly approbation ; while from my staunch asThe entire cost of the printing of the work was 1248/. : of the paper1033/.; of the engravings in copper and upon wood, probably 2000/.as I have no very correct data here to go upon : for copperplate printingand French paper to print upon, 578/. This was at least a BOLD undertaking; and sufficiently justified me in calling upon my friends and thepublishers to advance something on account. To the best of my recollection,I had paid away 2000/. before the day of publication. Wellmight my friend Dr. Bliss observe, on receiving his copy of the De-cameron,bound by Lewis, and on expressing his admiration and entiresatisfaction with the work, " Such a RISK was only to be undertaken bya vivacious and spirited undertaker." This from St. John's, Oxford,Jan. 14, 1818. He adds, correctly: " I hear that it has risen in pricebeyond all idea, and that you have sold every copy:" and then hefavours me with one of his own " vivacious" dissyllables " BRAVO !"t In a letter from Althorp, of the date of the 21st April, 1816, HiLordship was so good as to express himself thus :DEAR SIR,I DID not follow your suggestion of postponing my perusal of theSecond Day of your Cameron till to-day, but went through the wholeof it on my way down hither yesterday. It is a most beautiful volume,and contains a great deal of very curious and interesting matter ; whichis, however, of a nature not to be adapted to all readers, though all mustof course admire the beauty and correctness of the decorations. I havelooked through the volume with the same freedom as I took in perusingthose of the Bibl. Spencer., but I have found nothing which can bedignified with the title of an Hippopotamus error; and, indict. if you614 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Billion.well as early friend, George Henry Freeling, Esq.,I got a response which shall speak for itself in thewords which " hereafter follow."I THANK you heartily for the treat you have affordedme. I had always calculated upon a very beautiful book ;but I confess it far exceeds my most sanguine expectations.It is truly magnificent. To judge from the specimens Ihave seen, the DECAMERON will do equal credit to yourtaste, research, and liberality ; which latter commodity is,from its rarity, of some value now-a-days, in Bibliographersas well as in Bibliopoles. The Subscribers will have theirworth of a penny" full measure and must be amply satisfiedFrom such a variety of different subjects it isvery difficult to say which is the most admirable. Any particularone I could not select. The Introduction ; the gloriouscapital P in the Chronicle of Francis I. ; the delicious Magdalen; and the exquisite little Kalendar of the Months" &c.Now, this I hold to he the language of a man whonot only knows what he is talking about, hut is inearnest in what he says.These favourable opinions were of great en-wishto adhere to that metaphor, the smallest kind of water-rat wouldbe a more appropriate designation for any of the very trifling errors Ihave noted.Yours, very faithfully,SPENCER."His Lordship, with his usual accuracy and minuteness, enclosed thewater-rat" errata here alluded to, on a slip of paper which indeedjustified his designation of them. On the 21st of the following July, onreceiving the " Third Day" Lord Spencer cheered me by a continuationof the probationary strain, thus : ' ' I took a cursory view of the ThirdDay as I came down in the carriage here j^Althorp], and I find it fullof interesting anecdotes, though less in my way than some others ofyour productions. The decorations are very beautiful."Decameron.'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 615encouragement to me*. Another object pressed uponmy consideration after the work had gone to press.I was desirous of a LIVING PORTRAIT or two (as Ihave been, equally in vain, in the present work togive an additional interest, as well as embellishment,to my pages; and those of Mr. Roscoe and Mr.George Hibbert were thought likely to be productiveof the object in view. My readers will, Ithink, feel equal pleasure with myself in being madeacquainted with the answers of these distinguishedgentlemen to the request in question.But from no one quarter did I derive a higher gratification in thetransmission of these "peeps behind the curtain" than from that ofone of my own Publishers Mr. MAJOR. He was the largest shareholder(as may be seen at page 600) in the Cameron Sank, and it wasonly due to his prompt and generous support that he should have someidea of the Work to which he had so liberally lent his aid. Besides,the gallant spirit evinced by him in the purchase of the Stock on handof the fourth volume of the Bibl. Spencer. 3 entitled him to every consideration.His reply is not less creditable to himself than it was flatteringto my feelings.Skinner Street, April 10, 1817.DEAR SIR,I return you the precious demi-tome, with many thanks for the foretasteyou have thought me worthy to receive of a treat so highly intellectual,although in one sense bewitching and bewildering. Biblioma-niacs, ' yet unborn, shall bless the writing of that DAY.' ' It was thefelicity of Pope (says Johnson) to rate his talents at their real valueOf this felicity, I trust you enjoy a sufficient share, for self congratulation; as, after all, some will want taste to admire, though more mustlack the power to express their admiration. For my own part, I willwish you no better fortune than that every one who Bees, may be equallygratified with myself, and feel equally disposed to aid, abet, and comfort,the Author of such a delectable entertainment," &c.Yours, ever sincerely,.I Ian .M V .OR."616 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. \ Biog."Liverpool, July 19, 1816.MY DEAR Sill,You judge quite right in supposing that I should< shrink ' from the honour of finding myself exhibited, inpropria persona, in your Bibliographical Cameron. Myambition is abundantly satisfied with the friendly notice youhave already taken of me and my pursuits ; and I cannotbut feel that the exhibition of my portrait would be an instanceof my vanity, without being an advantage to yourwork.W. ROSCOE."MY DEAR SIR,I TAKE as a high compliment your proposal about myportrait, but to that I must decidedly say NO. I ride myBibliomania as I have done other hobby-horses, withoutany call of genius or qualification by study for that particularpursuit. It happens that good fortune now and thenputs some good books into my possession; and when inyour work (which will be consulted hereafter by all whoadopt this pursuit) I find it recorded that I possess any suchrare treasure, I consider the record as valuable to me, becauseit ensures, in a great degree, to me, or my successor,the public estimation of the article. But to thrust myvisage forward among those who have, with diligence andwith intelligence, rendered themselves, as it were, a corpsbibliographique, is what I never can consent to. My tasteand pursuit may diverge, as it often happens to merchants,more especially if they have upwards of a dozen children.A few years ago I had the finest private collection of PLANTSin England. I introduced many hundreds into the country.I studied Botany. I might then, I make no doubt, by somechance, have seen my nose peeping out in some page orother of a work recording the Botanical Worthies of theAge; and what a smile would such an appearance haveexcited in these days, when I have not a plant that doesDecameron.'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 617not grow everywhere? This is my frank explanation ; and Idare say it satisfies you, who are candid, and only on oneparticular subject bitten by a mania.Ever yours truly,"GEORGE HIBBERT*."But I will fairly own that there were few portraitswhich I was more desirous of possessing than thatof SIR JOSEPH BANKS; not only because, withoutany personal knowledge of him, I had spoken ofhis library in the First Day of the Cameron as Ithought it deserved to be spoken oft, but becauseThere were other portraits and ONE in particular which I was exceedinglyanxious to possess, as most apposite and interesting embellishmentsto my Decameronic pages. But it might not be. There aresensitive minds in this world who shrink from, or startle at, the echo oftheir own reputation : " e'en at the sound themselves have made." Ihoped, however, to possess the physiognomy of the veteran Orontes(see p. 294, ante), or James Bindley, Esq. ; the more so, as his firstrefusal was somewhat coy or coquettish. He observed to me " that hecould not bring his mind to say positively yes, or no ; and must thinkthe matter over more than twice before he ventured to appear in public;"adding, " that he never had his portrait painted, and now felt less inclinationthan ever upon that subject" Finding it a doubtful point, Iceased to press it : although that venerable gentleman did afterwards sitfor his portrait to Mr. Beings ; and a private plate is struck off from it.If I mistake not, there is also a print of Mr. Bindley 's portrait takenwhen he was about forty-five ; with his hair tied behind in a club, andwith formal side curls.t The passage in question is as follows : . . . . "the incomparablelibrary of SIR JOSEPH BANKS, in which, as in a wood of ancient growthand primeval grandeur, amidst insects of all hues, reptiles either noxiousor innoxious, and wild beasts that walk abroad or love the lair youmay disport at ease, and solace yourself without injury, and to yourheart's delight Such a collection should not be suffered to be dissipated;as neither years nor centuries of years can erase the name of the ownerof it from the records of imperishable fame." Vol. i. p. 2*6. The wish618 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. \ Billing.he was questionless an eminent public character ;and the admirable bust of him by Sir F. Chantryhad whetted my appetite to possess it. How thematter fell off, I cannot now pretend to say ; but SirJoseph's answer to my request is at least worthy ofarresting the reader's attention for a few seconds."Soho Square, Aug. 17, 1815.REVEREND SIR,THOUGH I certainly possess a library of some value, andhave not hitherto spared any expense in rendering it usefulto those who pursue the studies that were my delight untilmy eyes refused any longer to submit to the fetters of a microscope,I confess myself to have so little of BOOK HEROISMin me, as to have declined the sacrifices made by the moreHeroic Collectors in the purchase of Books more valued fortheir rarity than their use. I am willing, therefore, to accepta subordinate station in the temple you intend to raiseto the honour of Bibliomania.I am gratified, however, to learn, from your letter,that my treasures, as a collector, are valued by you, Sir, ata higher rate than I myself ever put upon them ; and shall,I assure you, be flattered by seeing my admirable bust* (forso, in justice to Mr. Chantrey, I must call it) brought for-hereexpressed has been REALISED ; and the library in question takes itsplace " for aye" in the BRITISH MUSEUM. It was so bequeathed by itslate owner.Sir Joseph Banks was fortunate in the representations of him bythe hand of art. He is all intellect in Chantrey 's bust : he is the veryPresident of the Royal Society in Mr. Phillips's picture full of attentionto what is going on " Vir Ipsissimus." And how fortunate is thelatter in Schiavonetti's engraving of his portrait ! It is difficult to saywhich is the more alive the picture or the print ?Decameron.'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. il!)ward in a way that will do credit to his talents, while itplaces me IN COMPANY WITH MEN whom I esteem aboveall others.I am, Rev. Sir,Your most faithful and most humble servant,At length came the day of parturition. Ac icustomer as I had recently been to a progeny of nomean beauty and splendid and stately as were theSpencerian tomes I could not keep down the inwardswell of delight on the first view of the volumesof the Cameron. The paper, the workmanshipat the press and with the copperplate printer*, thevariety, in form, colour, and character, of the ornamentsstruck me, when united in one solid bodycompact with stiffened boards" as something perfectlysui generis. But this was not the fond andMr. Lahee, of Castle Street, Oxford Market ; who for twenty-fiveyears has been my principal, if not my only operator" hoc in re" Ifduring that period he have received some two thousand pound* from me,we will readily hope, and infer, that " the labourer is worthy of hishire." He is among the most punctual men of business with whom Iam acquainted ; and in the mezzotint department of his art the acknowledged"facile princeps." But the honest eulogy of a Veteran in hisart, must not make me forget the rising merits and acknowledged clevernessof Messrs. Lloyd and Jennings in the same important department.Mu ry body knows how imperfectly, if not in some instances, wretchedly,the plates of the immortal Collect are printed. I feel persuadedthat lead they got into an office like either of those just mentioned, weshould have seen such impressions from his Pith cry, Jl '<//*, Ln Ihtgur,.and from the Won t as would have astonished us at the extraordinaryability of his burin.620 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. \ Blbliog.foolish effervescence of mere parental drivelling ordotage. My friends the Public the world atlarge partook of the same feeling * ; and such wasmy anxiety that the work should be delivered tothose subscribers of my particular acquaintance, inas beautiful a condition as possible, that I prevailedupon them to have their copies bound by CharlesLewis, in the first instance, as being the safest passportto their own hands. To the best of my recollection,about 120 copies were thus bound in conformitywith my wishes t. I then began to feel my way withI shall not easily forget the frank and warm manner in which Mr.Bartsch (of Vienna) expressed himself to me upon this subject at ourfirst interview in the Imperial Library. " Jamais de ma vie je n'airien vu de plus beau ou de plus interesting." It was a passport to animmediate and strict intimacy with him during the whole of my stayat Vienna. Nor may I withhold a part of the eulogy of a most competentjudge dwelling in the metropolis of France. " Get ouvrage est dansle meme genre a peu pres que la Bibliomania du meme auteur, alaquelle il fait suite; mais il est imprime d'une maniere beaucoup plussumptuous, et les graves sans nombre dont il est enrichi en font unlivre Raiment EXTRAORDINAIRE i nous pouvons meme aj outer, ,UNIQUE en son genre." BRUNET. The cynical EBERT (see page555) even growls something like admiration.t A very pleasant correspondence, of some few dozen letters, ensuedupon the delivery of the bound copies to my respective friends. A partof Mr. Bindley's letter, in acknowledgment, may lead the van of extracts.Stamp Office, London, Dec. 19, 1817.MY DEAR SIR,I yesterday received from Mr. Lewis my copy of your Cameron,and I find myself in the same predicament with Dean Swift in possessinga BookToo nicely gilt for me to soil.'Thus much for the outside. Now for the contents. As far as I haveventured to open it yet, I foresee much and very useful information, andDecameron.'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 621those of the TRADE who had not previously taken aparticular interest in the work. Mr. Jennings, thenabundant entertainment from the perusal of it ; and I think we areobliged to you for the communication of such various and curious noticesof Bibliographical History." The remainder of Mr. Bindley 's letter isbetter placed in a sub note*.Among those to whom I had been indebted, not only for muchkindness and civility, but for many substantial acts of friendship, andof a branch of whose family a distinct and interesting notice is takenin the pages of the Cameron, vol. iii. p. 371, was, and now is,JEREMIAH Herman, Esq., a gentleman who, as a British Merchant (thatcharacter, alas ! too frequently adumbrated at the present day with manya doubtful shade!) and a lover and encourager of the fine arts, standsupon a lofty and enviable pedestal. Mr. Herman thus, in few but gallantwords, acknowledged the receipt of his large paper copy. " Accept mybest thank for your kind attention in having superintended the bindingof my exquisite copy of your magnificent work." The " letter missive"of my friend Mr. Hatchets followed " hard upon."Mount Clare, Southampton, Dec. 29, 1817.MY DEAR SIR,I am delighted with the Large Paper Copy of your Cameron,for indeed it much surpasses my most sanguine expectations. I mustalso allow that Mr. Lewis has done justice on his part to this beautifuland interesting Work.Yours, with great regard,CHARLES Hatchets."From the country also I had several " Testimonia in laudes Actors."Thus writes Richard Shandy, Esq., from Penkridge."Dec.7, 1817.I am quite delighted with the Work. I repent that I did not attendto your recommendation in having had my copy bound by Lewis ; butmy impatience to possess it would not allow me to wait longer than Icould possibly help." Is the Author of this letter who writes so warmly,whom I have never seen, and of whom I know nothing YET Alive?If so, I will not pass within a thirteen mile post of his house without atender palmas."" Having on a former occasion, perhaps improperly, assumed to myselfa designation of which it would be an unseasonable delicacy to622 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Biog.living in the Poultry, absolutely ventured upon aspeculation abroad and gave me a prompt andliberal order for thirty-six copies. Even the calculatingbrow of Mr. Master relaxed into smoothnessand admiration. " He had never seen suchsweet books" and when he begged I would immediatelysend him twenty-five copies at my ownprice, the church clock of St. Paul's then strikingcould not have produced, to a novice in London, amore astounding sensation than did the words ofthat order . as it " fell upon mine ear I" But when,in a very short time succeeding, I received from himwritten instructions " for another twenty-five copies,"I thought justly that " the field was already won."Judge, too, gentle reader, of my equally-balancedsurprise and triumph, on receiving the followingaffect ignorance, and of the additional proof of your kind regard affordedme in your present publication, I feel, with a due sense of the honouryou have done me under my nom de guerre, as a penny combatant inthe field of BIBLIOMANY, some concern lest others should feel as I domyself; that your friendship has in this instance got the better of yourjudgment. Accept my best thanks and wishes, my dear sir, for thehealth and happiness of yourself and family, and here we will end, forI know of no other termination that can be better.As you must be now for some time a comparatively idle man, 1 hopeyou will find time now and then to look in upon me, as I shall alwaysbe most happy to see you.I am, dear sir,te Your most obliged, and very humble servant,Decanter.] Publications Contentnotification from the Adjutant-general, at headquarters,No. 39, Paternoster Row. " I am gladthere is such a demand for your work. It is worthyof it, and is certainly cheap to a gentleman at Ql. 9*.As soon as I had even partially examined it, I wasfully convinced it would all be sold in a few months ;but I must confess I could not have supposed therewould have been such an incessant demand for anywork of such magnitude, and of which such a numberof copies was taken off. C. 11."From other billiopolistic quarters in the countryfrom Bath, Newcastle-upon-Tyn'e, Leeds, Bristol,Edinburgh, and Glasgow, "the tide" of ordersset strongly in. My friend Mr. J. M. Dutch, the thenleading bookseller of Bristol, and editor of the FelixFarley Journal, had disposed of all his copies at!)/. ( .)s. 9 and was desirous of more. His concludinglanguage, in a short letter of Jan. 17, 1817, is worthyof himself but it is not for me to quote it. TheDecameronic flame seemed to catch, and to burn in,the bosom of his venerable parent, the Rev. J. Dutch,Registrar to the University of Oxford: for thuswrites that most worthy Gentleman and kind heartedfriend. " On enquiring at Mr. Parker's tit is mnrn-/>/ir, 1 cannot find that a Subscript inn <-<>](>/ of yourCameron Lias been sent for me. I have the refit reprocured a frank from the Bishop of Oxford in //"//,and beg the favour of an answer whether I am tosive a copy. Parker has disposed of the coj>,'rs /subscribed for, and </o-//r.v me to ask yuu how lie is624 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. \ Billing.to send you the needful? If All Soul's Collegeshould wish to have a copy, how is it to be procured fWith best compliments, fyc.But the gallantry of Messrs. Robinson and Sons,of Leeds, shot far a-head of all bibliopolistic competition.I was pressed to let them have fifty copieson my own terms ; they tendered 9 1- 9s. per copy forthe earlier, and 8/. 18s. 6d. for the later. I couldonly part with twenty-five impressions. This wasindeed THE GOLDEN AGE OF THE BIBLIOMANIA.Those who know me longest and best will not accuseme of a cold or ungrateful heart. I could not possiblyhave the slightest idea of the extraordinary,not to say extravagant, sale of the work, when, beforethe day of its publication, I asked my Publishersto dine with me. They came, with Mr. Bulmer andMr. Wm. Nicol. They saw, lying upon the table,the new offspring cradled in the morocco of CharlesLewis. I had then, to the best of my present recollectionand belief, about 320 out of the 7^0 smallpaper copies bespoke. A cabinet council hadbeen held by my booksellers {"en voiture cheminfaisant") to make me an offer of 61. 6s. percopy for every remaining copy. Mr. Evans, whoDecameron.'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 625was the " Mercurial, or Chief Speaker" on the occasion,was to draw a cheque for the whole amount-say2000/. if I acquiesced. The safety of the worldat least of the political world may be said nowand then to depend upon a YES or a No. The fate oflovers is often locked up in one or the other of theseemphatic monosyllables. To the surprise of myguests, and to my own utter astonishment ever since,I DECLINED the generous offer. By putting thisnegative construction upon the proposal, I was ultimatelya gainer to the amount of some few hundreds.Nothing, however, could exceed the harmony of ourmeeting ; and I am not sure whether, of its kind,this were not a unique symposium.It gave rise to ANOTHER, induced by a similarfeeling of grateful generosity. Many of my kindFriends, who had so gallantly supported me duringthe progress of the Bibl. Spenceriana, and TypographicalAntiquities at whose tables I had so oftensat, and of whose liberal kindnesses, in various directions,I had so often partaken were good enoughto accept a quaint invitation* to dine with me on theAs a sort of counterpart to what appears of the same kind in apreceding page (531), I annex three of the characteristic replies to thequaint" invitation here mentioned. First, for James Boswell, underthe character of Aristarchus.Thou hast damnable iteration ! What, didst thou look at thy hooksto And that thou hadst written me down an ass? If thou tallest to meof 2/. 12*. 6</., I shall look upon thee as the fair Ophelia, and say " Ir gave you aught." If thou saddest me to dinner, why then withS S626 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Billing.9th of December, 1817 and to carry away withthem their respective copies, in large or small paper,bound by Charles Lewis, in morocco or in russia, asthe orders might have been given. A back parlourwas consigned to these copies, and a comely andheart-cheering pyramid they formed. About a dozenguests obeyed the summons. Somewhat of an extraordinarysurprise awaited them on their arrival.the Spirit of an Ancient Roman, I will answer with Cassius, ' Ay, if I bealive, and your mind hold, and your dinner be worth the eating !'Thine,et From the Temple Gardens. ef ARISTARCHUS."I will bid Lewis garrulity."To the best of my recollection, the mistake was on my side, and tomy disadvantage. Mr. Boswell had advanced nothing. Lewis was tosettle it; but I cannot make out what precedes " garrulity" nor, asbefore, do I know what that word means.The next tells its own tale admirably.Right Kynde <5y worthy effendi,Thy byddynge hath safely come into my handes, & I shall notbe unmindful thereof, & albeit I elite not our muche in ' Wine & wassailyet do I intended that we shall disport ourselves cheerily, & likeworthy & discrete Bibliomaniacs, so that we maye for the nones borrowedthe pithy sentiments of the learned Bishop of Ducked (' on whosoul God haue mercy')Now make we mery, away dole harte's dull,Now drink, send offer Tapster cowpis fullBring Wine againe, and set thereof plantesThy lounge fronde,EDW. V. Utters."The third from Mr. Haslewood, though brief, is not a bad pendant towhat appears at page 533, ante.Be it well known to Master ROSICRUSIUS, that the devoirs of theComte de Rabelais were never more to be depended upon by the aerialdeities, or the bewitching spell of Belinda's beauty more certain in effecton its Slaves, than his own fiat for the feast of the Cameron is withBERNARDO."Decameron.'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 627A tray, filled with several of the choicer woodenblocks, which had been used in the printing of thework, was handed to each guest, with an urgent requestthat he would help himself to one, two, orthree of these woodcuts, as taste or inclination led,as a memento of the Day which might indeed, onvery many accounts, have been called the ELEVENTHDAY. My worthy friends helped themselves liberally,as I wished them to do. Some were for convertingthese blocks into SNUFF BOXES *, others forAmongst the SNUFF BOXES manufactured in part with these woodenblocks, is one, in the possession of my friend the Rev. Henry Drury,having at top and at bottom the two heads which appear as the bottomsof pages 156-7 of vol. 1. They treat " of the Chin and of the Ear inPhysiognomy." It had been more lucky had my friend obtained theupper block at page 156, which treats "of the NOSE." These blocksare embedded in silver, and the snuff is as Decameronic as possible.Were I a Prime Minister, I could refuse my friend nothing if, in preferringhis request, he tendered me, at the same time, a pinch of snuffout of THIS Box.For myself, I was content with the beautiful device of NicholasEpiscopus the son-in-law of Frozen having a Crosier in the centre;as being elegant in itself, and of not overgrown dimensions, and seenat page 312 of vol. 1 : but nothing like so beautiful and rich as that usedby some Venetian printers, which may be seen at page 1 79 of vol. 1 . Ofall possessors, however, of the Episcopus, surely a Mr. JOHN BISCIIOKP,of Leeds, should have been the Individual! for thus wrote that (unknown)Individual to me.Leeds, 29th Jan. 1818."Bin,A pardonable wish to obtain everything and every anecdote concerningmy Forefather*, is my apology for intruding myself at thismoment ; and, though a perfect stranger, of troubling you with a request.In turning over your interesting publication, the Bib. Cameron. 1was delighted to find an excellent Portrait of J. Frozen, and enoughsaid of his son-in-law, NICHOLAS BISCHOFF, to make me wish to knowmore. Being lineally descended from this Nicholas, and of course br628 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. {Bibllog,framing and glazing them, or making them the substratumof a drinking cup.But the surprise greatly increased when anothertray, filled with similar materials, was presented,with a request that every Visitor would take a block,and throw it into the fire. They looked astonishment.A thrill of horror seemed to pervade everybosom. Remonstrance and entreaty were resortedto, in vain. I led the way to this unparalleled act ofIncendiarism, by throwing the ugly and frightfulfigure of Lucifer (p. 219, vol. i.) into his naturalelement. . .the flames. Mr. Baron Holland followedwith the largest and most expensive block thatfrom the Triumphs of the Emperor Maximilian,about a foot square and paused and hesitated erehe cast it upon Lucifer. These were already beginningto enlighten us, when Mr. Hibbert approachedwith the full plumaged Knight, of nine inches inlength, from the same work and destined to followthe same fate. Sir Francis Freeling brought forwardhis Wife Justine, from Frozen, I feel anxious to possess the best engravingof that esteemed character. I therefore made application forit in London, but in vain and I have since seen an advertisement inthe Gent's Magazine which precludes all hope. The manner in whichyou speak of the merits and character of my respectable Ancestors, emboldensme to address myself to you ; in the hope that, if you have animpression to spare, you will favour me with it. Hoping you will excusethis liberty,I am, with great respect,Your obedient servant,JOHN BISCHOFF."I cannot now charge my memory with the result ; but I believe thathis request was as immediately, as cheerfully, complied with.Cameron.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED.the expressive physiognomy of Baptista Porta (seenat p. 158 of vol. 1) but twice hesitated ere he committedit to the flames. Mr. Alexander Chalmersgroaned inwardly as he advanced, " with measuredstep and slow," with the large woodcut of the DancingBear, seen at p. 215 ; but bruin was at lengthtossed upon the pile, heels uppermost. Mr. HenryDrury seemed to move " oculis verses" as he threwSt. Gregory performing high Mass (p. 67) into themidst of the crackling elements. But why furtherparticularise? or I might tell how my friendsMessrs. Utters, Boswell, Pontons, Markland, andHaslewood fed, in turns, the " rising flame." Beforewe descended to dinner, the fire had consumed property,which may be fairly said to have cost itsOwner upwards of one hundred pounds sterling.But WHY this ruthless act which in apparentbarbarity of principle, and of its kind, seemed to haveequalled the firing of the Alexandrine Library byOmar ? I will tell you, gentle Reader. The propertyof THE WORK was in a measure secured by it. Asmall sacrifice led to a great saving. Ere my friendsdeparted, another and another trayful of BecameBlocks followed the destiny of their precursors.'1 lie gatherings of three years anxious cost andraivt'ul selection were annihilated in less than fivehours. Even after dinner there was a top and abottom dish of Cameron-blocks, enfiladed by fruit.A very outcry was made to preserve tin-in. JamesBoswell oratioiiiM'il. Mr. Haslewoud twice rose,630 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Billing.and twice sat down, in vain. The " secret orders"had been peremptory, and block after block wascommitted to the flames ! Who NOW could doubtabout the value of the Impressions in my work fromthese identical woodcuts ? Who now could rob,and pawn, and be guilty of PIRACY ? I knew thatthe whispers of scepticism, and the insinuations ofslander, were beginning to have currency as to a probablyillegitimate use of these blocks on some futureDay." These were silenced and set aside for everby the bold and original measure just adopted. Forthe " Festival" itself, it was joyousStrong, without rage ; without o'erflowing, full."The precept of the " Book of Demeanor" (seepage7) was exhibited in singular perfection.Let forehead wyfull be handful 9It shewed a merry part ;And cheerfulness in countenance,And pleasantness of Heart.The symposium described in a preceding page(531) was to the full equalled by that under description; and I shall ever have reason to number thisEleventh Day of the Cameron as among themost gratifying of my existence. The Survivorsyet do me the honour to talk of it now and thenwhen we meet.But now for the VOICE OF THE PUBLIC (voxpopuli Vox Dei") as to the merits and demerits ofDecameron.'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 631the Work. Who was to throw the first stone ? Who,to twine the first wreath ? What said Mr. Giffordand the Quarterly ? A letter from Mr. Burnershall here interpose.Cleveland Row.DEAR SIR,I have seen GIFFORD since your departure. He ismuch pleased with the Cameron, and seems strongly inclinedto review it; though it cannot appear in the forthcomingNumber of the Quarterly. I was with Earl Gower *this morning. He brought forth the Cameron, andspoke of it in a way I will not tell you. Evans is sellinghis small papers at Jo. 10s., and will not take less. Thismust be flattering to you. I am glad to find you in suchhigh spirits in contemplating your host of subscribers forthe new works.W. Buller."It never appeared in the Review in question;although about seven years afterwards a slight portionof it was lugged in, head and shoulders, to throwridicule upon that and upon another work, to benoticed in due order. But what of the NorthernCritical Journal my friends in the blue and bujf&c-accoutrements ? That, too, has been uniformly silent.I am most free to admit that it were difficult tomake what is called an entertaining review of a worklike that of the Bibliographical Cameron; butstill, as a production of very great and curious research,and of a typographical and graphical beautyThe present Duke of Sutherland. t The Tour.632 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. {Eilliog.doubtless never exceeded, it were but a natural, andI hope an honourable feeling, on my part, to supposeit to be as deserving of a niche in either of the twoReviews just mentioned, as other performances whichare dispatched while the chocolate is cooling, orbefore the slippers are taken off for a lounge at theAthenaeum. I knew, from another quarter, thatMr. Gifford was looking out for " his man ; M butthat the quantity as well as quality of the mattermade it doubtful who should be " the undertaker."I thought I knew^/owr men who were quite "up tothe mark." To one of these, Mr. Roscoe, I wroteforthwith ; with a view of his doing it for the Quarterly.I annex a part of his answer, as confirmationof his kind and independent spirit.With respect to my waving the critical rod over you,there will be no danger of either < thumps or bumps.' I donot like the task of anonymously reviewing ; and I do notlike to write in a review where I consider myself as havingbeen pointedly and intentionally ill-treated. Whateverremarks may occur to me, will, if communicated at all, begiven in my own name, and these rather for the purposeof clearing up doubts, and correcting a few unavoidableinadvertence, than of attaching censure to your work."In due course I received the following communicationfrom him, with which I confidently anticipatethe reader's satisfaction as being little short ofmy own.MY DEAR SIR,As yet I have scarcely had time to do more than turnCameron.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 638over the elegant volumes to admire the beauty of theprinting, and the exquisite engravings with which they areso richly strewed ; but from what I have glanced over, Ipromise myself a plentiful harvest of amusement at somefuture, though perhaps imaginary, hours of leisure. Onone subject, however, I could have wished Ricardo hadbeen a little more sparing, and had not stuck up a certainperson of your acquaintance, like a dead fly in amber, to beua/ed at as long as your volumes exist. Had I ente retainedthe least suspicion of such an intention, I should loudlyhave entreated your mercy; but two days of mortificationreconciled me to my fate; and as I am quite sensible youmeant to touch these deeper notes with the hand of a friend,and moreover as I had suffered (from my own inadvertence)the stupid verses which you have quoted under the appellationof a sonnet*, to come before the public, I sliail giveneither you nor myself any further trouble on this head;but when I write again, shall confine my observations tosuch points as I hope will be more agreeable to us both.Yours, ever truly,W. ROSCOE."Then I thought it possible that Mr. DawsonTurner (the common friend of Mr. Roscoe andmyself ) might successfully brandish the flagellationflail. I wrote to him ; but, avoiding the point altogether,he replied thus alluding to my projectedTour upon the Continent which was then prettygenerally avowed, and pretty generally known.Y<innuf/i, Dec. 20, 1817.." I might add, from tli< These areimperial work, and \vortlty Kings.' In the moult.SecvoLiii. 143.634 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Billing.of my congratulations, I must turn to human nature, beselfish, and express my hopes that your present success willonly have the effect of stimulating you to new efforts. Yourprojected Tour to the Continent opens before you a mostnoble field. At Rouen, and at Caen, I have friends whomay be serviceable to you. I would say the same also ofParis, but there you cannot possibly need any introduction.1 could otherwise depend, I am sure, upon the kindness ofDenon and of Miller. Let me know when you are going,and I should be proud to do what I can to facilitate yourobject. " D. TURNER."But in the absence of public criticism, whetherof approbation or of censure, it was most gratifyingto receive, from private channels, such testimoniesof the work (in many instances, too, from quartersof which I had no personal knowledge) as scarcelyto leave a wish ungratified, or an object unrealised.I was of course prompt to transmit to His Grace theDuke of Devonshire the PATRON of the work oneof the earliest large paper copies, bound in themorocco garniture of Charles Lewis. His Grace'sreply was as follows."Devonshire House, Dec. 19, 1817.DEAR SIR,I have received with great pleasure the magnificentcopy of the BIB. DECAMERON. Should you be disengagedon Monday morning, between ten and twelve o'clock, itwould be very agreeable to me to look at the work withyou. I wish also to ask your assistance in the choice of areprint for the Roxburgh Club.66 Believe me, dear Sir,Your sincere and obliged servant,DEVONSHIRE."Cameron.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. ii. rThe result of our conference was, the hook-contritionto tir Roxburgh Club of which the titlei--i\( 11 at page 463, ante. Towards the end of thefirst volume of my work I had spoken of the RecordCommission, established chiefly by the exertions oftin* late LORD COLCHESTER, when (as Mr. Abbot)he was Speaker of the House of Commons. I had,or rather have, in the same volume, spoken largelyand warmly of a National or Royal press, similar tothat established by Louis XIV. in France, undertin* latter designation. I felt also bound, in somemeasure, to present that distinguished Individual,who was at the head of the commission, with a copyof my work*. His answer may as well be in thereader's possession as in my own."Kiebbrooke, Dec. 28tf, 1817."SIR,I am exceedingly obliged to you for the very splendidlocation which I had the honour of receiving from youyesterday, and shall have great pleasure in looking throughtin contents of these curious volumes. With respect to somuch as refers to my share in the labour of the RecordCommission, I am fully sensible of the kindness with whichit i> adverted to, and am gratified to find that it has obtainedyour approbation.I have the honour to be,Sir, your faithful servant,COLCHESTER."Hut among my personal friends and literary acquaintancesfew "broke ground" more quickly, orfee *oL iii. p. U-8.636 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. \Ribliog.in a more gallant style, than the author of theCuriosities of Literature. 9 ' His note is brief butsparkling and panegyrical."Bloomsbury Square, Saturday, 2d Dec. 18 J 7.MY DEAR SIR,I only received your volumes on Thursday. Theynot only exceed my expectation but even my imagination.I could never have conceived any work so interesting forits decorations. It is surely without a rival in the wholehistory of Typography I have already derived themost pleasing information. Fruits and comfits have beenthe outer as yet ; but I shall sit down* soon to a solid meal.I sincerely congratulate you on the close of yourlabour. The caged bird, wetting its wings with the dews ofheaven, and flying once more from tree to tree, is not happierthan yourself. I hope you will give us " a Literary Voyage"on your return from the Continent. With every good wish,believe me to be yours truly,I. Disraeli."The testimony of our mutual friend, Mr. DOUCE,shall " follow hard upon." In a letter from ,Portland-place, which has only a diurnaldate, but which must have been written about thistime, he thus disports himself.MY DEAR SIR,Let me instantly convince you that I do love honestyand plain dealing above all things in this world: Be thisthe motto in all our mutual dealings. The enclosed willprobably exempt me from any other interference on thepart of Lewis, than the mere delivery of the Cameron(more precious to me than even an edition princeps of 77Delamere) when it is ready. I shall not lose a momentrtieron.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED 637in executing the commission to Balm *. We talked ofyou yesterday over some roast beef; and I had another sliceof you, without the beef, to-day at Lang's; whose largepaper copy of the D. may possibly render his castle an objectof some future siege, by an army of Bibliomaniacs: thoughthey may find the said book proof against their attacks.God prosper you, saysPROSPERO !"My friend here, by the word " proof," puns uponthe Large Paper copies of the Work, having proofimpressions of the copper plates ; and by the adoptionof a fictitious name, he takes to himself mydesignation of him, both in the Cameron and inThe REV. EDMUND Balm, of No. 14, Russell-place, Fitzroy-square.This gentleman was the old and intimate friend of Mr. Douce,and was one of the/owr legatees to whom Nollekens, the sculptor, lefthis enormous personal property. His death, before that of the testator,caused a lapsed legacy. Mr. Balme's share of the Nollekens propertywould have been, I believe, about 50,0007. In consequence of his dyingbefore the testator, his family, and relations, and all belonging to himand all to whom he might have prospectively bequeathed the expectedlegacy (had he been aware of the testator's intentions in his favour)were deprived of every shilling of benefit resulting from it Thattestator too was a man who would not have endured the putting out ofa feeler. In consequence, the testator's next of kin was sought after :above, below: in England in Holland in Flanders anywhere:everywhere. And I believe a very great HOLE to hare been therebymade in that 50,000/. Such was the working of a commission grantedby the Lord High Chancellor of England, according to the law of theland a commission, which could not fail to be based upon ex partemotives, and to be worked with no very nice attention to expenditure.Mr. Douce, Mr. Palmer, and the late Mr. Kirrkh, were co-residuarylegatees with Mr. Balme ; in whom I always found the well-manneredgentleman and the accomplished scholar. He died a bachelor, at theage of sixty-five, without preferment, but in very easy circumstances.See A"ie*or Literary Illustration*, vol. vi. 826.638 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. ithe Bibliomania*, under the character of PROSPERO.My friend Mr. Lang's town residence in Portland Placewas within a stone's throw of that of Mr. Douce.Never were Christmas Holidays so joyously spent aswere those immediately following the publication ofTHE DECAMERON. Notes, letters, private and publiccongratulations, in all the capricious and mirthfulvarieties of style, were showered upon me ; and,for the first time in my life, the credit-side of theLedger Book responded to the voice of public praise.I had certainly merited, by several years of incessantattention and application to say nothing of " thebold daring" of the measure the harvest which ISee vol. iii. p. 31 , of the first work, and page 180 of the second work ;and perhaps yet more completely individualised in the following descriptionof him in the Bibliotheca, after he had been several years inpossession of the Nollekens property. " It will delight you, I am sure,to hear that PROSPERO is yet in the full exercise of his enchanter's wand ;yet f true to his guns which he sometimes double shots and treble shots.His maple-wooded bookcases rejoice the eye by the peculiar harmony ofthe tint with the rich furniture which they enclose. Here a bit of old,bright stained glass, exhibiting the true long-lost ruby tint; there, aninkstand, adorned in high cameo-relief, by the skill of John of Bologna;a little regiment, pyramidically piled, of the rarest China cups, out ofwhich seven successive Emperors of China quaffed the essence of bohea.Persian boxes, Rafael-ware, diptychs, and chess-men the latter usedby Charles V. and Francis I., on their dining together, tete-astute, notlong after the battle of Paria. Koran, missals, precious manuscripts ;Marc Antonio, Albert Durer, Roman coins the very staff with winchRegiomontanus used to walk on his housetop by moonlight, after makingcertain calculations in his calendar ! ! Magic lore, and choice madrigalssung by Queen Elizabeth's private band ; brave prick-songs ! and theparchment roll which Handel wielded in beating time on the first representationof his Messiah. But his belles-lettres, facetiae, old poetry,and rare prints, form a combination which hath no compeer ! and,septuagenarian as he is, I wish him a good score of years to shot hisguns, and to fire them off with effect."Cameron.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. * 639reaped. " It has rejoiced my heart, my dear friend(said the Honoris of the * Ninth Day') to hear ofthe success of your Cameron. Deserved it unquestionablyis ; but sometimes success does notfollow desert." And on another occasion, said thesame gallant-hearted friend, " should the tide everflow downwards with the Cameron, it will be onlythat it may return with a more swelling and plenteouswave." There is no Ledger-wealth comparableto treasures of this kind.But abroad or from the country there were demonstrationsof approbation to the full as glowingand cheering as the foregoing. Including lettersfrom provincial Booksellers, I remember that onemorning's post brought me Twenty-seven Dispatchesa very " Arose" of its kind : for someof them were richly laden with that sort of thin,dingy, dirty, scribbled paper, which we are toldby the severe moral poet of "good Queen Anne's"reign, onlylends corruption lighter wings to fly."The Uphams, Robinsons, Blackwood, Masons,and Heightens were among the chief contributorsof this kind ; but my satisfaction was increased inafourfold degree by the receipt of such letters asthe ensuing of which the authors were, and yet;nv, personally UNKNOWN to me. The following,from E. W. Percy, Esq., of Stoke, near Coventry,-ball lead the way.040 * PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Billing.Stoke, near Coventry, Jan. 16, 1818.REV. SIR,I now remit you the balance of my subscription, accompaniedwith my most sincere thanks for the CHEAPEST GEMI ever possessed. I observe you designate the result of yourlabours in the undertaking as having c done little more thanpresented a sketch,' with an Appendix which must makethe whole Bibliomanical world all a tip-toe. My earnestdesire is, that your inclination, your leisure, your health, andyour Interest, may induce you to commence, and enableyou to extend, the work to its most costly and elaboratefinishing.I have the honour to remain,Rev. Sir,Your most obedient and obliged humble servant,E. W. PERCY."Nor less delectable was its successor from itsreverend Author.Tansor, Feb. 4, 1818.DEAR SIR,I cannot refrain from expressing my satisfaction inpossessing a copy of your exquisite work, which I open withthe sentiments of aeneas, and consider itAttractive nefas : donee me famine vivoAbler.'The part of the work that interests me the most, are thefac-similes of the ancient Foreign Printers' Devices, towhich I think that only one objection can possibly be alleged;viz., they are too beautiful, and, generally speaking, vastlysuperior to the original designs. This is more especiallyevident in the flying Horse of the Wenches*. I cannot contr.Wheelwright is correct, generally speaking; but the identical horseis, line for line, the same. The difference consists in the working uponCameron.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 641without expressing my conviction, that your work exhibitsits triumphant a specimen as could be given of thepresent state of the art of engraving in this country, and ofevery thing connected with typographical embellishments.C. A. Wheelwright."Among a new set of Correspondents which sprungup in consequence of or rather connected withcertain passages, events, or characters, described inthe work, there was several of a most gratifying description.Yet it pained me that, of my old correspondents,and of all those likely to receive the mostthorough and unmixed enjoyment from a perusal ofmy pages, ONE had not survived the printing even ofthe second volume ! To be sure, his death furnishednit* with valuable epistolographical materials for thethird volume; but I had frankly parted with thetrifle for one letter of congratulation from him onothe public appearance of my labours. I allude tothe Rev. DANIEL MAC Neville, of Edmonstone, inIreland. Well did Mr. Mason (the bookseller ofDublin) exclaim on receiving his copies of thework " our poor friend Mr. Mac Neville would haveenjoyed every line of it. He was most liberal in his} rises when he met any thing to his mind ; and withtin paper. The Wenches seemed to have an insuperable attachmentto bad paper. Their "flying horse" is impressed upon some of tin-sorestand slowest Telling volumes in Christendom. The good people ofHanover and of Frankfort upon the Maine were easily pleased with theballad-paner productions of their most popular printers.I I64*2 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Biog.the exception of some little heat on subjects, which,in my opinion he had good reasons for, he was amost worthy man. As a BiUiomaniast he has notleft his equal behind. Had he lived these twentyyears, you might have reckoned on two or more largepaper copies for himself' 9But among the subjects, or characters, introducedinto my work, there was one, at pages 217-8 of thesecond volume, of the name of CORNELIUS NICOLAI,a young Dutchman, passionately addicted to, anddeeply versed in numismatic lore. He died in his24th year ; but his collection of coins, and hislibrary, is a subject of particular notice and commendation; and at the conclusion of that notice, Ihad observed, " on reading" the foregoing account,who does not think of BARRE CHARLES ROBERTS?"Not long after the publication of my work, I receivedthe following letter from the Father of this identicalyoung man an almost perfect stranger to me."Ealing, 4th Feb., 1818.DEAR SIR,Your kind reply to my note of yesterday called myimmediate attention to the relation of Cornelius Nicolai, inthe Bibliog. Cameron. I cannot conceive a greater lossto have ever occurred to the intellectual world, by prematuredeparture, than in the instance of this highly giftedand extraordinary young Dutchman I amno ways entitled to draw comparisons ; but I am lost in astonishmentat the striking coincidence in character, habits,pursuit, and studies, and diversified acquirements, eminentlyCameron.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED.attained, between the lamented Nicolai and B. ('. Rom iYour tiling Apostrophe, at the conclusion of the not,rxi-itos a bulky volume among my reflections.I am, sir,Your obedient and most faithful servant,EDWARD Roberts."A slight mention of a fine copy of the Elephantinefolio edition of the Greek Testament, 1550, (in anote, p. 324, of the third volume) in the choice littlelibrary of the Rev. John Sackville Bale, Rector of\\liithyham, near Bucklers, in Kent, led to a shortbut pleasing correspondence ; in which was the followingprophetic letter from the owner of the volumein question. Mr. Bale's letter is in his own originalstrain premising only that, in the library ofMr. Roberts died in this present year, 1835, in his eighty-seventhyear. He had been sixty years connected with government; havingretired, on his fiftieth year's servitude, in the full pay of Chief Clerk oftin Tells. He was a most communicative and well-bred gentleman, andretained his faculties to the last. His memory was tenacious, and heloved to talk of other times. When very young, he attended the soireesof the Hon. Topham Beauclerk, and there saw Johnson more than once.His eldest son, above alluded to, was a very extraordinary young man,well versed in antiquities of every description, and extravagantly smittenwith the numismatic passion. Whatever Barre Roberts did (and hewag a Reviewer in the Quarterly at the age of nineteen !), he did witha sort of classical feeling and relish. His works were collected by a fondand liberal parent, and printed with a view to private distribution, in ahandsome quarto volume, of which a copy was presented me ; and to myacknowledgment of which an allusion is made in the beginning of theabove letter. It may form no mean notion of the magnificence of theson's views and taste, and of the liberal patronage of the father, when.on the death of the former, in his twenty-fourth year, the Governmentpurchased his collection of coins, for the British Museum, at the priceof 4000/. ! ! The Ty*en Collection had Ixvn the basis of it.T T *644 PUBLICATIONS Continued \ Billing.this Gentleman, I saw, for the first and last time, anuncut copy of the three duodecimo volumes of OldBallads of 1726.Withyham, June 25, 1818.DEAR SIR,I thank you much for your book, and for your letter.The first full of beautiful and curious ornaments, entertainingand interesting matter the second kind and friendly.You are a man of dangerous approach. This kind ofmadness is very catching; but a man, however slightlytouched, would not be without it Pol me occidistis amici !'I look at the copy of the Greek Testament (now invaluable)with infinite great pleasure, and drink the Hock with greatrelish and feel myself what shall I say? Honorablemention was very kind in you, when you might have transfixedme with one of your keenest darts for the half bound,cut short, copy of the Bibliomania, which you espied on myshelf; but you were not then enraged, or concealed yourrage under a most placid form ; and forgave me that wrong,of which indeed I was innocent, and sympathized with youmost piteously. But now that I am in possession of a specimenof Lewis's excellent binding, I long to have more,and shall desire your advice how we may clothe these newvolumes in handsome attire, worthy of themselves, by theoperation of that famous Bibliopegist. There is such anexuberance of amusement and information from the inexhaustiblewell, as quite astonishes. I give you joy of thehappy parturition, and of the produce that fully answersexpectation. Our friend Harvey tells me, that in the estimationof the world, Maniacs and others are known byproofs unequivocal and that you have enriched the Possessorsby a rapid rise in price still increasing. What next ?An active mind and body cannot rest. A journey to Germany? A rummage among the relics of Italy ? Perhapsyou will some fine day add to the obligation I owe to Harvey,/> interior.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 045by meeting him here. I hope you will; we shall not inn-twith less glee than on the day recorded.Believe me, dear sir,Very truly yours,J. S. BALE."From the Savants who hover about ,I had one or two letters of considerableinterest; but having touched upon the GrangePress (vol. iii. 452), and given an imperfect accountof its productions (under the late George Allan,Esq. ), the friendly sensibility of John Trotter Brocket,Esq., of that place, was excited to give more lengthenedand interesting " particulars of the press inquestion which has furnished the principal materialsfor Mr. Martin's" picturesque pages*. Mr.Bracket's letter to me was that of a Gentleman andan open hearted critic ; but in justice it must be mentioned,that my own sketch was wholly supplied bya deceased friend, who could be rarely taxed withinaccuracy t. The contents of this third volume(for it was almost wholly anecdotal) were fertile inobtaining for me, sometimes curious, and sometimesvery amusing, correspondents. The reader (that isto say, if he be in possession of a copy of thisA Bibliographical Catalogue of Books privately printed, &c. 317.Hut it should seem, from page 419 of this same work, that there was aTypographical Society (now broken up) established at Ncwca*tle-upon-with limit impressions of the works, which they printed chitr jirivati- distribution. The name of Bewick stamps a species of immortalityupon the press of that town.t The late Mr. Joseph Haslewood.646 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Billing.scarce and expensive work) may turn to pages 336-344 of the third volume and there learn manycurious particulars of the origin, or substratum, ofBishop Percy's celebrated Reliques of Old EnglishPoetry. What there appears, was supplied in consequenceof a visit paid by me to the late SAMUELIste, Esq., of Ecton Hall, near Northamptonthe elder brother of George Istedd, Esq., the Roxburgh,of whom kind mention hath been alreadymade*, and who had married the eldest daughter ofthe Bishop, and in whose house the precious MS. inquestion was, and yet is, deposited. I spent (asrecorded) several pleasant days in mid winterat Mr. Istedd's hospitable mansion, in company withthe late Mr. Hebe. Nearly the whole domesticparty then assembled are, with one obvious exception,now no more. But it seems to be even as thepayment of a just debt due to the memory of thethen Owner of the mansion, to bring forward thetwo following racy, and in all respects characteristic,effusions of his pen of which the point seems tohave been occasionally dipt (doubtless by mistake)into his favourite midnight punch at the timeof writing.See p. 368, ante.t Samuel Istedd, Esq. was among the last of those old English gentlemenwho loved late hours and late conviviality. He thought he couldnever fete his guests sufficiently ; but his midnight Punch-bowl was, totimid nerves, a somewhat awful object to contemplate : the master ofthe feast being also the Coryphaeus of punch manufacturers. To anexperienced palate, the flavour of his treacherous liquor was said to haveCameron.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. G47Ecton, Jan. 3, 1818.MY DEAR SIR,I fully meant to have met you to-day at Northampton,and George Istedd with me; but 'it snows, it blows, itblows, it snows, we cannot come to-day.' G. Istedd will beatAlthorp on Thursday, when he will load himself withseven guineas and a half, and I will load him with nineguineas more for your ' Dick I don't know what youcall it ' Hammer-on? I think ? Are there any more copiesof these extravagances to be parted with ? Answer me that.If you leave Althorp before Thursday, write a line by post,and we Brothers will send a draft. Mrs. Istedd being notin her best health, we have sent excuses to the visitations wemeant to execute during the next three weeks, so that weshall be found sitting all the winter, and most delighted toreceive you at any time you can favor us with your company,and for as long a space as you can spare ; and we willtalk of MSS. and printing, old and modern; and parchmentand vellum ; and binding and boards ; and illuminations,and frontispieces, and vignettes ; and ' when thewaning night grows old,' we will conclude with binding upJos. RITSON * < hard and fast' with Cameron. I havebeen perfect : the mingling virtues of lime, arrack, saccharine materials"et hoc genus omne" being complete. To taste, was to shoutapprobation ! A hardened disbeliever in the Pindaric system of thevirtues of water, Mr. Istedd shunned, almost systematically, the infusionof the latter element ; but allowed you, with singular humanity, to makewhat use of it you pleased for your own portion. His heart was as broadas his shoulders. He attained the mellow age of seventy-five; and lefta liberal inheritance for his only child and heir, the present occupier ofEcton Hall, who is stedfastly bent upon filling his upper chambers witha succession of representatives.Joseph Ritson was the dogged and desperate antagonist of Mi.Istedd's father-in-law, the Bishop of Promote. He had once the inso-le me to deny the existence of the MS. from which the Bishop prinu-lhis interesting " Ilcliqucs." Of course, the latter waa not to turn itnd pat the cheek of a man who had insulted him by hit vulgarity, andtraduced him by his malevolence.648 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. \Eilliog.lost my old and faithful servant Canaille. As I had himfrom the late Lord Lucan, perhaps Lady Spencer may guessat his age as I imagine, from the defalcation of his powers,during a few of his last years, we thought him older than heowned himself to be.Yours, ' for ever and a day,'SAMUEL Iste."Ecton, Jan. 11, 1818.*' MY DEAR SIR,I must positively say another nine guineas for the ' tendays pleasant conversation, and I have known the time whenI have paid a great deal more in one day for conversationless edifying so I have the thing cheap at the money.Stand to your text' about your 20th or 22d, and I '11 giveyou a bottle of my Claret Wine to wash down my dullnessand G. Istedd's prattle. As I know you to be a man ofLetters I will not bore you any longer with mine.And so, Sir, your servant,S. Iste."Thus much for Decameronic Epistolography, ofwhich a portion might have been probably wellspared. But favourites whether in the shape of aBook or a Biped are apt to be overloaded withattention. I have only one or two more, but mostgratifying points to allude to, rather than to discuss,and then shall take my leave accordingly. It wouldbe the grossest affectation in me not to dwell withuncommon delight upon the notification of twoILLUSTRATED COPIES of this work : in addition toDecameron.'] Publication CONTINUED. <> p.)what has been observed in a preceding page (325).The one is in the library at Althorp* y upon largepaper, in three volumes of Lewis's morocco binding,and adorned with many of the more beautiful drawings,as fac-similes, which were executed by hisbrother George and other Artists. It has also manyother exclusive rarities, comprehending duplicateproofs of copper plates. Of its kind, it seems tometo be nearly perfect ; and it ought to be so, forit cost its late Noble Owner upwards of 150 guineas.The OTHER illustrated copy is the property of myaffectionate and excellent friend, George HenryFreeling, Esq., who has absolutely allowed the passionof ILLUSTRATION toGrow with his growth, and strengthen with his strength."The preparation of those graphic materials whichhave already expanded his copy (upon small paper)to eleven morocco-coated volumes, has been, in verymany instances, a solace to him in sickness, and ahark forward" note in health. It is at once themost felicitous and stupendous triumph of book-ardourwith which I am acquainted. It has knownI request the reader to throw his eye upon the words " Spencer,Earl y " in the "General Index" to the Cameron, and see, at one glance,how that nobleman's BOOK-MU A -i m >. in town and at Althorp, still (1 to enrich the pages of my work. There is one note, occupyingabout fourteen pages, devoted to an account of his VELLUM BOOKS aloiu ;and several pages are tiled with a sort of ;mri* of the Althorp library,and an account of the first sale of his Lordship's duplicate*, in 1790u>l. ii. p. :*V6-62; vol. iii. p. 390-97.650 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. \ BiUioy.no relaxation. Winter has not cooled it ; nor summerallowed it to relax. How could it be otherwise?Hear the possessor of the treasure in question expresshimself, after his first visit to Mr. Lewis thebinder, as he takes, in fancy, a vista-view of hisresplendent volumes ! "I was at Lewis's to-day.He proceeds magnanimously with the glorious work.If the Gods could read, they would never be withouta copy of the Cameron in their side pocket!' 9In a letter of Dec. 17, 1817> he is pleased to say,the book has nearly turned the head of one old andexcellent friend of mine Alexander Chalmers*hight. He got 'other night so much upon stiltsabout it, that he found it necessary some days afterwardsto write a sort of apology, hoping he had notsaid too much ; or, to use an official phrase, that hehad not ' committed himself." 'It was, and will continue to be, one of the purestas well as keenest sources of pleasure to me, to lenda helping hand towards the completion of a fabric ofsuch sparkling but durable materials. True it is,that my efforts have been rather cordial than extensivelybeneficial ; but such as they are, the Ownerof the treasure in question knew full well that he hasonly to command them. A succinct, but too sketchyaccount of the ten volumes will be found in the notebelow t, furnished by the possessor himself.See page 629, ante ; but more particularly in a following paget" BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DECAMERON, in ten volumes, bound by CharlesLewis, each volume comprising one Day, with distinct title and wood)Cameronian PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED.A second source of more particular satisfactionderived from the publication of this work, was, a latecut. There are in addition two octavo volumes of Supplement, and onenot yet quite completed, in folio.The ten volumes contain about FIFTEEN HUNDRED additions or Illustrations,which may be thus classed : 450 proofs, for the most partonIndia paper, and before the letter, of the ordinary decorations andplates of the book ; some with variations, and some originally intendedfor the book, but not published. This in itself would amount to anillustration of the best class. Above 400 portraits, some proofs, andseveral private plates ; 200 drawings and tracings from manuscripts andold books several coloured in imitation of the originals ; and nearly 500other pieces, original devices of printers, views, alphabets, wood cuts,and miscellanies of every description.u The first volume of the Supplement is of a miscellaneous character ;the principal features of which are letters from Walter Scott, Mr. Jones,Mr. Hebe, and other distinguished Collectors, &c., pending the sale ofthe Roxburgh Library, literary trifles connected with the Bibliomaniacs,and the accounts for printing, paper, engraving, &c., for the Biblio-graphical Cameron. The second volume of the Supplement is formedwholly of copies of decorations, 100 in number, from books more or lessrare, executed with singular spirit and fidelity, by a near and dear relationof the owner of the book, with a masterly and appropriate frontispiecefrom the pencil of Mr. J. P. Nealee. ' The boards ' for the binding, arethe original copperplates of the Diana of Poictiers and Lady Jane Gray.The third, or folio volume of the Supplement (not quite complete), containsa few portraits too large for the book, and title pages, chiefly fromthe Plantin press, many of them proofs before the letter. The contentsof the Supplements are exclusive of the 1530 additions to the Ten Daysor volumes of the book.The insertion of portraits in a book is the easiest of all modes ofillustration, if there be a sufficiency of means wherewith to procure them.In the absence of these means, the possessor of these volumes has notmade engraved portraits his particular object ; his aim has been to collectmaterials rather out of the ordinary track of illustration, yet appropriateto the subjects treated upon in the book. Amongst the drawingsare some few very pretty specimens byUwins, J. P. Nealee, G. Lewis,and the Author. Several remarkably fine Devil* (engraved), **nDiana de Poictiers, including a proof of the private plate before theletter, and one of the defaced impressions, three only of which weretaken oft' (another of the three, formerly Haslewood's, being in the same652 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Cameron.offer to translate that portion of it which relatedmore particularly to the typographical history ofFrance in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Thetranslator was a Mons. TREBUTIEN, who shall speakfor himself in the following note ; but it is almostneedless to add, after "the dreadful tire" of the9th of December, 1817 (see page 628, ante) therequest of the translator, to use the identical blocks,could not possibly be complied " with. Of coursenothing came by " the motion." But Mr. Trbu-tien's request shall in part appear below*.Having thus seen my new work fairly and successfullylaunched upon the ocean of public opinion, andcollection ), ten Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough, one being a splendiddrawing by Uwins, and sundry Lady Jane Grays. It will perhaps sufficientlyexemplify the range of these ' Illustrations' to mention, thatfrom these altitudes (exclusively of the devils) they descend as low as thepenny specimens of printing at the fair on the ice, when the Thameswas frozen over in February, 1814.""MONSIEUR, Londres, 29 Octobre, 1833.te En lisant au British Museum votre savant et si curieux Biblio-graphical Cameron, j'ai concur le projet de traduire lamartine relativea nos anciens improvers Francis, auxquels leurs compatriotes commencenta rendre aujourd'hui une justice tardive. Certes, ouvrage Men d'etre traduit tout entier; mais la multitude de fac simile,d'ornemens et de curiosities bibliographiques en tout genre dont il estorne entrainerait dans des defenses trop considerable pour qu'il soitpossible de trouver aujourd'hui en France un editor pour se charger decette entreprise. Et meme la reproduction seule des planches de lapartie que je me propose de traduire occasionneroit deja de grands frais,c'est ce qui m'a engage a vous ecrire et je crains que ce ne soit une indiscretionde ma part pour vous demander si vous avez conserve cesplanches, et, dans ce cas, si vous voudriez les confer pour impressionde ma traduction, aux conditions qu'il vous plairoit d'indiquer vousmeme. Au reste, Monsieur, quelle que soit la maniere dont vous ac-theTour'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 653spring coming on, when an ocean of a different descriptionmight be safely passed .lenis crepitans vocat Auster in altum,"I strapped my portmanteau, buttoned up my coat,and set my face towardsThe vine-cover'd hills and gay regions of France."This brings me immediately, as a matter of course,to some account of A Bibliographical, Antiquarian,(i nd Picturesque Tour in France and Germany,undertaken and completed during the latter ninemonths of the year 1818, and published in the springof 1821. The anxiety for this trip or tour was extreme,from the year 1815 ; and fortunate it hadbeen for me, on the score of further book-acquisitions,had I carried my wishes into effect about ayear or two earlier than I did. What is said in thepreface about pointing to the white-sailed vessels, asthey were scudding or gliding before the wind, and\\ wishing to be on board with a view to some biblio-graphical exploit in some unexplored monastic libraryis not the mere ebullition of fancy or caprice.I was earnest and sincere in the wish. The rise,progress, and conclusion of that Tour, are faithfullyc-uillcrez cette proposition, elle ne peut que trouver grace autres tie vousen faveur <lu sentiment qui 1'a dicte, K- d< sir tie rendre un hommagehihliou r raj)lii(juc ;i non pays ainsi quad vous menu-tinin in v,Membre de la Societe ; cs Antiquarians,"81, George-street, A<Klj>lii.654 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [The Tour.before the public, in three splendid octavo volumes,aided and adorned by all the luxury of paper, printing,and ART. I place a stress on the latter word,as I am well justified in doing ; for the united expensesof DRAWING and ENGRAVING amounted tofour thousand seven hundred and forty pounds ; addabout three thousand for paper, printing, copperplateprinting and boarding and you have the extentof the risk. But I was resolved to spare nopains, and to shrink from no liberal remuneration ofacknowledged merit. For upwards of two years, conjointlywith the JEdes Althorpiance, was the Tourprogressing at the press and with various artists.Of these artists, Mr. GEORGE LEWIS must necessarilybe placed at the head ; not only because heattended me professionally through the whole tour,but because his pencil, with some very few exceptions,furnished the entire materials for the burin.Mr. Lewis, at starting, was less known to me thanhis brothers : but as he was recommended to me bya very old friend and competent judge, Mr. Masquerier*; and as his manners were simple andobliging, and his diligence, activity, and versatility,beyond all question, I consented, scarcely withouta moment's hesitation, to engage him. I put forthno tenders. I made no public announcement forcompetition. My " compagnon de voyage " was toeat out of the same dish, and to partake of the sameSee page 148, ante.Tour."} PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED.tare, in all respects, with him upon whom the entireexpenses of the tour devolved. He travelled like agentleman, and he fared like one. For a youngman, imperfectly known in his profession, the opportunitywas, in every sense of the word, a GOLDENone. It proved abundantly to be so. Mr. Lewismight have equally enlarged his knowledge and improvedhis taste by what he did, and been paid liberallyby his employer ; but there the matter mighthave ended. Not so his engagement with me. Hehad the extraordinary good luck to have his talentsmade known in the most favourable manner imaginable.The very first artists, as Engravers, wereengaged upon his drawings. These drawings werecarefully executed in sepia from his first pencilsketches taken on the spot ; and as there was onlyone colour to manage, the facility of execution wasmaterially promoted. There can be no doubt butthat the drawings were as full of ability as theyevinced versatility of talent : but when one remembersthat such men as Mitan, Landseer, LeKeux, Finden, Smith, Robinson, Romney, th, and Worthington, &c., were engaged at liberalprices, to engrave them, surely the designer hadabundant reason to congratulate himself upon thefelicity of his lot. In fact, such a sort of stemscarried him at once to the top of the tnv.I must do Mr. Lewis the justice to add, that hethrew his whole soul into the undertaking ; and wasarmy and late, as well in preparing his own designs656 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [The Tour.as in " touching up" engravers' "proofs." Frommy back parlour window, " many a time and oft,"have I seen him, with accelerated step, making towardsme, brandishing a rolled proof in his hand,his countenance beaming with delight if it happenedto be to his heart's content. But what a continuedsketch of mental anxiety on my part ! What tempersto soften down what irregularities to controlwhat delays to endure what SUMS TO PAY ! ! In acentury hence, the following list of payments to theseveral engravers and artists engaged in this Tour,may possibly be considered a curiosity : and if thereader have expressed his surprise at the paymentsfor the Althorpian decorations*, he may be stillmore astonished at what he is here about to peruse.Perhaps I was the first individual to give one hundredguineas for a plate to be inserted in a royaloctavo volume ; but such w T as the price paid for theSouth View of Rouen Cathedral, engraved by Mr.Henry Le Keux, and for the Halt of Pilgrims, byMr. Mitan t. I proceed with a statement of the sumtotal paid to each artist engaged in the Tour.See page 585, ante.t I do not consider it possible for the ART of ENGRAVING, even in thedexterous hands of Mr. Henry Le Keux, to go beyond what appears inthe very extraordinary plate of Rouen Cathedral above mentioned. Itis the assemblage of such numerous figures which gives an air of indescribablebrilliancy to the print in question. The TWO Le Keuxs aregiants in their way. The burin of John, the elder, is perhaps bolder andbroader, and for effects on a larger scale : but let any man view the interiorof Milan Cathedral by Henry, and how absurd to institute comparisons,when each talent of its KIND is equal ! Had I the revenues ofThe Tour.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUE.t.d.*.d.AgarFreeborn -Arterial -Freeman -Aiulinet -FryAvengerHayward -ByfieW -HolliesByrne -HutinCook -H. Le KeuxCooper -J. LandseerCorbouldT. LandseerCorlxmldF. C. Lewis*Finches -G. Lewis -some of the Cardinals in the time of Leo X., I would allow no man tolay a finger upon the burin of either of these eminent artists but myself:and I would set them both instantly to work upon my Alma Mater OXFORD. Where they asked pounds, I would make itguineas; and they should be lodged as warmly, and fare as sumptuously,as Raffaelle was by Leo.JAMES Milan is no more. It will be seen to what an extent he wasremunerated for his contributions to my work. He was an admirableartist, ready at anything, and clever at every thing : but the " Halt nfthe Pilgrims" vol. iii. p. 421, is not calculated, from the heaviness andsameness of the draperies of the numerous figures, to do exact justice tohis merits. I consider the Stuttgart Market-place (for which he hadeighty guineas) to be the chef-d'ceuvre of his talents, in the Tour ; andeven beyond the very expensive plate of the " Masked Sail" (see p. 583ante), in the ^Edes Althorpiana?. The street scenery at Vire, and thegroups at St. Lo and in Strasbourg Cathedral, (vol. i. p. 394 ; vol. iii.p. 32), are singularly clever and effective.It will be seen that the elder Mr. Lewis (Frederick Charles) wasalso pretty amply remunerated as an engraver for his labours on myTour. But ably as he has done every thing in it, that work was notthe arena for tin display of his admirable, and, in many respects, extraordinarytalents. For fidelity, nothing went beyond him ; and for expressionand feeling I think him equally happy. His engravings fromtin prairie and tinted drawings of the late Sir Thomas Lawrence bringslavery originals before you. I possess several ; but the profile of MinBarton is the drawing itself, multiplied as tin.- impression may be. Anythingmore thoroughly, if not angelically, feminine, was never transitU658 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Tete Tours.d. s. d.Mitan586 Swain - 10 10Murray21 J. Thomson 120mitted to copper. And so I would speak of his Lady Wriothesley Russell,from the elegant pencil of the elder Charon. It is perfection. Andso of the " Seville Nun" from the beautiful drawing of his son John.The black gown, and the picturesquely disordered head-dress, have allthe freedom and the mellowness of the pencil. In sketchy subjects ofthe human figure, there is nothing to equal him. Mr. Lewis is nowengaged upon bringing out twenty plates from the drawings of ClaudeLorraine in the British Museum, bequeathed to that establishment by thelate Richard Payne Knight. They will be executed in the manner ofEarlom's engravings of the Liber Veritatis, and cannot fail, I shouldthink, of securing a very large sale. Still, as was observed by me twentyyears ago, I greatly desire talents like his to be applied to one TRULYNATIONAL object, the engraving of the HOLBEIN PORTRAITS in theRoyal Collection. Compared with what I have seen of ONE engravingby him from these portraits, that of Pestalozzi is a FICTION.I have spoken of Mr. Lewis's son : I might have said Sons. If thereflex of his own talents as an artist can make a father happy, Mr.Lewis has just cause to be both happy and proud of his progeny. JohnFrederick is galloping as fast as a young man can possibly gallop towardsperfection in his Art : and yet, let me whisper in his ear, " Festinalente." He has brought home all Spain in his portfolio her nuns,monks, friars, monasteries, palaces, and fastnesses. His Alhambra isa masterly production ; spirited, sketchy, and full of interest and instruction.But Murphy's Antiquities of the Arabs in Spain must andwill never be forgotten. See Bibliog. Cameron, vol. ii. p. 391. Mr.Lewis's " Preaching Friar" may even presume to elbow the JohnKnox of Wilkie. He has a brother of the name of Charles, who is takingup a position as an Acquaint Engraver, which promises to place him onthe topmost branch of the tree in that department of art.Then again we have one Charles Lewis the uncle, and thereforebrother of Frederick Charles and George who may be fairly said, Ithink, to have some notion of BOOK BINDING ! Thus we have a sort ofThree Consuls in Art, of whom each may be thought a Napoleon in hisway. diaries Lewis once told me, that of the Cameron and Tourtogether, he thought he had bound some 750 copies ! It is pleasant,and to me at all times most gratifying, to see merit and moral worthmoving progressively to the utmost boundaries in the calling or professionin life which has been chosen. And long after my head has'/'///.]PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED.65 i*.d.</.Pugin.8R. ThomsonK)Tries -KaleTurret -Robinson -Vivares -Romney -Wiser -Richards -Warren -ScottWright -Si-rivenWoolnothSmith fWorthingtonTo all this, add 130/. to foreign engravers. ThusI had at least deserved well of the fine arts, even inthis work alone. But to embark on such a sea oftrouble, expense, and anxiety, without the pros]of something like adequate support from the public,had been madness indeed. Accordingly, shortlyafter my return, and after the intended publicationwas " noised abroad," I put forth my proposals to myfriends and to the trade; soliciting, as an indispensablypreliminary measure, the advance of one-thirdof the subscription on account. The price to mybeen quietly resting in its " narrow bed," there will doubtless be a of LKWISKS, which, in number at least, will have equalled thoseof the same name who once ruled the destinies of France.The talents of Messrs. Smith and Robinson are united in the landsplates of the first volume. Of these, the " Cuinh >c " is the moststriking specimen of such union. Alone, Mr. Robinson shines in theMnlhi'rlx' of vol. i. and the boat illumination, page 468 of vol. iii. Butsince all this, Mr. Robinson has taken a bold and splendid flight. His// '<>lf and Lamb" (from .Already's perfect picture) has grappled withovercome all the mightier difficulties of the art of engraving. It is'iiuine print, but of a painful subject. Bullies are a despicablether upon four legs or upon two; whether at school or in matureryears. Mr. Robinson's ,N'iV H'ultrr Scott (from Lawrence) is in hisand happiest manner; and yet the head of Christ, which he engravedfor my Thomas u Kempis, shall acknowledge no superior effortof !u> burin.I !660 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. \T1ie Tour.friends was Ql. 9s. the small, and 16/. 16s. the largepaper ; to the trade, from 61. 16s. 6d. to Jl. 17 s. 6d. 9according to the number taken, and the priority ofthe impressions of the plates. " Ce n'est que le premierpas qui conte" and this "first step" happeningto be a " false" one, the result proved most unfortunateand vexatious indeed. One additional guineaupon the copies to friends, and proportionably tobooksellers, had secured a reasonable, although farfrom outrageous, profit. As it turned out butthis is a little premature. I proceed with equalpleasure and gratitude to the exhibition of the gallantmanner in which I was supported by the trade,accompanied by a declaration that all my friendswere also found at their posts, and with unstrungpurses in their hands. It was clear that the De-cameronhad not been written in vain. The leadingBibliopolists were thus marshalled in my ledger :premising, that several of them afterwards enlargedthe number of their copies.Messrs. J. and A. Arch*LARGE.SMALL.Mr. MajorMr. TriphookMessrs. LongmanMessrs. Payne and FossMr. EvansMr. Upham (Bath)Mr. MurrayMessrs. Treuttel and WiirtzMessrs. Arterial (Manheim)Messrs. Arch had afterwards another fifty copies.the Tour. PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED.The work was inscribed to the " RoxburghClub" in the following dedication.TO THEPRESIDENT AND MEMBERSOF THEClttb,THESE VOLUMESARE RESPECTFULLY DEDICATEDBY Till: AUTHOR.662 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Tie Tour.There were 100 copies upon large paper and 900upon small. Owing to many of the prints being toolarge for a sufficient margin in the small paper, thecopies upon large paper are doubtless, on this accountalone, to be much preferred ; but in addition,these latter contain all the earlier impressions of theplates. And yet, in many instances, so sound andartist-like was the workmanship of the engraver,that, with one plate the portrait of Pisan, in volumetwo 1 presented a seven hundred and fiftieth,and a seventy-fifth impression, and the former waspreferred. In fact, all the characteristic smallerplates which may be called the marrow of thework being executed in the line manner, and uponIndia paper, there is very little perceptible differencebetween the impressions of the two papers. Afest of the earlier copies will be found in thefigure of Christ, and of the Soldiers sleeping, (inthe second volume, between pages 146 and 147),being of a somewhat darker hue in the brown inkin which they are printed. On the day of publication,the fight and struggle was to obtain copies withthe earlier impressions. Messrs. Leighton were myboarders. Their premises were besieged by hackneycoaches. But every one could not have theirs biteof the apple ; and even those who came in for thefifth or sixth bite, were at last reconciled to theirfate. The apple appeared to be yet juicy and wellflavoured, and was soon " bought up" in the market.I have spoken of the " first step" taken as beingThe Tour.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. OG:3a "false one." Had an additional guinea been putupon each copy (and a very knowing bookseller toldme that the three volumes were cheap at \ C 2L 12&),I might have probably realised about 900/. As itwas, I think I lost 120/. as a dead book-debt withallmy travelling expenses (about 300/.) unredeemed.Even the sale of Mr. Lewis's beautiful drawings leftme miserably deficient. But then there was glory,and honour, and even patriotism, to reward me ! Ihad travelled far and wide in search of books andof book-establishments ; I had lost no opportunityof making known the treasures of my own country,whenever a fit occasion presented itself. I soughtpeace and good-will among men, and I found it.On a limited but honourable scale, I may be said tohave been a benefactor ; for in various towns I purchasedlargely, and upon liberal terms. Before Iturned my back upon the Continent, I incline tothink that little short of 900/. had been expended inParis, Augsburg, Munich, and Vienna, for books,chiefly for the library of my Noble Patron : andthis, without mention of the bold stroke of biblio-graphical diplomacy at the court of Stuttgart, whu-hsecured for him the two Virgilss, of which he hadfor twenty years anxiously desired the possession*.This "bold stroke of bibliographical diplomacy" has been twicetold in both editions of the Tour. In the second edition (vol. iii. p. 56)it will be seen that, together with a fac-simile of his autograph, a doubt<d about the then existence of M. LeBret, the librarian of thepublic library, with whom the diplomacy was conducted. I since learnthat he is dead. His memory will be as much cherished by me as was664 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [The Tour.Nothing gave greater energy to my exertions thanthe warmth of his approbation and the liberality ofhis requital. When at Munich, on sitting down inan apartment, of which the floor was covered withmy purchases for Spencer House while the Latin and German Bibles, and the AldineGreek Force of 1498, were within an arm's lengthof me I scarcely knew how to moderate my expressionsof joy in transmitting the intelligence toHis Lordship. Nor was Lord Spencer's reply lessjoyous and commendatory. In a letter from Ride,dated August 30, 1818, he thus observed: "Youhave indeed a right to say that your letter containsGREAT AND GLORIOUS NEWS ;' and to borrow anyboastings from the broadsides of Erhard llatdolt * ;his person and many excel! em good qualities. It was said that I hadoutflanked him in the negotiation, and that he had yielded too soon.All that need be observed in reply is, that the King of Wittenberg, hismaster, was entirely satisfied with the result. This " bold stroke " wasachieved at Manheim, on quitting Germany to return through France.Lord Spencer was thus pleased to express himself, in a letter dated 18thOct. 1818, from Althorp, on receiving the news of the acquisition of theVirgilss. " Though I apprehend that it is probable that this letter willnot be in time to reach you before you leave Paris, I cannot resist riskingit to say with how much pleasure I received (on the 16th) yoursfrom Manheim, dated the 7th, which proved, indeed, a glorious conclusionto your bibliographical expedition in Germany. I cannot sufficientlypraise the prompt decision of your measures, by which yousecured the possession of the two Virgilss, and I am quite satisfied withthe bargain, which, all things considered, is as good an one as couldbe expected."I had purchased a broadside (the only one I have ever seen) printedby Erhard Ratdolt, a beautiful printer of great celebrity, at Venice inthe fifteenth century of the Curators of the public library at Augsburg.I think the price was about three or four pounds.The Tour.~\ PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED.or of any other more fortunate Bibliomaniac. Intruth, you have really done wonders ." In thissame letter His Lordship was pleased to remark,that " Mr. Grenville, who was present that morningon the receipt of my Munich letter, was nearly asmuch pleased with its contents as he was himself."And I have it in the handwriting of that eminentindividual and profound bibliographer himself, thathe had seen, with equal delight and surprise, theextraordinary acquisitions which I had made forLord Spencer, and which exceeded all that couldhave been hoped for." Indeed, I was most anxious,and at one time a little sanguine, about procuringfor Mr. Grenville thejlrst Aldine Virgil and Horace,UPON VELLUM, in the public library at Munich,upon terms as honourable for one party to receiveas for the other to offer.But I am not going to take the reader into mytravelling chaise to make the tour with him overagain; although one or two RKMIMSCENTIAL pointsmay not inaptly be here adverted to. I was resolved,on quitting England, to leave behind every thing inthe shape of petty prejudice and national antipathy.I left my home and my family as an English gentlemanand as a Christian minister ; resolving to treatmankind in the true spirit which those qualities cn-jninrd. I found everywhere civility; and I hopeand believe that I brought what I found. Thrivewas no time to form friendships ; although, in someinstances, a difference of language and of nail r imwould have been no bar to their cultivation \Vlun666 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. the Tour.I least expected it, I found an excess of civility ;and when I most needed it, an equal excess of generosity.I had very frequently only to express a wish,and it was complied with : only to hint at a possiblewant, and it was supplied. There are many kindand generous spirits whom I know I have left behind,and parted with for ever. The grave hasreceived Denon, Million, Barrier, Trial, and Beaten; hut Messrs. Van Prae, Gail, Duchesse . . .and, above all, Le Marquis de Chauteaugiron andDurant de Lane, on . are " yet alive." There washowever, ONE, on whose decease, before he had receivedthe intended copy of my work, I felt morethan I can adequately describe : ONE, who had notonly shewn me every degree of personal civilityand from the influence of his situation had procuredme a most signal and substantial service * but who,on my departure, and during the whole of a briskcorrespondence carried on while my work was atpress, was indefatigable in maturing my plans andaccelerating their execution. I allude to ADAM DEBatch, an Aulic Counsellor, and Prefect or ChiefLibrarian of the Imperial Library at Vienna.What I have owed to THEE, my heart can ne'er forget f."BOWLES.When I reached Vienna, the public Library was about to be shutup. M. Bartsch, who was at the head of it, prevailed upon his Colleagueschiefly those excellent men Messrs. Kopitar and Payne toindulge me by continuing it open for another fortnight,haud equidem tali me dignus honore."t The last Letter which I ever received from my amiable friend, andThe Tour.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 667I remember being much struck with a conversationheld with him on the very afternoon of mymost efficient Correspondent, was one, of which the following is a portionsthe reader ought to be apprised that " the loss of the twentyDucats" (about 10/. sterling) originated in the carelessness of a Courier,in losing a drawing, or fac-simile, of one of the most splendidly illuminatedletters in the world from an Evangelistarium of the Fourteenthcentury. I had paid Fend 10/. 10*. for this fac-simile, which had beenconfided by Bartsch to one of the Ambassador's (Marquis of Londonderry's)Couriers. But for the letter of my Correspondent.A Vienne, ce 10 Mars, 1821.MON TRES CHER AMI,A 1'e'gard de 1'exemplaire que vous m'annoncez d'une maniere aussidelicate qu'amicale et generous, comme un present pour ma proprebibliothtque, je dois vous demander instalment la permission de le refuser.Vous souffrez deja une perte de vint ducats. Je ne puis, et ne veuxdone, pas vous causer en meme temps une autre defense qui ne serontpas moindre. Non, mon tres cher ami, vous naves pas besoin de fairece sacrifice pour me confirmer dans les sentiments de seedtime et dedenouement que j'ai toujours eu pour vous. J'ai la conscience de vousavoir servi depuis notre connaissance avec zee et exactitude; et j'ai laferme volant de vous rendre aussi a 1'avenir tous les services que vousme demander et dont je serai capables, avec le meme zee et avec lameme exactitude. J'accepterai avec plaisir les trois t'yrcuves de monportrait que vous voulez bien m'envoyer. Je vous en serai infinimentoblige, et je les considered comme un beau gage de votre amitie pourmoi * * * Je finis cette lettre ne vous assurance, tres cher ami, queje ne cesserai jamais d'etre constamment,Votre tres devote et tres fidele,"Ami et serviteur,ADAM DE Batch."The " portrait" here alluded to appears in vol. iii. p. 448. It is veryliL , but yet an unsuccessful portrait ; wanting spirit and colour. Whilethat of SciiwKioiuersKR (in the same volume) is full of vitality andresemblance. My friend Bartsch seems to be about to take his afternoon'sdose. He never saw it. His active friendliness procured for meacopy on large paper for the Imperial (public) Library, the Emperor'sprivate Library, the Duke D 1 Albert de Saxe Touching (the Archduke668 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. \ The Tour.arrival at Vienna on immediately betaking myselfto the Imperial Library to "deliver my credentials"to him. After the first ordinary salutations, ourfamiliarity increased ; when, pacing the magnificentmarble floor of that matchless book-room, and lockinghis arm within mine, he observed, " Je n'aimepas vos compatriotes. J'aime votre pays et votreliterature ; mais je n'aime ^>as vos compatriotes."Eh, pourquoi done? " " Je men vais vous dire. Ussont si fiers: ils se competent d'une hauteur excessive: les Anglais marchent a haut-pied, sansmalignant mme regarded un pauvre Allemand. Oui,Monsieur, ils sont froids ; tacit urges : mes con tent detout ce qu'on fasse pour les satisfied." I parried thesharper points of this attack pretty successfully ; butinmy conscience I knew much of it to be true. How-charles'sFather-in-law), and the Count de Frees. In this, his lastletter, he describes himself as being 63 years of age, with his memorysomewhat impaired but he scarcely looked so old. Vienna may be proudof Batch as not only being an engraver of first rate merit, but ashaving produced works upon that art which are the constant subjectsof reference as well as of admiration. Of these, his Pointe GBAVEUB,in 22 vols. 8vo., is justly the most celebrated. Some of Bartsch's ownetchings might, in three instances out of five, be mistaken for the Originalsof which they are copies. In the whole, his name is subjoinedto five hundred and five engravings. A fac-simile of his autographappears in vol. iii. 394 of the second edition of this Tour. Bartsch was acautious man in discourse, with a warm heart, and a vivid fancy. Thegovernment of his country had somewhat austrianised his principles,which, left to the freedom of their own operation, were liberal andurge. He told me that a Review like the Edinburgh would not betolerated ; and even the Quarterly was a little too saucy for some of theVienna stomachs. And yet every body loved the Emperor and calledhim a " BON PAPA." One night, by moonlight, we strolled upon theramparts, and he gave me some very curious particulars about the siegeof Vienna by Bonaparte but these for another generation !Tour'] Publications CONTINUED. 669ever, a long peace has rectified this and many otherjust causes of complaint against the English ; andthe international intercourse is carried on with infinitelymore mutual satisfaction than it was nineteenyears ago when every Frenchman, and perhapsmany Germans, fancied they saw the WaterlooMedal spread upon the breast of every Englishman.The " give and take" is the great maxim, in theobservance of which, travellers from all parts of theworld may eschew much bickering and ill-will.Wherever I went and upon all fitting occasions,I cautioned every one against drawing generalconclusions from particular premises : national anathemasfrom individual irregularities.An anecdote (and several indeed might be adduced)may serve to illustrate this. When I drove up to theGrand Hotel at Nancy, there seemed to be a demurto admit me. I was anxious to know the cause ;and alighting, begged forthwith to see the Masterof the Inn. He approached hesitatingly, and evidentlynot much disposed for the interview. Mysalutation was one of studied civility. He returnedit yet more formally. " Cannot I have admissionhere, Sir, to-night ? My train is small." " Sir,have you any acquaintance with the ladies and gentlemenwho have just left us?" On asking theirnames, and finding that I was wholly ignorant ofthem, I replied, "none at all." " Then, sir, \<>;imay descend, and stay as long as you please, though1 see that YOU also are an Englishman" " What670 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [The Tour.have my countrymen done to offend you ? " " Much,Sir and to disgrace themselves." " Speak, Ientreat." He then told me that they had called forChampagne, and not satisfied with it in bottles, hadboiled it in a kettle, and thrown a large tumbler ofit, hissing hot, into the face of his head waiter. Amost sympathetic " Mon Dieu!" on my part helpedto soothe his irritability and a solemn assurancethat I could not afford to drink Champagne, hot orcold. " But, sir, you do not wage war againstBurgundy ?" To win myself into his good graces,and to make him forget my predecessors, I ordered abottle of Vin de Beaune, and his best/ricandeauof any kind. I begged he would come and sit withme after dinner ; help to dispatch my Burgundy,and to draw up " our judgment." "When thesecond bottle, sir, has had its proper influence," saidhe archly interrupting me. He came, and beforethe appearance of the judgment working secondbottle, he was perfectly appeased. I never spentfour pleasant days at any hotel, and completelysucceeded in establishing my hypothesis that hewas not to judge of our countrymen by one capriciousexample of them, but to attribute what had takenplace to a superabundance of money, and not to anAnti Galilean spirit. " We '11 soon cure yourCountrymen of the former," said he and yet neverwere charges more moderate than his own.The only other point to which I crave leave toallude, is, that during the whole of this Tour myThe Tour"] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 071mental excitement having much injured my health,tin? French critics have amused themselves withmy feverish restlessness, and minute detail of sleeplessor gleeful nights *. It is most true, that on theeve of examining a monastic, or public, collection ofBooks, I seldom had what is emphatically called " agood night." Sleep had almost wholly fled my pilisubjoin a version of the criticism of Mons. Licquet, who translatedthat portion of my work which had relation to Normandy.The Author's work is not only a description of Castles, Towns,Churches, Public Monuments of every kind it is not only a representationof the general aspect of the country, as to its picturesque appearances,but it is an extended, minute, though occasionally inexact account,of PUBLIC and PRIVATE LIBRARIES, with reflections upon certain customsof the country, and upon the character of those who inhabit it.It is in short the personal history of the Author throughout the wholelength of his journey. Not the smallest incident, however indifferent,but what has a place in the letters of the Bibliographer. Thus, he mentionsevery Inn where he stops recommends or scolds the Landlord,according to his civility or exaction. Has the Author passed a badNight ? The reader is sure to know it on the following morning. Onthe other hand has he had a good night's rest in a comfortable bed ?(' dans un lit comfortable') We are sure to know this also, as soon asheawakes ; and thus far we are relieved from anxiety about the healthof the Traveller. Cold and heat fine weather and bad weather everyvariation of atmosphere is scrupulously recorded." Second Edition ofTour, vol. i. p. xxviii. : but see p. 99. There is some point and pleasantryin this and of the " same kidney " is the following saucy tiradefrom M. Bracelet.M. Dibdin, dans son voyage en France, a visit nos d apartmentsole 1'ouest et de Test, toutes leurs principales villes, jusqu'a tous lea lieuxremarkable par les beauties du site, ou par les souvenirs historiques. IIa visit ; les Chateaux, les Glides, les Chapelle : il a observe nos moeurs,nos coutumes, nos habitudes. II a examine nos Muses et nos premiersCabinets de Curiosity. II s'est concentre dans nos Bibliotheca. 11parle de notre literature et des hommes de lettres : des Artes, et de nosvs. II critique Irs personnes comme les choses. II loue quelquefois,il plaisantc souvent ; la vivacity ; dc son esprit I'-'-pirc presque toulon."672 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [The Tour.low ; and a very unusual phantasy which possessedme was, that I might find a copy of Dugdale's monasticAnglican especially at the monasteriesof Molk, St. Florin, Chremsminster, Gothic, and,above all, at Closterneuburg, upon large papereven with the third volume in that condition ! Vainbewitchery! Add to all this book-fever of thebrain, I encountered much locomotion, which, withshort stoppages, and hurried glances of objects, tendprodigiously to diminish the weight of human flesh.When I returned to Paris, I was scarcely recognisedby some old Kensington friends. But to return tothe immediate consequences, or in other words, togive an account of the publication of a WORK, uponwhich so much time, so much anxiety, and so muchmoney had been expended. Cooled by the result ofthe Cameron, I did not, even for a moment, anticipateany elaborate review of it in our more po-popularCritical Journals ; but in the mean time mysubscribers and kind Mends were as prompt andenergetic as ever in their congratulations on thesplendour of the graphical embellishments, whichseemed even to eclipse their predecessors. A veryodd but I am sure a very honest feeling possessedme at starting. I was resolved to make presents offour copies (with the earliest impressions) to thefollowing distinguished public characters with thetwo first only of whom I had any personal knowledge: namely, to my Diocesan, the then Bishop ofLondon, and now Archbishop of Canterbury ; toThe Tour.'} PUBLICATIONS Continued i7 >Sir Walter Scott, to Robert Southey, Esq. (the PoetLaureat), and to Thomas Campbell, Esq., thePoet. I considered the three latter not only tobe at the head of their several departments, ingenius and literature, but as veterans entitledto an act of homage and respect from a "rankami file" man in the regiment of the belles-lettres.With the Bishop, I felt great delicacy in theapproach. A splendid present from an beneficedclergyman to his Diocesan, carried with it a sortof prima facie doubt or suspicion about the disinterestednessof the gift, and in consequence tojustify its refusal. What the exact words of theletter, accompanying the donation, were, I cannottell, for the whole was a sort of off-hand production.But this I can tell that my feelings and views wereutterly unconnected with professional objects. Ihad long considered Dr. Rowley, not only as myDiocesan, but as a Gentleman, a Scholar, and aDivine. The language of his acceptance of myhumble offering, while it confirmed my appreciationof his character, was most gratifying to my feelings,and will I am persuaded be most acceptable tomy readers.Fulham, May 21, 1821.DEAR SIR,"The sentiments expressed with so much delicacy in theIrttcr which accompanied your very splendid ;ind beautifulwork, have relieved me from the embarrassment which 1should actually have felt at a mark of attention which isusually confined to publications of less expense, and to\ \674 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [The Tour.which I feel that I have no claim. On the grounds youhave stated, I accept with great pleasure this valuable present; the execution of which does honour to your zeal andattainments, and will ever be a splendid monument of yourbibliographical labours.W. LONDON."So much in consequence of the first donation.The result of the second is worth the reader's especialattention. It is this identical answer, which, inreference to the writer, I have called in a precedingpage*, " perhaps one of the most curious onrecord." I had long been fully convinced that SirWalter Scott was the " Author of Waverley" evenbefore I had read the very ingenious and convincingpamphlet upon the subject by the younger Mr.Adolphus. " Aut Scotus aut" .was ever mysecret conviction. Thus impressed, I sent thatillustrious Individual a copy of my Tour ; with therequest or condition that he would be pleased toconvey it to the Author of Waverley, as a humbleproof of my admiration of those talents which, inthe estimation of others as well as of myself, had solargely contributed to the delight and instruction ofthe British public. My letter was somewhat afterthe fashion of that in the case of the Bishopof London, but I took no copy of what I wrote.The drencher, however, was as follows. I apologisedSee p. 398.The Tour'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 675to Sir Walter for imposing this trouble upon him ;but " after repeated inquiries, I found that the onlyprobable chance of my Present reaching the Authorof Waverley, was through his own kind intervention."His reply at once dissipated the fiction, andconvinced me that " the Author" in question, andSir Walter Scott, were ONE AND THE SAME PER-Songe."Edinburgh, June 13, 1821.MY DEAR SIR,Upon my return from a little excursion to the country,I found your splendid work, which I think one of the mosthandsome that ever came from the British Press and returnyou my best thanks for placing it in my possession as amark of your regard. You have contrived to strew flowersover a path which, in other hands, would have proved avery dull one; and all Bibliomanes must remember youlong, as he who first united their antiquarian details withgood-humoured raillery and cheerfulness. I am planninga room at Abbotsford to be built next year for my books,and I will take care that your valued gift holds a place uponmy future shelves, as much honoured as its worth deserves,and for that purpose an ingenious artist of Edinburgh haspromised to give your Tour an envelope worthy of the contents.You see from all this, that I have no idea of sufferingthese splendid volumes to travel any farther in quest of thenameless and unknown Author of Waverley. As I have metwith some inconveniencies in consequence of public opinionhaving inaccurately identified me with this gentleman, Ithink I am fairly enabled to indemnify myself by intercept in>jtb is niliKtfili' ti-simony of your nydnl.Tin* public have called lor a new edition of old Johnxx 2676 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [ The Tour.Dryden's Works, on which I bestowed much labour manyyears ago. I hope you will let me place a set of thesevolumes upon your shelves in return which are just on thepoint of issuing from the press, and will wait on you in thecourse of a fortnight. I hope Ames does not slumber ? Iam always,My dear sir,Your obliged and faithful servant,WALTER SCOTT."My third donation elicited the following replyfrom the eminent Individual to whom it was sent ;and sent, with the most cordial good wishes for hislong life and prosperity.""Keswick, \\thjune, 1821.DEAR SIR,I hardly know how to thank you for one of the mostbeautiful and constable books of modern times. As yet Ihave not had leisure to do more than look through it, butthat has shown me how much pleasure I may expect from aregular perusal. If chance should ever bring you this way,it would give me great pleasure to shew you my BOOKS, forthough they have no pretension to the name of a collection,there are a good many Spanish and Portuguese ones amongthem, of considerable rarity, and a great number of manuscripts,which have enabled me to bring forth a History ofBrazil, and will enable me to complete a History of PortugalIf some bibliographer had done for the TypographicalAntiquities of that country what you have performed forours, my labours would have been greatly facilitated. Buthow much I am beholden to you, you will understandwhen I say that I am, and long have been, preparing ma-theTour.'} PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 6771 1 rials lor a History of English Literature, and EntjliikManners*.Believe me, my dear sir,With many thanks and sincere respect,Yours faithfully,ROBERT SOUTHEY."By some accident or mistake, I have misplacedthe answer of Mr. Campbell, though my memoryis tenacious enough to assure me of its elegance andcordiality t. The same spirit induced me to transOh, spring to light ! auspicious babe, be born !" is my immediateexclamation and cordial wish in reference to such a^work.} To Englishmen(and Mr. Southey is " Englishman all over), twould be amongthe richest legacies he could bequeath. We should then have a condensationof what Wanton, Henry, and Struts had expanded over toowide a surface, and thus frittered and enfeebled by the expansion ; andthis " condensation," too, executed in a style of ready and lucid eloquence,warmed by patriotism, and polished by taste. Mr. Southey isalso a poet The reigns of Elizabeth and James I., and those of theCharles's, would, in his hands, be invested with a sort of literary halo,with which they had never been before surrounded. To this, let us havea complete History of England by HENRY H ALLAH, Esq., a supporterof those principles which placed William the Third on the throne ofthese realms ; master of a masculine style, and of deep historical erudition.His " Middle Ages" are my delight; nor do I see that the author,as imputed to him by the most powerful prose-writer of the day, is sofond of putting on the black cap," to pronounce sentence of deathupon state delinquents. " JUSTICE must take place, let the heavens berent asunder;" and there is sometimes more mercy in the execution ofher decrees, than in the yielding to a slip-shod humanity, which frequentlyconfounds all distinctions, and mixes up the bad with the good.Besides, if the cap be black, it is usually made of silk, and can be easily.s//>/ off the head ! Whereas, the powerful writer, using this remark,not only occasionally has his head cased in this black cap, (made ofvelvet too!) but, lictor-like, holds the axe of execution in Aims hand also!t To the test of my recollection, this answer was begged, coaxed,borrowed, or from me, to enrich the album of some autograpliicalManiac.678 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [The Tour.mit each of these four copies ; and I really do notknow any one circumstance of my chequered life,which, upon reflection, has afforded me a moresincere gratification. The congratulations of myfriends, in sundry " letters missive," were withoutnumber. The reader must not be deprived of thepleasure of throwing a glance over a few of themnor must the author deny himself the solace ofrecording the adhesion of that steady corps, orthose cohorts, of friends which had supported himduring all the anxieties and risks of his Spencerianand Decameronic toils. The veteran Mr.DOUCE shall lead the way. On starting my work,he wrote thus " my name, and what little interestI may have, is, on the present occasion, and willever be, I trust, at your service. For Balme* I willpositively answer. I have been loud in my commendationsof your materials Mr. Lewis's Drawingsand I am sure the text will be equally curiousand interesting. So no more, butPROSPER Ot!!!"See page 637, ante ; and Nichols' Literary Illustrations, vol. vip.826.t Shortly after I received the following kind-hearted and characteristicnote from him :Charlotte Street, Portland Place, March 18.IC MY DEAR FRIEND,Are we never more to recreate ourselves in those delectable conversations,which, in these turbulent and perilous times, chiefly renderlife supportable ? I heard, six weeks ago, that you intended me a visit,but the pleasing rumour is not realised. Do mention some day thatmay best suit you for a tte--tte (the only way to do business) over aThe Tour.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. <7i)Our common friend, Mr. D'!SRAELJ, shall not befar behind. His pithy and spirited note assuredme that " the number, and the exquisite finish, aswell as the subjects of my embellishments, claimedthe grateful acknowledgments of my subscribers."I long to travel with you (concludes he), but shallnot be able to get into your chaise at least for a fortnightto come." But no words, in my appreciationof their sense, contained a warmer eulogy, than thepregnant brevity of those of Sir Richard Colt Hare,Bart., to the elder Mr. Nichols, of Gentleman Magazinecelebrity. " I have a great treat in D 'sTour : it is quite a GENTLEMAN'S BOOK."A few Roxburghian Responses shall ensue ; andthat of the gallant Honoris shall lead the way.Clapham Common, April 21, 1821.MY DEAR SIR,It is the most splendid and liberal publication which,in my days, I have ever seen ; and I presume that the executionof the work stands unrivalled. I expect much menuattainment from the narration and criticisms, a foretaste ofwhich I have snatched in turning over the leaves. I wasleft nearly alone at home, my family making an Easterholiday, and even our Brother Lang is realizing; so that Ihave had almost a solitary and gluttonous monopoly of yourbook. To the few who have seen it, the treat has luvnand delicious.Ever yours, most faithfully,JIir.nr.KT."mutton chop and a little mock turtle, that they make ri la mode ,.at m;. oks.J\ P i680 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. the Tour.Brother Lang*" shall speak for himself in thefollowing warm-hearted and encomiast strains.Portland Place, May 17, 1821.MY DEAR SIR,I received all the books safe. They are magnificent,and exceed even my expectation. As to the Literary Memoirs,I shall know more tomorrow, as I devote thisevening to read more of them.I think our Roxburghers do not support their Vice-presidentas they should dos. As to monuments, somehundred years hence, our posterity may erect one to YOU,and I trust will have to say that he lived to a good old age.Ever yours,ROBERT LANG."And with what a keen relish did I devour thevarious little notices (Adversaries /) and congratulationsof my excellent friend MENALCAS^, who waspleased " thus to pour forth his unpremeditatedstrain."Lockwood, August 19, 1821.MY DEAR D * *,The great delight of my vacation, hitherto, has beenthe reading, notes and all, your most captivating and joyousTour. Father, mother, wife, and aunt, have been equallypleased ; each with their separate perusal.Affectionately yours,H. D."And within a few weeks after : " Your Monasteriesare delicious ; but I hate your * Siesta,' andSee page 371-% ante.t This alludes to the Dedication of my work to the Roxburgh CLUB.I think there were about seven members whom I have reason to suspectdid not take a copy of the work.% See pages 296-7, &c.The Tour.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 681should have drunk a little more wine with the Abbotsthan you did."We will now examine the complexion of a few ofthe letters brought in by the Country Post. TheRev. Mr. Wheelwright* had not allowed his warmthand kindness of feeling one jot to escape ; for he thusobserves :The Bibliographical Department of your Tour gives itapeculiar and novel interest, which, added to its otherattractions, can scarcely fail to secure for it the patronageof the public ; and I am happy to hear that it has met witha rapid sale ; for, after all, that is the only substantial remunerationto which an author looks, as the due reward ofhis costly labours."It is with feelings of no ordinary gratification thatI make known the expressions of one (a countryclergyman), the brother of my late respected friend,Sir M. M. Sykes, Bart., with whom, in other andhappier days (never to come over again !) I havespent many a social and many a rational hour, andwho has not yet allowed his personal attachment to. . . " pale its ineffectual fire."Bestow April 24th, 1821.MY DEAR SIR,I consider myself extremely obliged to you for theattention paid to my application, and particularly so to mybrother, for once more adding to the pleasure and delight Ihave always received from your labours; as it affords to us'iuitr>/ parsons an opportunity of having fac similes of thoseSee page 640-1, ante.682 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [The Tour.rare gems that can never elsewhere greet our eyes. Iassure you the lads of the north are as much delighted witha few months' residence in the smoke of London as you arewith the rare atmosphere of Sledmere, and less likely to inhaleit ; but the opportunity of meeting you there or elsewhere,will always afford me much pleasure. We considerthe residence of your friend, Mr. Todd, amongst us a greatacquisition ; though, I fear, with his literary habits andpursuits, he will not meet with many congenial spirits. Iam happy to say that he likes Settrington much.My dear sir, yours,CHRISTOPHER SYKES."Within less than a month, my amiable and righthearted, as well as right " learned friend " theARCHDEACON alluded to in the foregoing letterwrote to me, in part as follows, on transmitting hissubscription for a copy of the Tour. My friendhad not long then been in the possession of hispreferment*.After many years of laborious and successful toil in having beenthe editor of Spenser, Milton, and Johnson's Dictionary to say nothingof other minor performances, among which, I think, my friend's pamphletupon the Eikon Basilica completely successful and unanswerableit was the lot of the Rev. Henry James Todd to get at length a substantialliving in Yorkshire, through the interest of the late Earl ofBridgewater. The late Archbishop of Canterbury presented him withCoulsden, in Kent, which he surrendered on taking possession of Set-trenton; but he was then taken away, in the autumn of life, from histalking and his silent friends, to rusticate the remainder of his days ata distance of two hundred miles and upwards from the metropolis, andfrom his beloved Lambeth library. Now, where had been the harmwhere would not have been the glory in the prime minister of his day,were he Perceval, Portland, or Liverpool to have given SUCH A MAN a-stall at Canterbury or at Westminster, so as to have rendered the Yorkshireperegrination unnecessary? And what are the pretensions ofThe Tour.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 683Settri/if/ton, Mutton, May 15th, 1821. -DEAR D *,These kind remembrances of you, and old CurlKin's yellow notification, put me also in mind of a certainwork, from which I shall gather the greatest delight,and for which I enclose my subscription, herein consideringthat I could not be wrong in following Swift, who, to savethe stamp upon one of his tracts, placed a prayer at theend of it ; and therefore, to save payment of the stamp, Ihave sent thee, friend D., a two months* draft.Why, I have found, in this neighbourhood, churchesand buildings of which the diversified architecture veryancient, middle-aged, and grotesque, would occupy youand Mr. Lewis a good twelvemonth, for tolerable selections.Your first visit to me, with the Stockwell Recorder*, will soonconvince you of this. The country round about is beautiful,and very superior to Sledmere. Do you know such aplace ? And also one Christopher Sykes, and one Sir Mark ?and if clerical knighthood had still maintained its ground,one " Sir Henry," parson of Settrington, " a very foolishknight," as Sir Andrew Aguecheek says, and properlyapplies with That 's me !'I fancy you do know them pretty well. Sir Mark returnsin August or September. There are no literary mennearer than York (and ' rare nantes' there) except at ,about three miles less distant, where the Rev. F.those, who, since Mr. Todd's possession of Settrington, have filled thenumerous stalls which have become vacant? Worthy and good mendoubtlessly fill them ; but have they edited Milton, Spenser, and written professional biography, like the Archdeacon of ?It will be observed, that I argue this point as one of a literary complexionentirely . or I might just whisper in the reader's ear, that myfriend the Archdeacon lias a family of nine daughters . . . joining, bowsheartily as any of his congregation in the response, " happy isthe man that hath his wrm:u rri.i. <>i i m M !"Henry IV trie, Ks<j., kirjwr of his majesty's records in the Towerof London. ivM.ling at Stockuvll.684 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. the Tour.Wrangham resides,* with whom I am become acquainted.I was told indeed, before I came hither, of a most learnedperson, very near this place, skilled in various sciences, and(as Sir Toby says) ' Master of three or four languages, besidesplaying on the viol de gambol whom I dreaded tomeet, knowing my own deficiencies. But how have I beenrelieved by the accidental meeting when I found his diversifiedlearning to consist in the new modes of agricultureand experiments of chemistry, which an old book-wormcould not be supposed to know any thing about; and thereforeI had only to < bow as to superior spirits is due.'Pray give me a line acknowledging the receipt of this,and any literary news. Remember me to any who ask afterme, especially to PETRIE. If I had called upon all myfriends before leaving the south, there would have been noend to it; and to this, I might add, much unexpected business,which at the eve of our departure befell me ; and soonafter our arrival here I was very ill. I am now quite hearty,as are all our family. I have bought an old hunter, dischargedfrom the chace, as gentle as may be, bearing, however,the haughty appellation of Fergus. I would havetreated you with his pedigree if time would have permitted.We are going to York, or Scarborough, or Arlington, tillthe new roof of our house is finished; but we shall not leavethis place for a few weeks yet, and all will be rectified bythe autumn. Petrie and you will bear this in mind.Yours, ever sincerely,H. J. TODD."From two other country clergymen I received testimoniesof a very gratifying description, althoughaltogether personally unknown to me ; testimonies,which have been in perfect accordance with theiruniform adhesion to my humble lucubrations. TheSee page 391-2, ante.The Tour"] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 685Rev. James Dalton, of Croft Rectory, near Darlington,and a neighbour of " Friend Sams* " althougha Bibliomaniac of a very humble order, witheight children, and consequently much " let andhindered in the course he was well disposed to run"must not only needs have a copy of this, " veryamusing and instructive work," but of Mr. Lewis'setchings also. The Rev. Frederick Skins, a NorthumberlandRector, was pleased thus to expresshimself in a gay and courteous epistle.Joseph Same, bookseller, of Darlington, in Yorkshire : a man, inall points of view, sui generis. Ardent, active, keen, credulous (theamiable failing of humanity !) locomotive, adventurous, ambitious, victorious.In coins, in books, in diptychs, in intaglios . in anything, ineverything . his curiosity knows no bounds his acquisitions have notermination. Now, standing on one leg upon the top of the highestpyramid; and now groping among the catacombs of Paris for theskull of Damien or of Robespierre. I possess various of his letters ;they are original, equally for the mode of scription and of sentiment :from the first letter, E (" Esteemed friend") to the curvature of thelast S (" Joseph Sams"). His address is pleasing, his voice is soft, hisexordium is winning, his peroration seductive. You draw out yourpistoles," and find yourself laden with a Speculum, printed by ,or some Papal Decretals, executed by Eggestyn too ponderousfor ordinary arms to bear away too doggedly dry for the perusal evenof a dozen lines too remotely uninteresting for the operation even ofthe keenest curiosity. Of Mr. Sams, and of his Hebrew MS. of thePentateuch, I have made honourable mention in the Cameron, vol. i.l. iHo. One of the most amusing letters I ever received from LordSpencer, was his Lordship's description of Mr. Sams's visit to Althorp.t These etchings were afterwards separately published by Mr.Lewis, from drawings taken on the spot, while he was travelling with me.They are clever, but they are coarse: not harmonising, in the slightestmanner, with those engraved by the first artists, which appear in theTour itself. I never wish to see them mixed up with tluir precursorswithout the slightest personal feeling upon the subject, but only fromtluir own distinct individual character; they are a thing apart, andshould be kept apart.686 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [The Tour.Worketh Rectory, May 25, 1821.DEAR SIR,Last Tuesday I had the pleasure of receiving your delightfulTour, arid hasten to remit my subscription for thatpleasant work. The engravings are exquisite, delicate,characteristic and exact. I have ordered a copy of Mr.Lewis's Etchings; the letter-press amuses me highly, andaffords me, to boot, much desirable information. I am stillwith you at Rouen, for I do not gulp my food, but take itquietly like a good boy. I should like much to see theCatalogue de la Bibliotheca Bleue" and perhaps youwould have the goodness to shew it me, should I happen tobe in town this summer. Living in the open air, in a fineclimate, reading romances and diverting stories, andagreeable gossip, contribute much to make the French,of the middling and lower class, so lively and polite as wegenerally find them to be.Yours, very truly,FRED. Skins."I turn to the metropolis again, or rather to itsenvirons. It was my good fortune, between the publicationsof the Cameron and the Tour, to makethe acquaintance of a Mr. Dobree, sen., a septuagenarianat the time of my acquaintance with him.He was a native of Jersey, and a retired Britishmerchant his son having a counting-house in thevicinity of that all-important street "hight" Threadneedle.Although our acquaintance had been ofvery short growth, it quickly ripened into whatmight have been called intimacy. In Mr. Dobree,sen., I found my old friend Mr. Tyson* revived.See page 197, ante.The Tour.] Publications CONTINUED. 687He lived at Walthamstow ; one of the very prettiestand most picturesque (if the neighbourhood of Poorestbe taken into consideration) villages invicinity of London. I have spent more thanone or two most sympathising days with him there ;for his cellar was curious, and his table was large.He loved art in all its varieties ; and had been asort of Maecenas, in former days, to Chantrey, toTurner, and to Wilkie *: having some fine sea-piecesof the second (when his style was grand fromthe breadth of his shadows and the sobriety of hiscolouring), and of the latter, the original picture ofHiring the Servant." In fact, the print from thislatter picture was dedicated to its owner. Mr.Dobree had, of all men whom I knew, one of themost pleasant and unaffected modes of address, andreception of his friends. His heartiness of speechdid not enumerate into noisy exclamation or generalisingremark. It was quiet, warm, and winning.A few words, in his sotto voce manner of utteringthem, found their way directly to your heart. Hishand was always fully grasped within yours . not asort of cold, stiff, protruding, pick-locking forefingerbut the whole four fingers and thumb wentinstantly within all the wards of friendship's lock.My intimacy with him was of too short a duration :Mr. Wilkie was engaged by Mr. Dobree to design his first historicalpicture being the death of Sir IMnlij Suliu-y, in small and engravedley llaimbach, for Mr. Dobree's very curious book, entitled the BOOK OPDEATH.688 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [The Tour.but there is ONE ever swift and sure to strike, as heis resistless in his course. I believe Mr. Dobreewas buried in Walthamstow churchyard, not far fromthe grave of one, over whom he had been instrumentalin procuring the chisel of Chantrey toraise a splendid monument. It will be seen fromthe ensuing letter by my departed friend, that hewas disposed to " revel" in more than one copy ofthe work under consideration. How thoroughlycharacteristic of him is the ensuing!Jw/z/25, 1821.MY DEAR SIR,"Yesterday morning I found on my desk the long expectedparcel containing the finished prints, cancelled leaves,&c., for the large paper copy, together with another beautifulDiane, for which please to accept my fresh and redoubledthanks. I shall now have two of the prettiest copiesof your Tour, for in each of them do I intend to bestowone of your Diana's. I have seen more of the malignantspirit of which you made mention ; but all the harm it does,I suppose, is to render its author despicable. The wholereview*, if it may be so called, was unfair, untrue, ungentlemanly,unhandsome, with a number of other uns toonumerous to mention. There is no one but must considerHe alludes to a review in a weekly journal. . I will not mention thename of the journal, nor the author of the review. It was smart andsparkling in the outset, and I was amused at being designated as theBeau Brummell " of living authors, in regard to the glossy splendourof my publications. But its uncalled-for and most obtrusive severityarose from a misconceived notion that I had some secret sinister view inrunning down the talent of the late Charles Stothard ! I might withequal justice have been charged with having intentionally manufacturedthe bullet which was to go through Mr. Perceval's heart !Tli,' Tour'] Publications CONTINUED.your book as a very entertaining and instructive performance.The Prater, the Boulevards of Paris, and othersimilar places, are extremely well written, and very diverting:quite in the Yorick style*. Make yourself easy, andwrite another book as soon as you can to confound therogues.Ever most truly yours,S. DOBREE."Armed with such testimonies, I was prepared," me, mea virtute, involves") to snap my fingersat the recklessness or Jesuitism of a Review t. Myfriend, Mr. Dawson Turner, who published a veryelegant and instructive Tour in Normandy about thesame time which was adorned by the singulargraces of the pencil and the burin of a Wife and aDaughter found himself, in the long run, somewhatmore successful ; as far as a gracious nod from theQuarterly Review was to be taken into consideration.His equable style, and cautious narrative together*with the more exclusively architectural objects of hisTour made the "censure" of the Critic necessarilyof more facile execution. I presume, however,that reviewing like a certain other matter\\liich need not be named "goes by favour." ISo thought, and so says (see post) Mr. Schweighaeuser. If therebe any merit in the style of the author, it is that of being his own.t I desire to qualify : in other words, I " rise to explain." In thereview of the second edition of my Tour in Blackwood, I recognise theskilful and exercised hand of a master : lenient, temperate, just. I admitthat the " avant propos" relating to Messrs. Licquet, Crapelet, andLesne, had been better away. But, for once, let me be allowed to exclaim." Semper ego auditor tantum ? nunquam reponam ?"Y Y690 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. {Tlie Tour.hasten to mention one or two only testimonies fromdistinguished Foreigners. From poor Million, hadhis life been spared, what might I not have expectedfrom the elastic vigour of his ready pen ! And fromBatch, a still more eloquent and copious censureparainetica might have been anticipated. Yet I amequally proud and well content to record the following; the first, from a thorough Gentleman, andwell-informed Antiquary, of Rouen ; the second,from the learned Son of a learned Father, whosename will live as long as those works of ancientclassical celebrity which he nas so admirably edited.The letter of Mons. A. LE Provost commenceswith acknowledging my present of a copy of theTour to the Library of the Royal Academy atRouen, of which he is himself one of the brightestornaments.Ce26 Mars, 1822.MON AIMABLE ET RESPECTABLE AMI,61 J'ai tarde bien long temps a repondre a votre lettre du31 Janvier dernier, par harrison qu'elle m'a trouve maladea la campagne, et queue n'aipu en consequence acquittedqu'assez nouvellement de votre obligeante mission autresde Academic de Rouen. La Compagnie me charge devous temoigner la vive reconnaissance qu'elle prove de vosnombreux et magnifiques presents. J'ai moi-meme de nonmoins vies remercimens a vous addresser pour le bijou quevous me promettez, et qui sera le plus precious ornement dema Bibliotheca. Vous ne laurie croire combien votreTour instruct et interesse aujourd'hui stout que jele lis a tete repose. Vous me faites connaitre nos ItichesscsBiblioyraphiques mieux que Je ne 1'avais jamais fait ; et jecherche en vain a m'expliquer comment, dans un si courtTour'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 691sejour, vous avez pu rassembler tant de material, et encomposer un tableau si complet et si anime. Vous voyezque je suis bien loin de voir votre livre des menes yeux queCrapelet, ou meme que mon Compatriote (Licquet), dont jevous envoie la petite publication. Je ne puis m'expliquercomment, acres avoir lu expression des nobles et touchantsentiments qui occupant la dernier lettre qu'il a traduite, ila pu prendre une attention si minutest a chercher lesmoindres sujets de discussion, et un ton si inconvenant pourles relever, &c. Adieu ! Je vous prie de vous souvenirquelque-fois deVotre tout devote serviteur et ami,AUGUSTE LE Provost."Before introducing the brief testimony of myfriend M. SCHWEIGH^USER, I ought to inform thereader that I had committed " une petite indiscretion,"in telling the public that that worthy and unsuspectingGentleman had confided to me the keyof the public Library at Strasbourg, for the sake offinishing my book researches there in quiet and inprivacy. He says, " You ought to have been attendedby the Apparitor, Eton. If he left you alone,it was from a just confidence in your integrity buthe was failing in his duty." He concludes thus :ct Vous voyez, estimable ami, que ma franchise est aussiincorruptible aux 61oges, que notre Sturdiness Pa 6t6 avotre Or : mais ce qui vous fait pardonner beaucoup, c'estnon seulement votre inability pour notre ville et notre pays,mais encore Esprit et le pinceau Sterne que vous avezmis dans beaucoup de vos descriptions et de vos rccits. II692 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [The Tour.est permis d'etre inexact quand on est piquant et amusant,mais encore vaudrait il mieux etre 1'un et autre, &c. &c.Adieu, estimable ami : je vous embrasse de tout moncoeur.Votre tres devote,SCHWEIGH^USER FILS."I omit very much of the commendatory strain ofthis worthy correspondent ; and hasten, while engagedin the " foreign department" of Criticism, totake notice of one or two things which it will be seenare referred to in the letter of Mons. Le Provost.Two names there appear for the name of Lesne *(afterwards noticed hy my Correspondent) is scarcelyworth the writing a second time.Unintentionally on the part of one or two of thezealous tribe of French Critics, my humble performancehas received the highest honour to which itsAuthor could aspire, in having been attired in aFrench dress. The whole of the work relating toFrance has been translated into the language ofthat country, in four volumes, with a repetition ofall the woodcuts. The common paper of this workis very unworthy of all the parties concerned in it.The large paper is the opposite in all respects ; itis struck off in a manner worthy of being placed bythe side of the large paper of the original Work, toLesne 's bombast makes him diverting; see some extracts from his"Poem on Book Binding' 1 in the Introduction to the second edition ofthe Tour.'/'/ Tour"] Publications CONTINUED.\\hk-h it was obviously and professedly intended tobe a companion. Messrs. Licquet and Crapelet,after having each discharged a separate shot* atthe Author, united their forces, and by the jointproduction of this translation, concluded in fact withthe homage of praise. . .towards a Work which theyhad separately strove to undermine. Because, asmy friend M. Le Provost observes, I had " utterednoble sentiments" about his country and had evenintroduced him to the knowledge of MSS. and printedbooks at Rouen of which he had been ignoranttherefore M. Licquet thought my ninth letter developingthose bibliographical curiosities deservingboth of translation and attack t. M. Licquet is noIn the translation of the ninth letter of the first volume, and the.thirtieth letter of the second volume, each most beautifully printed, andwith a limited number taken off.t I sent a copy of M. Licquet's translation to a very sensible, as wellas amiable friend, Lady C ; who was in possession of a beautifulcopy of the original work, and who had also procured me several subscribers.Her answer is as follows :MY DEAR FRIEND, " York Terrace, Tuesday.I return you the volume, with many thanks. I have read it withpleasure and with anger, to see how well he has translated you, and yethow ill he has understood you. The notes are puerile, and beneath aman of letters ; and I should be ashamed of any Englishman who couldbe so childish. However, your work will be read and liked, non obstanteM. Licquet's notes ; and I think the feeling of the readers will be againstIris sneering observations. Let us have such a work from a Frenchmantravelling in England ! It is all envy, envy, envy. Oh, how they envyand hate us !Ever yours, most sincerely,A. M. C.P. 8. I should like to write to M. Licquet my opinion of him."This is smart and clever like the writer. But as my translator and694 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Tie Tour.more ; but having " returned his fire" in the secondedition of the Tour, I ceased to harbour one ungraciousthought, or one unworthy sentiment, towardshim. We had met. and discharged our shots, andthere was an end of it. " InimiciticB placable."Of M. Crapelet I will only repeat in substancewhat I have before observed that it was utterly impossiblefor me in my thirtieth Letter, descriptiveof Booksellers and Printers at Paris, in which thewarmest commendation was bestowed upon himselfsuppose, that there was anything in that letterwhich could possibly have " moved his bile." Sothat my astonishment on the appearance of histranslation, could only be equalled by my contempt ofthe ungenerous spirit which could have engenderedit. Having also " returned his fire" in a very specialmanner first, by my "Roland" for his " Oliver",critic is now " at rest," a sense of justice induces me to qualify many ofhis " childish remarks' and inconclusive deductions, by an extract fromhis work, which at least does great credit to his HEART.A Dieu ne plaise, toute fois, que j 'accuse ici le coeur de M. Dibdin.Je n'ai jamais eu honneur de le voir. Je ne le connais que pas sesecrits, principalement par son splendid Tour; et je ne balance pas a declarerque Hauteur doit etre doue d'une ane bonnet, et de ces qualitiesfundamentals qui constituent Homme de bien. II prefer sa croyance,mais il respecte la croyance des autres ; son erudition parait varied ;son amour pour les antiquities est immense ; et par antiquities, j'entendsici tout ce qui est antique ou seulement ancien quelles que soient d'ail-leurs la nature et la forme des objets."Of this tract only thirty-six copies were printed ; and it is now becomeso scarce and dear, as to have brought 2/. 12s. 6d. at a public sale.I possess a curiosity connected with this subject: nothing less than aFrench translation of it, by a Parisian, in MS. ; but it shall not see thelight. Mr. Crapelet may be left to the " thumps and bumps" (see pageThe Tour.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 695and secondly by the observations prefixed to thethirtieth letter in the second edition of the Tourlean only wish the Author a better taste in theexercise of his future operations, both as a Printerand a Translator. My old bibliographical acquaintance,Mons. Peignot, of Dijon, in his " Varies,Notices, et Parents Bibliographiques" 1822, 8vo.,p. 4, while reviewing the labours of my translators,took that opportunity of delivering his opinion,roundly and freely, upon the original work. I amnot indisposed, upon the whole, to hold the balance-as M. Peignot is pleased to fill the scales*. And632, ante), which are occasionally inflicted upon him, and which he soobviously merits, in the second edition of my Tour." Few books (says the Bibliographer of Dijon) have been executedwith greater luxury. It is said that the expenses of printing and engravingamounted to 6,000/. [7,000/.] to nearly 140,000 f 166,000]francs of our money. It must be admitted, that ENGLAND is the ONLYCOUNTRY in which such an undertaking could be carried into effectWho in France would dare to risk such a sum, especially in threevolumes in octavo ? He would be ruined if he did." I quote these passagessimply to shew under what extraordinary obliquity of feelingMessrs. Licquet and Crapelet must have sat down to the task of translationand abuse of that very work which is here admitted to containsuch splendid representations of the " bibliographical, antiquarian, andpicturesque beauties of their own country !"GABRIEL PKIONOT is one of my oldest bibliographical acquaintances.Twenty years preceding this controversy, I had done him ample justicein the pages of the Bibliomania : see " Bibliographical Index" of thatwork. Therefore it is, as I conceive, that, after sugaring my translationas much as he dare venture upon, he concludes thus : " II y aurait injusticea refuser a M. Dibdin des counaissanccs tres tenues en histoire,literature, et en bibliographic; nous le disons franchement, il adroitformer les yeux a la lumiere, ou rtrc d'une partiality rcvoltante, pour nepaa convenir que, juste appreciates de tous les tremors bibliographiquetPUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. the Tour.thus much for the " foreign department" of criticismupon the Tour.A very general, and apparently very hearty,opinion having been expressed, that the informationcontained in such costly volumes might be acceptableto the Public through a less expensive andmore portable medium, it was resolved to bring fortha second edition not divested of ornaments, butcontrariwise, possessing some * which do not appertainto its precursor. This second edition, in asmall octavo form, is beautifully printed, and publishedat a moderate price ; possessing, in the runningnotes, critical replies, and biographical memoranda,advantages which, in these respects, give it asuperiority over the first. It is dedicated to aBrother-Traveller, and Brother-Bibliographer, whonow so ably fills a conspicuous situation in the Universityof Cambridge t.qu'il a le bonheur devoir dans le main, M. D. en a fait reconnoitre endetail toute la richesse dans de nombreux ouvrages, ou tres souvent leluxe erudition se trouve en harmonic avec le luxe typographical qu'ily a tale."Namely, the portrait of the Abbe de la Rue, the Comte de Brien,and the Prater, near Vienna. It has also small bird's eye views of themonasteries of Salzburg and Molk, and of the Black Eagle at Munich ;a repetition (in small) of the filles de chambre at Caen and Nuremberg ;with several of the groups reduced and cut in wood. There are alsothirty-three fac-similes of autographs of eminent men. All the copperplatesof the first edition are DESTROYED.t The dedication is in the following terms :To the Rev. JOHN LODGE, M. A., Fellow of Magdalen College, andLibrarian to the University of Cambridge.MY DEAR FRIEND,tf Most grateful it is to me, at all times, to bear in remembrance thoseWe Tour.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 697But another word, and I have done ; nor shouldeven that word have been spoken, but as being instrict conformity with what has preceded it*. Itwill be seen, as here referred to, that I have mademention of two Illustrated Copies of the Cameron.It must now be permitted me to notice one illustratedcopy of the Tour ; and it is one of singular beautyand perfection, extracting and combining the splendourof three similar copies. At first, a marigold ;secondly, a china-aster ; thirdly, a sunflower ; andfourthly and lastly a conjunction of the whole three.My friend Mr. Henry Drury was its first possessor.From his bed of jonquils it was transplanted intothe parterre of Mr. George Hibbert where itthrived amazingly. Hence it creeper into thejardin de plaisance" of Mr. Hanrott ; whence itpleasant discussions, in which we were wont so frequently to indulge,relating to the libraries upon the Continent ; but more than ordinarilygratifying to me was that moment, when you told me that, on crossingthe Rhine, you took the third volume of my Tour under your arm, andon reaching the monasteries of Molk and Gothic, gave an off-handtranslation to the venerable Benedictine inmates, of what I had recordedconcerning their MSS. and printed books, and their hospitable receptionof the author. I studiously concealed from you, at the time, the wholeof the gratification which that intelligence imparted ; resolving, bow-ever,that should this work be deemed worthy of a second edition, todedicate that republication to Yourself. Accordingly, it now comesforth in its present form, much enhanced, in the estimation of its author,by the respectability of the name prefixed to this dedication ; and wishingyou many years' enjoyment of the honourable public situation withwhich you have been recently and so deservedly invested, allow me tosubscribe myself,Your affectionate and obliged friend.U'unHImm Flare, June 30, 189. f K. D."Seepage 619.698 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [ The Tour.was borne away by the victorious hand of a Gentleman,who scrupled not to give 178/. for the prize.On hearing this, I not only congratulated the Conqueror(who was personally unknown to me), butspontaneously tendered a basket full of florets toadd to his bouquet. The pleasant correspondenceupon this chivalrous subject is annexed below*.I sent the purchaser my PASS-PORT, and a variety of curious andinteresting MS. documents. On receiving them, Mr. B returnedthe following answer :REV. SIR,I had the honour of receiving yesterday evening your very politenote, and in answer beg to say, that I shall be most happy to avail myselfof your kind offer, by the receipt of the documents alluded to. SinceI made the fortunate purchase (for such I consider it), I have addedFOUR ORIGINAL DRAWINGS to the work, amongst which is the ' exquisite*bust of Denon, by Laguiche. I shall embrace every opportunity thatmay offer itself of further enriching the book, which has always been agreat favourite with me, and, in every point of view, well deserves whatevermay be expended in its embellishment.I have the honour to be,Rev. Sir,Your much obliged, and very obedient,J. B."Some short time after, the possessor of this many-coloured BOUQUETwas induced to part with his treasure ; and in so doing, he returned meall my additional communications, with the following letter :REV. SIR, ft Dolby Terrace, Monday Morning.A very splendid offer has induced me to part with the Tour to agentleman, whose name I am not at liberty to disclose. Under thesecircumstances I feel it my duty to return you the papers which youwere so kind as to send me, and beg to repeat my grateful acknowledgmentsfor your very handsome and obliging communications.You are very well known to the present proprietor of the book, andI have apprised him of the existence and nature of the documents, andalso of my intention of returning them to you. If, therefore, he shouldwish to possess them, you will probably hear from him on the subject.I remain, &c."I do not know to WHOM my correspondent referred ; but I do knowThe Tour.'} PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 699And thus I take leave of a Work, the most costlyon the score of embellishment, and the most perilouson that of responsibility, in which a Travellerrelying upon his own resources exclusively wasever engaged. That it has failed, in an eminentdegree, to remunerate me in a pecuniary point ofview, is most certain and notorious ; but that evennow, when eighteen years of life have spreadtheir broad pinions, swifter than the wind,"and fled away since I first put my foot upon the shoresof France even now, I say, were the PATRONAGEin all respects commensurate, I would strive to dofor Italy what I have done for France, Bavaria, andAustria; and, lastly, should it please a gracious Providenceto prolong health with existence, I would yetstrive more lustily to surpass what had gone beforefor the COUNTRY IN WHICH I LIVE*. I must notthat I immediately transferred all these "addenda" to my intimate andaffectionate friend, George Henry Freeling, Esq., the possessor of theunrivalled copy of the Cameron (see page 650, ante), whom I knewto be desperately well disposed to do for the Tour what he had donefor its Precursor.It is, however, but due to the spirit of the London booksellers toadd, that there was an attempt, some ten years ago, to put me in motionupon this * c voyage of discovery ;'' and advances even of the respectivequotas were made but clouds of one description or other in thepublic as well as the private horizon of hope, rendered it necessary toabandon the execution of the work altogether. It was on so liberal ascale as to allow 2.50/. for travelling expenses. Since that year (1825)what tempests, as well as clouds, have darkened the bibliopolistic hemisphere! But intelligence of this projected tour soon got abroad. Mr.J. Alley Repton thus wrote from Essex : " I am glad that your TourIN ENGLAND is undertaken. Pray give us plenty of wood-cuts, and aJaointerior views of old halls, particularly Hardwicke Hogue | scc700 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. \TheTour.say the " country of my birth" for THAT, as thereader will see in the first chapter of this book, liessome ten thousand miles away !page 566, ante], with minute details of furniture*. The needle workof Queen Mary's bed, &c., and even the old iron lock of a door, areworth engraving. The old binding which I saw at Washington's wouldmake a beautiful plate, and perhaps better than the rude cuts of stuntedlegged gentlemen with clubbed feet, or wolves that look like cats.May 17, 1825."Trahit sua quelque voluptas:" and such are the objects of tasteor of mania with my amiable and intelligent co-respondent, Mr. Rep-ton.But I should have been disobedient to his wishes; for metal moreattractive would undoubtedly have occupied the attention, and exercisedthe pencil, of the Tourist.Another friend wrote, " Don't let an old gateway or a crumblingbuttress escape you:" a third, " If you don't give us a raisonne catalogueof every original picture in every ancient mansion, your labourswill not be worth a brass button ! !"What a perilous undertaking do I appear luckily to have escaped !Of a far more encouraging and rational complexion was the exhortationof my excellent friend, Mr. DOUCE. He concluded a long and-chattyletter thus :I have been rambling through most of the south-west counties,with a great deal of clerical and very pleasant intercourse. I wish youwould do the same, and treat us with another (ENGLISH) TOUR, and-withthe interesting embellishments that you know so well to select.The subjects are innumerable, and with the aid of a professional companion,you might publish a volume every year. Such a work remainsa desideratum in this curious age, whilst the rubbish of that blockheadSurely keeps up its enormous price. Whatever you undertake, may ifrbe crowned with that success which you so well deserve.God bless you, my dear friend ! Ever yours,"F. DOUCE."For old furniture betake thyself, antiquarian, or antiquated reader,to the delightful performance of Mr. Shaw, which is to be obtainedat a moderate cost at No. 57, Chancery-lane. He represents the verymetal of the furniture copied. The silver ornaments of James theFirst's bed-chamber, at Knowles, are inimitably executed.Museum.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 701I must now be permitted to make a sort of mention of a Weekly Journal of the nameof THE MUSEUM ; to which I occasionally contributedeither in the character of a Critic, or in that of aSupplier of Original matter. Of this publication,Mr. Abraham John Valpy (of whose spirit of enterprise,as well as love of honest literature, I have saidno more in the Cameron* than is justly his due)was at once the Patron, the Printer, and Publisher.The first Editor was a Mr. Peter Bailey, a gentlemanwholly unknown to me ; but apparently a man ofan elegantly constructed mind, and by no meansdeficient in the ordinary topics of taste and criticism.He was gentlemanly in his manners, andmild in his discourse. Mr. Valpy, Mr. Bailey, andmyself met at my house to concoct the IntroductoryAddress ; always the most awkward, generalising,and little meaning, piece of composition in the wholework, and usually as safe . as a speech from thethrone. I composed an address myself, which wasapproved in part : two others were composed butneither of the three was adopted. This is by nomeans an unusual proceeding.The Museum" continued to be published everySaturday, from January 1822, to December, 1823.I never knew the extent of the sale, nor the amountof the profits including even my own. Nor indeedSee Bibliographical Cameron, vol. ii. p. 412-1.702 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Museum.do I remember upon what terms I was engaged ; butI was true to my post, and tolerably abundant aswell as regular in my contributions*. Of thesecontributions, the most remarkable in its effect wasthat entitled " A Day at Dulwich College' 9 Perhapsthe personal history of Literature contains noinstance of stouter courage than that of a Writercoming forward, in the most solemn manner whichthe law could impose upon him, to avow himself tobe the Author of a production, supposed and believedto have been written by another 9 for the expresspurpose of wounding the feelings of a third person.This is all I choose to say upon the subject at thispresent moment. But I may refer, with a keenerrelish, and with the certainty of giving offence to noone individual person, to the account of anothervisit, under the title of "A DAY AT Harrow'which will be found in the pages of the same work,and from which I select a portion from the beginning,the middle, and the end ; thus assigning to itMy contributions were miscellaneous. The principal of them arenoticed above ; but in ART and BIBLIOGRAPHY I criticised the publicexhibitions of pictures, and wrote some rather lengthened articles uponthose of Mr. Wilkie. Nor did the Chapeau de Faille nor GerardDow's enamel escape me. The book sales of Mr. Watson Taylor,Mr. Perry, and Mrs. Garrick were also anatomise. Several workswere also reviewed by me ; and that of Mr. Butler's Reminiscences,Mr. Ottley's History of Engraving, and Major's edition of Walton'sAngler in particular. Giulio Clovis; Sir Harry Inglefield; Conan,Irving, Burnet, Vivares, &c., and (cum multi alias) were all embodiedin my Cornucopia of contributions,PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 703all the Aristotelian requisites. The scene describedtook place on the 4th of June, 1822, when Dr.Butler was head master."A DAY AT HARROWAND A SPEECH-DAY too ! On Thursday, June 4, I ascended, aslead Ixjen 'the custom of my forefathers,' the hill of Harrow, in orderto witness the gay sights, and to hear the grand speeches, which areusually made at that distinguished seminary about a fortnight or a monthbefore the Midsummer recess. It is all mirth, joyance, and jollity, onthese occasions. Every tongue breaks out into rapturous exclamations ;every eye sparkles with delight, and every bosom beats with expectation.It is difficult to say which of the two classes, the lads or their parents,feel the greater gratification; and may I not add a third class theMasters? * * * * *No well-educated human being, I verily believe, whether or not hehave a son there, can visit Harrow on these occasions without feelinghis spirits dancing within him. The road, the country, the ascent, theview, the RECEPTION always render such a journey among the pleasantnessof my existence. And if the day be fair and fine, it is hardlypossible for any thing to exceed the rich and unbounded champagnewhich lies out-stretched before you. So much for protege. I ascended,as 1 said and according to the custom of my forefathers the hill ofHarrow, on the 4th of this month ; but not on foot. It was agreed thatmy old friend BERNARDO should put his well-known pair of black, fleetcoursers, to a neat tea-coloured carriage, which might be very easily mistakenfor a physician's, and that, with a postilion, in a sort of Epsomlivery, (being a white silk jacket, with chocolate-coloured stripes), weshould move forward, &c. &c.We rattled onward at more than a swing canter, passed every thingand every body, to the admiration of the lads, who were now, like bees,all swarming over the place and pulled up, as a postilion so attiredought to pull up that is to say, at something like the peril of tearingthe horses' tongues out of their mouths. We made our salutations toour excellent old friend and right-hospitable host, MENALOAS, as well asto his fairest of all fair sposas f BELINDA, and then lost no time in endeavouringto secure good seats at the forthcoming exhibition. And wli.itan ' exhibition' do we behold, of matter as well as of mind ! Ladies,whose bright eyesRain influciu-e, and decide THE Pub'occupy almost every bench, each rising above the other, display704 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Museum.themselves like beds of tulips attired in every colour, prismatic orblended ! There is nothing pleases me more than such a sight ; and,further, I will be free to remark, that such a sight is almost peculiar tof dear old England The cleanliness, the smartness, the taste, even theexpression, conveyed by certain forms and colours of dress; add towhich, the transparent complexions and ' the eye's blue languish' (asCollins hath it) of the wearers are, if I may so speak, the peculiarcharacteristic of this country ; and beauty, genuine, gentle beauty, hathalways a softer tint, and a tenderer expression, when it is fanned by themorning breeze, and lighted up by the morning sun. * * *tf Dr. Butler is clothed in his academic robes, as indeed are all themasters. The patrons of the school sit beside him, to the left, and infront of the orators. Every parent's eye is fixed on his beloved child,who is to figure in this Marathon scene of classical competition. Hope,joy, delight, confidence, alternately possess and mark their countenances.ff Up rises the junior orator. Not a sound, but that of his voice, isheard. Gently suppressed plaudits crown his address. We have, inshort, within this narrow arena, a representation of real life (as it iscalled), which cannot fail to strike every thoughtful observer. Cicerospeaks here, and Chatham there ; Horace strikes his lyre in one place,and Virgil in another; Juvenal and Johnson Sallust and ShakspeareCallimachus and Collins start up, alternately, within the narrow arenaof twelve square feet ; and characters and times, long gone by, re-appearwith all the fascination of youthful enthusiasm. I shall draw noinvidious comparisons; except that it seemed to me that the Latinorations were delivered with better intelligence, or a clearer perceptionof the exact sense, than several of the English. But ALL the auditorswere delighted, as they had good reason to be. The captain of theschool, hight Merivale, Sen.* * * *This "Captain" has since proved himself to be a General in hisacademic campaign. He went to Oxford, having been entered of OrielCollege . . . stood for, and obtained, the FIRST " University Scholarship"founded by Dr. Ireland, of Christ Church College, and the presentDean of Westminster. The examination was novel; and as sharp,tough, and trying as it was novel. The opponents were young men ofmetal and of acknowledged scholarship; but the "ripest and bestscholar" was young Merivale. Indeed, he is said to have " won in ahand canter." Proudly might the heart of the Father, as well as of theson, swell on such a triumph ! But more honours awaited him. Besidesthat of being a first-class man, he went through another trial, instanding for a fellowship at Baliol College. " He came, saw, and con-publicationsCONTINUED. 703The company rise, break up, and depart; some to repossess themselvesof their carriages and cabriolets, others to partake of the hospitalityof the several masters, under whose care their sons are placed. Everyhouse and every table is crowded to excess. The banquet does notsmoak; for it is (necessarily) all cold. Pigeons, fowls, lamb, lobsters,tongues, hams, jellies, concertos of every description, flanked by salladsand sauces, sparkle on every table, and whet the appetite of every beholder.If hospitality, and a generous Englishman-like feeling prevailsanywhere, it prevails at HARROW. All are ' honourable men.' Everymaster's heart is as brim-full as his cup. The rooms, the corridors, thegalleries, die halls, are filled, chiefly with those ' living tulips' (now disclosingyet lovelier petals) of which I before made such honourablemention. Knives, forks, plates, glasses, yea, even dishes, are in motion.All is classical quotation and pleasant parlance. They eat, drink,and are merry. My friend and self, with sundry Roxburghers, take upour quarters with Menaces; being guests at the ABBATIAL tablewhence, at one dart of the eye, we traverse a track of country of some smiles,and view the twin hills of Hurley Bottom (unde derivatur?)gilded by the glow of sun-set. The window of Menaces is gemmedwith stained glass, and golden fret-work irradiates his vaulted cieling.The feats of conversation the frequent and well-directed vollies of wit,from intellectual batteries furnished for a ten years' siege the streamsof good humour and of old wine, flowing in parallel lines, delight ustill long after the welkin ceases to reflect the sun's parting ray. It wasthen high time to bid adieu to our host and hostess, and we renewedthose hearty demonstrations of friendship which marked our arrival.The black steeds of my friend were neighing at the door, and both theleft flank of his near horse, and the panel of his tea-coloured carriagehad, fortunately, escaped contusion. We returned even more rapidlythan we came ; and agreed, on a comparison of notes, that the day ofmerriment, described in a certain Bibli'jr<i]>1iical Tour, as having takenqueried." He is now at the bar ; and it must be his own fault if, withinsome fifteen years and a half hence, he has not the attorney-general'ssilk gown upon his shoulders. Why not add that his Christian name,like that of his accomplished father, is 11 in MAN? Ail why not yetsay, in addition, that my learned and excellent friend, the Rev. HenryDrury, was his private tutor at Harrow ? he, who hath recently experiencedthe game kind of parental swellings in the bosom, by his ownSon having gained the Latin and <J reek-epigram prizes at the recentit Cambridge!706 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Museum.place at a certain monastery in Austria, was nothing in comparisonwith that of a HARROW SPEECH Day."Some few years after this event, it was my good fortune to meetas it is generally my good fortune to meet, at these anniversary symposiaunder the roof of Mr. Drury some rare, pleasant, scholar-like guests ;among whom was ONE gentleman who delighted us all vehemently, aswell by the subject chosen, as by his manner of handling it. The individualin question was the Rev. WM. WAY (of whose elder brother thepages of my Tour had made particular and honourable mention),of Glympton Park, Oxon ; and it pleased him to favour us with someverses, in Latin and in English, upon the " Statues of Tarn O'Shanterand Souter Johnny" then exhibiting at Old Bond Street, and sculpturedby Mr. Thorn, the Teniers of the chisel. A portion of the classicalpart of my friend's banquet is transferred from his table to that ofthe reader.Grains mirari, aut Romans roscius artes,Sculptor adept nous, emeritoque virescit honoreArte potent mira Sculptor inc lares cere saxo :Indoctus licet, exegisse perennial sereSculpture opus tamen, et studiis imitative nullusSic potuit, caeca ut salis fugientibus seasTnvida note premat nunquam immortal sara.Vicious hinc Populi est Sculptor celebrates, ut alterPraxiteles ! Adsunt Animi Simulacra, labour(Emula Praxiteles, multum baud referenda corpus !Mira adsunt Statute ! apicius spirantia sara,Stores spirantem umbra, et ridentis Amici !O qualis Facies, et quali digna tabella ! 'Quanta Figurarum est, duce te, Natura ! Venustas !Animus sine voce jocose, risusque hideous !Risus finest oculis, et quintus in ore Cachinnus !Aspire vestments, pedes, caligataque cruraDigna ita plus uno suppress perennial seclo,Artificumque futurum exemplary habere !Sculptor magne ! Opifex Statuary maxime ! Salve !Tu rudis, ind oct usque antique baud indians Artis ;Sculptor aces nous, et jam vix sit imagine vivaMira magis Medica Venus, vel magnus Apollo,Quam Tutor thus et rides Stores Amicus ! "&c. &c. &c.Museum.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 707The most important contribution in the shape oforiginal matter, was a series of communications entitled" The Picture Book," of which I believe onlya dozen numbers were published. Some notion maybeformed of what was comprehended in this proposedwork, by the words of the prefix in one ofthe numbers of the Journal, thus :London The Banks of the Thames The OxfordElection, or a Revisit to St. John's CollegeNational Historians The unexplored LibraryIsaac Walton The New Moon Tie WidowedTwo laughing Statues aVe from Scotland brought,The works of Nature's Child, by art untaught ;But tho' untaught their Sculptor, Time must endBefore the Cobler and his tipsy FriendLosing their power to please, neglected lie,And cease, unseen, to charm the public eye.These Statues no mute Bodies' Image giveThe mind they represent they breathe they liveVoiceless, they magnify the Sculptor's name,And give him, great Praxiteles ! thy fame.Sculpture's strange powers our senses so beguile,We hear the Cobler's tale we see his smileWe hear his Friend's applause and hearty laughWe see them both th' inspiring tankard quaff,Join in the jokes of Souter Johnny's Tale,And long to pledge him in his jug of ale.Genius made Tarn O'Shanter's wond'rous hose,And made not Genius Souter Johnny's clothes ?Yes ! Genius from his apron, cap, and canChopped off the marble and brought forth the man.More honest praises Tarn O'Shanter's holloAnd Souter Johnny's queerest stories followThan criticks give the Venus or Apollo."ZZ 2708 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Museum.Bride Street Architecture Newspapers ReviewsSchoolboy Days, fyc. fecitwill be evident, from such a list, that the au kthor has it in view to supply us with a sort of supplementalvolume to * The Sketch Book? and thathis materials are of a nearly similar miscellaneouscharacter. The task appears to be a somewhat boldone ; for there is a freshness, vigour, and racinessin the performance just mentioned, which will longsecure to it a place among our purest British classics."Next to the " Picture Book" in extent of matter,was the FontJiill Fever, or a Trip to Fonthill Abbey*before the memorable sale of the furniture ofMr. Phillips, the Royal Academician, and the late Mr. Haslewoodwere my companions in this trip ; and I did not fail to describe in itthe very delightsome day we spent at Stairhead, with the venerableand most learned antiquarian who calls that " proud domain" his OWN.Sir Richard Colt Hoare's venison and claret were deemed, by my companions,perfect of their kind; and as we returned to the inn whereLa Belle Gabrielle presided " imminente Luna" my friends werenot less copious in commendation of the breadth of the septuagenarian'shospitality, than of the quality of his pictures and books. A correspondenceof some twenty years since, or longer standing, with this distinguishedbaronet, justifies as well as prompts the assertion, that Englandhas no prouder inhabitant to boast of than HE! His collection is,under very many points of view, a national one. He has done morefor his county (Wilts) and thereby for his country than all the lord-lieutenantswho ever presided over it. " Ecce signum" in the workswhich have issued from his elastic pen.Recollections Abroad, 4 vols. 8vo., 1815-18, private.Shrievalty of Sir Richard Hoare, 4to., 1815, private.Family of Hoare, with numerous portraits, 4to., 1819, private.Monastic Remains, 4to., 1824, private.Museum'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 709that not less memorable residence, when everyhorse's head in the kingdom seemed to be turnedin that direction. My communication was underthe signature of Cuthbert Tonstall, a favourite name,and once attached to a Bishop of Durham, of whomI am always disposed to speak warmly in commendationof his bibliomanical enthusiasm.Of occasional communications upon the passingoccurrences of the day, I know of none which givesme a livelier pleasure (a pleasure, however, mingledwith keen regret) to reflect upon, than that whichwas inserted respecting Mr. Canning's (supposed)Farewell Speech in the House of Commons, previouslyto his planned departure of taking upon himthe government of India : a plan, however, whichthe unexpected and premature death of Lord Londonderryrendered void. I heard the Orator makehis speech, from the front row of the gallery of theHouse ; and I also heard Lord Londonderry speakbriefly and effectively, on the same evening, and uponEnglish Topography, arranged in Counties, 8vo., 1815, private.Ancient WILTS, 2 vols. imperial folio, 1819.(Modern Wilts,, South District, nearly completed.)Giraldus Cambrensis, translated, and illustrated with plates, 3 vols.4to., iMi.i.Hungerfordiana, 8vo.Camulodunum (Colchester) 12mo., 1827.Tour in Ireland, 8vo., 1806.rhroniom \\ 'iltunense, folio, 1830, private.Registrar Wiltum-nse, Saxon and Latin, folio, jirimti:Catalogue of Italian Topography, 1812, 8vo. Given to the BritukMutenm!710 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Museum.the same subject!! The communication was sentby me to the Museum, the day after the speech, inthe following words :On Friday, the 10th of this month May, 1822], Mr. Canning issupposed to have made his farewell speech in the House of Commons,on the second reading of his own bill for the restoration of the rightsof seven Roman Catholic Lay Peers to sit in the House of Lords. Thefirst reading of this important bill was carried by a majority of five, in aHouse so crowded, as to want only one towards the number of 500members. The second reading was carried by a majority of twelve, inaHouse wanting about forty of the same number. This shows what alively interest the country took in the discussion. But, if we mistakenot, an interest almost as lively was taken, by the House of Commonsin particular, to witness the last display of senatorial eloquence by theRt. Hon. Mover of the bill. It was evident, both from the complexionof the debate, and the general feeling of the House, that this ' lastspeech* was anticipated with that sort of vehement desire, and personalfondness, which we take in the farewell of any favourite public characterwho has charmed us by his talents, and won us over to him by his attainments.The triumph of Mr. Canning on his taking a temporaryleave of his country, for the highest of all situations in the Asiaticworld was indeed complete ; for he received alike the applause of theTreasury Bench, and the cheers of the Opposition. Now, we contendthat nothing but absolute and unequalled talent, in the way in which itwas exhibited, could have called forth this general and simultaneousdemonstration of respect. We have nothing here to do with politics.In the devious and intricate mazes of a political life, especially in thehigher departments of it, we know perfectly well how difficult it is tojudge from a partial knowledge, and from imperfect glimpses ; and thatgeneral and damnatory conclusions are drawn where the premises havebeen limited, and where a consequent restraint has been imposed whenacting within such limits. We believe, however, that we are speakingthe words of truth and soberness when we observe, that there is not asingle member of his majesty's privy council, nor one of the most activeand able leaders of the opposition, who is not ready to express bothsurprise and regret at the withdrawing of so radiant a star from thepolitical hemisphere.The political life of Mr. C. is about to receive rather a prematuresuspension, than decease. He leaves us, with the regrets and wishes ofevery benevolent heart that his return may be speedy and safe; and inhis absence, we shall dwell upon the recollection of his talents, as we doMuseum'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 711on the pencilled resemblance of a dear and separated friend. Our presentbusiness, however, is to say a few words on the character of Mr.Ces ELOQUENCE; of that eloquence, which includes reasoning, wit,imagery, declamation, and persuasion. It will be better, perhaps, tomix all these points together in our remarks ; for nothing is more tediousand uninteresting than a lecture on each of these distinctive peculiaritiesof eloquence.Longinus seems to concentrate the whole excellence of oratory inaction.If this be so, Mr. C. will not be very remote from perfection.The charm of action may be said to depend a good deal upon the charmof person ; and especially on physiognomical expression. With a figurea little above the mean or middle stature, the countenance of our oratoris most expressive. A broad open front, elevated forehead, large blueeyes now beaming with gaiety, and now flashing with indignationwith an action, always animated, and not unfrequently graceful, aidedby a full and melodious voice these have always obtained for Mr. C.that attention, which, even unconnected with other causes, an orator ispretty sure to obtain. Yet there is a mannerism in his voice and action.In truth, all first-rate geniuses are mannerists. Mr. Pitt was a mannerist,and so was Mr. Fox. There is, indeed, a mannerism in all thespeeches of the House of Commons ; a mannerism, decidedly capableof improvement. Hence we observe that swing of the arm and sway ofthe body, that frequent jerking at the close of a period, and that violenceof action, where the matter is not proportionably weighty and convincing.If, however, Mr. Canning be not free from some of these objections, hepossesses many qualifications which more than counterbalance them.Whenever he rises on a subject of which he is full, and in which heconfidently anticipates the cheering of the House, nothing can be moredelightful and gratifying than his strain of eloquence. His thoughtsseem to breathe, and his words to burn ; and the country, as well as theHouse, seems to hang upon the music of his periods, and the energy ofhis appeals. Sometimes, at the end of a long and didactic speech andin which there was necessarily much official detail we have seen himbreak forth in a strain of brilliancy, like stars from an expiring rocket,which made you forget all its preceding dryness. In argument, Mr. Canningis not so close, vehement, and irresistible, as was Fox. We cannotsay of him as Plutarch said of Pericles fipovrav fie ainbv Roi atnpair-7. ii' ore cijfir)^opolij t Seivbv 6e Kcpavvbv cV <y\u>fforj 0t'^>i/ Xe<yoVro>>and as, indeed, we may say of Fox. But then Mr. Canning is notwanting both in clearness of conception and acuteness of reasoning ; andin all the constitutional speeches which he has made, at Liverpool andin London, (in which, doubtless to his own disbelief, there is nearly asniiu-li of ul t i : />jittm as of toryUm), one cannot but discover the traits of712 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Museum.a mind singularly adapted to comprehend all the philosophical views, aswell as the minuter machinery, of the British Constitution. Cradled inwhiggish, it was natural that our Orator should at times betray theproofs of a mitigated Tory.In wit, he is now without a rival. Perhaps he is not so brilliant aswas Sh erica ; and, if irony be considered a constituent part of wit, notso caustic and cutting as Pitt. He has a great portion of humour, andis singularly playful and splendid. At times, however, his wit has greatforce ; and, as a proof of it, is generally dreaded by his opponents. Whois now to make a finishing speech commenting on the conflicting argumentsin the debate, and interweaving with his comments a hundredlittle brilliant flowers of classical gaiety it were perhaps vain to inquire.Who is now after a hot and tempestuous night of angry discussion tocheer and refresh the wearied combatants by a display of beautiful fancy,enlivened by apt quotation? Have we not, on many such eveningsfound the remarks of Quintilian on Cicero abundantly verified in ourCanning ? ' Non enim pluvias (ut ait Pandarus) aquas collegii, sed vivogurgle exundat, dono quondam providence genius, in quo total viresseas eloquent experiretur. Nam quis ducere diligenter, movere vehementlyprotest? Cui tanta unquam jucunditas adfuit*?' The Atticsalt and pleasantry of Mr. C. will not indeed be easily supplied fromother quarters.In imagery, our Orator is inferior to Burke, and in declamation toPitt : but he combines more of these two properties than either of hisgreat predecessors. His love of classical lore mixes itself with almostevery thing which he describes : but this weakens in some measure theeffect of his own natural powers. His periods are sometimes mouldedin Ciceronian structure ; and yet this is not always accomplished withoutinversion and obscurity. There is less verbosity about his speeches thanin those of Mr. Pitt; from some of whose most elaborate orations yourose rather with astonishment than conviction that great man beingfrequently, like Julius Africans, f in cura variorum nimis, et com-position non nunquam longer.' In point of polish, or finish, perhapsthe preference is to be given to Mr. Canning ; in whose exuberance,even, there is generally something classical and impressive.The art and end of eloquence, let Longinus and Quintilian declaimas they please, is persuasion. Now persuasion depends a good dealupon personal authority, or relative situation. A minister is sure to bemore persuasive than an independent member. Both shall be equallysincere. But if we could put relative situation out of the question, weDe Inst. Oral. lib. x.Museums"] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 713can conceive nothing more persuasive (even without the recent evidenceof it furnished by Sir T. Lethbridge*) than the eloquence of Mr. Canning; and supposing him to have held the high and responsible situationof Pitt, the world would have beheld in him perhaps the most perfectorator of the British Senate."Mr. Canning did afterwards hold " the high andresponsible situation" of his early friend and patron,Mr. Pitt ; and just as his commanding talents andmagnificent views were about to be triumphantly developed,it pleased a mysterious but all-wise Providenceto take him from us. Like the leader whomhe succeeded in the House of Commons, HE, too,sunk prematurely . . . but from a cause of a wholly oppositenature. It seemed to me, on my last view ofhim in the House, as if the weight of the world weresitting on his brow : so deeply anxious the mindso palpably yielding the body ! I did not hear hismarvellous speech in justification of sending troopsto Portugal then, in fact, upon their march butmore than one or two friends who did hear it, andwho were old stagers in the House, and Whigs intothe bargain, assured me that it was something almostunearthly. But a truce . for the present.Upon the death of Mr. Bailey t I was offered theEditorship of the Journal at a salary of 200/., with aSir Thomas Lethbridge avowed that Mr. Canning's eloquence orargument had induced him to change his mind in favour of RomanCatholic emancipation.t His death was sudden, and free from pain. He had been longafflicted with an aneurism, and his om-h was at all times deep andomiiwii . < >n n turning in a carriage from the opera (an entertainmentto \\Iiii-lt he was passionately addicted), he haul just time to turn to hiswife, and pronouncing her Christian name, expired in her ,irin>714 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Libraryshare of one-sixth in the proceeds : but the duties ofan Editor are one thing, and those of an occasionalcontributor are another. The former was as theTown mouse ; the latter, the Country mouse. Preferring,therefore, thehollow tree,My crust of bread and liberty,"I declined the offer unhesitatingly ; and it was thenput into the hands of George Sonne, Esq. son of thecelebrated architect, and author of several vigorousand successful dramatic pieces. The property wasultimately disposed of to some bookseller, who engageda Mr. Graham for the editorship. Mr.Graham shortly afterwards went to America, andwas shot in a duel. Thus much for the fate of THEMUSEUM, which I believe fills two comely quartovolumes, and is now so scarce that Mr. Valpy, theoriginal publisher, was unable to supply me with aperfect copy of it. " Paulo majora calamus."I approach that particular period of my literarylife which was rendered as interesting as any precedingportion, by the publication of a work, in oneoctavo volume, unadorned with cuts and unattractivefrom beauty of paper or printing. It will be evidentthat I allude to THE LIBRARY COMPANION *. What-theentire title was as follows : " THE LIBRARY COMPANION ; orThe Young Man's Guide and the Old Mans Comfort in the Choice ofa Library." The reader will be pleased to bear the latter part of this(','m/KUiion.'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 715r\ IT I had done before however laborious howevercurious and however splendid from the unitedattraction of art and press-work it might still beeli-si^-nati'd as "caviare to the multitude." Somethingmore intelligible more useful better adaptedto the capacities and tastes of the generality ofinvaders was yet a desideratum. I ought also tohave been, as I at length was, conscious that thepublic could not go on giving from five to ten guineasfor my humble lucubrations, however embellished byart, and splendid from press work. It seemed,therefore, that I had only to apply the key in mypossession to the door of that Cabinet, in which, forso long a time, a great mass of bibliographical materialshad been gradually accumulating.Under this impression, I sketched the outline ofmy LIBRARY COMPANION, and submitted it to myPublishers, of whom Mr. Joseph Harding, not longthen established as the successor of Messrs. Lack-ingens,was the principal. His proposals for thepurchase of the copyright, along with Mr. Major,each to have a half-share, were so liberal that Ihesitated not one moment to accept them; and Iwent to work with as much zeal and alacrity as hadever possessed me. From the first conception to themoment of parturition, that zeal was not only unitknitting, but my notion or opinion about the realtilting collection ; as many point. \'m the letters of my friciuU, ti thefollowing pages, bear or play UJHUI it.716 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Libraryobject to be accomplished was never for a momentvaried or shaken. Information was the first objectand anecdote mixed up with it was the second ;and these, if I mistake not greatly, will be foundcombined in the eight hundred and forty-four pagesof which the work is composed. To these wereadded a synoptical table of Subjects and Authors,with an Index compiled with great care and copiousness,by Mr. R. Thomson *. So that altogether therewas a bulk of book-intelligence such as the publichad never before witnessed in one octavo volume.But I had many aids, abroad and at home ; or such alabour could not have been so creditably accomplishedin so short a period. It was my good fortuneto possess two friends, who, of all others, werethe most competent to furnish useful hints, to correcterrors, and to supply ready and valuable information,especially in the department of English History.These were HENRY Petrie, and THOMAS AMYOT,Great was the gratification of all who knew this amiable and intelligentantiquarian, to find him casting anchor in the London InstitutionBay" as one of the librarians. His talents as an illuminator may beseen to exquisite advantage in the Magna Charta deposited upon theshelves of the Althorp library. See the JEdes, vol. i. 207 225.t To Mr. Petrie, the friend of my early youth, I also owed manyobligations for corrections and additions in my " English De Sure"and the "first day" of the Bibliographical Cameron. His knowledgeof ancient MSS. places him second to none ; while in those whichappertain to " BRITISH HISTORY," I consider him the facile princeps ofliving antiquaries. How well and wisely are hands like his employed,by the government of his country, in erecting and consolidating thefabric of our Ancient History ! Seville, Twysden, and Gale will be sue-publicationsCONTINUED. 717Esquires. To the latter I had, and ever shall have,a weight of obligation to acknowledge, which is notlikely to be effectually discharged without attainingto the age of twice " threescore years and ten."Other aids abroad, were the libraries of EarlSpencer, Right Hon. T. Grenville, Mr. Hebe, Mr.Hibbert, &c. ; and as a test of the weight and importanceof such aids, I request the reader to turnto these respective names in the " INDEX" and tosee how they each stand out and shine forth. . . " velut inter ignesLuna minores."I have endeavoured to express my sense of thankfulnessfor such and other aids in the preface to thework*. Those arising from "at home," were theembodying of all that was useful in my previouslyprivately printed tracts* as well as from a collectionof extracts, memoranda, letters, and a varietyneeded by One who will have dug infinitely deeper below the surface ofthat soil of which they may be said to have comparatively only tuntrdup the turf, or upper stratum. With" what sincere gratification didI learn (when meeting my friend at his annual visits with myself atAlthorp) that the late Sir James Mackintosh had declared that "he shouldbe proud to carry a straw towards the erection of such a building asTHAT which Mr. Petrie was then occupied in raisiiur."It is not a little singular that, in the fourth, and by far the richest,part of the library of the late Mr. Hebe, there will scarcely be foundone rare poetical tract, or piece, but what has been more or less noticedin the " Library Companion" or in the 3rd and 4th volumes of the7 '/// < ></ graphical A antiquities."t See page 338, ante.718 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Libraryof details, which required a very vigilant re-examination,as well as a judicious pruning. The pearlswere all loose in a large box and I had only tostring those, as from Ceylon, which should maintaintheir lustre for the longest period. It was necessaryto give the text a sort of readable character, as I feltpretty confident about the notes ; and I am willingto believe that this point has been accomplished.The departments of Divinity, History, Voyages andTravels, and Poetry, were those which required aminuter attention, and exacted a greater labour.Some of the notes were incorporated and written inavery small hand, measuring four feet of copy whenextended, and poor Batsford* used to growl dreadfullyas he held them up to the Compositor !There was, however, one thing which I thoughtneedful before publication and that was, a Dedicationof the Work either to some " Young Man," orOld Man." My thoughts at first were naturallydirected in the former channel, to the Hon. andReverend George Spencer, youngest Son of thevenerable Earl to whom the " Spencer Library"had been as naturally inscribed ; but Mr. Spencernot only declined the intended honour with a delicacypeculiarly his own, but approved, and evenapplauded the choice of the " Old Man," to whomSee page 602, ante.t In a second letter upon this subject after having, in his firstdeclined the acceptance of the offer of the dedication, my amiable correspondentwrote thus : " I was anxious to look at the page next to theCompanion'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 719the volume was in fact inscribed. And that venerableindividual was the late Mr. THOMAS PAYNE*.When the volume was ripe for publicity, the Publisherannounced and subscribed it at what is calleda trade sale ; and I own that the number of copies(twelve hundred) subscribed for, exceeded my mostsanguine expectations. I had however a few confidentialanticipations. My friends at the corner ofCornhill had not only had a "peep behind thecurtain," but had expressed themselves well pleasedwith what they saw; while the more interested butsharp and critical examination of that bookseller,whose name stands at the foot of the title-page ofthe volume and whose name, ALONE, I am as proudTitle, as you may suppose ; and I think the name which appears in it,in every way and on all accounts, most suitable : much more so thanthat of a certain other person that shall be nameless. In fact, I don'tthink you could have chosen better ; and a very kind and proper feelingappears in it knowing, as all do, the kind of intercourse whichyou have always had with that veteran Bibliopole."The Dedication is simply thus " To Mr. THOMAS PAYNE, Bookseller,this Work is inscribed, with every sentiment of respect andesteem, by his faithful and humble servant, the AUTHOR." This excellentman, and highly respectable Bookseller, died in 1833, in his 79th year.What is said of him in the Bibliophobia, p. 28, is said truly as well asfeelingly, " and he is yet before me," as he rose and spake the " Z ds"recorded in a preceding page : 550. But another word of him in anensuing Chapter.t " We are much obliged (says Mr. John Arch) by the sheets of theL. C., last sent to us, which teem with curious and interesting matterto be voraciously devoured by both YOUNG and Om who will owe adebt of gratitude to the author for the series of publications on Biblio-ifrnitliicnl and Antiquarian subject, which he has laid before hiscountrymen."7 4 20 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Libraryas prompt to put in front of these " Reminiscences*,assured me that my labours could not fail to beIt is out of my power to add another word of praise to Avhat issaid in the Bibliophobia, p. 20, &c., in commendation of the Walton,Walpole, Robinson Crusoe, and Hogarth moralised, put forth in themost creditable and attractive form by the above gallant-hearted Bibliopolist,now residing at No. 71, Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury.His Walton's Angler t, has just reached a third edition, so that thousandsof copies of that delightful and instructive volume have been circulated.The Lives are now scarce, and the large paper of both thesetwin-volumes is running to a low ebb. Some squeamish Sentimentalisthad attacked the pure memory of ISAAC WALTON by an indirect imputationof cruelty from the apparent cold-blooded minuteness withwhich his instructions are given for fastening the frog and the wormbaits. Mr. Major fired up at the supposed charge and his Muse dictatedto him the following vigorous couplets on the occasion :Go, hypocrite ! indulge thy secret hateOf ah 1 that's open, manly, good and great ;For slight obliquities affect remorse,But act enormities as things of course.Spare the blunt insect from thy just control,And save thy tortures for the human soul.Strike at mans heart; and then serenely sleepAssured the wound is exquisite as deep."But Mr. Major has since taken loftier ground as a Bookseller and Publisher,in coming forward, conjointly with Messrs. George and WilliamNicol, in the publication of THE CABINET GALLERY OF PICTURES selectedfrom the splendid Collections of Art, public and private, whichadorn GREAT BRITAIN, with Bibliographical and Critical Dissertations byALLAN CUNNINGHAM, in 1833, 2 vols. imperial octavo. These two magnificentvolumes, executed in all the luxury of the Shakspeare Press,contain not fewer than seventy-two Engravings by the best artistswith various degrees of merit : but all chosen with discriminating taste.The letter-press, by Mr. Cunningham, is a treasury of instructive criticism.It is written throughout with the judgment of an artist, expressedt See a copious and excellent review of this enchantingly decoratedand got up little volume in Blackwood's Magazine for October, 1823.Companion'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 721productive of the most substantial as well as honourablereward.And thus the LIBRARY COMPANION the last biblio-graphical and most elaborate octavo volume from mypen came forth. Perfectly persuaded, as well ofthe upright spirit of my book, as of my motives inits publication, I felt quite sure that the former couldnot give the slightest possible offence, nor the latterreceive an improper construction. As before, I wasswift to acknowledge obligations by presents of copiesof the work to those who had aided me during itsconcoction, or to whom I stood in that sort of relativesituation as should seem at once to call forand to justify such a mark of its acknowledgment.Of the first description, there was in fact no oneso thoroughly entitled to it, as my excellent friendMr. Amyot: of the latter, the Bishop of Londonand of Norwich, and the Earl of Liverpool* hadthe only claims. Mr. Amyot who had so oftenscribbled my margins," especially in the historicaldepartment of the work and whose honesty wasof yet greater service than his kindness t did notin the frequent language of poetry. Mr. Cunningham seems always tolook at a picture with feelings as strongly poetical as Johnson saysThomson did, even at a couple of candles burning on a table. And hetreats foreigners with the same even-handed justice as native*. Heshould edit a new Dictionary of Painters. From " hose to hat" he isfull Of the POETRY OP THE ART.I had then just obtained the living of St. Mary's, Bryanston Square,Marylebone, from the Crown, through Lord Liverpool, the PrimeMinister.t I annex a few " proofs positive," of the original and racy style of3A722 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. libraryfail to acknowledge the gift in the following offhandgallantry of style and expression.James Street, ttthAug. 1824.MY DEAR D**,A thousand thanks for the Book of Books. It looksadmirably, and much less bulky than I expected. IndeedI hear that it is by no means too bulky to move, and that itleaps down from a Bookseller's shelf as nimbly as poorMadame Sacchi used to do from her tight rope. We haveno new edition of Madame Sacchi ; but I have heard morethan one Bookseller talk of a second edition of the Companionbeing likely to be called for. I trust it will, and Ihave no doubt you will in that case receive literary contributionsfrom all quarters which will enable you to render thework a perfect and complete one, by cleansing it of themy friend's correspondence. Thus : " A thousand thanks for the perusalof your proof-sheets, which I thoroughly accomplished last night.My appetite was too keen to be stayed." " Pray continue to send meyour proofs, if you find it convenient to do so, and I will readily andgladly return such observations as occur to me 7 And in the sameletter, a little below " I am afraid, by the by, that being myself, or,rather wishing to be, a bit of a book-buyer, I shall have to make a complaintagainst you similar to Launcelot Gobbo's against his Master,when he charges him with raising the price of pork by converting Jewsto Christians. You will certainly bring into the market more lovers,and consequently raise the prices of ( stately folios and beautiful duodecimo" On a subsequent occasion : " I have scribbled away mostfuriously on your margin. Some few of my notes must, I fear, be attendedto." But again, to balance this rough treatment, in a letter ofsome few days following : " When a Judge on the circuit meets withwhat is called a maiden Assize, he demands from the sheriff a pair ofwhite gloves as a perquisite. I think I have a similar claim on you, onaccount of the proof which I return ; for its maiden purity can hardlybe sullied by two trifling observations which I have made in themargin."Companion'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 7J ;trifling mistakes which were incidental to so novel and < x-tensive an undertaking. In the meantime, however, thepublic and the Booksellers too would be ungrateful if theywere not satisfied with it in its present state ; as I have nodoubt they will be, both 'old man* and 'young man,' thecomforted ' and the ' guided.'Yours, ever most sincerely,THOMAS AMYOT."But the following communication from the sameintelligent quarter will probably be more acceptableto my readers."Saturday Morning.MY DEAR D**,I am always proud to perform the office of warming-panin airing your wet sheets. I hope you do not think Iam apt to throw a wet blanket over them. In the presentinstance, as there is nothing to be noticed about Editions, Ihave not found occasion to scribble your margin. But as amatter of taste, I must say that I think your praises of thePoets of the day (with the exception of Scott and Crabbe)are a little extravagant. You know my almost peculiaropinion of Lord Byron's poetry, in which I will venture to jprophesy that the world will pretty nearly agree with me afew years hence. They will then have 'supt full withhorrors,' and will be as tired of the monotony of his gloomyravings, as they already are of the alternate barks and growlsof Kean, the Byron of the stage. Not that I would denyKean the merit of being a capital Caravaggio, a SpagnolettoTragedian. Nor do I find fault with your comparison ofMyron with those painters, and indeed I am well pleasedwith many of your remarks on him; but Caravaggio andSpagnoletto are not painters of ^ first class, however 9724 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Libraryexcellent in their peculiar styles, nor are they by any meansmodels for imitation. I therefore think you decidedly wrongin calling Lord Byron the { greatest Poet of the age;' a titledue to Scott alone in my mind though without wishing topush him to a competition with those with whom the worshippersof Byron would place their idol on a level. Iadmit your encomiums on Scott to be just, and your estimateof the relative merits of his poems to be discriminating.But I am a very heretic with respect to some others of yourheroes. I will not trust myself to say any thing about"Wordsworth, whom some of my friends (walking neverthelessat large without a keeper !) extol above Milton ! . . .Ever yours, most sincerely,THOMAS AMYOT."My Diocesan, of London the present Archbishopof Canterbury was not slow to acknowledgethe receipt of the volume, adding a brief and " comforting"testimony of its worth ; inasmuch as itappeared to him to be "a useful and entertainingvolume, replete with curious matter of great interesteven to those who have no touch of the Bibliomania"My other Diocesan was not less commendatory, anda little more diffuse."London, Dec. 6, 1824.DEAR SIR,Accept my grateful acknowledgments for your verykind and valuable present. It will give you pleasure to beassured that I have never received greater amusement, ormore useful information from the perusal of any singlevolume, than from the ' Library Companion,' and that ithas revived in the breast of an Octogenarian Bishop thatCompanion'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 725attachment to literature which formed the delight of hisearly life; and bids fair, through the medium of your labours,to afford him a never failing source of ' Comfort* in hisOld AgeBelieve me, my dear Sir,Your affte. and obliged,HENRY Norwich"*My friends, the Roxburghers, very speedily, andquite spontaneously, put their pens into motion, andwafted their congratulations upon the wings of thetwopenny post. First came Mr. Hibbert, with anavant-propos or knocking at the study door."When am I to be comforted as an 'Old Man?'for, alas! 'tis out of the question to instruct measa * Young Man.' Am I to look to you for theBook?" On getting possession of it, he wrotethus:Portland Place, 20M Aug. 1824.MY DEAR MASTER,I got my Book last night. Many thanks for it, and letme know what I am in a more worldly sense indebted. Ihave glanced into different parts with ' comfort and instructionsIf, however, you are preparing for another edition,I will point out some trivial errors, such as in a work soThese were not mere complimentary words of course ; for my friendMr. Dawson Turner, of Yarmouth, had written to me, two months before,in the following style : " You will be glad to hear that the Bishophas read much more of your book than 1, and is no less pleased. Hi-expressedhimself very kindly respecting you, and was particularly gladthat you had got the m\v church in London, which was news t himtill this morning."726 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Libraryvarious, and so bulky, could hardly fail to slip in. I amgoing out of town for three or four days, and shall carry myComfort with me.Ever faithfully yours,GEORGE HIBBERT*."And in a subsequent letter of the date of December,he says, " I hear the book very frequentlyspoken of with much commendation ; and I ampersuaded that it is powerfully contributing to " theCause of Bibliomania all over the world." Thislatter sentiment is the concluding toast of the Anniversarydinner of the Roxburgh Club : see page375, ante.My excellent " PUPIL" shortly afterwards wrotethus :Still there will, I apprehend, remain a labour for yourfuture life. I mean a work in the alphabetical form whichshall give a critical, brief, and tasteful character of all ourliterature. This, I presume, to be the Corps courage, towhich your present work may be the preliminary dissertations.Twenty years ago this had been worth a seriousreflection. Now, it cannot have a thought. * Heu ! funa letter previously to the publication, my friend expressed himselfthus : " Many thanks for the entertainment I have had in an attentiveperusal of the further portion kindly lent to me of the new work.It will be very useful, full of gratifying information, and, I trust, willbe in every body's hands. For the last wish I have more than onereason. Do not be in a hurry to get it out 'twill be a pity that itshould not be the record of all your own recollections that are directlyconnected with the subject, and also of what you may easily collect fromaccessible sources, living or dead."t In a subsequent letter, Mr. Hibbert thus judiciously enlarged uponthe subject :I know nothing more desirable than a very good Critical Index toCompanion'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 727gates labuntur anni ! ' and die current of life would nowbe frozen ere the outline of such a gigantic undertakingwere correctly got in besides other occupations, otherthoughts," &c.The next Roxburgherer, a nephew of Mr. Hibbert,whose testimony I shall " bring to book," is that ofmy old and amiable friend James Heywood Mark-land,Esq. ; a gentleman in all respects qualifiedto give good counsel, and to appreciate bibliographylore.our English literature : nothing that requires more diligent researchand more varied talent. Helps there are, both in print and living.These of both sorts are accessible to you, together with a large fund ofknowledge on the subject, already treasured up in memory or put uponrecord. The work should be critical, or it would be little worth ; butthe criticism should be liberal, scientific, tasteful, and terse : authoritiesshould be briefly cited where more extended information on each articlecould be found. Of the rarer works, copies should be indicated, orMSS. Prices also of these rare works should be cited, and a few well-chosenanecdotes as to the history of the existing copies. The workitself should be strictly grave, historical, and critical.There exists at present a dispersed multitude of luminaries, whichif combined, might produce this brilliant constellation ; but how maytheir scattered lights be collected together ? Does there not exist, incertainquarters, a notion that an initiation into all the craft and mysteriesof Bibliography is a privilege too valuable to be laid open to thevulgar ? that those who have been let into the secrets of the bona den,cannot impart their information to the public, without at once beingguilty of profanation and of lessening their own importance ? I thinkI have now and then observed symptoms of such a spirit ; and farther,to a certain degree, it might obstruct those means of information ofwhich the undertaker of such a work, as we are thinking of, would wishto avail himself. The more 's the pity, if it be so !However, be assured that you have my hearty prayers for yoursuccess, should you undertake the task ; or such a prodromtts as youthink might be an expedient herald, so as to invite and obtain assistsenough, and more than enough, for the presentEver yours,"G. HIBHI728 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [LibraryAt first, on taking a glimpse of some of its earliersheets, he observed " Your pages have afforded memuch pleasure. The book will not be exactly whatI expected. I wished for one not so entertaining ;but which would give us the requisite informationas to editions, sizes, dates, and variations. You arenow and then too cursory, and dismiss eminent mentoo much in the lump." On obtaining a completecopy, his joyful heart broke forth thus :Dorking, Aug. 24, 1825.MY DEAR D**,I have now devoted three nights to the perusal of yourLibrary Companion, and must express my astonishment atthe quantity of information contained in the notes. Youare a singular man to have accomplished such a labour inso short a time, with various heavy calls upon you, professionaland otherwise. The book is written in a gayer tonethan I quite approve of, considering the subject ; but uponthis point I know that we should not agree.Ever yours, most faithfully,J. H. Maryland."The third Roxburgherer, whose testimony it is tomeupon all occasions most pleasing to record, is theRev. Henry Drury, to whom the reader has beenbefore pleasantly introduced. My friend had madea rapid and pleasant tour with his family throughFrance in the summer of 1824. On his return hewrote thus: .*' Now in all this riot and running,there was not much time for the leisure contemplationof books or pictures ; and the only two of theCompanion'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 7*29former which I took and read, were Mde. La RocheJacqueline, and the Library Companion. I havediligently perused the whole (note and sub-note) ofyour entertaining and instructive bantling. It isan excellent work but you cannot always keep upthe Old and the Young Man.' Did you not findthe twins to bother you at times ?" &c. This, from awriter full of vivacious, original, and most entertainingintelligence. A neighbour and a Parishionerof no mean rank and influence was pleased totender the following most gratifying testimony ofthe satisfaction he had derived from a perusal ofthe pages of his Rector, to whom he was scarcelypersonally known. It was the more acceptable, becauseit contained intelligence of which I availedmyself in the second edition of the Work*.SIR, " Cluster, Oct. 1, 1824.I have received so much pleasure from the company ofyour very agreeable and useful Library Companion, thatgratitude should make me return thanks, and restrain meperhaps from pretending to assume the office of a detectionof errors. I am persuaded, however, that you will pardonmy officiousness, and attribute this communication to theonly real motive.May there not be some mistake in page 292 ? whereina note, you im-nation that Mazerar on getting ink of us,always consulted his barometer should it not be thermometer? In page .299, you remark that there has been noAt page 118.730 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. libraryengraved series of Bonaparte's Coins and Medals. Is therenot a Medal-History of Napoleon, in 2 vols. publishedabout five or six years ago ? I must beg of you to forgivethese remarks, which may perhaps be misplaced. Amongstyour great histories I do not see one, which I should thinkwas of sufficient importance to be mentioned : it is entitled,Fides Regia Britannica, sive Annales Ecclesiae Britannica.Auctor R. P. Michael Afford, alias Griffith, 4 vols. folio.Leodii, 1663. It treats of the Church history very elaborately,and of course of the general history of the Countryalso, from the earliest period down to the end of the reignof Henry II. Are you acquainted with the c Champ Fleury'par Maitre Geoffrey Tory de Bourges ? It is a very curiousbook, published in 1526, treating scientifically the mode ofmaking capitals and devices for illuminations. On lookinginto the Cameron, I see no mention of it *. You must beso used to being pestered with letters, that I hope you willforgive my intrusion.I remain yours,NEWCASTLE."Sir Francis Palsgrave volunteered the transmissionof his sentiments in the following manner :the more gratifying, as undoubtedly coming from aquarter not only thoroughly competent to appreciate,but where there could be no possible motive forflattery or disguise.Parliament Street, 6th Sept. 1824.MY DEAR SIR,I must return you many thanks for the pleasure and instructionwhich I have derived from your most valuablevolume. From the title-page to the Index it is full of new,It is however a book perfectly familiar to me ; and I have hadmore than one copy of it.Companion'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 731valuable, and amusing information : and although less gaythan its elder brothers, there is no one of the works producedby you which has better claims upon the publicsupport and approbation, &c.Believe me, my dear sir,Your most obliged and faithful servant,FRANCIS Palsgrave."I will fairly and fearlessly avow, that the opinionexpressed in the latter part of Sir Francis Pal-grave'sletter was decidedly my own. If the bookstood any chance of standing at all, it must havebeen from its own intrinsic solid worth. There wasnot a feather of an ornament, except the group ofbooks in the title-page, to recommend it. I wish Icould here contrive to cut out a piece from a letterfrom my friend Mr. D'Israeli on his return from aContinental Tour which related to Professor Wyt-teach, and the public library at Trees .but itmay not be. In the course of this entertainingletter, the author graciously contrives to entwine asmall chaplet to put round the brow of my " Companion*."His language is precious, because it is not that of unqualified commendation.Worthing, Sept. 2Sth, 1824.MY DBA B FRIEND,Your ' Companion,' I may venture to predict, will be that of allpersons who, like myself, return home with suppressed longings afterwhat you have well called ' Library Comforts' By your classificationyou have given unity to your labours. The heterogeneous matters liecondensed together ; but all may be found readily on the proper shelf.I discover many hundred new things in it, and your skilful reference toexisting objects (such as Upcott's Cat. and a multitude of literary732 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [LibraryMy friend Mr. Dawson Turner thus lets off aflying rocket of commendation.What I have seen of it I have enjoyed prodigiously,and I have observed no other errata than that at page 8,you call my poor friend Mr. Sparrow, Thomas,' insteadof * Robert.' What you have said of the RockinghamLibrary in that and other places surprizes me greatly. Youhave observed circumstances that had escaped me, often asI had seen them which is only so far extraordinary, that Inever saw you take a single note ; indeed never perceivedyou to make one. Please God I will go through your bookregularly, and will note down all I see that appears to meto be inaccurate, though I am persuaded it will amount onlyto half a dozen verbal or literal emendations."From several quarters the language of praise wasaccompanied, and rendered more acceptable, by thesuggestions of improvement and the detection oferrors. Mr. Archdeacon Wrangham was, for him,expansive upon both points *. Mr. Tooke, the Mem-anecdotesof the day) is most happy and peculiar. Your pages teemwith information, and all curious book-men in the country must surelybuy your e Companion I have been too delighted to read with a penin my hand, but there are unquestionably corrections and emendationsto be made. In your rapid views, you sometimes fall short of information; and in some cases you have fallen into mistakes ; but these areevils unavoidable in a labour so varied and so extensive. I shall oftenbe looking you over, and I have no doubt I shall be able to supply someimportant corrigenda for a future edition.Ever yours,J. D'lSRAELI."His letter from Unmanly, August 26, 1826, observes thus:Well ! I have eased my conscience, at least, in telling you how much Iam delighted with your Library Companion. May I tell you of a fewCompanion'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 733bcr for Truro, and son of the Rev. William Tooke,the celebrated historian of Russia, in offering somecorrections in my account of his father's works, thuspleasantly commences his letter.Bedford Row, Sept. 16, 1824.DEAR SIR,Though of that middle-aged class to whom your bookprofesses not to be addressed, I am inclined, judging bymyself, to think, that men of your and my standing, willderive equal, if not greater, 'guidance and comfort 1 fromit, than either youth or declining age ; with greater experiencethan the former, and more active habits than thelatter, they will be better able to appreciate the labour of thepublication, and profit more by its substantial merit," &c.This kind letter was accompanied by a presentof the translation of Lucian, in 2 vols. 4 to., byMr. Tooke's father, of which I had unaccountablyomitted the mention. I do not scruple to avow,that to those quarters whence I received notices oferrata and hints of improvement, I was doubly gratefulfor the intelligence. It is in these points thatgenuine friendship and a kind and considerate feelingbetray themselves. Among the former was a long,pa ins taking, and most acceptable letter from my oldfriend Mr. DOUCE who prefaced five pages of closewriting, containing corrections and additions, by thefollowing facetious and comforting exordium.errata . . . ' quae human parum cavity natura ? ' H And he then directs myattention to about a dozen points. I should have heartily thanked himhad he trebled die number.734 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. libraryKensington Square, Feb. 12, 1825.MY DEAR FRIEND,You see you are not out of my thoughts, though youare out of my reach. Whilst I, miserable creature, amthrown by and forgotten like a tattered garment as saidthe worthy old * * * and disciple of Dr. Squinted. Sinceyour elopement from this spot to your terrestrial paradise,4 vix duo tresve mihi de tot buprestis amici :' and I am nowas solitary as the Hermit of Ample ; but, thank God, withouthis ' prick of conscience. 9 I hear you are about reprintingyour ' Companion.' Doubtless you have heard of thegood-humoured ' guide to the companion and company tothe guide.' Such an one here, in all humility, waits uponyour good reverence ; but if you find him, like many otherguides, a blind one, or like many other companions a dulland stupid one, kick, buffet, batter, bruise, and tear him totatters. I have been too much bothered to do any thinglike ample justice to the said ' Companion,' whom I alwaysfind a * comes secundus in via.' Now and then he got ontoo fast for me, and then I would stop and talk to himsomewhat in the following strain *."Then follow his corrections. The very first are characteristic ofhimself: thus, "page 40, 'The York Missal is allowed to be' stateboldly that it is. It is now before me:" and he then gives me itscolophon at full length. Again, p. 42 (Lib. Comp), " None of youhave got the clue to the edition princeps of the BOOK of COMMONPRAYER of 1549 1. Sometime or other I will put a candle into your darkhawthorns till when you must remain in catiline nigra. Lord Oxfordand his friend Humphrey Manley thought they had caught it after along hunt : sed $u ? A propos de Homfri. He tells us, somewhere,that at Freeborn's sale of books, Vaillant, who catered for Lord Sunderland,bought the Virgil printed by Carolus, circ. an. 1472, for 40J; andpuzzled aloud, and threw up his hat for joy that he bought it so cheap !It might be dog cheap now at that price ; but surely then, it was asstMr. Douce was very rich in editions relating to the Book of CommonPrayer. In one of his letters to his friend Mr. Markland, he thusexpressed himself : " I have the Primer of 1534. It is the first inCompanion'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 735But from no quarter have I greater obligationson this score to acknowledge, than from the Rev.Thomas Farewell Home who was sure to pouncewith avidity upon a closely printed octavo volume,brimful of miscellaneous literary intelligence. Heappears to have eyed every page with pen-inlandto note down the errata, and to warn me of the samewith no unfriendly voice." My margins shouldseem to have been lustily scribbled with his crown.What he discovered and transmitted, was tomea source of triumph rather than of discomfiture ;and yet, as he justly observed, he might have embodiedthem in a printed review, and rode the highhorse of criticism with a grand display ! He thoughtit both wiser and more gracious to apprise methrough the private channel of epistolary communication; and I believe the second edition bears proofof the incorporation of his corrections. Some of hisremarks rather amused than surprised or disturbedme. " In Jurisprudence (says he) you have not onebook not a single Cycle or Encyclopaedia mentioned!"No, good Mr. Home, nor in Grammar,Lexicography, Geography, &&& Philosophy! Where-englishonly, and is a very singular curiosity in many respects. Butthis is not, strictly speaking, the King's Primer, which is that of 1545,and supposed to have been compiled or arranged by his pious majesty,he having only licensed the others. The Rev. Mr. Barrett, of Westminster,has that of 1535, not so rare as the first, but likewise a bookof great value and curiosity. I have also Primers of 1527-36-38-59-57,all quartos; and above a dozen more duodecimo, of the respectivereigns of Henry VIII., Edw. VI., and Mary : any, or all, of which areat your command. F. D."736 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. libraryfore? The work is yet incomplete; but in themost important objects which it does embrace, Ihold it to be sufficiently full and satisfactory.The first edition, of 2000 copies, was sold offwithin six months. A second, in the ensuingyear (1825), comprised half that number ; and thatI understand to be approaching a state of exhaustion.At length came forth THE REVIEWS. It was clearnow that I was both understandable and assailable tothe many." The Monthly Magazine (of whichSir R. Phillips was then the reputed editor) led theway*. The British Critic quickly followed in thewake of the " Monthly Magazine" less coarse, lesscaustic, less declamatory, less absurd : but tart, saucy,superficial, and well disposed to give a rib-thrust. ISurely it is out of my power to make a more effectual reply to theabove review,, than by quoting the language of a shrewd and intelligentcorrespondent, conveyed in a letter, of which the following is afaithful transcript.Hare-street, West, Rumford, Nov. 30, 1824.MY DEAR SIR,I have just concluded the LIBRARY COMPANION, and my copy isnow covered with pencil marks. I have also seen the critique upon itin the Monthly Magazine. The editor seems to have mistaken theobject of the work : it is intended for the use of gentlemen, and notmechanics ; and I cannot help fancying, when reading the MonthlyMagazine, that I am in the company of a strange sort of people ; suchas tax-gatherers, with pen in mouth good sort of men hearty fellowsin worsted stockings clumsy fists black waistcoats with whitestars ; whose conversation is made up of General Washington Buonapartefine fellows politics grumble grumble steam engines patentmachines to feed workhouse brats. f A penny saved is a penny got,' aspoor Richard says : ' patent fences, which break cows legs &c. &c.The Gentleman's Magazine is a very different work, and is excellent.I. A. R."(Companion'] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 737had not read twenty lines of it ere I recognised itsauthor. We had been neighbours and friends atKensington, and occasional oppositionists at vestrymeetings. In fact, we were as pitted champions in thedisputatious arena of those uproarious assemblagesof the human race. Sometimes he was the Demosthenes,and I was the Aeschines of the day : at othertimes, it was vice verse. I forget who bore the palmwhen the crown was awarded to the victorious championof eloquence.Almost simultaneously with the exhibition of thejudicial powers of the British Critic, appeared the"Censure" in the WESTMINSTER REVIEW the mostelaborate, but the most violent and vituperative of allthe reviews of the work in question. Nothing, frombeginning to end, can exceed the solemn fopperyand fierce invective of this piece of composition.There should seem to have been, in the motto or ruleassumed by the writer of it, the following wordsborrowed from the Trachinice of SOPHOCLES :*raw* c/toO KryaeiV. 477-8.Indeed that very writer himself may be thus described,in the language of the same great dramatist :BXcVw reap \0pov 0uvra, ital-rax'liv KatcSt?T\WV, & STJ KttKOvpryoi egtKon' i' /}/<."V. 1061.The latter is from the Ajax Flogellifer no bad designationof this splenetic Soils himself. Of ///;//,too, I shrewdly suspect that 1 had some personal738 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. libraryknowledge. Intentionally, by inference, by word ofmouth, or in deed, I never gave him cause of offence.I once assisted him in some trifling directions, ratherthan instructions, in a meditated trip to Munich ;and I have openly praised several of his contributionsto the RETROSPECTIVE REVIEW *, of which hewas the reputed Editor. He has shown a gratefulsense of such conduct on my part.But severity, or rather vituperation, was " theorder of the day ; " and down came the QuarterlyReview upon my heterodox volume. Now, as aReview, strictly speaking, is the opinion only of onewriter, I might have rested, and did in fact rest,satisfied with those commendatory opinions fromcharacters of undoubted literary distinction, withwhich the preceding pages have abounded ; but assuch opinion, when incorporated in a large body ofcriticism or collection of opinions in one volume,or journal, gains an additional force, its effect,whether in favour of, or in opposition to, the workreviewed, is apt to be more influential. This I believeis the secret history of almost all reviews,and of the sensitiveness of authors in consequence.Moreover, there are some people who have no eyesof their own to perceive, or judgments to exerciseor depend upon, in the perusal of an author. Theymust borrow the intellectual optics of others. TheySee an expressly honourable mention of this Review at p. xvii. ofray Preface: edit. 1825.Companion.] PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 739must lean upon the arms of an unknown, and, insome instances, an interested judge. From theQuarterly, I had both right and reason to expect atleast " fair play." The principles of my book werein strict consonance with those of the establishedchurch and state. I had impugned no rites andceremonies which had been sanctioned by time andpractised by the learned and the good. I had bespatteredno gentleman with the dirt and filth ofslander and detraction ; nor had I, on the otherhand, been the slave of a sneaking hypocrisy. I hadcompromised no just and liberal principle. Myheart dictated what my pen indited. Moreover, thepublisher of the Quarterly Review had been knownto me for a long period even during his residencein Fleet Street, where, for the first time, I met hisfriend Mr. D'Israeli at dinner. Mr. Murray'sfather had been one of the publishers of my unfortunatevolume of poems ; and had shewn kindness aswell as readiness in the bibliopolistic patronage conferred.In Fleet Street the Quarterly Review tookits birth. I had watched, with anxiety and evenfondness, its first struggles for distinction its earliestefforts at flight. I saw it flapping the groundwith the tips of its wings, till, confident in thestrength of its pinions, it soared, eagle-like, in theblue sky .Para met prime ; mox sese attollit in auras."I had in an especial manner noticed many of itsSB740 PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. [Libraryablest articles in the pages of the " Library Companion,"and suggested that plan for a Collection ofsome of the Articles upon Voyages and Travelswhich was in a measure subsequently adopted.All this might at least have blunted the edge of acoarse and ruthless weapon, which was exercised intomahawking my volume. That it did not lay inthe breast of the Publisher to have softened suchacrimony, or to have diverted or omitted the attackaltogether, is a position which I cannot bring myselfto admit ; for I know that such interventionhas been, both before and since, indisputably andeffectually exercised by the Publisher and Proprietorof the Review. I must be among the weakest ofmankind to take any protestation to the contrary, asbased upon truth. Who the then Editor was, I canhave as little curiosity to know as inclination torespect. The report was, he was " a Gentleman ofthe Law." A member of the profession he mighthave been ; but the genius and the judgment of itslate editor, Mr. Gifford, certainly did not appearto possess his successor. He might have put thehelmet of Minerva upon his head, but the bird ofinspiration did not grace its front. It should seem,however, that matters had a disposition at that timeto retrograde at head quarters, and that there was a"screw loose" somewhere. In consequence, thefollowing and sixty-fourth number of the QuarterlyReview came out under fresh editorial auspices. Agentleman succeeded who not only brought with himPUBLICATIONS CONTINUED. 741a large share of necessary experience in the mechanicalmanagement of a periodical journal, butsuperadded genius, taste, and eloquence ; a poet, anovelist, and a practised critic. That gentlemannow brandishes the editorial sceptre of dominionover the same Journal ; and I hail, as an earnest offuture good, and of increasing fame, the omission ofALL POLITICS in the last number which has issuedunder his control.But I should be ungrateful, at the close of theseremarks, if I did not notice the opposite line of conductpursued by a writer in the BRITISH REVII:\\,wherein appears an article as kind as it is copious ;betraying a thorough knowledge of the subject-matterreviewed ; and evincing, as I have before observed*,the feelings of a Gentleman with the taste of aScholar."Advertisement to the second edition.CHAPTER XIKENSINGTONIANA.A SIGH the absent claim, the dead a TEAR."POPE.IT may have been observed in a preceding page*,that in the year 1803 I came from Worcester toKensington, where I resided for the next twenty-oneyears of my life. This was a long time for a youngman to become stationary. But so it was and duringthat time I must have necessarily seen manyshifting, and changes, and losses, and gains, in thecircle in which I moved ; together with numerousalterations in the external face of things. Houses,and its concomitant, population, quickly spread overlawns and pastures; and trees were felled to makeroom for Villas, Places, or Terraces. Upon CamdenHill not a single house for the first five years waserected except the large brick mansion upon thebrow of the hill ; tenanted latterly by the family ofthe DE Vilest. Between Lord Holland's andSee page 165, ante.t A respectable, well-informed, and exceedingly agreeable family.There were few homes where " fare" was more intellectual as well asRENSINOTONIANA.Mr. DELAFIELD's (now inhabited by Mr. South ofastronomical celebrity) there was not one mansion tothe right or to the left*. This gave the neighbourhooda tolerably rural aspect ; and the last elevenhospitable. Drawing, painting, music, and a knowledge of languages,delighted and instructed in turn. Of this fine and handsome familyor rather of all those whose faces I was wont to meet at their joyousbanquets ONE only survives. My friend, Gerard de Vise, the eldestson, has but lately paid the debt of nature. I knew his widow, andvisited her family (Major Torriano's) long before Mr. De Vise'sfather came to settle at Kensington. I believe no union to have beencloser or more affectionate than that of my friend with his survivingpartner.Mr. Delafield, a widower, was latterly my immediate neighbour.He was the active partner in a great and long-established brewery, andhad married the sister of the late Alderman Combe, one of the bestchief magistrates of which the City of London could ever boast : active,honest, patriotic. Mr. Delafield was a sensible and highly respectableman. His house was enfiladed by two avenues of elm-trees, of beautifuleffect, at a given distance ; and the house, though small for hisestablishment, had the snug and picturesque air of a country villa.Now, all is changed. The elms have disappeared ; a brick wall encirclesthe garden; and the tube of the astronomer is nightly levelled atthe stare, where, erst, the quiet rubber and the pi tit souper resuscitatedand enlivened the parting guest. Mr. Delafield always entertainedlike a gentleman. Judges of port wine allowed none to go beyond his.I was more intimate with his peaches and nectarines. Late in lifeand I believe in a great measure at my suggestion he undertook thereading of Gibbon's " Decline and FaU" He read it throughsteadily,a nd unflinchingly ; and told me he had been astonished how a manworking with such materials, and through such darkness and barbarity,could have BUILT SUCH A HISTORY. He loved the society of intelligentand clever men. He met Dr. Jenner at my table, when living in:ton Street; and was delighted with his pleasantry of mannerand generality of information as he well might. Jn after years heim-t Mr. Roger Wilbrahara, whose talents struck him with equal force.1 >r. Cionet and Mr. Delafield had long been great cronies. The formert;ood old age, and his eldest son is the inheritor of his worthas well as of his fortune.744 KENSINGTONIANA.years of my residence, at the extremity of ThorntonStreet, was, upon the whole, a cheerful and a desirableposition. From the drawing-room and bedroomwindows, we had an uninterrupted view of theavenue leading to Holland House. This was somethingfor a residence within two miles of HydePark Corner. Within this house were celebratedthe Spencerian and Decameronic Symposia*.But the lapse of " twenty-one years" marks otherchanges in a variety of channels, and of which someare of a serious complexion. . .A sigh the ABSENT claim, the DEAD a tear."And of both this description of changes I havehad my share of experience. I first tasted thatbitterest of all sorrows which is brought to our ownhomes, and to our own bosoms. . .in the loss of a belovedchild t. I could, however, even without suchsharp experience, have sympathised with others, surroundedby darker distress ; and among those earlierafflictions, which fill a parent's cup with woe, therewas not one, without my own threshold, whichtouched me more sensibly than that of our thenVicar, Mr. Ordered, on the loss of his youngerson Holden : a Dynamite full of talent and ofpromise t. Of those who paid me the earliestPages 531, 625, ante.t Page 282, ante.J I got intelligence of this melancholy event when at Manheim in1818, on my return to England; and the same post that brought suchsad news, conveyed intelligence of another similar event, that affectedKENSINOTON1ANA. 745attentions, HENRY NORTON WILLIS, Esq., wasan MM ir the most forward and cordial. He was agentleman and a scholar, and a man of a broad andliberal understanding. His amalgamation of whiggishand toryism was admirably managed, so as tooffend neither party ; and during the threatened invasionof this country, by Bonaparte, my friend Mr.Willis, (par courtoise Colonel) who was the secondin command of the Kensington Volunteers, (MajorTorriano being the Colonel), felt as gallantly and aseagerly disposed to cut off the head of the Invaderas the Right Honourable William Pitt himself.His loyalty was not to be questioned; but hewould pin his faith, and fasten his creed, upon noman's sleeve, unless he had liberty to form and todefend it to the utmost as the result of his ownunblessed conviction. There was no slavish suc-currencyabout him to any man, however exaltedby rank or condition. At one time he was consideredto have been intimate with the Princeafterwards George IV. ; but he would cultivate nosociety where there was not a thorough congenialityof feeling. He was one of the Gentlemen of theBoard of Green Cloth, and had been half a centurya servant of the King. When Lord Grenvillewas Prime Minister, he was chosen by that loi'tv-intended statesman to become Treasurer to the Princemore nearly ; the demise of my niece in her twenty-eighth year.She lies Imrio I, together with her mother, who wax burned to deathaccidentally, by the side of my dear son in Kensington churchyard.746 KENSINGTONIANA.cess Charlotte of Wales ; a post which he filled withundeviating correctness and integrity. Mr. Williswas very much above the ordinary run of gentlemen-scholars; and, like the present venerable Bishop ofNorwich, having an aptitude in quoting Latin prose,he would frequently, in my hearing, give us manyeloquent passages from Livy an author to whomhe was particularly attached. But how delightfullywas his day wont to commence ! Visit him, as Ihave often done, by ten in the morning, and thereyou found him tete-astute with his daughter ****-[,both rolling out the hexameter of Homer : nowfrowning with Achilles, and now weeping with Andromache! and both, curious and dexterous in allthe mysteries and niceties of the middle-verb. Myfriend reached his seventy-seventh year ; and died, Imay truly say, " universally respected."Of the Rev. Dr. Posset, who afterwards removeto town, I have before spoken, as well as of theRev. Thomas King; both, men not only of veryopposite principles to each other, but in very littleunion with those of Mr. Willis. It was amusing tosee these three learned gentlemen, with the Vicar*t* This amiable and talented lady was, and for aught I know to thecontrary, now is, the ablest and most faithful draughtsman, in copiesof ancient pictures, in the figure line, with whom I am acquainted. Iscarcely know such specimens as those which came from her pencil.Her kindness furnished me with a head of my beloved Sir ThomasMore, in miniature, upon ivory, from the original of Hans Holbein inKensington Palace. It has been these twenty years the inmate of mystudy.% Page 167.KENSINGTONIANA. 747cheering them on," having occasional gladiatorialskirmishes with each other chiefly upon politics.At that time there was little or no half tint in men'sopinions. They thought boldly and spoke roundly.Mr. King was for pouring out the whole contents ofhis vial of wrath upon the head of Mr. Fox and ofBonaparte. The income tax and the assessed taxeswere always the Iiicubi which sat on Dr. Cosset'spillow. Mr. Ordered strove to frighten them away ;and Mr. Willis* would come in coolly, after Mr.King's vial of wrath had been entirely expended, tojoke and to jeer in the pleasantness and most reconcilingmanner imaginable. He was always sure ofMr. King's heart being in the right place.The earlier years of my residence at Kensingtonwere spent in Hornton Street, a very humble mansion,in rather an inferior quarter of the town ; butwhich, in the time of William III., is supposed tohave been inhabited by many of the lordly attendantson the court at Kensington Palace. This houseMy friend, Mr. Willis, had a large and a good society, in whichlie was fond of moving. He was a great Clubbutt. He must have beenconscious of topping the generality of his acquaintance upon ordinaryliterary subjects. His powers of conversation were considerable, andhis voice was soft and melodious. As he was a resolute thinker, so hewas occasionally a resolute speaker. When a certain general was appointedto a West India command, he did not scruple, upon everyoccasion, to declare his conviction of his being " a coward at heart ;"and this, accompanied by an action " suited to the word." The late Dukeof Kent had a high opinion of him, and they had frequent and lengthycorrespondences together. Under few roofs have I passed pleasant, ror more improving hours than under that of my DECEASED FBUSKD.ixxlily sufferings were excruciating before his departure.748 KENSINGTONIANA.was full of timber, and full of inconvenience in consequence.Yet I left it with a sort of regret ; forthough it had witnessed some acute scenes of suffering,it had witnessed more of vigorous labour andof joyous recreation*. The Bibliomania, the Classics,the first three volumes of the Spencer Library,and the first two volumes of the TypographicalAntiquities had been completed in it to say nothingof More, Fenton, and Charles. Here too Icomposed my Lectures for the Royal Institution .The little recess, or boudoir, in which these Workswere anvilled and shaped, was always dear to me;and provoked, rather perhaps than justified, its intrusionupon the public attention at the end of thethird volume of the Bibliographical Cameron.From this identical spot I walked into the pulpit ofKensington Church to preach my first sermon beforea congregation that might have awed stouter andAt one of these " recreations " when Mr. D'Israeli, Mr. Alex.Chalmers, Mr. Markland, Mr. Haslewood, and a few others, dined withme for the first time it chanced that Mr. Chalmers and Mr. Haslewoodsat opposite each other; and a very warm discussion took place abouttwo small rival editions of Prince Arthur and his Round Table. Neitherof the two last named gentlemen had known that his opposite neighbourwas the editor of one. After much cross-examination by all the rest,Mr. Haslewood was compelled to confess himself the editor of that editionwhich had scarcely any sale; and Mr. Chalmers the editor of thatof which the impression was nearly exhausted; but to the disgrace ofthe age I add, that Mr. Haslewood's had all the exceptionable passagesexpunged, and Mr. Chalmers's all the same passages retained. Mr. H.wrapped himself up in his virtue," and construed defeat into triumph !t See page 290, note ; where some local anecdotes are mentioned inconnexion with the composition of the Bibliomania, in the above residence.KENSINCJTOMAN ^.older nerves* ; and I obtained my first piece of prefermentby preaching a funeral sermon upon thedeath of the Rev. Archer Thomson, at Quebechapelt, for which I had notice of preparation onlyon the Saturday morning preceding.And here I commenced my combat-trials forpreacher ships, and public situations of literary distinction.Let no young man's " heart fail him" onfirst, second, or even third discomfiture. " On"the " contra audacious ito" should be his motto; iflie have any confidence in his own powers and moralcourage and any reliance upon influential friends.London is a vast field an unequalled " champ deMars" for the exercise of warfare of every description.I know not for how many preacher ships IOf course I never thought of preaching a first sermon of my owncomposition. It was one of Carr's, with the text, " And Isaac wentout into the fields to meditate at the eventide." Upon this very text Iheard the once famous Mr. Irving preach, on my first acquaintancewith him in the pulpit. He disappointed me. I had been taught toexpect more eloquence and more passion.t Mr. Archer Thomson was the eldest son of the Rev. Seth Thomson,one of the most winning and apostolical of preachers as to persuasivenessand sincerity. His son was what is called a fashionable preacher ; buthe was fundamentally wrong in his idea or doctrine of preachnuMit :not because he was impassioned, but because he gave the colouringof passion to all topics alike ; and would be tearing the heart of theIn .ire, as well as of himself, out of its very socket, when there was nonecessity or intelligible ground for such excitement. I heard him preachhis last sermon on Good Friday, in Kensington church. It was themost painful exhibition I ever witnessed, and became almost terrific atUs conclusion. No physical energies could sustain a frequent repetitionof such violence. He died, justly beloved and respected, in his 3.1thyear, in 1805.750 Kensington ANA .strove; but Dean Andrew did not allow me topreach a second time when he offered me the pulpitof Archbishop Tennyson's chapel in Swallow nowRegent-Street. I loved the name of Tennyson on athousand accounts ; and not the less for the Owner ofthat name having had a vehement passion for iftofos,and for having left behind him a library from whichthe public is at no time excluded*. But I cast myeyes around for a more lofty object of professionalambition. The Philanthropic Chapel was justerected, and, as usual, scores of Candidates were inmotion. There was no chance. My friend theRev. Mr. Yates, with his colleague, the Rev. Mr.Jackman, had been engaged to fill the pulpit alternatelyt. There was a talk too of the Rev. SydneyI refer the reader, with a pleasurable confidence, to what is said ofthis exemplary archbishop in the Biog. Cameron, vol. iii.^. 273.t They are now both AT REST, and both, while living, had alwaysmy cordial and respectful attachment. Mr. Yates was chaplain toChelsea Hospital for many years. On his death, that situation wasconferred by Lord John Russell, then Paymaster of the Forces, uponthe Rev. John Gleig, a name well calculated to excite attention and bespeakpraise. He commenced his career as a "militant" of a differentdescription. His Subaltern will never want a reader : it is among themost sparkling and captivating of modern prose specimens. It stormsthe heart, and takes all its affections captive ; but there are yet scenes(witness the night battle, see page 79, ante, in the New Orleans Campaign)of a higher class of writing. Had that hapless and most spiritedcampaign terminated victoriously, a livelier interest, and more prosperoussale, had attended the publication. There is a natural, if notinvincible repugnance, to read that which ends in one's discomfiture, ifnot disgrace. Oh ! that those ten thousand British bayonets, whichgleamed upon the plains of New Orleans, had been directed by thesame British arms upon the plains of Waterloo ! . . . that stupendous battlehad terminated at four in the afternoon. What then ? The victorymight not have been so complete.KENSINOTONIANA. 75 iSmith coming forward the admitted pulpit-giant oftho day. He and Dr. Moore, the present rector of1'ain-ras, were about that time filling the eveningpulpit, alternately, of the Foundling Hospital. Theywere powerful preachers and attractive from verydifferent causes ; the first being considered as theCaravaggio, the second as the Guido, of painters ofthe human heart and passions. The one sometimescame down upon you as an overwhelming hailstormof reasoning and invective. . .not unmingledwith that occasional thunder and lightning of moralpower, which drives the erring wretch into his lurkingplace and strong holds if vice can be said tohave strength any where! The other taught thecontemplation of human nature in its more tryingmoments of illness, distress, and helplessness ; andfew men could be said to draw the curtains of adeath-bed with a more graceful hand than Dr.Moore.But in my personal history of competitor-ship,nothing equalled the struggle which I enduredfor succeeding to the Secretaryship of the Societyof Antiquaries, vacant by the death of Mr. Brand*.Mr. Brand was rather the acting Secretary forthe quasi Secretary; that situation being held by theUov. Mr. Wright. My eyes were now fixed uponnothing but the List of Members of the Society inHe died in 1807 ; and some account of the sale of his library maybeteen in the Bibliomania, page 605.752 KENS1NGTONIANA.question. In every room, and upon every table,there was the list. The pen was always in my hand.Letters, notes, mementos, memoranda, promisesdoubtful and positive, negatives equivocally shaded. .in short, for many weeks, all the anxieties, doubts,and fears, which are the attendants upon all candidates'hopes, prevailed. But I had powerful friendswithin and without Kensington. Alas ! I had oneEnemy, or rather Opponent, more powerful than allmy friends united ; one, who, in proportion to hissupport of the favourite*, was as intermitting inhis opposition to myself : an opposition, which wasnever allowed to cool over the morning chocolateor the evening negus. In short, I had to combatthe Director of the Society in the person of SAMUELLyons, Esq.t. However, I did not allow a featherThe " favourite" proved to be the present NICHOLAS CARLISLE, Esq.a worthy and respectable gentleman, and author of many laborious anduseful works, which it was found he could execute in perfect compatibilitywith the execution of his duties as Secretary to the Society ofAntiquaries. There was a third candidate, whose name I have forgotten; but I believe he had not a dozen votes.t Mr. Lysons must not be defrauded of his DUE. He was opinionated,dogmatical, and, at times, overbearing. There was only one dictum towhich he, apparently, deferred and that was, the opinion of the manby whose instrumentality he is reported to have become the successorof Mr. Artie, as Keeper of the Records in the Tower of London ; asituation of equal respectability and responsibility, and not destitute ofa substantial revenue. The " man" here alluded to, was the late SirJoseph Banks. Mr. Lysons could " bear no rival near his throne."Few men intrigued so deeply in all matters connected with the Societyof Antiquaries ; and to oppose him was to seal your own doom, if youhad any material object to accomplish. He did not care whose knockerhe lifted, or whose chamber he invaded, when an important electionKENSINGTONIANA.of my wings to droop. The morning, or rather theo\ filing of contest, at length arrived. My Kensingtongoing on ; his whisper was about equal to three human voices atfull stretch ; and his elevated tones would have split tumblers, wherethe man, recorded by Morshof, split one wine-glass, by the sonorouspowers of his voice. See this curious matter referred to in the Bibliomania,page 61, note.But this is NOT Mr. Tyson's " due," because the more commendablepart of his public character ought not to be withheld. He was ardent,active, and indefatigable in all measures which he believed to be conduciveto the Society's credit and well-doing. He had scarcely a rivalin antiquarian and tasteful acquirements. He had a ready pencil and afaithful needle; and he etched with the facility that he drew. Youmight depend upon the general truth and character of all that came fromhis pencil. His productions were numerous, for their labour and expense.In the " Environs of London," in which he largely assisted hisBrother, the author of the work, he may be said to have scarcely donemore than executed an elegant outline of an interesting picture. HisRoman Antiquities are all of a grand and striking class of character.He spared no expense, and he risked a great deal in some of those publications.His Magna Britannia is necessarily little more than the foundof a work, which, if completed according to such a beginning,would have immortalised the name of Lyons. Yet its Authorwas not a deeply read English Historian. His impressions were quickand strong, therefore often erroneous ; nor till pushed to the last extremityor stronghold, would he surrender the post he had at firstobtained. He was the Crib of all antagonists, " never knowing whenhe had had enough." His works are indispensable to all well-selectedlibraries.It has been a matter of surprise to me, that, to the active and enterprisingmind of the late Mr. Samuel Lysons, it never struck him thatthe appendage of a MUSEUM to the Society of Antiquaries might beboth an appropriate and a highly instructive appendage. There wouldbe only two modes of accomplishing this : a grant or loan of money, inthe first instance, and a subscription of I/, per annum from each member,to cover the loan and contribute to occasional contributions. Whenone thinks what annual sums are paid for eating and drinking Hubs,one has a right to expect countenance and support in a matter of suchcomparative " pith and moment." On the appointment of my friendJames Hey wood Markland, Esq., to the Directorship of this Society, inSc754 KENSINGTONIANA.ton friends the Vicar, Rev. Dr. Hamilton, Mr.Willis, and Mr. Delafield accompanied me to Holy-lands'coffee-house, hard by, where we dined : beforethe note of preparation" was heard. The issue iswell known. On " the house dividing," there appearedone hundred and twenty votes for my Antagonist,and seventy-seven for myself. I yielded, andwithdrew ; but the most gratifying circumstance of thenight to me was, the merited severity with whichMr. Ray, a barrister, chastised the Council of Antiquariesfor allowing the disgraceful practice of ascored, or House list, with the name of the favouritecandidate to be thrust into the hands of theunwary*, and strewn upon the table around whichthe Members sat. And yet this practice was againresorted to in an election of greater "pith andmoment" than that just recorded.It was during my residence in Hornton Street,that I made the personal acquaintance of a man, atthe stroke of whose pen all understandings wereenlightened, and whose hand the proudest upon earthmight have been yet prouder to grasp. It is [Sir]WALTER SCOTT, of whom I now speak. He breakfastedwith me twice, and met Mr. Hebe at dinner1827, that gentleman wrote and published a very sensible and convincingletter to the Earl of Aberdeen, the President, upon this identical subject.Seven of my voting friends went over unintentionally to the enemyfrom having this " scored list" put into their hands. The fact is, thatseveral, seeing this list put upon the table by Council-craft, did, withoutthe use of their own eyes, go and put them into the balloting box underthe impression that they were supporting myself.KENSINGTON IAN A. 7 Honce. Our conversation was animated and incessantand as instructive, on the part of my guests,as animated. The first time he breakfasted withme, on attending him to the street door, and slippingthe bolt, he stopped me, and grasping my arm,asked me if I had seen the Hon. Mr. Spencer'spoems, just then published? On replying in thenegative, he repeated the first stanza of one of themsent to a Lady in apology for not having attendedher evening party in consequence of having beenat a ball. . .Too late I stay'd : forgive the crimeUnheeded flew the hours ;For noiseless falls the foot of Time,Whene'er he treads on flowers."and pronounced the whole to be very .beautiful.He had not then long published the Lady of theLake, and I amused him exceedingly by telling himof the eagerness with which I had carried thatpoem, on its publication, to a countrywoman of his(Mrs. Drink water, the wife of Colonel Drink water *)then residing at Kensington and read to her tin*whole of the first two Cantos (not in a " sotto voce")on a Saturday evening, when I had to preach aCharity Sermon on the ensuing morning for whichtwo thirds of my voice were gone! and the congregationin consequence requested that " a gentle-seepage 150, ante.756 KENSINGTONIANA.inn in the possession of lungs might be engaged ona future occasion."I cannot name the foregoing poem without callingto mild how the public used, from time to time,to anticipate the periodical returns, as it were, ofthe MUSE of Scott, and to hail her with renewedjoyfulness upon every appearance ! They looked forwardto "another and another still succeeding," withan absolute " increase of appetite," which seemed togrow by what it fed upon." The blaze of his prosehas now perhaps reduced his poetry to a fainter tint ;but Sir Walter Scott is the second of modern poetsonly because Lord Byron is the first. What a preludeto his Marion, and the Lady of the Lake,was his Lay of the Last Minstrel the most finished,as well as elaborated, of all his poems. I saw itin MS., with a friend in London, two years beforeits publication. . .and only marvelled, as I well might,how such a Gem should not have before seen thelight*. I had more than a glimpse of the comingsplendour of Marion, by Mr. Miller the bookseller(who had a fourth share in the copyright), readingto me its gloriously picturesque opening, whenOf all the sweet and spirit-stirring passages in this romantic poem,not one, in my humble opinion, quite comes up to that of the poet'saddress to his country . . .O Caledonia ! stern and wild;"Had Burns lived to hear it, or to read it, he must have gone half crazy.But I fancy I yet discover in the Glenfinlas of Sir Walter Scott firstpublished in Matt. Lewis's " Tales of Wonder" the dawn of the noondaysplendour of his Lay.KENS1NOTONIANA. 7.>7little more than the second Canto had been printed.From the first it was my favourite; although Iapprehend the general verdict, from principles ofirtillnntry, will be in support of heady oftheLake*.Yet there are parts of Rokeby equal to either. Itear myself away from these themes reluctantly .and almost growl, as Ajax did, when he was compelledto retreat with his full-moon shield thrownbehind him, from the " iron sleet of arrowy shower"of the Trojans. But surely no more pleasurableexcitements ever took place in the breast of thepublic, than on the announcements, and yet more onthe deliveries, of the quarto volumes of these immortalpoems ! poems, in which a strict principleof morality is combined with the loftiest romanticdaring ; in which virtue can be yet braver, and morebeautiful, than vice ; and in which all the stirringsympathies of kind and of country are most singularlydeveloped, and pressed home upon the bosomof the enchanted reader. But I leave all thisand ten thousand times better than "all this" toSir Francis Freeling and Mr. Hebe were among the first of SirWalter Scott's friends to whom early copies, accompanied by letters,were sent of his respective poems. I remember Mr. Hebe's repeatingto me the whole of that Canto of the Lady of the Lake in which FrederickDiu and his men make their suddenly magical appearance from thu-irsubterraneous hiding-places : and this, nearly a month before the PublicFEAST commenced ! I seem to have something of a sort of twilight"Reminiscence" of a copy of Rokeby having been in Mr. Herbertlibrary, in which there waa a letter, from iu author, stating it to havebeen composed within four months I758 KENSINGTONIANA.Mr. Lockhart. I dare not trust myself with theDramatic Novels of this SECOND SHAKSPEARE*.Not long after the first visit of Sir Walter Scott,my humble mansion was illuminated hy the presenceof another great Scotch Don, in the person of Dr.Jameson, the author of a Dictionary which hasprobably no equal in a living language. He is alsoauthor of a great deal of profound antiquarian loreespecially in Mseso-Gothic researches. He must nowbe verging fast towards Octogenarianism ; thoughI understand his faculties to be as sound, and hisTo have had something like a correct notion of the various, as wellas astonishing, powers of this extraordinary man, the reader shouldhave been present (as many might have been) at the personifications ofhis leading characters by the whole strength of the Corps Dramatiqueof Drury Lane, shortly after his decease. It was represented, when Isaw it, after the play of Rob Roy . . . when Mr. Macready walked acrossthe stage in the very dress in which he had played that character witha discrimination and force to leave all rivalry at a distance.I yet hope to see a good bulky octavo volume, entitled SCOTTIANA,developing all those curious, amusing, and collateral circumstances connectedwith the literary life of this GREAT MAN. Mr. Lockhart will doubtlessdo much ; but his line is more direct and exclusively biographical.Two things were always the attendant upon the introduction of the subjectof Sir Walter Scott's Novels : first, who was the AUTHOR ? secondly,which was the MOST DELIGHTFUL ? I remember being privy to ratheran angry discussion upon the first point : a Lady having boldly declaredthat they were written by one of her sex, an American, and regularlytransmitted from Baltimore across the Atlantic ! This was indeed verydroll! . . . but cheeks reddened, and eyes flashed fire during the discussion.Had it been from " the sterner sex," something else mighthave also " flashed fire !" Upon the second point, if all the suffragescould be collected, would it be in favour of the Heart of Mid Lothian ?and yet my own would not exactly go in support of this selection.Which then ? Gentle reader, they are ALL my FAVOURITES with two(obvious) exceptions only.KLVMVMOMANA.habits of literary application as unsubdued, as ever.But if there were any one tie, or circumstance which,on retrospection, binds me to the memory of thismy humble residence, it was that, here, I made theacquaintance, on very extraordinary grounds, of oneof the warmest and most generous-hearted of friendsGEORGE Wander NEUNBURG, Esq. I have saidthat our acquaintance originated (as our friendshipwas afterwards confirmed) upon "very extraordinarygrounds." Thus it was. Opposite to methere lived an amiable lady, a widow, whose husbandhad been lost at sea off the Cape in that terriblestorm in which Admiral Trowbridge went down inthe Blenheim that vessel being the convoying shipto a large fleet of East India Merchantmen. Shewas about to retire into Kent, with a numerous littlefamily, and to economise upon what her stintedincome allowed. The bill for the letting of herhouse was affixed to the window, and some tradesmenhad also a written notice of her intendeddeparture.It chanced that Mr. Neunburg, who was awidower, and a retired City Merchant, had takenup his quarters at the King's Arms Coffee House,at Kensington ; being not only desirous of changeof air, but of a small commodious residence in theimmediate neighbourhood. By accident, he calledwhere there was an announcement of my friend'shouse about to be let. He was directed to the houseit-elf; its owner happening to be at the time engaged760 KENSINGTONIANA.at dinner. He examined the furniture, attendedby the Servant expressed himself well satisfiedwith what he saw, and asked, on retiring, for herMistress ? He received an answer that she couldnot then, conveniently, see him 5 but if he wouldcall on the morrow, the business might be furthergone into. He called on the morrow. Not Edwardthe Fourth could have been more struck with thepresence of Elizabeth Woodville, than Mr. N. waswith my opposite neighbour. She was in truth ahandsome woman, and in the prime of life. TheVisitor had turned his sixtieth year.He ran his eye quickly, but confusedly, over theseveral items of furniture, and expressed himselfentirely satisfied with the charges " but, Madam"(said he, addressing himself directly to the fair mistressof the house, who at the time was surroundedby her large and blooming family), " there is ONE,and, as it strikes me, the MOST ESSENTIAL, piece offurniture which you have omitted ? " Now few mencould assume a more gentlemanly air, and tone ofvoice, than the Visitor in question. The lady couldnot comprehend what was meant or alluded to. Shethought there had been a strange neglect in makingout the Inventory, and begged the unknown "wouldbe more explicit?" "Madam," rejoined that unknown," CAN I be more explicit ? On what objectare my eyes fixed upon, BUT YOURSELF . in makingthis declaration? You will forgive me, but I speakas I feel." I would here ask the most experiencedKENS1NGTON1ANA. 761of novel readers, or novel writers, whether " theRomance of real life" furnished anything moreromantic than THIS? But so it was and withinsix months of this memorable interview, the partiesbecame man and wife at Kensington Church theceremony having been performed by myself.Mr. Neunburg took his Bride down to his mansionat Stamford, in Lincolnshire, where he had long resided,and ably and faithfully performed the dutiesof a magistrate for the twenty preceding years. Hewas the very next neighbour to the Marquis ofExeter, whose park enfiladed the back part of hishouse. His connexion with the late Marquis continueduninterrupted till the day of the death of thelatter ; and more than upon one occasion of electiondid my friend's influence with the freeholders ofStamford stand the Marquis in "good stead." Iwas not long in paying a visit to the " Happy Pair,"and found them not only extremely well disposed togive me the warmest reception, but the Library * ofthe bridegroom had more than ordinary attractionsto prolong my sojourn. Mrs. Neunburg latterlybecame afflicted with the severest rheumatic affectedhad been many years collecting rather a curious, than a generallyserviceable, library. My expedition with him to Dash, the bookseller,at Kettering, is recorded in the Biog. Cameron, vol. ii. p. 53 ;and his precious little volume of a collection of black-letter Catechismsis described at page 528-9. This was the last book I ever put into thehands of the late Bishop of Ely, who seemed to devour it, as he placedit upon a shelf within reach. It was valued to the Duke of Devonshire,in the sale of that prelate's library, at 10/. 10., and it was worth it. The762 KENSINGTONIANA.tion, so as to render locomotion, even to the shortestdistance, almost impracticable ; and for the lasttwelve years of her life she may be said to have beenboth a prisoner and a martyr to her afflictions. Theaffectionate attention of Mr. Neunburg never forone moment knew diversion or decay. He died inhis seventy-second year in 1822, and was followedby his widow in 1831 * after sustaining her protractedsufferings with christian-like fortitude andresignation.Towards the year 18 14 I quitted my residence inHornton for one at the top of Hornton Street thenjust newly built ; and although my house was verylittle larger, the situation was more airy and agreeable: for nothing intercepted my view of the avenuecrack volume of black-letter rarity, in my friend Mr. Neunburg's library,was, Fullest's Flower of Fame, which was sold for 30/. 9*., at the saleof his library after his decease, which sale produced 1750/. Many anhour have I tarried with the owner in his library : many a draweropened : many a shelf cleared, filled, cleared, and filled again. He wasdelightfully exulting over his fine and perfect copy of Bentley's Monumentsof Matrons; or, Seven several Lamps of Virginity, 1582, 4to. ;Nichols' History of Leicestershire, which was sold for 51 1. 9s. ; and,above all, his Illustrated Granger, which produced 210/. But myhospitable friend had as curious a cellar as a library ; and, open-heartedand generous to excess, was himself little beyond a sipper and taster ofvinous fluids. Some few dozens of champagne and burgundy wereone day denounced as acid and worthless : " I'm glad they are not myBOOKS" . . . was his only reply.Mrs. Neunburg's second son is now Rector of Carlton Scroop, nearGraham. The father-in-law had purchased the next presentation forhim, some eight or ten years before he came into the possession. I amproud and happy to call this exemplary young man my " right goodfriend." He lives as comfortably as a bachelor can live.KENSINGTONIANA.of elms leading to Holland House. I might indeedin some measure sayLarger hie campos aether et lumina vestitPurpura . . ."for the sunsets had frequently all the colours of aPainter's pallet. It was in many respects a desirableand cheerful residence. I had not long enteredit, when my friend FRANCIS DOUCE, Esq., came topitch his tent in Kensington Square, so as to reconcileme yet more to having resisted all attacks andappeals for transferring my Penates to London.The reader has been repeatedly introduced to Mr.Douce in the previous pages in the character of anHistoriographer*, in which he certainly maintainsno despicable reputation. But he must now knowa little more of him as my neighbour at Kensington.Nullius addicted jurare in verba magistri"seemed, of all others, to be the motto by which hewas guided the pivot upon which his intellectualmachinery turned. This necessarily at times ledhim into errors if not into scrapes. He wouldneither bend nor bow to any man breathing. Freedomof thought and of action was his birthright,and he was determined to show it upon all occasions.This may be very well of itself, provided the individual,resolving to shape his course accordingly,live apart from the world in the centre of Salis-seepaget 308-12, &c.764 KENSINGTONIANA.bury plain, or of the " Great Desert," or in Northernwilds, inaccessible of human foot. . .." where Mentis sleeps, and hardly flowsThe freezing Tanais through a waste of snows."But, for a man, warming himself by the side ofNewcastle coals living in London ; roofed in by alarge and commodious house ; surrounded by ampleand highly-polished maple wood book-cases ; everkeen in pursuit of art and antiquities ; and lovingsomething like conflicting opinions upon these subjectsfor a man, I say, of such complexion, it wasthe most indiscreet and indefensible system whichcould have been adopted! Yet it was surprisinghow, in a great measure, he lived by such a rule,and harassed himself, in very many instances, inconsequence.Of this indiscretion, my amiable and generousfriend was not, strictly speaking, fully sensible ; buthe was nevertheless an eminently amiable and generousman. The gentle attentions and civil courtesiesshewn to him by Dr. Bandied and others, at theBodleian Library, secured to that magnificent establishmentthe bequest of his library. The cordialhospitality extended to him by Sir Samuel RushMeyrick, at his residence in Monmouthshire, wonthe visitor's heart ; and his collection of curiosities,antiquities, &c., were bequeathed to his host in consequence: so that there must have been no smallsusceptibility or consciousness of kindnesses and .765mentions bestowed, on the part of Mr. Douce*. Myfriend died a very rich man, although a dozen yearsbefore his death he was scarcely in possession of afifth of what he left behind ; with the exception ofhis library and curiosities. It may be doubtedwhether his peace of mind was not a little broken,and his serenity of temper a good deal ruffled, bythe NOLLEKENS LEGACY. I do not think that hewas ever afterwards so happy as he was beforenotwithstanding his increased ability to meet all thetaxes which the state and the parish might imposeupon him! Indeed I have the evidence of his ownconfession in writing, that this suggestion is but toowell founded. A portion of a letter, written undergreat morbidity of feeling, ends thus :Upper Gower Street, 26th April, 1828.MY DEAR FRIEND,* * * * *How strangely things go in this incomprehensible world !Y<>u keep up your spirits amidst occasional adversity. Ilose mine in the bosom of that prosperity which men falselycall happiness. Thus is the balance between us renderedHe observed in his will that he hoped his friend, Sir S. R. Meyrick,would build a room to receive these curiosities. Sir S. Meyrick has doneso, and will never repent it to his dying hour. What a singular andprecious cabinet it is the fruit of half a century's quiet but perseveringcollecting! How often have I caught but im-rc glimpses of it, sufficientto convince me of the pleasure derivable from a leisurely survey. Goon-uhCOURT may well be a show-house, on more accounts than one. Howadmirably is it placed, and by what a country in it surround. <1 !766 KENSINGTONIANA.even: and this is the INSCRUTABLE WISDOM* that we arebound to acquiesce in and to venerate." He concludes :66 I might as well attempt to fly as to walk to you on sucha day as this which, while it enlivens other INSECTS, para-linesME.Yours, ever most cordially,F. DOUCE."Such is the dispensation of things which reconcilesus to our thatched roofs and our " dinners ofherbs." The letter was in all respects teeming withpersonal kindness towards me. What was rathersingular, I saw my friend the very morning when hewas fastening on his sabots to go to London to hearNollekens's will read ; and quietly observed to him,in the ignorance of my heart, " I hope you havenot been for gotten ? " He was remembered . to theamount of 50,000/. and was carried through all thecontingent expenses and worries of law litigation witha high and triumphant hand, by a common friend,who was certainly not over-rewarded by two of thelegatees for the trouble and difficulties encountered t.The same kind of feeling possessed him a dozen years before ; forthus most considerately did he express himself to me, in one of hisletters of this date, on the loss of my younger son : " I am apparentlyusing you very ill, in not noticing, otherwise than through Mr. Ellis,your obliging letter and Catalogue Raisonne of Hearne's Pieces ; butI really forbore to molest you, until I thought time had, in some degree,mitigated the affliction you have undergone, and for which, indeed,I am most heartily sorry ; I cannot doubt that you submit with fortitudeto measures, to us INSCRUTABLE, but undoubtedly JUST."t I allude to what all our common acquaintance know full well theexertions, as well as discretion and judgment, displayed by JAMES HeywoodMaryland, Esq. I could have wished, in addition to the honorKNSINOTONIANA. 767It will be over and over again imagined that Mr.Douce, as a sensitive man, would be obnoxious toall external, as well as internal, nuisances. Hehappened to be the neighbour of the late Mr. Cobbett: that is to say, their gardens, behind, joined ;or rather a brick wall only separated them. Cobbettkept dogs to protect his property. My friend complainedbitterly of their barking by day and howlingby night. In return, his neighbour thought he hada more serious cause of complaint or charge againstMr. Douce, for he threatened to bring an actionagainst him on account of the trespasses committedby his slugs and snails. The mind of my friendfired up at this imputation, and he sought counseland advice in the following truly original effusionfurnished me by our common friend.Kensington, 28th April, 1825.MY DEAR SIR,Will you believe that I am menaced with an action ofdamages from Mr. Cobbett, as to whom I am more ' sinnedagainst than sinning He complains that he has sufferedimmense loss by the migration of the snails and slugs frommy garden into his ; and that I do not feed them at homeby cultivating my ground in a proper manner. I reallyimagined I was starving the enemy to absolute destruction,by not feeding him, and that he would die at home. I by that gentleman, that our departed friend had bequeathedto him his beautiful nlltnn /'//////. with illuminations, ofwhich a distinct notice is taken at page 769, post. He would haveas he would have justly merited, such a richly book-legacy.768 KENSINGTONIANA.tempted to see Mr. Cobbett yesterday, but the great manwas writing his Register and inaccessible. Pray be kindenough to look into Bridgmarfs Index, article snails, if it bethere, and tell me the law on the subject. I must apply toshine Catholic priest to sprinkle them with holy water, or,what is perhaps better, to exorcise or curse them by < bell,book, and candle. 7Ever yours, sincerely,F. DOUCE."To J. H. Markland, Esq., Temple."I agree with my friend Mr. Markland in thinkingthat this was a hoax practised upon him.But the LIBRARY was the charm and the boast ofMr. Douce's mansion. THAT was eminently richand curious : and its owner might have been calledthe Ballet or the La Monroe of his day. Not abook but what had its fly-leaf written upon. Inshort, no man ever lived so much with, and so entirelyfor, his books as did He*. He had longabsented himself from society : though once the intimatefriend of George Ellis, Col. Jones, Mr." The BIBLIOTHECA DOUCEIANA is now enclosed within the walls ofthe BODLEIAN LIBRARY. It occupies a noble room of 44 feet in lengthby 24 in width ; with six extra presses, double shelved, three on eachside of the room ; and two huge oak tables, with shelves to hold theprints." Such is the spirit-stirring language of my friend, Dr. Ban-dine,who adds, that " when all the books and papers, on which theyare catalogued, are numbered, we shall instantly go to press." Thesooner the better, rejoin I. Among the books which grace this veryvaluable, if not extraordinary, collection, is ONE upon which I desiresomewhat to pause. Look, gentle reader, at the OPPOSITE PLATE. It isa fac-simile from a curious and resplendently illuminated large octavo,or small folio, improperly, by a later hand, designated as ef vigne mysteriesbut, in reality, as my friend Dr. Bandied well observes,KBN8INOTONIAM \- 76i)Cracherode, and Sir Joseph Banks. In Ian -r lifethere were few with whom he 1 was so familiar (andhardly any one else with wliuin he dined), as RogerWilhraham, Esq., who had a sincere regard and inspectfor him. In social habits, never were two menwider asunder : the latter full of burgundy as wellas of the Breton language joyous generous ofgood fare, delicious deserts, and diversities of wines :the former adhering rigidly to all vinous abstinence,le desraln line de la vigne nostra seigneur (" vigne nre s r -"). The prefacecontains a short sermon on the passage in the Gospel relating tothe payment of the labourers in the vineyard.This MS. volume, executed probably at the very conclusion of thefourteenth century, was once mine. I had purchased it of Mr. Trip-hookfor 20. It then became the property of Mr. Anderson, jun., atthe sale of whose library it was purchased (at my particular instigation)by Mr. Douce, for precisely the same sum, or a pound only under. Itis most extravagantly decorated with illuminations: and the mostgorgeous is the one here selected, being the Assumption of the Virgin.The back-ground is all gold, and unsoiled. The draperies are fresh andrich in colour. The entire illumination is in a blaze of splendour. Andwhat Demons! Here is Beelzebub himself at full-length; an up:figure, with a head-attire which should seem to be a Tower of BerAnd what demoniacal groups of smaller dimensions grotesque, savage,wild, murderous! My deceased friend used to chuckle aloud onsatiating upon these oddities. Great was the surprise, and the inuimurnot small, on the bequest of such a library to the Bodleian ! All tonguespronounced the British Museum to be the fitter spot for the deposit ofso very miscellaneous a collection. Latterly Mr. Douce bought IV,and gave large sums for a beloved object of admiration. ( >f these " belovedobjects," none unloosed his purse-strings to such an amount asthe Italian J'li/n/ of 1 l?<i, i i-u\ vK.u.rM, adorned with the chastestand most classical illuminations imaginable. This was ohtaimd ofi'iyne and Fuss, not long be fore the purchaser's death, for300 guineas. Some of his missals, especiallyarc of the finest quality. Tin MKthem is the best MS. of the version of the Bible by \\ iclyftc in thiscountry. A\Y shall soon know something satisfactory atnnit all this.770 KENSINGTONIANA.throughout dinner, with the exception of one old-fashionedglass of Madeira from which entrenchmentnot even the " ardent verba" of his hostcould ever drive him. Mr. Douce's crotchets weresometimes very curious * : and stubborn as curious.If he took up a notion, or maintained an hypothesis,which at bottom was strictly untenable, you couldnot dislodge him from his position without a greatdeal of hard fighting. His moral courage, too,was sometimes powerfully evinced. Having consideredhimself to have been once insulted by Rit-sona man as long-headed as, but fonder of literarywarfare than, himself he coolly but firmly pointedto the door, and told him that his way out lay there,and that he forbade his re-appearance t. On a moreIt was the operation of one of these " crotchets" which led to thesevere review upon his most excellent work of Illustrations of Shakspeareand of the Ancient Mariner, &c, 1807, 8vo. This review wasin the Edinburgh,, and my venerable friend never forgave it. It wasconcerning his conjecture about the exact meaning of Lady Macbeth'sexhortation to her husband, to " screw his courage to the sticking-place."My friend had a crotchet that this referred to the formationof certain daggers in inflicting a mortal blow. He was wrong, and thereviewer (reported to have been the editor) was right ; but when, inconsequence,the latter called the commentators of Shakspeare " a weaktribe, who wished to build their nests in the everlasting branches of Shakspeare,"this was wormwood to my friend. "He might have beencalled a rash, a short-sighted, and even an ignorant critic ; but a weakone . Sir, the reviewer is a " " Vox faucibus hsesit ! !" There wasno getting him ever to stomach this luckless attack, generalised as itwas ; and I have not the slightest doubt that it went to paralyse muchof his future exertions. How well and how instructively he couldwrite, sufficiently appears in the pages of the Archtsologia.t The circumstance was this. Ritson had written a book uponAbstinence from Animal Food ; " a work, by the by, most admirably re-VSINGTONIANA. 771important topic, and within a few months of hisdecease, Iw still displayed the melancholy restwhich sometimes flow from a prejudice as jaundicedas unfounded. . Some twenty-five years ago,through the instrumentality of his friend Sir JosephBanks, he succeeded the late Rev. Robert Nares asprincipal librarian of the manuscript department inthe British Museum ; but the situation soon becameinsupportable to him. He entered upon it at tooadvanced a period of his life, when his habits werefixed, and when even the semblance of a superiorwas obnoxious to him. He told me, just before hisdeparture from it, that " he could work as well asany man, but that he would be ordered by NO man."reviewed in the Edinburgh, voL ii. 128. The author of this whimsicallystarving treatise waged war against aliments of every description, inwhich, by any possibility of conception or construction, life might haveappeared to have been previously sacrificed. He made a morning's callupon Mr. Douce, bringing a little girl, his niece, with him. His hostasked him to take a "bit of lunch," and cheese was placed before him.He had hardly begun to eat, when the little girl saw some animalcule ormites, busily at work in the cheese, which, to a pampered appetite,might have been an additional commendation. But Ritson wasHorror-struck and turning to Mr. Douce, asked him " if he meantto insult }\\in:" Mr. Douce rose up, and, as above observed, told himthat " the door was before him," and prohibited his ever entering again.1 believe that he never saw him more.I am in possession of one of his letters, written to me about thistime, which not only, as usual, contains one of his growls, but is aocharacteristic of his literary habits and pursuits, as well as of his fear-lev,and at times trenchant opinions, that the perusal of it may begratifying to the reader. It was in some measure written in consequenceof my dissertation upon the M<-n(- JiHA- <>f 1 l.iA. It will bealso seen that he was just then about t<> <jidt tin" Nm-nm.D*772 KENSINOTONIANA.This alluded to a recent regulation adopted by thelate Lord Colchester, when, as Speaker of the House"British Museum, 21 Dec. 1811.MY DEAR FRIEND,You will please to observe that I had nothing particular to saywhen I called upon you. It was accident that carried me to Kensington.I have not the Chasse aux Bibliography, which I once borrowed of Edwards,and read it ; neither have I Fournier's Letter to Freron ; butGerard de Pretend is at your service. I wish you would contrive,some how or the other, to stigmatise the VILE PAPER MAKERS of thepresent times. I can get none that will permit me to write legibly ; thepresent is like a file, and tears the pen to pieces; and is, moreover,greasy and adverse to the ink. If you can really spare an impressionof your Essay on the Mente Bible, I shall value it as it deserves ; I amquite sure that, on the whole, you have proved your pointI have sometimes wondered that the curious old Chronicle, which is inreality another Cologne Chronicle, though called " Fasciculus Tern-porus" (Rowincks}, should have been wholly neglected, though anearly evidence about printing. Under the year 1475, it is said, " impressionsliberum multiplication in terra" This was said only seventeenyears after the fact* [of the discovery of the art]. It is a pity thatmore was not said, for certainly we gain no very important knowledgeby what is said. Of this book I have the 1476 (Louvain) edition, withrough uncut edges ! What say you to this, my masters ? I think I musthave showed it you, as I have scarcely any other 1400 that is curious.You know it exhibits the earliest wood cuts (dated) in Flanders t. . . .Mons. Jansen is a most impudent plagiary, and blockhead into the bargain.I was greatly disappointed with his work, which has partly stolen,and partly misrepresented, a fact, in my little account of the Dance ofDeath, that I gave to Edwards Every thing in the British Museshould rather have said twenty or twenty-two.t A fac-simile of one of the cuts (the crucifixion) from an edition ofthe work, two years before, printed by Ther. Horned, at Cologne, appearsin the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iii. p. 318.J This treatise of Mr. Douce, highly enriched as well as enlarged,with fac-similes of all the wood cuts of THE DANCE OF DEATH, havinga most beautifully illustrative wood-cut frontispiece, was published in avery handsome octavo volume by Mr. PICKERING, in 1833. I stronglyrecommend this exquisite book to every well-selected library.KENSINOTONIANA. 773of Commons, he was one of the principal managingTrustees.It is infinitely to be regretted that he has left solittle behind in the shape of a LITERARY Monument.Few men had such vast stores at command.He loved to instruct, but was rather shy of being instructed.Yet, to say the truth, it was rarely thatyou left him, entrenched as he was in his numerousand very curious and instructive volumes,without finding yourself enlightened upon some onetopic or other which might have been started betweenyou. He had a sort of loathing and hatredof letter writing ; and yet few men (as I presumethe pages of this work to afford abundant proof)wrote more pithily, and to the point, than himself.I present the reader with no uninteresting specimenconfirmation of his antipathy to Epistolography.MY DEAR FRIEND,I see you make it necessary that I should write again,as you have not said you would call before the 30th, anilif you should, I fear I may be either absent, or up to thescum remains, so far as is at present known within the walls, in statu</>/<>. Why the parties take all this time, I cannot tell. From this daylonv.ird. I shall be plunging about in a sea of trouble; and beginmoving next week ; but I shall not be out of the place, as I calculate,for some time.Yours, ever faithfully,F. 1.I was told that, within eight or nine days, there were 5000/. worthof books sold from Mackinlay's shop, and the agent then told me, it wasbecause all the books were cheap, and low marked. I hope yon gotsome ? I got nothing."774 KENSINGTONIANA.ears in books, bags, packing cases, dust, &c. &c., withoutone lucid or bibliographical idea about meThe Alterius (1472) does not exhibit the first wood-cuts.This was asserted by Martin in his book on engraving ; butthere are two or three, or even more, before that time*.My head is too choaked now to say any more on the subjectbut of it more hereafter. I well remember the vellumcopy of Alterius, which is a favourite book with me. Istuck along longtime at Collins'sf, being miserably imperfect.At length Edwards bought it, I know not why. Ihave the Pinelli copy of the Edition Princeps ; but I fear itwants one leaf in the middle. I have also a modern Frenchtranslation of him with woodcuts, which are singularly interesting,and not wholly mathematical It istime that I have done scribbling, which I do hate mostabominably. O, that we could breathe out an impressionof one's words upon a prepared sheet of paper !Yours, ever most sincerely,F. DOUCE."It was by mere accident that I was present whenmy friend was seized with one of those epileptic affectionsto which he had been so long subject ; andwhich seizure might be said to have been the crisisof his fate. No one else was present; and if, bysoftening his fall, I did not save his life, it wasclear that I mitigated the severity of the shockfor he might have been a bleeding as well as a sense-therewere several ; but, if the evidence of the block books be laidaside, or considered doubtful (which is by no means my own impression),the wood cuts of Pfister from his Biblical Histories, of 1462, aredoubtless the first for book decorations. See Bibl. Spencer., vol. i. p. 94.t Concerning this original little gentleman, consult something atp. 85, ante.KENSINGTON I AN A. 77 >object. By rushing out for medical aid, I immediatelyobtained that assistance which, in the end,wrought his cure. His life at that moment seemedscarcely worth twenty-four hours purchase. He recovered,and was never again subjected to epilepsy.But his hour came at last within some ten or twelveyears afterwards. Scarcely six months had elapsedfrom his telling me of the death of our commonfriend Mr. Hebe*, when he himself became thevictim to the " irresistible summons." I knew littleor nothing about his illness till within a fortnight ofhis demise. His bodily suffering was, I believe,great. It was evident, too, that the intellects wereyielding to the inroads which disease was makingupon the body. On his decease, his man-servantbegged that I would see his master ere the lid ofthe coffin was irrevocably fastened. I did sohesitatingly and reluctantly; but I had seen a latecommon friend t in the same situation, and whyshould I shrink from contemplating those featureswhich had never been turned towards either of usbut in expressions of affectionate friendship? Inever gazed upon a countenance so altered by thestroke of death, it was as the trunk of the oakscathed by the passing storm. It was not cognisable,from its terrific sternness. How often had I heardthose lips (now, as it were, hermetically sealed I) pronouncethe emphatic words " to THIS ComplexionSec page 433, anu .776 KENSINGTONIANA.we must come at last!" His WILL was more thana"nine days* wonder*.The WILL of FRANCIS DOUCE, Esq., is no longer matter of secrethistory. Its publication in the pages of the Gentleman's Magazine forAugust, 1834,, renders it of general cognizance. To that publication isprefixed a memoir of the testator, of which Mr. W. W. Singer is thereputed author. There were sufficient motives, both on the score ofzeal and gratitude, for such a memoir j which might indeed have beenof yet more copious dimensions for its author had been remembered,by the subject of it, not only with a legacy of 500/., but. by being appointedone of two residuary legatees, and by reaping the fruits of somewhereabout 22,000/. by such appointment ! while three nephews, fromthe loins of his OWN BROTHER, found a remembrance of not one-fifth partof such sum. The remaining co-legatee was the Rev. Edward Goddard,a friend from early youth, of about the same closeness of alliance as Mr.Singer. To the brief memoir of the deceased by the latter, a reply byA LOVER OP JUSTICE," appeared in the month of October in the sameMagazine. This reply not only contains sharp words, but home-truths,and should seem to have been the production of one of thenephews ; if so, it might have dealt out heavier blows.In the will of Mr. Douce 1 found myself a legatee to the amount of500/., bating the duty. I will honestly confess that I was wholly unpreparedfor it ; neither syllable nor sentence, by word of mouth or bypen, ever having in the least taught me to expect such a solid mark ofmy friend's remembrance. His will was made in 1831, on the death ofhis wife. The legacies in money were about thirty in number, amountingto somewhere under 10,000/. The property was sworn to be under80,000/. The harvest of the co-legatees could not, therefore, be called ascanty one. In the absence of relationship, but on the footing of an oldand affectionate friend, I do not pretend to that puling affectation tosay, that " I little merited" what was bequeathed me ; for, as far as themerit of a respectful attention, and a cordial sympathy in very manytastes, and for some twenty-five years, went, I gave only the same"valuable consideration" for the gift as either of the two residuarylegatees. And further, in no one instance did I, or would I, surrenderto him, my departed friend, the free exercise of my own thought, or ofmy own expression, by word of mouth or by pen. Indeed, we wouldsometimes have skirmishes which gave indication of an approachingbattle.But, sitting down to exercise the opinion of an experienced and .777The settlement of my friend WILLIAM Yoi \<,OTTLEY, Esq., in Pliillimore Place, was another ofpassionate friend, upon the spirit and tendency of this WILL, I cannothold back the expression of my deep regret that it was not ennobled andadorned by SOME remembrances which would have helped to canonisethe memory of the Testator. The reader may hence account for thecapricious lights and shades of his character: those crotchets impulses,and immoveable prejudices, above mentioned in the text, whichpeculiarly distinguished him. Surely, his OWN BLOOD might have receivedat least one third of the whole Property ? But more extraordinaryONE old and kind-hearted friend the friend of half a century'sgrowth and standing with whom he had so often, so constantly, andso instructively, " taken sweet counsel together" whose tastes, whosepassions, whose pursuits, on the score of GRAPHIC ART, were thoroughlyand avowedly kindred UK, that old and long-tried friend, was overlooked. . . forgotten ! But he may be remembered by the co-residuarylegatees ! I will hope it . I will believe it. This, however, I do believe,and will as solemnly avow . . . that if I had been one of them, God'sblessed sun should not have shed its evening's rays on my pillow withouta communication imparted to that old friend of the deceased thatan annuity of a hundred pounds per annum should be paid him by mybrother trustee and self, as long as he lived or, in default of thatbrother, he should have fifty from myself ! The heart of man, be heking or subject, is inscrutable.The bequeathing of papers, including letters, memoranda, diaries,&c., not to be opened till the year 1900, is a sad instance, of the manyon record, of a foolish and unworthy disposition of property : implyingas much cowardice and conceit as discretion and candour. If thesepapers contain useful intelligence, why not benefit the present generation? If otherwise the inference is that they may be only a secondedition of the slander and misrepresentation of COLE. Even to thelast at least, while making his will three years before his death he wasnot divested of his " crotchets." His friend, Sir Anthony Carlisle, thesurgeon, is requested, in that will, to sever his head from his body, ortnki' <>nt his heart, to prevent the "return of vitality." Here he tooka leaf out of the book of his old friend and co-residuary legatee, .Mr.Enrich, who had even requested the same operation to be performedin the presence of his SON ! " Surely, all this at the present time ofday i 8 as babyish as revolting ! Pi \ m is its own too Fair in i1 I I.H.778 KENSINGTONIANA.the principal causes which rendered the latter yearsof my residence at Kensington the more agreeable,if not instructive. On more accounts than one Iam well pleased, if not proud, to call that settlementto recollection. Mr. Ottley and myself had, in manyrespects, kindred pursuits. I believe I was the firstto infect him with the bibliomaniacal disease ormania as it respected enquiries into the Origin ofPrinting ; but at no time was I resolved to go tosuch great and fearful lengths as he was pleased topush that subject, in relation to the claims of Holland.Indeed, whenever the COSTER-FEVER wasfully upon him, I usually made my escape ; for hewas dangerous of approach unless he were copiouslyblooded*. But it is not so much on thisaccount that I call the residence of my neighbour,Mr. Ottley, to a pleasurable " reminiscence :" it is,on the contrary, because through my instrumentalityhe became engaged with Messrs. Arch to executehis noble work upon the History of Engraving,It was at my house, some time in 1813, before the sale of theMerely Library, that Mr. Ottley was induced to institute his enquiriesabout fixing the dates of the block books, in consequence of seeing in thatcollection a Dutch and a Latin edition of the Speculum. These enquirieswere carried out at full length, and triumphantly proved in his workupon Engraving ; because the conclusions were drawn from the verysingular evidence of the Cuts. But he is now busily engaged in bringingout an ex professor work upon the same subject, in 4 to., illustratedwith a profusion of most curious engravings j the result of which workis to annihilate the claims of Strasbourg and Mente, and to establishthe first rocking of the cradle of the Art of Printing in Holland orHarlem applied, however, to the furnishing of merely elementaryworks upon education.KENSINOTONIANA. 779in two quarto volumes; a work, of which LordSpencer was well pleased to accept the Dedicationto Himself.And of yet higher " pith and moment" to myfeelings, was my friend's extraordinary collection ofPrints ; and most curious assemblage of Pictures,chiefly ancient of which some reached the periodof Giotto and Cimabue. These latter ought to becomeNational Property, as containing the germ orelements of Art upon which Raffaelle, while gazing,might have caught more than a common sparkof inspiration*. My friend is now, with great propriety,enrolled among the intellectual " officers" ofThis extraordinary collection of ancient pictures gives us no faintor unsatisfactory idea of the restoration of the Art of Painting, from itsdawning at Pisa and Florence, in the middle of the 13th century, andat the beginning of the 14th, under Giunta Pisano, Cimabue, Ugolinoda Siena, Giotto, &c., to the close of the 15th century, when Leonardoda Vinci, Fra Bartolommeo, Michel Angelo, and Raffaelle shone forth,perfecting the Art. There are yet, however, in this curious collectionsome earlier and connecting steps, upon which the student may walkwith equal surprise and gratification ; for my friend possesses three orfour very curious Greek pictures, executed from the 8th to the 13thcentury ; one or two of them being in encaustic. The other, Florentine,pictures, are all, with the exception of one (in fresco) painted indistemper ; or, to use the Italian phrase, a tempera.I can conscientiously, because truly, add, that this collection has beencarefully examined by competent critics foreigners as well as natives ;and that in pronouncing it to be worth some few thousand pounds, itmust be remembered that this valuation is made under the fixed impressionthat such ANOTHER collection could not be got together. Now,we are building a NATIONAL MUSEUM, or GALLERY, of some 400 feetin KiiLrth. Might not a very small portion of this establishment be aswisely as conveniently devoted to the reception of such early gems ofLord Melbourne, our Premier, has both a capacious and liberali ii i nd, and the Nation has YET a purse.780 KENS1NGTONIANA.the British Museum as the Chief in the departmentof the pencil and the burin. The Museumdoes itself honour by the enrolment : for, added tohis critical powers*, Mr. Ottley is himself an artistmade up of all the stirring elements of the MichaelAngelo school. His " Fall of Satan," or conflictbetween the host of heaven and hell, supplied bythe text of Milton, has scarcely been equalled byany living artist t. It breathes of the genius of thatgreat man, whom, in frequent converse with his latefriend, Mr. Fuseli, I have heard " our Ottley" placealoft in a state of beatification which the Mantuabard could scarcely have described . as reposingamongancona viretaFortunatus decorum, sedesque beats."My friend very soon and very successfully gave proof that thetreasures of ancient art, scattered, in the character of illuminations,through the myriads of volumes in the British Museum, had attractionswhich might be made instrumental to public instruction. A Latinversion, by Cicero, of the astronomical poem of Aratus, written inminuscules, or small lower-case roman letters, happened to have illuminationswhich caught Mr. Ottley's eye, as being indicative of art ofthe fourth century, before the time of Constantine. It has long beenan established rule (from Pavillon downwards) that minuscules couldnot be pushed up beyond the lath century; but Mr. Ottley has uponthe whole successfully combatted this position in a long and learneddissertation read to the Society of Antiquaries, and illustrated by plates,which has been just published in the Archaeological. The scription ortext seems here to be a secondary question ; as it might have beenwritten upon the vellum which had long previously contained the illuminations.Upon the whole, my friend has produced a very preciousmorsel for hungry dilettante to feed upon.t It was exhibited at Somerset House, and is executed in black andwhite crayons, upon paper of a blue ground, measuring some five feetin length by four in height.K ! NSINOTONIANA. 781The mention of Mr. Ottley reminds me of thelate Sir Thomas Lawrence, his especial and mostintimate friend ; to attend whose obsequies he cameover express from Holland, where he had beenpushing his researches, with unabated ardour, tosubstantiate the claims of his beloved Coster. Imet Sir Thomas several times at the table of an oldcollege-friend, Col. Wesley, then living on this sideof Hammersmith, in a pleasant sort of Tusculum,not vehemently encroached upon by brick, mortar,or lath and plaster. The trees were sufficientlygreen, and the sky continued to exhibit, now andthen, some lapis-lazuli tints; which, to Mrs. Wesley,a very extraordinary artist in oil painting, could notfail to have their decided uses. I remember once,after dining in company with Sir Thomas, at ourcommon friend's on returning home in his chariot,I took occasion to observe to him that my aunt,Mrs. William Compton (already introduced to thereader's acquaintance * ) had known him when quitea lad, at Devises, and had thrown off some stanzasin praise of him on the sight of a red-chalk drawingof a subject from Homer, executed by himfrom a print by Roland, after Angelica Kauffman.Sir Thomas Lawrence drew most beautifully for histender years. I asked him if he would like to hearlhe<e verses for about a dozen years before I hadcaused them to be printed in the European Magazine.He said he should be well pleased so to do.Page 65, ante.782 KENSINGTONIANA.I repeated only the two following stanzas for Ireally had, and still have, forgotten the remainder.Go on, sweet youth, the glorious task pursue ;On Emulation's wing let Fancy soar ;Depicture Nature in its loveliest viewWhat could a Raffaelle or a Reynolds more !LAWRENCE the name to future years shall liveShall greatly live till Time's Memorial dies :Merit to merit shall its tribute give,And Italy's proud Sons yield up the prize."On concluding this recitation, Sir Thomas, withsingular aptitude, and with only a slight perversion,or addition, replied : " Thou knowest the mask ofnight is on my face, else would a mantling blushbepaint my cheek."My subsequent intercourse with Sir Thomas Lawrence was ratherslender,, even when I came to settle in town. We lived far apart, andit might be almost said of both of us " nulla dies sine LINEA." To thepublication of Thomas a Kempis he became a subscriber, as will beseen in a subsequent page. The last time I called upon him, and sawhim, was, when he was touching a proof of the mezzotint of Charles X.from his own portrait of that ill-fated monarch. " You see (said he) thatpainters and authors are at least alike in touching up a proof sheet" Hetold me he had been four hours upon it. It was surprising to see howhis touches (in black and white chalk) told. His WORKS are the propertyof the whole civilised world. The Royal collection may boast of hisfinest picture all things considered. It is the HAMLET, for which theportrait of the late Mr. Kemble furnished the physiognomical representation.It is altogether a thing apart unearthly : the mind and soul of thefigure being as it were concentrated in heaven. How beautifully drawnthe latter, and with what appropriate accompaniments ! Every limb,every movement is that of a prince of ONE who was calledThe glass of fashion and the mould of form."Being a night-scene, with a few faint stars twinkling in the sky, thecolouring is necessarily low and sober. It is rather extraordinary thatReynolds's finest (portrait) picture, should be the Sister of this india783But Kensington need not have boasted of the flyingvisits of Sir Thomas Lawrence to connect it,however remotely, with the fine arts. It had solid,stationary, and as it were indigenous, claims to attentionand admiration. Here lived WILKIE ; andhere lived Alcott : names, of great and glowingreputation that gave a sort of sunny tint to thewhole neighbourhood. I was intimate and thoughfate has of late years locally severed us I amwilling to believe that I am yet intimate with boththese illustrious Artists : quite, as I conceive, at thehead of their respective departments. There wasthis marked peculiarity or difference in their mannerof work. Mr. Alcott never cared how much youtalked with him while he was painting*. Mr.vidual, who here appears in all the dignity of tragic garb and expression.But we must not institute comparisons. It is a glory for eachindividual to have been instrumental to the exercise of the pencil of thegreatest artists, in their respective days, in its happiest effort. When Isay this, I do not forget the pencil of Lawrence in two other delineationsof the same great actor ; the one as Coriolanus, the other as Holla. Theformer was exhibited in 1798, and I yet possess a manuscript criticismupon it, made of materials supplied while standing opposite the picture.Of this I had personal experience on visiting him while he wasoccupied with his Pool of London and View off Dover; the former,one of his most surprising and successful efforts. With what delightdo I call to mind his Water-mill more than the dawn of that transcendantmerit by which the majority of his pictures is distinguished ! Ilove his gray tints, his quiet skies, his cool shadows, his refluent waves,and his classical groups . the latter more especially designated in hialate Italian views ! The first of his pictures, of the latter kind, may besaid to have, in a manner, transfixed me. The Caracas could not haveexhibited finer grouping, nor Claude himself a more delicious Italiansky and atmosphere. While fixed before it (I think it was a view ofBologna or of Florence), a foreigner, who had been eyeing it very KENSINGTONIANA.Wilkie, to my knowledge (and my visits to him,from his contiguity, were more frequent than to histalented neighbour), never exercised the brush atany one visit which I paid him and yet I haveseen the progress of execution of very many of hismore celebrated pictures *. The first sketch of JohnKnox and the completion of the Chelsea Pensionerswere no every day objects to fasten an hungry eyeupon. Unless I am much deceived, I was indirectlyinstrumental to the fixing of the price upon thislatter, most felicitous and bewitching effort of hisunrivalled pencil.It was during the progress of working at my attentively,turned round to me, and telling me he was perfectly well acquaintedwith the spot, added "En effet, monsieur, Jay suis." Then,again, his Italian Sea-Ports Can one vouchsafe a glance upon VERNETafterwards ? Yes ; but for thirteen seconds only.Mr. Wilkie lived comparatively within a stone's-throw of me. Ihad the gratification of seeing the foundation, progress, and finishingof the following pictures: 1. Guess my name 2. The Breakfast3. The Parish Beadle 4. Reading the Will 5. The Chelsea Pensionersthe perfection of THE, as well as of his, art the Sketch ofJohn Knox preaching : and I think of several others. The highestcompliment ever paid to a Royal Academician, was paid to Mr. Wilkieon the exhibition of his Chelsea Pensioners. I was present on the firstday ; the pressure to see it was prodigious ; and the picture being placedon a level with the eye, every body chose to exercise the nose too. Meanwhile,rims of bonnets were rubbed upon the surface of the painting, whichwas soon likely to be killed with over-much caressing. I acquaintedMr. Wilkie with this circumstance, and the mischief likely to ensue ;and the next day saw the picture guarded by a semicircular brass-fence.I reviewed it, as well as the Parish Beadle, in the Museum. I oughtto add, that I saw his Duke of Fork and Distraining for Rent in theirprogress of execution. Mr. Wilkie's pictures are painted for all agesand all countries. The immense sale of the PRINTS, executed fromthem, is a triumphant confirmation of the latter.K.ENSINGTONIANA.cameron, that I received visits from two Artists ofvery different complexion and degrees of reputation :I mean NORTIICOTE and BLAKE. The former wasthe pupil and biographer of Reynolds the latter. . .pupil of no Master, but a most extraordinary artistin his own particular element: although I believeho professed to have been a pupil of Flaxman andFuseli artists, as opposite in all respects as a chasteseverity differs from a wild exuberance of style. Iused to meet Mr. Northcote frequently at dinner atthe late Bishop of Salisbury's, in Upper SeymourStreet, and was always well pleased at his courteousbehaviour and gentleness of expression. Few electricalsparks were ever elicited from him in conversation; but one liked to listen to the periods, shortor quaint as they might have been, of ONE who hadpainted so much, and done many things so well, asNORTHCOTE*.The establishment of the SHAKSPEARE GALLERY may be said tohave established Northcote's fame upon a more permanent basis than ithad yet rested. His " Smothering of the Young Princes t, Hubert andArthur, and more especially, Lady Jane Grey," are among the mostmasterly efforts of his pencil. Of these, my friend Mr. Neeld, memberfor rhippenham, possesses the latter, for which he gave 300 guineas. Itis full of pathos, or sympathy for suffering beauty and innocence ; forto talk of tjitilt in a child of seventeen is an insult upon the human understanding,and an outrage upon all law or principle, human and divine,t I remember, during the evening, after a dinner party at Mr. WatsonTaylor's, in Cavendish Square, being called by the host to notice theexact conformity of the figures of these two young princes asleep, withthe two celebrated young sleeping figures on the monument exhibited byi . Clan trey, some twenty years ago, which justly ran away with allthe applause of the room of sculpture at Somerset House. I wish die786 KENS1NGTONIANA.I soon found the amiable but illusory Blake farbeyond my ken or sight. In an instant he was inhis "third heaven" flapped by the wings ofseraphs, such as his own genius only could shape,and his own pencil embody. The immediate subjectof our discussion and for which indeed he professedto have in some measure visited me was,the minor poems of Milton." Never were such"dreaming" poured forth as were poured forthby my original visitor : his stature mean, his headbig and round, his forehead broad and high, hiseyes blue, large, and lambent such as my friendMr. Phillips has represented him upon his imperishablecanvas*. "What think you, Mr. Blake, ofFuseli's Lycidas asleep, beneath the opening eyelidsof the morn?" " I don't remember it." " Praysee it, and examine it carefully. It seems to me tobe the pencil of poetry employed to give intelligenceand expression to the pen of the poet" or words tothis effect were, I think, pronounced. I learnt afterwardsthat my Visitor had seen it but thought itgaoler in this picture had not introduced his gaunt form and savagecountenance ; it is a most unnecessary, as well as impertinent, intrusion.No picture of the modern school presents a finer tone of colour than this ;and it is most admirably placed in my friend's collection.This portrait, which gives more elevation and dignity to the originalthan he should seem actually to have possessed, is nevertheless amost faithful and happy resemblance. And Schianovetti's burin hasdone ample justice to the pencil of the painter. There is yet anotherportrait of the man," as well worth the contemplation and that is,,the brief, but spirited, and most exceedingly interesting Biography ofhim by Allan Cunningham, Esq.KENSINOTONIANA. 787too tame" lameness from Fuseli*! I told Mr.Blake that our common friend, Mr. Masquerier, hadinduced me to purchase his " Songs of Innocence "and that I had no disposition to "repent my bargaint." This extraordinary man sometimes butingood sooth very rarely reached the sublime ;but the sublime and the grotesque seemed, somehowor the other, to be for ever amalgamated in his imagination; and the choice or result was necessarilyThis truly beautiful, as well as highly intellectual picture, nowgraces the collection of the Marquis of Bute, at Luton. It is a grey,soft, reposing picture, throughout. The very dream of the outstretchedand sleeping Lycidas seems to he of poetry.t Mr. Cunningham has judiciously quoted one of these songs, amor.gthe prettiest, which shall find a place here from my own copy of itthrown by in a portfolio some twenty years ago.Passing down the valleys wild,Piping songs of pleasant glee,On a cloud I saw a child,And he laughing said to me' Pipe a song about a lamb ;'So I piped with merry cheer1 Piper, pipe that song again ;'So I piped he wept to hear.' Drop thy pipe, thy happy pipe,Sing thy songs of happy cheer ;"So I sung the same again.While he wept with joy to hear.' Piper, sit thee down, and writeIn a book, that all may read.'So he vanish'd from my sight ;And I pluck'd a hollow reed.And I made a rural pen ;And I stain'd the water clear ;And I wrote my happy songs,Every child may joy to hear."788 KENSINOTONIANA.doubtful. Yet there are few books of which I loveto turn over the leaves, more assiduously and carefully,than " Young's Night Thoughts," emblazonedby his truly original pencil*. When Blake enteredthe arena with Stothard, as a rival in depicting theIn the original conformation of these " REMINISCENCES" I had intendedto have devoted an entire chapter to the Fine Arts, and thereintohave given BLAKE not more than his due. Under this impression,, Iwrote to my friend, Mr. D'Israeli, to furnish me with the loan of suchmaterials of this master as I knew him to be in the possession of. Hisreply not only staggered me, but induced me to abandon nearly mywhole intention in regard to Blake. It shall here tell its own tale, becauseI do not know any other pen which could tell that tale with greaterfelicity of diction.'' Bradenham House, Wy combe, 24 July, 1835.MY DEAR FRIEND,It is quite impossible to transmit to you the ONE HUNDRED ANDSIXTY designs I possess of Blake's ; and as impossible, if you had them,to convey every precise idea of such an infinite variety of these wonderousdeliriums of his fine and wild creative imagination. Heaven,hell, and earth, and the depths below, are some of the scenes he seemsalike to have tenanted ; but the invisible world also busies his fancy ;aerial beings which could only float in his visions, and unimaginablechimeras, such as you have never viewed, lie by the side of his sunshinypeople. You see some innocent souls winding about blossoms forothers the massive sepulchre has opened, and the waters beneath giveup their secrets. The finish, the extreme delicacy of his pencil, in hislight gracile forms, marvellously contrast with the ideal figures of hismystic allegories ; sometimes playful, as the loveliness of the arabesquesof RafFaelle. Blake often breaks into the " terrible via" of MichaelAngelo, and we start amid a world too horrified to dwell in. Not theleast extraordinary fact of these designs is, their colouring, done by theartist's own hand, worked to his fancy ; and the verses, which are oftenremarkable for their sweetness and their depth of feeling. I feel theimperfection of my general description. Such singular productionsrequire a commentary.Believe me, with regard,Your sincere well wisher,I. Disraeli."KENSINGTON! ANA.Dramatis Persona of Chaucer's Canterbury Tales,he seems to have absolutely lost his wits ; his pi-milwas as inferior to that of the former, as his burinuas to that of Crone, who engraved Stothard'simmortal picture.While upon the subject of Artists, let me notomit the mention of ONE, an inhabitant of Kensingtonof lowly residence, humble pretensions, butof no despicable ability in his own particular department.It is of the venerable " Livres," son ofthe Engraver of that name, which will be evercoupled with Claude Lorraine's, that I would wishwarmly and yet respectfully to speak. It will beseen that I was not unsparing in my remunerationof him as an artist * ; but of much higher gratificationto my feelings was an opportunity that presenteditself of being instrumental to settlingupon him, and his aged Partner, a small governmentannuity, which, now that he stands, or rathersits, ALONE, by the side of his solitary hearth, inhis eighty-fifth year . is in consequence materiallydiminished t.Page 659. The miracle of his art is the Assumption of the Virgin,from a Niello of Finiguera, in Mr. Ottley's work upon engraving.Vivares was turned of seventy when he engraved ittI mentioned his case in " the Museum ;" and Mr. Audire, a brotherengraver, possessing one of the warmest hearts and most liberaldispositions that ever animated the human frame, has been greatly instrumentalto his comfort. Yet a FEW POUNDS are almost absolutelyrequisite to " keep body and soul together," for this desolate and most,worthy veteran. There are yet many bitters which linger at the bottomof his almost exhausted cup of mortality.790 KENSINGTON I ANA .From Pictures to Books is a very natural transition.While the Bibliotheca Spenceriana was inprogress, I felt great pleasure in the little ruralmigrations and visitations of my city and west endof the town friends, who would occasionally enduremy "pot-luck" fare. Among these, I was sometimesfavoured with a call from Sir Harry Englefield,who once breakfasted with Mr, Kett at my house.The latter was at that time considered as an Exilefrom Oxford. I have before made mention of him,and through him I was indebted for my introductionto the venerable and learned President of MagdalenCollege*. In these Spencerian labours, whileoccupied with the editions of Juvenal, I had recourseto a copy of Gering*s edition as supposed to bethefirst which was in the library of MagdalenCollege, in order to make my description complete :a copy of that identical impression being then onits way from the Continent to Lord Spencer. Itwas a pity not to lose such an opportunity of completingthe description. Moreover, the volume wasessential to me for the purpose of making the facsimilewhich appears in the work, vol. ii. p. 21,From the President I received the following graciouscommunication :Magdalen College, Oxford, Feb. 9, 1813.DEAR SIR,4 As I should too probably have omitted some curiousSeepage 115.KENSINGTON1ANA. 791particulars in my description of the Gearing's Juvenal, I determined,alter consulting the officers of the College, to entrustthe book itself to the care of Mr. Kett, who went totown this morning. I hope I have done what is agreeableto you and to Lord Spencer.And remain, dear sir,With great esteem,Your faithful and obedient servant,My friend Mr. Kett hastened to apprise me ofthe probably speedy arrival of this " bijou " in thefollowing letter.6, Suffolk Street.DEAR SIR,Immediately on my arrival in town, I write to informyou that I have brought with me a curious Princeps ofJuvenal which I am commissioned by that great Bibliomaniac,our Friend the President of Magdalen, to deliverinto your hands. As I know how delighted you will be atthis intelligence, I presume you will fix an early day, andparticular hour, when I may acquit myself of my charge,aud deliver this inestimable bijou of primitive Typographyinto your hands ; or if you chuse to commission any trustyPerson to receive the said bijou, and you will fix any timewhen he will call to receive it, let him bring his credentialsin the form of a note from your Carbonic or PynsonicHighness, (I had rather the note were a large paper copy ;that i^, ;i letter from you), and IK shall have the book fromme on giving a mvipt for the saint . And if radiance792 KENSINGTONIANA.you should write, and not call, do tell me what chance Ihave of finding you at home in the course of the next fortnight,if haply I should stray so far as Kensington ?Dear sir,66 Ever sincerely yours,This precious volume, being in need of a goodlycovering, was returned to its old resting place in agarb of russia, supplied by the " cunning hand"of Charles Lewis.The next, and almost the last principal feature todescribe, connected with my residence at Kensington,was the death of Mr. Ordered, the Vicar, and theappointment of the Rev. THOMAS RENNELL as hissuccessor. The presentation to the living lay withthe Bishop of London, now Archbishop of Canterbury; and I do not believe that any one exercise ofthat Prelate's episcopal rights ever gave greatersatisfaction, or was attended with more beneficialresults, than the appointment under consideration.A love of truth, however, compels me to declare thatI was a competitor for the important object at stake.I had lived upwards of a dozen years in the Town,had a large general acquaintance, many friends, andfelt assured that my energies would be readily andvigorously devoted to a conscientious discharge ofall the important duties which such a stationKENSINOTONIANA. 793enjoined. Lord Spencer was so obliging as to promotemy views, by personally waiting upon LordLiverpool and the Bishop. The written reply ofthe latter to my Patron was quite characteristic ofthe elegant mind, and honest motives, in forming adecision adverse to my wishes. That prelate atfirst offered the living (which then netted about1000/. per annum, with a roomy house and largegrounds, and which had been enlightened andadorned by the presence of Fortin), to his oldfriends Dr. Goddard and Mr. Archdeacon Wollaston.On their declining it, it was presented to the eldestson of Dr. Kennel, Dean of Winchester!.Mr. Kennel was a young man, but with an oldhead upon young shoulders. He was an excellentscholar, a practised writer, and what is better thanboth together, a good Christian. He entered uponthe important duties of his office (which, alas ! hewas to fill for so short a period) with zeal, withOld Mr. Martin, the bookbinder, who did business for Dr. Fortin,told me, that Dr. Fortin had told him, " he never made 400/. per ann. ofKensington vicarage." The flat stone, ONLY, which covers the remainsof this distinguished scholar, is walked over by half the congregation ontheir Sabbath impress and egress from the church. This ought not to betShortly after the appointment of his son to the vicarage, I met theDean of Winchester, as my " frequent wont" was to meet him, in theshop of Mr. Payne, the bookseller, with whom he much loved (as whodid not ?) to hold " pleasant discourse." The Dean had bandagesabout his legs, being then under the treatment of Dr. Scott. He couldnot easily rise from his seat to greet me exclaiming, that " he was notaHIRING man !" " No, sir," replied I ; " but your SON is!" He waspleased with this very obvious impromptu.794 KENSINGTOMANA.earnestness, and with a conscientious determinationto do his duties therein without fear of man, and inpraise of his Maker. He DID so uniformly andeminently ; and on the expiration of the first sevenyears, or, as he would term it, his "service ofapprenticeship" his parishioners gave him a publicdinner in attestation of his worth and public services.His church was always filled hy an attentive andwell-ordered congregation. His manner of preachingwas his own, and therefore the more relished by hisauditory. All that has been before said of earnestness*at once the characteristic and charm ofKennel's addresses from his pulpit must be repeatedhere. The preacher was naturally a man of greatacuteness of understanding. He loved to trip upfallacies by the heels, and to dissect sophisms totheir very bare bone. He was singularly happy inone memorable instance of the display of thisanatomise talent. His scholarship was soundand varied.Page 173, &c.t I remember consulting Mr. Kennel upon a passage of GregoryNazianzen, connected with an excerpt from that Father, by Melanchthon,as written in the fly-leaf of one of his books ; noticed in the LibraryCompanion, page 16, first edition. The passage is a little crabbed orobscure ; but it served as a spur to the Vicar's researches, for he wroteme the following critical and pleasant letter upon the subject :MY DEAR SIB, " Vicarage, Thursday Evening.The passage which you mentioned to me this morning, occurs inthe thirty-first oration of Greg. Nazianz. about the middle, p. 504,vol. i. of the Parisian edition of M.DC.IX. As I find it, it runs thus o-ravKENSINOTONUNA. 795111 eloquence, and in impassioned delivery, he wasnot equal to his Father, the present venerable andlearned Dean of Winchester ; but as a Controvert0*9 cCOTCU, TTpOffOc?) fcoTU p.f.V Tot /CaAoty/tVofV, Kltt TOovTU) vcvovai.After an exhortation to chastity, Gregory cites Matt. ix. 11. ' Allmen cannot receive this saying , save they to whom it is given;' uponwhich he thus comments :' When you hear this expression, ' it is given,' do not suffer yourselfto be led into heresy, nor speculate upon the difference of mens'natures, the earthy, the spiritual, or those between both. For there arethose who are so ill disposed, as to think that some men are of a naturefitted altogether for destruction, and others for salvation ; and that theseare severally in such a condition, according as their predisposition shallincline them to the worse or to the better. I myself, indeed, allow thatone man will have a greater or a less aptitude than another ; but I donot allow that this aptitude alone is sufficient for perfection, but thatthere is a process of reasoning which calls it out, that nature may advanceto the accomplishment of the work as the stone produces fire,when struck with the iron. Ashen you hear this expression, ' to whomit is given,' add this, ' it is given to those who are called, and who havethus a right inclinationThe whole passage is rather crabbed, as Gregory is steering the truecourse between predestination on the one side, and unassisted liberty onthe other. I have given you a tolerably close translation, which mayperhaps explain the meaning of the passage in question. Melanchthonprobably cited it in opposition to the violent predestinarianism of Calvin,at the same time ascribing to the grace of God its due effect upon thehuman will.I have to thank you for putting me upon this scent ; as in the courseof the evening I have read over one splendid oration, in which I wasdisappointed of the passage, but was delighted even with my disappointment.My second trial was a more lucky one, for I found it immediately.I shall be happy to show you the passage, or to send youthe volume.Always, my dear sir,Very truly yours,Til. Ki:KlL."796 KENS1NGTONIANA.silliest, I think he went beyond him : his pamphletby one of the working Clergy," being among themost decisive and eminent proofs of a logical head,and of a christianity spirit. Doubtless, had helived, he would have done a great deal more in thisway; and become thereby such an ornament to hisprofession, as to have secured for him a seat uponthe bench of Bishops.Ille si quis alms ! "But it pleased Providence that it was not so to be ;and he who had lived so well, was to instruct us thathe could die as he had lived. . .." And oh ! too highThe price of knowledge taught us how TO DIE ! "My intimacy with him continued till my departurefrom Kensington in 1824, a few months beforehis decease. He had married the daughter of myneighbour Mr. Delafield, in the preceding autumn ;and during his absence I helped to fill his place inthe pulpit. On his return, he exhibited serioussymptoms of indisposition ; but he was watched,and nursed, and attended by domestic solicitude andmedical skill. I will own that I saw him, the firsttime on his return, with serious apprehensions. Adiagnostic physician might even then have auguredfatally of consequences. The last note in reply toone containing an anxious inquiry, on my part, aboutKENSINOTONIANA. 797his hrnlth, with an offer of professional help whichI ever received from him, was the following :Vicarage, Monday.MY DEAR Sir,Let me thank you most truly for your valuableoffer. Hope, from day to day, will promise me that tomorrowI shall be able to take my duties in part again.But I almost fear the worst. It would be wise therefore toclose in with your gratifying offer. My complaint is Iknow not what ; it is, I fear, a very long insidious derangementof digestive organs. It makes me utterly useless bothto myself and others. I could not have seen you to-day atthe time you called. Perhaps you will be kind enough tomorrow,or the next day, to try me again, and I will promiseyou a better reception. Many thanks to you for thevery kind interest which you take in me.Most faithfully yours,To the best of my recollection I never saw himafterwards. Meanwhile the utmost solicitude wasexpressed by his patron, as well as by his parishioners,respecting the progress of his indisposition. I hadcommunicated occasionally with the Bishop. " Iam much obliged (said his Lordship in one of hisnotes) by your kindness in writing. Would to Godyour intelligence were not of so melancholy a kind !I shall be grieved to the heart should anythinghappen to Mr. Kennel." It was thought advisable798 KENSINGTONIANA.to send him to his Father, at Winchester, for thepresumed benefit from change of air; and the Vicartook leave (alas, a final one!) of Kensington, withthe best wishes, and many sighs, of the Inhabitantsfor his convalescent return. He sunk gradually,but certainly. It was one direct unvarying courseof increasing debility and prostration. But themind had yet its " heavenly musings." Nothingdaunted the hopes of the sufferer, or repressed hisfeeding upon his Redeemer, in his heart, by faith,with thanksgiving." The intelligence of his deathfirst reached me (when I had been four monthssettled in Town) from the Archbishop, or rather histhen Diocesan. " Mr. Kennel (said his Grace), Ilearn by this day's post, expired yesterday morningfull of consolation and hope in his Redeemer."Fulham, July 13, 1824.But there lives ONE the venerable Parent of theDeceased who has since drank of the cup ofaffliction yet more copiously and bitterly filled . bythe recent loss of a second son, in the same profession.Scarcely two months have elapsed since,in reply to my communication with him about havingthe present work " upon the anvil," the Dean ofWinchester, now an Octogenarian, answered, in oneof his happiest moments, thus"Deanery, Sept. 1, 1835.MY DEAR SIR,** . . . . Both my dear Sons were cut off however early,KENSINGTONIANA. 799yet not till they had discharged their short-span ministrywith no ordinary fidelity and energy ; and are, we humblytrust, gone forward to their reward. The lives of bothwere shortened by their labors. God be praised for such aprivilege reminding usThat precious gums are not for lasting fire,They but perfume the Temple, and EXPIRE!'Believe me, dear sir,Yours, ever sincerely,T. RENNELL."It remains, while upon this subject, only to add,that on the death of the Dean's eldest Son, theVicar of Kensington, a subscription confined toone guinea as the highest sum was raised to placehis monumental bust in that church which had beenso frequently warmed by his piety, and enlightenedby his wisdom. The names of Mr. Canning andMr. Croaker were at the head of the Committee forcarrying this laudable design into effect. It \\;iscompletely successful ; and the chisel of Chantreyseems to have been guided by that warmth of feelingwhich is sometimes as necessary for the handas for the head of the Artist*.There is little more to add to these KENSING-Montana : yet the introduction of the name of Mr.Canning necessarily forces upon me the recollectionof my great obligation to him, in having given myonly surviving and elder Son a cavalry-cadetship onThe resemblance is perfect ; but it was the result of consultationwith friends, and an examination of a print. The situation of the busthat always struck us as very objectionable.800 KENSINGTONIANA.the Bengal establishment. I owed this almostentirely to the friendly intervention of the late Mr.Hebe for upon that illustrious Senator himself Ihad not the shadow of a claim. We only came incontact when I was placed in the pulpit of KensingtonChurch. What was suffered on partingwith that Son from his native land, could only beexceeded in agony, by the intelligence, some sevenyears afterwards, of having parted with him forever! But this is premature uppermost as it is,and never can fail to be, in the mind and upon theheart of a Parent. Not long after my Son's departurefor Calcutta, it was my good fortune to havethe BISHOP of that place, REGINALD HEBER*, asThe reader must not suppose that the Rev. REGINALD HEBER isthe first of that celebrated name who has written English verse, or thefirst, of the same name, to be incorporated in the list of ENGLISH AUTHORS.Far from it. In the year of our Lord, 1752, appeared a small octavovolume, with the following title : " An Historical List of Horse Matchesrun; and of Plates and Prizes run for in Great Britain and Irelandin 1751. By REGINALD HEBER." In his preface, it will be seen thatthe author was by no means disposed to undervalue the weight and importanceof his own studies, for thus writes he : " In the series ofyears, during which I shall, by the Divine's permission, continue thiswork [his predecessor had been one John Cheney], all those genealogiesthat can hereafter be procured with certainty, shall be hereafter stated,and transmitted to posterity ; this being a matter of prime considerationin the matter of horsemanship. And it is well known that Horace'sconsideration of hereditary valour in the families of the great, is by thatauthor himself applied to the generous breed of those animals, which isonly to be expected from generous progenitors.'Tis from the noble and the goodA gallant race succeeds jSo the strong herds, a generous brood,A barb a barb succeeds."The author had about five hundred subscribers to his little volume.KENSINGTONIANA. SO 1my dinner guest, in company with his Brother, anda few more select friends. There were circumstances,or rather topics, attending that day's symposiumnot to be easily forgotten.Within a week of the visit, the Bishop set sail.I never saw him afterwards; but on his quittingme, I accompanied him to his carriage, and pressinghis hand most anxiously and earnestly, on takingadieu, I entreated " that he would remember, andif he could, aid and befriend MY SON." " I willdo for him (says he) as you yourself would wishme to do were you present : never fear we shallALL meet again." Such are the hopes, and suchthe calculations, of man * !A sigh the ABSENT claim, the DEAD a tear."" Propontis Homo, disponee DEUS."Thomas* a Kempis*.3rCHAPTER XII.LONDON.O THOU, resort and mart of all the earth,Chequer'd with all complexions of mankind,And spotted with all crimes ; in WHOM I seeMuch that I love, and more that I admire,And all that I abhor;"Cowper.SUCH are the strikingly characteristic verses ofthe Author of The Task. They are a perfect conveyanceof my own feelings and sentiments. I had onlybefore occasionally skimmed the surface of, or takenup a temporary abode in, that immense city whichis not inaptly described by Gibbon as a " vast solitude,"although swarming with the population oftwelve hundred and fifty thousand souls : but nowmy fixed destiny rendered it peremptory that Ishould be entirely located there. What led to thislast removal of my Penates, may be told in fewwords. The prediction of my excellent friend, thelate Mr. King, proved to be but too true*. I hadshot a good way beyond my fortieth year, when prefermentcame upon me and in a manner almostdouble-handed.My first piece of preferment, in 1823, after havingbeen nineteen years in the church, was the smallSee page 168, ante.LONDON.living of Exiling, in Suffolk, situate within t\\<>miles of Newmarket*. For this first move I wasexclusively indebted to my late Noble Patron whonever ceased, since the completion of the Bibl. $pen (mariana, to regret the absence of all previous opportunityof befriending me in my profession. I wasgrateful for the autumnal retreat which this slender,but in many respects comfortable, residence affordedme. The duties of the parish, from its limited population,were necessarily of easy execution. Denuded,as the surrounding country is, of every featurecontributive of picturesque beauty, the parish of Ex-kingboasts of a rich and productive soil in wheat andbarley. It boasts also of some important historicalReminiscences t. It was somewhere, I think, aboutA short parochial history of this place, together with a north-westview of the Church, was furnished by me, some four years since, for theBritish Magazine, or the Churchman's Orthodox Manual. I rejoiceto learn the increased and increasing sale of this admirable "MonthlyVisitor." It is perhaps now and then a little too tenaciously orthodox ; butI recognise, in its Editor, a man of a capacious and vigorous understanding,and master of a style which has all the point and perspicuity,without the coarseness and recklessness, of Swift. His " &/.r Letters tothe Farmers" on the subject of Tithes, is one of the most TELLING productionsof the time.t Here a plot was hatched to upset William the Conqueror on histhrone. And here, some few centuries previously, was born ETIIEL-DRIDA, through life a wife and a virgin and the founder of the firstreligious establishment at Ely whose marvellous history figures abundantlyin Bentham's History of the Cathedral of that place, and is cutin stone, in eight compartments, beneath the " magic lantern " of theCathedral itself. Tin inhabitants of Exning, (or Joining) in the oldentime, were the scent of Caesar's Commentaries: and its present churchwas tin Mother ( 'lurch of both those at Nrirmarh-t. Exiling was alsothe Old-market town, till the erection of the AVtr-nwrArf.3i804 LONDON.the year 1821, that the parish of Marylehone becamealtogether the property of Government, hypurchase, in regard to the disposition of all prefermentwhich should arise from the building of additionalChurches *. Four additional Churches werein due course erected ; to the first of which St.Mar\fS) Brimstone Square I was presented bythe Earl of Liverpool, then Premier.There were some unusual circumstances attending,or rather preceding, this presentation. Thepoint at issue was altogether unprecedented : and ahost of candidates was in the field for the possessionof the prize. I was one in the number which it issaid (I know not even with what semblance of truth)amounted to one hundred and thirty. But the hopesand anxieties of each candidate were kept in abeyancefor nearly three years. Two years had elapsedbetween the putting in of my own " lot in the urn"and its turning up a prize. It might possibly bebad taste in me to doubt or disclaim the complimentarylanguage of the Premier on presenting mewith the living ; but my judgment must be warpedI have reason to believe that an odd 2000/. only, fixed the churchpatronage of this immense parish in the hands of Government : that isto say, an opposite and an adverse party . at all times"Willing to wound, and yet afraid to strike". . .bid as far as 38,000/. for the same patronage. Nor was it until LordSidmouth had exerted every energy, and pointed out every concurrentpropriety, that Lord Liverpool was induced to add another 2000/. to thebidding. The right of patronage, on presentation, had previously vestedin the Duke of Portland.LONDON. 805or obtuse indeed not to be fully persuaded that " aword in season," from my Noble Patron, helpedessentially to fix the determination of the Premier.Nor was the position and the influence of the Diocesanby any means overlooked by Earl Spencer inhis unceasing desire and efforts to secure to me soprominent and respectable a piece of preferment :and few results in the whole of this affair were moregratifying to me than the ready and most creditabletestimony of the Bishop.Now came the day of CONGRATULATIONS bywordof mouth and by epistle. It is impossible tolook back upon this gilded moment without feelingthe consciousness of the value of those " golden opinions"than which nothing could be more delightfulfor myself to receive, and without which I considergood luck to be worthless, and the wealth of millionsbut as rubbish. I will particularise no one ofthese " congratulatory strains" in preference to anotherbut I yet possess them ALL . and considering<r what has since taken place, and that the authorsof several have quitted this world for a better . Iam not sure whether, in the perusal of them, sorrowdo not preponderate over pleasure? From almostall quarters all callings and pursuits in life, Iwas fortunate enough to receive some one little flower ;so as to make, of the whole, a nosegay of rather animposing size, and of a decidedly "sweet odour."Sic positi (jiioniani suaves iniMvtis adores!"806 LONDON.But what fixed my foot more firmly upon thefresh soil which I was treading, was, that I startedwith my old and faithful friend Sir Francis Freelingfor my Church Warden ; and I believe for the wholeapprenticeship-period of seven years, for which hewas invested with that office, he never shrunk fromthe fulfilment of the duties of it in every essentialparticular. These duties were, to be sure, slender,and of rare occurrence ; but they had still demandsupon time like his, so overwhelmingly engrossed bythe more important duties of his public station.The church of St. Mary's, Marylebone, wasconsecrated on the 7th of January, 1824. I preachedthe sermon on that occasion ; and as this sermon isbefore the public in print, it shall tell its own tale.But there was one understanding in the congregationto which it savoured somewhat of heresy :for an anonymous letter was written to the Bishop(now Archbishop of Canterbury) complaining ofwhat I chuse here to designate as a lack of spiritualityand unctuousness of the sermon in question.The Bishop, with that discretion and gentlemanlyfeeling which always characterise him, sent me theanonymous letter as his usual proceeding was insuch matters without one word of commentary. I feltit a duty to make a particular reply to my Diocesan ;but I could only harbour contempt for my shadowycorrespondent even had I known the substance towhich he were attached. There is nothing sothoroughly base and indefensible as anonymous vi-london.807operation. But the spirit which dictated this pieceof flimsy criticism, vented itself, in the course of theyear, in the newspapers, by gentle insinuations andgratuitous inferences, that my pursuits were of tooliterary a complexion to enable me to attend to themany professional duties of my newly appointedsituation.O, quam saepe mails generator orig bonorum!"So sings Lucilius ; as may be seen in Wernsdorf 'sedition of the minor Latin Poets, Altenb. 1788, 8vo.p. 163. My " gentle " Censures was indirectly andunintentionally the cause of much good to me. Icalled the attention of the Bishop to these publicnotices ; simply from an excess of sensibility, lestthey might, by the remotest operation, warp hiskindly-disposed feeling towards me. His answer atonce justified the step taken by me, and entrenchedme, as it should seem, yet more strongly in his favourableopinion. Above all, did it confirm me inthe views I had ever taken of the compatibility oflife ran with professional occupations. After assuringme that " I had no reason to fear that anyimpression to my disadvantage would be made uponhim by statements in the newspapers, which weretoo apt to take liberties with public characters," hisLordship was pleased to express himself thus : " Amind, active like yours, will find leisure sufficientfor literary pursuits after the faithful discharge ofmure important duties; and will perhaps <Krm608 LONDON.vigour from this change of employment to givegreater efficacy to its daily labours." Fortified bysuch a dictum from such a quarter, I resolved, inthe union of such avocations, to shrink from no exertionswhich the duties of my church and the caresof my family might equally call upon and countenanceme in the performance.An occasion quickly presented itself for the exerciseof the double duty both of Author and Pastor.A National School was, not long after the openingof St. Mary's, established in the immediate vicinityof the Church. Its history is unprecedented. Thesplendid liberality of ONE Individual of the nameof Willard * enabled us to erect a building whichThere is almost something of the air of romance attached to thetf splendid liberality" of the late JAMES Willard, Esq. who died a bachelor,or a widower (I forget which), without children, some six or sevenyears ago. On the contemplation of the building of the four newchurches in Marylebone, he offered to lend, or rather, indeed, to give,the parish 20,000/., on condition of his receiving 51. per cent, for lifeonly: and he was then in his sixtieth year. He also presented the fundsof the above National School with 4000/. precisely on the same terms :and he did not survive the donation six years ! Here was a special anda glorious display of CHRISTIAN BENEVOLENCE in the best of all causes!And yet, will the reader believe it ? can he believe it ? Within notone of these churches is there a TABLET TO HIS MEMORY ! Although theparish have been benefited to the amount of 1000/. per annum, yetAnd what? no monument, inscription, stone,His race, his form, his name almost UNKNOWN ? "It is very true, the reader may retort upon me in the language of thesame bard, and add,Who builds a church to GOD, and not to fame,Will never mark the marble with his name."But though the builder, in the exercise of a good taste, will not do so,LONDON.should contain room for the instruction of sixhundred children, and afford at the same time aiv-hence for the Master and his Wife. Thestrenuous zeal, and unremitting exertions of myfriend George Buck, Esq. the brother churchwardenof Sir Francis Freeling greatly contributedto give a general interest to the undertaking, andto induce a ready and liberal subscription. Atthe head of this Subscription stood the name ofEdward Berkeley Portman, Esq., as our PATRONa young man, then not long in the possession of hisFather's noble fortune a Member of the House ofCommons and decidedly distinguished for hiscultivated understanding, his liberal principles, andbenevolent heart. We desired nothing better thansuch a gallant Captain to be standing upon the poopof our vessel as it was launched upon the ocean ofpublic opinion. The launch, as launches usuallyare, was a fine sight. The vessel was quicklytrimmed, and ready for sea ; and I must say, it hasthose who have profited so largely by his bounty, and by the building,are bound, methinks, in honour and in conscience, to shew somethinglike proofs of a grateful feeling. How admirably has the same Bard,from whom the preceding extracts are taken, dwelt uponThe unwilling gratitude of base mankind !"We sometimes raise columns and obelisks, and spread far and wide,upon the walls of our churches, the variegated marble and the pompousinscription . while the VANITY of the survivor is the only palpablyevident motive of the erection. The pride of pedigree is gratified bygenealogical display ; but the ashes which sleep below have been rarelyj>crhaps warmed by one ordinary act of Christian Charity ! What aCompound is man ! " Vanity vanity AM. is VANITY !'810 LONDON.been ever since navigated with as much care,prudence, and success, as attend similar navigations.The leading Members of the Committee (of whichI was officially one) came down with a 20/. subscriptionin ready money, and %L annual donation. Ipreached the first Charity Sermon in aid of its funds,at St. Mary's, in May, 1824, which produced the sumof 98/. But my zeal was not satisfied with this demonstrationof feeling only. I resolved to publisha volume of Sermons, by subscription ; and, dedicatingit " to the Patron, President, and Trustees"of the School, to present the establishment with allthe proceeds of profit, after payment of the contingentexpences, should any arise.I considered myself to have been rather fortunatein the result ; for although the number of Subscriberswas small, yet the interest taken was considerableand I was enabled to enlarge the fundsof the Institution by a donation of 100/. I putnot a shilling into my own pocket. The volumewas published towards the end of the year 1825,and it included both the Consecration and theCharity Sermon. It is the second volume of Sermonswhich I have published*, and of which theThe first volume of Sermons published by me was in the year1820, and bore for title as follows: "Sermons, Doctrinal and Practical;preached in King Street, Crompton, Quebec, and Fitzroy Chapels"They were " affectionately and respectfully dedicated" to theseveral congregations of those chapels wherein they were preached. Ashort advertisement accompanies them ; in this I have said that theSermons in question, " bear testimony of the author's affectionate vene-LONDON. 811publication has never been accompanied by oneemotion of regret on retrospection. I desire tostand or fall as a Divine by the principles thereindeveloped*. It was, I think, somewhere towardsthe opening of the year 1826, that on being askedto furnish an Introduction, or Prospectus, to aperiodical work (to be called THE HIVE. . .to be thechannel of some beautiful engravings), I suppliedthe few remarks which will be found in the subjoinednote.ration for THAT CHURCH, in the principles of which he has been educated,and in the faith of which he hopes to live and to die." It may be aswell to add, that the first sermon preached by me, as one of his presentMajesty's Chaplains in Ordinary, in the presence of the King himself, onSunday, April 28, 1832, is to be found in this volume, as having beencomposed and first preached in 181 1 : thinking it more really respectfulto my sovereign not to compose a Sermon expressly for the occasion.My reception at the Levee which followed, proved that I had done wisely.Here is also the first sermon which I preached in March, 1810, afterthe death of my younger son, of which the text is " The Lord gave andthe Lord hath taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord:" page 281.The second volume of Sermons, of the date of 1825, is, I shouldhope, as exhibiting the proofs of an enlarged experience, of a moreedifying complexion than the first. In each I have done my best ; butit was a proud moment for me, when, in the language of one of mysubscribers to the reprint of Fox 8 Martyrology, I read such a sentimentas the following : " for my principles, in the religion of my country,I refer you to those developed in your own most acceptable volumeof Sermons." So spake the late Rev. F. Carson, the inmate and highlyrespectable friend of Sir Richard Colt Hoare, Bart.t The entire " PROSPECTUS" was m follows:" Bold will be thatman who shall deny ' THE HIVE' to be a ' collection of sweets :' and yetbolder may be that individual, or set of individuals, which, under suchan attractive title, presumes to mingle no bitters with the sweet inthe literary compositions to which that tide is a prelude. Such an attempt,nevertheless, will be made in the pages, which, in due time, willfollow this announcement.812 LONDON.The close of the year 1825, and the opening ofthe year 1826, presented a train of public eventsBut if ' the hive' he a t collection of sweets,' it is also a monumentof industry ; and as far as honest views, patient research, and carefulcomposition, be evidences of an industrious spirit, in such proportionshall we make good claims upon the public to consider our lucubrations,both as monuments of industry, and collections of sweets.Not that we promise to keep our readers upon the constant stretch ofcuriosity, or to indulge in one undeviating strain of vivacity. Theremust be variety in all compositions : and a few sober reflections, occasionallybrought forward to the consideration of our more serious readers,may have the effect of giving additional pungency to the more mirthfulperiods. Even should a little nodding occasionally accompany the perusalof these grave and monitory strains, it must not be considered asout of character : for who has described, with greater beauty and truth,the sleep-inviting hum which usually attends a ' hive,' than the princeof all Roman poets ?Hinc tibi, quae semper vicino ab limite sees,HyblfBis Apibus flores depart sancti,Saepe levi somnus suadebit inure susurro.' Eel. 1.So that it is hoped the very abstractions, or dreaming, of our readers,will not be unattended with poetical visions !We proceed, without further protege, to announce the real objectsin view in the publication of ' THE Hive Instead of tales of love-sickmaidens, of castles stormed by warriors, or plains inundated with humanblood instead of haunted mansions, wailing ghosts, or gossamer sylphswe shall present our readers with fare of a more substantial and nourishingquality. HISTORY, sacred and profane, foreign and British :BIOGRAPHY, foreign and domestic : PHILOLOGY, including Poetry, originaland borrowed, of the highest class : MORALS, at once enforcedand heightened by facts : ANTIQUITIES, purely British, and of almostevery description, including Sports and Pastimes : NATURAL HISTORY,in many of its popular branches.Thus much for our text. It is proposed to embellish that text withspecimens of ART of the very highest order. Every number will containthree plates upon steel, of a larger size, and three smaller plates,engraved by the most eminent artists ; as well as a few wood cuts : tobe accompanied with six sheets of letter press. And when it is announcedthat this ' letter press' will be put forth at the SHAKSPEAREPRESS, the Publishers presume that it will be worthy of the long establishedreputation of the quarter whence it issues'LONDON. 813or rather of public and private distress almostunparalleled in the History of Commerce. Thecauses of this distress seem even yet, if not whollyinexplicable, to be hardly satisfactorily accountedfor. If it did not partake of the name, it had certainlyall the wild characteristics, of the South SeaBubble. To-day you had only to put your namedown to a share or shares in the Rio de la Plata, orother South American mines, and tomorrow a supplicantpurchaser would give you fifty per cent, forevery share taken. The old were bewitched . theyoung were in ecstasies. Everybody made a rushfor the City. A new world of wealth had beendiscovered. It was only to ask and to have. " Whyare you reluctant ? (said one knowing friend to me).Many of your order have enrolled their names." " Itmight be so ; but it ought not to be so ; and youknow not only how obtuse my scent of lucre at alltimes is, but what a thorough dislike I have to commercialfreaks of every description. I should begulled by the veriest goose. Talk about Edit'mm'srecipes, and I'll honestly tell you their value."To the best of my recollection these were almostthe very words that passed between us.Now came, as always does come, the moment ofreaction ; which, morally speaking, may be calledthe DAY OF VISITATION." Individuals firstbanking-houses afterwards fell prostrate before tin-blast.Scarcely any one could face it. Day afterday, and almost hour after hour, you heard " how814 LONDON.the mighty had fallen!" The Bank of Englandwas closed for the preparation of the January ConsolDividend. Its gates were besieged, and loud andstrong was the voice of woe heard from without itsportals 'help us, or we perish I' Gentle reader,these are not fine flourishing words of course, inthe way of dramatic description. They are " wordsof truth and soberness." The Governor andDeputy Governor (Mr. Buller and Mr. Richards)happened to be my parishioners, and I shall neverforget the physical as well as moral trials whichthose two worthy gentlemen had hourly to endure.The day was too short for the comprehension even,much more for the settlement, of such conflictingand extensive claims for the reparation of suchtremendous losses and wide-spreading ruin.I used to hear tales from their lips, which wouldwell nigh cause the flesh to creep and the blood tocurdle. They were admirably supported by theirbrother Directors. . .and Government at last lent alistening ear, and extended a protecting armmotos componere fructus."But the entire line of coast was dotted with wrecks.The tempest had shattered the stouter, and overwhelmedthe frailer, vessels. The small craft wereall submerged. From that day to this there hasbeen always a heavy, if not a treacherous, swell ofsea. A perfect calm has not yet succeeded. Andhow many worthy, unsuspecting, and too confiding,LONDON. 815human beings have perished in that general wreck !How severely has wisdom been purchased! . andwhat a MORAL has that "day of visitation" readto a rash and a credulous race of Beings! I didnot escape the general contagion; but my loss,although great*, was occasioned by the defection ofthose whom it was impossible to suppose would nothave gallantly " rode out the storm." They arenow at rest. Peace to their Spirits !But there are losses of a more cutting andtremendous description which can NEVER be suppliedor replaced. Wealth is fluctuating. Chance,or a good turn of events, may restore to-day thedefalcations of yesterday. At all events, there ishope, fluttering her many-coloured wings, whichsomehow or other contrives to tell us that thegolden shower" is only delayed to fall in heavierdrops. Not so with those losses which affect usThe above, as affecting me through a collateral source which shallin nowise he named. As DIRECTLY affecting me, the panic, describedin the text, fell as severely upon BOOKSELLERS (and in consequenceAUTHORS) as upon any other class of tradesmen ; and I had individuallyto refund*, sum of money of nearer Tube than TWO THOUSAND POUNDS,which had been spiritedly, and, as it should at first appear, rationally,advanced for the English Tour, the fourth edition of the Introductionto the Classics, and the meditated new edition of fox's Book of Martyrs-therefunding of this large sum, received under circumstances so calculatedto gratify the feelings of an Author, and which, at the time, wujoyfully viewed by him as the pivot on which to turn, and to husbandhis newly-acquired resources, shook the HOME-BANK to its very centre.Fortitude and resignation are among the severest but most triumphanttrials of a CHRISTIAN! I have endeavoured to exemplify bothand thus strive to dismiss this distressing topic from my recollection . . .FOR Ever ! .816 LONDON.in our relative capacities, as parents, relations, andfriends. I will endeavour to be methodical. Inthe spring of 1826, I issued proposals for the publicationof THOMAS A KEMPIS, " On the Imitationof Christ." In the spring of the ensuing year, Iannounced an intention of bringing out a newedition of Fox's BOOK OF MARTYRS. Of each ofthese in due order. But I was now to be revisited *with a severe and overwhelming sorrow. The readermay remember t that my elder and only survivingSon had been presented by Mr. Canning with a to Bengal. He had been seasoned,as most young men usually are, by a sharp fit ofillness on his arrival in India; and was meditatingan embarkation as far as the Cape for the establishmentof his health. Calcutta appearing to agreewith him, the Marquis of Hastings, then Governor-general,and Commander-in-chief, very kindly andopportunely gave him an appointment in his BodyGuard. He fulfilled the duties of that station regularlyand honourably for a twelvemonth ; and findinghis health established, he rejoined his regiment upthe Country ; where he was both respected andcaressed by his brother Officers. The letters whichI continued to receive from him were of the mostgratifying description ; evincing the gallant feelingan aspiring young man not less observant of steadydiscipline than of gentlemanly decorum. Yet, asSee page 283. t See page 800, ante.LONDON. 817is ever the case, a secret love of home an increasingattachment to parents and sisters, as distance increasedwould frequently be the under current ofhis effusions. The siege of Buhrtpoor came, andhe was regularly at his victorious post as SeniorLieutenant of his regimentAlas! at length came the hour of dismay andaffliction to his Parents. In the spring of 1827 1went down to join my family at Exning for a week'scalm and comfort ; the intermitting and importantduties of my situation rendering such a temporaryretreat almost indispensable. On leaving Town, Istrictly forbade the transmission of all letters uponbusiness or otherwise ; for, as if " prescient ofcoming ill," I observed, that " I would not have onedrop of bitter infused into that week's cup of sweets."My instructions were literally fulfilled in this quarter.Not one letter was sent from home to Exning. Butfrom another quarter, the Post brought two letterson the same morning, each sealed with black wax,and written in the same hand. I had as usual beenabroad before the Post arrived ; and looking from mygarden gate, saw a grave being dug in the churchyardnot having been apprised of the death ofany Parishioner. I had no sooner learnt the nameof the deceased, than the letters were put into myhand. The issue needs no lengthened recital. Thesympathetic reader will anticipate the failings ofwoe and wretchedness, and the desolation of heartSo818 LONDON.which ensued ! It came upon us all like a thunderbolt; but one spirit has been since gradually sinking,and longing to be at rest with HIM who hasbeen thus prematurely taken from her !My own individual sorrow was as deep as unfeigned.When the effects of the stunning blowhad a little subsided, on looking out, as it were,upon the external face of things, how drearyappeared every object upon which the eye alighted !The heavens were never smiling ; the sky was neverbright and beautiful ; and the buds and blossoms ofSpring seemed to taunt man on the sterility of thegrave ! These were early, and perhaps naturalemotions; but the "sorrow" which is "withouthope," is not the sorrow of a Christian and itwas neither mine nor that of my family. Thencame from every sympathising quarter those lettersof condolence like heaven's own dew-drops to refreshthe parched ground ! The effect of them fell uponour hearts, and sunk as deeply as they were plentifullybestowed. My son's patron, Mr. Canning,led the way on this mournful occasion : " sincerelycondoling with me on my irreparable misfortune."It was the last note (March 27, 1827) which I everreceived from him ; and he too, within six monthsof that day, was to be added to the DEPARTED. MyNoble Patron was among the earliest to evince hissincere sympathy ; and Lady Spencer favoured mewith a letter upon the subject, singularly confirma-london.SIDlive of her exalted religious principles, and soundgood sense, which would have done honour to anyhead and heart. I deeply regret that I do not considermyself at liberty to make it public. Frommy Diocesan I received a letter full of sentimentsand expressions which did honour to human nature,and to any rank however exalted. I will ventureupon his forgiveness as I am sure I shall obtainthe commendation of the reader if that letter heremeet the public eye. Alas I since its scription,how yet more deeply has its Author partaken of thecup of domestic affliction * !London, April 13, 1827."MY DEAR SIR,I heard with great concern of your domestic calamity ;and having children myself, know full well what must be theaffliction of parents for the loss of a beloved Son. I couldnot, at such a moment, expect that your mind would be atliberty to think of literary engagements however importantand was not surprised at your silence. But itgives me pleasure to find that you are gradually recoveringfrom the shock, and particularly that you derive satisfactionin dwelling on the virtues of those Sons who have been takenfrom their earthly parents to the presence of their FATHERWHICH is IN HEAVEN. In this respect, die greater yourloss, the more solid are your grounds of consolation, in theassurance that they who die in the Lord are blessed, andBy the loss of both his sons, and of his eldest daughter, LadyBeaumont,*his Grace is now bereft of those who, with his name, mighthave carried the practice of his virtues later down to posterity.3 r,20 LONDON.will hereafter be restored to their Friends who tread in thesame good path.I remain,My dear sir,Very truly yours,W. LONDON."And with what exquisite and to him naturalfeeling, did my affectionate friend Sir F. Freeling,address himself to one of my family upon the occasion." I am laid low (observed he in a letter tomy elder daughter) by the account of this afflictingvisitation of Providence. I cannot write to yourgood Father upon it, for my heart is sunk withinme. I pray to God to support him and your excellentMother under this trying dispensation," &c. &c,His letter to myself, subsequently written after Ihad poured forth the sorrows of my heart into hisbosom is fraught with such exquisite touches offeeling, as well as sound and consolatory advice asplaces its author among the justest thinkers, as wellas most felicitous Epistolographers, of the day. Thecore of my heart is not dearer to me than is thisletter. Nor was my old friend Mr. Douce muchless prompt and warm in his sorrowing sympathies.Be assured (observed he) that you have not a connexionthat more sincerely and deeply deplores theloss you have sustained. My nerves are not equalto bear even the affliction of others ; and I am freeto state, that I always thought visits of condolenceLONDON. 821the most unnecessary things in the world and I ampersuaded that not one person in ten expresses hisreal feelings on the occasion. Moreover, I havenot been well for some time, and am unable to takelong walks as I used to do ; even to call on our poorfriend Wilbraham*, whose looks and appearance,yesterday, when he called, distressed me not a little."But from a " Centenary " of Letters on this heart-distressingsubject, it will be difficult, as it might bedelicate, to continue the selection. My old andamiable friends, whose names are not specificallymentioned, will not, I feel persuaded, do me the injusticeto think that I value their communicationsthe less on that account t. But limits must be assigned.Intense and agonising sorrow has a reaction,perhaps quicker than mental afflictions of aless overwhelming kind. Though there was " noson of mine succeeding," there were OTHERS who atonce diverted my griefs by fixing my attention andaffections more exclusively upon themselves. I sorrowedfrom the heart from the inmost soul. Theworld, for a time, seemed to be made up of other elementsthan heretofore : society seemed occasionallyas a sort of insulting masquerade. I looked out forHIM who was GONE . . . but I saw him not. I listenedSee page 406, ante.t And yet I cannot reconcile it to myself to omit the names of someof my very oldest friends : Messrs. Petrie, Barwis, Masquerier, &c. ;Lady Campbell, Mrs. Children, and Captain and Mrs. Selden ; fromthe latter of whom the first intelligence of my son's demise reached meatKxning.822 LONDON.for the tone of his voice, or the sound of his footsteps,. . . and hearing it not, I sought my own chamber,and cried out, with Him of ancient times,Would to heaven I had died for thee, O I. . .my Son,my Son ! " But this might not he. I then made aneffectual rally; and after giving instructions for theerection of a mural tablet to His MEMORY*, I cameup to town with my family : and within a monthwas sustained in my pulpit to preach a sermon, ofThe inscription upon this mural tablet, erected within the chancelof Exning church, is given at length in my parochial account of thatplace. Here it may be only necessary to quote a part of it which affordstestimony of the honourable estimation in which the Deceased was heldby his brother officers.SACREDTo THE MEMORY OFFRANCIS D I B D I N,* * *His Brother Officers,To perpetuate the Remembrance ofHis professional and private Worth,Erected a MonumentTo his MemoryAt the Place of his Interment.* * *He died, where he had been long quartered, at Muttra ; the seniorlieutenant of the third regiment of Bengal cavalry. In his LAST LETTERto me Mr. Canning observed " I hear from you with pleasure of theesteem and respect manifested by the brother officers of your late sontowards his memory," c. &e.LONDON.which the text was : " If in this life only we have/n>]>(> in C/trisf, we are of all men most miserable*. 99To divert and in a manner to comfort me, duringthis season of sorrow, I took up my THOMAS 'AKEMPIS resolutely ; and, as the concluding sentenceof the preface testifies t, felt it, at times, a source ofrefuge during the stormy sorrows of the mind. Itsvery tone of asceticism was medicine to a bruisedspirit : for at that moment I could have become acloistered monk even of the order of St. Francis, orof St. Dominic. But I had scarcely begun to make adecided progress in my Kemplsian labours, when Ireceived the startling intelligence of the serious illness,and, in all probability, approaching dissolutionof Mr. CANNING. He had been my son's principalbenefactor ; and ever since the perusal of his Iterad Mecca I had been induced to consider himas among the most elegant Latin poets of the day.His victorious eloquence in the senate needed notthe humble testimony of my praise. What I hadsaid of it in the Musewnt, was said " pectore <i1>him ." while his last letter to the present Lord Lynd-1 Cor. xv. 1. v. 9. It was preached on the Sunday immediatelyfollowing Christmas Day, and has never been published.t The sentence is as follows : " In reverting to the intrinsic characterof the volume, now in the possession of the public, it only remains toobserve, that the editor commenced his task of translation under theoppression of much worldly nn.rirty, and concluded it in a season ofDEEP DOMESTIC AFFLICTION ; but his consolation throughout has beenneither nugatory nor trivial. May his readers sympathise in his comforts,without participation of similar sorrows."J Seepage 710, an824 LONDON.hurst, offering him the Lord High Chancellorshipof England, shewed how, even after no small causeof provocation, he could allow the more playful feelingsof his fancy to get an ascendancy over the severerdictates of his judgment. The anecdote hasbeen twenty times "extant in choice print," andneeds not a repetition here.I had never spoken to Mr. Canning in my life ;hut as I am not in the habit of loving or respectingby halves however I may qualify my oppositionit seemed to me to be a debt for ever hanging aboutme, to shew that illustrious man, upon every occasion,a mark of attention and grateful consideration.With this view, while I had presented thefour copies of my Tour, upon small paper, to thefour distinguished characters mentioned in a precedingpage* (and to whom 1 had in fact no personalobligation) I resolved to present a copy upon largepaper to Mr. Canning. His manner of accepting itshewed immediately that he understood the preciseterms upon which it was tendered t. Still, illnessSee page 672.t At the sale of Mr. Canning's library, in the following year, [by thelate Mr. Christie, I was a brisk competitor for this identical copy ; butSir , Bart, was not a bidder to suffer a defeat. He obtainedit for the sum of 307., in boards, nearly double the publication price.Mr. Canning's name (very like what appears at page 822, ante) waswritten on a fly leaf of each of the three volumes ; and I scarcely knowan instance of a public sale of a library, so wholly unattractive from condition,where such heavy prices seem to have been so readily given ;,especially where the copy exhibited any mark of its ownership withits late proprietor.LONDON. 825increased : and my personal inquiries increased inproportion. There was no hope ; and on' the 8thof August, 1827, he breathed his last, as PrimeMinister of Great Britain.I pretend not to know, and of course I am incapableof appreciating, what collateral causes mighthave hastened his departure : but the mind of thePremier was not composed of ordinary materials. Ithad braved many a storm within the house, and ithad faced an adversary of unshaken courage without*.The battle of Austerlitz is said to havehastened the death of Mr. Pitt : a speech in theUpper House is said to have induced that temperamentof mind which engendered the seeds of a fataldisease in Mr. Canning. I believe neither the onenor the other. But the sorrow of the country wasgeneral and sincere on the death of the latter : andit is my firm belief, that had his life been prolonged,he would have been among the most skilful and distinguishedpilots who had ever weathered the vesselof state through all the conflicting and harrowingstorms which might have environed it. What aspeech would his have been, on bringing in thebill for his favourite measure, of emancipation of theRoman Catholics, under the conviction that it wouldI allude to his duel with Lord Londonderry ; while Sir FrancisBurnett is a living instance that Mr. Canning was never deficient in theexaction of what he conceived to be due to himself as a gentleman. 1 1 sohappened that I was the very first of the Kensingtonians to call at(Gloucester Lodge within twenty minutes after its owner had beenbrought in wounded in the thigh from the bullet of his adversary.826 LONDON*be triumphantly carried through both Houses. Yetthe speech of Sir Robert Peel, on the same occasion,would have owned no superior but that of his predecessor*.The funeral of Mr. Canning, which I had requestedto attend, was strictly private. My communicationon the subject was through Mr. Backhouse,one of the Secretaries of the Foreign Office ;a gentleman, who was the intimate and confidentialfriend of Mr. Canning, and who adorns the importantsituation which he fills as well by the integrityof his principles as by the suavity of his manners :whose heart is as warm as his head is clear. " Ilost no time (said Mr. Backhouse, in his reply tomy request) in transmitting your note of yesterdayto the Duke of Portland. Such testimonies of re-My own mind needed not the aid of either speech to convince meof the wisdom of the proposed measure. Lord Grenville, some twentyyears preceding, in the Upper House, had wrought upon me the mostcomplete conviction of the indispensable necessity of the adoption ofthat bill. His reasoning not less convinced than his eloquence warmedme. The history of the late career of this bill, through both Houses, isamong the most curious, as well as astounding, upon record. Meetingthe present Bishop of Exeter before he was advanced to the bench, andshortly after we had been both voting at Oxford for Sir Robert Peel(who abandoned his seat on bringing it in), he told me he had beenpresent at Sir Robert's delivery of his Speech. It lasted four hours. Onmy asking him how he liked it, he said, " he had never been so delightedsince the time of Pitt. It did not appear to him to have lasted half thetime; he never tired one moment." But the more curious thing tomention is, that Sir Robert Peel, before he slipped on his night-capthat evening, or rather morning, saw his whole speech in the printedcolumns of a daily journal. This has been unhesitatingly told me froma quarter in which I put the highest faith.LONDON. 827spect and attachment cannot fail to be grateful tothe feelings of the afflicted family and friends ofMr. Canning. I understand that the direct invitationsto the funeral will he confined strictly to theimmediate connexions of the DEAR DEPARTED, andto the Cabinet Ministers ; and that the friends generally,who may intimate a wish, like yours, will berequested to meet at a suitable place (to be appointed)in the immediate neighbourhood of theAbbey, then to join the procession. It is probablethat a public notice to this effect may be issued tomorrow.I am," &c.For some reason, of a peremptory and professionalnature, I was unable to attend ; but I gave vent insome measure to my sympathetic feelings, and to myadmiration of the talents of the deceased, in the sermonpreached in the pulpit of St. Mary's on the Sundayfollowing the funeral of which the text was this :2 Kings, xx. v. 1., " Set thine house in order ; forthou shall die, and not live." Among my auditorsit was gratifying to see the countenance, and toconfide in the sympathy, of Mr. Backhouse and hisLady. But I hasten to lay before the reader somethingof much more interest and importance, connectedwith the ILLUSTRIOUS DEAD, than the feebletestimony here recorded. On examining the immensecorrespondence of the late Mr. Hebe (theonce intimate friend of Mr. Canning, and to whoseintervention I was primarily indebted for im <on'<cadetship from the latter) I found an original note828 LONDON.from the late Lady Hester Lucy Stanhope* (a cousinof Mr. Pitt) to Mr. Hebe; written, as it bears toopalpable evidence, a short time before Mr. Pitt'sdecease ; and containing the following proud testimony,from the dying statesman, of the affectionatemanner in which he estimated the moral worth ofMr. Canning,Montague Square, Thursday Night.DEAR SIR,Finding that I must send early tomorrow to my friendTownshend (your neighbour) I have put off conveying theintelligence I promised you to-day by the penny post. Mr.Pitt left Town for Bath the 7th of December, and returnedthe lath of January. He arrived at Putney the evening ofthat day, accompanied by Charles and Sir Walter thoughnothing hurts me, and enrages me so much, as personsclaiming Mr. P.'s friendship who neither possessed nordeserved it. I am more than anxious that THOSE whom hereally loved, should be known by the world to have enjoyedso great a happiness ; as it ought to make them stand highin the estimation of every honest man. Might it not thereforebe as well to particularly mention the affectionatemanner in which he received Lord Wellesley on his returnfrom India (the Tuesday he saw Lord Chatham), and toadd, that the Marquis was one of his oldest and dearestfriends, as this is really the fact for whenever I complainedabout the "fools" he used to say, " Have patience, Wellesleyis coming home in him you will have all the talentThere can be no doubt of its genuineness. Mr. Backhouse sawthe original, and Lady Canning and himself did not hesitate one momentin assigning the initials to the lady abovementioned. The copyof it, here published, was taken with the knowledge of the present proprietorof the original.T. A. Kempis.~\ LONDON. 829and spirit you can desire." If CANNING be mentioned inthe sheet you did not bring, it may be fairly said Mr. Pittloved kern as his own Child for when he first introducedhim to me, he said, " You must love him like a Brother" andI am sure I have obeyed.Yours sincerely,H. L. S."I return to literary records. While a pretty briskcorrespondence was established in the earlier partof the year 1827, relating to an intended republicationof Proofs Book of Martyrs, the text of Thomasd Kempis was regularly proceeding at press ; and thelist of Subscribers as regularly being enlarged*.My translation was .new ; with the helps of many ofthose of my numerous predecessors commencingeven with that of Atkinson, executed in the reign ofHenry VI It. The greatest names of literaturemay be marshalled among those of the translators ofI should be unworthy the support received, if I did not dwell, as Iever do, with a peculiar gratification in the acknowledgment of 600copies having been subscribed for by private friends ; at the head ofwhom the Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Kenyon, and Colonel Eyre,were each pleased to put their names down for ten copies. My friendsMiss Currer, Earl Spencer, Mr. Douce, Mr. D' Israeli, Mr. R. Wil-abraham,Dawson Turner, Esq., Rev. T. Wintle, Rev. John Not,James Willard, Esq., were each pleased to take five copies; and Mr.Major and Mr. Pickering each became responsible for Jiffy copies. Only750 copies were printed upon small paper. The large is now, I believe,not to be procured.t A volume of extraordinary rarity. See page xxxix of preface ;where ray obligation to my friend Sir F. Freeling is expressed for theloan of his beautiful copy of it. See also note p. Lxxi.B30 LONDON. Thomasthis extraordinary original * ; which, by Fontenelle, isplaced second only to the GOSPELS ; and by the philosophicalLeibnitz is called the summum bonum of allmoral excellence ; " happy (says the latter) is theman who puts its contents into practice, and is notsatisfied with the mere admiration of them." Indeedthe historian Seraglio tells us, that " a Deyof Algiers shewed him a Turkish version of it;adding, that he valued it more than the Koran"In fact, abroad, there seemed to have been only onesentiment in regard to its extraordinary popularity,and its almost unearthly purity of doctrine.Such a work could be no unfit object for a ProtestantClergyman's attention, sanctioned as it hadbeen by the editorial auspices of Dean Stanhope,who had exalted it under the title of The Christian'sPattern t Still, in our own country, there seemedto be no translation worthy of the admitted celebrityof the Original. Be the AUTHOR of that Originalwhom he might. . .and let him have lived where hewould cities have contended, as in the case of Homer,for being his birthplace . . . monasteries have maintainedcontroversies respecting the appropriation ofHIM among their brotherhood. How little, in manyOf editions of the original text and of Translations, Le Comte Sanguinissays there are TWO THOUSAND : of these, sixty translations havebeen in the French language alone. Among them, is one of the greatCorneille a portion only. See p. xcviii., &c.t See p, xxvi of my Preface for a particular account of this version.A-Kempis.'] LON I >< > N .instances, is posthumous fame anticipated! Thepoor secluded monk, who had scarcely a glimmer oflight in his cell, becomes irradiated in the estimationof posterity with a sort of halo of undyingglory. So fared it with the Author of THEIMITATION.Under every view of the subject, I was determinedto make it both a beautiful book and acritical performance ; and I will venture to indulgethe rational hope that my wishes have been realisedin both particulars. I know not a more beaut ii'uloctavo volume on the score of printing and embellishment,and I am willing to believe that it has receiveda competent portion of editorial aid *. The Countallude more especially to the INTRODUCTION, which embracesthree points of view: 1. Of the author of the work. 2. Editions ofthe work. 3. Character of the work. The third division is one onwhich I look back with the greater satisfaction, as touching on moreimportant and stirring objects. It concludes thus : " If, occasionally,there be MYSTICISM, it is the mysticism of a spirit not intoxicated byconceit, rashness, and misguided zeal. It is quietism (with few exceptions)of the purest nature ; a casting down of the eyes; a smiting of thebreast ; an invocation to heaven, to have mercy upon a sinful soul. Inall highly wrought and fitful moods and especially in those appertainingto religious studies some little indiscretions, whether of judgmentor of conduct, will be readily pardoned by a charitable Christian.That the author of this work is free from such venial errors, nevercame within the contemplation of his present editor. It is from a convictionof the good, theoretical and practical, which these pages contain,that the author of them now appears, in a garb not unworthy, 1trust, of his reputation, to attract the notice, and to secure the respect,of the virtuous reader. Nor can I close this painful travail' I*than by availing myself of the concluding remarks of my immediatepredecessor, DR. CHALMERS.' Such a work may be of service in thesedays of soft and silken professorship, to arouse those who are at ease in832 LONDON. [Tltoma*tess Spencer was pleased to accept of my dedicationof the volume to Herself, under the followingform : .Zion ; to remind them of the terms of the Christian discipleship, as invitinga life of conflict, and watchfulness, and much labour ; to makethem jealous of that evil nature, the power of which must be resisted ;but from the besetting presence of which we shall not be conclusivelydelivered, until death shall rid us of a frame-work, the moral views ofwhich may be kept in check while we live, but cannot be eradicated byany process-short of dissolution.' " p. d.The reader may probably be well disposed to receive a brief specimenof the tone and character of the original text. " JESUS hath many loversof his heavenly kingdom, but few bearers of his cross. He hath manythat desire to partake of his comforts, but few to share in his distress.He finds many companions of his repast, but few of his abstinence. Allare disposed to rejoice with Jesus, but few to suffer sorrow for his sake.Many follows him even to the breaking of bread, but few of the drinkingof the bitter cup. Many reverence his miracles, but few follow the ignominyof the cross. Many love Jesus while they are free from adversity;many praise and bless Him while they receive his consolations;but if Jesus hide his face, and leave them but a little, their confidenceis shaken, and they sink into murmur and despair." * ******This desire of suffering is not the effect of any power inherent in man,but is the fruit of the GRACE of CHRIST ; operating so powerfully in thefrail flesh as to make it love and embrace that which it would naturallyabhor and shun. It is not in man to love and bear the cross ; to resistthe appetites of the body, and bring them under subjection to the spirit ;to shun honors ; to receive affronts with meekness ; to despise himself,and to wish to be despised by others ; to bear with resignation the lossof fortune, health, and friends, and to have no desire after the prosperityof this world. If thou dependent upon thyself, thou wilt findthat thou canst do nothing of the kind ; but if thou trusted in GOD,strength shall be given to thee from on high, and the world and theflesh shall be put under thy feet. Fortified by this confidence, anddefended by the Cross of CHRIST, thou neatest not fear the efforts ofthy adversary the deviL"TOLA VIN I ACOUNTESS SPENCERTHIS VOLUMEIS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED,BY HER OBLIGEDAND OBEDIENT SERVANTTHE EDITOR.834 LONDON. [ThomasDuring the preparation of the work, I had hadfrequent intercourse, by correspondence, with herLadyship's youngest Son, the Hon. and Rev. GeorgeSpencer. . .who had, in former years, assiduously readthe work in its original tongue. On the receipt ofhis copy of my Translation, I was in no smalldegree gratified by the communication of his sentimentsin the following language :I have not had time to give attentive perusal to your4 INTRODUCTION *,' but I have run through it especiallythe last division of the three; and I think it very wellcalculated to do what an Introduction has to do; viz., toexcite attention to the work itself, and to prepare a Readerto discriminate, and taste its excellencies. As to the BOOK,taking it altogether, I am certainly happy to think that itwill find its way to so many tables in so pleasing a form, forit is beautifully got up. I remember reading through theLatin, three or four years ago, with great delight andbenefit, and I trust the present edition may be read profitablyby many. Whoever has any religion already plantedin him, cannot fail to have it fostered by such a study ; forthe book contains, in a great deal of its substance, genuineand sterling good, though it is far from presenting a Christiancharacter, such as would make a fit pattern for us altogetherto follow. A true imitation of Jesus Christ willnever make a recluse. I think the book is good at thepresent time, as it may produce feelings of love and gentleness,of which there exists too little between Catholics andProtestants."The feeling of my amiable and respected Correspondentwas precisely my own ; and I was willingSee preceding note.A-Kempis.~\ LONDON.to confide in at least something like a negative consolation,that the asperities of opposition, Ixstweenthese two denominations of Christians could, byno means, be rendered more implacable by the publication.On its appearance, I was also gratified bythe following letter from no incompetent authorityto pass a sound judgment upon the performance.I mean that of the late ARCHDEACON NARES."Hart Street, Feb. 15, 18*2aMY DEAR DR. D**,Two days ago I had the pleasure of receiving your newand elegant volume on the Imitation of Christ, and I cannotdeny myself the satisfaction of congratulating you onyour successful exertions to make it acceptable to the intelligentpublic. I have read your Introduction, and amsatisfied with the manner in which you have discussed thelong agitated question of the true Author, in which I onceinterested myself a little.The Ornaments of the volume are few, but elegant andwell chosen ; the Head of Christ prefixed, the finest engravingI have seen for some time ; but, to my surprise,without an engraver's name*. The Typography also isbeautiful, particularly in the text of the work, which I havenot yet much examined.I hope that this publication, and that which you arepreparing on Fox, will be of material assistance to you ;and the execution of this authorizes the best and highestexpectations of the other Mate est says,Yours, very truly,By Mr. Robinson : see page 659..> II836 LONDON. [ ThomasI consider myself however in duty bound here toregister two Letters, from very different quarters,but each of first-rate respectability ; containing awish to have the writer enrolled in the list of mySubscribers to the work under consideration. Thefirst is from the late Bishop of Limerick, Dr. Ebb,a name never to be pronounced by me but with anaffectionate respect for his memory."Dublin, Aug. 16, 1826.MY DEAR SIR,I received your letter while rambling through theNorth of England, and was prevented by migrations andother causes, from paying it that early attention which itmerited. The delay, however, enables me to request thatyou will have the goodness to add to your list of Subscribersto Thomas a Kempis, along with my name, that ofmy Brother, * the Hon. Mr. Justice Ebb.'With gratitude for your kindness, when I had thegratification of your company and conversation in LordSpencer's library, and with sincerest wishes that your projectedwork may be, in all respects, as satisfactory to yourself,as I am sure it will be valuable to the public,I remain,My dear sir,Your obliged and faithful servant,The following, from the late Sir THOMAS Lawrence,alludes in part to a proof-impression of thehead of Christ prefixed to the volume (and engravedA-Kempis.] LONDON. 837by Robinson), sent to him by me, and of which Ibegged his acceptance. His reply is in his usuallygracious and courteous manner.Russell Square, Aug.ZQ, 1827.MY DEAR Sill,I am too late in offering my thanks to you for the Printyou had the goodness to send me: a very beautiful specimenof the skill of the Engraver, and of his mastery over thedelicate mechanism of his art. If the expression andcharacter had been equal to the execution, it would havebeen a Gem indeed. I remember the Original in theCousin Palace at Rome, and thought it superior to anywork of the same subject Mr. West's Picture, by Guido,alone excepted. Should you be tempted to this bleakregion (which is now hardly owned in the bills of mortality),I think I can show you a Picture of devotional subjectworthy of your inspection, and even of an hour's walkto see it.If your work, of which this engraving is to form aTitle Page, be not too learned for me, I assure you there isnothing in the subject that is not grateful to me. Pray,therefore, have the goodness to put my name down, unlessyou publish for Churchmen only, or Controversialists.Believe me to be with much esteem,My dear sir,Your obliged and faithful servant.1 hiring the progress of the printing of tli iI became acquainted with the splendid edition of the*838 LONDON. [T. A-Ktmpis.Latin text, from the editorial pen of MONS. Hence,who had been also one of its translators into hisown tongue. I differed from that learned editorabout the Individuality of the authorship of theOriginal ; but as we were " fellow-labourers in thesame vineyard," I sent him a copy of my book,begging his acceptance of it. In return, he sentme a copy of his own performance upon large paper,which I received through the prompt interpositionof his friend Mr. Bertolacci, mentioned in hisletter ; that gentleman describing his Parisian friendas "in perfect health, and with a mind as vigorousand active as a young man of twenty-five" adding,that he made the original work the principal studyand object of his "life." The letter of Mons.Hence is as follows :"Paris, \* Out, 1828.MONSIEUR,Je marquette un peu tard d'un agreable devoir, en vousmerchant de Homage que vous avez bien voulu me faired'un bel exemplaire de votre estimable traduction de Excellentouvrage de V Imitation de Jesus Christ. Je suis tressensible aussi a votre elope de mon edition Latine; et je metrouve heureux de vous voir adopter quelques unes de mesnotes. Mon meilleur ami, M. Bertolacci, dont j'ai attendule voyage pour qu'il ftft mon organe a ce sujet, vous entemoignera mes remerciments. Je vous prie de vouloir bienaider de vos conseils ce litterateur des plus instructs, auteurde tres bons ouvrages qui resident Amour de Humanityet de la paix. Votre zee pour la propagation de la saineJohn Fox.'} LONDON. 839literature, measure que vous ferez ce qui depend devous, Monsieur, pour lui etre utile sous ce rapport par vosconnaissances litt^raires et bibliographiques.J'ai honneur centre, Monsieur,De Votre Reverence,Le tres humble et tres reconnaissanceServiteur, et frere en J.C.Quoique le Reverend Mr. Dibdin, ne soit pas de monavis sur Pasteur de r Imitation, jose le prier de vouloir bienlire Extract ci-joint des journaux principaux sur mon EditionLatine a ce sujet, et Particle Kempis de la BiographicUniverselle."And thus much for THOMAS a KEMPIS*.I am now to touch upon the unexecuted plan ofreprinting JOHN Fox's BOOK OF MARTYRS. Asbefore observed, my proposals for this somewhatstupendous undertaking were before the public earlyin the year 1827, and the present Archbishop ofCanterbury (then Bishop of London) was graciouslypleased to accept the Dedication of the Work toHimself. " I am glad (said his Grace) that youhave made up your mind to republish the greatI am not sure whether a reprint of this book, in a small 8vo. form,with the head of Christ, and the group of cherubs sustaining a crosbyStothartl), at the end of the preface together with the head of thereputed author might not be a successful publication, at half the costof the large edition. Perhaps only the third division of the Introductionneed be reprinted ?840 LONDON. iFoz's BookWork on The Martyrs, and most willingly consentto your request of being allowed to dedicate thenew edition to myself." His Grace's views uponthe entire bearing of the original, appeared to meto be as luminous as just. He desired nothing morethan that error might be guarded against, and truth,if possible, still more firmly established. I hadpreviously and deliberately weighed (in my ownmind) the pro and con of the whole undertaking.I did not shrink from its magnitude, and (to speakthe truth from my inmost bosom) I was determinednot to set about the task as & partisan on either sideof the question. My own opinion of Fox had beenslightly shadowed, rather than positively expressed,in the pages of the Bibliomania ; and if thatauthor had many errors to rectify, and many extravagancesto qualify, still, in the main, there appearedto be a strong current of truth which pervaded hispages*. I had, moreover, for many years whichmy previous habits of study and research at onceprovoked and strengthened a strong desire towrite a History of the Reformation, either by anew edition of Burnet, or on an expressly newscale ; and having, by choosing Fox, necessarilyabandoned the former, I thought I could make theAbout a year and a half after the issuing of my prospectus, MR.SOUTHEY, not knowing in what state the work was, observed thus in aletter from Keswick " Is your edition of THE ACTS AND MONUMENTSgoing forward ? I have always intended to take advantage of its appearance,for writing a life of JOHN Fox in the Q. R., wherein I mightrender due honour to a man for whom I have a great venerate on."of Martyrs LONDON. 841text of the Martyrology the vehicle of much curious,if not original matter, appertaining to ourChurch History. And I had also a lurking suspicionthat Burnet had either examined his authoritiescarelessly, or had quoted them superficially;believing him, intentionally, to have been incapableof holding out false lights. Under all these impressions,I put forth my Prospectus and at oncechallenged and courted the freest strictures of myfriends*.Among the most cordial, as well as the most forward in the transmissionof these strictures, was my old and excellent friend, Mr. ArchdeaconTODD. " I wish much to talk with you (observed he) of JohnFox ; the life of him you must write anew. Many are the slumberingmaterials respecting him, and a very interesting piece of biography, Iam quite sure, you can make of him." Again, on the receipt of myprospectus: "Do not make needless concessions in your prospectus.As loud as you can cry, I will (much older though I be) shout louderfor the historian, and exclaim, ' Fox FOR EVER ! ' " On his first visitto me in London, on coming to take his turn of duty at the ChapelRoyal, as one of the King's Chaplains, I perfectly remember his gallanteffervescence of speech touching my Fox "when I had read yourprospectus (said he) methought I rose from my table a foot higher."The present venerable and learned Dean of Winchester (Dr. Kennel)was thus pleased to cheer me on the publication of the prospectus, andwith his entire approbation of the " end and aim" of the work itself.MY DEAR SIR, Deanery, Feb. 3, 18S7.I return you my best thanks for your kind communication of yourintention of giving a new edition of Fox's Martyrs. I think it is impossibleto conceive an undertaking of more importance to the best interestsof the Protestant cause ; and that, in carrying this design intoexecution, you will have deserved well of your country. To vindicateFox's veracity, as would be done in the course of your most laudableundertaking, would be to render an essential service to the chinEngland. I admire much the tone of your protpcctu*, which it timelyand animated. My approbation of your design is unqualified ; and be842 LONDON. [Fox's BookI found in Mr. Pickering who was one of thepublishers of my Thomas & Kempis a bookseller,well disposed to push my work to the utmost possiblelimits, consistently with a consideration of prudence,and, I believe, little short of the sum of 100/. wasabsolutely expended by him in fulfilling theoffice of avant courier only. The mode of publicationwas announced in the following words ofthe Prospectus.To render the impression of such a work (which may be truly calledNATIONAL) as deserving as possible of public patronage, it is proposed toexecute it in the commodious form of an Octavo of which one volumewill be published every two months. Is is calculated that the entirework will not exceed TWELVE VOLUMES ; each volume containing 650pages. The text will be accompanied by short illustrative NOTES ; which,as these will occasionally contain the fruit of researches among MSS. andscarce publications, will, it is presumed, render the present the mostvaluable impression extant. This Impression will be also at least asattractive in ILLUSTRATION as any previous edition. It will containaccurate fac-similes of the spirited Wood Cuts, either entire, or in part,as the occasion may require; which are peculiar to the Black letterEditions, and which are so unskilfully and faithless executed uponCopper in that of 1684. Each volume will be further embellished withat least one Portrait, upon Wood, of the principal REFORMER whoselife, or works, are described in the volume published. These portraitswill be taken from original paintings whenever obtainable. That thetastes of Book-collectors of every description may be gratified, it is proposedto strike off a limited number of copies upon a superior paper of aRoyal Octavo form, corresponding in size with the Biographical De-cameronand Bibliographical Tour, by the Editor of the present work ;assured that every assistance within my humble powers and influenceshall be exerted. I shall be proud to be among your subscribers ; andthink I can answer for our Chapter also.Yours, in haste,But most truly,T. RENNELL."of Martyr's LONDON.the ordinary copies selling for 14*. and the large paper for II. 8*. pervolume*.That the Reader may have a correct notion of the advantages proposedto distinguish the PRESENT EDITION, he is informed that the textwill be carefully collated with ALL the earlier texts published during thelife-time of the Author : that this Edition will contain the ENTIRE TEXTOP Fox and that an examination of the ORIGINAL TREATISES, (manyof them equally rare and valuable), incorporated in the work, will, wheneverobtainable, be carefully attended to. It is further proposed to commencethis Edition with the " HISTORY OP WICLIPPE," as being moreimmediately interesting to English Readers ; and to give all the introductoryportion of Fox (which is composed in a more general and excursivemanner) by way of SUPPLEMENT.The appeal was unsuccessful. It was impossibleto think of going to press without seven hundredand fifty copies bespoke. The amount of Subscriberswas scarcely one third of that number.The names of four Bishops only (London, Durham,Salisbury, and Chester, now London) appeared inthe list of Subscribers. My own personal friendswere all, as before, at their posts, and the majorityof them for large paper copies. But it was a palpablefailure ; and after many days and many nights ofactive research, and harassing anxiety, I consoledmyself with the reflection of having merited* if II might have added, that the first edition of the original work,published in 1563 (see too Bibliomania, p. 315-6, and Typographical Antiquities,vol. iv. p. 82), was of excessive rarity, as well as great value.I believe that the only known perfect copies of this first edition are inthe libraries of the Rt. Hon. Thomas Grenville and T. \\ wilkes, Esq.,M. P. The latter had belonged to the late Mr. Hurd, and was purchasedat the sale of his library for 257. No doubt, the greater numberof copies, once fastened to desks in parish churches, had been torn awayby piecemeal. A little instructive volume, purely bibliographical, i;be written upon all the editions of Fox's Martyrs.844 LONDON.had not obtained, the reward which, from the beginning,I had been sanguine enough to anticipate.This was very natural. But whatever were the disappointmentsconsequent upon the failure of thissplendid project, they were born with evenness, yea,with the heroic coolness of a Martyr comparedwith the endurance of that vexation and dismaywhich, in the subsequent year, overtook me fromthe failure of a scheme of a wholly moral, or as itmay be called social, character and tendency.The caprice of the public is not only to bemet, but to be endured, by every man who makesthat public a tribunal to which he appeals. Thereare, however, circumstances connected with ourpublic characters, more difficult in the treatment,and more mischievous in their results. Fraud,cunning, falsehood, hypocrisy, recklessness, andwhen they play about us in ever-shifting Proteus-shapes,are terrible things to combat with. I hadlistened to " the voice of a Charmer," in the avowedobject of parochial, as well as Chris manlike benevolence.I was circumvented by the wiles of morethan One, to lend my countenance, as Rector, to theestablishment of an HOSPITAL in one of the mostpopulous and needful parts of my Parish. I wasto appoint a Chaplain, visit the sick wards, andpreach a Sermon for the benefit of the Institution.I acquiesced readily in all these plans for the alleviation,if not removal, of human suffering. Aboard was established. Beds were procured, andLONDON. 845patients began to increase. A subscription, chieflythrough my instrumentality*, was set on foot, andmany kind-hearted parishioners liberally contributed.But a dark and fearful cloud suddenly settled withinthe walls of the establishment. The prime moverof all this apparent public good, was only secretlystriving to accomplish some crooked and selfishplan of his own. He was a man as destitute ofresources as of principle.Suspicion and alarm now became the order ofthe day. A union of some active and highly honorablemen in the parish of Marylebone thoughtit essential to put forth a declaration by way ofcaution to the unwary, and of raising a warningvoice to the public, describing the character of thisPrime Mover" precisely in the terms which a loveof truth seemed to render it necessary it should be described.This declaration was subscribed by severalsubstantial householders ; and afterwards printedand circulated. It was owing to the manly and independentspirit of ONE Individual, in particular, that sowholesome a manifesto saw the light. As Rector ofthe District in which the pseudo Hospital was established,my name was necessarily at the head of theAmong these subscribers, my friend, Mr. Neeld (see page 785,ante), was considerate and kind-hearted enough (although not a parishioner),to give me a 10/. cheque. I now forget the amount of thesubscription ; but I do not forget the trouble, fatigue, and anxiety whichI underwent to render it effective.846 LONDON.Subscribers. There were the names of three respectableClergymen in addition.With a drowning man, it is but natural to catchat straws. But in this instance, the individual whowas the prime mover of all this complicated mischiefand misery, thought he had something more substantialthan straws to lay hold of; and, fortifiedeither by the shallow or insidious advice of someprofessional man, he brought an action of libelagainst the whole subscribing party ; fastening, inthe first instance, upon my friend, above alluded to,who had called us together to put a stop to suchiniquity. I was marked out as the second victim tothe infringement of law ; and damages were laid atSOOO/. in the first case, and at 7000/. in the second.Of course, it was firmly as well as finally determined,by every subscriber, to bear the expenses ofthe lawsuit in common. As the law of LIBEL itselfis perhaps one of the most mongrel and inexplicablefeatures of the jurisprudence of this country, so is theprocess of justification, by proof, specially pleaded,one of the most slippery and expensive. A verylong time, and consequent delay, was incurred inpreparing the defence ; while the plaintiff was asconfident as impatient for the day of trial. Some ofthe first characters in the realm were subpoenaed byour adversary to give the " air important " to his case.Lord Tenterden sat upon the bench. The wholeday was consumed in the trial. Had the plaintiffLONDON. 847succeeded, we had been all tumbled down like apack of cards. Lord Anger was leading counselfor my friend; and Lord Penman (supported byMr. Baron Gurney) were my own counsel. Thejury was a special one : but they did not deem itnecessary to give the Chief Justice the trouble ofsumming up. From the very opening of the case toits conclusion there could be but one colouringgiven to the whole. The plaintiff's ground hadbeen always rotten beneath his feet : and in hisheart he must have anticipated the "nonsuit"which was recorded against him. In the court oflaw our victory was complete ; but one has read ofvictories being tantamount to defeat. I reared mycrest in the Court of King's Bench ; but an expenseof 1200/. had been incurred and the plaintiff hadnot one twelve hundredth part of assets to meet it.In carrying the law into execution against one whohad so richly merited its severest visitation, we musthave incurred even an additional expense of Go.and of what use, of what solace, was the detentionof the person without the prospect of one shillingof remuneration for the incurred expense ? All thisis very incomprehensible, very shocking, and veryunjust. But it is the law of the land.Now came the pinching moment of a severer trial.My highly respected friend, who had " led us gallantlyinto action," stood, with myself, who immediatelyfollowed in his wake, " true to our guns."It remained to be seen who of our supporters stood848 LONDON.also true to theirs. The Rev. Basil Wood (a namenever to be pronounced but with all the Christiansympathies and charities playing about one's heart)and the Rev. Dr. Fawssett, had departed this lifebefore the day of settlement arrived. The widowof the former paid the required quota to the uttermostfarthing : and that of the latter manifested anamiable and generous feeling : but " WHERE WERETHE NINE?" Those among them who have heartsmust answer this question. All that remains to betold is, that this defence of character took five hundredpounds sterling out of each of the pockets ofmy friend and myself. These are sad incidents tonarrate, and sadder yet to reflect upon. There issurely no one object, moving about in society, morehorrible to mix up with, than that of a humanbeing, privileged, as he may now suppose himselfto be, to act the treble part of hypocrite, bully, andcoward.The effect of all this, upon a mind of sterner temperamentthan my own, might have been as harrowingand as distressing as, in fact, it was for a time,upon mine. It sickened me of all strange facesand especially of those which came whisking up tothe door in green carriages, with snorting horses IOh, what a quantity of cunning, fraud, and wickedness,do these " whisking carriages," in and aboutLondon, frequently enclose! For a time, I evenloathed the name of a Charitable Institution andyet, it was precisely in this year that I receivedHist. Oxford.] LONDONseven applications for the use of my church in theirbehalf.I revert again to literature. Of all the undertakingscontemplated, at ever so respectful a distance,none appeared to me to be so large, so bold, and yetso certainly productive of a profitable and honourableissue, as that which, towards the autumn of1829, I contemplated in reference to my belovedAlma Mater Oxoniensis. In short, it was nothingless than a History of that University, in three foliovolumes. The plan of it was carefully drawn up,and printed in a folio form, with a handsome type,by my friend Mr. Nicol, the proprietor of the Shakspearepress ; and I am not sure whether an expenseof some fourscore or a hundred pounds was not incurredin giving it publicity. The main features ofthat plan have been repeated in the Bibliophobia* .Here, I need only subjoin what is mentioned in theaccompanying note. LORD GRENVILLE, the Changepage 73 of that work.t " Admitting, however, the splendour and general interest of such aWork ; admitting the competent talents both of Writers and of Artistsengaged in its execution, it cannot be denied that a LARGE Subscriptionis absolutely necessary to carry it into complete effect It is proposed,therefore, to make an appeal, not only to the UNIVERSITY INPARTICULAR, but to the PUBLIC AT LARGE in order to induce such apecuniary support, as may ensure its final and satisfactory accomplishment.It is proposed to publish the Three Folio Volumes in threeseparate deliveries, at 11. 17*. Gd. each volume; and LARGE PAPERcopies, at 12/. 12*. the Volume. The Supporters of the Work win bedesignated under the titles of PATRONS, and SUBSCRIBERS for large orsmall paper Copie*. Every Patron to advance 100/. on loan to be re-850 LONDON. [Hist, ofcellar, in a morning visit which I paid him atDropmore, had been pleased to accept of the Dedicationto Himself. On the completion of my plan,or prospectus, I sent it to Him; begging his freestrictures upon all its bearings. His reply is toointeresting or at least was too gratifying to myfeelings to suffer me to forego its insertion in thepresent place."Dropmore, Oct. 1.0, 1827.SIR,I have for the last three weeks been labouring under adisorder in my eyes, which has left me little opportunityfor reading, and none for writing ; but I have had read tomethe printed project of your work, and there reallydoes not occur to me any suggestion at all likely to improveit. On the practicability of your plan I can formno judgment, because that must depend upon local knowledge,which I do not in any degree possess; but you arefully authorised to express, in any manner which you maythink useful, my best wishes for its success. I expect Mr.Grenville here in about a fortnight, and I can undertake tosay that both He and Mr. Wynne will feel as I do on thesubject.I am, Sir,With great truth and regard,Your faithful humble servant,funded by a large paper Copy, with Etchings on India Paper, as DuplicatePlates ; and his Arms, as a distinctive mark of his copy, to be illuminated,and placed at the head of the List of Patrons and Subscribers.The balance remaining to be returned on the completion of the ThirdUniv. Oxford.] LONDON. 851The tenor of this letter naturally gave me greatconfidence ; and I waited upon Sir Robert Peel, atthat time the influential Member of Parliament forthe University. As Sir Robert was then out ofoffice, my motives could not be breathed upon evenby the subtle breath of suspicion itself. Both SirRobert Peel and his colleague, Mr. Escort, becamesubscribers, each for a large paper copy only.Lord Grenville was among the Patrons *. The Arch-volume.The Subscribers to the Large Paper to advance Seven Pounds,and to the Small Paper, Five Pounds : receiving specific acknowledgmentsof the money advanced. The impressions of the Plates to bedelivered in the order of Subscription."The list of PATRONS and SUBSCRIBERS, as printed upon the lastpage of the folio prospectus, was precisely as follows :PATRONS.LORD Grenville, Chancellor.His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury.Right Hon. the Earl Spencer, K. G.Right Hon. Thomas Grenville.Joseph Neeld, Esq., M. P.W. T., Esq.Thomas Ponton, Esq.SUBSCRIBERS.The Lord Bishop of London large paper.The Lord Bishop of Durham.The Lord Bishop of Llandaff. See page 302, ante.Right Hon. Earl Candor Large paper.Right Hon. Lord Lyttelton.Viscount Worketh Large paper.Viscount Clive Large paper.Right Hon. the Speaker of the House of Commons.The Hon. George Agar Ellis, M. P.Robert Peel, Esq., M. P. Large paper.T. B. B. Escort, Esq., M. P. forge paper.The Very Reverend the Dean of Cheater.Sir Francis Freeling, Bart. 7,ry* paper.852 LONDON. \ Hist. ofbishop of Canterbury also enlisted himself amongthe Magnates of my subscribers in a letter, whichMiss Currer Large and Small Paper.Rev. Dr. Routh, President of Magdalen Coll. Large Paper.Rev. Dr. Burney.Rev. Dr. Chandler, Dean of Chichester.Rev. Dr. Hawtrey Large Paper.Rev. Dr. Langley.Rev. Henry Drury Large Paper.Rev. David Lewis, D. D.John Herman Merivale, Esq.Edward Roberts, Esq. Large Paper.Philip Augustus Hanrott, Esq. Large Paper.Henry Petrie, Esq.James Heywood Markland, Esq.Joseph Delafield, Esq.Thomas Amyot, Esq.Joseph Haslewood, Esq.There were names subsequently received, as those of Sir Robert HarryInglis, Bart., one of the present members of the University; thevenerable Archdeacon Pott ; Rev. Charles Henry Hartshorn ; HenryWilson, Esq. ; and last, though not least, my old friend the venerableArchdeacon Todd. On rousing the bibliopolistic spirit at Oxford, Ireceived the following animated and most cheering letter from Mr.Talbot, which shall tell its own tale, in its own words : uniting thelanguage of prudence with the voice of encouragement.DEAR SIR,I duly received your packet last night, and have sent the parcelsout for delivery this morning. The work you are about to undertake,will, I hope, recommend itself, when made known, and your name appearswith the proposals. I shall be very proud of being employed init in any way that will serve you ; and trust you will excuse my advisingthat you should well consider, calculate, and arrange how it may bestturn to your own advantage, as well as the pleasure of the public. Youwill, I am sure, forgive my presumption, perhaps impertinence, in thisparticular ; as you will perceive it cannot be founded on self-interest.The enterprise will cost you immense labour and anxiety. It will,indeed, be a NOBLE WORK if you are sufficiently encouraged to exertyourself. It gives me great pleasure to find you have already met withsome spirited individuals. God forbid I should dishearten you ; but IUniv. Oxford.] LONDON.was most gratifying to my feelings, and most stimulantof renewed exertions. " Your projected //?'*-fun oftlic University of Oxford (said he, in a letterfrom his archiepiscopal residence at Addington, nearCroydon, dated Aug. #7, 1829) comes recommendedby the interesting nature of the subject, and by theassurance that, under your superintendence, the executionof the work will not fall short of the splendourpromised in the prospectus. I request, therefore,that my name may be set down in the list of Patrons,and I shall be ready to pay my subscriptionas soon as the scheme is sufficiently matured to requireit' These were cheering words ; dictated bya thoroughly kind and liberal spirit.That the reader in fact, that posterity mayknow something about the " promised splendour" ofam afraid J Mr. Skelton was liberally patronised ; but then he drewthe money by degrees, and did much by application to individuals. Forthe world in general it is, at this moment, so far as I know it, in a stateof morbid insensibility upon all such matters. Your work, however, inof so magnificent a nature; so much wanted; and has so many pointto recommend it, that I hope it will at least rouse our great folk* to aready and vigorous patronage, from their usual apathy. Indeed, uponthe whole, I think you cannot fail for want of encouragement.What little I can do, you may command. Perhaps 1 may sell acopy or two for you abroad. Wishing you the most complete successin your glorious enterprise the very projection of which must add toyour present fame I beg you to believe me,Dear Sir,Very respectfully and sincerely,Your most obedient servant,< irford, 6th Oct. 1829. D. A. Talbot."I 1 . S. I have not seen yet the new edition of your Tour. I amfitly just returned from a five weeks' residence at Paris."854 LONDON. [Hist, ofthis work, I subjoin a mere sketchy outline of whatwas intended, in the way of ART, to enrich it ; andto give it an interest which might be as acceptablewithout, as within, the walls of the University.COST.Twelve large Architectural or Landscape Plates,at 2007. each plate 2400Twelve similar plates, less elaborate, at 150Z. eachplate 1800Twelve Portraits of a large size, at 60Z. each portrait720Six Portraits of smaller dimensions, at 457. eachplate 270Sixty highly finished copperplate vignettes, at30Z. each vignette 900Twenty-four Wood Cuts at 10Z. per cut. . . 240Forming an expenditure in the way of Engraving,of 6330Most assuredly, a glance upon such a GRAPHICprogram will convince the reader that I was resolvedupon making the materials worthy of the structureas far as ocular gratification might be considered.But I was not less ambitious of rendering the intrinsicworth at least equal to its extrinsic attraction.I had apportioned, in the funds to be derivable froma successful sale, no inconsiderable sum for the remunerationof talented writers and zealous colleagues.Mr. SOUTHEY was immediately in "my mind's eye"to furnish me with Biography*. Mr. Disraeli,In the same letter in which he had given me his sentiments aboutJOHN Fox (see page 840, ante), he thus spoke of my projected Historyof the University.Univ. Oxford.] LONDON. sr>.">with a warm-hearted promptitude which has everdistinguished his conduct towards me, volunteeredhis literary services, if needful : and I knew thatevery arrow drawn from his well-furnished quiu-rwent direct to the bull's eye of the target*. I calculated,also, upon very essential services from myold friend Dr. BLISS, the Registrar of the University,in all archaeological matters ; and was well persuadedthat Dr. Bandied, at the head of the Corps Biblio-graphite of the Bodleian Library, would not allowmy pages to be barren or uninstructive in all mattersKeswick, Sd Sept. 1829.MY DEAR SIR,I am glad to see your Prospectus, and wish you as much success asyou could wish yourself in the undertaking. Hint or advice I havenone to offer ; because you must have digested your plan, and at presentI see only the difficulties of arrangement, &c., which appear at firstsight. With regard to assisting you, the Biography is the only part inwhich I would do this, and for which I have rather inclination thantime. Moreover, in such things I like to have always ' ample room andverge enough ;' and your Lives, I think, cannot well be upon an extendedscale, &c.My dear Sir,Your very trulyROBERT SOUTHEY.""If any literary aid which I might be able to impart (says Mr.D'Israeli) should be useful, I have no doubt that I can always findleisure, and I am sure willingness, to offer it to you." Speaking of theproject itself in the paragraph immediately preceding my friendbreaks forth in his usual ardour and felicity of diction. " You haveformed a MAGNIFICENT PROSPECTUS. May you find the 'fifty clients'[Patrons]. Are there 'Giants in the land?' I hope so: and then Iwill prognosticate that you will produce a work unequalled, &c. I wishyou ' a merry Christmas,' in full anticipation of your ' Army ' of Artist*warming themselves by your yule-block. Bradenham House, Went11 th Ort. 1H9."856 LONDON. [Hist, oftouching the inexhaustible treasures of which he isthe Conservator : while my learned and ever cordialfriend from the north, the Rector of Settrington,blew a merry blast " announcing his troopers tobe at my disposal*. I could also calculate withcomplete confidence on the learned Conclave at theBRITISH MUSEUM " being, to a man, my friend."Meanwhile, among many of my Subscribers, themost anxious solicitude and warm-hearted " cheering,"prevailed. I preserved a pet drawer in whichI deposited their communications ; and of which afew may be acceptable even to the most fastidious!." Most readily (says ARCHDEACON TODD) will I be a subscribersyour work, upon small paper, and will watch opportunities to recommendit hereabouts ; though, when you think on the Wolds, and thatthere is now no Sir Mark Sykes at hand, you will admit that there'sbut little chance. As to my affording you literary assistance at such adistance, it must be, I fear, a mere dream. Certainly, I have some curioustracts relating to Oxford, which I will some day look out, and not failto give you an account of them, that they may be at your service, ifrequisite. As I shall see you, I earnestly hope, so soon, there is nooccasion for other observations on your subject now by letter, exceptthat I wish you a host of subscribers, health for your employment, andhappiness as the result."t The venerable and learned PRESIDENT OF MAGDALEN COLLEGEshall lead the way. " Dear Dr. Dibdin, I am ready to subscribe to yourintended work in any form you please ; and could have wished to havebeen one of its distinguished Patrons; but, from recent events, that isnot now practicable. I hope you enjoy your health ; and am, my dearsir, with great esteem, your faithful servant, M. J. Routh."My ever warm and steady friend Lady C , from whose well-pointedpen the reader has before (p. 693) had no indifferent specimen, waspleased to " hark forward" the cause in hand in a letter of the date ofNov. 12, 1829. " I wish I were an Oxonian of large dimensions andcapacious purse :mais he/as! I can only wish the project success andthat I do most heartily. I shall be glad to find, not only for your sake,Oxford.] LONDON.At the time, they were " present helps ;" urging meto think and to do much in the cause of my AcademicParent. Mr. Thorpe's catalogues whichcontain everything in manuscript and in print weregreedily seized and as greedily devoured. " I laidon, right and left." Contemporaneous pamphlets,relating to the University, from the time of James I.downwards, were my especial food for the small-talkof history of that period. The whip-syllabusbut for that of the country, that there are Patrons for such nationalworks. It appears to me that there is just now a dearth of spirit in theland : and that we are sinking into a dull beef and pudding people.John Bull requires the spur to rouse him."I will continue the strain from the softer sex. Miss CURRER, whoennobles a fine library not less by her taste and spirit in collecting, thanby her liberality in patronising works of art and literature, wrote thusto me, from Eshton Hall, her ancestral abode. " I shall have greatpleasure in taking two copies of your projected work, one large and onesmall paper ; and I think it will be a most interesting publication. Sincerelyhoping it will be attended with increase of fame and of somethingmore substantial, believe me, my Dear Sir, to be ever yourssincerely."My friend MR. M Ireland shall be no ignoble whipper-in upon thisgratulations thesis. " I have read your Prospectus (says he, in a noteof Aug. 98, 1829) with much attention, and admire your unconquerableindustry. After giving to the public more octavos and quartos thanalmost any man of your day, you now venture upon three volumes infolio ! ! As you have not always consulted your own interest in yourpublications, I hope that you will exercise caution before you make thefirst plunge. I offer this suggestion from a true friendly feeling, andparticularly from your manuscript note as to the large sum to be givento your COADJUTORS. If one thousand pounds be paid to them, can youhope to reap yourself the benefit that you ought to derive from so Herculeana labour ? If you enter into engagements with others to suchan extent (unless, indeed, your subscription list is most amply filled),you may be left without a sixpence ; although the origin of the undertaking,and the rhii-f hart of the labour, are yours. Believe me yours.always faithfully. .Ml. M."858 LONDON. \ Hist. Oxford.of poetasters seemed to furnish no untimely side-dishesfor the more substantial sirloin of Annalistsand Historians, I had a peg for every anecdote tohang upon. The pulpit of St. Mary's and the rostrumof the Theatre would have been in a glow withbiographical details of those, the more worthy ofrecord, who had filled them since Anthony a Woodhad been gathered to his fathers . . . and here, again,the active and successful researches of my friendDr. Bliss would have been of incalculable advantageto me. But, as before intimated, I would receiveassistance from no quarter without a valuable considerationbeing given. TIME is the estate of literarymen ; and you have no right to the smallestslice of that estate without an adequate compensation*.But . "here my story ends." The project waseminently UNSUCCESSFUL. Not one public library expresseda wish to have a copy of the work. Not oneCollege, as a body, gave me its support. Not onetwentieth part of a sum which has been sometimesdevoted to banqueting and carousal in causes certainlynot more intellectual, was tendered to smooththe arduous road in which it was too evident I mustmove. It is true, that, because an author is sanguine,he has no right to calculate upon success ;but the character of my preceding works, for elabo-See the contents of Mr. Markland's letter, at the conclusion of thepreceding note.Stuultiy Library'] LONDON. 859ration and costliness, was at least an earnest of t Inspiritand integrity with which the present wouldhave been conducted and concluded. Had the supportbeen general and liberal, the third and lastvolume of this magnificent work would by this timehave SEEN THE DAY. " Ofallacem hominem seem,fragilemque fortunate" &c. Cicero must tell therest in his De Charms Oratories. lib. Hi.I hasten to touch a more genial theme. Theconclusion of the year 1829 may be said with me tohave set in a heavy cloud. But I was not to be easilydaunted ; and while quietly and dispassionately examiningall that had past, and all that might be tocome, I yet looked forward to a more favourableissue in the next literary undertaking that mightpresent itself-acting in a measure upon the memorabledictum of Lucan, in a verse perhaps asfrequently quoted, or rather perhaps misquoted, asany other of our ancient classics.Nil actum creeds, dum quid suppressed agendum*"An opportunity, or rather perhaps accident, furnishedthe means of carrying my next literary undertaking,THE SUNDAY LIBRARY, into complete andI remember the late Mr. Hebe mentioning that, in a conversationwith Porson, he repeated to him the verse of Lucan (Pears. ii 657), aait is usually quoted, thus :Nil actum reputed*, *i quid suppressed agendumand asked him " if all was right?" Porson replied in the affirmative:upon which Mr. Hebe repeated the verse as it stands in the text, andas it stands in I. wan too. Porson said "it had escaped him."860 LONDON. [Sundaysuccessful effect. It was on a rainy Sunday Morning,when, from indisposition, I was incapable ofattending my duty at St. Mary's, that, casting aboutto suit my reading to the day, it seemed as if itwould be a refreshing thing to hold, in one portablevolume, a collection of Discourses, by eminentChurchmen, upon great vital points of doctrine andof practice. An ailing man is necessarily an inactiveman . in his chamber of sickness. The very effortof rising to take down one volume after another, andto search in vain for the subjects on which you areat the time desirous of meditating, is necessarilyadding to the gravamen of illness whatever it maybe.The heavens are dark ; the wind is loud ; andthe rain is pattering upon the skylight of the study ;and you wish as much as possible to be insensible ofall without, from the intense interest excited in thatwhich is within, your retirement.I wished for a moveable SUNDAY LIBRARY ; andI possessed it not. Hence arose the work publishedunder that express title or denomination. The planwas hardly conceived ere it was begun to be carriedinto execution. But there were obviously weightypoints which presented themselves to my anxiousconsideration ; as I knew the whole would dependupon the judgment displayed in the selection. Butfortunately I had not to hesitate about the characteror bearing of my own principles, or my own practice,in a matter of this moment. Those had been settledfrom my earliest entrance into my profession, andLibrary'] LONDON . >< J 1my printed Sermons were at least proof that I hadnot to publish my Ort/iodo.r Creed for the first time.My main object was, in imitation (however immeasurablydistant!) of THE GREAT EXEMPLAR .todogood." Publish what I might, I knew therewould be discrepancies of opinion upon many pointsat issue : but I was resolved at all events that thepositive good should be uppermost, and the doubtfulresults (though never contemplated as such) bethrown into comparative shade.I was necessarily desirous to feel, at starting, oneparticular pulse which had always beaten kindlytowards me. It seemed almost natural to requestthe opinion or advice of THE PRIMATE, as to theprobable result, supposing the materials of the workto be sound and valuable. I was gratified to receivea reply, from that highly respected and competentquarter, that " the plan of my Sunday Library wasapproved. With due care in selection, such a publicationwould probably be extensively circulated,and would of course be very useful." The workwas dedicated to his Grace by a sort of stolenmarch*. I could hardly anticipate an unfavourableAs this Dedication is short, it may bear a repetition. Prefixed toitis a small wood-cut of the new archiepiscopal palace of Lambeth, ofwhich Mr. Bore is the distinguished architect, " My Lord ; I haveventured, without the permission of Youn GRACE, to dedicate this workto yourself. Such a dedication would imply a pledge that the doctrineswhich it imparts are worthy of the best principles of our Church, andillustrative of the most vital principles of our religion. The establishedreputation of those Authors from whose works the present selection is86 4 2 LONDON. \ Sundayreception, but it seemed as if I had no right toask expressly for a special permission. The sixvolumes, of which the work is composed, appearedabout once in two months, and by the middle of theyear 1832, not fewer than THREE THOUSAND COPIESof PERFECT SETS were sold. It is only an act ofcommon justice to my Publishers, Messrs. Long-man,Trees, Orme, and Co., to add, that their exertionswere unremitting, and upon the largest possiblescale. The very process of Stereotyping itproved, from the beginning, that they thought wellof the plan ; but let no over-sanguine Author everimagine that success, even on this scale, is to beobtained without large risks, and heavy expenses*.At this present day it is equally my triumph and(may I say justifiable ?) pride to inform the Christianreader, that four thousand two hundred andfifty sets of the COMPLETE WORK have left the warehouseof the Publishers for ever. Here was amade, can scarcely fail to assure the unprejudiced reader that such willbe the probable issue. Under this impression, which induces a wellgrounded hope of obtaining Your Grace's sanction, I hasten to subscribemyself, with much truth, Your Grace's obedient," &c,Within eighteen months not less than 400/. was expended in Advertisements;and upwards of 200 copies of the work were gratuitouslydistributed to the Proprietors and Editors of Newspapers and CriticalJournals. All this is " selon les regis." To give notoriety to the factof publication, throughout this ever-agitated empire, is no trifling effort;and is attended by no mean expense. The giving publicity to the meditatedHistory of the University of Oxford was nearer 100/. than fourscorepounds out of my pocket. The same expenditure was incurred byMr. Pickering in the promulgation of the meditated new edition of Fox'sBook of Martyrs.Library'] LONDON. 863union of liter mary with professional avocations, whichcompletely justified the prediction of the Archbishop*.But let it not be supposed that everything wassmooth and encouraging from the moment of conceiving,and during the progress of the executionof the plan. A work of considerable interest, andpromising popularity, of an exclusively theologicaltendency t supported, too, by talents of the firstdistinction was set on foot about the same time ;and on consulting the Bishop of London (Dr.Blomfield) about the probable result of my own,that Prelate replied, that " he was very doubtfulas to the success of my plan, which would to a certainextent interfere with one of a more comprehensivekind, which was then set on foot." TheBishop, however, readily conceded to my request toallow me to print four sermons of his own, withthe permission of the Publishers which was readilygranted. I also consulted a common friend of theBishop's and myself, the Rev. A. M. Campbell,Vicar of Haddington, and well qualified from hisposition in the great clerical synod in Lincoln's-innFields, to give me safe advice about the probableissue of my undertaking. He replied he " shouldSee page 807, ante.t The Theological Library. I ought to add, that the/w// title of myown work is, " The SUNDAY LIBRARY, or the Protestant's MANUALFOR THE SABUATII DAY.+ These Sermons are in the first and sixth volumes.864 LONDON. [Sundaybe very glad to hear that the undertaking succeeded,but he need not tell me that competitors werenumerous and powerful." Now, putting these twosomewhat discouraging opinions into the same scale,it might prime facie appear that my own opinion,in the other scale, would " kick the beam."No such thing. I set my machinery to workwith redoubled ardour and activity. It was myfixed object, as it was my unremitting effort, thatevery wheel in the same piece of machinery shouldhave its distinct movement without attrition in itself,and without obstruction to what might come incontact with it. My plan was peculiar : to giveSermons of a certain period, not much exceedinghalf a century and among those of the DEAD, toincorporate a great number of the LIVING. Fromthe latter I obtained every facility t a readiness, aMy friend alluded to the same work as the Bishop of London.The result has proved that the vast arena of the moral world is wideenough for the successful operation of all similar wholesome correctivesof the f< unruly wills of sinful mentI cannot, of course, particularise every kind and complying expressionof my numerous and distinguished Correspondents upon thisimportant subject: but I may venture upon a few. From DR. Lawrence,Archbishop of Castel, I te was perfectly at liberty to print thesermons alluded to, whenever, and in whatever manner, I pleased. Heheartily wished me success in the publication." It may be no smallgratification for the Author of the incomparable Sermon alluded to(On Predestination, vol. iv. p. 309), that, to my knowledge, it has, inmore than one instance, contributed to an absolute conversion from thedark and distressing doctrines of Calvinism. But a love of justice impelsme to add, that DR. PARR'S Sermon on the Wedding Feast, (vol. iii.p. 209), helped to the conversion. From the venerable ARCHDEACONPOTT (that able and well-read Septuagenarian in all the niceties of theLibrary'] LONDON. B05frankness, and a cordial co-operation, which setmy heart at rest and assured me that the fan!would be my OWN if success did not ensue. Madmy plan been different had I not resolutely adheredcontroversies of the period of the Reformation and whose intimacywith Tindal, Faith, Barnes, Coverdale, Erasmus, More, and Luther,is almost provocative of enviable feelings I received the assuranceof his being "glad that I had undertaken so seasonable a work ; and heshould be happy to render any aid towards its circulation. It would beas well, he conceived, to select a good sermon upon the Lord** Day inthe front of the work, as there had been some very injudicious cavilslately broached upon the subject." The Archdeacon was right: and Irefer to what appears upon this important subject, in vol. i. p. 207. Fromthe Bishop of Chichester, Dr. Shuttleworth, Mr. Milan, Mr. Le Bas,and Mr. Benson, I obtained the most cordial co-operation.But I desire to introduce a name in this place of comparatively humblepretensions . . . and yet not unworthy of the especial notice of the Christianreader. In this instance, my bosom discharges itself of a debt ofgratitude due to THE DEPARTED. The first name is that of my moreimmediate neighbour and clerical Brother, the late BASIL Wood, (seepage848, ante) : a man, made up of all the kindlier elements of an unsophisticatedChristianity : gentle ; generous ; unsuspecting ; good. Oncommunicating to him the plan of the " Sunday Library," he answeredthus:MY DEAR SIR,On the subject of your proposed publication, may 1 take the libertyof observing, that a general system of Christian Doctrinal Practice is,I conceive, a desideratum. I recollect none at present, but 3 vols. 8vo.,by the late Mr. Robinson of Leicester ; but these would be too long assermons. There are three volumes of the same nature by Dr. Burrows,Secretary of the Christian Knowledge Society, highly creditable to hislabours and information, but not calculated for Sunday evening reading;they would be thought too dry and systematic. Could the proposed beso arranged as to form a regular system of Divinity, with large quotationsillustrative of tin Liturgy and Homilies, I think tluy might form astandard library worthy the support of clergy and laity.I remain, my dear Sir,Your very faithful and obedient."BAKU, \3K866 LONDON. sundayto it had I yielded to conflicting opinions, which,on the one side urged me to the older divines, andon the other suggested topics, or points of doctrine,altogether at variance with my own fixed views, thepublic, I am persuaded, would have gained little ;while the Editor, with his Publishers, would havereaped less than little. Had I, perhaps, followedthe unfettered exercise of my own judgment, I haddipped largely into that school of Divinity whichimmediately succeeded the Reformation; and ofwhich the pages of the Library Companion * exhibitsuch instructive specimens. I am willing to think,on a dispassionate retrospection, that I have chosenthe happy medium ; as a sale of such extent cannotbe a forced one. And I desire, humbly and unfeignedly,to be thankful to the Great Disposer of allevents for the GOOD which I feel persuaded hasensued, and is long likely to ensue, from the circulationof the SUNDAY LIBRARY t. As far as thisvital object be considered, I have not been an idleFrom page 72 to 89 inclusively : second edition,t The names of the several DIVINES, together with the subjects takenfrom their works, of which the Sunday Library is composed, may bethus arranged :ALISON, ARCHIBALD.On Winter, as the Season of Religious Thought.as the Season of Social Amusement.On the Lord's Prayer.BENSON, CHRISTOPHER.God tempting Abraham, and Abraham's obedience and faith inoffering Isaac, considered.Library'] LONDON.or inefficient labourer in the vineyard of a MASTER,whose reward is not confined to a mere sublunarystate of existence.The existence of difficulties in the Scripture not incompatiblewith their object as a religiously instructive work.BLAIR, HUGH.On Tranquillity of Mind.On a life of Dissipation and Pleasure.Bromfield, BISHOP.Christian Improvement.Christian Purity.On Prayer.Choice of a Religion.CHALMERS, THOMAS.The Necessity of a Mediator between God and Man.Emptiness of Natural Virtue.On Winter, as the Season of Social Amusement.CHANDLER, DEAN OF CHICHESTER.The Influence of Christianity upon Society.D'OYLY, GEORGE, D. D.On the Assurance of Salvation.Alliance of Religion and Learning.The Intermediate State. (See, too, page 871, post).GILPIN, JOSHUA.The poor in SpiritThe rejoicing of Hannah.GRAY, BISHOP.On the Influence of Christianity.Hazlitt, GEORGE, D. D.On the Catechism.HALL, ROBERT.Modern Infidelity considered.HEBER, BISHOP.The Atonement.Time and Eternity.Duties of the Ministry.HEWLETT, JOHN.The Duty of studying the Holy Scriptures with patience*.Patience, Comfort, and Hope to be derived from the Scriptum.8KB868 LONDON. [SundayBut I had more I had some earthly rewards worththe mention setting aside the little property thatHOBART, BISHOP.Mistakes concerning Repentance.Delay of Repentance.HORNE, BISHOP.On the Redemption of Time.Life, a Journey.Horsey, BISHOP.The Syrophoenician Woman.Anniversary Sermon of the Sons of the Clergy.Observance of the Sabbath.Huntingdon, Bishop.The Necessity of Vigilance and Prayer.False Philosophy considered.On the Preaching of our Lord.IRVINE, ANDREW.The Millennium.Personality and Office of the Holy Spirit.JONES, WILLIAM.Sufferings necessary to Perfection.Decency and Order in Divine Worship.LAURENCE, ARCHBISHOP OF Cassel.The Doctrine of Predestination.LE BAS, C. WEBB.The Fear of God.The Love of God.The Labourers in the Vineyard.MALTBY, BISHOP OF CHICHESTER.On good Works.The Grace of God.Divinity of Christ.Man, BISHOP.Necessity and Benefits of the Lord's Supper.Pride contrasted with Humility.On Spiritual Pride.Milan, HENRY HART.Characters of the Apostles.Forehead, ROBERT.On Religious Retirement.Library.] LONDON.might be vested in the publication which were ofpeculiar consolation to me. My Noble Patron, theOn Religious Meditation.On the Good Name of the Dead.On Natural Religion.On Revealed Religion.NARES, ARCHDEACON.The Power of Faith.Love, the Principle of True Religion.NEWTON, BISHOP.God and the King.The good Samaritan.Paley, WILLIAM.Taste for Devotion.Seriousness in Religion.PARR, SAMUEL, D. D.The Parable of the Marriage Feast.Faith and Morality.POTT, ARCHDEACON.On Brotherly Reconciliation.The Fruits of the Spirit.On the Nativity.Christ considered as a Saviour.Porters, BISHOP.Christ's Sermon on the Mount.Parable of the Sower.Day of Judgment.RUN NELL, THOMAS.Take heed how ye hear.Rejoice in the Lord always.Seeker, ARCHBISHOP.On a General Fast.Thanksgiving for Peace.SllUTTLEWORTH, PlULIP NICHOLAS.Reasonableness and Efficacy of Prayer.Woe unto them that call Evil Good, and Good Evil.Christ's yoke easy, and burden light.SMITH, SYDNEY.On Repentance.On the Government of the Hi870 LONDON. [Sundaylate Earl Spencer, took a lively interest, as well asexpressed a warm commendation, during the wholeprogress of the work. On receiving the first volumeof it, his Lordship expressed his entire approbation ;and hoped it would continue to contain as goodselections adding, that " he should not fail to distributeit among those of his neighbours of themiddle classes, who might be likely to derive benefitfrom, as well as take interest in, it." He bespoketwenty copies of every volume, with this preciseobject distributing them among his minortenantry and dependents. On receiving the fourthvolume, he observed in a note, " Your selection inthis volume contains some very beautiful specimensof pulpit oratory, especially Bishop Huntingdon's *,On the Love of our Country.On Scepticism.SPRY, JOHN HUME.Final Prevalence of Christian Unity.SUMNER, Bishop OF CHESTER.Christian Charity.Christian Faith and Christian Practice.The Christian's dependence upon his Redeemer.Towns, GEORGE.Evangelical Obedience.Love God and keep his Commandments.VAN Milder, BISHOP OF DURHAM.Human Inability to frame a Religion.Natural or Moral Philosophy insufficient Teachers of Religion.WHITE, PROFESSOR.Christ and Mahomet compared.Miracles and Prophecies confirmation of Christ's Divinity.There were few instances or occurrences connected with the publicationof my work, which gave me such entire satisfaction as one connectedwith the publication of the fourth volume ; and with that of theBISHOP of Huntingdon's Sermons, at the head of it, in particular.Library"] LONDON. 871both Bishop Blomfield's, the two first of Maltby's,and all three of Forehead's."On the receipt of the sixth, or last volume, therewas one sermon, that " On the Intermediate State"by Dr. D'Oyly (and it is a sermon of not less beautythan importance), which, as his Lordship had notlong then become a Widower, had probably someadditional cause of excitement upon his attention.Dr. D'Oyly's sermon (observed his Lordship, inaletter to me of Dec. 1, 1831), attracts much ofmy attention from its peculiar subject a most diffname of this (late) learned prelate has been slightly mentioned atpage 168, ante. His portrait, from Lawrence, is at the beginning of the4th vol. ; and a preface, in the shape of a slight memoir appertainingto the Bishop, precedes the sermons in question. On the appearance ofthe volume, I received the following letter from its octogenarian author :DEAR SIR, Ifireford, Aug. 30, 1831.That such a work as the ' SUNDAY LIBRARY' had been published,I did not know till the middle of July last A gentleman left for methe fourth volume as a present, and be assured a most acceptable one.If you were that gentleman [which I was not], I should imkvd havebeen happy to have seen one so intimate with my ever dear friendMr. King.I should be insensible if I did not feel, and disingenuous if ! didnot acknowledge myself gratified by the very kind terms in which youare pleased to speak of the author, whose two sermons stand first in thefourth volumeQue tibi, quite tali, redder pro munere dona ?'The best I can my sincere thanks.I am, dear sir,Your respectful and obliged servant,9.872 LONDON. [Christianficult one to handle. The reflections to which itsperusal gives rise, whether he he right or wrong inhis conclusions, are of a deeply interesting nature ;but it is a subject of tremendous difficulty." Fromvarious quarters and very many unknown I receivednot only congratulations for the past, butencouragement for the future ; and, under that impression,propounded, on the issuing of the sixthand last volume, at the end of the preface, a Continuationof the Work under the title of " ChristianCLASSICS*" of which the original idea, orThis work was announced in a circular, of which the following isa copy :Christian Classics ; being a collection of approved and populartreatises on the Truths and Doctrines of Christianity ; with notes andillustrations. ADDRESS : The success of the SUNDAY LIBRARY, towhich this work may be considered as a Companion, has induced theEditor again to come forward, in a shape not less acceptable, he trusts,to the kindly feelings and good taste of a Christian Community. Ifthere be one object more than another, which he has at heart, in thepreparation of the materials of these ' Classics it is, that they may beinstrumental to the direction and consolidation of those Principles,upon which the present and future happiness of human beings may besaid to depend : as an antidote to the poison of infidelity on the onehand, and to the misery of fanaticism on the other. And if there beone Class of Individuals more likely to be benefited than another bysuch a Publication, it is The Young on commencing their career inlife whether at our Universities, or on being placed out in the world.If there be such attraction in the word ' Classics,' as applied to the cultivationof taste from a knowledge of Heathen Writers, let some of theablest treatises in our language (of which the titles are here announced)have their due influence upon the understandings of Young Men, whenthey are adorned by the purity of a classical style, and directed to thenoblest of earthly objects.CONTENTS. Grotius : on the Truth of the Christian Religion.English version, with notes from Le Clerc and others. Locke : on theLONDON. 873plan, was to appropriate the first volume of it toa Life of Christ. My publishers however did notencourage the project ; but yet I must be permittedto think that, according to the plan below, theChristian Classics ought not to want a general and aliberal patronage. Upon no one undertaking haveI received more uniform encouragement to proceed,from eminently learned and competent critics, thanupon this. But unless I could get it taken up byall the leading public schools *, I am not desirousof making the experiment. Meanwhile, as myprincipal motive is the good of my fellow creatures,and the spread of Christianity all over the globe,it will be seen that I make no mystery or secret ofthe plan. Let a more adventurous Editor take itup, and strike off two thousand five hundred copiesReasonableness of Christianity. Addison : the Truth of the ChristianReligion. Steele, Sir Richard : the Christian Hero. Some Jenynt :on the Internal Evidences of the Truth of the Christian Religion.Portent: on the Evidences of Christianity. Warburton, Bishop: onIrresistible Grace. Douglas, Bishop: the Criterion. Michaelis: onthe Authenticity and Inspiration of the New Testament, with BishopMarsh's notes. Pales Horse Pauline: or Verification of some RemarkableParticulars in the Life of St Paul, as recorded in die Acts ofthe Apostles. Lord Lyttelton : on the Conversion of St. Paul Chandler: Plain Reasons for being a Christian. West : on the Resurrection.Bishop Watson Apology for the Bible."My truly learned, as well as most amiable and generous friend,Mr. ARCHDEACON BUTLER, gave me every encouragement to proceed ;and said he would "introduce it in his school;" a compliment, thanwhich I di-sircd nothing more encouraging.t See page 169, ante.874 LONDON. [Pastor's Adviceat once. Fewer ought not to be thought of . tomake the matter tante*.It ought to be mentioned that the year 1830 sawtwo productions from my pen, of which one wasexclusively professional but printed only for privatedistribution, at the request of several auditors of theoriginal composition. It was a Sermon preached inthe Church of St. Paul's, Covent Garden, on theVisitation of the Venerable George Owen Cambridge,Mea., Archdeacon of Middlesex. TextI HAVE KEPT THE FAITH." 11 Tim. iv. J. Theother publication, here alluded to, cannot be consideredas unprofessional, since it was a letter writtento the Editor of the Times, in defence of his attackupon the Diocesan (Dr. Blomfield)on his strictures onthe present neglect of the Lord's Day. It wassigned BY Christians : motto " Let not injudiciousadmiration mistake the venom of the shaft forthe vigour of the bow." Johnson. This littlepamphlet of some forty pages was written in thespirit of a downright honest and fearless feeling;An anonymous correspondent, signing himself, " A PROTESTANT,"suggested to me, in a letter from Bath, dated May 12, 1835, a continuationof my " Sunday Library," by a selection of Sermons on theFeasts and Fasts of the Church, as likely to be of great advantage tothe public. His letter is at once flattering and grateful to me . . . but . . .it should seem, that the tide is ebbing, and a spring tide is yet far off.It was the wisest thing done in the management of the " SUNDAYLIBRARY," to stop where I did stop ; although I wanted not strongexhortations to double the number of volumes.to Its Flock'] LONDON. 875not in uniform commendation of the Bishop'sstrictures," nor certainly in anything approachingthe strain of panegyric of his Opponent's attacks.I look back upon this cordial impromptu with thatsatisfaction which every right-minded man shouldfeel on having performed his duty, in his own conscience,with justice to both parties.I hasten to colophonise. In the very beginning ofthe year of the appearance of the first volume ofthe " Sunday Library," 1831, EARL GREY becamePrime Minister of England, at the head of a WhigCabinet, and a Whig Government. Abroad, theFrench Revolution, which placed Louis Phillipsupon the throne of France, in the same year, wasone of the most extraordinary upon record. Apopulation of many millions diverted the ordinarycourse of monarchical succession without the accompanyinghorrors of revolutionary bloodshed.The soldiers and subjects scarcely ever intermixedbayonets ; and although the " memorable threedays" were not unattended with slaughter, yet, consideringwhat was in contemplation and execution,the marvel is that political excitement was not followedup by a more lengthened and wide-spreadingmischief. When one thinks of the quantity ofnoble and virtuous blood shed in our own count r\,during the civil wars of the fifteenth and seventeenthcenturies, we may, as Christians, indulge inequal wonder and consolation that the French lu -volution of 1831 bore so slight a resemblance to876 LONDON. [Pastor** Advicethat of the forty years preceding when the Guillotineknew no rest, and the soil of France wassaturated with human blood.At home in our own country at the momentof the Premier's taking the helm, there were strongsymptoms of a perturbed and perverted feelingamong great masses of the middling and lowerorders of society. With the latter, the evidences ofIncendiarism were as general as appalling ; andmen seemed not only to act recklessly, but to lettheir " thinking aloud" be preludes to such acts.A " Public Form of Prayer" was ordered "onaccount of the troubled state of certain parts ofthe United Kingdom." At this crisis, it struck methat I had a public duty to perform ; and I did itaccording to my notions, and to the best of my ability.I wrote (" calais currentissimo" as may be tooevident!) a little pamphlet, entitled, " A Word ofCaution and Comfort to the middle and lowerClasses of Society, being a Pastor's Advice to hisFlock in a time of Trouble." No name was affixed; but mine was neither concealed nor disavowedas that of the author of the tract which was sold atthe trifling sum of sixpence. I believe the sale wasThe following, from the form of prayer abovementioned, was prefixedas a title : " Restore, O Lord, to thy people the quiet enjoymentof the many and great blessings which we have received from thybounty : defeat and frustrate the malice of wicked and turbulent men,and turn their hearts : have pity, O Lord, on the simple and ignorantwho have been led astray, and recal them to a sense of their duty."to his Flocked LONDON. 877pretty general ; and to have cleared my expenses, only,was something beyond a negative consolation.I desire respectfully, and dispassionately, to callthe reader's attention for a few minutes to one ortwo circumstances connected with this little pamphlet;and I shall first beg to put him in possession of anextract or two from it, so as to furnish him withsome materials for the exercise of his own judgment.It begins thus :My Christian Brethren,"In every point of view, I ought to address you by sucha designation. But I address you in a time of trouble'and especially of * peril among FALSE BRETHREN.' I willcall it, if you please, political peril ; for physical and moralperils are the ordinary lot of humanity. The first wish ofmy heart and bent of my understanding incline to givingyou a word of CAUTION. Attend to this caution ; and youwill see how COMFORT springs out of it Do not mistrustmy motives ; nor doubt the efficacy of the advice which youare about to receive. Follow it honestly and manfully ; andit will lead you, in the end, into the ' patris of peace.'It cannot be denied that the present is a moment ofmore than usual anxiety and agitation among ' all sortsand conditions of men.' Some of these anxieties may probablyhave no foundation : but many are grounded uponindisputable matter of fact Even the stillness of night,and the hours commonly allotted to repose, have been invadedby a thoroughly mischievous spirit of destruction : aspirit, as indefinite in its object, as it is diabolical in itsmeans of carrying it into execution. The labours of thehusbandman have been rendered fruitless ; and, sometimes,the hand which helped to hind the sheaf hath !> . n instrumentalto its wanton destruction. The nutrition of thou-london.[Pastor's Advicesands has been scattered to the winds : and human beingswith the prospect of winter, and a state of starvation beforethem, seem to have taken pains to shew how indifferent theycould be to the one, and how regardless of the other. Inthese instances, both God and man are set at defiance,"&c. &c.After a brief sketch of many of the disturbancesabroad, and in the Low Countries, I bring the readerto a Home View, and speak of the Governmentthen existing, as I have been, and always shall be,conscientiously disposed both to think and to speak.It is the utterance of sentiments upon broad publicprinciples. Whatever might have been my individualrespect for some of the then Members of theCabinet, that had no influence either on my principlesor professions. I had no obligations to acknowledge.I have had none since j but here I mustbe supposed deliberately to repeat what I have beforeadvanced.Look now AT HOME, and bless God as you look, uponthe state of things which, comparatively, there meets youreyes. You have a King beloved, as he ought to be beloved: a King, who, in almost every sentiment which heutters, and every action which he betrays, proves himself, notonly to be thoroughly English, but thoroughly humane ;who incorporates and identifies himself as it were with thewants and wishes of his subjects : who expects homageonly because it is impossible to be withheld grafted as it isupon the stock of respect and esteem. It was said of HenryIV. of France, that he was their ' good King,' because hewished for nothing better than that every one of his subitohis Flitch.] LONDON. 879sects should have a < chicken boiling in his pot It maybetruly said of William IV., that he desires nothing betterthan that every Englishman should have h is roast beef turninground his spit. The good conduct of his subjects mustbe the principal means of carrying this desire into effect.You have a CONSTITUTION the work and the gloryof ages: the admiration and the envy of the world. Faultsand imperfections it cannot fail to have, because it is human,and necessarily partakes of human fallibility. You have aGOVERNMENT, strong, vigorous, upright, well intentioned:a government, which will not fail to correct what is corrigible,according to opportunities granted and means supplied ; andto modify what is incongruous or verging to decay;a government, which has not only the courage to give apledge, but the virtue to carry it into effect. I desire to beunderstood as not wishing to institute comparisons betweenone set of ministers and another. I have neither the meansnor the ability to entitle such comparison to any respectfulattention. I speak only of existing facts : of the presentmembers of his Majesty's government : of men of highbirth, high alliance : possessing a spirit incapable of basecompromise : above corruption : above suspicion : lovers ofthe church, and supporters of its best interests.Again : in a consideration of HOME enjoyments. Frommatters of State, let us speak of those of the CHURCH : ofthat established church, to which, for twenty-six years past,it hath been my lot professionally to belong. More able,more active, more successful Ministers than myself, theremay be in abundance ; but one more zealous, or more disposedto do all the good in his power, both within andwithout his church, I will not readily allow. My consciencetells me that I can fearlessly make this assertion : and,as I can make it now, so do I trust to make it HEREAFTER.I have served, if I may so speak, an apprenticeship to thespiritual matters entrusted to my charge: and during thoseseven years in which I have resided among you, I hope that880 LONDON. [Pastor's AdviceI have never, knowingly, c turned my face' from any deserving< poor man. 1 In a charge so extensive, as well asso important in a parish including a population of twenty-fivethousand souls it is impossible to meet the wishes,satisfy the desires, and realise the expectations of more thanavery limited number ; but I have executed, and hope tocontinue to execute, the task assigned to me, with all thezeal and all the best intentions in my power a zeal, however,which, I would fondly hope, does not exclude theoperation of the profoundest Christian humility. The consequencesrest with GOD *."The reader has had some notion of the commencement of this littletract; may I further venture upon his patience in making him acquaintedwith its conclusion ?I have now gone through the entire first division of this PastoralAddress. I have endeavoured to awake in you a sense of CAUTIONrespecting the surrendering of the absolute advantages you possess fordoubtful equivalents and respecting the ordinary character of thosewho counsel such a surrender. It remains only to make a short appealto you on the score of the COMFORTS absolutely enjoyed. I call themcomforts in every sense of the word. Your house is your castle. Itcannot be invaded with impunity. Your person is protected both withinand without that house. RIGHT is as much the poorest man's, as it isthe richest man's, civil inheritance. You may do what you will withyour property while living, and direct it to be bestowed in any manneryou please after death. I speak of the exercise of this right upongeneral principles, and in the ordinary way. Now, these alone are greatcomforts : but it is the law of the land which gives them : and to thatsame law you must be conformable. The moment you are born, youbecome an object of its protection. As long as you live you exist underthe same protection. As a natural and necessary result, therefore, youare bound to obey those laws. Shall the child resist the parent, in theact of receiving that parent's arms thrown round it for protection ?ff Think a little what you would get by disaffection and studiedresistance. You might see injury in one mode of proceeding, and yourneighbour in another. You seek this remedy, and he advises that.Multiply these instances of discrepancy : and collect the suffrages of awhole street and to what intelligible and attainable end would thosesuffrages or opinions direct you ? Trust me, you would become thet his Flock.] LONDON. $81Whatever might be the result, on the score ofpublic opinion, for good or for evil, I had abundantreason to be well satisfied that this labour of threeevenings had met the unqualified approbation ofsport of every fanciful suggestion ; and, in the ultimate result, the objectof your own secret scorn and derision. I can conceive no severerreproach and punishment than TIIIS. Under every point of view, connectedwith things temporal and things spiritual, every rational maushould be taught to consider the nature of the change proposed, ere hebeled to adopt or to reject it. Above all things, should every rationalman judge or obtain some competent means of judging of thequalifications of those, who, in proposing change, have frequentlyrevolution at heart : and before the clamour of the factious be listenedto, strive to make yourselves well acquainted with the liberties and thecomforts which you actually enjoy.I feel persuaded, that, during this ' time of trouble* and agitation,many a man, once engaged in an extension of the mischief, has, uponreconsideration, seen ' the evil of his ways,' and turned from them,heart and soul, to his family and to his Maker. Such have indeed goodneed to ask pardon of God and man. Bad as may have been the past,let uspiope that it is not wholly without good for the future. Let ushope that a lesson has been learnt, not to invade the rights, nor destroythe property of individuals, under the delusion that either may be donewith impunity. Permanent blessings are sometimes the result of partialsufferings ; but let it be remembered that the blood of the guilty mustatone for the violation of the innocent ! Above all things, let it beremembered that a HIGHER power, than anything human, must be supplicated,' in all our troubles and adversities,' of whatever description,whensoever they oppress us : ' that, in the hands of that same powerare ' the issues of life and death ;' and that, both in private and inpublic, we must entreat him to ' have mercy upon us : ' to ' save anddefend us from all dangers, ghostly and bodily : that he will keep uafrom all sin and wickedness, and from our ghostly enemy, and fromeverlasting death ; and this we trust he will do of his mercy and goodness,through our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.'Such, in conclusion, my Christian brethren, such is the languageof our incomparable Catechism. ' Happy are we if we knowthings ; but happier far if we DO them.' "> I88-2 LONDON. [Pastor's Advicemy friends. . .both Whig and Tory. I sent a copy,"as in duty bound," to Mr. Archdeacon Glover,my rural clerical Commander, and his opinion inreply is well worth a place below*. The late SirJames Mackintosh had then recently become myParishioner. From his residence in CumberlandStreet, he was not long in favouring me with thefollowing reply :MY DEAR SIR,Many thanks for your good and serviceable tract, whichDEAR SIR,I thank you for the kindness of your attention in sending me a copyof the PASTOR'S ADVICE. It is well calculated to meet a crisis, which,thank God, has now, like a hurricane, spent its fury and disappeared ;and as good often comes out of evil, so do I hope that the late excitements,which, after all, were not the fruits of mere wantonness andrestlessness of temper, but of long and heavy oppression, will be productiveof ultimate advantage to society at large. The clamour againstthe clergy has been the pure work of the farmers, or of a few minorlandlords, whose interests were considered as identified. The presenttithe-system does, however, ' work not well :' it has not even the negativepraise arrogated for the borough-system of representation in theHouse of Commons ; and I am very anxious to see the Clergy themselvesstepping forward to petition for a mode of provision more convenientto the present condition of society, the interests of agriculture,and the PEACE of our ( SION.' And this, I feel quite confident, may beeffected by a judicious, and yet very moderate alteration. To an allotmentof land, or to a commutation for a tax on land, I most decidedlyobject. Both these plans are as full of mischief as the wooden horse ofTroy.I am, my dear sir, yours truly,GEORGE GLOVER."There can be, I think, but one opinion, both among Whigs and Tories,of the propriety of such an epistle as this.tn hh Flock.] LONDON.is intended, and, I think, calculated to be beneficial. Iheartily wish that success to your intentions and exertionswhich they well deserve. I shall soon have the pleasure ofdoing my duty by attendance in my Parish Church. Duringthe cold weather I am scarcely allowed to venture.cc Ever yours faithfully,My noble Parishioner, Lord Kenyon, whosegeneral political views cannot be considered as preciselysynonymous with those of the last Writer,was pleased, in a note of the date of Feb. 21, 1831,to " thank me for my Pastor's Advice, as beingwell calculated to answer its purpose." His Lordshipadded what will be gratifying to read "ThankGod, in my neighbourhood, in Wales, all is loyaltyand good humour, and no one wants work or fairwages." " I am glad (concludes the Noble Writer)to hear that your Sunday Library progresses well,as the modern phrase is, and hope it will be moreand more countenanced." " I have long reproachedmyself (said an amiable and highly talented Headmasterof a distinguished public school) for not1 laving thanked you for your Words of Caution andComfort to your Parishioners. I, as a Whig, wasmuch pleased with your remark on the French 1 (volution, and there were sugar-plums enough forthe Tories." Although there nrr "rife884 LONDON. [Pastor's Advice.which I may not name in detail*, yet it is toogratifying to me to suppress the mention only ofa few of my older friends. " Many thanks for yourpamphlet (observes John Herman Merivale, Esq.,now one of the Commissioners of Bankrupts) which isnot only excellent in itself, hut excellently well timed,and that is more. D * * shall read it. Perhaps hemay not he disinclined to act upon it. I order afew shillings' worth forthwith for the edification ofthe good people of Exeter." But the zeal of myfriend John George Children, Esq., induced himto order forty copies of the brochure and to dispersethem as much beneath the thatched as theslated roof. My spirits had quite a holiday uponthe occasion.Still drawing to a close. Only two more itemsin the Literary Record, and then farewell at leastto Chapter XII. The year ensuing that of thepublication just mentioned, was one, in all respects,of a character at once agitating and awful. Thepassing of the Reform Bill authorises the firstepithet ; the ravages of the Cholera justify thesecond. In loth instances terrors were magnified ;" Very many thanks (said a late neighbour and brother clergyman,to whom Lord Liverpool gave a small piece of preferment in my parishbut who is now " SLEEPING Well), for your words of caution and comfort; which do honour to the head and heart of the patriotic writer.Your review of the constitution, both of church and state, is judiciouslydelineated and supported," &c.Bibliopholtiu.'] LONDON. ss.">but in the last, there was doubtless much danger tobe dreaded .DespairTended the sick, busiest from couch to couch ;And over them, triumphant, DEATH his dartShook'To these causes of excitement and apprehension,was to be added another the indifference, if notdislike, to Book-pur chasing. In vain did theshelves of Messrs. Payne and Foss, and Thorpe,and John, and Cochrane, and Pickering, hold outconstable objects of possession in the book way. Noone came to purchase. Under the operation of allthese impressions, I put forth a small 4s. 6d.pamphlet, entitled BIBLIOPHOBIA, with a feignedname as that of the Author*. It scarcely occupiedme a fortnight in the composition, and it toldtolerably well. The motto, placed in the title-page,and taken from the body of the work, was sufficientlyattractive.FEAR is the Order of the Day. To those very naturalfears of Bailiffs and Tax-gatherers may now be added thefear of Reform, of Cholera, and of BOOKS." Page 6.An odd circumstance accompanied the compositionof this unpretending little volume. One ofmy principal heroes was, or rather is, the Rev. Dr.VALPY, of Reading. The entire passage relatingIts title was as follows: " Bibliophobia. Remarks on the promptlanguid and depressed state of Literature and the Book Trade; in aLetter addressed to the Author of the Bibliomania. By MKRCVBIUIRUSTIC i s. With Notes by CATO FARVVS."LONDON. \ Bibliophdbia.to that Octogenarian's bibliomanical renown, occupiesthree or four pages of the work*, in which Ihad complimented him upon the consistency of hisviews, as well as the ardour of his passion, in adheringto the consolations to be derived from the entiretyof his Library. The passage, just belowalluded to, had scarcely been perpetuated in print,when I met his Son, Mr. Abraham John Valpy, whotold me he " wanted to have a few words with meabout his Father's SELLING HIS LIBRARY!" " !"But such was the fact ; and in the monthof June ensuing the library in question was disposedof under the hammer of Mr. Evans. The venerableowner of it had sprinkled the catalogue with afew spicy notes, which afforded an increased relishto its perusal.See from page 63 to 65 of the JBibliophobia. But perhaps Dr.Valpy's apology for the sale of his books is best told in one of his ownnotes in the catalogue of his library, thus :190. Art de Conserver la Vue Paris.Could these directions, or any other means, have preservedmy sight, the sale of my books would not now have taken place.To this defect must be partly ascribed the errors, omissions, andredundancies, which may occur in this Catalogue."^ Of course I could not read, without an increased action of thepulse, what the author of these " spicy notes" was pleased to say of myhumble but intermitting labours in the field of Bibliography. Myspecimens shall not incorporate that ; but what follows has, I think,something pleasingly instructive or interesting about it.137. Aristophanes, Porson, a Dobree, LARGE PAPER . 1820.Mr. Dobree* was a native of Guernsey, Fellow of TrinityCollege, Cambridge, and Greek Professor in that University.He enjoyed 3 the, friendship of Porson; and in critical sagacity,and profound and accurate skill in the^Greek language, was in-LONDON. 887To publish so trifling a jeu-d? esprit with the ideaof obtaining any pecuniary advantage, were perhapsfervor to him alone. Dobroeus, as his name is Latinised, hadcommunications with the first scholars on the Continent Hev was making preparations for some important classical editions,but intense application to study brought him to the grave at anearly age. Some of his critical observations are collecting by hislearned successor, Mr. Scholefield.".H6. Colardeau, (Oeuvres de, 4 vols. . . /Ww, 1803A beautiful copy. Colardeau ranks high amongst the Frenchpoets. His Heroines have the beauty of those of Ovid, and moresimplicity. His Eloise to Abelard does not fall short of Pope's,and has the freshness of an original."1784. Nichols's Literary Anecdotes of the 18th Century,9 vols. . Lord. 1812On the foundation of the Caxton of his age, the learnedBowyer, his worthy successor, the late venerable J. Nichols hadraised the first story of this immense structure : a fire levelled itwith the groundIncendia lumenPr&bebant; aliguisque malofuit nous in illo.A more splendid edifice arose from the ruins, which gives a mostextensive view of the authors and works of the last century. Hisson has, with kindred qualifications, completed this great monumentof historical research and judicious industry.1097 Grammar Institutes of Latin, by Grant . T/onrf. 1813Had Mr. Grant copied his ' Institutes' from the ancientgrammarians of our country, those authors, Lilly, Ruddiman,Busby, &c., could not have brought an action against him forpiracy. But to appropriate and to attribute to himself the laboursof his contemporaries, is, to say the least, not very honourable.What part of this publication others may claim, I know not ;but all the rules in verse, and many in prose, are taken verbatimfrom my Grammar, without the slightest notice."2904 Xenophon, Ben well, 2 vol. . . . Oxon. 1804Mr. Sewell early distinguished himself at school for hiscompositions. At Oxford, where he was Fellow of Trinity College,he obtained every prize in prose ami verse. ( 'convinced ofhis eminent talents and genius, tin luiMisity unanimouslyoffered him the Professorship of Poetry. I* ' I'ru-ml888 LONDON. [ Bibliopholia.an idle dream ; but the result ought not to havebeen as it has been. The chief reward, and themost heart-felt solace, I felt, was in the epistolarycongratulations of my old and faithful friends. He,of " Harrow on the Hill" renowned* alike forclassical erudition and social worth shall lead theway. " I have just received your racy little Book.I threw down my Mrs. Trollope, and Basil Hall, andabsolutely devoured it. It came at six, and beforebed-time it was thoroughly read through. It putme in mind ' of the olden time' the by-gone time! "The Bookie (says another classical friend, livingat the foot of Greenwich Hill) has amused memuch. Its spirit is quite as it should be. I haveheard nothing but good-natured remarks upon it,always coupled with hearty good wishes for theAuthor's well doing. Decus ought to be tickledand flattered ; but he is no such proud aspirant asyou would do your best to make him." What exceedinglyamused me, was, that the character of myfriend Mr. Douce, under that of Prospero, was taken,by that worthy and most learned Antiquary, au piedwho had expressed a wish to obtain it, induced him strenuouslyto decline the honour ; and that friend, after an arduous contest,was defeated. Mr. Sewell's character rose so high inevery branch of literature and of clerical exertion, that he waspatronised by some persons of eminence and power in the state ;and the highest preferment awaited him, when he fell a victim, atan early age, to his charity and humanitytX Oj> TO Getov <pi\,ei aTroOvijaicei i>e'o9."See page 313, ante.BibUophobia.] LONDON.de la lettre and his Epistle in consequence was oneof the most curious and stringent I ever received fromhim*.My Oxford bibliographical friends, Messrs. Ban-dine,Bliss, and Hawkins, were pleased to expresstheir satisfaction at the parts assigned to them inthis libliophobistical Drama ; in which, by the by,the account of the sale of the MSS. oftJie WaverleyNovels (as they are called) may be considered rathera curious morceau of information. In this work,too, the rising glories of Euphorbia t, in the bookSee page 45 of Bibliophobia, reprinted in a preceding page. Myfriend's letter, above alluded to, ran in part thus :SIGNOR MERCURY,I have no doubt that one of your demons has (in a dream) lentyou his claw to scribble p. 45 in your truly mercurial effusions forwhat have I to do with the staff of Regiomontanus ? It would havebeen more in character, had your demoniacal prompter exchanged itfor my namesake's magic wand; an article, just as likely to be in mypossession as the other.Moreover, where did your D 1 learn the story of Charles V. andFrancis I. about the chess-men, or the Elizabethan Madrigals, orHandel's parchment roll? now, I suppose with him where he oughtto be in Heaven. The other articles being only halfway thither initnhibut.As to imperial cups (with prick-songs, poetry, anthems) bohea maybesipped from them of a better quality than imperial souchong which,when 1 tasted it, had the true flavour of chopped hay or straw. Wheneversaid doctor pleases, after a Lenten fast on mutton chops, which areall the present disordered state of my culinary (as Dr. Shaw wouldhave called it) can produce, &c."t See pages 23, 94 of the Bibliophobia. My last letter from euphorbiabetrays not only his unshaken zeal, but his instituted laboursin the BOOK-CAUSE. " I am now engaged (says he) in editing somevery interesting Catalogue* of the Monastic Library of Durham, fromthe Conquest to the Reformation, for the SURTBBS' SOCJBTV. This LONDON. [Bibliophobia.world, were distinctly predicted; and subsequentfacts have proved the truth of the prediction. Iam still curious to know whether the bibliomanicalcareer of a certain heir apparent (qu. presumptive?)of a Ducal Coronet, be still running the laudablecourse described in the pages of the "Bookie*?Only one further fact merits distinct notice, andshall receive from me the warmest commendation.The preceding pages have made mention of an instanceof Book Illustration such as is hardly uponrecord. The author or inventor affix what prefixyou will of that Illustration, has not thought thehumble work under consideration too mean for theexercise of his powers of embellishment ; andCharles Lewis is now occupied in stitching, andsewing, and coating such an assemblage of materialsas scarcely could be supposed procurable for sucha work.excellent association has already given Reginald to the world, and a collectionof Wills and Inventories, illustrative of the domestic mannersof the middle ages. The man that declared that there were only twobooks in the world the Bible and Euclid was not so far out of theway as would at first seem. Nevertheless, I am proceeding to arrangemy copious notices of the CATHEDRAL LIBRARIES OF ENGLAND, witha view to this publication at no distant period." These effusions, fromone who unites the power of wealth and of intellect, and of early manhoodtoo, do one's heart good to peruse. For the Surtees' Society, seepage606, ante.See page 888, ante. My friend Dr. Burney's coinage of this wordis methinks a good translation of the " libellous" of the Romans.t I learn from the fountain-head that these Illustrations consist ofFOUR HUNDRED AND Thirty-two in number ; more than half of whichare proofs, for the most part before the letter, or on India paper. OfI ', lit Lecture.] London.Once more and for the last time. I would herespeak briefly, but fearlessly, of the LENT LECTURESpublished in 1833, in two elegantly printed smalloctavo volumes. My Subscribers (chiefly Parishioners)were about four hundred in number. Theprice was I/. Is., and a few copies were thrown offupon large paper for double that sum. In thewhole, seven hundred and fifty copies were printed.The subjoined note will explain the contents ofthese volumes, and shew upon what principles, andwith what feelings, they were given to the world*.these, 15? are portraits, including several private plates, and verycurious proofs, difficult of obtainment. There are also thirty sevendrawings, including three by Stothard, and some very beautiful byJ. P. Nealee. My friend's first intention was "merely to have put insome half a dozen duplicates, which he happened to have by him ;" buthe became fond of the tract, and like many an untimely daughter ofindigent'parents, he has lavished more graces upon it than the bantlingwas worth, or is consistent with the finances of the infatuated parent.This gem, of its kind, I have never yet beheld.The motto in the title-page is " Let your LIGHT so shine beforemen, that they may see your good works, and glorify your father.which is in heaven." The body of the volume contains, 1. Three IntroductoryLecture* upon the Evidences of Christianity ; 2. AYr Lectureson the Life of Christ ; 3. Six on that of St. Paul ; 4. Six on theLord's Prayer; 5. Four on the Liturgy; 6. On the Catechism of theChurch of England. 7. On the Burial of the Dead; 8. Eight on tl.eCreeds and Sacrament.* nfthf Church of England; 9. On CongregationalPsalmody ; 10. Visitation Sermon: see page 874, ante. The workis dedicated to the HON. MBS. SPENCER, second daughter of W. II.Points, Esq., M. P., and daughter-in-law to the late Earl Spencer. AMthe Preface is short, the reader may endure its extraction.In obedience to that most wise and holy admonition contained inthe title-page, the present volumes are given to the world. They aregiven under the hope and anxious desire that ' light' rather than darknessmay ensue from their perusal ; ami that God's OLORV may be setLONDON. [Lent Lectures.One thing is undeniably obvious. One object hasbeen clearly established. Since my removal toforth by any effort, however humble, which has the salvation of immortalsouls for its object. One consolation is unquestionably derivablefrom the publication of these pages. Nearly the whole of the firstvolume will at least be found to evince an early zeal in the dischargeof professional duties; since it is the fruit of the labour of the first twoyears after having taken Holy Orders. The materials of that volumehave, however, been both corrected and enlarged upon a subsequentdelivery of them from the pulpit ; and if the sinews and muscles continuethe same, the form and the substance have been, I would hope,considerably improved. The present both within and without theChurch, is undoubtedly a CRISIS. But I have lived long enough tosee the reaction of opinions hastily adopted, and of principles crudelyformed. To anathematise bodies or professions, from the occasionalirregularity of individuals of whom those bodies are composed, is atonce perverting and stultifying the very end and objects of all moralreasoning. To condemn systems, merely because they are old, andwithout a nice observance of the operations or leanings of their componentparts, is surely not the line of conduct which a wise and agood-hearted man would be disposed to pursue. On the other hand,it must neither be concealed nor disavowed, that, as in the progress ofall mundane affairs both imperfection and decay will present themselves,so will it be better to look the character of that imperfection anddecay resolutely in the face ; and to adopt timely and efficient remediesfor their removal. In this spirit it will be advisable, where practicable,to substitute zeal for indifference, activity for slothfulness, and talentfor inability. There is yet time and scope enough for the correction oferror, and for the beneficial influence of all the results emanating fromthe adoption of such a measure.Meanwhile, let every MINISTER of the GOSPEL remember, that he,of all descriptions of persons, is armed with weapons of the most admirabletemper and construction for the resistance of much of thatfierce clamour and wild outcry which is just now directed against theChurch Establishment of this 'country. He will not fail in the languageof Scripture to ' put on the breast-plate of faith and love, andfor a helmet, the hope of salvation ; above all, taking the shield of faith,and the sword of the spirit, which is the Word of God.' Let suchweapons only be fearlessly but discreetly exercised, without compromisingthe sacred character imparted to their use ; and, above all, withLent Lecture.] LONDON.London, and taking upon me so largo and so importanta charge, as that of the District Rectoryof St. Mary's, Bryanston Square, it cannot be saidthat my publications have been exclusively literary.The hungry and thirsty after righteousness 9cannot complain that I have offered a "stone"when they have asked for "bread:" and althoughthe manna which once came down from above hasceased to fall," yet my labours in the vineyard ofmy MASTER cannot be taxed as being sparing or unprofitable.I have taken my full share of clericalduty within the first ten years of residence with myBrother Rectors of Marylebone; and what mayhave been deficient in talent, has been supplied byzeal. If darkness and distress have of late comparativelysurrounded me*, that darkness has notinvaded me by the desertion of friends, and thatdistress has not been aggravated by the obliquitiesof conduct. I have been as shocked as surprised bythe perfidy of some to whom not even the slightestreference or allusion is made in the previous pages ;love unfeigned, and a true spirit of Christian charity towards all mankind.The most efficient and the most permanent of every species ofREFORMATION, consists in the influence of moral and religious example.The humblest minister, attendant on God's altar, is here as influentialas the most exalted; and I earnestly pray that, with every such minuter,as well as with the flocks committed to their charge, the LIGHT or THEGOSPEL may shine with increasing lustre, till the whole world be unitedas 'one fold, under one shepherd, JESUS CHRIST oim Lord'"See page 815, ante.894 LONDON-andI find, after all, that the celebrated Dr. Buck-landhas YET a species of Hyaena to describe !But the foregoing is not the whole of that experiencewith which a long residence in LONDONhas supplied me. I have had something to " love,"and more to " admire" according to the languageof Cowper, prefixed to this chapter. New friendshave sprung up ; and although the flowers of friendshipbe of slow growth, and at their budding ofdoubtful hue, yet I can conscientiously place EUPHE-MIA almost as the crowning flower in the parterreof which I am discoursing. Her fortune, ample asit is, is yet not so ample as her heart. Her kindredtaste, and highly intellectual pursuits. . .but shedesires to be veiled ; and the richest veil that Brusselsor Mechlin ever manufactured, shall, if practicable,be furnished by her Encomiast for theconcealment of her form. Her occasional neighbour,SOPHRONIA, composed of many materials incommon with herself, but advanced in yearsobservant shrewd of enlarged experience andsound judgment shall live for ever in my remembrance.SOPHRONIA has a heart as warm, andexhibits perhaps charities as extensive, as those ofher of whom I first spake. She is not an indigenousplant (I should say flower) of this country ;but she weathers our atmosphere as bravely, andenters upon all the cardinal points of moral andLONDON.political discussion, as sagaciously, and as luminously,as those who affect a more exclusive andparamount intelligence.Nor is ANGELINA an indigenous flower of thissoil. An early widow, and as beautiful as early, sheyet retains both her singleness and her beauty.The noon-day is not so radiant as the morn, butthere are blending and warm tints which yet characterisethe atmosphere of her presence ; and thosewho have seen her pictorial, or engraved resemblance,will not convict me of prejudice or flatteryin this delineation of the Original. But her "herpart" presents a picture in which there is a unionof colours yet more enduring. Angelina has aheart that always unlosens the strings of her purse ;denying to the poor and dependent nothing . "buther Name." Long may her presence continue toirradiate the circles of the polished, and to makethe heart of the disconsolate " sing for joy." Norbe the sedulous care, and affectionate anxiety andsolicitude, of Theodosian forgotten in softening thestruggles, and extending the period of the life, of abeloved husband. Among the complicated dutiesand distracting trials of life's ever agitated state ofwarfare, none wear a more commanding form noneextort a more unqualified commendation than thosewhich have been, and yet are, so triumphantly exhibitedby Theodosian HERSELF, too, yet in theA neat compliment, paid by Cowper, in one of the most beautifuland touching passage* of hit TVwAr, to the late Sir John Throgmorton.896 LONDON.vigour of life, and as capable, as the most debonairof her daughters, of contributing to thecharm and cheerfulness of the festive circle. Theforegoing (with the exception of the first) are amongmy Parishioners.But there may be equal worth and excellencebeyond these parochial precincts. Salina is faraway,and perhaps never to be seen, or revisited ;but the inmost recesses of my breast assure me thatthe remembrance of past days and past kindnessescan never be forgotten. The preceding pages haverecorded an event, which, of all earthly occurrences,hath perhaps gone more sharply, and more deeply,to cut her heart in twain than any other. Floridacan infuse equal courage and comfort into a woundedspirit, by invigorating the understanding with wholesomeprinciples, and by lighting up the fire of hopein the moment of lassitude and despondency. Shehas also a pen which readily answers the dictates ofa cultivated intellect. MINORA is just warmly glowingabove life's horizon, disposed to do all that iskind and courteous, and gentle and generous ; hervoice, the melody of a seraph's ; her form, that inwhich chastity and virtue should seem by preferenceto dwell. Within the breast of FIDELIA the warmestsympathies and "all gentle charities" reside.(" There, all the gentle charities reside,With liberal sentiment and chaste desire")The verses are Huddisford's in the third ode of his Salmagundian ode, which exhibits all the tenderness of Tibullus with all the vigourof Dry den.LONDON. si;A sense of religion, deep, pure, calm, humbletinged by no fanatical asperities, and sullied by nosocial antipathies marks her secluded career, inwhich she unites the privacy of a Recluse with thecheerfulness of a Christian.I turn to " the rougher sex," and drop the appellativesof fiction. To a lover of iSofees, there mustnecessarily be no place like LONDON; and in London,no place like No. 81, Pall Mall. This is anythingbut the foolish language of preposterous praise.In how many occasions have I said so ? and morethan once in print. The spirit as well as the name ofPAYNE," is yet to be found in that residence *. Alas!I have said that more than on one occasion I have dwelt " in print,"upon the high respectability of the name above mentioned. From theSibliophobia, p. 27, 1 hesitate not one moment to recommit to press whatis there said of the House; premising, that my friends, Messrs. T. I.Payne and II. Foss, are personified in the two classical names at itscommencement.Retracing my steps, I steadily paced onward to the Castor and PoUturof Pall Mall, and there entering a suite of book-rooms, in which, informertimes, I was wont to see assembled some of the more eminentHtrrati of the day archbishops, bishops, earls, doctors in divinity andin physic academics, renowned in either university senators, judges,lawyers, wits, poets, and punsters I gave myself up to profound reverie.Not a mouse was stirring in other words, the managing partner wasalone pacing the quarter-deck.And started back, he knew not why,E'en at the sound himself had made !The Master-spirit had departed to a better world. In imagination Iembodied him seated in his arm-chair his favourite Se**<e cat purringby his side ; one leg balanced across the other ; a pinch of snuff in hisright hand ; his spectacles now raised to his forehead, now resting tranquillyupon their wonted seat. The gentle salute; the kind enquiry;the desultory, cosy gossip; the retreat to the Brill and beef-tete ;"3 M898 LONDON.there has been another gap made in the circle withwhich I used to associate, up stairs, round the tablewhere hospitality presided in every dish, andsparkled in every cup. Mr. ALEXANDER CHALMERSis gone. Of nearly the same age as his departedhost, he has, about a twelvemonth ago, been gatheredto his Fathers * ; but there is ONE, yet alive and longthe Boracic-flavoured sherry ; the full-bodied port ; the fragrant souchong; the departure " au revoir." Then, again, as touching " stockin trade" vellums, large paper an uncut Benson reposing here ; slumbering soundly there ; Azzoguidi and Aldus, Giunti and Giotto,Wynkyn de Worde and Wye . all intertwined in somnolentembrace long sets and sort sets, Great Councils and Little Councils,decretals and dictionaries, chronicles and cautioners, and poetry withoutend ! "Messrs. Payne and Foss have recently put forth some " wingedwords," in the shape of a small catalogue of seventy-three most preciousarticles, or works printed UPON VELLUM. I will hope, as much for thecredit of the age as for the individual profit of the proprietors of thesemembranaceous articles, that scarcely six will "rest on their hands" atthe close of this present year. My favourites, did my purse enable meto carry my wishes into effect, would be Nos. 9, 26, and 43. Can be apprised of these obtainable gems ?The late Mr. Alexander Chalmers was one of the most constantvisitors of his old friend Mr. Payne ; nor could he repeat his visits toofrequently. With the late Mr. Nichols, of Gentleman-Magazine celebrity,he was not less intimate. I have recorded, in a somewhat drollnote (page 748, ante), his first visit to myself in the year 1811. Whereeverhe went he diffused around him good humour and useful intelligence.He had lived long in literary circles, and worked at as hard andheavy labour as any pioneer or sapper and miner at the siege of Buhrt-poor. His style is easy and perspicuous ; and he always sets about thecollection of his facts with a straightforwardness and sincerity which giveno trifling value to his labours. His anecdotes, which were numerous,were told in few and ' ' pleasant" words ; and I scarcely know a manwho, from his years and opportunities, had he been so disposed, couldhave bequeathed to us a more pleasant manual of anecdotes in the shapeof Ana, than himself: because, however spite and malice unfortunatelyLONDON. s:>)may life animate his gallant bosom who used tocomplete the number of this truly estimable ///////,//-go a good way in sprinkling lucubrations of this kind with a sort ofpalatable *//, yet Chalmers's ANA would have had no need of such materialsto maintain their vitality. Mr. Alexander Chalmers has the meritof having left behind him the best Collection of our Poets and Dictionaryof Biography ; and deeply is it to be regretted that his material foranother edition of the latter had not been further extended.What I have said of its author in the Library Companion (p. 492-3,second edition) is not a whit beyond what his labours merited. Onmeeting him at Mr. Payne's, after the death of Mr. Canning:, I told himthat " there was a great man gone, whose name began with a C hopingit might not be too late for the new edition of his Biographical !)-binary ? " " Confound these great men (replied he) I wish they wouldnot die so fast or dying, would contrive to die in alphabetical orderI have got to II." Mr. Chalmers died in 1834, in his seventy-seventhyear; a fact clearly established by a letter from him to our commonfriend Mr. Major, of Dec. 23, 1833. I am favoured with a correct copyof this not incurious letter to which a lac-simile of the writer's autographis subjoined."33, Throgmorton Street, Dec. 23, 1833.MY DEAR SIR,I thank you for all your kind presents. I have heard of your plan,but have now almost given up all thoughts of adding to my collection.I have given your young man 51. for binding of Della way's very handsomebook ; and should have sent it sooner if I had had any opportunity.There is one thing I wish you to take notice of, and guard against : I amgetting old and I really find that, at the age of twenty-six, I am notthe fine young fellow that I " </ v ; but I shall always preserve my regardfor you, and remain, my dear Sir,Yours, very truly,On sending him one of my broadside prospectuses of the intendedhistory of the University of Oxford (see page 849, ante), his reply miserycharacteristic of himself. "Well! and what do I rare A fyfor your broadside* ! ! " A. C. Hon. Sec. He was an instant subscriber.His notes and letters were usually very racy, am! worth the3 M900 LONDON.rate. A Whig in politics ; an orthodox churchmanin practice ; a Christian in spirit and in heart.Such is my worthy and venerable friend, WILLIAMCOMBES, Esq., of Henley upon Thames*.The Royal and Antiquarian Societies are open ofI believe nobody has such a collection as our common friend, GeorgeHenry Freeling, Esq. His library, almost wholly biographical, furnishinga delectable opportunity for the enrichment of collections of a similarcomplexion, was sold by auction, in this year, by Messrs. Sothebys : prefixedto the catalogue of which there is a life of the late owner of thebooks, taken from the obituary in the Gentleman's Magazine, which Iunderstand to have been written by the intimate friend of the deceased,Bowyer Nichols, Esq., the son of his old and dear friend, John Nichols.It is judiciously and instructively executed. But I have a " tale to tell"touching the sale of the library of my deceased friend. Among hisbooks was a Latin Bible, of the date of 1557, which had belonged toMelanchthon, and had the cost price of 2s. 6d., in the fly-leaf, as thatat which it had been probably obtained by its owner at a book-stall.Fortunately for those who were to derive benefit from the sale of thislibrary, the Melancholic eye of Mr. Sotheby, jun. glanced upon thisprecious volume, which was published two years before the death ofMelancthon, and exhibited many curious manuscript notices, of importancesufficient to incorporate it among the books of DR. Loss ; at thesale of which library it was purchased by Messrs Payne and Foss, forDr. Hawtrey, the head master of Eton school, for 10/. 5s. It could notbe better placed.I have made mention, in the work quoted in the last note but one,of Mr. Combes's attachment to DEAR OLD ISAAC WALTON (a bad mancan never be a lover of the ANGLER of that truly original as well asamiable man), and of his former habits of reading him while ramblingalong the margin of the Thames, or seated on a stile, to return to hiswell-dressed omelette or fricandeau at Henley, the place of his abode ;just in time to receive his little circle of friends at his hospitable table,where the flavour of his wall-fruits is yet inferior to that of the " pleasantdiscourse" which always circulates around it : and then, the quietrubber in the trellis-papered drawing-room towards eventide. But ahigher theme is touched when I speak of his unwearied attentions andinexhaustible bounty to THE POOR. He will have his reward.LONDON. !?n|ji Thursday night, and it is neither an unseasonablenor an unprofitable occupation to have a few previousmoments of gossip with the renowned Mr.Thorpe, of Bedford Street, Covent Garden " labouret labour" his collection is ever moving on ;it knows no stay ; it disdains all bounds*. I believeI am speaking quite advisedly, in assertingthat one third of the late Mr. Hebe's library hasbeen lodged within the precincts of Mr. Thorpe'spremises. Some of the catalogues of his MSS. \\ illbecome quite curious, and highly estimable in th.course of a score or two of years. I know of nosuch dogged indomitable energy and perseveranceas that exhibited by this renowned Bibliopolist.The morning is fair, and promises to be succeededby a fine day. I take my pilgrim's staff in hand,and pursue my journey towards my old and worthybibliopolistic friends, Messrs. J. and A. Arch, ofCornhill. But I thread a few friends en route.There is the British Museum, and I must needsshake hands with the Cohort of Governors duellingwithin its walls. How do you do, my dearfriend C.? And you, and you, and you ? each amiall ? " all honourable men t ! "I refer the reader, with confidence and pleasure, to what is said ofthis extraordinary bibliopolist, in the pages of the Hydrophobia, p. 84,A complete collection of Mr. Thorpe's Catalogue* withan alphabetical index to the whole, would be a desideratum with anylibrary in Europe.1 U hat a scene is the BRITISH Mi SKI M now, compared with thatwhich I remember it some thirty yir* ago ! Now, the posts are nearly90'2 LONDON.I cross the way, gossip with the gentle and generousAudire hear tales of other times howWoollen worked, and Hall and Brown ploughed theircopper and then drop down and cast anchor, verynaturally, with my old friend and publisher, JohnMajor, just settled about twenty doors below. Hereyou will find him as ambitious to deserve the chairacer of a general and tasteful bookseller, as if hehad never published a volume of his own. His lateneighbour, Mr. Lilly, is as full of goodly promise, asheis distinguished for courteous civilities. WithMr. Major, in former days, I used frequently to meetthe late Reverend James Dallaway, at one time employedby the former to edit a new edition of Walpole9 s Anecdotes of Painting in England ; a workwell and truly" executed by him*. Mr. Dallawayhad a natural and quick turn, or rather love, for thefine arts. His vicarage at Leatherhead " was a thingdoubled; and active and intelligent commanders placed to guard them.I do not believe that there is another similar establishment, where somany and such able CONSERVATORS are to be found. But I have morethan an ordinary reason to place my friend JOHN GEORGE CHILDREN,Esq. in the foreground of the text. In doing so, nothing borderingupon comparisons is even thought of. I recognise in him not only oneof the Secretaries of the Royal Society, and a man, from toe to top,brimful of scientific ardour and scientific experience, but the gentlemanand the friend ; united to ONE, whose transcendant generosity ofspirit is only exceeded by the warmth and the steadiness of her attachments.I speak advisedly when I say so. The plates in the old editionwere coarse and faithless ; and the editorial additions render this impressionnecessarily the only one worth consulting for information.LONDON. M):Jto see indeed," and his Church partook largely ofthe taste manifested in the vicarage. The groundsof the latter were the main attraction, and these Ionce saw in company with our common friend " theMajor," to the greatest possible advantage. Wemade a day " express" to go down to see the wondersof these grounds. The day was one in high summerbright, hot, oppressive just calculated toenable us to enjoy, as it did, the cool transparencyof the river Mole in a bocage stifled with honeysuckles,which was fixed on its margin upon agreensward as soft and rich as velvet. Our hosthad plunged a bottle of his best sherry for anhour's cooling in the stream ; and as it sparkledin the glass, and cooled our fevered tongues, hewould regale us with sundry pleasant stories nowa tale from Boccace and now an anecdote fromthe Phcedo of Plato. Mr. Dallaway was a man ofkindly feelings, but disappointed views. His penwas the ever ready instrument in transmitting thefirst emotions of his heart. Some of his letters toMr. Major evince great steadiness of attachingand no infelicitous diction in composition t.There is a privately printed book, called Lutheran, five FortiLethertaani, with vignette etchings of different objects and views in thegarden, and executed by the tasteful burin of Mrs. Dallaway.t I select a few specimens (furnished me by his publisher) of Mr.Dallaway 's correspondence, connected with the progress of the new editionof WALPOI.K. The first letter touches upon the method of publicationand of editing.DEAR SIB, " Leatkerkead, July 13, 1833.As I cannot be in town before Monday next, I reply to your letter,904 LONDON-howdoes Mr. Pickering do this morning ? Andwhere are his Cantons and Wynkyns, and Personsand will then bring you the proof sheet. The type and arrangement giveme perfect satisfaction. I have marked the additional notes thus \ ],as being the mode already adopted by Park, in his edition of the Royaland Noble Authors, and saving the repetition of Edit. Your extendedviews with respect to the size of the volumes satisfies me much. I hopethat you will speedily turn your Grenadiers to as good an account asFrederick the Great. You must decide upon these important points,and 1 sincerely trust that the virtuosi public will feel and reward yourmotive and spirit. One of the first observations I made to you was,that [Walpole] had not made the most of [Vandyke] t. No pains orresearch shall be spared by me to supply that deficiency ; but it mustbe done succinctly, to avoid the tediousness of note upon note, and yetnot to suppress necessary illustration.f< Yours ever, most sincerely' &c. &c.MY DEAR SIR, " Lcatherhead, Feb. 14, 1826.Your packet has just been inspected, and entirely approved. Iaccede willingly to ah 1 you have proposed, and I think it far the best ;and I think that you will allow that 1 am not too tenacious of my ownopinion. I am now in great hopes that the 15th of March will be ourBirthday, and, I pray, under good auspices. Of one thing I am certain: that if the world does not mend before that time, it' will certainlyfall in pieces. I have now a lawsuit added to the rest, to be tried atFordham Assizes next month, as I have discovered <t gross fraudin * God help us ! Notwithstanding all this, I send you thefirst chapter of the second volume (there are only four), done to myown satisfaction, and I trust to yours."DEAR SIR, " Tuesday Evening.I have this moment received your letter and packet, and withthem great satisfaction. I really begin to feel something like contIt so happens, that the article " Vandyke," in Mr. Dallaway's editionsof Walpole's work, is executed throughout with care, ability, andsuccess. And it also so happens, that the portrait of that great artist,prefixed to it, is one of singular interest and beauty ; being most skilfullyengraved by Worthington, from an original picture by Vandykehimself, in the exquisite collection of Jeremiah Herman, Esq. See page621, ante.LONDON. !'0;>his Accuses, Elzevirs, and Michel Le NoirsfBut Mr. Pickering has a note of louder triumph tosound, in being publisher of the BRIDGEWATERTitKATiSES . which bid fair to traverse the wholecivilised portion of the globe*. Much as I respect,licence; and though, without false humility, I cannot subscribe toMr. J**'s opinion of my authorship, 1 think with you that his praisewill render us an essential service : may it prove so ! I owe much. Ibelieve, to D'Israeli's long acquaintance and friendship. No more atpresent fromYours ever respectfully,First for the antique printers above-mentioned.CAXTON'S " Polychronicon." " Chaucer's Boethius." " CanterburyTales," first edit. " Chronicle of England." " Lydgate's Life of OurLady." " Gower's Confessio Mantis." " Katherine of Sends." " Recueildes Histoires de Troy."ST. Allan's CHRONICLE, 1483." " BOKE OP ST. ALDAN'S, i486 ;"Rob. copy, 42; sold for 147. "Polychronicon," Wynkyn deWorde, 1495. [All the above works want a few leaves.] " GoldenLegends," Wynkyn de Worde, 1527. Perfect, 31 10*. " Hargrave'sNova Legends Anglia," Wynkyn de Wide, 1516. Perfect. " Divesand Pauper," Pinson, 1493; very fine copy, mor. by Lewis; 31 10*.perfect.PLINY, 1469 ;" edition princeps, with illuminated caps ; fine copy,mor. by Du Rome, 40. " Plinio Astoria Naturale," Landing, Venus.Benson, 1476, upon vellum. " Boniface Decretals ;" Pet Schceff'er,Mount, 1470, upon vellum. " Historia Apocalypse;" S. Joanna, circa1420, mor. fine copy. " Wierix Historic Evangelic* Imagines;" 153plates upon satin, 42, unique. " Marlborough Gems;" 9 vola. firecopy, mor. by Lewis, 63. " Hearne's Works," fine copy, small paper,il calf gilt bindings.Hut .Mr. Pickering, whose zeal in a good cause has been sufficientlyproved by his adhesion to FOJCS Martyrology (see page 848, ante) hasalso a passion for ART as well as for printing. What he has done forIsaac Walton, is an almost absolute miracle. In his cscruloirc, too,906 LONDON.and much as I admire, the varied talents exhibitedin these well got up publications, I yet desideratesome effusion from the powerful and practisedpen of Mr. Sedgwick whose Sermon, beforethe University of Cambridge, in defence of thepursuits and studies of SCIENCE as being in nowiseinimical to the best interests of RELIGION*I consider to be among the master-pieces of theday for pulpit reasoning, and pulpit eloquence.Let us hear from him again " in this matter : "the sooner the better.In a thrice I am at the corner of Cornhill, withmy worthy, and old, and respectable friends, socialas well as bibliopolistical, John and Arthur Arch.But time has laid his hand upon them a little rudelysince we used to have our Spencerian and Becamedisporting some twenty years ago! And Iknow not even if a Cordial from Caxton would operateto the filling up of certain chinks, or increasingpersonal agility. Good books fine books instructivebooks are yet thickly planted around them;there reposes a PLATE, from a very curious ancient portrait of Margaret,daughter of James I. of Scotland, and afterwards wife ofLouis XI. of France. This portrait is exquisitely as well as faithfullyengraved by Picard, from an old picture once in my possession,and more lately in that of Mr. Anderson, jun., the unequalled collectorof foreign autographs. The costume and materials of the dress areequally curious and resplendent.My friend, Mr. Archdeacon Butler, has lately favoured the publicwith an address, as president of one of the Geological meetings atShrewsbury, upon the tendency of that study as contributing ratherto raise in the human breast, an increased flame of adoration towardsthe ALMIGHTY CREATOR of all things.LONDON. 907and " a pleasant grove for their wits to walk in"may be safely anticipated by the good citizens ofLondon. . .if they will only devote some of their gainsto the acquisition of such treasures. I say "goodday to them" and heartily "wishing them all theprosperity which they can wish themselves " andwhich they richly deserve I return homewards, inall the rumbling horrors, and agonising economy, ofan Omnibus.And is this LONDON ? Have I lived ten yearswithin its " Bills of Mortality" only to pick up,and to impart, such intelligence as this ? Where isthe Parliament House? Where are the Club-houses? (not in St. James's Street, but in itsvicinity) the Alfred, the Athenaeum, the Travellers,the University? Truly, I heed them not. Itis sufficient glory for me, and for my escutcheon, tohave been consulted by Sir Thomas Bernard, andthe late Bishop of Durham, upon the establishmentof ft&Jirst; and to have contributed, in conjunctionwith the late Sir Humphrey Davy and Mr. Hebe,to the establishment of the second. When thelatter had reared its proud front, and ponderousporch, it needed not such a feeble and insignificantprop as myself and I bowed and took leave accordingly.But the Collections of Pictures, and Statues,Coins, Medals, Curiosities theGemmas, marmot, chur, Tyrrhuimsigilla, tabellas?"Not one word upon any of these subjects or topics ?908 LONDON-theatres,Operas, Banqueting ? When we havedomestic Pastas, domestic Paganinis, and domesticArmenians, in almost every Square, Crescent, andPlace must not one word he pronounced upontheir talents and proficiencies? Truly, not one.There is such a thing as being tired of accomplishmentsand of perfections. With this feeling, I omitall details of the funereal solemnity of set dinners(where the viands are rich, and the conversationis poverty-stricken), and the maddening gaiety ofevening carousals : for such themes belong to theNovelist and the Writers upon mankind in the mass.There is, to be sure, a pleasure in the attendanceupon coteries where intellect (such as we see in theparties of BELINDA, in P. P.) has its share of attractionand instruction. . .but to be dragging (like awounded snake") " one's slow length along" a successionof vapid assemblages in the same evening, issurely not to be expected from one, whose "migrations,"like those of his predecessor Dr. Primrose,are usually confined "from the blue room to thebrown." But the heats of Summer begin to parchthe earth and to render the air oppressive. It istime to woo the breezes of the Vicarage . . .To-morrow to fresh woods and pastures new."CHAPTER XIII.SKETCHES OF PRIVATE LIBRARIES.Come like shadows ! so depart ! "SUAK.SPKAKK.BEHOLD my "woods and pastures I" Yet letnot the owners of the several libraries about to besketched" rather than described, take umbrage,or start back amazed, at the adoption of the abovetitle. It has no reference whatever to the shiftingor changing properties of their BOOK-TREASURES. Iam willing and anxious to believe that they maymaintain their respective positions till the close ofthis century at least. The above motto is adoptedmerely in reference to the very scant time and hurriedmovements in which, like the figures across thedisk of Banquo's glass, the libraries in question mustof necessity be introduced in this the last chapter ofthe Author's " REMINISCENCES." With food andmatter sufficient to furnish an entire and bulky volume,I have the temerity to sit down under the impressionthat even a "shadow" of justice can berendered in the ensuing Prices.For ever respected, yea, immortalised, be thatgood man half-monk and half-artist whose in-910 SKETCHES OFtenuity and patience dropt the parent-seed of allBook-collections ! "B. . .eats Vir" under all its gratifications! I mean, the genius that conceived theillumination of such manuscripts, and gave the firstproof of such conception, by the adornment of theletter B*, which is the first in St. Jerome's Latinversion of the Psalms. Where, but for this " adornment"this spur to diligence this awakener ofelegant and fanciful decoration would have beenhalf the libraries from the time of that of the Alexandrine,downwards ? The Psalter of David atonce exercised the voice, the harp, the pen, andThe reader will he pleased to throw a curious and critical eye onthe initial capital B (the largest and the most beautifully illustrative inall respects with which I am acquainted) which faces p. 345, ante. Itis there inserted for the sake of a more equal distribution of the platesof this Work, and is a most faithful copy of Mons. Languors not lessfaithful transcript of the original letter prefixed to a version of thePsalms by St. Austin, of the end of the eleventh or the beginning ofthe twelfth centuries, from a MS. in the public library at Rouen. Thisinteresting ornament is fully described by the French artist in hisMemoire sur la Calligraphic des Manuscrits du Moyen Age; and iswell designed to represent, in its chief ornaments, a few of the leadingevents in the life of David. At top, he should seem to be representedas a shepherd-lad blowing the horn while tending the sheep : a littlebelow, as attacking and overcoming the lion, which was about to invadethe flock. To the left, a little below, David wears his kingly crown,and is seated, playing the harp. Again, below, and occupying thelarger compartment of the letter, there is a representation of his combatwith Goliath whose flattened helmet, with the nasal safeguard andquilted armour, bespeak, as I conceive, the above period of the executionof the subject.But for the successful execution of this and of all similar letters in theemblazonment of ART, let the Reader possess himself, if practicable, ofthe beautiful and unrivalled work of Mr. SHAW, in his Illuminated Ornamentsselected from Manuscripts of the Middle Ayes; 4to. and folio. Ihave before spoken of his Ancient Furniture and Elizabethan Architecture,&c.PRIVATE LIBRARIES.the pencil: and the preface of Theodore* uponthis inspired portion of Holy Writ induces thestrongest belief in the propriety of these inferences.Thus, but for the " immortal B," the libraries ofParker, Cotton, Harley, Sloane, and PHILLIPS t,Prcpf. in Psalms*, vol. i. p. 391. Opera Theodore EpiscopiCyril; Lute. Paris, 1642, folio. The passage, from which the aboveinference may be drawn, may be thus rendered : " However we mayobserve the greater number to make little or no mention of, or to holdin scarcely any estimation, the other divine books, yet the Songs, or thePSALTER OF DAVID, seems to have been their constant companionalone, or in society, for ever bearing these songs in remembrance, andsoftening the chanting of them with a sweet modulation of voice ; apparentlyreceiving the highest intellectual satisfaction in consequence."I own the pencil is not to be found in this passage; but I have nodoubt of the existence of illuminations of this identical B. of the seventhcentury, if not earlier.t SIB THOMAS PHILLIPS, BART, of Middle Hill, near Broadway, inWorcestershire. I must refer the inquisitive reader to Mr. Martin'sbeautiful and interesting book relating to libraries and private presses(to which in my seventh chapter I have been so frequently indebted),for a more particular, and yet very sketchy, account of the extraordinaryMS. TREASURES in the collection of Sir Thomas, which are estimatedby an admirable judge (the Rev. Joseph Hunter), in terms of no ordinaryoccurrence. " Ex uno disc omne." More than once has ourcommon friend, Sir Frederick Madden, assured me, that he has beenoften imbedded in book-luxury in Sir Thomas's mansion, of which theuninitiated cannot even have the good luck to dream. He has beenseated, all alone, at an oblong oaken table, measuring 15 feet by 7,entirely covered with the oldest MSS. upon ROM AUNT LORE; uponwhich all the Knights of the Round Table seemed at one moment to besitting, with their respective banners and cognizance waving aboveas they well might ; for never was such homage before paid to the memoryof their achievements ! But the MSS. of the worthy Baronet areof all classes and of all periods. You cannot mention one class, butwhat he has an ample store of illustrations upon it. Even in paroeUflA/,/,//-// he possesses a most curious one (in part printed by him, I be-lateof the Rebellion of 1745, where the parishioners arepretty sharply shown up by the topographer, according to their sitting*912 SKETCHES OPmight have never had existence. How long andhow fondly my attachment to this prominent decorationin so many sacred volumes of antiquity has beenproved, the pages x>f past works sufficiently attest*.But for an onward movement : and yet, at thisprecise moment in comes my zealous friend and animatedcorrespondent, Mr. JOHN Adeo REPTON ;and unbuttoning a curious case, places before me athing, in the shape of a boke-fragment, called theSquire of Lowe Degree" and insists upon myor the number of their pews in the church. Of the pecuniary value ofthis most marvellous collection, it would be rather folly than indelicacyto hazard even a conjecture; but I can say with confidence,, becausewith truth, that the united amount of all the purchases of the greatcollections mentioned in the text, preceding Sir Thomas Phillips's,would be scarcely half of what HE has expended in the gratification ofhis darling and most delectable pursuit.And he merits all his acquisitions from the exquisite relish manifestedin the pursuit of them, and his real love of intelligence in theliterature of the olden times. His two papers in the Transactions ofthe Royal Society of Literature, upon some of the MSS. in the Low-countrylibraries, show that he is " made of the proper stuff;" whilehis personal escort (all night long, in a posthaste) of a huge waggon -load of MSS., in route from Oxford to Middle Hill, triumphantly provesthe ruling passion of his mind. Nor college fare, nor college friends,could divert him from this escort; and even Sir Frederick Maddenclapped hands, and shouted aloud in ecstacy, as the chaise drove off ! . .at a measured pace . . by the side of the ponderous waggon.See particularly the FIRST DAY of the Bibliographical Cameron.t In the " Richardson Correspondence" just privately printed byMiss Currer, there is a letter from Thoresby, the antiquary, to Dr.Richardson (Miss Currer's great grandfather), of the date of 1708-9, inwhich the following notice occurs of HARLEY'S passion for collectingMSS. : " I was surprised to find so prodigious a number of originalcharters, bulls, manuscripts, as are of late collected and purchased, atvast rates, daily, by Mr. HARLEY, the late secretary." p. 97.PRIVATE LIBRARIES. 913giving it a steady attention, before I sally forth tolift the knocker of my near neighbour and friend,Sir Francis Freeling. Leave it, good Mr. Repentantlet us see. This very curious* and by no meansuninstructive work, (from which Mr. G. Ellis hasgiven a copious extract in his Metrical Romances),is absolutely a unique impression*, and much earlierBy the permission of its owner, the public is here treated with the (whole of the fragment in his possession. There are thirty-three linein a full page. The perfect copy in die British Museum contains 1132lines or verses : hut the spelling not only occasionally varies, hut thewords also, as in line 358, " The" for " /," &c."It was a squire of lowe degreeYt loved ye kynges dougtcr of hflgre:Ye squire was certes and kind ;Echo md hi loved and was his free.He served the kyle her fader dereFully the tyme of seueri yere.For he was marshall of his hallAnd set the lordes both grete and smallAn hardy man he was and wightBoth in batayll and in fightBut ever he was still mourning.And no man west for what thyngeAnd all was for that faire ladyThe kynges daughter of hungryThere west no wyht in crystenteHow well he loved that lady free,He loved her more than seven yereYet was he of loue never the nereHe was not roche of golde and feA gentleman borne forsooth was heTo no man durst he make his noneBut sighed sore hym self aloneAnd evermore when he was woInto his chambre would he goAnd through the chambre he toke the wayInto a garden that was full gave3N914 SKETCHES OPthan the only other known copy of it, in the BritishMuseum, from the Garrick Collection. It has aAnd in that garden as I wereWas an arbor faire and greneAnd in that arbor was a treeA fairer in the worlde might none beA. u.The tree it was of cypressThe fyrste tree that Jesu theseThe sochernewode and the sycamoreThe rede rose and the lely flourThe boxe the biche and the laurel treeThe date and also the danseThe filberts hanging to the groundeThe fygge tree and the mapyll roundAnd other trees there were many oneThe pyany the popular and the planeWith brode branches all abouteWithin the ember and eke withoutOn every branches sate byres threSyngynge with grete melodyThe laueroke and the nightingaleThe ruddocke and the woodwhaleThe pye and the popyngaleThe throstle range both night an dayeThe bartlett and the wrenne alsoThe swallowed wyppynge to and froThe j aye jangled them amongThe large began that mery songeThe spare spread her in the sprayThe mavis range with notes full gaveThe nothawke with her notes newThe sterling set her notes full treweThe goldfinch made full mery chereWhen she was bent upon a breedAnd many other follies moThe osyll and the thrushes also t.t For the lines from 60 to 301, see Ritson's Romances from theGarrick Collection in the British Museum.PRIVATE LIBRARIES.wood-cut prefixed to which I beg the amiable andthorough-bred Bibliomaniac to doff his bonnet anddo obedience.But I've of that steward !And speke we more of that squireHow he to his chambre wentWhan he past fro that lady genteThere he prayed him in scarlet redeAnd set his chapelet on his heed916 SKETCHES OFThe extract from this estimable rarity, given below,and which unfortunately is the whole of the belt aboute his sides twoWith brode barres to and froA home aboute his neck he casteAnd forth he went then at the hasteTo do his office in the hallAmong the lordes grete and smallHe toke a white verde in his handeBefore the kynge then he gan stanceAnd soone he set him on his kneadserved the kynge full royallyWith deynte metes that were dereWith particle peacock and ploverWith byres in brede bakeThe tell the duke and the drakeThe cockle the curlue and the craneWith fesauntes faire there where no waneBoth stores and tuytes there were alsoAnd venison fresse of buckle and doAnd other denies many oneFor to sette afore the kynge aloneAnd when the squyer had done soHe served the hall both to and froEcho man hym loved in honestHye and lowe in there degreeSo dye the kynge ful suddenlyAnd he west not wherefore nor whyThe kynge beheld the squyer wellAnd all his reymente every deleHym thought he was the semelyest manThat ever in the world he sawe of thanThus sate the kynge & etc right noughtBut on his squyer was all his thoughtAlone the steward toke good hedeAnd to the kynge full soone he redeAnd soone he told unto the kyngeAll their wordes and their wowyngeAnd how she hight hym land and feGolde and silver grete plentyPRIVATE LIBRARIES. 017ment, will prove to the reader that it has muchmore than mere scarcity to recommend it TheAnd how she shulde his leve takeAnd become a knight for her sakeAnd thus they talked both in fereAnd I drew me nere and nereHad I not come in verilyThe squyer had laden her byBut whan he was ware of meFull fast a way gan he fleThat is south lo here is my handeTo fight wl hym whiles I may stand*The kynge sayd to the steward thoI maye not be leve it shulde be soHath he be so bonfire and benyngeAnd served me sith he way angeAnd ready with me in every nedBoth trewe in worde and eke in dedeI may not leve by night nor dayeMy daughter dere he wyll betrayedNor not to come her chambre nyeThat rode to fonde with no forethoughtshe would to hym consentsThat lovely lady faire and genteI trow hym so well without dreeThat he would never do that dedeBut yf he might that lady wynneIn wedlock to wilde without sonneAnd yf she wyll assent hym tillThat squire is worthy to have none yllFor I have seen that many a pageHave become men by marriageThen it is seemly to that squyerTo have my daughter by this manereAnd echo man in his degreeBecome a lorde of ryalteeBy fortune and by other graceBy heritage and by purchaseTherfore steward beware herebyDefame hym not for none envyIt were grete ruth he tholef >r put to dfthe wilhouten gylu-918 SKETCHES OFowner of it is one of those who well and happilyunderstands the applying of the " uses of anti-andmore ruth of my daughter dereFor changing of that ladies chereI would not for my crowne so newThat lady changed hyde or hereOr for to put thy sole in dreeBut thou might take them with y e dedeFor yf it maye be found in theThat thou them fame for envyteThou shalt be taken as a felonAnd put full dee in my prisonAnd fettered fast unto a stoneTill xn yere become and goneAnd drawn with hors through this citeAnd soone hanged upon a treeAnd yf thou may thy selfe excuseThis dede thou shalt no way refuseAnd therfore steward take good hedeHow thou wylie answer to this dedeThe steward answered with grete envyThat I have sayd I wyll stance therebyTo suffer lethe and endless woSyr kynge I wyll never go theretoFor yf that ye wyll graunt me hereStrength of men and grete powerI shall hym take this same nightIn chambre with your daughter brightFor I shall never be glade of chereTill I be verged of that squireThen sayd the kynge full curteyslyUnto the steward that stode hym byeThou shalt have strength enough wi theMen of armes xxx and threTo watch that lady moche of priceAnd her to kepe from her enmyesFor there is no knight in crystenteThat would betrayed that lady fre tt From 420 to 1132 see Ritson's, &c.Sir F. Freeling.] PRIVATE LIBRARIES. 919quite" to a thousand intelligible and ornamentalpurpose.The reader must now enter with me the mansionof SIR FRANCIS Feeling, BART., the long cherishedand highly honoured and respected friend, to whomit has afforded me the sincerest delight to dedicatethese Reminiscences pages. I must not permit thatsame reader to devote more than thirteen minutesto a glance at the limited but choice collection ofpaintings, of the British School*, which may besaid in a manner to flank his many-complexionedLibrary. We will begin with the Father of theBritish Press,WILLIAM CAXTON.Here are two works of the execution of this venerableTypographer; the one, a Life of Christ \, theBe it allowed me to pay a passing tribute to the WILKIE (the bagpipeplayer), which is the pendant to a small head by Ottade, from theOrleans collection But, oh ! how infinitely superior, in touch, in character,and general execution. The latter is comparatively still life,though marvellously penciled. Of Betty, here are four exquisite gems ;and his Cleopatra sailing down the Cydnus among them ; but his titoCupids show radiant, tender, natural, simple, unrivalled ! There isthe best small picture, by Cranfield, with which I am acquaintedthe Market Boat! What an admirable engraving it would make.And then LANDSEER, with his Terriers catching Rat* in a Barn .'Who is like him ? And JONES, with his tenderness and delicacy andvaried knowledge of his art !t There is a most beautiful copy, in the same collection, of Median' $rare reprint of this Life, in 1531, 4to. The eye can scarcely reposeupon a lovelier tome of this period of the art of printing. It hain the collection of the present Duke of Marlborough.920 SKETCHES OF [Sir FrancisRoxburgh copy, obtained in exchange from the lateEarl Spencer to which exchange I was instrumentalat the time of the Roxburgh sale. The other Cax-ionian volume is the Moral Proverbs of Pristine ofPisa ; obtained in exchange from the Right Hon.Thomas Grenville. It is a prodigiously rare poeticaltract, of four leaves only the whole of which are reprintedin the Bibl. Spencer., vol. iv. p. 218.WYNKYN DE WORDE,The pupil and successor of Caxton, and superior tohis master in every department of the exercise ofhis art. His type, his printing, and the paper usedby him, have never yet been surpassed in our owncountry. We will begin with one of his very finestproductions of which the copy happens fortunatelyto be perfect Bartholomew, De ProprietariesRerum, without date, in folio. This copy had inancient times belonged to one " Thos. Flame,"who has gravely marked the cost of its purchase["preciv"] by him as "00. 105. Good. It may benow worth forty times this sum. The Ordinaryof Christen Men, 1502 ; 1506, 4 to. fine copies. TheControversy between a Louer and a Laye, 4to.,without date. A volume of extraordinary rarity ;and reprinted by me from a copy belonging to theDuke of Devonshire (for which his Grace gave 391.at the sale of the Roxburgh Library), as a portionof my contribution to the Roxburgh Club : seeFretliny^ Bart.'} PRIVATE LIBRARIES.page 463, ante*. This copy is in very nice condition; but yet inferior to the very beautiful copy ofthat scarce book entitled Treatise of a Galant :only four leaves and worth what you will perleaf! Scala Perfections, 1507: again, 1533, 4to.The latter, a most beautiful copy, obtained from thelate Earl Spencer in exchange for some early printedtracts. The Folowyne Jesu Christ, 4to. ; no date :a translation, by Atkinson, of Thomas a Kempis;of very extraordinary rarity and of which I availedmyself, by the use of this most beautiful copy of it,in the work alluded to in the preceding pages : seep.829, &c. Here are two different copies. ThePater Noster, Aue, and Crete : a very small andscarce tract of an early date. Richard RolleThe agonies of the lover's passion are described as being far moreintolerable than any endured by the famous Knights of the RoundTable, whose " flames" are thus delineated:Thus am I wrappedAnd in wo am elapsedSuch loue hath me trappedWithout any cure.Syr Trystram the goodFor his leman IsoudeMore sorrow never bodeThan I do endure.Lammwcll and LamarckWayne and Launcc/otteGrate and CraddockeWith the table round,Syr Bevy Syr GlamourSyr Terry Syr TryamourtIn more gracious dolourWas never in bounce."922 SKETCHES OF [Sir FrancisHermit of Ample his contemplations : veryscarce. All these works will be found more or lessdescribed in the Typographical Antiquities of GreatBritain.WILLIAM Pinson.Mandeville's Travels in Pinson's small secretarygothic type a small 4to. volume ; and probablyunique *. The Chorle and the Byrd, 4 to., no date : inthe printer's large gothic type. This is a very rareas well as early re-impression of the text of Caxton :see Typograph. Antiquity., vol. i. p. 396. Kalendarof Shepherds, folio : a book, as singular as uncommon,and one of my oldest acquaintances. There areafew more Persons ; but of minor consideration.Before we proceed further let us take down theprecious volume of Covered ALE'S BIBLE, of whichthe Sacred Text is entire t : and from an adjoiningSir Francis possesses more than one reprint of this rare and curiousperformance. Among them is one of the date of 1625, 4to. ; an extraordinarycopy, uncut, and bound in blue morocco, with a frontispiecefacing the title. What a horrid story, with a horrid cut, is that atCh. V. of a Young Man and his Lucian ! and what a cut is that of theFiend catching hold of the Spirit of Judas Iscariot, hanging ! : sign. G.t The Duke of Sussex, the Marquis of Northampton, and MissCurrer each possess a copy of this most desirable volume with the TEXTperfect. Lord Jersey alone possesses it from beginning to end, includingthe map, in a PERFECT STATE. It was on the Sunday of thethird centenary anniversary of the translation of this Holy Book,Oct. 4, 1835, that Sir Francis, being confined by severe indisposition,wrote to me: "I read the lessons for the Sunday out of dear old MilesCoverdale's own book, and it seemed as if I derived additional comfortfrom the perusal." My orthodox friends and especially of my ownprofession were I think inaccurate about the basis of the PROTESTANTJUBILEE ; which I date from the Augsburg PROTEST to the EmperorFreeli/tf/, Barter] PRIVATE LIBRARIES.division, let me select, while upon grave topi s theSpeculum Christ i 'ani, printed by Macklin, in small4to., and of good size and condition and of whichI have known a fine copy bring the good round sumof thirty guineas. Analogous, in size and subject,is the book entitled Bishop Fisher on the " SevenPenitential Psalms," printed by Wynkyn de Worde :which still holds up its head among the rarer andhigh priced books. What have we here? Thelargest and cleanest copy perhaps in existence, ofthat most curious, and in many parts coarsely vituperative,book of John Bale, entitled The Imageof Both Churches*. The papist is here floggedwith a thong that draws blood at every stroke.We will delay no longer, but proceed at once tothe description of that more remarkable feature ofthis well garnished Library which is devoted to theowner's very valuable collection ofOLD ENGLISH POETRY t.Before we speak of Originals, let us, in compliancesV. in 1530, and not from the mere translation of the Scripturesinto English ; for if that be the basis, Tints version of the NewTestament in 1526-9 must claim priority of commemoration.See some extracts from this in the Bibliomania, pp. 231-3.t The MS. Catalogue of this Old English Poetry is a thing perfectlyunique of its kind, and as gratifying to its Owner as it is interestingand beautiful. It exhibits a series of fac similes of the ornamentaltide-pages of the rarer pieces, together with fac similes of thosewood-cuts which are more remarkable for grotesque and striking character.These, with the tides of the books themselves, have beenexecuted by willing as well as able hands, directed by FILIAL HEART*.This beautiful book is in to., Round by C. Lewis in morocco.924 SKETCHES OF [Sir Francisment to their classical predecessors, make mentionof a few old Roman poets in their earliest Englishgarb. What a copy of Gain Douglas's metricalversion of Virgil, 1533, 4 to. clean, sound, and acopy worthy of the reputation of the translation !The Roxburgh copy. Here, too, are perfect copiesof Stannyhurst's metrical version of a part of theAeneid, and the yet rarer volume of Fleming's similarversion of the Bucolics and Georgic, in 15S9 34to so scarce, that a copy of the Georgic onlyhas been valued at \5l. 15s. Smile, gentle reader,while you hear the opening of the third eclogue, andbe thankful for Dryden and Pitt !Me. O Dame, tell, whose beasts be these; are theyMelib's, or no ?Da. Not his, but-ZEgon's ^Egon gave them me of late[to keepe].Me. O sheep, always unlucky beasts, while he-^Egon,I mean."Hard by, we find the Three Books of OIL Ovid'sElegies, by C. M. (Christopher Marlow, Esq), andEpigrams by I. D., at Middlebourgh, but printed inEngland ; of which a copy, wanting one leaf, wassold at Mr. Bindley's sale for 81. 18s. 6d. A yetearlier translation of the same poet's " Her oy callEpistles, set about and translated by George Turnerswas printed in 1567, 4 to. ; and again by Simon,in 1600, 4 to. The first impression, by Turberville,is of great rarity especially in fine condition.Here is also the first Four Books of Martial tFreeling, Bart.~\ PRIVATE LIBRARIES. i-'J31628, 4 to. ; a most beautiful and clean copy ; amiwell designated by its intelligent owner as " Ra-miss"in the corner of the fly-leaf.Of Original works, let us begin with those of aserious and sacred description ; and first, for a precious,little, slim quarto, entitled Ki/rd IV. 7W///r\,Sonnets , and Songs of Sadness, 1588. 4to ; whereofI chuse to select a specimen touching the famousSir Phillip Sidney thus :ON SIB P. SIDNEY.Come to me, gree, for ever ;Come to me, tears, day and night ;Come to me, plaint ah, helpless !Just gree, heart tears, plaint worthie.Go fro me, dread to die now ;Go fro me, care to live more ;Go fro me, noyes all on earth,Sidney, ! Sidney is dead !He whom the court adorn 'd ;He whom the country courtesies ;He who made happier his friends ;He that did good to all men ;Sidney, the hope of land strange ;Sidney, the flour of England ;Sidney, the spirit heroic ;Sidney is dead ! O, dead, dead !Dead ? no, no : but removed,With the anointed one,Honour on earth at his feet,Bliss everlasting his state.Come to me, gree," &c.Here is a most singular book, entitled 3/tcro-926 SKETCHES OF [Sir Francismillion, or the Bible 9 s Epitome : in verse, by SimonWas tell, sometimes of Queene's Colledge in Oxford.London, 1629, 12mo. It is dedicated to the secondLORD SPENCER ; and every verse begins in the alphabeticalorder of A B C, with four leaves of addendaat the end. See MS. note. The Holy Rode, orChrist s Cross, containing Christ crucified, describedin speaking picture. By John Davies, no date,12mo. See Destitute, iii. 260. This scarce littlevolume (of which a copy was sold for yl. %$ 6d. 9 atBindley's sale) is dedicated to Alice, Countess ofDerby, and her three noble daughters. Here isalso the Summa Totals, or All in All, by the sameAuthor, 1607, 4 to. This book is dedicated to theLord Chancellor Elsmere with, the following motto.These lines, which all or none perceive aright,Have neither judgment, art, wit, life, norspright:"The dedication to the Chancellor, which is alsoin verse, ends thus :Then (with your greater gifts) accept this small,Yet (being right) its more than All in All."Saint Peter's Complaint, with other Poems, 1599,4to. After an address 4to his " loving Cousin," inprose, and two others to the reader in verse, itopens thus with verses by no means deficient invigour and point.Launch forth, my soule, into a maine of tearsFull fraught with grief, the musick of the mind :Torne smiles will serve, thoughts rent with guiltie tears ;Remorse thy Pilot ; thy misdeeds thy Card ;Torment thy Haven, shipwrack thy best reward.Dart'] PRIVATE LIBRARIESShun not the shelf of most deserved shame :Stick in the sands of agonising dread :Content thee to be stories and billows game :Divorced from grace thy soule to pennance wed :Fly not from lorraine evils, fly from thy hart :Worst than the wort of evils is that thou art.Give vent unto the vapours of thy brest,That thicken in the brimmed of cloudy eyes :Where sin was hatch'd, let tears now wash the nest ;Where life was lost, recover life with cries,Thy trespass foule, let not thy tears be few :Baptize thy spotted soule in weeping dew."We will bestow about the same quantity of attentionupon another scarce little book, entitled ThePenitent Publican, his confession of mouth, contritionof heart, unstained repentance, and ferventprayer unto God for mercy and forgiveness. London,1610, 4to. By T. C. (Thomas Collins). Thisuncommon production opens somewhat in the styleof that of St. Peter's Complaint.On bended knees, and with a broken heart,Eyes cast on earth, hands beating of my breast,I came to act a penitential partBefore the Almightie, who is pleased bestWith sinful soules, when they are thus addrest ;In whose dread presence (caitiff that I am)Prepared thus (till now) I never came.Knees ever bow, and standing beare no more ;Eyes ever weep, and nere be drie again ;Hands beat my brest, and make it ever sore ;Heart never cease, but sigh and sob amain ;Tongue ever pray, and for my crimes complain .Till tears, blows, sighs, sobs, prayers and complainHave freed my soule from all her fonlc attaints."928 SKETCHES OF [&> FrancisAmong the tender and impassioned pieces ofNicolas Breton, are his Ravish Soule and BlessedWeeper, dedicated to the Lady Mary, Countess ofPembroke : of great rarity. But we will now proceedto the old English poetry of a miscellaneousdescription. And yet there is little space for extendedspecimens. In fact, in the Library Companion Ihave entered into the detail of many pieces of thevery first degree of rarity, which are to he found inthis Library among which, the names of Greene,Dekker, Kale, Skelton, and Taylor maintain a proudsuperiority. I must therefore only further observe,in regard to the present selection, that here are ,Gascoigne, Baldwin, with the earlier piecesof Spencer, and his first Fairy Queen. The original,and I believe only known, copy of the Caltha ,or Custode's Bumble Bee ; from which Mr.Hebe's reprint (see page 465, ante) was given tothe Roxburgh Club. The Rede me and be notroth the famous satyre against Cardinal Wolseysupposed to have been written by Skelton. And seethebrief, but relishing notice of Bishop 9 s Blossoms,1633, 4 to., at the 729th page of the work just mentioned.But what have we here ? Not only a rare,but an intrinsically interesting volume, dedicated toLady Morton, the wife of Sir George Morton. It iscalled The Maiden Queen, entituled The BretagneShepherds tears for the death of Astronomical *In the running title it is Astronomical. But in this library there isalso a very rare and curious poetical volume,, entitled, Queen Elizabeth's//<,////,/. Hart.] PRIVATE LIBRARIES.[Qiuvn Klixabcth], Ik Harry K;ivin<>n<lr,4 to. The conclusion IHMMLT an address to hisTears, written by Christopher Leer, ko. This copy had belongedto Bindley, who gave !()/. for it; and afterwards to the late Rev. .1. MAlice. The work relates to the pel seditious of the queen by StephenGardiner, Bishop of Winchester. As we have " opened " a note here,let us contrive to fill it up with a few more spicy materials.The House of Correction ; or certaine Sntyriral/ Epigrams writtenby J. H., Gent. : together with a few characters, called Par Pan, orlike to like, quoth the Devil to the Collier. (1619), 12mo." In thefly leaf, Sir Francis has observed, " many of these epigrams are writtenin a happy style, and have much point : the characters give a livelypicture of the manners of the time : 1 have not seen any ether copy,except an imperfect one at Longman's, which is marked at 51. 6s."I am necessarily straitened to little more than one specimen :To the Bookseller.Nay, fear not, Bookseller ; this booke will sell :For be it good, as thou know'st very well,All will goe buy it ; but say it be ill,All will goe buy it too; thus thou select still."Spines his Choice.Spines would wed, but he would wed a wench,That hath all tongues Italian, Spanish, French ;But I disease him ; for if she hath any,She hath enough : if two, that's two too many."I mention the following, for the sake of the characteristic epistleattached to it, from the donor of the volume (see page 898, ante), toSir Francis Freeling. I pretend to no knowledge of its contents ; andhave only to observe, in elucidation of the letter, that it is a toiled andthumbed copy of a work which is entitled, " Smith's Poems of Controversybetween Episcopacy an Presbytery, 1714, lmo."MY DEAR Sill,In a late rummage among my odds and ends, I found the inclosed ;and then methought it would make a figure in a certain collection ofrarities in Bryanston Square. Rare it is and I doubt whether any ofyour rivals can match it.' Twas mine 'tis yours and, from cruralappearances, ' has been slave to thousands.' It will shew, however, thatsick or well, a man of my kidney does not forget you, and ii glad of anyopportunity to shew you that he is, " Your, most sincerely,June 14, 182). ALEX. CIIALMUIA,"So930 SKETCHES OF [sir FrancisLibrary may be acceptable to the curious bibliomaniac.Ad sums liberos."As Time and the cold graceConcluded every thing,So you I ended have,POORE Books, amidst the spring,Even as the Large saluted day,And silver drops bedew'd each way.Go now and pardon craneOf that heroick Knight*Which wisdome doth embrace,Whom if you know not right,His bounties, stature, complete sonne,And valour great shall you informe.His haire like wreaths of goldDo shade his manly face,So warlike to beholdAs Mars, the God of Thrace.Nature and Art did both consentSo to contrive him excellent.His Lady fresh also f,And daughters virtues flowersAdorne you, as you goe,Untill your latest hours,Which goodly creatures to be seene,Seeme Lillies on their stales so greene.So pass away ; and if that envie stirred,Tis but a stingless drone, a barking cur."And yet, not less from chronological precedence,than from the extraordinary whimsicality and amusinginformation afforded by its contents, I oughtSir George Morton. f Dedicated to Lady Morton.Retain?, Bart.] PRIVATE LIBRARIES. HIperhaps to have noticed that once celebrated :mdbiting satire of the day, called Qit^/n'sfor UpstartNewfangled Gentlewomen ; or a Glasse to view thePride of vain glorious Women ; containing a pleasantInvective against the F<i/ihixticnl Foreign4tones day lie used in Women 9 s apparel, 1595, 4to.,with a whole-length of a lady in full attire, in thetitle-page. Here are only FIVE LEAVES . and yetthe late Sir Mark Sykes was too happy to giveTWELVE GUINEAS for them. Thus they begin :And when proud principles, Rascals battenfashions will be Princes mate ;And every Gill that keeps a cattle,in rayment will be like a State,If any cause be to complain,In such excess who can refrain.And when young whiskers fit for worke,in no good sorte will spend the day ;But be profane more than a Turks,intending nought but to be gaie :If we were bent to praise our time,Of force we must condemn this crime.And when grave Matrons, honest thought,With light heels trash will credit crackle,And following after fashions nought,Of name and fame will make a wrack,Might love, and lip, a fault conceal,Yet act, and fact, would filth irelandwhen old beldame, withered lagged,whom hungry Dogged cannot require,Will winnie still, like wanton nagges,And sailed be with such attire.A patient heart cannot but rageTo se the shame of this our age..; o -j932 SKETCHES OF [S> FrancisThese glittering causes, of golden plate,wherewith their heads are ritchie decet,Make them to seen an Angell's mate,in judgment of the simple sect.To peacocks I compare them right,That glories in their feathers bright.These perriwigges, russes, armed with pines,these spangles, chain, and laces all :These naked paps, the devil's innes,to worke vain gazers painful thrall.He, fowler is : they are his nettesWherewith of fools great store he gets."A very odd, curious, and valuable volume ; butinparts coarse and repulsive.Shakspeare's Lear, 1608 A clean and perfectcopy of the First Edition; splendidly bound byLewis, in blue morocco. Most rare.But two more which are curious for the subjectmatter. The Manage was a great object, at the timeof publishing the ensuing work, in the stables bothof Monarchs and the Nobility ; and all worksconnected with Horsemanship received immediateattention from the rich. . .as it was especially aboutthe end of the sixteenth century that THE STABLEwas superintended by its Owner, who thought itapride to excel in riding a fine horse with unitedgrace and agility. Our " Masters of the Horse,"in " the days of good Queen Bess," were not mastersin name only. But for the Book and theextract ; in the latter of which we find a mostsolemn appeal or address, of which the conclusionsomewhat amusingly savours of the bathos./ 7/wy, Barf.-] PRIVATE LIBRARIES. : \: IA plaint and easie way to remedy a Hone that is foundered in hitfeet. Set out by Nicholas Molbie, Gentleman, Servant tothe Queen's most excellent Majestic. Imprinted at Londonby Thomas Purfoote. 1583. B. L. 4to.The following is from a Poetical Address from Purfoote to theLord Robert Dudley, " Maister of the Horse."For though you haue a comely courser great,And Pegasus into his sure he haue ;Though passing trim the trodcn wales he beate,With loftier looke that trotted fine and brave,With raine as round as hart can wish or ci m.As trimly trade can yare about the ground,And seemly sault and tourneboth light and roundshe can the Galliard gallop too,Passe the carrier; the Cornet tie can daunce,Can fetch the April and other tricks can d.As brave and fine as any hence to l-'rum.What doth auaile these vert lies to aduauance,By diligence thus brought to perfect frame,If afterward he fall diseased, or lame ?"Latine Songes, with their English, and Poem$ 9by Henry Bold*, 12mo. Take a sample of partsof the Chevy Chace, thus translated.Cane, feras ut nbigatPerches obiit,Vel embryo elugeatQuod hodie acccdit.)n the death of Sir Hugh Montgomery :Htigonem Comers, versusSie teluni statutVel Anserinus calamus,In corde inquit.Edited by Captain William Bold.904 SKETCHES Of [sir FrancisWilmington on his stumps.Pro Wilmington sit genius,Ac si in tristibus,Qui pugnuyit de GeniusTruncated Curious *.But the rarer piece of Henry Bold is called " Wita sporting in a pleasant Grove of Fancies " 1657,12mo. ; in a beautiful copy of which Sir Francishas observed, that " he considers this as one of therarest books which he possesses. Great value isattached to the portrait and to the book itself. Thelatter, without the portrait, was sold at Bindley'ssale for 61. 13s." The portrait here is in fine condition.In ROMAUNT LORE we have a most beautiful copyWe may just cursorily notice, among other scarce poetical pieces,the following: Nasmyth's Divine Poems, 1665, 8vo. ; a sound goodcopy : a bad one fetching 3 8s. at Bindley's sale. News out ofPoles Church Yard, in eight satires, by Edw. Hake., 1579, 12mo. :the verses are in stanzas of eights and sixes. A very rare and curiouslittle book. The Temple of Loue, by W. Covenant, 1634, 4to. Thiswas a mask represented to Charles I. and Henrietta on Shrove Sundayat Whitehall, of which Indigo Jones had the direction. The Scourge ofVenus, by H. A., 1613, 18mo. Perhaps unique: see a specimen inthe Library Companion. It is the horrible story of Pyrrha andCinyras from Ovid; told occasionally in stanzas of warmth and vigour.The Phoenix Nest, 1593, 4to. See Below's Anecdotes, vol. vi. p. 248.The Holy Historic of King David; drawn into English Meeterforthe Youth 4to read, by John Warbeck, 1579, 4to., properly marked"Rariss" by its possessor. Churchy and Chorie, 1579, 4to.; a mostbeautiful copy of a most rare book : not in the collection of Farmer,Stevens, or Brand. The Serpent of Division. Garboduc, 1590, 4to.:the former 23, the latter 55, pages. Of great rarity. Godson's Ephemeridesof Phealo, 1586, 12mo. School of Abuse, 1587, 12mo. Twoworks of especial rarity and intrinsic curiosity.Frcdirtff, J3a/7.] PRIVATE L1BRA1U! sof a most uncommon book, called Robinson 9 * ancientOrder, Societies and Unite, fyc. of PrinceArthur and the Knightly Armoury of the RoundTable, 1583 : together with JohnLeylantfs Learnedand True Assertion of the Original Life, &c. ofPrince Arthur, 1582, 4to. See Brit. Bibliog. i.106. Nor ought I to omit the mention of a copyof the well known, though badly printed, volume ofArthur and the Knights of the Round Table, of1634, 4 to. with cuts exceeded perhaps only by theStanley copy for integrity and amplitude of condition.And here, in reference to a volume of romanticand heroic achievement in its way, be itallowed me to make honourable mention of a volumeupon which I have probably gazed more frequently,and expatiated more copiously, than the generalityof Bibliographers. It is the TEWRDANCKHS andthe very fine and perfect copy of this first <///////of it, UPON VELLUM now before me to which Iallude. This magnificent book, bound in all themorocco luxury of the Lewisian binding, was a jsent to Sir Francis by Charles Seeking, Syndic ofHamburgh, and late Envoy Extraordinary at theImperial Court of Brazils. This precious copy hasthe table, with a blank leaf of vellum after signatureP . Then the 118th cut with four pages oftext ; then A. in eights, as a table. Here is alsoa MS. explanation, in the French language, of theseveral cuts ; and of the more celebrated individualsdesignated by the German names.There is neither time nor space to do any thing936 SKETCHES OF [Sir Francismore than to mention generally one peculiar anddistinguishing feature in this Library, in which itseems to he the received opinion that it has no Rival.I mean the department of WITCHCRAFT and Demonology.Even the late Sir Walter Scott mighthave gathered more than one relic wherewith toenrich the many shrines of this description whichhe has erected within his fascinating performances.I dare not venture to put my hand upon more thanone volume; for I have no desire to disturb thereader's rest by conjuring up frightful dreams,which must inevitably ensue if a lengthened detailwere entered into by an enumeration of the bizarrefeatures of this marvellous collection. And yet,before my specimen is selected, it is my duty tomake especial mention of the MS. Catalogue ofthese bewitching volumes, executed, as in the caseof the Old Poetry, by the pencil, as well as pen, offilial ingenuity and perseverance. These extraordinaryvolumes have scarcely one attractive decoration,in the way of art, but what is facsimilised (andadmirably and faithfully too) by the same affectionatehands as have executed the ornaments in thedepartment of the Old Poetry : see page 923. ThisCatalogue is a perfect quarto gem, bound in moroccobv Lewis.wHere we read the melancholy end of the DamnableLife of Dr. Finn, in News from Scotland, 15914 to., a book of such scarcity and singular curiosity,that it was deemed worthy of being re-printed as thecontribution to the Roxburgh Club, by George;///, /;<//>.] PRIVATE I.IIiRARIKS. HIHenry Freeling, Esq., the eldest son of Sir Francis.See page 464, ante. From one of the two cuts, therereprinted, 1 am enabled to close these Freelingianaby the use of it on the present occasion. It is fullof mystery and terror.938 SKETCHES OF [Hon. T. Grenville.But three more collections to notice in Londonand these very briefly : although one of them, alone,would furnish materials for the composition of oneof the most interesting and beautiful bibliographicalvolumes in the world. It is that of the Right HON.THOMAS GRENVILLE to which I can only allude, andto which so many pages of my previous productionshave been indebted for so large a share of interestwhich they might contain. It is more than negativeconsolation to be sensible of the debt which I haveendeavoured to discharge in the language of thankfulnessfor all favours conferred from that quarter.Not only for its dimensions (and yet TWENTY ThousandVOLUMES cannot be said to be contained in anut shell /) have I never seen anything like it, but Ican have no conception of anything going beyondit. In Spanish lore it is exquisitely rich ; and therecent acquirement, not only of the highest pricedbook sold at the sale of Mr. Hebe's library(Tyrant IL Banco), but of very many of themore prominent cast of character in that same Collection,seemed only to be wanting to render such aLibrary as that in Cleveland Square as complete. . .as all earthly things can count upon being.But a passing and a final word upon the BibliothecaHeberiana here alluded to. It is now fastmelting away. Seven successive snow-balls of enormousdimensions*, have already disappeared ; andSee page 366, ante.R. Hebtr, *</.] PRIVATE LIBRARIES. U39four more of equal size are quickly to fall intodissolution. Within six months to come, everyvolume will have also probably taken its departurefor ever ; and an aggregate of perhaps some onehundred thousand volumes will have been disposedof under the hammers of Messrs. Sothebys,Evans, Stanley, and Wheaten. Considering theshort time allowed for the dispersion of such an unparallelledmass of Books the celerity of dispatch,in the preparation of the several catalogues, byMessrs. Payne and Foss, has been perhaps equallyunparallelled. It boots not now to introduce my ownnotions, or my earliest views, of the best methodto have been adopted in the disposal of so largeand so valuable a body of property in the shapeof BOOKS. Every subsequent reflection has onlyconfirmed the propriety of those early views. Whenit is known, as a fact, that the late Owner of thesebooks declared, several years before he went abroad,that his Library had then cost him Ninety-twoTHOUSAND POUNDS, and that the Individual*, towhom that communication was made, supposed thesum must have been DOUBLED before Mr. Hewersdecease, it seems both a natural and necessary consequenceto infer, that its net produce even nowwould be nearer half than a third of the sum originauthority is ray friend Mr. Markland, who received the intelligencefrom the late Roger Wilbraham, Esq., to whom .Mr. IMicr personallymade the communication. Mr. Wilbraham added to Mr. Mark-land,that he supposed the sum in question had been nouBun>.040 SKETCHES OF [/?. Hebe, Esq.nelly expended. Time alone will solve that point.Meanwhile Messrs. Payne and Foss have most faithfullyacted up to the letter and spirit of their instructions; and the part, just published, of the Manuscripts,is really a most creditable performance.But, in the probable result of all these unitedSales, there are several drawbacks to be taken intoconsideration. First, the times have been clearlyadverse to the public sales of Libraries. The bibliomaniais greatly subdued even with well-disposedand wealthy purchasers. Books, like other objectsof pursuit, or articles of taste, have become of easyobtainment . chiefly in consequence of their constantimportation from abroad. But, more than either,or than the whole of these drawback-considerations,must the character or complexion of Mr. Hebe'slibrary itself be taken into consideration : first, inrespect to condition, and secondly, in regard toduplicates. The condition of the books, generallyspeaking, was far from tempting ; and I once hadit from the mouth of their Owner, that 5000/. mightbe well laid out upon their coating. The bindingof the Harleigh Library (chiefly in red morocco)cost Lord Oxford 18,0001. The duplicates the triplicatesand even more of rare and costly volumes,had no end. Of the first Aristotle and first Platoalone, there were, one with the other, hardly fewerthan five copies ; each not only throwing the otherinto a darker shade, but thereby impoverishing thevalue of every other copy in the market. TheLord rrinw.] PRIVATE LIBRARIES.system of doubling, trebling, and even quadrupleseemed to have neither definite object nor boundary,and is only traceable to a rapaciousness of hungerand thirst, in the INDIVIDUAL COLLECTOR, such asthe world never saw before, and is not likely to seeagain. The foregoing pages * too strongly attest myformer attachment to that Individual to supposethat, on the present occasion, I can have any otherwish than that a PLENTIFUL HARVEST may crownthe exertions of those who have brought their sicklesinto the field.But it is getting late, and there is much of LibrarySketching yet to encounter. I will take thereader with me to Upper Brook Street, and introducehim for a few minutes only to the select andpromising collection of the Honourable R. Curzon,a young man deeply imbued with that thorough indomitableardour in the cause, which knows noabatement, and will lead in the end to the acquisitionof some of the rarest treasures. The last letterwhich I had the gratification of receiving from thisenterprising Knight," is full of good omen. " Ihave only just returned (Jan. 23, 1835, says tin-writer)to England, and have brought several toughold books and Greek MSS. from Syria and Albania,which I should be very glad to shew you."Of a more classical and finished character, is thelibrary of LORD VERNON; a young Nobleman, whohas but just lifted his late father's coronet to hisSee page 49 446.942 SKETCHES OF \ Lord Vernonbrow, and as brave a Book Knight as ever " couchedhis quivering lance." He will not content himselfwith large, when the largest paper is to be procuredwitness his Xenophon and Hesiod*. But Cicero,Lucretius, Pindar, Tacitus, Thucydides, &c. are allwith him in their large and flowing vestments, includingthe Poetics of Aristotle by Tyrwhitt. Thenagain we have the Gre nadir Learned " in longarray;" while Homer, in his first appearance in thetypographical character, and in the subsequent resplendentdraperies of Clarke and the Grenville,catches the eager eye and quickens the excited pulse.The foregoing is indeed but a " sketch." Yonder isDante in the Folio attire, and again with theCommentary of Landing and twenty-one coppercuts. Explain how this may be, " good, my Lord ?"Will you venture to claim more felicitations thanWhat a curious tale belongs to the recent acquisition of a largepaper copy of the TRUE FOLIO of Robinson's edition of Hesiod, printedin 1737, 4to. Gr. and Lat. There were only ten copies printed in thisform ; of which that in the library of the late Duke of Grafton was purchasedby the Right Hon. Thos. Grenville for 100 ; Intro. to Classics,vol. ii. p. 35-6. Lately, a straggling copy of this calibre was found inan obscure place in the country, and marked at FIVE SHILLINGS ! Thewhole book-world, from Whitechapel to Hyde Park Corner, was in motion: carriages, carts, and horses were all put in requisition. The resultmay be anticipated. There was a combination not to oppose one another.The booksellers had what is called a " knock-out " concern, and it waspurchased by one firm for one hundred guineas, and sold to the abovegallant collector for an additional twenty guineas. Mr. Vernon's Hutchinson'sXenophon is also of the superlative degree of comparison. Theyare always fine volumes. Lord Acheron, Earl Gosport's eldest son,has just become the fortunate possessor of Renard's copy of the " TRUEFOLIO HESIOD." " Fortunate ambo ! "t See Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iv. p. 108115, and Ottley's Historyof Engraving.Duke of Sussex.'} PRIVATE LIBRARIES. SJ43belong to the Owner of the copy described in thefourth volume of the Spencerian Library? I haveonly time just to cast a hurried eye over the besteditions of the French Classics, bound in the appropriatemorocco ligatures of De Sueil, Padaloup, DeRome and other orthodox French Bibliopegists . . .and making my obeisance to the gallant Owner ofthese treasures as the dusk of evening is advancing.I hasten home to prepare for dressing and dinnerand for something better than both . the Soiree atKENSINGTON PALACE.The Library of His Royal Highness the DUKEof SUSSEX is to be seen under two very different aspects.If you go by day to look at the books tothread a Cretan labyrinth of corridors, boudoirs,galleries, and cubical chambers amply and richlyfurnished with some forty thousand volumes ofall qualities and sizes from the Lilliputian AgnusDei to the Brobdignagian Choral Book*, you willI am in possession of one of these AGNUS DEI'S, which seems tohave been printed for, as well as dedicated to, Prince Henry, the elderson of James I. Its form is indeed diminutive ; for it measures onlyone inch and three-eighths in height, an inch in width, and half aninch in thickness. Its author is Jo. Weever, and it consists of anabridged life of our Saviour in English metre, having only a couplet oneach page, printed prose-wise. The title is AN AGNVB DEI. Printedby N. O., for John Smethwicke, 1610. Then follows, " To PrinceHenry, your humble servant, lo. Weever." The dedicatory epistle isaa follows :Thou matchless issue of a mighty king,To whose green years and judgment grave I bringThese holy numbers of my heavenly muse,Which ray late empresse gained to peruse ;The like acquaintance humbly I intreat.My book is little, but my loue is great. lo. Weever"The two gigantic Choral Books, in the possession of His Royal HighestSKETCHES OF [His R. H. the,be richly repaid for one of the liveliest chasses imaginable.Such was the morning chasse of which I oncepartook : when the sky was bright, the gardens weregreen, and beds and bowers of flowers and shrubsand sweets perfumed the summer air. Under suchfavourable circumstances, I examined more minutelythe early manuscripts and illuminated missals of soextraordinary a collection.I have the St. Austin de Civitates Dei the loveliestof all lovely manuscripts of this celebrated work,which I ever saw at this moment sub oculis. Itis of Italian scription, in the Roman letter, andItalian art ; in a large folio upon vellum, so softness,about a yard in length, and upwards of two feet in width, bearthe following inscription, as having been executed in 1420:Ad laudes omnipotent dei. patris. et filii. et spes sancti. departvirginis marie, totiusqz celestial curie, stud psalter scribe fecit Reverencespater, dns. Antonius tsgrooten. de Oesterwyck. Abbas modernshumus monasterii Tongerelensis ordinis premonstratensis. per Franciscanwert scripture lovanii residence. Anno verbs incarnate M.CCCCXXII.mensis martin die xxii. finit feliciter. Neo gracias."The following ornament appears on the bottom margin of the firsthighly illuminated page of text.Duke of Sussex.] PRIVATE LIBRARIES. 945white, and subtle, as to be suited only to the fingersof fairies to turn over. The colophon acquaints usthat it was "purchased by one Nicolas, Prior ofthe Monastery of St. Matthias de Muriano, for ninegolden ducats, in the year 1472 :" and further, thathe the said Prior Nicolas " fabricated and illuminatedthe whole with his own proper hand." It isscarcely possible to conceive, or to desire, a moreperfect volume, in all respects. It might have beenWritten in 14-70.In the room where so many beautiful missals anddecorated volumes, chiefly of a devotional character,appear, is a copy of Hall's Chronicle, printed byGras ton in 1550; in which book is the autographof the unfortunate Lord Darnley (the only onewhich I ever saw), who was once the owner of thevolume. The following is a fac-simile of it.But the two rooms in His Royal Highness's Library,which may compete with each other althoughof a totally different complexion both in structureand in book-furniture is the gallery, sixty feet inlength, and the large square room, recently built, inThe prior's attesting colophon is precisely in the following lines :Iste liber est Monastery sti Matthias de Muriano quern ego JVI-colau*, Prior Mon Sti Matthias de Muriano t emi pro to Man. prtcioilncatorum novem auri. Ano dnj, H7. " Pique tan propria et minimum."3p946 SKETCHES OF [His R. H. thewhich the Royal Master receives his guests on hispublic evenings, as President of the Royal Society.By daylight, to my eyes, the gallery is the morethoroughly bibliomanical receptacle: a place, inwhich you would the rather wish to build yourbook-nest to forget the world without, and themany wretched creatures that crawl upon its surface.Here are the Bibles and the Fathers ; and Theologyin all languages and in all its varying and instructiveforms. In this department His Royal Highness hasNO EQUAL. Let Mr. Pettigrew's noble volumes* tellthe tale more at large, and fill up satisfactorily therough outline here chalked out. See, too, for abrief minute, pages 551, 580, ante. I think thereare only three essentially necessary, or parent-textsof the Bible, in the fifteenth century, of which HisRoyal Highness is in absolute want.Let us now enter the large square room ; and firstgaze upon the stupendous table, made of Britishheart-of-oak, which occupies the greater part of itscentre. Upon this table, on the social evenings alludedto, are placed curiosities of every description,I allude to his splendid catalogue, in two imperial octavo volumes,published in 1827. Mr. Pettigrew devotes the first to an account of theMSS. ; the second to the printed books on Theology only. The firstvolume is in a blaze of decoration with fac similes of ornaments in themore ancient Hebrew manuscripts.These are imperial works, and worthy KINGS"and, of course, the SONS of kings ! I hope the day is not very distantwhen we may see a continuation and completion of this praiseworthyproduction. The Bibliotheca Spenceriana rejoices to stand in rank andfile with such comrades.J)tt/u (f Sussex.] PRIVATE LIBRARIES. D17both in books and antiquities. Here, I have seenan exact model, with every stone represented, of the(great Pyramid of Egypt. Bridges, arches, obelisks,beasts, birds, fishes, are, more or less, within thisand the adjoining rooms, to be viewed with alternsurprise and admiration. It is clear, therefore, now,that these book-rooms are about to be described bylamp-light. Even so. At nine, the "gathering"begins. Characters, from all quarters, in all thevarieties of rank, talent, station, and influence,assemble together. By ten, " the busy hum" is at itshighest pitch. Stars, garters, ribands and medals ;the full and the plain dress ; the flowing beard andthe precise mustachio; the varied dialect; the eagerenquiry, the cautious reply, the patient hearing ;the whisper on the sofa, and the laugh on tip-toe ;archbishops, ambassadors, plenipotentiaries, consuls,-Iiarg6-d'affaires presidents, professors, fellowsscience, literature, art; with the stars that glitter ineach are all collected, concentrated, and crowdedon these Saturday evenings of most delectable conversazione.In a more quiet retreat, and in a room less frequented,are one or two almost solitary turners-overof the pages of antiquated volumes. My flesh ha-morethan once creed on seeing the beloved Sue,Austin's manuscript, and the splendid membra -nauseous volumes of Fust and Schoeffher's Bible of1 1 62, encountered by hands which had been bettersuited to the task had they been cased in kid gloves.948 SKETCHES OF \ Duke of Sussex.I once made my advances to an elderly gentleman,a foreigner, busied in reading Buxton *s Lexicon bythe side of an old Hebrew Bible. " Sir (said he tome)here is my only comfort. Whenever I want information,Buxton never fails me. He was themost deeply learned of all Hebraists." Leaving myrabbinical Buxtorfian, I was quietly threading one ortwo more of the other boudoirs each of them havinga lamp suspended from the centre when, turningabruptly to the left, an half-opened door induced meto enter the room itself. Not a creature was withinsight or hearing. I entered, and the first and onlyobject which caught my eye, was a colossal bust ofBonaparte, upon a therm, in the centre of the room,from the chisel of Canova. The concentrated light ofthe suspended lamp shone full upon the countenance.I seemed for a short moment to be holding conversationwith the ORIGINAL . now, unmoved by ambition,uninfluenced by cabals, agitated by opposition.At the foot of the therm lay one of thegreat choral books just mentioned*. While I wasthus musing, a tread of feet and murmur of voices washeard. I turned, and it was Prince Talleyrand andHis Royal Highness who were approaching !But the carriages are drawing up, and the names oftheir owners are announced plenovoce. Time is fastgalloping away ; and within a quarter of an hourthe palace clock will strike the hour of midnight,See page 944, ante.Miss Current*] PRIVATE LIBRARIES. 949and the Sabbath breezes will be stirring the leavesof the neighbouring avenue. I make my obeisanceand retire. By twelve, scarcely a visitor is leftbehind.Thus much, or rather thus little, for " Sketchesof Private Libraries" in LONDON. I fly to thecountry ; and with a pigeon's wing velocity plant myselfopposite Eshton Hall, near Skipton, in Yorkshire.Its amiable and intellectual owner invitesme to enter ; and within five minutes I find myselfin the midst of her Library. Miss CURRER is not acollector of the caprice of a day. From earliest youth,her passion both for reading and amassing bookshas been extreme ; and fortunately her means enableher to gratify this passion to an extent of placingher at THE HEAD of all female Collectors in Europe.In fact, as I have often remarked, this Lady is asort of modern CHRISTINA of the North. But shehas been fortunate in building a superstructure upona broad and splendid foundation. The Beverley Li.(>r<try, descending with the property of her greatgrandfather, Dr. Richardson*, has enabled her toMiss Currer has very recently, under the editorial care of herfriend DAWSON TURNER, Esq., put forth, but not published, an interestingoctavo volume, with plates, entitled, " Extracts from the Literaryand Scientific Correspondence of Richard Richardson, Med.F. R. S., of Beverley, Yorkshire. Yarmouth, 1835, 8vo." This volumeis botanical from beginning to end ; exhibiting an ardour and perseveranceand tact such as can with difficulty be conceived; and writtenwhen some of the greatest botanists of the day were living, and the starof LINNAEUS was just beginning to irradiate the horizon of that science.950 SKETCHES OF [Miss Richardsonerect one of such, splendour and extent, as to filltwo rooms, whose united lengths (besides a bayBut the " dramatis persons" (if I may so speak) of this volume, arebest brought under the reader's eye in the language of its learned editor.The 'Richardson's Correspondence' fills twelve folio volumes,, andwould, if printed, probably form eight of the same bulk as the present.I had two objects in view, when first I solicited the loan of it from MissCurrer. I thought it might possibly throw light upon the early historyof Sir Joseph Banks, whose life I have for some time been engaged inwriting; and I also conjectured that it might afford me assistance inanother of my favourite projects, a new and enlarged edition of Dr.Pulteney's ' Sketches of Botany in England.' In the former of thesehopes I found myself entirely disappointed : so long a period had elapsedfrom the close of the life of Dr. Richardson to the commencement ofthe scientific career of Sir Joseph Banks, that their pursuits did notpossess any point of union. *In my other object I should not have experienced a similar disappointment.The information to be derived from these letters, and from thecorrespondence of Sloane and Sherard, could not fail to be highlyvaluable to any one engaged in a similar pursuit. But I felt that Ishould not do justice to the memory of Dr. Richardson by such a limitation.I had not proceeded far in the examination of his papers, beforeit was evident to me, that, regarded collectively, they were of themselvessufficient to answer two other and more important purposes ; tofurnish materials for the biography of the individual to whom they areaddressed, and to supply such a fund of knowledge towards the annalsof natural history, during the period they embrace, as merited a morehonourable distinction than the being embodied in another work, ofwhich, from its nature, they could be made to form but an inconsiderablepart."These " performers in the botanical drama" are then further shewnup by the same pen ; and, as far as I have had opportunities of verification,I find the strictures correct. Some of the effusions of Dilleniusand Gronovius have much diverted me ; especially the former, page262-3, in his conjectures about the unknown herbaceous treasures whichThe dark, unfathom'd caves of ocean bear."But Mr. Turner shall continue his sketches.They also enable us to estimate the characters of Dr. Richardson'sdifferent correspondents: the generosity of the 'consul Sherard; theselfish closeness of his brother ; the gentlemanly feelings of Sloane ; thetT.] 1'IUVATL LIIJUA! Is. 951window in each room of fourteen feet by twelve)are seventy-six iivt, by twenty-four irrt in width, andintense, unwearied industry of Ikarne ; the true spirit of a collector inThoresby; the devotion to botany in Dillon us ; the querulousness ofBrewer ; the honest unlettered zeal of Knowlton ; and so of the rest ;for letters are peculiarly calculated to display the human mind in iumost undisguised state; and, however there may, even in them, beartifice, I am greatly mistaken if an equally sure test of character is anywhereelse to be found. Upon the disposition also, and the habits, andthe pursuits of certain other less generally known individuals, and particularlyof Uvedale and of Buddha, some light will be thrown by theprinting of this correspondence. The former of these, the successfulcompetitor of Sir Isaac Newton, at Cambridge, is very slightly noticedby Pulteney ; the latter, not at all ; though his knowledge was such asto have caused him to be designated by Mr. Vernon as ' the top ofmoss-croppers in England and though of frequent occurrence, thebeauty and agreeable odour of the shrub which bears his name, wouldnaturally make botanists desirous of learning particulars about theman'The name, or rather the letters, of Hearne now and then enrichthis necessarily rare volume, as only 250 copies were printed. But it isnot surprising that the GREAT GRAND-DAUGHTER should inherit thebibliomaniacal passion from such a source as this; for in one of Dr.Richardson's letters to his son Richard, see with what ardour he describes,and with what delight he views (and which I, in my collegedays, and in the library of St. John's, used as delighted to look upon)Cooper's Anatomy. " I have at last received (Jan. 2, 1733) Cooper 9Anatomy. I have paid for it 31. 10*. It is a GLORIOUS PERFORM \Nothing can be executed with more neatness and accuracy than thisworke." Again " The Hortus Elthamensif is a NOBLE Booke, in twovolumes, folio. . .-Dr. Dillenius prints it at his own expense." Page 328.Well, therefore, might the amiable great grand-daughter thus expressherself to me, in one of her notes of 1833. " I consider myself muchmore of a RICHARDSON than a Cuuiti H.It is, I think, but a just tribute to TRUTH, to select, as I do with aperfect conviction of its propriety, what our common friend, Mr. DawsonTurner, has observed of this distinguished female descendant.It only remains for me to say, that the sole merit (if there be meritat all), which is ascrihahle to me in this work, lies in the selection andthe notes : all else belongs to Miss Currer. The compilation was originallymade for my own private amusement and instruction : herSKETCHES OF [Miss Richardsonsixteen in height. The first of these rooms, of fortyfeet, is the Library, properly so called ; the secondis the Drawing-room ; but, as the OPPOSITE PLATEtestifies*, equally devoted to books as the first. Athird room, on a smaller scale, but to be fitted upwith furniture equally foMowtfractf/, is in contemplation; to which a conservatory is to be attached t.liberality and spirit, her love for literature and for the arts and sciences,her desire to gratify her friends, her feelings for the honour of herfamily; and, above all, her pious affection for the memory of her distinguishedancestor, induced her to direct that it should be committedto the press."- The plate of the LIBRARY will be seen as the frontispiece of PartII. There are, in fact, FOUR PLATES attached to the catalogue of MissCurrer's library, to be presently noticed. The third is an exterior viewof Eshton Hall, which has quite an Elizabethan air. The fourth plateis a view from the library window ; in which view the distant hill iscalled Also. For the use of these two plates my best thanks are necessarilydue to the owner of the Library.t The FURNITURE of the above splendid rooms is in perfect harmonywith their chief attraction: that of the first, is carved oak; of thesecond, carved rosewood : the book-cases in both rooms are oak. Therewas a first intention to have pictures, and no books, in the second room ;but who can resist the growing and soft contagion of Bores? The fairOwner " soon found out that one room would by no means contain herbooks." Now as to PICTURES I find, on going through the RichardsonCORRESPONDENCE, that old Wander Gucht, a sort of fashionableengraver in his day, used to cater for Dr. Richardson in Italian paintingsand Rembrandt prints; and this volume bears evidence (LettersCLIX. Lxiii.) that he was " no bad hand at a bargain" though, as anengraver, especially in Hearne's pieces, he was absolutely below contempt.In this first letter to the doctor's son (whom the father used tocall " Dear Dick), of the date of Sept. 9, 1749, he talks of letting himhave a genuine Nicol Poussin (five feet high by three feet and a halfwide) for thirty-five guineas; assuring him that "no person livingbesides should have it under fifty." Then follows an account of anHannibal Caracas considered, although damaged in several places, " thebest picture of the master then in England." In the second letter,>'.] PRIVATE LIBUAim :s. 953This species of BOOK-paradise, in \\liidi thir impassionedCollector ini^ht love to rove, and peradventureto fix a temporary abode has i n a measure becomefamiliar to us by that spirit of liberality in its proprietor,who is always so anxious to add to the quantity ofbibliomanical bliss. Her archives are not, like manydevoted spots, fenced round with high walls and deepmoats ; but, even without stirring from his fireside,the ardent devotee may make himself acquaintedwith every iota of their contents. Of course, I canonly allude to that beautiful volume, printed at herentire cost for the sake of partial distributionwhich bears the following title : "A Catalogue ofthe Library collected by Miss RICHARDSON CurrentEshton Hall, Craven, Yorkshire. By C. T.Stewart, Bookseller, London. Printed for PrivateCirculation only ; 1833, 8vo.*."But although the latter part of this title mightWander Gucht brings in his bill to Mr. Richardson's son, for some drawingsby Vandyke, Bergen, and N. Poussin, together with some Rein-brandtprints: the whole amount being 41/. Among the prints, is theHundred-Guilders," valued at 51. 15*. 6d. I have known this printbring 751. and more. I may add that THESE Pictures, with others fromRubens, Domenichino, and Raffaelle, and a large portfolio of oldgratings, yet enrich the interior of Eshton Hall. But, in the boast ofpedigree, Miss ( urrcr may dwell with complacency on the names of theTWO Wantons, Archbishop Sharpe and his brother the mathematician,and Baden, the translator of Domesday.The Catalogue, which is beautifully got up, contains only the titlesof the books. Had I Urn at Mr. Stewart's dhow, it would havehardy possible to have resisted the temptation of supplying a littleof a more savoury quality than that of mere titular information. Therosity of tli- ( >wnor, for a volume of such facie >. has beenwithout precedent.954 SKETCHES OF [Miss Richardsoninduce a supposition that the Owner of the Librarydid not throw open the doors of it sufficiently wideto the public, yet, such has been her judgment andliberality, that it may be questioned whether therebe a dozen gentlemen decided Book Collectorsin the kingdom, to whom a copy, by some means orother, has not been graciously sent ; although thepossessors of the volume may not be aware that thetotal expenditure of putting it forth in its presentbeautiful garb, was very little short of Six HundredPounds ; a rare and noble instance of adorninga favourite pursuit, by allowing others to becomegratuitous partakers of it. Among the many distinguishedCollectors, who have good reason to"thank their stars" for the possession of such atreasure, are six to my own knowledge. Messrs.Freeling, Turner, Bromfield, Repton, Morgan, andUpcott. An elegant compliment to the utility ofthe book, and to the liberality of its Owner, was paidby the late Earl Spencer, to whom in consequenceof Miss Currer's telling me that " any friends whomI might be pleased to mention should have copies,* " acopy was expressly sent in the thoroughly handsomehalf-morocco binding of Mckenzie the usualdress in which the copies quitted the wardrobe oftheir Owner.Lord Spencer, in reply to me, thus observed : Ihave just received the very handsome book fromIn this same note or letter, its author mentions the having orderedfifty copies to be put in half morocco binding by Mckenzie, with a viewof making them donations.PRIVATE LIBRARIES.Miss Currer. It would have been at any time avery interesting and valuable addition to my class ofBibliograjj/u/ ; but it is more particularly so nowas I am occasionally employing the few leisure momentswhich my unavoidable calls on business, andchecks from ailments, allow, in trying my hand at aClassed Catalogue of the Bibliotheca Althurpiana;a work which, of course, can never be finished, butthe fabrication of which will be much benefited bythat respectable Lady's production in the same line.I shall of course, ' as in duty bound,' trouble herwith my grateful acknowledgments."/^^, June17> 1833. Considering myself also " in dutybound" to make Miss Currer acquainted with suchfavourable sentiments from such a quarter, she observedin reply, " I had a very flattering letter fromhis Lordship himself yesterday."And now, if the uninitiated reader be disposedto ask what is the character of this Library, aboutwhich so much is said, I answer, in the very wordsof its Owner with which the " Advertisement" prefixedcommences. "The LIBRARY, of which thisvolume forms the Catalogue, has been collected solelywith a view to UTILITY ; yet in those works usuallyconsidered ornamental and curious, it possessesspecimens of no common occurrence*. In the Natshould be here mentioned, that all the older books in MissCurrer's library, such as Carton* Polychronicon, the St. Alba netChronicle (upon vellum), the Frnctu* Temporttm, with Covfnfulcg\ |. /*.>, were obtained "at little cost, in all probability, as she956 SKETCHES OF [ Miss Richardsontural Sciences, 'Topography, Antiquity, and History,it is more particularly rich ; and the Manuscripts,although not numerous, are interesting and valuable.The Books, individually, are in the finest condition,and not a few of them in the richest and most " tastefulbindings. " An admirable Index is the immediateclue to the discovery of any work of whichwe may be in pursuit ; and there are not fewer thanFIFTEEN THOUSAND VOLUMES to refer to. Such arethe treasures of Ashton HALL, in the departmentof books alone. For the continued, and long continued,health and happiness of its amiable andaccomplished Owner, there can be but one feelingand one sentiment amongst every enlightened andliberal hearted Individual : accompanied even witha secret wish that SUCH examples, in the same sex,may "abound more and more; 5 ' and that there isno one duty more imperatively inculcated than that ofadorning this world's wealth by pursuits, which, inherself supposes," by her great grandfather. They are imperfect ; butthe Coverdale has been lately completed by the skill of Mr. Harris, whopronounces it next to that of Lord Jersey's to be the finest copyhe ever saw. Since the publication of her Catalogue, Miss Currerinforms me that she has only purchased the following article, of anynote, of Mr. Henry John, for 631. It is a very extraordinary copy ofClaude's LIBER VERITATIS, by Earlom, with duplicate plates in thecharacter of etchings, proofs, variations, in four volumes folio, containing500 plates ; the fourth volume having the etchings and variations.This extraordinary copy was made up by the late Mr. Baker (the Quis-juliusof the Bibliomania) who was well acquainted with Earlom, andhad the pickings of his portfolio. It is questionless the finest copy ofthis interesting work in existence.PRIVATE LIBRARIES. 057the language of the Great Roman Writer* (prefixedas a motto to the Catalogue itself), " nourish youth ,delight old age ; adorn prosperity ; afford a refugeand solace in adversity ; forming our delights athome; anything but hindrances abroad ; which areour nightly associates ; our indoor and out of doorcompanions.' 9 These be general topics of admirationand congratulation. For myself, that sentiment isthe most deeply felt which neither the tongue northe pen has the ability of adequately conveying:In fretadum fluvii current, &c.# * * #Semper HONOS NOMENQUE TUUM laudesque manebuntQuae me cinque vacant terrae."Miss Currer is too good a scholar to impose uponme the task of an inadequate translation . and thusI bow to, and take my leave of, the Book Genius ofAshton HALL !It is a long way to Shrewsbury from hence ; butit is nevertheless a delightful occupation to directyour horses' heads to a quarter where you are notonly sure of the most generous and hospitable reception,but where every thing, and every object around,is redolent of iflofces ; of morocco odour, and Russianfragrance ; where the very genius of ALDUS seemsto pervade every nook and corner, and where theCicero.958 SKETCHES OF [ArchdeaconCradle of the Typographical Art is rocked by nounskilful hands. . .even by those of Fust, Pfister, andLawrence Coster.Look, gentle reader, at what here greets youreyes. Didn't ever enter within its walls ?This is the Shrewsbury Public School*, of whichthe Head Master is the Rev. Dr. SAMUEL BUTLER,The above is copied by permission from a large views executed inlithography, and published at a very reasonable price by Mr. Leake ofShrewsbury.Butler.] I'HIVUT, LIUKAI;.Archdeacon of Derby. But I have nothing to dowith out-of-door disporting. Would that 1 had! andcould eject the marble, and trundle the hoop, orcanvass the last cricket-match, about which the twostouter young gentlemen, to the left, seem to be soanxiously occupied. My business is within doorsand there stands the distinguished Governor, myespecial good friend the Archdeacon, ready to recehme. In an instant I am engulphed amidst his In-cunalula Typographical. What unheard of DONA-useshave we here! Mere fragments I admit; butstill important and conclusive evidences of the veryearliest efforts of the Art of Printing. Let us beginwith that which is executed in the types of theMazarine Bible (by Fust and Schoeffher), and forany thing I know to the contrary, may have beenexecuted in 1450, or before. Here are four pages ;Inning thirty three lines in a page, of which each isfull, all printed UPON VELLUM. Of one of these, Iselect from the fifteenth line, as follows :muctio qttfo cst. pars oration'sortrinansquc scntcntfam. (Compunction quotaafout. tufa. quc potestas figura ? orfco $ottstas conjunction quot species jjabet. qui.There are fourteen lines below. This copy is mark* \\folio 12 and folio 13. The last sentence at the tenthline, from the bottom of the reverse of folio 13, beginsthus :980 SKETCHES OF [Archdeaconmor amarfs duel aware amateur et plurality amanmur armament amateur. ^reterfto fmpftcto amer.A fac-simile of this character of type will be seen inBibl. Spenceriana, vol. i. p. 4.We will now be introduced to Pfister .a newmaster, to my knowledge, in this department ofprinting. Here are several specimens in the wayof fragments the greater number so blurred anddisfigured, that it is only from the following " preciousmorceau" I am enabled to present the readerwith an intelligible fac-simile.HO jjftfpffo tfi tocuiHI toaiiffe$tocuittmf Somite Doruiflcctfufo riiDoatMt tilt cflnotutrinf fcotuicmsDotitprfi flat Brrbo mtoualimo m mite feoifNow, if this type be compared with that whichappears at page 9 of the work just referred to,there can be no doubt about the identity of thetype as belonging to the first Printer of Bamberg.Dr. Butler has three of these Historian fragments,each upon vellum, with twenty-five lines in eachpage. Neither the late Lord Spencer, nor myself,Private LIBRARIES. 961nor even the late Mr. Horn, had any knowledgeof these extraordinary relics, which certainly rendersit doubtful where the first Donatus was printed,especially if we consider the next article.Here is a fragment of Donatus in the Speculumtype of the supposed LAWRENCE ROSTER. Thereare four leaves (upon vellum, or rather parchment),having twenty-seven lines in a full page, the pagebeing about five inches in width, much blurred ; butthere is a head line which seems to begin thus :paries orations qt sut.A space, occupying six lines, is below, for the insertionof the letter P. There is another curioussimilar specimen of two pages upon vellum (notpaper, as Dr. Butler, and perhaps others may alsothink), in good preservation, pasted upon the interiorof a cover of a book, bound in wood ; but thepattern worked upon the exterior-cover does notstrike me as being very ancient. This fragmentbegins thus :u'ma bedinatio quot twas terminate fcabet &uas quae a et s (Ohtot terminations tres quae.A full page has twenty-seven lines. It is doubtlessa great curiosity, and is a further proof of the earlyDutch presses being devoted to the working of elementarytreatises of education.Here comes a great rarity, in the shape of aPrinter, of whose type there is not a single specimenin the Spencer Library. This also is a Donatus in962 SKETCHES OF [Archdeaconfolio ; but I differ, toto cell, from its learned Owner,who considers it to be a Xylographiccd production,or a book printed with wooden blocks. Onthe contrary, I consider it to be decidedly metal,and of a date not anterior to 1480. The reader shalljudge for himself by the following fac-simile of thecolophon :The book consists of only two leaves, or three pages.There are twenty-six lines in a full page. It beingimpossible, within reasonable limits, to give even aprecis of treasures of this description in the Archdeacon'slibrary, I hasten only to the further mentionof a production, of about the same period, andwith all the air of wood-block printing ; but, in fact,not so. It is a small thin quarto volume, entitledConfessional, and printed throughout in the Germanlanguage. The very first page of it presentsthe following figure of Christ, of which the draperyin the back ground, running upon a brass pole withliiitler.']PRIVATE l,IBHAKIi:vrings, is precisely in many instances in the modernfashion.The reverse is blank. On the recto of the secondleaf the text begins thus : " Ici armor lundiger,SKETCHES OF[Archdeacon&c." A full page has twenty lines. At the sixthline we read thus : " She Horn Reichert Smacksvnd Taste, vnd dutch lose neigug der Offerticket Gyntikeit Has Horns Vnmessigkeit" &c.On the reverse of the second leaf, there is anotherwhole length, with the Dove to the left, and theAlmighty to the right, holding the Commandmentsto Moses, who is kneeling to receive them on amount below r . Two figures, one male, and the otherfemale, draped, are kneeling to the right. At thebottom of the opposite page, " Das under gebot."Every page has the word "gebot" at bottom. Onthe reverse of folio v., being the "vis gebote ," isthe following:Ihttler.'] IMIIN.VIT. uiiKMUES.The figure of Christ, as in the preceding fac-simile,is repeated. Five pages follow. This little volumeis doubtless a great curiosity of its kind.Having fully entered upon the Fifteenth Century,and aware of the theological as well as classicalattainments of the Owner of this Library, I may aswell "sketch" a few only of the chief treasures orgreat guns in that department and this, before Ienter the Aldine Cabinet, from which the " revocaregradus" will not be of such facile execution. Ofcourse my first attention are the Bibles ; and yet, asaprelude, I may as well notice the three block booksof Ars Memoranda, Apocah/jtxis, and Biblia Pau-peru.But of Bibles properly so called, here arethe Polyglots of Menes and Walton, the formeruncut, the latter the republican copy. Also, theLatin and German Bibles of Mentelin, of excessiverarity*. Also the English Bible of Crajtnifr, 1531),slightly imperfect with the Lord Chancellor Cromwell'sinjunction, as a broadside, for setting up theBible in Churches, pasted within the cover. Theseare flanked by a few Catholic Canons and Decretals,in folio, printed UPON VELLUM ; while a splendidcopy of that always splendid work, the St. Jcromof 1168, printed by Xirei/iihej/m and Pannnrtz (IA fac simile of the type of this very rare Latin llible appears inthe JEdes Althorpiarur, vol. ii. p. 40. I doubt it tlu-n- U- four copiesof it in England.966 SKETCHES OF [Arc/tdracvnwish for its Owner's sake it had been upon vellum * )flanks the outer postern of the theological department; while a fine copy of V. de Spire's Cypriankeeps it close company. But the extraordinary gemin this department is Dr. Loss's copy of the OpusculaTheological of MELANCHTHON purchased inMay last for 37/., a folio volume and forming a sortof common-place hook of its once illustrious Possessor.Young Mr. Sotheby very naturally, andvery commendably, runs riot in his descriptionof itt.The only known VELLUM copy of this most magnificent productionof the press of Sweynhym and Pamartz, is that in the Imperial Libraryat Vienna, which had belonged to the famous Cardinal Cessation, andis described in my Tour, vol. iii. p. 304, second edition.t See the Bibliotheca Klossiana, No. 4637, with a minute 'and carefullydrawn out list of the contents of this most extraordinary volumewhich, though better placed it cannot be than it now is, in a privatecollection, ought nevertheless to have found its way into the precinctsof the Bodleian Library. This is the last time an opportunity willpresent itself to speak, as I feel myself in justice bound to speak, of thelucid order and pains-taking industry, as well as the spirited display ofgraphic embellishment, exhibited in Mr. Sotheby's, jun. catalogue ofthe Library of Dr. Loss of Frankfort, which was sold in this countryin 1835. The collection, especially to a student in typographical antiquities,offered opportunities of acquiring rarities, such as I do notremember to have before presented themselves. The total amount ofthe sale was 226 1/., a sum which, considering the present deterioratedstate of the market, may be considered by no means dissatisfactory.The highest price obtained was 39/. for the Latin Bible of 1477, printedby Soberer, exclusively on account of the wonderful illustrations,in the shape of notes, by its once learned and pious possessor, Melancthon.Mr. Sotheby exhausts the vocabulary of panegyric in commentingupon it. It was purchased by the house of Messrs. LongmanPrivate LliUl UMKS.Of CLASSICS as might have been expected fromthe long established celebrity of the Possessorhere are Fifteeners without end; but I can onlysupply room for a few. Of CICERO, there is theDe Officiis of 1465, UPON VELLUM ; and the Epistlead Attinnn, 1-1-70, first edition. Of Q. Curtis,the Demosthenes (both), Eutropius, Horace (firstwith a date), Homer, Justin, Livy, the two Lines,Quintilian, Martial, Tacitus, and Virgil, the FIRSTEDITIONS ; but my friend must not be allowed tohave a succession of nights of undisturbed reposetill he possesses the first Horace, and the first Romanedition of Virgil. Of the latter he has theMentelin : a marvellously rare book, and whichMons. Van Prae tells him is the first.But then here are sundry gems of Fifteenerswhich do not exactly class with Theology or withand Co., for the exclusive reading and meditation (according to report)of the senior partner in that gigantic firm.Among the late Mr. Hebe's letters, are several from ProfessorHaulthall, or Hanthall, the celebrated Horatian. The correspondencebetween these two scholars was in the Latin tongue. Amongthe letters of the former, is one in which express mention is madeof the Loss COLLECTION thus: " Klossiana [Bibliotheca] tot cttanta continent, ut prius consilium tuum cognoscere velle, quuro singulaacquirement. Hinc intactapsne vestige ilia sununa, quam in hungfine mihi proebere dignus es. Ex schemes, quos adjunct, ride*quanti pretii ilia unica collection icstimanda sit. Colossus heros sumsrecensuit in quatuor vol. in folio; notes que seas bibliographicalabject, qua? ex diuterno historia artis typographical studio profecUphaud pari ponders judicande sunt. Animus autem Cloesio oliiu erat,Pander Annales, auctor et corrects edcndi, sed ab hoc pro pom ito nuncdestitute videtur," cVc. Tatirini, 29 llfart, 183*.968 SKETCHES OF I ArchdeaconClassics. Let us draw a few out of their lurking-holes.Here is a CAXTON, the Life of St. Catherineof Sends, the Roxburgh copy ; the Dante of1477; the Decor Puellarum\ Etymological Grcecumof 1499 ; and Ptolemy, 1482, upon vellum ; andTerentianus Taurus of 1497- Of a later period,and in diverse departments, receive the following.The six first folios of Erasmus' Greek Testament,and four first folios of Shakspeare : the first Eustathiusupon Homer ; the Irish Grammar of 17^8 ;Louvain, 12mo., of which only two other copies areknown in England ; Reuchlin's Hebrew Grammar,with his own MS. notes,. 1506, folio. Then again,if any body talks of challenging my friend on thescore of broadside curiosities, he very quietly andsignificantly points to the Original Challenge of theAdmirable Briton, printed by Zileti in 1580, andaffixed to the doors of the church of St. John andSt. Paul, at Rome ; to which the modern Challengerno sooner directs his attention, than he apologisesfor his temerity, and acknowledges the panoply ofthe Archdeacon.But the day is wearing away, and where are theDEAR Lines? "I purse, sequar te;" and Dr.Butler leads me half over his house in pointing tothem, in all forms and conditions. Here are sevenUPON VELLUM, twenty-three upon large paper, ofwhich several are uncut ; unique oddities varieties; an Aldine forest of even larger circuit thanLord Spencer's, but undoubtedly the generality ofJlutler.'] I'hiVATi; LIHUAKII &the trees are neither so stately in form, nor so temptingin fruit. How well do I remember the daywhen, accompanied by Mr. Foss, the Archdeaconcame to Spencer House to take a sober (whichturned out a maddening) view of the ALDINE there I What expressions of delight whatscreams of extacy in alternate Greek and Latinquotation I All this was very natural, and as commendableas natural. Dr. Butler is not the firstmortal who has had " a secret fire" lighted up withinhim on a contemplation of exterior attractions. . .Vtilnus alit venis, et cseco carpitur igne."Hence he returned to Shrewsbury full of the devouringflame ; a flame, which has manifested itselfby its ravages through so large a portion of his ownhouse. To drop metaphor. If Dr. Butler have notthe finest Collection of Lines in regard to vellumsand large papers he has certainly the largestand most complete ; but I am both forward andfearless to say, that, in many instances, this Aldinepassion is carried to extravagant, and to me unintelligible,limits. I cannot comprehend why forgeriesare to be mixed up with genuine commodities.1 cannot comprehend why the authors of such basestuff are to sit down upon the same bench with theoriginal manufacturers. Would you, knowingly,travel one post in the same chaise with a notoriousforger ? And yet, my excellent friend, the ArchonsSKETCHES OF [Arehdwtemdeacon, stuffs the pockets and seats of his own carriagewith a very host of Lioness Counterfeits !Again. There is too much digression too muchcomprehension of matter, or of hooks and treatisesconnected rather with the Giunti, than intrinsicallyand absolutely the Aldine, Press. Doubtlessit may he both difficult and rash to propound thecerte fines" in this pursuit; and all I chuse furtherto say is, that if Dr. Butler's ALDINE LIBRARY bethesecond in Europe, it is only because Lord Spencer'sis the first. Away, then, for the Books themselves! But the w r work of Renard can alone beour guide as here is occular demonstration of thetruisms of his text. I must of necessity be comparativelybrief. First for the Fifteeners ; but letus make our passing reverence to the productions ofthe press, of this period, which were manufacturedin the office of Andrews Torrents, the father-in-lawof Aldus. Here is the Cicero Exist. ad Fan. 91483, folio, splendid UPON VELLUM : Sabellici Hist.Tenet., 1487, also UPON VELLUM. Alphabet etPieces lllyriccz, 1527, 4to., UNIQUE. Of Aldus,here are the Galeomyomaclua, Musaeus, Lascars,Leonicenus, Force, Theocritus, and the Poliphilo(UPON VELLUM). . .all of the Fifteenth century : thefirst of indescribable rarity.As we travel downwards, here are the PoetcBChristian, Virgil and Martial, all of 1501 ; andof the latter, one copy upon fine paper, the otherJlutlrr.'] PRIVATE Libraries i7 1UPON VKLIJM. The Dante of 1502, UPON viLUM. The Retires Gra>ci, of 1508, splendid ; thevirgil of 1514, upon large paper, and Petrarch ofthis date, UPON VELLUM ; the Greek Bible of 1518,upon thick paper; the Pontamis, 1518, on largepaper ; Athenaeum Pausanias, first editions ; Herodotus,on large or thick paper ; Catechisms, Canons,and Councils of every date ; and that of Trent, of1564, upon large blue paper; Dudley Oratio, 1.04to., only one other copy known ; the Latin Bildcsof 1590, 159^, folio, each upon large paper. Butenough. The handling of these " DRAGONS" hasrelaxed your stoutest muscles, and exhausted equallyyour attention and terms of admiration. Thedinner bell rings, and after disburdening ourselvesof a layer or two of Aldine dust, we hasten to theApollo," and there behold all that is attractivefrom a breadth of hospitality becoming a Proprietorof large mur^hn'd Lines. And then hard byeven during snatches of savoury viands, and especiallyduring the migrations of the glass there lurks,in yonder cupboard, a dessert in the shape of AncientGREEK MSS. chiefly of the sacred text :which "ever and anon" shew their enticing formsand glittering accompaniments, in the character ofIlluminations. What a gorgeous and comfortingdisplay ! many of them being of not less intrinsicworth and antiquity than adventitious embellishment.But my friend the Archdeacon possesses a KAMI;beyond that which is only connected with ran and97*2 Sketches OF [Sir John Colin.costly volumes. He is not less true to the principlesof his church than of his constitution ; of that constitution,framed according to the wisdom of thosewho worked the Revolution of 1688, through all itsshifting varieties, to a steady and triumphant close.As the Head Master of a Public School, his celebrityis decidedly . UPON VELLUM.It is some forty miles hence to* the river Merseybut at sunset I must cross it in a steamer, and striveto reach Oak Hill for there lives the worthy knightSIR JOHN Robin ; and beside him are the Bedfordand Ferdinand and Isabella Missals. A thousandguineas shall not wrench these lovely tomes fromtheir resting places. Talk as you will of what Parisand Munich contain, no Englishman would exchangethe first for any gem of foreign complexion ; and everySpaniard ought to have united and made a canopyof their swords over the head of the latter, ere itshould have been allowed to have left its native soil.Both volumes are old and dear friends of mine ; asthe pages of the Cameron* sufficiently attest. Butinthis passing tribute paid to their excellence andworth, I love, as I wish, to record days of " pleasantdisporting," spent, some two years agone, in thebosom of the family of the Master of the property inquestion days which, in the ordinary calculation ofhuman occurrences, never can return again.See the First Day, pp. c. and lxiii-vii. The fac similes one ofthe Duke of Bedford in the former, and of St. John the Evangelist inthe latter, may be pronounced as perfect as they could well be represented.Sir, Joint Tulnn.~\ PRIVATE LIBRARIES. 973Would that lite had not severer anxieties and disappointmentsthan this : and yet, this is anythingbut trivial . to a grateful heart.First, of the paramount BEDFORD MISSAL. Hutwhat more can possibly be said of it ? Yes a volumemay be written about it, bulkier and prettierthan the production of old John Cough. I haveever considered the representation of the Dukealone though given with the utmost accuracy inthe work just referred to to be rather a partialand ungallant achievement ; and therefore, by thehelp of the ready and dexterous pencil of Miss SarahTobin .at all times devoted as much to obligeothers as to gratify herself . I am enabled to brinirthe Duchess out of her hiding place, and to introduceher more largely to the world. The readermay rely upon the fidelity of the copy.SKETCHES OF[SiV John Tobin.What gorgeous volume next greets my eye, andcauses an increased pulsation of heart ? It is oneof the most splendid as well as stately dimensions :uniting the graphic talents of those distinguishedartists, Messrs. Cooper, Willement, Stephanoff, andR. T. Bone ; and is an historical account of theCHAMP DE DRAP D'Ou. It is reported to havecost its first owner four hundred guineas ; and wasbought hy its present owner at the sale of Mr. Han-root'slibrary for 160/. That was a good day's work.But how to select from such an assemblage of heroicand chivalrous adjuncts ? where vignettes even overpowerthe larger subjects as that represented inthe OPPOSITE PLATE, and the one here subjoined,triumphantly attest.Nev .////* '/y////.] HMVATE UIMMUI.S i>7:>For both embellishments I am indebted to the namekind disposition and talented pencil as that whichpourtrayed the Duchess. This glorious book came >t ,at least, be said to be opened by unworthy hands. ( )1the artists engaged in its illustration, the pencils ofMessrs. Willement and Bone (from the latter of whomboth these copies are taken) strike me as having beenmost felicitously exercised : by the use of of I and{TUJH especially of the former. In consequence,those of Messrs. Cooper and Stephanoff, by the mereuse of water colour, seem to want warmth and eilcct.Of course, in drawing and a thorough knowledge ofart, they are in all respects worthy of the handswhich executed them. The text is a transcript ofthat of Hall the Chronicler ; but I cannot say thata cursive hand is the fittest accompaniment of pictorialdecoration.Sir John Tobin has recently given another proofof his attachment to illuminated volumes, in thopurchase of a small missal called the Hours of Maniof Burgundy : also from the Hanrott collection. Itis so small as to be very little more than four inchesin height, by three and four only in width ; but it ispregnant with rich and striking specimens of theart of the time. Its late owner has, I think, overratedits graphic skill. The arrangement or dU-positionof its ornaments appears to me to be its more- ntial merit. The larger heads of Christ andthe Virgin are in the usual meagre style of theday, and decidedly ut' Hcmish art. As to the juv-970 SKETCHES OF IS ir John Tobin.sued likeness or portrait of Mary of Burgundy, inone of the three females St. Catherine, St. Barbara,and Mary Magdalene I cannot bring myself to giveany credence of it. It is clear that the larger headof the Virgin, on the reverse of folio 287, is takenfrom the same original (though more matured in theexpression) as that of the three preceding. Thecleverest, for brilliancy of execution, is that of thesmaller head of the Virgin, folio 288, rect. Thechief attraction and worth of this splendidly executedlittle book, consists in the extreme and unusual perfectionof its condition. This little gem was notprocured under the sum of one hundred guineas.Long may its owner, now a septuagenarian, run thiscareer of elegant and intellectual pursuit. His booksare few in number, but precious as the reader hashad sufficient proof in intrinsic and extrinsic value.He is blessed in a united and well-settled family ;and enfiladed by tendrils and branches of the secondgeneration . to his heart's content : and, if I mistakenot, there is more than one nuptial knot yet totie in the sympathetic and affectionate circle of thefirst generation. Prosperity and happiness be theattendants !Once more and for the last time. There is yeta Library to visit rather than to describe : first, becauseit is extensive, miscellaneous, and yet choice ;general, and yet it is particular : and secondly, becausea perfect, or even satisfactory, account of it isimpracticable at the conclusion of this long drawn.Turner, Etq.] PRIVATE LIBRARIES. 977out volume of Reminiscences. But the sounder andmore weighty reason is, because the owner of it himself" ille si quis alius!" is in contemplation ofthe task of executing a Catalogue Raisonne. It isof my friend DAWSON TURNER, Esq., of Yarmouth,of whom I would now wish to speak; a gentlemanlong distinguished for his varied talents and hisequally indefatigable pursuits in business and inbibliomancy*. The darling passion of his mind, asdeveloped in his editorial notes in the RichardsonCorrespondence, is Botany. " Muscovy forties" andmolli prate" for Him I There is no such a thingas a weed in his nomenclature of nature ; but whenhe calls it, with Johnson, " a flower out of its place,"he revels upon its stamina and petals. Ray, Sib-thorpe,Linnaeus, Pulteney, Dillenius, and ConsulSherard, for Him!But the reader is not to suppose that Classics, bywhole handfuls, are not to be gathered in the Hortus*Turnerianus it being anything but "siccus" onthis point. I should say that a love of Manuscriptswas the dominant possession of my friend ;not so much for the sake of Autographic Orators asof really curious unpublished materials ; and on thisscore his purchase, conjointly with his friend HudsonGurney, Esq., of the MACRO COLLECTION t, inThe compliment paid him by Dr. Valpy, in the catalogue of hisown library, is no more than his duetThis collection was purchased, by private contract, of Mr. Christie,the late auctioneer. It included the valuable collections of Sir Henry3 R978 SKETCHES OF \ Dawson1820, was one of the most judicious and valuablestrokes of book-policy that has been struck for a longSeaman, the celebrated antiquary ; and Royal Autographs, from thetime of Henry IV. of England, with Royal Letters, &c. ; and the Correspondenceand Travels of the Rev. D. Lovell, of Cambridge. TheRev. Dr. Macro was a native of Bury St. Edmund, and was educatedat Christ's College, Cambridge; dying in 1767, at the advanced ageof 84. See also Nichols's Literary Anecdotes, vol. ix. p. 359. Of the139 lots, into which the catalogue of these treasures is divided, Mr.Turner was well satisfied to give half the amount of the whole cost(which was Goose), for only 33 lots ; but then these were the 48-poundersin the Macro battery ; as witnessNo. 107 Volume 1, containing the correspondence of Sir Henry Seaman(vol. 2) with Jeremy Stephens, Archbp. Usher, Whitlock,De Last, and many others, altogether about 193 articles,and various autographs at the end.No. 108 Volume 1, ticketed " Epistles M miscellanea," containing about180 letters, original and copies, and various interestingpapers, among which are : Letters from Sir E. Wotton,1544, Lord Cobham, 1587, Oliver Cromwell, 5, Sir SamuelLuke (ridiculed as Hudibras), Sir Ph. Stapleton, Sir Edw.Coke, Clarendon, Card. Mazarine, &c. &c. Archbishopsand Divines: Alli, Beveridge, Fowler, Hall, Hare, Po-cockle,Usher, Wake, Whitby, Wesley. Learned Men:Josh. Barnes, Bentley, Leeds, M. Aur. Severing, Battle,Dugdale, Sooner, and correspondence of Sir Simon Dewson Numismatick and other subjects ; and about 90 curiousautographs.It was, I think, from this latter volume that I selected, when on avisit at my friend's, some dozen years ago, that portion of Oliver Cromwell'sletter, which appears in the Des Althorpiania, vol. i. p. 9, illustrativeof the expression, " up and be doing," and relating to the battleof Gainsborough, in which Cromwell took so decided a part ; furnishingone of those bloody banquets, of which that ferocious hypocrite lovedto partake.No. 122 A folio volume, containing upwards of TWO HUNDRED royaland other letters, and valuable historical documents. Invaluable! in my estimation.No. 123 A folio volume, containing 171 original Papers and Letters,from some of the distinguished Reformers and Puritans,and original correspondence of learned men of the .]PRIVATE LIBRARIES.period ; and I do earnestly entreat Mr. Turnerwhose portion of them related chiefly to the LITTERSteeth century, viz. Phil. Melancthon to Bucer, 1519.Martins Ihicerus, autograph and draft of letter. Petrus.Martyr (of Florence and Oxford). Bishop Latimer, WalterHaddon, 1563 (2). Bishop Ridley (2). John Pilot(Reformer), John Bradford (Martyr), to Bucer and others(5). John Hoper, 1554. John Careless (11). ThomasWhyttyll (now condemned to die for the Gospel), 1556,Jan. 21. Wm. Cummings, Steven Stradwyke (presom-r inthe Marshals for the testimony of Jesus Christ). RolandTaylor. John Fox to Matt. Parker. John Fecknam (prisoner).Laura. Humphrey, 1505.One more as "the meadows" will have been then "sufficientlyirrigated." It exhibits a cohort, equal to the Grecian phalanx or theRoman legion equal to both united !No. 126 A folio volume, containing upwards of 500 original Lettersand Papers, including correspondence of the most celebratedpolitical and literary Characters in the early part of the lastcentury, among which are the following :Royal Autographs. Charles II. Queen Catharine, 1682.Duke of Monmouth. James, Duke of York. Queen Anne.Political, &c. Earl of Essex, 1593. Jer. White and Thos.Goodwin (Chaplains to Oliver Cromwell). George Fox(founder of the sect of Quakers). Clarendon, Earl ofShrewsbury, 1689. Trevor (Speaker, 1691). Marlborough,Godolphin, Halifax, Gage, Sacheverell, Holt, R.Walpole, Onslow, Jekyll, Grafton, Chesterfield ; also, sheetsof cyphers and interesting papers relating to the CatholicRebellion in 1717, private list, and characters of JacobiteNobility in Ireland, &c.Admirals. Cloudesley Shovel, Herbert, Byng, Hardy, Wager.Bishops and Clergy. Attcrbury, Baxter, Cumberland, Cave,Cudworth, Chappelow, Dolben, Fleetwood, Freaks, Frewen,Grace, Hammond, Abbott, Lamplight Mill,Parker, Patrick, Potter, Prideaux, Pyle, Sullingfleet, Sherlock,Smallridge, South, Stanhope, Stabbing, Spines, Til-lotion,Venison, Wilkins, Wake, Waterman, Wahky,Whiston.Men of Science. Newton, Locke, Maclaurin, Sir Hans Sloane,3 R980 SKETCHES OF [DawsonHumanities to make known some of the treasureswhich fell to his lot in this distribution. Amongthem are many letters from CROMWELL, of which,as just observed in a note, I have availed myself ofone emphatic passage in a previous production. Butadocument still more precious is found among them,in a "pithy and pertinent" note from the Protectorqua First Lord of the Admiralty to get ready afrigate for the immediate transportation of the PortugueseAmbassador to Lisbon ; his brother havingjust committed a murder. I am obliged to my friendfor the OPPOSITE Facsimile of it.Mr. Turner's collection of Autograph Letters isdivided in the following manner : first series, 2 vols.small 44to. ; second series, 6 vols. imperial 44to. ;third series, the same; fourth series, 12 vols. imperial44to. ; fifth series, 1 vol. 44to. Franks ofMembers of both Houses of Parliament, 3 vols. imperial4to. Fac-similes of Au4tographs of EminentCharacters in England and France, 1 vol. 4to. Avolume of Caesar de Missy's manuscripts, 17<50, ^5 ;Tavernier, Sherard, Dillenius, Cheyne, Woodward, Maple-tost,&c.Antiquaries. Hyde, A. Wood, Stukeley, E. Pembroke, Lloyd,Dugdale, Willis, Tanner, Thoresby, Elstob, Carte, Peck,Grey.Poets, &c. Wycherley, Congreve, Centimetre, Mat. Prior,Amor. Phillips, A. Pope, Voltaire, Swift, Addison, R. Steele,D. Buckingham, Lansdown, Bolingbroke, Warburton,Thomson (Christ), Pitt, Potter, Rudolph Muster.Painters. Jervis, Dahl, Boit.Turner"]I'RIYA-TE LIDHAIUI.s1)8 1L V4 1 ^ jff * N 1-; >ffij *^ S> $ 4 t :\< ' '<^1 v "^ 14 1>^ yv^ .^^ ^ir4 <\ ^\. ^ -l<> A *982 PRIVATE LIBRARIES. [U. Turner.Tillotson's Baronage to 1572. Then follow richclusters of illustrated books, privately printed books,and books printed in small numbers. Of LARGEPAPER, I well remember a splendid regiment ; andespecially in the bibliographical department. Inshort, as a library of research, utility, and curiosityunited, I scarcely know where to plant my footwithin precincts so admirably calculated to exciteand to gratify all the nobler passions of the Bibliomania.But night is rapidly advancing and Oldham isat an unattainable distance . before the curtain ofdarkness shall fall heavily upon the earth. Seeit descends ! . . . even upon the labours of the Reminiscent.THE END.LONDON:PHIXTKU BY WILLIAM WJLCOCKSON, WHITEFR1ARS.