HISTORYOF THEHARTFORD CONVENTIONWITH AREVIEW OF THE POLICYOF THEUNITED STATES GOVERNMENT,WHICH LED TO THEWAIL OF 1812.BY THEODORE DWIGHT,SECRETARY OF THE CONTENTION.V-^''^'^5.Published by N. & J. White,New-york ;And Russell, Osborne, & Co.BOSTON.D. Bashaw, P "inter.1833.ID.£351-O'OEntered according to the Act of Congress, in the year one thousand eighthundred and thirty-lhrefe, by Theodore Dwight, in the Clerk's Office ofthe Southern District of New York.HISTORYOP THEHARTFORD CONVENTION.No political subject that has ever occupied the attention,or excited the feelings of the great body of the peopleof these United States, has ever been the theme ofmore gross misrepresentation, or more constant reproach,than the assembly of delegates from several of the New-englandstates, which met at Hartford, in the state ofConnecticut, in December, 1ftl4, commonly called theHartford Convention." It has been reviled by multitudesof persons who were totally unacquainted with itsobjects, and its proceedings, and by not a few who probablywere ignorant even of the geographical position of theplace where the convention was held. And it was sufficientfor those who were somewhat better informed, butequally regardless of truth and justice, that it afforded anopportunity to kindle the resentments of party againstmen whose talents they feared, whose respectability theycould not but acknowledge, whose integrity they dare notimpeach, and the purity of whose principles they had notthe courage even to question. A great proportion of thosewho, at the present time, think themselves well employedin railing at the Hartford Convention, were school-boys atthe time of its session, and, of course, incapable of formingopinions entitled to the least respect in regard to the objectswhich it had in view, or of the manner in which its duties4 HISTORY OF THEwere performed. In the meantime, men of more age,and greater opportunities for acquiring knowledge, havestood calmly by, and have coolly heard the general falsehoodsand slanders that have been uttered against theconvention, giving them at least their countenance, if nottheir direct and positive support.In these, and in various other ways, the Hartford Convention,from the time of its coming together to the presenthour, has been the general topic of reproach and calumny,as well as of the most unfounded and unprincipled misrepresentationand falsehood.In the meantime, very little has been done, or evenattempted, by any person, to stem the general torrent ofreproach by which that assembly have been assailed. Consciousof their own integrity, and the purity of their motivesand objects, the members, with a single exception,have remained silent and tranquil, amidst the long seriesof efforts to provoke them to engage in a vindication oftheir characters and conduct. One able and influentialmember of the convention, a number of years since, publisheda clear and satisfactory account of its objects andits proceedings. But it was deemed sufficient for thosewho did not believe the accusations which had been solavishly preferred against that body, and who, of course,had no intention of engaging seriously in a discussion ofthe general subject, to reply, that the author of the vindicationwas one of the accused, and on trial upon the chargeof sedition, at least, if not meditated treason, against theUnited States, and therefore not entitled to credit.This mode of replying to an unanswerable vindicationof the convention, as might have been expected, satisfiedthe feelings of interested and devoted partizans ; of course,that publication had no tendency to check the utteranceor the circulation of party virulence, or vulgar detraction.Reviling of the convention have been continued in commonconversation, in newspapers, in Fourth of July ora-hartfordCONVENTION. $tons, in festive toasts, and bacchanalian revelries andsongs. And finally, when driven from every other topicon which to support false principles by unfounded argumentation,grave senators and representatives of the UnitedStates, have introduced the threadbare subject of theHartford Convention into debate, in the legislative hallsof the nation, when engaged in discussing the weightyconcerns of this extensive republic, and united with thoseof inferior standing and character, in vilifying the HartfordConvention.Occurrences of this kind, with others of a more seriousand portentous description, seemed to indicate, in a clearand convincing manner, that the time had arrived whenthe public at large should be better informed on the subjectof this convention. The objects for the accomplishmentof which it had originally been convened, and theable and most satisfactory exhibition of their labors containedin their report, which was published by them to theworld at the moment of their adjournment, have longbeen lost sight of, and forgotten. With this is connectedthe extraordinary circumstance, that besides the membersthemselves, no individual, except a single executive officerof the body, had any means of knowing what passedduring their session. That officer was the only disinterestedwitness of what was transacted by the convention.He was present throughout every sitting, witnessed everydebate, heard every speech, was acquainted with everymotion and every proposition, and carefully noted theresult of every vote on every question. He, therefore, ofnecessity was, ever has been, and still is, the only person,except the members, who had the opportunity to know,from personal observation, every thing that occurred. Histestimony, therefore, must be admitted and received, unlesshe can be discredited, his testimony invalidated, or its forceentirely destroyed.Previously to entering upon the immediate history of6 HISTORY OF THEthe convention, it will be necessary to review the policyand measures of the national government, which eventuallyled to the war between this country and Great Britain; as it was that war which induced the New-englandstates to call the convention.After the formation of the Constitution of the UnitedStates by the Convention of 1787, and before its adoptionby the several states, the country became divided into twopolitical parties — the friends and the enemies of thatconstitution. The former, being in favour of the establishmentof a federal government, according to the plan delineatedin the constitution, naturally took the name ofFederalists. Those who were opposed to the constitution,and the form of government which it contained, as naturallytook the name of Anti-federalists. Under these titles,when the constitution had been adopted, and was about tocommence its operations, these parties took the field, andarrayed themselves, both in congress and in the country,under their several banners. THe Federalists, that is, thefriends of the new constitution and government, were forthe first eight years the majority, and of course were ableto pursue the policy, and adopt the measures, which intheir judgment were best calculated to promote the greatinterests of the Union. At their head, by the unanimousvote of the nation, was placed the illustrious Washington,who had led their armies to victory in the war ofindependence, and who was now designated by the wholebody of the people as their civil leader and guide, and theprotector of their rights and liberties. No person who isnot old enough to remember the feelings of ]789, canrealize the deep emotions of that most interesting period,the hopes that were enkindled by the reappearance of thisgreat man upon the stage of active usefulness, and of theconfidence that was reposed in his talents, his wisdom, thepurity of his character, and the disinterestedness of hispatriotism. Congress assembled, and the government wasHARTFORD CONVENTION. 7organized. Among the members of the legislative houses,were to be found those who had attended the conventionof 1787, and assisted in forming the constitution underwhich they were convened to deliberate on the highestinterests of the Union. Among them were the names ofStrong, King, Ellsworth, Johnson, Sherman, Madison,Langton, Few, Paterson, Read, Baldwin, and Lilian —all members of the convention. These men could notfail of being thoroughly acquainted with the constitution,in all its parts and provisions, the views which were entertainedof its character and principles by the convention,and which had been fully explained and discussed beforethe state conventions by which it had been approved andratified. They were also associated, in the Senate andHouse of Representatives, with others from different partsof the Union, and of the highest reputation for publicspirit and talents, many of whom had, either in the councilor in the field, assisted in vindicating the rights andachieving the indepernlonoR of their country. Among thelatter were R. Morris, Carroll, R. H. Lee, Izard, Schuyler,Benson, Boudinot, Fitzsimmons, Sedgwick, Surges,Trumbull, Ames, and Wadsworth. On men of this description,devolved the task of commencing operationsunder the new and untried system of government, whichhad been established by the great body of the people overthis infant republic. No collection of statesmen or patriotswere ever placed in a more sublime or responsiblesituation. On their wisdom, integrity, patriotism, andvirtue, under the blessing of Heaven, depended not only thefreedom, the prosperity, and the happiness of the unnumberedmillions who might hereafter inhabit this emancipatedportion of the western continent, but the result ofthe great experiment which was about to be made, whetherthere was virtue enough in men to support a systemof free, elective, representative government.The attempt was made, and it was successful. During8 HISTORY OF THEthe two successive periods of General Washington's administration,the cardinal principles of the governmentwere ascertained and established, and a general systemof national policy was marked out and pursued, whichhas regulated and controlled the important concerns ofthe national government to the present day. At the firstsession of the first congress, a judicial system was formedwith such skill and wisdom, that forty year's experienceapproves and sanctions, in the fullest manner, the soundnessof its principles and the practical wisdom and utilityof its general character and provisions. A financial system,devised by the extraordinary mind, and matured by theintuitive discernment of Hamilton, was adopted, the greatprinciples of which have been in operation through all thevicissitudes of party which the country has experienced,and are still in force. The funding system was alsoadopted by the first congress, which as strongly displayedthe wisdom, as it did the justice of the government.The national Bank, an institution indispensably necessaryto the government as well as to the country at large, wasanother important measure of this administration. Theorganization of the militia, and the formation of a navy,were objects of its constant attention and solicitude. Inshort, it may be said, without danger of its being seriouslycontroverted by men of intelligence and character, thatthe great principles of policy which have led the nationonward to reputation, respectability, prosperity, and power,were proposed and adopted under the administration ofWashington, and were the fruits of the combined wisdom,profound forecast, and disinterested patriotism of himselfand his associates in the councils of the nation. He wasthe great leader, and they were members, of that classof politicians who were called Federalists — a body of menwho have been the objects of vulgar reproach and popularcalumny from the time the government was formed, downto the present period.HARTFORD CONVENTION. 9The acknowledged head of the Anti-federal party wasThomas Jefferson. At the time when the conventionwhich formed the constitution were in session, and untilits adoption by nine of the states, Mr. Jefferson was absentfrom the country in France, where he had resided as theambassador of the United States for a number of years.As his character and conduct will be found to be intimatelyconnected with the subject of this work, it will be necessaryto devote some time to an examination of his politicalcareer, from the time of his return from Europe, until theexpiration of his administration of the national government.This gentleman came into public life at an early age;and after having been once initiated in political pursuits,he devoted to them a large portion of the residue of hisdays. His mind was of a visionary and speculative cast; —he was somewhat enthusiastic in his notions of government,ambitious in his disposition, and fanciful in his opinions ofthe nature and principles of government. By a long courseof watchful discipline, he had obtained a strict commandover his temper, which enabled him to wear a smooth andplausible exterior to persons of all descriptions with whomhe was called to mingle or associate. Having been chairmanof the committee of the congress of 1776, by whomthe Declaration of Independence was drawn up, that factgave him a degree of celebrity, which the mere style ofcomposition in that celebrated document would not, underother circumstances, have secured to its author. At thesame time, he had the reputation of being a scholar as wellas a statesman; and more deference was paid to him, inboth respects, than the true state of the case called for, orinstrictness would warrant. His knowledge of men, however,was profound ; he understood the art of gaining andretaining popular favour beyond any other politician eitherof ancient or modern times. Whilst ho was apparentlyfamiliar with those who were about him, he was capableof deep dissimulation ; and though he had at his command10 HISTORY OF Theamultitude of devoted agents, he was generally his ownadviser and counsellor. If, by any untoward circumstance,he found himself in the power of any individual to such anextent as to endanger his standing in the community, hetook care to secure that individual to his interests, by anobligation so strong as to be relieved of all serious apprehensionsof a future exposure. In addition to all his othercharacteristics, during his long residence in France, he hadbecome thoroughly imbued with the principles of the infidelphilosophy which prevailed in that kingdom, and extensivelyover the continent of Europe, previously to andduring the French revolution. This fact, in connectionwith the belief that his views of government were of awild and visionary character, destroyed the confidence ofa large portion of his most intelligent countrymen in himas a politician, as well as a moralist and a Christian.Mr. Jefferson was in Paris when the constitution waspublished. He early declared himself not pleased withthe system of government which it contained. On the13th of November, 1787, in a letter to John Adams, hesaid — " How do you like our new constitution ? I confessthere are things in it which stagger all my dispositions tosubscribe to what such an assembly has proposed. Thehouse of federal representatives will not be adequate tothe management of affairs either foreign or federal. Theirpresident seems a bad edition of a Polish king. He maybeelected from four years to four years, for life. Reasonand experience prove to us, that a chief magistrate, socontinually, is an office for life. When one or two generationsshall have proved that this is an office for life, itbecomes, on every succession, worthy of intrigue, ofbribery, of force, and even of foreign interference. Itwill be of great consequence to France and England, tohave America governed by a Gallon or an Anglican.Once in office, and possessing the military force of theUnion, without the aid or check of a council, he would notHARTFORD CONVENTION. 11be easily dethroned, even if the people could be induced towithdraw their votes from him. I wish that, at the endof the four years, they had made him forever ineligible asecond time. Indeed, I think all the good of this newconstitution might have been couched in three or four newarticles to be added to the good, old, and venerable fabric,which should have been preserved even as a religiousrelique."In a letter of the same date to Colonel Smith, hesays — " I do not know whether it is to yourself or Mr.Adams I am to give my thanks for the copy of the newconstitution. I beg leave, through you, to place themwhere due. It will yet be three weeks before I shallreceive them from America. There are very good articlesin it, and very bad. I do not know which preponderate.What we have lately read in the history of Hollandin the chapter on the Stadtholder, would have sufficed toset me against a chief eligible for a long duration, if I hadever been disposed toward one ^ and what we have alwaysread of the election of Polish kings, should have foreverexcluded the idea of one continually for life. Wonderfulis the effect of impudent and persevering lying. TheBritish ministry have so long hired their gazetteers torepeat, and model into every form, lies about our being inanarchy, that the world has at length believed them, theEnglish nation has believed them, the ministers themselveshave come to believe them, and what is more wonderful,we have believed them ourselves. Yet where doesthis anarchy exist, except in the single instance of Massachusetts? And can history produce an instance of rebellionso honorably conducted ? I say nothing of its motives.They were founded in ignorance, not wickedness. Godforbid we shoidd ever he twenty years without such a rebellion.The people cannot be all, and always well informed. Thepart which is wrong will be discontented in proportion tothe facts they misconceive. If they remain in quiet under12 HISTORY or THEsuch misconceptions, it is a lethargy, the forerunner of deathto public liberty. We have had thirteen states independentfor eleven years. There has been one rebellion. Thatcomes to one rebellion in a century and a half for eachstate. What country before ever existed a century anda half without a rebellion ? And what country can preserveits liberties, if its rulers are not learned from time totime that this people preserve the spirit of resistance Letthem take arms. The remedy is to set them rio^ht as tofacts, pardon, and pacify them. What signify a few liveslost in a century or two? The tree of liberty must be refreshedfrom time to time with the blood of patriots and tyrants. Itis its natural manure. "In a letter to William Carmichael, dated December11th, 1787, he says — " Our new constitution is powerfullyattacked in the American newspapers. The objectionsare, that its effect would be to form the thirteen states intoone ; that proposing to melt all down into a general government,they have fenced the people by no declaration ofrights ; they have not renounced the power of keeping astanding army ; they have not secured the liberty of thepress ; they have reserved the power of abolishing trialsby jury in civil cases ; they have proposed that the laws ofthe federal legislatures shall be paramount to the laws andconstitutions of the states; they have abandoned rotationin office ; and particularly their president may be reelectedfrom four years to four years, for life, so as to renderhim a king for life, like a king of Poland; and theyhave not given him either the check or aid of a council.To these they add calculations of expense, &c. <fec. tofrighten the people. You will perceive that those objectionsare serious, and some of them not without foundation."The subject is alluded to subsequently in a variety ofletters to different correspondents, in the course of whichhe confines his objections principally to the omission of aHARTFORD CONVENTION. 18bill or declaration of rights, and the re-eligibility of thepresident.Enough has been quoted to show that Mr. Jeffersonwas not friendly to the constitution ; and some of his sentimentswere of a nature to shake the confidence of its friendsin the soundness of his general political principles. Of thisdescription were his remarks on the Massachusetts insurrection.So far from considering rebellion against governmentan evil, he viewed it as a benefit — as a necessaryingredient in the republican character, and highly usefulin its tendency to warn rulers, from time to time, that thepeople possessed the spirit of resistance. And particularlywould the public feelings be shocked at the cold-bloodedindifference with which he inquires, " What signify a few "lives lost in a century or two ?" and the additional reifiark,that " The tree of liberty must he refreshed from time totime v>ilh the blood of patriots and tyrants. It is its naturalmanures This language would better become a TurkishSultan, or the chief of a Tartar horde, than a distinguishedrepublican, who had been born and educated in a Christiancountry, and enjoyed all the advantages to be derived fromcivilization, literature, and science.In September, 1789, Mr. Jefferson left Paris, on his returnto the United States. On the 15th of December, ofthat year, he wrote the following letter to General Washington:Chesterfield, December 15, 1789.** To THE President.Sir, — I have received at this place the honor of yourletters of October the 13th, and November the 30th, andam truly flattered by your nomination of me to the verydignified office of Secretary of State, for which permit mehere to return you my humble thanks. Could any circumstanceseduce me to overlook the disproportion between itsduties and my talents, it would be the encouragement of14 HISTORY OP THEyour choice. But when I contemplate the extent of thatoffice, embracing as it does the principal mass of domesticadministration, together with the foreign, I cannot be insensibleof my inequality to it ; and I should enter on itwith gloomy forebodings from the criticisms and censuresof a public, just, indeed, in their intentions, but sometimesmisinformed and misled, and always too respectable to beneglected. I cannot but foresee the possibility that thismay end disagreeably for me, who having no motive topublic service but the public satisfaction, would certainlyretire the moment that satisfaction should appear to languish.On the other hand, I feel a degree of familiaritywith the duties of my present office, as far at least as Iam capable of understanding its duties. The ground Ihave already passed over, enables me to see my way intothat which is before me. The change of government too,taking place in the country where it is exercised, seems toopen a possibility of piocuilug from the new rulers somenew advantages in commerce, which may be agreeable toour countrymen. So that, as far as ray fears, my hopes,or my inclinations might enter into this question, I confessthey would not lead me to prefer a change.But it is not for an individual to choose his post. Youare to marshal us as may best be for the public good ; andit is only in the case of its being indifferent to you, that Iwould avail myself of the option you have so kindly offeredin your letter. If you think it better to transfer me toanother post, my inclination must be no obstacle ; nor shallit be, if there is any desire to suppress the office I nowhold, or to reduce its grade. In either of these cases, beso good as to signify to me by another line your ultimatewish, and I shall conform to it cordially. If it should beto remain at New York, my chief comfort will be to workunder your eye, my only shelter the authority of yourname, and the wisdom of measures to be dictated by youand implicitly executed by me. Whatever you may beHARTFORD CONVENTION. ISpleased to decide, I do not see that the matters which havecalled me hither will permit me to shorten the stay I originallyasked ; that is to say, to set out on ray journeynorthward till the month of March. As early as possiblein that month, I shall have the honor of paying my respectsto you in New York. In the mean time, I havethat of tendering to you the homage of those sentimentsof respectful attachment with which I am. Sir,Your most obedient, and most humble servant,Th. Jefferson."This letter will show with what feelings of esteem andrespect for General Washington Mr. Jefferson professedlyaccepted the appointment of Secretary of State. It mayhereafter appear with what degree of sincerity these professionswere made ; and it is important to the object ofthis work, that it should be borne in mind by the reader,because one end which the writer has in view in preparingit is, to enable the community to form a more just estimateof his principles and character.By adverting to that part of Mr. Jefferson's writings,published since his death, which bears the singular andawkward title of "^«a," it appears by his own declarations,that immediately upon entering upon the duties ofhis office, he became an opposer of some of the principalmeasures of the government. He says —I returned from that mission (to France) in the firstyear of the new government, having landed in Virginia inDecember, 1789, and proceeded to New York in March,1790, to enter on the office of Secretary of State. Here,certainly, I found a state of things which, of all I had evercontemplated, I the least expected. I had left France inthe first year of her revolution, in the fervor of naturalrights, and zeal for reformation. My conscientious devotionto those rights could not be heightened, but it hadbeen aroused and excited by daily exercise. The press16 HISTORY OF THEdent received me cordially, and my colleagues, and the circleof principal citizens, apparently with welcome. Thecourtesies of dinner parties given me, as a stranger newlyarrived among them, placed me at once in their familiarsociety. Eut I cannot describe the wonder and mortificationwith which the table conversations filled me. Politicswere the chief topic, and a preference of a kingly over arepublican government, was evidently the favorite sentiment.An apostate I could not be, 7ior yet a hypocrite ; and Ifound myself, for the most part, the only advocate on therepublican side of the question, unless among the gueststhere chanced to be some members of that party from thelegislative houses. Hamilton's financial system had thenpassed. It had two objects : 1. As a puzzle, to excludepopular understanding and inquiry ; 2. As a machine forthe corruption of the legislature; for he avowed the opinion,that man could be governed by one of two motives only,force, or interest ; force, he observed, in this country, wasout of the question ; and the interests, therefore, of themembers, must be laid hold of to keep the legislature inunison with the executive. And with grief and shame itmust be acknowledged that his machine was not withouteffect ; that even in this, the birth of our government, somemembers were found sordid enough to bend their duty totheir interests, and to look after personal, rather thanpublic good."Another measure of great Importance, which Mr. Jeffersonstrongly disapproved, was the assumption of the statedebts. Nothing could be more just or more reasonablethan this act of the-general government. The exertions ofdifferent states had necessarily been unequal, and in thesame proportion their expenses had been increased. Butthose expenses had all been incurred in the common cause ;and that cause having been successful, nothing could bemore just than that the debts thus incurred should be borneby the nation. Mr. Jefferson, however, stigmatizes theHartford CONVENTION. 17measure as corrupt. " The more debt," he says, " Hamiltoncould rake up, the more plunder for his mercenaries."And he closes a long series of opprobrious remarksupon the subject, and upon the manner in which, accordingto his opinion, it was carried, by saying — " This added tothe number of votaries to the Treasury, and made its chiefthe master of every vote in the legislature, which mightgive to the government the direction suited to his politicalviews."The bank was another measure which did not meet withMr. Jefferson's support.After remarking on these various subjects, he says,Nor was this an opposition to General Washington. Hewas true to the republican charge confided to him, and hassolemnly and repeatedly protested to me, in our conversations,that he would lose the last drop of his blood in supportof it ; and he did this the oftener, and with the moreearnestness, because he knew my suspicions of Hamilton'sdesigns against it, and wished to quiet them. For he wasnot aware of the drift, or of the effect of Hamilton'sschemes. Unversed in financial projects, and calculations,and budgets, his approbation of them was bottomed onhis confidence in the man.*' But Hamilton was not only a monarchist, but for amonarchy bottomed on corruption." And he then givesan account of a conversation which he says took place ata meeting of the Vice-president and the heads of departments,in the course of which the British constitution wasalluded to ; and in regard to which he says — " Mr.Adams observed, 'Purge that constitution of its corruption,and give to its popular branch equality of representation,and it would be the most perfect constitution ever de .vised by the wit of man.' Hamilton paused, and observed,Purge it of its corruption, and give to its popular branchequality of representation, and it would become an impracticablegovernment; as it stands at present, with all its18 HISTORY OF THEsupposed defects, it is the most perfect government whicheverexisted."The Funding System was one of the great measuresthat distinguished General Washington's administration.It was devised by Hamilton, and has ever been consideredas reflecting the highest credit upon his talents and patriotism.No man labored with more zeal or ability toprocure the adoption of the constitution than this greatstatesman. The Federalist, of which he was one of theprincipal writers, and contributed the largest share, haslong been considered as a standard work on the constitution,and is now resorted to as an authority of the highestrespectability and character, respecting the true principlesand construction of that instrument. The system of revenueadopted under General Washington, vias also the workof this distinguished financier ; and so nearly perfect wasit found to be in practice, amidst all the changes andviolence of party, and under the administration of thoseindividuals who were originally opposed to its adoption,that they severally found it necessary, when placed at thehead of the government, to pursue the system which he haddevised. Even Mr. Jefferson himself, during the eight yearsthat he held the office of chief magistrate, never ventured toadopt a new system of finance, but adhered, in all its essentialparticulars, to that devised by Hamilton. And yet,from the moment he came into the executive departmentof the government, and was associated with Hamiltonand others in establishing the principles of the constitution,it appears, by his own evidence, that he Alas endeavoringto destroy the reputation and influence of that great statesman,by secret slanders, and insidious suggestions againsthis political integrity and orthodoxy. The article fromwhich the foregoing citations are taken, was not written atthe moment — it was not the record of events as they occurredfrom day to day : it bears date in 1818 — nearly thirtyyears after most of those events took place, and fourteenHARTFORD CONVENTION. 19years after General Hamilton had been consigned to thetomb. A more extraordinary instance of vindictive, personal,or political hostility, probably cannot be mentioned.This work, however, has not been undertaken with theview of vindicating the character of General Hamiltonfrom the aspersions of Mr. Jefferson. That duty devolveson others ; and it is a gratification to know that the task isin a fair way to be performed by those, who, it is presumed,will see that it is done faithfully. Mr. Jefferson's " Writings"have been referred to for the purpose of showinghis original dislike of the constitution, his opposition to themost important measures of the government at its firstorganization, and his inveterate hostility to the most able,upright and disinterested expounders of the constitution.Among these was Alexander Hamilton. The mode of attackupon this Histingnislipd individual, and equally distinguishedpublic benefactor, was no less insidious than itwas unjust and calumnious. It was to represent him notonly as unfriendly to the constitution, in the formation andadoption of which he was one of the intelligent, active, andinfluential agents, but as a monarchist — an enemy to republicanismitself. In the quotations which have alreadybeen made from his " ^»a," he says General Hamiltonwas not only a monarchist, but for a monarchy bottomedon corruption." And he professes to repeat declarationsof a similar kind, made openly by General Hamilton at adinner party, when Mr. Jefferson himself was present.Assertions of this kind, unsupported by any other evidencethan his own declarations, are not worthy of credit. GeneralHamilton was too well acquainted with Mr. Jefferson'sfeeling toward him, and of his disposition to undermineand destroy him, thus voluntarily and unnecessarily toplace himself in his power. In some instances, in thecourse of his " Ana" other names are introduced as corroboratingwitnesses in support of some of the chargesagainst General Hamilton. It is difficult to disprove postsHISTORY OF THEhumour testimony by positive evidence, especially when theparties, as well as the witnesses, are in their graves ; butseveral of the individuals, named by Mr. Jefferson as thepersons from whom he derived a knowledge of the conversationsand declarations of General Hamilton, will add nostrength to the evidence; they are not worthy of beliefin a case of this kind.That General Hamilton was an enemy to the very natureof the government, in the formation of which he hadassisted so zealously and so faithfully, in procuring theadoption of which he had laboured with as much talent,and with as much effect, as any other man in the UnitedStates, and in developing and establishing the great principlesof which, his exertions were inferior to those of noother individual, will not at this late period be credited.That Mr. Jefferson wished, by eeciGt measures, and atrain of artful and insidious means, to destroy his greatrival, no person acquainted with his history, conduct, andcharacter, can doubt. It comported with his policy tolay the charge of monarchical feelings and sentimentsagainst him, because his object was to avail himself ofthe prejudices of the people against Great Britain, whichthe war of independence had excited, and which time hadnot allayed, to raise himself to popularity and power.When the French revolution had advanced far enough toenlist the feelings of a portion of our countrymen in theirfavour, on the ground that the nation was endeavouring tothrow off a despotism, and establish a republican government,another portion of them considered the principlesthey avowed, and the course they pursued, as dangerousto the very existence of civilized society. Mr. Jeffersondeclares in his-twa," as above quoted, that he " hadleft France in the first year of her revolution, in the fervorof natural rights and zeal for reformation." His devotionto those rights, he says, " could not be heightened, but ithad been aroused and excited by daily exercise." Accord-hartfordCONVENTION. 21ingle he became, at a very early period, the leader of theparty in this country, who, in the utmost warmth of feeling,espoused the cause of revolutionary France. Torender himself the more conspicuous, he found it expedientto stigmatize those who entertained different sentimentsfrom himself, as the enemies of republicanism, andof course, as the friends of monarchy. The meaning ofthis charge was, that they were the friends of Great Britainand the British government. Hence proceeded thecharges of a monarchical propensity in Mr. Adams andGeneral Hamilton, specimens of which have been alreadyadduced. But it was soon found necessary to go greaterlengths than this. To pave the way for a gradual attemptto undermine the popularity of General Washington, andto shake the public confidence in his patriotism and integrity,a similar effort was made to involve him in asimilar accusation. The plan adopted to accomplish thisobject, was to represent him as having a bias towardGreat Britain, and against France. If Mr. Jefferson, whohad espoused the side of revolutionary France, couldsucceed in making the country believe that GeneralWashington had taken sides with Great Britain againstFrance, in the great controversy that was then convulsingEurope, it would follow almost as a necessary consequence,that he would be considered as the enemy of freedom, andthe friend of monarchical government. In his correspondence,published since his death, there is the followingletter :To P. Mazzei.« Monticello, April 24, 1796.My dear Friend — The aspect of our politics haswonderfully changed since you left us. In place of thatnoble love of liberty and republican government whichcarried us triumphantly through the war, an Anglicanmonarchical and aristocratical party has sprung up, whose22 HISTORY OF THEavowed object is to draw over us the substance, as theyhave ah-lady done the forms, of the British government.The main body of our citizens, however, remain true totheir republican principles : the whole landed interest isrepublican, and so is a great mass of talents. Against usare the executive, the judiciary, two out of three branchesof the legislature, all the officers of the government, allwho want to be officers, all timid men who prefer thecalm of despotism to the boisterous sea of liberty, Britishmerchants, and Americans trading on British capitals,speculators and holders in the banks and public funds, acontrivance invented for the purposes of corruption, andfor assimilating us in all things to the rotten as well asthe sound parts of the British model. It would give youa fever were I to name to you the apostates who havegone over to these heresies, men who were Samson inthe field and Solomon in the council, but who have hadtheir heads shorn by the harlot England. In short, wearelikely to preserve the liberty wc have obtained onlyby unremitting labors and perils. But we shall preserveit ; and our mass of weight and wealth on the good sideis so great, as to leave no danger that force will ever beattempted against us. We have only to awake, and snapthe Lilliputian cords with which they have been entanglingus during the first sleep which succeeded our labors."When this letter first appeared in the United States, itwas in the following form :*' Our political situation is prodigiously changed sinceyou left us. Instead of that noble love of liberty, and thatrepublican government which carried us through the dangersof the war, an anglo-monarchic-aristocratic partyhas arisen. Their avowed object is, to impose on us thesubstance, as they have already given us the form, of theBritish government. Nevertheless, the principal body ofour citizens remain faithful to republican principles, asalso the men of talents. We have against us (republicans)HARTFORD CONVENTION. 23the executive power, the judiciary, (two of the threebranches of our government,) all the officers of government,all who are seeking for offices, all timid men, whoprefer the calm of despotism to the tempestuous sea ofliberty, the British merchants, and the Americans whotrade on British capitals, the speculators, persons interestedin the bank, and public funds. [Establishmentsinvented with views of corruption, and to assimilate us tothe British model in its worst parts.] I should give you afever, if I should name the apostates who have embracedthese heresies, men who were Solomon in council, andSamson in combat, but whose hair has been cut off" bythe whore England.They would wrest from us that liberty which we haveobtained by so much labor and peril ; but we shall preserveit. Our mass of weight and riches are so powerful,that we have nothing to fear from any attempt against usby force. It is sufficient that we guard ourselves, and thatwe break the Lilliputian ties by which they have boundus, in the first slumbers which have succeeded our labors.It suffices that we arrest the progress of that system ofingratitude and injustice toward France, from which theywould alienate us, to bring us under British influence."It may easily be imagined, that the appearance of thisextraordinary article in the United States, was calculatedto disturb the feelings of Mr. Jefferson. Such an attackas it contained on the character of General Washington,as well as upon his coadjutors, could not pass unnoticed ;and it obviously placed the writer of it in a perplexingand inextricable dilemma. Accordingly, in a letter addressedto Mr. Madison, dated August 3d, 1797, he thusunbosomed himself:The variety of other topics the day I was with you,kept out of sight the letter to Mazzei imputed to me inthe papers, the general substance of which is mine, thoughthe diction has been considerably altered and varied in24 HISTORY OF THEthe course of its translations from French into Italian,from Italian into French, and from French into English.I first met with it at Brandenburg, and for a moment conceivedI must take the field of the public papers. I couldnot disavow it wholly, because the greatest part was minein substance, though not in form. I could not avow it asit stood, because the form was not mine, and, in one place,the substance was very materially falsified. This, then,would render explanations necessary; nay, it would renderproofs of the whole necessary, and draw me at lengthinto a publication of all (even the secret) transactions ofthe administration, while I was of it ; and embroil mepersonally with every member of the executive and thejudiciary, and with others still. I soon decided in my ownmind to be entirely silent. I consulted with several friendsat Philadelphia, who, every one of them, were clearlyagainst my avowing or disavowing, and some of themconjured me most earnestly to let nothing provoke me toit.I corrected, in conversation with them, a substantialmisrepresentation in the copy published. The originalhas a sentiment like this, (for I have it not before mop)*' They are endeavoring to submit us to the substance, asthey already have to the forms of the British government;meaning by forms, the birthdays, levees, processions toparliament, inauguration pomposities, &c. But the copypublished says, ' as they have already submitted us to theform of the British,' &c. ; making me express hostility tothe form of our government, that is to say, to the constitutionitself; for this is really the difference of the Wordform, used in singular or plural, in that phrase, in theEnglish language. Now it would be impossible for me toexplain this publicly, without bringing on a personal differencebetween General Washington and myself, whichnothing before the publication of this letter has ever done.It would embroil me also with all those with whom hischaracter is still popular, that is to say, with nine-tenthsHARTFORD CONVENTION. 25of the United States ; and what good would be obtainedby avowing the letter with the necessary explanations ?Very little, indeed, in my opinion, to counterbalance agood deal of harm. From my silence in this instance, itcannot be inferred that I am afraid to own the general sentimentsof the letter. If I am subject to either imputation,it is to avowing such sentiments too frankly both inprivate and public, often when there is no necessity for it,merely because / disdain every thing like duplicity. Still,however, I am open to conviction. Think for me on theoccasion, and advise me what to do, and confer with ColonelMonroe on the subject."This letter, take which version of it we may, disclosesthe secret of Mr. Jefferson's policy. It was to representthe federal party as monarchists, and aristocrats,, enemiesto republicanism, and therefore devoted to the interestsof Great Britain, and hostile to those of France. No manever understood more perfectly the effect of names uponthe minds of partizans, than this great champion of modernrepublicanism ; and hence he informs his friend Mazzei,that the Federalists were a body of Anglo-monarchies Aristocrats,and himself and his friends were Republicans.Nobody will be surprised to find, that the publication ofhis letter in the newspapers of the United States, gaveMr. Jefferson uneasiness. The man who had the hardihoodto accuse General Washington with being an aristocratand a monarchist, and particularly, with being devotedto British influence and interests, must have possessed adegree of mental courage not often found in the humanconstitution. And it is perfectly apparent that this wasthe circumstance which so greatly embarrassed him, whendetermining the important question whether it would bemost for his own advantage to come before the public, andendeavour to explain away the obvious meaning of hisletter, or to observe a strict, and more prudent silence,and leave the world to form their own conclusions. He26 HISTORY OF THEfinally resolved on the latter, making his explanations onlyto his confidential friends, and leaving them in such a form,that they might pass, with his other posthumous works,to future generations.A little attention to the subject will show, that headopted the most prudent course. Mr. Jefferson's attemptto give a different meaning to his own language, is entirelyunsatisfactory. In the letter, as first published in thenewspapers, it is said — " Our poetical salivation is prodigiouslychanged since you left us." In the version of itin his posthumous works, it is — " The aspect o( our politicshas wonderfully changed since you left us." Not havingthe original, either in Italian or French, it is not practicableat this time to say which is most correct. But thereis a material difference between the expressions " Ourpolitical condition," and " the aspect of our politics." Thefirst has an immediate and obvious reference to the situationof the country at large, as connected with the generalgovernment, and the character of that government ; theother relates merely to the measures of the government.The first, if in any degree to be deplored, must be consideredas permanent ; the last, as referring to merelegislative acts, which in their nature were transitory.The next sentence shows, conclusively, that it was thecharacter of the government, and not merely its measures,that were alluded to. " Instead of that noble love ofliberty, and that republican government, which carried U3through the dangers of the war, an party has arisen." The "republican governmentwhich carried us through the dangers of the war,"was the " old confederation," as it is usually called. Thechange that had taken place was in the system of government— in the substitution of something else in the place ofthe confederation. By turning back to Mr. Jefferson'sletter to Mr. Adams, dated November 13th, 1787, we shallfind him using the following language — " How do you likeHARTFORD CONVENTION. 27our new constitution ? I confess there are things in itwhich stagger all my dispositions to subscribe to what suchan assembly has proposed." He then enumerates severalobjections, and says — " I think all the good of this newconstitution might have been couched in three or four newarticles to he added to tie good, old, and venerable fabric,which should have been preserved even as a religiousrelique." It is obvious, therefore, that his affections wereplaced on the "good, old" confederation; and when hecomplains of the prodigious alteration that had taken placein our political condition since Mr. Mazzei had left us, hemust have had reference to the new constitution.This is further manifest from the language which immediatelyfollows. He declares in the letter as first published,that the "avowed object of the party to which he has alluded,is, to impose on us the substance, as they have already givenus the form of the British government." In the letter aspublished in his works, he blends the two sentences together,and after mentioning the Anglo party, varies the passageabove quoted, by saying — "whose avowed object isto draw over us the substance, as they have already done theforms, of the British government." The British governmentconsists of three estates — a hereditary monarchy, ahereditary House of Peers, and an elective House of Commons— or in other words, of King, Lords, and Commons.Our government consists of a President, Senate, and Houseof Representatives — all elective, though for different periods.One objection urged, on various occasions, againstthe adoption of the constitution, was its resemblance, inthe particulars just mentioned, to the British government.Among others, Mr. Jefferson was pointedly opposed to there-eligibility of the executive. He compared it to the caseof the king of Poland, and thought there ought to havebeen a provision prohibiting the re-election of any individualto that office. The people of the states, however,concluded that their Liberties would not be exposed to any28 HISTORY OF THEimminent hazard, under a system where all the officers,executive and legislative, were elective, and they took theconstitution as it was. And great as Mr. Jefferson's fearsof danger to freedom were from this quarter, he eventuallyovercame them so far as to suffer himself to be placed inthe office of chief magistrate twice, without any apparentmiso-iviuffs of mind or conscience. Now it is scarcelypossible for any unblessed mind to believe, that he had notimmediate reference to this part of our constitution, whenhe remarked, that the " Anglo-monarchies Aristocratic"party were endeavouring to impose upon the nation " ikesubstance, as they had already given it the form, of theBritish government." These three cardinal branches of theBritish government, viz. "Kings, Lords, and Commons,"are all the form there is to that government. All theresidue of what is called by themselves their constitution,consists of unwritten and prescriptive usages, sometimescalled laws of parliament, which never were reduced toform, and certainly never were adopted in the form of aconstitution.Mr. Jefferson, in his letter to Mr. Madison, attempts togive a totally different meaning to this part of his letter.He says, " The original has a sentiment like this, (for I haveit not before me,) They are endeavouring to submit us tothe substance, as they already have to the forms, of theBritish government ; meaning by forms, the birth-days,levees, processions to parliament, inauguration pomposities,fcc. For this is really the meaning of the word form,used in the singular or plural, in that phrase, in the Englishlanguage," We do not believe that any person, wellacquainted with the English language, ever made use ofsuch an awkward and senseless expression as that abovecited — They are endeavouring to submit us to the substance.As Mr. Jefferson always was considered a scholar, theinternal evidence derived from this singular phraseologyHARTFORD CONVENTION. 29is sufficient to warrant the conclusion that it was adoptedhere for the occasion.But the application of the expression form, or evenforms, of the British government, to the practise of observingbirth-days, holding levees, of moving in procession toparliament, or the pomposities of inauguration, is downrightabsurdity. These ceremonious customs-are no partof the government, either in Great Britain, or in theUnited States. They may be childish, they may bepompous, they may be servile and adulatory, but they arenot proceedings, either in form or substance, of the government.Nor has the word form or forms any such legitimatemeaning. This explanation was doubtless contrived forfuture use, and not to be made public ; and it is not at allsurprising that Mr. Jefferson found there were seriousdifficulties in the way of a public exposure of his meaning,if this was all the explanation he had to give. The coursehe adopted, which was to observe a strict silence, was farmore discreet. A more weak and unsatisfactory attemptto evade a plain and obvious difficulty has rarely been made.The next sentence in the letter as first published is, " Nevertheless,the principal body of our citizens remain faithfulto republican principles, as also the men of talents."In the letter in Mr. Jefferson's works, it stands thus —The main body of our citizens, however, remain true totheir republican principles ; the whole landed interest is republican,and so is a great mass of talents." Now it may besafely said, that no mistake in translation can possibly accountfor the diversity that appears in these two sentences.Without noticing the difference between the first and lastmembers of the two sentences, the expression — "the wholelanded interest is republican" — is entirely wanting in theletter as first published. This must have been wilfully suppressedin the first letter, if it was in the original — a circumstancethat is not to be credited, because no possiblemotive can be assigned for such an act. The inference30 HISTORY OF THEthen must be, that it was introduced into the copy left forposthumous publication, to help the general appearance ofmistranslation, and to countenance and give plausibility toother alterations of more importance.The letter as first published, then proceeds — "We haveagainst us (republicans) the Executive Poicer, the Judiciary,two of the three branches of our government,) all the officersof government, all who are seeking for offices, all timidmen, who prefer the calm of despotism to the tempestuoussea of liberty, the British merchants, and the Americanswho trade on British capitals, the speculators, personsinterested in the Bank and Public Funds, [establishmentsinvented with views of corruption, and to assimilateus to the British model in its corrupt parts.] In the letterin Mr. Jefferson's works, it stands thus — " Against us arethe executive, the judiciary, two out of three branches of thelegislature, all the officers of government, all who want tobe officers, all timid men who prefer the calm of despotismto the boisterous sea of liberty, British merchants, andAmericans trading on British capitals, speculators andholders in the banks and public funds, a contrivance inventedfor the purposes of corruption, and for assimilatingus in all things to the rotten as well as the sound parts ofthe British model.It is impossible to avoid the conclusion, that the articlepublished in the form of a letter to Mazzei, in Mr. Jefferson'sworks, from which the last extract is taken, is not acorrect transcript of the original, but was prepared to answera specific purpose. No person will be persuadedthat Mr. Jefferson ever called the executive and the judiciary" two out of three branches of the legislature.''^ Thelanguage of the letter first published is correct — " rico ofthe three branches of our government. ^^ Again he says,speculators and holders in the banls.''^ There, was butone national bank, and reference must be made to nationalbanks alone. The first letter has it correctly — the Bank.HARTFORD CONVENTION. 31The fact that banks are mentioned in the last, is decisiveproof that the first is the most accurate translation.There is an expression here which is so strikingly characteristicof the author, that it ought not to pass unnoticed.Mr. Jefferson says, " We have against its republicans— all timid men who prefer the calm of despotism tothe tempestuous sea of liberty." In the second letter it isthe boisterous sea of liberty." It will be borne in mind,the "timid men" here spoken of, were not inhabitants ofFrance, or England, but of these United States, then underthe mild, and peaceable, and prosperous influence of thegovernment which they had so recently adopted, and thebeneficial effects of which they were then realizing in amost gratifying degree. That a man of his temperamentshould call such a state of things, under such a government,the calm of despotism, is not a little extraordinary.But it will be recollected, that in a letter quoted in theformer part of this work, when speaking of the insurrectionin Massachusetts, he said, "God forbid we shouldever be twenty years without such a rebellion." "Andwhat country can preserve its liberties, if its rulers are notwarned from time to time, that this people preserve thespirit of resistance ? Let them take arms." — "What signifya few lives lost in a century or tv/o ? The tree of libertymust be refreshed from time to time with the blood of patriotsand tyrants. It is its natural manures'' After readingthese sentiments and expressions, no person can besurprised to find that Mr. Jefferson should prefer the tumults,the distresses, and the bloodshed of insurrections, tothe peace, the tranquillity, and the social happiness, whichare enjoyed under a mild, beneficent, well-regulated, andwell-administered government. No man of sound mind,and virtuous principles, will envy him his choice.But the most extraordinary expression in this letter isthe declaration, that the republicans, that is, Mr. Jeffersonand his political partizans, were opposed by the executive32 HISTORY OF THEand the judiciary. When this allegation was made, andit is contained in both versions of the letter, the chief executivemagistrate of the United States was GeorgeWashington. George Washington led the armies of theUnited States through the revolutionary war ; and duringthe whole of that arduous and distressing conflict, discoveredmilitary skill and talents of the highest order. Underall circumstances, and in all situations, he manifested themost pure and devoted patriotism ; and after having seenhis country victorious, and its independence acknowledged,even by the adversary with whom he had so long and sosuccessfully contended, in a manner that excited the surpriseand the admiration not only of his own country, butof the civilized world, he surrendered the power withwhich he had been clothed, and which he had so honos exercised,into the hands of those from whom he received it, andretired to private life amidst the applause, and loaded withthe gratitude and benedictions of his fellow citizens. Whenit was found that the government which had carried thenation through the war, was insufficient for the exigenciesof peace, he again lent his whole talents aud influence to theformation and adoption of a new system, better calculatedfor the wants, and better suited to the promotion of the greatinterests of the union. As soon as that system was adoptedby the nation, he was called by the spontaneous, and unanimousvoice of his countrymen, to the office of chief magistrate; which call was renewed, with the same unanimity,on a second occasion ; at the end of which, after havinghis fellow citizens in a train of the warmestaffection, the purest patriotism, and the most elevatedpolitical morality and eloquence, he declined being again acandidate for office, and crowned with the highest honourswhich a free people could confer on their most respectedand revered citizen, bade a final adieu to all further activeengagement in the public affairs of the government andcountry. The life of this great man passed without a.HARTFORD CONVENTION. 33Stain. The annals of nations contain no account of amore unimpeachable character, either in military or civillife. And what adds much to the splendour of his reputation,he was as highly distinguished as a statesman, as hehad previously been as a soldier. In both he was illustriousin the most exalted sense of the word ; while mprivate life, he was, in an exemplary degree, amiable andvirtuous, beloved by his most intimate friends, and respectedand venerated by an enlarged and highly respectablecircle of neighbours and acquaintance.Such was the man who was stigmatized in this letterto a foreigner, residing in a distant quarter of the globe,as a member of an " Anglo-monarchic-aristocratic party"in this country, whose " avon-ed object was to impose onusthe substance, as they had already given us the form,of the British government." General Washington's republicanismis here expressly denied, notwithstanding hehad risked more, suffered more, and made greater exertions,to support and establish the republican character,principles, and government of his country, than any otherindividual in it.After having thus attempted to fix upon General Washingtonthe reproach of being a monarchist, and of enmityto the Constitution of the United States, Mr. Jeffersonproceeds to say of the monarchical party, of which heobviously considered General Washington as the head,*' They would wrest from us that liberty which u-c haveobtained by so much labor and peril ; but we shall preserveit. Our mass of weight and riches are so powerful,that we have nothing to fear from any attempt against usby force." In the letter, as ^j?^&//^/<6\'/ in his works, thispassage stands thus : "In short, we are likely to preservethe liberty we have obtained only by unremitting laborsand perils. But we shall preserve it ; and our mass ofweight and wealth on the good side is so great as, toleave no danger that force will ever be attempted against34 HISTORY OF THEUS." In the first place, it may be again remarked, thatno man, even of ordinary understanding and capacity,will ever believe that the difference of phraseology betweenthese two versions of this part of the letter, was causedby a mere mistake in the translation. The first implies -afull expectation that force might be used to destroy ourliberties. It says, " They would rest from us that liberty,"&.C. The second, that we are likely to preserve the libertywe have obtained," &c. without a suggestion of any attemptto wrest it from us.The letter, however, states the manner in which ourliberties are to be preserved. It says — " It is sufficientthat we guard ourselves, and that we break the Lilliputianties by which they have bound us, in the first slumberswhich have succeeded our labours." In the letter in thepublished works, this sentence is thus expressed — " Wehave only to awake and snap the Lilliputian cords withwhich they have been entangling us during the first stepwhich succeeded our labors." This can be considered inno other light, than that of referring to the Constitutionof the United States. It has already appeared, by thelanguage used in a variety of instances in his letters thathave been quoted, that Mr. Jefferson had strong objectionsto the constitution, and that in his judgment, " all thatwas good in it might have been included in three or fourarticles," added to the old confederation. As it was, thegovernment was too strong for his taste. The first slumberswhich succeeded the labours of the country in achievingits independence, must mean the period between the peaceof 1783, and the adoption of the constitution. This constitutionwas ^'■thc Lilliputian //e" by which the nationhad been bound, while in a fit of drowsiness ; but whichmust be broken, to insure its safety from bondage. Thispassage will assist the community in forming a just estimateof Mr. Jefferson's regard for the constitution, andof the government which it provided, and over which heHARTFORD CONVENTION. 35was destined at a future day to preside. This constitutionGeneral Washington assisted in forming ; he recommendedit strongly to the adoption of the country ; andhe devoted his great talents and influence for eight yearsto the development of its principles, and the establishmentof its operations; and was laboriously engaged inthese patriotic labours at the moment when Mr. Jeffersonwas thus secretly calumniating his character, and impeachinghis integrity ; and at the same time declaring,that our liberties could only be preserved by the destructionof the constitution.But Mr. Jefferson had still another machine to makeuse of in accomplishing our deliverance from the dangerswith which our liberties were surrounded, and by whichour freedom was threatened. " It suffices," says the letterfirst published, " that we arrest the progress of thatsystem of ingratitude, and injustice towards France, fromwhich they would alienate us, to bring us under Britishinfluence,''^ &c.Here is to be found the great governing principle ofMr. Jefferson's political conduct. — It upas friendship forFrance and enmity to Great Britain. Those whodid not adopt his sentiments, and pursue his system ofpolicy, were monarchists and aristocrats; and those whoagreed with him, and placed themselves under his directionand influence, were republicans.It should be mentioned as one of the singular circumstanceswhich attend this letter, that the sentence lastquoted from it is entirely omitted in that published in theposthumous works. It would seem very strange that theperson who translated Mr. Mazzei's letter, should not onlyhave added this sentence, and then finished with an &c.as if there had been something still further, if, as Mr.Jefferson would have it understood by leaving a copy ofit to be published after his death, no such sentence was inthe original.36 HISTORY OF THEThat this attack upon the reputation of General Washington,was the result of a political calculation, and intendedto answer the selfish and ambitious purposes of Mr.Jefferson, cannot for a moment be doubted. It has beenseen, that General Washington, at the first organization ofthe government, appointed him Secretary of State. Mr.Jefferson's letters, on various occasions, are full of expressionsof respect and regard for General Washington. Heleft that office at the close of the year 1793, and retired tohis residence at Monticello, in Virginia. There he wrote,in 1818, the first article in that collection of "Ana," as itnow stands in his book. This, it will be observed, wasmore than twenty years after the date of his letter toMazzei. In that, when speaking of General Hamilton'sinfluence, arising from the Bank, and other measures, andalluding to his monarchical principles, he says — " Herethen was the real ground of the opposition which wasmade to the course of his administration. Its object wasto preserve the legislature pure and independent of theexecutive, to restrain the administration to republicanforms and principles, and not permit the constitutionto be construed into a monarchy, and to be warped inpractice, into all the principles and pollutions of their favoriteEnglish model. Nor was this an opposition to GeneralWashington. He was true to the republican chargeconfided to him ; and has solemnly and repeatedly protestedto me, in our conversation, that he would lose the lastdrop of his blood in support of it."In the month of February, 1791, the House of Representativesof the United States passed a resolution callingon the Secretary of State [Mr. Jefferson] " to report tocongress the nature and extent of the privileges and restrictionsof the commercial intercourse of the UnitedStates with foreign nations, and the measures which heshould think proper to be adopted for the improvement ofthe commerce and navigation of the same." This reportHARTFORD CONVENTION. 37ives not delivered until December, 1793 ; and on the lastday of that month Mr. Jefferson resigned his office. Onthe 4th of January following, the house resolved itselfinto a committee of the whole on the report above alludedto, " when Mr. Madison laid on the table a series of resolutionsfor the consideration of the members."These memorable resolutions," says Judge Marshall,in his Life of Washington, " almost completely embracedthe idea of the report. They imposed an additional dutyon the manufactures, and on the tonnage of vessels, ofnations having no commercial treaty with the UnitedStates ; while they reduced the duties already imposed bylawon the tonnage of vessels belonging to nations havingsuch commercial treaty ; and they reciprocated the restrictionswhich were imposed on American navigation."Mr. Pipkin, in his '' Political and Civil History of theUnited States," when alluding to this subject, says, " Thisreport of Mr. Jefferson formed the basis of the celebratedcommercial resolutions, as they were called, submitted tothe house by Mr. Madison early in January, 1794. Thesubstance of the first of these resolutions was, that theinterest of the United States would be promoted by furtherrestrictions and higher duties, in certain cases, on themanufactures and navigation of foreign nations. The additionalduties were to be laid on certain articles manufacturedby those European nations which had no commercialtreaties with the United States." " The last of theresolutions declared, that provision ought to be made forascertaining the losses sustained by American citizens,from the operation of particular regulations of any countrycontravening the law of nations ; and that these losses bereimbursed, in the first instance, out of the additional dutieson the manufactures and vessels of the nations establishingsuch regulations."A long debate ensued on these resolutions, in the courseof which, Mr. Fitzsimmons, a member from Pennsylvania,38 HISTORY OF THEmoved that in their operations they should extend to allnations. This motion was met by one from Mr. Nicholas,of Virginia, the object of which was to exempt all nationsfrom their operation except Great Britain.In discussing these resolutions," says Mr. Pipkin, " awide range was taken ; their political as well as commercialeffects upon foreign nations, were brought into view.In the course of the debate it was soon apparent, that theirpolitical bearing was considered as the most important,particularly on that nation to which its operation wasfinally limited, by the motion of Mr. Nicholas."Judge Marshall gives a more extended sketch of the debatesThe advocates of the resolutions said, they " conceivedit impracticable to do justice to the interests of theUnited States without some allusion to politics ;" and after along discussion of the character and effects of the resolutions," It was denied that any real advantage was derivedfrom the extensive credit given by the merchants of GreatBritain. On the contrary the use made of British capitalwas pronounced a great political evil. It increased theunfavourable balance of trade, discouraged domestic manufactures,and promoted luxury. But its greatest mischiefwas, that it favored a system of British influence, whichwas dangerous to their political security."It was said to be proper in deciding the questionunder debate, to take into view political, as well as commercialconsiderations. Ill will and jealousy had at alltimes been the predominant features of the conduct ofEngland to the United States. That government hadgrossly violated the treaty of peace, had declined a commercialtreaty, had instigated the Indians to raise thetomahawk and scalping knife against American citizens,had let loose the Algerine upon their unprotected commerce,and had insulted their flag, and pillaged their tradein every quarter of the world. These facts being noto-HARTFORD CONVENTION. 39pious, it was astonishing to hear gentlemen ask how hadBritain injured their commerce?The conduct of France, on the contrary, had beenwarm and friendly. That nation had respected Americanrights, and had offered to enter into commercial arrangementson the liberal basis of perfect reciprocity.In contrasting the ability of the two nations to supporta commercial conflict, it was said Great Britain, totteringunder the weight of a king, a court, a nobility, a priesthood,armies, navies, debts, and all the complicated machineryof oppression which serves to increase the numberof unproductive, and lessen the number of productivehands ; at this moment engaged in a foreign war ; taxationalready carried to the ultimatum of financial device ;the ability of the people already displayed in the paymentof taxes constituting a political phenomenon ; all provethe debility of the system and the decrepitude of old age.On the other hand, the United States, in the flower ofyouth ; increasing in hands ; increasing in wealth ; andalthough an imitative policy has unfortunately prevailedin the erection of a funded debt, in the establishment ofan army, in the establishment of a navy, and all the papermachinery for increasing the number of unproductive, andlessening the number of productive hands ; yet the operationof natural causes has, as yet, in some degree, countervailedtheir influence, and still furnishes a great superiorityin comparison with Great Britain."The present time was declared to be peculiarly favourableto the views of the United States. It was only whiletheir enemy was embarrassed with a dangerous foreignwar, that they could hope for the establishment of just andequal principles."The real object of this report by the Secretary of State,and of the resolutions introduced by Mr. Madison, wasstated in the course of the debate upon the latter. *' Thediscussion of this subject, it was said, '' has assumed an40 HISTORY OF THEappearance which must be surprising to a stranger, andpainful in the extreme to ourselves. The supreme legislatureof the United States is seriously deliberating, notupon the welfare of our own citizens, but upon the relativecircumstances of two European nations; and this deliberationhas not for its object the relative benefits of theirmarkets to us, but which form of government is best andmost like our own, which people feel the greatest affectionfor us, and what measures we can adopt which will besthumble one, and exalt the other.The primary motive of these resolutions, as acknowledgedby their defenders, is not the increase of our agriculture,manufactures, or navigation, but to humble GreatBritain, and build up France."And such was unquestionably their real character andobject. But the intended operation of them, and of thelanguage and sentiments uttered respecting them in debate,was so clear and explicit, that they could not be mistaken,and therefore they could not fail of producing their designedeffect upon the feelings of the British government andpeople. Nor could they be viewed in any other light, thanas expressing great hostility to the interests of that nation,and strong partiality to those of France. And hence maybediscerned the first traces of that system of policy towardsGreat Britain, which originated with Mr. Jefferson, andwas steadily pursued by him through the remainder of hispolitical life, and by his immediate successor in the administrationof the national government, until it terminatedin the war of 1812.To establish the truth of the position just advanced, itwill be necessary to give a historical account of the measuresof the government, relating to the general subject,under the administrations of Mr. Jefferson and Mr. Madison.The facts which will be adduced, will be derivedfrom the public records and state papers, or from othersources equally authentic and creditable.HARTFORD' CONVENTION. 41In April, 1794, Mr. Jay, then Chief Justice of the UnitedStates, was appointed minister extraordinary to the courtof Great Britain. This mission was strongly dished bythe party of which Mr. Jefferson was the acknowledgedleader. But notwithstanding their disapprobation it waspursued; and in November following, a treaty was concluded,in which the great causes of uneasiness andanimosity between the two nations were adjusted, and afoundation laid for their future peace, harmony, and friendship.As soon as the news reached this country that sucha treaty had been concluded and signed, and long beforeits contents were known, there was a great degree ofexcitement among what Mr. Jefferson called the republicanparty. Notwithstanding all the clamour, the treatywas submitted to the Senate, who advised its ratification,with the exception of one article. One member of thatbody, however, in violation of the injunction of secrecyunder which they acted, and before the treaty was signedby the President, published it in a newspaper. Immediatelyupon its appearance, the country was thrown intoa ferment, and every possible effort was made to inducethe President to reject it. Meetings were held, violentresolutions were passed, and inflammatory addresses weremade, and circulated, with the hope, if not the expectation,of overawing that dignified and inflexible magistrate andpatriot, and of inducing him to withhold his final approbationfrom the treaty. The attempts all failed ; — the treatywas ratified ; and the nation derived from it numerous andsubstantial benefits.But it met the most decided disapprobation of Mr.Jefferson. In a letter to Mann Page, dated August 30th,1795, he says — " I do not believe with the and Montaigne, that fourteen out of fifteen menare rogues. I believe a great abatement from that proportionmay be made in favour of general honesty. But Ihave always found that rogues would he uppermost, and I42 HISTORY OF THEdo not know that the proportion is too strong for the higherorders, and for those who, rising above the swinish multitude,always contrive to nestle themselves into the placesof power and profit. These rogues set out with stealingthe people's good opinion, and then steal from them theright of withdrawing it, by contriving laws and associationsagainst the power of the people themselves. Our part ofthe country is in a considerable fermentation on what theysuspect to be a recent roguery of this kind. They say thatwhile all hands were below deck, mending sails, splicingropes, and every one at his own business, and the captainin his cabin attending to his log-book and chart, a rogueof a 'pilot has run them into an enemy's port. But metaphorapart, there is much dissatisfaction with Mr. Jay andhis treaty.'''' In a letter to William B. Giles, dated December31, 1795, he says — " I am well pleased with the mannerin which your house have testified their sense of thetreaty : while their refusal to pass the original clause ofthe reported answer proved their condemnation, the contrivanceto let it disappear silently respected appearancesin favour of the president, who errs as other men do, buterrs with integrity." In a letter to Edward Rutledgedated November 30th, 1795, he says — " I join with you inthinking the treaty an execrable thing. But both negotiatorsmust have understood, that as there were articlesin it which could not be carried into execution without theaid of the legislatures on both sides, therefore it must bereferred to them, and that these legislatures, being freeagents, would not give it their support if they disapprovedof it. I trust the popular branch of our legislature willdisapprove of it, and thus rid us o? an infamous act, whichis really nothing more than a treaty of alliance betweenEngland and the Anglomen of this country, against thelegislature and people of the United States."This animosity against the treaty cannot be accountedfor, on the ground that it was not a beneficial measure toHARTFORD CONVENTION. 43the nation. After the excitement which its publicationand ratification produced had subsided, its advantages wererealized and acknowledged ; and it may be said withsafety, that no subsequent arrangement between the twonations has ever been as beneficial to the United Statesas this. But it removed many sources of difficulty — thewestern posts, which the British had retained in violationof the treaty of 1783, were surrendered ; and the commerceof the country was greatly benefited. And it wascalculated to remove a variety of causes of uneasiness, ofcomplaint, of interference, and of recrimination, betweenthe nations, and therefore was thoroughly reprobated byMr. Jefferson. And it appears, by the last quotation fromhis letters, that rather than have it established, and go intooperation, he would have rejoiced if the House of Representativeshad encroached upon the constitutional prerogativeof the President and Senate, and withheld thenecessary legislative aid to carry its provisions into effect.The constitution authorizes the President, by and with theadvice and consent of the Senate, to make treaties ; andtreaties, when constitutionally made, are declared to bethesupreme law of the land. Of course, when thus made,if they require legislative acts to carry them into effect, thelegislature are bound by their constitutional duty, to passsuch laws ; otherwise the supreme law of the land may berendered inoperative, and be defeated, by one branch ofthe government. This bold experiment, Mr. Jeffersonwould have been gratified to see made, rather than havepeace and friendship established between this country andGreat Britain.Nor is the coarse attack upon Mr. Jay's character, byMr. Jefferson, in his letter above quoted, the least reprehensiblecircumstance in his conduct in relation to thistreaty. 3Ir. Jay was one of the most pure and virtuouspatriots that this country ever produced. His talents wereof a very high "order, his public services were of the most44 HISTORY OF THEmeritorious and disinterested description, and his publicand private reputation without reproach. Yet, with an airof levity, approaching jocularity, he is represented by Mr.Jefferson as one of those fortunate '■^ rogues,-^ who contriveto keep themselves uppermost in the world, — one who hadbeen guilty of an "infamous act" in making the treaty.Happy would it have been for his calumniator, if his characterhad been equally pure, and his services equally disinterestedand patriotic.When 3Ir. Jefferson came into office as chief magistrateof the Union, in 1801, Rufus King was minister from theUnited States to Great Britain. In June, 1802, that gentlemanwas instructed to adjust the boundary line betweenthe two nations ; and in May, 1803, in pursuance of hisinstructions, ho concluded a convention with that government.A dispute on this subject had existed between thetwo countries, from the ratification of the treaty of peacein 1783, to the date of the above mentioned convention.In forming this convention, it is known that Mr. King'sviews were fully acceded to by the British commissioner,Lord Hawkesbury, the latter having left the draft of theconvention to Mr. King, and fully approved of that whichhe prepared. In a message of the President of the UnitedStates to Congress, dated October 17, 1803, is the following]passage — "A further knowledge of the ground, in thenorth-eastern and north-western angles of the UnitedStates, has evinced that the boundaries established by thetreaty of Paris, between the British territories and oursinthose parts, were too imperfectly described to be susceptibleof execution. It has therefore been thoughtworthy of attention for preserving and cherishing the harmonyand useful intercourse subsisting between the twonations, to remove by timely arrangements, what unfavourableincidents might otherwise render a ground offuture misunderstanding. A convention has thereforebeen entered into, which provides for a practicable dearsCONVENTION. 45cation of those limits, to the satisfaction of both parties.The following is a copy of a letter from Mr. King, whichaccompanied the convention, when it was transmitted tothe United States governmentLondon, May 13, 1803.Sir, — I have the honour to transmit herewith the conventionwhich 1 yesterday signed in triplicate with LordHawkesbury relative to our boundaries. The conventiondoes not vary in any thing material from the tenour of myinstructions. The line through the bay of Passamaquoddysecures our interest in that quarter. The provision forrunning, instead of describing, the line between the northwestcorner of Nova Scotia and the source of Connecticutriver, has been inserted as well on account of the progressof the British settlements towards the source of the Connecticut,as of the difficulty in agreeing upon any new descriptionof the manner of running this line without moreexact information than is at present possessed of the geographyof the country.The source of the Mississippi nearest to the Lake ofthe Woods, according to Mckenzie's report, will be foundabout twenty-nine miles to the westward of any part ofthat lake, which is represented to be nearly circular.Hence a direct line between the northwesternmost part ofthe lake, and the nearest source of the Mississippi, whichis preferred by this government, has appeared to meequally advantageous with the lines we had proposed."RUFUSKlNG."On the 24th of October, one week after the delivery ofthe message to Congress, from which the passage abovequoted is taken, Mr. Jefferson submitted this conventionto the Senate, accompanied by the following message : —I lay before you the convention signed on the 12thday of May last, between the United States and Great46 HISTORY OF THEBritain, for settling their boundaries in the north-easternand north-western parts of the United States, which wasmentioned in my general message of the 17th instant; togetherwith such papers relating thereto as may enableyou to determine whether you will advise and consent toits ratification."A letter from Mr. Madison, Secretary of State, to Mr.Monroe, minister at Great Britain, dated February 14th,1801, contains the following passage: —You will herewith receive the ratification, by the Presidentand Senate, of the convention with the British government,signed on the 12th of May, 1803, with an exceptionof the 5th article. Should the British governmentaccede to this change in the instrument, you will proceedto an exchange of ratifications, and transmit the one receivedwithout delay, in order that the proper steps maybetaken for carrying the convention into effect."The objection to the fifth article appears to havearisen from the posteriority of the signature and ratificationof this convention to those of the last convention withFrance, ceding Louisiana to the United States, and froma presumption that the line to be run in pursuance of thefifth article, might thence be found or alledged to abridgethe northern extent of that acquisition."Then follow a series of reasons intended to show why theBritish government ought not to make objections to thealterations proposed by ours.First. It would be unreasonable that any advantageagainst the United States should be constructively authorizedby the posteriority of the dates in question, the instructionsgiven to enter into the convention, and the understandingof the parties at the time of signing it, havingno reference whatever to any territorial rights of theUnited States acquired by the previous convention withFrance, but referring merely to the territorial rights asunderstood at the date of the instructions for and signa-hartfordCOiWENTION. 4Yture of the British convention. The copy of a letter fromMr. King, hereto annexed, is precise and conclusive onthis subject.Secondly, If the fifth article be expunged, the northboundary of Louisiana will, as is reasonable, remain thesame in the hands of the United States as it was in thehands of France, and may be adjusted and established accordingto the principles and authorities which would inthat case have been applicable.Fourthly. Laying aside, however, all the objections tothe fifth article, the proper extension of a dividing line inthat quarter will be equally open for friendly negociationafter, as without, agreeing to the other parts of the convention,and considering the remoteness of the time atwhich such a line will become actually necessary, the postponementof it is of little consequence. The truth is thatthe British government seemed at one time to favour thisdelay, and the instructions given by the United States readilyacquiesced in it."It will be recollected, that in the message to Congress,on the 17th of October, J803, from which we have justquoted a passage, Mr. Jefferson speaks of this conventionas one that would give satisfaction to all parties. It seems,however, not to have been ratified, although it was submittedto the Senate for their approbation only one week afterthe date of the abovementioned message to Congress. Allthat can be ascertained respecting the causes of its rejection,are to be found in the above cited letter from theSecretary of State to Mr. Monroe, where the principalground appears to be that it might in some way affect ourconcerns ivith France. By its rejection, however, the disputeabout the boundary line was left unadjusted, and hasremained so to this day.Mr. Jay's treaty expired in 1804. As the country hadexperienced its beneficial effects for ten years, it was reasonableto expect that it would have been renewed at the4d HISTORY OF THEearliest opportunity. On the 7th of August, 1804, Mr.Monroe, then ambassador from the United States to GreatBritain, wrote a letter on that subject to Mr. Madison,then Secretary of State, from which the following are extracts.I received a note from Lord Harrowby on the 3d instant,requesting me to call on him at his office the nextday, which I did. His lordship asked me, in what lightwas our treaty viewed by our government ? I replied thatit had been ratified with the exception of the fifth article,as I had informed him on a former occasion. He observedthat he meant the treaty of 1794, which by one of itsstipulations was to expire two years after the signature ofpreliminary articles for concluding the then existing warbetween Great Britain and France. He wished to knowwhether we considered the treaty as actually expired. Isaid that I did presume there could be but one opinion onthat point in respect to the commercial part of the treaty,which was, that it had expired : that the first ten articleswere made permanent ; that other articles had been executed,but then, being limited to a definite period whichhad passed, must be considered as having expired with it."After a further detail of the conversation, the letterproceeds —He asked, how far it would be agreeable to our governmentto stipulate, that the ireati/ of 1794: should remainin force until two years should expire after the conclusion ofthe present war 9 I told his lordship that I had no powerto agree to such a proposal ; that the President, animatedby a sincere desire to cherish and perpetuate the friendlyrelations subsisting between the two countries, had beendisposed to postpone the regulation of their general commercialsystem till the period should arrive, when each party,enjoying the blessings of peace, might find itself at liberty topay the subject the attention it merited ; that he wished thoseregulations to be founded in the permanent interests, justlyHARTFORD CONVENTION. 49and liberally viewed, of both countries ; that he sought forthe present only to remove certain topics which producedirritation in the intercourse, such as the impressment ofseamen, and in our commerce with other powers, partiesto the present war, according to a project which I had thehonor to present to his predecessor some months since,with which I presumed his lordship was acquainted. Heseemed desirous to decline any conversation on this lattersubject, though it was clearly to be inferred, from what hesaid, to be his opinion, that the policy which our governmentseemed disposed to pursue in respect to the generalsystem, could not otherwise than be agreeable to his. Hethen added, that his government might probably, for thepresent, adopt the treaty of 1794, as the rule in its own concerns,or in respect to duties on importations from our country,and, as I understood him, all other subjects to which itextended ; in which case, he said, if the treaty had expired,the ministry would take the responsibility on itself, as therewould be no law to sanction the measure : that in so doing,he presumed that the measure would be well received byour government, and a similar practice, in what concernedGreat Britain, reciprocated. I observed, that on that particulartopic I had no authority to say any thing specially,the proposal being altogether new and unexpected ; thatI should communicate it to you ; and that I doubted notthat it would be considered by the President with the attentionit merited. Not wishing, however, to authorize aninference, that that treaty should ever form a basis of afuture one between the two countries, I repeated some remarkswhich I had made to Lord Hawkesbury in the interviewwhich we had just before he left the departmentof foreign affairs, by observing that informing a new treatywe must begin de novo ; that America was a young andthriving country ; that at the time that treaty was formed,she had little experience of her relations with foreignpowers ; that ten years had since elapsed, a great portion50 HISTORY OF THEof the term within which she had held the rank of a separateand independent nation, and exercised the powersbelonging to it ; that our interests were better understoodon both sides at this time than they then were ; that thetreaty was known to contain things that neither liked ;that I spoke with confidence on that point on our part ;that in making a new treaty we might ingraft from thatinto it what suited us, trait what we disliked, and addwhat the experience of our respective interests might suggestto be proper ; and being equally anxious to precludethe inference of any sanction to the maritime pretensionsunder that treaty, in respect to neutral commerce, I deemedit proper to advert again to the project, which I hadpresented some time since, for the regulation of thosepoints, to notice its contents, and express an earnest wishthat his lordship would find leisure, and be disposed to actonit. He excused himself again from entering into thissubject, from the weight and urgency of other business,the difficulty of the subject, and other general remarks ofthe kind."By this correspondence it appears, that it was a partof Mr. Jefferson's policy, whenever Mr. Jay's treatyshould expire, not to renew it. There were undoubtedlypersonal reasons for the adoption of this course. Mr. Jefferson,as has been seen, considered that treaty as an execrablemeasure, and regarded its ratification as opposedto the interests of revolutionary France, to which he was,in heart and soul, devoted. The advantages of the treatyhad been so fully realized, that it was natural to expectthat our government would have yielded at once to theoffer of the British ministry to renew it. Their willingnessto form a new treaty, upon the principles of Mr.Jay's, was repeatedly expressed, first by Lord Hawkesbury,in April, 1804, and afterwards by Lord Harrowsin August of the same year. Lord Hawkesbury, in a conversationwith Mr. Monroe, " went so far as to express aHARTFORD CONVENTION. 51wish that the principles of the treaty of 1794 might beadopted in the convention, which it was then proposed tomake; and Lord Harrowby informed him, " that his governmentmight probably, for the present, adopt the treatyof 1794, as the rule in its own concerns, or in respect toimportations from our country, and as he understood him,all other subjects to which it extended." He even wentfurther, and said, if the treaty had expired (about whichLord Harrowby appeared to doubt) the ministry wouldtake the responsibility on itself, as there would be no lawto sanction the measure." But Mr. Monroe, acting underhis instructions, was not willing to authorize even an inference,that the treaty of 1794 should ever form the basisof a future one, repeated to him the remarks he had previouslymade to Lord Hawkesbury, and observed, that informinga new one, we must begin de novo — that we werethen but little experienced in our relations with foreigncountries ; that our interests were better understood onboth sides than when the treaty was made — and that inmaking a new one, we might introduce into it what suitedus, omit what we disliked, and add what experience mightsuggest to be proper.The idea that the agents on the part of the UnitedStates, in this attempt at negotiation, understood theinterests of their country more thoroughly than those connectedwith the negotiation of 1794, is but little short ofludicrous. The treaty negotiated by Mr. Jay, in its operationand effects, proved to be a most beneficial one tothe country ; and it is a little remarkable, that no subsequentarrangement with Great Britain has been equallyadvantageous. Under Mr. Jefferson's directions, an effortwas constantly made to procure some provision againstimpressment — an object, certainly of great importance toour country. But, when it was found impracticable toinduce the British government to enter into stipulations onthat subject, it might well be doubted whether it was good52 HISTORY OF THEpolicy, by insisting upon an impracticable measure, tosacrifice all the other advantages which must necessarilyarise from a just and reasonable commercial treaty withthat nation. To this day such a stipulation has not beenobtained ; but the disadvantages experienced by the tradeof the United States, for the want of a treaty-like thatnegotiated by Mr. Jay, have been numerous, and greatlydetrimental. Those advantages were lost by not renewingthat treaty; and the treaty was not renewed, it is believedthe facts will warrant the declaration, because it comportedwith Mr. Jefferson's policy, at all times, to keepalive a controversy with Great Britain.In April, 1806, William Pinkney, of Maryland, wasappointed joint commissioner with Mr. Monroe, for thepurpose of settling all matters of difference between theUnited States and Great Britain, " relative to wrongscommitted between the parties on the high seas, or otherwaters, and for establishing the principles of navigationand commerce between them." Their negotiations wereheld under the ministry of Mr. Fox, who was consideredas a great friend to the United States. Owing to hissickness, the business on the part of the British governmentwas placed in the hands of his nephew. Lord Holland,and Lord Auckland. On the 11th of September,1806, the American commissioners wrote to the secretaryof state, giving him an account of their first interview withthe noblemen abovementioned, in which, when noticing thematter of impressment, they say — "On the impressmentsubject it was soon apparent they (Lords Holland andAuckland) felt the strongest repugnance to a formal renunciationor abandonment of their claim to take from ourvessels on the high seas such seamen as should appear tobe their own subjects." And such was the answer, fromfirst to last, to every attempt to come to a formal arrangementon this perplexing subject. Every ministry of GreatBritain, however differently disposed on many other sub-hartfordCONVENTION. 53sects, on this thought and acted alike. With all theevidence that they possessed of the impracticability ofnegotiating successfully on this topic, Mr. Jefferson madeit the turning point of all his efforts. In pursuance of thisdetermination, on the 3d of February, 1807, Mr. Madison,secretary of state, wrote to Messrs. Monroe and Pinkney,and after having alluded to the matter of impressments,said —In the mean time, the President has, with all thosefriendly and conciliatory dispositions which produced yourmission, and pervade your instructions, weighed the arrangementheld out in your last letter, which contemplatesa formal adjustment of the other topics under discussion,and an informal understanding only on that of impressment.The result of his deliberations which I am now tostate to you, is, that it does not comport with his views ofthe national sentiment, or the legislative policy, that anytreaty should be entered into with the British governmentwhich, whilst on every other point it is limited to, or shortof strict right, would include no article providing for a casewhich both in principle and practice, is so feelingly connectedwith the honour and sovereignty of the nation, aswell as with its fair interests ; and indeed with the peaceof both nations"]"The President thinks it more eligible, under all circumstances,that if no satisfactory or formal stipulation onthe subject of impressment be attainable, the negotiationshould be made to terminate without any formal compactwhatever."On the 3d of January, 1807, Messrs. Monroe and Pink-neywrote to the Secretary of State, saying — " We have thehonour to transmit to you a treaty, which we concludedwith the British commissioners on the 31st of December.Although we had entertained great confidence from thecommencement of the negotiation, that such would be itsresult, it was not till the 27th, that we were able to make54 HISTORY OF THEany satisfactory arrangement of several of the most importantpoints that were involved in it. A large proportionof the provisions of this treaty, — no less than eleven of itsarticles — was taken from that o/1794." After giving anaccount of the various articles, those gentlemen say —We are sorry to add that this treaty contains noprovision against the impressment of our seamen. Ourdespatch of the 11th of November, communicated to youthe result of our labours on that subject, and our opinionthat, although this government did not feel itself at libertyto relinquish, formally by treaty, its claim to search ourmerchant vessels for British seamen, its practice would,nevertheless, be essentially, if not completely abandoned.That opinion has been since confirmed by frequent conferenceson the subject with the British commissioners, whohave repeatedly assured us, that, in their judgment, wewere made as secure against the exercise of their pretensionby the policy which their government had adopted inregard to that very delicate and important question, as wecould have been made by treaty."This treaty was received at Washington the beginning ofMarch, 1807, but was never even submitted to the Senatefor their advice and consent to its ratification. On the20th of May following, Mr. Madison wrote to Messrs.Monroe and Pinkney on the subject. The following is anextract from his letter : —The President has seen in your exertions to accomplishthe great objects of your instructions, ample proofs ofthat zeal and patriotism. in which he confided ; and feelsdeep regret that your success has not corresponded withthe reasonableness of your propositions, and the abilitywith which they were supported. He laments more especiallythat the British government has not yielded to thejust and cogent considerations which forbid the practice ofits cruisers in visiting and impressing the crews of our vessels,covered by an independent flag, and guarded by theHARTFORD CONVENTION. 55laws of the high seas, which ought to be sacred with allnations.The President continues to regard this subject in thelight in which it has been pressed on the justice and friendshipof Great Britain. He cannot reconcile it with hisduty to our sea-faring citizens, or with the sensibility orsovereignty of the nation to recognise even constructively,a principle that would expose on the high seas their liberty,their lives, every thing, in a word, that is dearest to thehuman heart, to the capricious or interested sentenceswhich may be pronounced against their allegiance by officersof a foreign government, whom neither the laws ofnations, nor even the laws of that government, will allowto decide on the ownership or character of the minutestarticle of property found in a like situation.""It is considered, moreover, by the President, the morereasonable, that the necessary concession in this caseshould be made by Great Britain, rather than by the UnitedStates, on the double consideration, first, that a concessionon our part would violate both a moral and political dutyof the government to our citizens, which would not be thecase on the other side ; secondly, that a greater number ofAmerican citizens, than of British subjects, are in fact impressedfrom our vessels ; and that, consequently more ofwrong is done to the United States than of right to GreatBritain, taking even her own claim for the criterion.'* On these grounds, the President is constrained to declineany arrangement, formal or informal, which does notcomprise a provision against impressments from Americanvessels on the high seas, and which would, notwithstanding,be a bar to legislative measures, such as Congresshave thought, or may think proper to adopt for controllingthat species of aggression."That you may the more fully understand his impressionsand purposes, I will explain the alterations which are56 HISTORY OF THEto be regarded as essential, and proceed then to such observationson the several articles as will show the otheralterations which are to be attempted, and the degree ofimportance respectively attached to them.*' Without a provision against impressments, substantiallysuch as is contemplated in your original instructions, no treatyis to he concludedAfter a long series of instructions, and remarks, relativeto the manner of conducting the negociation, and of theconcessions that may, if necessary, be made, it is said —Should the concession, (relating to the employment ofseamen belonging to the respective countries,) contrary toall expectation, not succeed, even as to the essential objects,the course prescribed by prudence will be to signifyyour purpose of transmitting ther result to your government,avoiding carefully any language or appearance of hostileanticipations ; and receiving and transmitting, at the sametime, any overtures which may be made on the other side,with a view to bring about an accommodation. As longas negociation can be honourably protracted, it is a resourceto be preferred under existing circumstances, to theperemptory alternative of improper concessions, or inevitablecollisions."Thus, it is apparent, that this treaty was rejected primarilyon the ground, that no arrangement was made init to prevent the impressment of seamen. Of the importanceof such an arrangement, had it been practicable,there can be no difference of opinion among the inhabitantsof the United States. But when it was perfectly ascertained,that no stipulations on that subject could be obtained,that every successive cabinet in England had agreedon this point, and the question only remained for our administrationto determine, whether all the relations of thetwo nations, and impressments with them, should be leftin a loose, undefined, and irritating condition, or all exceptthat should be satisfactorily adjusted, leaving that for fu-hartfordCONVENTION. 57lure consideration, no reasonable doubt can be entertainedthat the latter course should have been pursued. It will berecollected that the standing reason urged by Great Britain,against yielding the principle that our flag shouldprotect the crew was, that she was struggling against thepower of revolutionary France for her existence, and dependedon her navy for her safety ; and that under suchcircumstances she could not admit the force of mere abstractprinciples — self-preservation being with her thehighest object of consideration. There certainly was muchforce in this objection on her part, to treating on that specificpoint, at that critical period. That Mr. Jeffersonshould feel differently from the British statesmen, wasperfectly natural. It has been shown that his governingprinciple in politics was, animosity against Great Britain,and attachment to France. It was well known, that fromthe strong national resemblance between Britons andAmericans, and particularly from the identity of language,great difficulty would exist in distinguishing between Americancitizens and British subjects ; and this was one argumentstrongly urged against negotiation on this subject.But a clue to Mr. Jefferson's feelings towards that nation,may be discovered in his works published since his death,beyond the passages already quoted. The following is aletter to William B. Giles : —'' Monticello, April 27, 1795.Dear Sir, — Your favour of the 16th came to hand bythe last post. I sincerely congratulate you on the greatprosperity of our two first allies, the French and theDutch. If I could but see them now at peace with therest of their continent, / should have hut little doubt ofdining width Pichegru in London next autumn; for I believeI should be tempted to leave my clover for awhile, to go andhail the dawn of liberty and republicanism in that island68 HISTORY OF THEThis is the language of Mr. Jefferson, when writing taan intimate and confidential friend. What must havebeen the principles and the heart of the man, who, frommere political feelings and resentments, could talk withsuch an air of levity, on such a subject ? Wishing to dinewith Pichegru in London, necessarily implied a wish thathe might, as well as a belief that he would, be able toifwade, overrun, and conquer Great Britain. That is,because the people of that nation preferred the governmentunder which they lived, and which had been themeans of elevating their country to a far greater heightof freedom, prosperity, power, and renown, than any otherEuropean nation ever enjoyed, to Mr. Jefferson's notionsof republicanism, he would have subjected them to all themiseries and horrors of an invading and victorious army,and to the tremendous consequences which must necessarilyfollow such a state of things, in such a country. Fortunatelyfor Europe, and the interests of the civilizedworld, he was disappointed of the pleasure to be derivedfrom such a festive entertainment. The French were notableto conquer Great Britain, and of course Pichegru hadno opportunity of inviting his republican friends in otherparts of the world to dine with him in London, and toheighten the hilarity of the entertainment, by witnessingthe pillage and butcheries which must have attended aconquest over such a city.Mr. Monroe, after the conclusion of the treaty, returnedto the United States. As might have been expected, heconsidered himself as having been harshly dealt with inrelation to it. On the 10th of March, 1808, Mr. Jeffersonwrote to him on that subject. Among other things hesays —You complain of the manner in which the treaty wasreceived. But what was that manner ? I cannot supposeyou to have given a moment's credit to the stuff which wascrowded in all sorts" of forms into the public papers, or toHARTFORD CONVENTION. 59the thousand speeches they put into my mouth, not a wordof which I had ever uttered. I was not insensible at thetime of the views to mischief, with which these lies werefabricated. But my confidence was firm, that neitheryourself nor the British government, equally outraged bythem, would believe me capable of making the editors ofnewspapers the confidants of my speeches or opinions.The fact was this. The treaty was communicated to usby Mr. Erskine on the day Congress was to rise. Two ofthe senators inquired of me in the evening, whether itwas my purpose to detain them on account of the treaty.My answer was, ' that it was not ; that the treaty containingno provision against the impressment of our seamen,and being accompanied by a kind of protestation of theBritish ministers, which would leave that government freeto consider it as a treaty or no treaty, according to theirown convenience, I should not give them the trouble ofdeliberating on it.' This was substantially, and almostverbally what I said whenever spoken to about it, and Inever failed when the occasion would admit of it, to justifyyourself and Mr. Pinkney, by expressing my conviction,that it was all that could he obtained from, the British government; that you had told their commissioners that yourgovernment could not be pledged to ratify, because it wascontrary to their instructions ; of course, that it should beconsidered but as a project ; and in this light 1 stated itpublicly in my message to congress on the opening of thesession."Some time after his return, Mr. Monroe addressed aletter to Mr. Madison, giving a detailed account of thedifficulties which the commissioners met with in the negotiations,the light in which he viewed various provisions inthe treaty, and the sentiments which he entertained of itsgeneral character. That letter was dated at Richmond,Virginia, February 23, 1808. The following are extractsfrom it —60 HISTORY OF THEThe impressment of seamen from our merchant vesselsis a topic which claims a primary attention, from theorder which it holds in your letter, but more especiallyfrom some important considerations that are connectedwith it. The idea entertained by the public is, that therights of the United States were abandoned by the Americancommissioners in the late negotiation, and that theirseamen were left by tacit acquiescence, if not by formalrenunciation, to depend, for their safety, on the mercy ofthe British cruisers. I have, on the contrary, always believed,and still do believe, that the ground on which thatinterest was placed by the paper of the British commissionersof November 8, 1806, and the explanations whichaccompanied it, was both honourable and advantageous tothe United States ; that it contained a concession in theirfavour, on the part of Great Britain, on the great principlein contestation, never before made by a formal and obligatoryact of the government, which was highly favourableto their interest; and that it also imposed on her the obligationto conform her practice under it, till a more completearrangement should be concluded, to the just claimsof the United States." " The British paper states thatthe king was not prepared to disclaim or derogate from aright on which the security of the British navy mightessentially depend, especially in a conjuncture when hewas engaged in wars which enforced the necessity of themost vigilant attention to the preservation and supplyof his naval force ; that he had directed his commissionersto give to the commissioners of the United States the mostpositive assurances that instructions had been given, andshould be repeated and enforced, to observe the greatestcaution in the impressing of British seamen, to preservethe citizens of the United States from molestationor injury, and that immediate and prompt redress shouldbe afforded on any representation of injury sustained bythem. It then proposes to postpone the article relative toHartford CONVENTION. 61impressment on account of the difficulties which were experiencedin arranging any article on that subject, and toproceed to conclude a treaty on the other points that wereembraced by the negotiation. As a motive to such postponement,and the condition of it, it assures us that theBritish commissioners were instructed still to entertain thediscussion of any plan which could be devised to securethe interests of both states without injury to the rights ofeither.By this paper, it is evident that the rights of theUnited States were expressly to be reserved, and notabandoned, as has been most erroneously supposed ; thatthe negotiation on the subject of impressment was to bepostponed for a limited time, and for a special object only,and to be revived as soon as that object was accomplished;and, in the interim, that the practice of impressment wasto correspond essentially with the views and interests ofthe United States. It is, indeed, evident, from a correctview of the contents of that paper, that Great Britain refusedto disclaim or derogate only from what she called herright, as it also is, that as her refusal was made applicableto a crisis of extraordinary peril, it authorized the reasonableexpectation, if not the just claim, that even in thatthe accommodation desired would be hereafter yielded.In our letter to you of November 11, which accompaniedthe paper under consideration, and in that ofJanuary 3, which was forwarded with the treaty, thesesentiments were fully confirmed. In that of November11, we communicated one important fact, which left nodoubt of the sense in which it was intended by the Britishcommissioners that that paper should be construed by us.In calling your attention to the passage which treats ofimpressment, in reference to the practice which should beobserved in future, we remarked that the terms " highseas" were not mentioned in it, and added that we knewthat the omission had been intentional. It was impossible62 HISTORY OF THEthat those terms could have been omitted intentionallywith our knowledge, for any purpose other than to admit aconstruction that it was intended that impressments shouldbe confined to the land. I do not mean to imply that itwas understood between the British commissioners andus, that Great Britain should abandon the practice of impressmenton the high seas altogether. I mean, however,distinctly to state, that it was understood that the practiceheretofore pursued by her should be abandoned, and thatno impressment should be made on the high seas under theobligation of that paper, except in cases of an extraordinarynature, to which no general prohibition against itcould be construed fairly to extend. The cases to which Iallude were described in our letter of November 11. Theysuppose, a British ship of war and a merchant vessel ofthe United States, lying in the Tagus or some other port,the desertion of some of the sailors from the ship of warto the merchant vessel, and the sailing of the latter withsuch deserters on board, they being British subjects. Itwas admitted that no general prohibition against impressmentcould be construed to sanction such cases of injusticeand fraud ; and to such cases it was understood that thepractice should in future be confined.It is a just claim on our part, that the explanationswhich. were given of that paper by the British commissionerswhen they presented it to us, and afterwards whilethe negotiation was depending, which we communicatedto you in due order of time, should be taken into view, inafair estimate of our conduct in that transaction. As thearrangement which they proposed was of an informalnature, resting on an understanding between the partiesin a certain degree confidential, it could not otherwise thanhappen that such explanations would be given us in thecourse of the business, of the views of their government inregard to it. And if an arrangement by informal understandingis admissible in any case between nations, it wasHARTFORD CONVENTION. 63out^duty to receive those explanations, to give them theweight to which they were justly entitled, and to communicatethem to you, with our impression of the extent of theobligation which they imposed. It is in that mode onlythat what is called an informal understanding between nationscan be entered into. It presumes a want of precisionin the written documents connected with it, which is suppliedby mutual explanations and confidence. Reduce thetransaction to form, and it becomes a treaty. That aninformal understanding was an admissible mode of arrangingthis interest with Great Britain, is made sufficientlyevident by your letter of February 3, 1807, in reply to oursof November 11, of the preceding year.Without relying, however, on the explanations thatwere given by the British commissioners of the import ofthat paper, or of the course which their government intendedto pursue under it, it is fair to remark on the paperitself, that as by it the rights of the parties were reserved,and the negotiation might be continued on this particulartopic, after a treaty should be formed on the others, GreatBritain was bound not to trespass on those rights whilethat negotiation was depending ; and in case she did trespasson them, in any the slightest degree, the UnitedStates would be justified in breaking off the negotiation,and appealing to force in vindication of their rights. Themere circumstance of entertaining an amicable negotiationby one party for the adjustment of a controversy, where noright had been acknowledged in it by the other, gives tothe latter a just claim to such a forbearance on the part ofthe former. But the entertainment of a negotiation forthe express purpose of securing interests sanctioned byacknowledged rights, makes such claim irresistible. Wewere, therefore, decidedly of opinion, that the paper of theBritish commissioners placed the interest of impressmenton ground which it was both safe and honourable for theUnited States to admit : that in short it gave their governedHISTORY OF THEment the command of the subject for every necessary anduseful purpose. Attached to the treaty, it was the basis orcondition on which the treaty rested. Strong in its characterin their favour on the great question of right, and admittinga favourable construction on others, it placed them on moreelevated ground in those respects than they had heldbefore; and by keeping the negotiation open to obtain amore complete adjustment, the administration was armedwith the most effectual means of securing it. By thisarrangement the government possessed a power to coercewithout being compelled to assume the character belongingto coercion, and it was able to give effect to that powerwithout violating the relations of amity between the countries.The right to break off the negotiation and appealto force, could never be lost sight of in any discussion on .the subject ; while there was no obligation to make thatappeal till necessity compelled it. If Great Britain conformedher practice to the rule prescribed by the paper ofNovember 8, and the explanations which accompanied it,our government might rest on that ground with advantage ;but if she departed from that rule, and a favourableopportunity offered for the accomplishment of a morecomplete and satisfactory arrangement, by a decisive effort,it would be at liberty to seize such opportunity for the advantageof the country."Large quotations have been made from this importantdocument, not merely for the purpose of showing thegrounds on which the United States commissioners actedin forming and concluding the treaty, but with the view ofestablishing the proposition, that Mr. Jefferson had nosincere disposition fully and finally to adjust the sourcesof uneasiness and irritation between this country and GreatBritain. It will be recollected, that the great reason forrejecting this treaty, without even submitting it to theSenate, who were in session when it was received, was,that it contained no article providing against impressment.HARTFORD CONVENTION. 65The other important subjects of negotiation were adjustedin it ; and had the treaty been ratified, there is no reasonto doubt that the war of 1812 might have been avoided.And there is too much reason to believe, that it was froman apprehension that the Senate might have advised toits ratification, that their opinion on the subject was notrequested. It was, however, rejected, for the reason principallythat there was no positive provision against impressment,under a full knowledge that no such provisionwould be obtained ; but, at the same time with an informalunderstanding, as appears by Mr. Monroe's letter, that thepractice should be avoided. The right they would not disclaim; but they would essentially abstain from its exercise.Had the interests of the country alone been consulted,if there had not been something else in view, it is difficultto imagine any good reason for refusing to adjust all thesubjects of dispute between this country and Great Britain,except one. If every thing had been concluded exceptimpressment, the United States would have been placed inno worse situation as it regarded that. On the contrary,their condition would have been more favourable, both inrelation to the practice, and to future negotiation. Besides,even that matter, by the informal understanding betweenthe British government and Messrs. Monroe andJ^iuckney, was much more eligibly disposed of, than it couldhave been if left in the situation in which it had previouslystood. That it would have been no worse for the UnitedStates, is most decisively proved by the fact, that from thatday to this, no arrangement, formal nor informal, againstimpressment, has been made with Great Britain ; nor, onother points of difference, have there ever been more advantageousterms obtained for the United States thanwere then offered and rejected.In June, 1807, the attack of the British frigate Leopard,upon the United States frigate Chesapeake, occurred.QS HISTORY OF THEThe first information which Mr. Monroe, our minister atLondon, received of this transaction, was through a notefrom Mr. Canning, dated July 25th, 1807. On the 29thof July Mr. Monroe addressed a note to Mr, Canning,calling his attention to this aggression on the sovereigntyof the United States ; and after having stated the case, heremarked — "I might state other examples of great indignityand outrage, many of which are of recent date, towhich the United States have hen exposed off their coast,and even within several of their harbours, from the Britishsquadron ; but it is improper to mingle them with the presentmore serious cause of complaint ;" and he concludedhis letter by saying — " I have called your attention to thissubject, in full confidence that his majesty's governmentwill see, in the act complained of, a flagrant abus of itsown authority, and that it will not hesitate to enable meto communicate to my government, without delay, a frankdisavowal of the principle on which it was made, and itsassurance that the officer who is responsible for it — shallsuffer the punishment which so unexampled an aggressionon the sovereignty of a neutral nation justly deserves."This letter was answered by Mr. Canning on the 3d ofAugust. After noticing the general subject of Mr. Monroe'snote he remarks — " If, therefore, the statement inyour note should prove to be correct, and to contain all thecircumstances of the case, upon which complaint is intendedto be made, and if it shall appear that the act of hismajesty's officers rested on no other grounds than the simpleand unqualified assertion of the pretension above referredto, his majesty has no difficulty in disowning that act,and will have no difficulty in manifesting his displeasureat the conduct of his officers.'* With respect to the other causes of complaint [whateverthey may be] which are hinted at in your note, I perfectlyagree with you, in the sentiment which you express, as Kothe propriety of not involving them in a question which is.HARTFORD CONVENTION. 67of itself of sufficient importance to claim a separate andmost serious consideration."On the 2d of July, Mr. Jefferson, President of theUnited States, issued a proclamation requiring all armedvessels belonging to the King of Great Britain, then in theports or harbours of the United States, immediately to departtherefrom, and interdicting their entrance into thoseports and harbours. Mr. Canning having received fromthe British minister an unofficial copy of this document, immediately,upon the 8th of August, wrote to Mr. Monroe,for the purpose of ascertaining whether it was genuine, ornot, and received for answer, on the 9th, that Mr. Monroehad not heard from his government on the subject ; butexpected, in a few days to be instructed to make a Communicationto the British government in regard to it. Onthe 7th of September, Mr. Monroe made a long communicationto Mr. Canning respecting the attack on the Chesapeake.On the 23d of September Mr. Canning replied,and in the commencement of his note made the followingremarks — " Before I proceed to observe upon that part ofit which relates more immediately to the question now atissue between our two governments, I am commanded, inthe first instance, to express the surprise which is felt atthe total omission of a subject upon which I had alreadybeen commanded to apply to you for information, the proclamationpurported to have been issued by the Presidentof the United States. Of this paper, when last I addressedyou upon it, you professed not to have any knowledge beyondwhat the ordinary channels of public information afforded,nor any authority to declare it to be authentic. Ifeel it an indispensable duty to renew my inquiry on thissubject. The answer which I may receive from you is byno means unimportant to the settlement of the discussionwhich has arisen from the encounter between the Leopardand the Chesapeake.The whole of the question arising out of that transactHISTORY OF THEtion, is in fact no other than a question as to the amount ofreparation due by his majesty for the unauthorized act of hisofficer : and you will, therefore, readily perceive that, inso far as the government of the United States have thoughtproper to take that reparation into their own hands, and to-resortto measures of retaliation previously to any directapplication to the British government, or to the Britishminister in America for redress, in so far the British governmentis entitled to take such measures into accountand to consider them in the estimate of reparation whichis acknowledged to have been originally due.*' The total exclusion of all ships of war belonging to oneof the two belligerent parties, while the ships of war of theothei^were protected by the harbours of the neutral power,would furnish no light ground of complaint against thatneutral, if considered in any other point of view than as ameasure of retaliation for a previous injury : and so considered,it cannot but be necessary to take it into account iathe adjustment of the original dispute.I am, therefore, distinctly to repeat the inquiry, whetheryou are now enabled to declare, sir, that the proclamationis to be considered as the authentic act of your government? and, if so, I am further to inquire whether youare authorized to notify the intention of your government towithdraw that proclamation, on the knowledge of his majesty'sdisavowal of the act which occasioned its publication ?"After a long series of remarks and reasoning on thesubject of impressment, and the difficulties attending amodification of the practice, Mr. Canning says — " Whetherany arrangement can be devised, by which this practicemay admit of modification, without prejudice to theessential rights and interests of Great Britain, is a question,which, as I have already said, the British governmentmay, at a proper season, be ready to entertain ; but,whether the consent of Great Britain to the entering intosuch a discussion, shall be extorted as the price of an ami-hartfordCONVENTION. 69cable adjustment, as the condition of being admitted tomake honourable reparation for an injury, is a questionof quite a different sort, and one which can be answeredno otherwise than by an unqualified refusal.I earnestly recommend to you, therefore, to consider,whether the instructions which you have received fromyour government may not leave you at liberty to come toan adjustment of the case of the Leopard and the Chesapeake,independently of the other question, with which itappears to have been unnecessarily connected.If your instructions leave you no discretion, I cannotpress you to act in contradiction to them. In that casethere can be no advantage in pursuing a discussion whichyou are not authorized to conclude ; and I shall have onlyto regret, that the disposition of his majesty to terminatethat difference amicably and satisfactorily, is for the presentrendered unavailing.In that case, his majesty, in pursuance of the dispositionof which he has given such signal proofs, will lose notime in sending a minister to America, furnished with thenecessary instructions and powers for bringing this unfortunatedispute to a conclusion, consistent with the harmonysubsisting between Great Britain and the United States.But, in order to avoid the inconvenience which has arisen,from the mixt nature of your instructions, that minister willnot be empowered to entertain, as connected with thissubject, any proposition respecting the search of merchantvessels."On the 29th of September Mr. Monroe wrote a longanswer to Mr. Canning's letter, in which, among otherthings, he says — " You inform me, that his majesty hasdetermined, in case my instructions do not permit me toseparate the late aggression from the general practice ofimpressment, to transfer the business to the United States,by committing it to a minister who shall be sent therewithfull powers to conclude it. To that measure I am far70 HISTORY OF THEfrom being disposed to raise any obstacle, and shall immediatelyapprise my government of the decision to adopt it."In a short time after the date of the letter from whichthe quotation immediately preceding was taken, the followingnote was addressed to Mr. Canning by Mr. Monroe.Portland Place, October 9, 1807.To Mr. Canning,Mr. Monroe presents his compliments to Mr. Canning,and requests that he will be so good as to inform him,whether it is intended, that the minister, whom his majestyproposes to send to the government of the United States,shall be employed in a special mission without having anyconnection immediate or eventual with the ordinary legation.Mr. Monroe has inferred from Mr. Canning's note,that the mission will be of the special nature above described,but he will be much obliged to Mr. Canning toinform him whether he has taken a correct view of themeasure. Mr. Monroe would also be happy to know ofMr. Canning at what time it is expected the minister willsail for the United States. Mr. Canning will be sensiblethat Mr. Monroe's motive in requesting this informationis, that he may be enabled to communicate it without delayto his government, the propriety of which, he is persuaded,Mr. Canning will readily admit."Foreign Office, October 10, 1807.'* From Mr. Canning,Mr. Canning presents his compliments to Mr. Monroe,and in acknowledging the honour of his note of yesterday,has great pleasure in assuring him that he is at all timesready to answer any inquiries to which Mr. Monroe attachesany importance, and which it is in Mr. Canning'spower to answer with precision, without public inconvenience.But it is not in Mr. Canning's power to state withconfidence what may be the eventual determination of hisHARTFORD CONVENTION. 71majesty in respect to the permanent mission in America.The mission of the minister whom his majesty is nowabout to send will certainly be limited in the first instanceto the discussion of the question of the Chesapeake."After Mr. Rose's arrival at Washington, he addresseda letter to Mr. Madison, then Secretary of State, datedJanuary 26, 1808, from which the following passages arecopied :Having had the honour to state to you, that I am expresslyprecluded by my instructions from entering uponany negotiation for the adjustment of the differences arisingfrom the encounter of his majesty's ship Leopard and thefrigate of the United States, the Chesapeake, as long asthe proclamation of the President of the United States, ofthe 2d of July, 1807, shall be in force, I beg leave to offeryou such farther explanation of the nature of that condition,as appears to me calculated to place the motives,under which it has been enjoined to me thus to bring itforward, in their true light."After a series of remarks, he says — " I may add, thatif his majesty has not commanded me to enter into the discussionof the other causes of complaint, stated to arisefrom the conduct of his naval commanders in these seas,prior to the encounter of the Leopard and Chesapeake, itwas because it has been deemed improper to mingle them,whatever may be their merits, with the present matter, somuch more interesting and important in its nature ; an opinionoriginally and distinctly expressed by Mr. Monroe, andassented to by Mr. Secretary Canning. But if, upon this morerecent and more weighty matter of discussion, upon whichthe proclamation mainly and materially rests, his majesty'samicable intentions are unequivocally evinced, it is sufficientlyclear, that no hostile disposition can be supposedto exist on his part, nor can any views be attributed to hisgovernment, such as, requiring to be counteracted by meansHISTORY OP THEsures of precaution, could be deduced from transactionswhich preceded that encounter."To this Mr. Madison replied in a long letter, datedMarch 5, in which he goes into a review of all the causesof complaint on the part of the United States, against theBritish Government, arising from the conduct of the navalofficers of that kingdom ; coming down in regular courseto the attack upon the Chesapeake by the Leopard; andsaying — that "it is sufficient to remark, that the conclusiveevidence which this event added to that which hadpreceded, of the uncontrolled excesses of the British navalcommanders, in insulting our sovereignty, and abusing ourhospitality, determined the President to extend to allBritish armed ships the precaution heretofore applied to afew by name, of interdicting to them the use and privilegesof our harbours and waters.""The President, having interposed this precautionaryinterdict, lost no time in instructing the minister plenipotentiaryof the United States to represent to the Britishgovernment the signal aggression which had been committedon their sovereignty and their flag, and to requirethe satisfaction due for it ; indulging the expectation, thathis Britannic majesty would at once perceive it to be thetruest magnanimity, as well as the strictest justice, tooffer that prompt and full expiation of an acknowledgedwrong, which would re-establish and improve, both in factand in feeling, the state of things which it had violated."The Secretary of State finally comes to the point betweenhim and Mr. Rose, the revocation of the proclamation —The proclamation [he says] is considered as a hostilemeasure, and a discontinuance of it, as due to the discontinuanceof the aggression which led to it.It has been sufficiently shown that the proclamation, asappears on the face of it, was produced by a train ofoccurrences terminating in the attack on the Americanfrigate, and not by this last alone. To a demand, there-hartfordCONVENTION. 73fore, that the proclamation be revoked, it would be perfectlyfair to oppose a demand, that redress be first givenfor the numerous irregularities which preceded the aggressionon the American frigate, as well as for this particularaggression, and that effectual controul be interposed againstrepetitions of them. And as no such redress has beengiven for the past, notwithstanding the lapse of time whichhas taken place, nor any such security for the future,notwithstanding the undiminished reasonableness of it, itfollows that a continuance of the proclamation would beconsistent with an entire discontinuance of one only of theoccurrences from which it proceeded. But it is not necessaryto avail the argument of this view of the case,although of itself entirely conclusive. Had the proclamationbeen founded on the single aggression committed onthe Chesapeake, and were it admitted, that the discontinuanceof that aggression merely gave a claim to the discontinuanceof the proclamation, the claim would be defeatedby the incontestible fact, that that aggression hasn't beendiscontinued. It has never ceased to exist ; and is in existenceat this moment. Need I remind you, Sir, that theseizure and exportation of the seamen belonging to the crewof the Chesapeake entered into the very essence of thataggression, that, with an exception of the victim to a trial,forbidden by the most solemn considerations, and greatlyaggravating the guilt of its author, the seamen in questionare still retained, and consequently that the aggression, if inno other respect, is by that act alone continued and in force.*' If the views which have been taken of the subject havethe justness which they claim, they will have shown thaton no ground whatever can an annulment of the proclamationof July 2d be reasonably required, as a preliminaryto the negotiation with which you are charged. On thecontrary, it clearly results, from a recurrence to the causesand objects of the proclamation, that, as was at firstintimated, the strongest sanctions of Great Britain herself74 HISTORY OF THEwould support the demand, that, previous to a discussionof the proclamation, due satisfaction should be made to theUnited States; that this satisfaction ought to extend to allthe wrongs which preceded and produced that act ; andthat even limiting the merits of the question to the singlerelation of the proclamation to the wrong committed in theattack on the American frigate, and deciding the questionon the principle that a discontinuance of the latter requiredof right a discontinuance of the former, nothing appearsthat does not leave such a preliminary destitute of everyfoundation which could be assumed for it.With a right to draw this conclusion, the Presidentmight have instructed me to close this communication withthe reply stated in the beginning of it; and perhaps intakingthis course, he would only have consulted a sensibility,to which most governments would, in such a case,have yielded. But adhering to the moderation by whichhe has been invariably guided, and anxious to rescue thetwo nations from the circumstances under which an abortiveissue to your mission necessarily places them, he hasauthorized me, in the event of your disclosing the termsof reparation which you believe will be satisfactory, andon its appearing that they are so, to consider this evidenceof the justice of his Britannic majesty as a pledge foran effectual interposition with respect to all the abusesagainst a recurrence of which the proclamation was meantto provide, and to proceed to concert with you a revocationof that act, bearing the same date with the act of reparation,to which the United States are entitled./ am not unaitmre, sir, that according to the view whichyou appear to have taken of your instructions, such a courseof proceeding has not been contemplated hy them. It is possible,nevertheless, that a re-examination, in a spirit, inwhich I am well persuaded it will be made, may discoverthem to be not inflexible to a proposition in so high a degreeliberal and conciliatory. In every event, the PressCONVENTION. 75dent will have manifested his willingness to meet yourgovernment on a ground of accommodation, which sparesto its feelings, however misapplied he may deem them,every concession, not essentially due to those which mustbe equally respected, and consequently will have demonstratedthat the very ineligible posture given to so importanta subject in the relations of the two countries, by theunsuccessful termination of your mission, can be referredto no other source than the rigorous restrictions underwhich it was to be executed."On the 17th of March, Mr. Rose replied to the foregoingcommunication, informing Mr. Madison that he was " underthe necessity of declining to enter into the terms of negotiation,which, by direction of the President of the UnitedStates," Mr. Madison had offered ; and saying, " I do notfeel myself competent, in the present instance, to departfrom the instructions, which I stated in my letter of the26th of January last, and which preclude me from accedingto the condition thus proposed." He then proceeds furtherand says —I should add, that I am absolutely prohibited fromentering upon matters unconnected with the specifickobject I am authorized to discuss, much less can I thusgive any pledge concerning them. The condition suggested,moreover, leads to the direct inference, that the proclamationof the President of the United States of the 2d of July,1807, is maintained either as an equivalent for reparationfor the time being, or as a compulsion to make it.It is with the more profound regret that I feel myselfunder the necessity of declaring, that I am unable to actupon the terms thus proposed, as it becomes my duty toinform you, in conformity to my instructions, that on therejection of the demand stated in my former letter, on thepart of his majesty, my mission is terminated."Thus another opportunity to adjust at least one, andperhaps several important subjects of dispute and com-76 HISTORY OF THEplaint between the United States and Great Britain, waslost, in consequence of Mr. Jefferson's refusing to yield amere point of etiquette, respecting the recal of the proclamationwhich he had issued, to say the least, precipitately,and which he was forewarned by the British government,would prevent an adjustment of the affair of the frigateChesapeake, if continued in force. It is not to be believed,if he had been sincerely desirous of establishing a solid andpermanent friendship (political friendship is here meant)between the two nations, that he would have failed ofaccomplishing that object on such slender a pretext as thatwhich put an end to Mr. Rose's mission.That he did not entertain such a wish is evident, notonly from the manner in which the negotiation with Mr.Rose was conducted, and the grounds on which it wasconcluded ; but from the circumstance, that a direct attemptwas made by the Secretary of State, in his correspondencewith him, to induce Mr. Rose to depart from hisinstructions, and enter upon the discussion of subjectswhich he was expressly ordered by his government not tomeddle with. Mr. Madison, in his letter of the 5th ofMarch, from which several extracts have been made, afterusing every effort in his power to induce Mr. Rose toviolate his instructions, says in a passage already recited —*' I am not unaware, sir, that according to the view whichyou appear to have taken of your instructions, such acourse of proceeding has not been contemplated by them.It is possible, nevertheless, that a re-examination, in a spirit,in which T am well persuaded it will be made, may discoverthem to be not inflexible to a proposition in so higha degree liberal and conciliatory." This cannot be consideredas any thing more or less than a direct propositionto the British minister to violate his instructions ; and thismust have been with a perfect knowledge on the part ofMr. Madison, that any treaty or arrangement made undersuch circumstances would be rejected by the BritishHARTFORD CONVENTION. 77government, because made in violation of his instructions.The conduct of Mr. Canning, when corresponding withMr. Monroe, was marked by a different disposition. Aftera long discussion of the difficulties between the countries,Mr. Canning said — "I earnestly recommend to you therefore,to consider, whether the instructions which you havereceived from your government may not leave you atliberty to come to an adjustment of the case of the Leopardand the Chesapeake, independently of the other questionwith which it appears to have been unnecessarily connected.If your instructions leave you no discretion, Icannot press you to act in contradiction to them."On the 13th of November, 1811, more than four yearsafter the affair between the British frigate Leopard andthe American frigate Chesapeake, the following messageand correspondence relating to that subject were transmittedto congress by the President of the United States.I communicate to congress copies of a correspondencebetween the envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiaryof Great Britain and the Secretary pf State, relatingto the aggression committed by a British ship of war onthe United States frigate Chesapeake, by which it will beseen that that subject of difference between the two countriesis terminated by an offer of reparation which has beenacceded to."Washington, October ZO,lSU.Mr. Foster to Mr. Monroe.Sir, — I had already the honour to mention to you, thatcame to this country furnished with instructions from hisroyal highness the prince regent, in the name and on thebehalf of his majesty, for the purpose of proceeding to a finaladjustment of the differences which have arisen betweenGreat Britain and the United States of America, in theaffair of the Chesapeake frigate, and I had also that ofacquainting you with the necessity, under which I found78 HISTORY OP THEmyself, of suspending the execution of those instructionsin consequence of my not having perceived that any stepswhatever were taken by the American government to clearup the circumstances of an event which threatened somaterially to interrupt the harmony subsisting betweenour two countries, as that which occurred in the month oflast May, between the United States' ship President andhis majesty's ship Little Belt, when every evidence beforehis majesty's government seemed to show that a most evidentand wanton outrage had been committed on a Britishsloop of war by an American commodore.A court of inquiry, however, as you informed me inyour letter of the 11th instant, has since been held by orderof the President of the United States, on the conduct ofCommodore Rodgers, and this preliminary to further discussionon the subject being all that I asked in the firstinstance, as due to the friendship subsisting between thetwo states, I have now the honour to acquaint you that Iam ready to proceed in the truest spirit of conciliation tolay before you the terms of reparation which his royalhighness has commanded me to propose to the UnitedStates' government, and only wait to know when it willsuit your convenience to enter upon the discussion."Mr. Monroe replied to this letter on the following day.Department of State, October 31, 1811.♦• Mr. Monroe to Mr. Foster.n Sir — I have just had the honour to receive your letterof the 30th of this month.I am glad to find that the communication which I hadthe honour to make to you on the 11th instant relative tothe court of inquiry, which was the subject of it, is viewedby you in the favourable light which you have stated.•' Although I regret that the proposition which you nowmake in consequence of that communication has been delayedto the present moment, I am ready to receive theHARTFORD CONVENTION. 79terms of it whenever you may think proper to communicatethem. Permit me to add, that the pleasure of findingthem satisfactory will be duly augmented, if they shouldbe introductory to a removal of all the differences dependingbetween our two countries, the hope of which is solittle encouraged by your past correspondence. A prospectof such a result will be embraced, on my part, witha spirit of conciliation equal to that which has been expressedby you."Washington November 1, 1811.Mr. Foster to Mr. Monroe.Sir, — In pursuance of the orders which I have receivedfrom his royal highness the prince regent, in thename and on the behalf of his majesty, for the purpose ofproceeding to a final adjustment of the differences whichhave arisen between Great Britain and the United States,in the affair of the Chesapeake frigate, I have the honourto acquaint you —*' First, that I am instructed to repeat to the Americangovernment the prompt disavowal made by his majesty(and recited in Mr. Erskine's note of April 17th, 1809, toMr. Smith,) on being apprized of the unauthorized act ofthe officer in command of his naval forces on the coast ofAmerica, whose recall from a highly important and honourablecommand immediately ensued as a mark of his majesty'sdisapprobation.Secondly, that I am authorized to offer, in addition tothat disavowal, on the part of his royal highness, the immediaterestoration, as far as circumstances will admit, ofthe men who, in consequence of Admiral Berkeley's orders,were forcibly taken out of the Chesapeake, to the vesselfrom which they were taken : or, if that ship should beno longer in commission, to such seaport of the UnitedStates as the American government may name for thepurpose.\80 HISTORY OF THEThirdly, that I am also authorized to offer to theAmerican government a suitable pecuniary provision forthe sufferers in consequence of the attack on the Chesapeake,including the families of those seamen who unfortunatelyfell in the action, and of the grounded survivors.These honourable propositions, I can assure you, sir,are made with the sincere desire that they may provesatisfactory to the government of the United States, andI trust they will meet with that amicable reception whichtheir conciliatory nature entitles them to. I need scarcelyadd how cordially I join with you in the wish, that theymight prove introductory to a removal of all the differencesdepending between our two countries."*' November \2th, 1811.Mr. Monroe to Mr. Foster.Sir, — I have had the honour to receive your letter of1st November, and to lay it before the President. It ismuch to be regretted that the reparation due for such anaggression as that committed on the United States frigateChesapeake should have been so long delayed ; nor couldthe translation of the offending officer from one commandto another, be regarded as constituting a part of a reparationotherwise satisfactory ; considering however theexisting circumstances of the case, and the early and amicableattention paid to it by his royal highness the princeregent, the president accedes to the proposition containedin your letter, and in so doing your government will, I ampersuaded, see a proof of the conciliatory disposition bywhich the President has been actuated."It is a little remarkable, that this final adjustment of aquestion about which so much had been said and done,should have been accompanied by such uncourteous andundignified language as that at the close of the foregoingletters. It seems as if it was studiously designed to irritatethe British government, even when nothing could be gainedby it.HARTFORD CONVENTION. 81On the 16th of May, 1806, Mr. Fox,, then prime ministerof Great Britain, addressed the following note to Mr.Monroe, the United States envoy at London : —Downing-street, May 16, 1806.** The undersigned, his majesty's principal secretary ofstate for foreign affairs, has received his majesty's commandsto acquaint Mr. Monroe, that the king, taking intoconsideration the new and extraordinary means resortedto by the enemy for the purpose of distressing the commerceof his subjects, has thought fit to direct, that the necessarymeasures should be taken for the blockade of thecoast, rivers, and ports, from the river Elbe to the port ofBrest, both inclusive, and the said coast, rivers, and ports,are and must be considered as blockaded ; but that his majestyis pleased to declare, that such blockade shall not extendto prevent neutral ships and vessels, laden with goods notbeing the property of his majesty's enemies, and not beingcontraband of war, from approaching the said coast, andentering into and sailing from the said rivers and ports,(save and except the coast, rivers and ports, from Ostendto the river Seine, already in a state of strict and rigorousblockade, and which are to be considered as so continued,)provided the said ships and vessels so approaching and entering(except as aforesaid) shall not have been laden atany port belonging to or in the possession of any of hismajesty's enemies, and that the said ships and vessels, sosailing from the said rivers and ports (except as aforesaid)shall not be destined to any port belonging to or in the possessionof any of his majesty's enemies, nor have previouslybroken the blockade.** Mr. Monroe is therefore requested to apprise theAmerican consuls and merchants residing in England,that the coast, rivers, and ports above mentioned, must beconsidered as being in a state of blockade, and that fromthis time all the measures, authorized by the law of nail82 HISTORY OF THEtons and the respective treaties between his majesty andthe different neutral powers, will be adopted and executedwith respect to vessels attempting to violate the saidblockade after this notice."On the 17th of May, Mr. Monroe wrote to the Secretaryof State, and communicated this note from Mr. Fox ;and in the course of his letter made the following remarks: —Early this morning I received from Mr. Fox a note, acopy of which is enclosed, which you will perceive embracesexplicitly a principal subject depending betweenour governments, though in rather a singular mode. Asimilar communication is, I presume, made to the otherministers, though of that I have no information. Thenote is couched in terms of restraint, and professes to extendthe blockade further than was heretofore done ; neverthelessit takes it from many ports already blockaded, indeedfrom all east of Ostend and west of the Seine, exceptin articles contraband of war and enemies' property, whichare seizable without a blockade. And in like form of exception,considering every enemy as one power, it admitsthe trade of neutrals, within the same litnit, to be free, inthe productions of enemies colonies, in every but the directroute between the colony and the parent country. I have,however, been too short a time in the possession of thispaper to trace it in all its consequences in regard to thisquestion. It cannot be doubted that the note was drawnby the government in reference to the question, and if intendedby the cabinet as a foundation on which Mr. Foxis authorized to form a treaty, and obtained by him forthe purpose, it must he viewed in a very favourable light.It seems clearly to put an end to further seizures, on theprinciple which has been heretofore in contestation^'^On the 20th of May Mr. Monroe wrote again to theSecretary of State. The following is an extract from hisletter. " From what I could collect, I have been strength-hartfordCONVENTION. 83ened in the opinion which I communicated to you in mylast, that 3Ir. Fox's note of the 16th was drawn with aview to a principal question with the United States, Imean that of the trade with enemies' colonies. It embraces,it is true, other objects, particularly the commercewith Prussia, and the north generally, whose ports it opensto neutral powers, under whose flag British manufactureswill find a market there. In this particular, especially,the measure promises to be highly satisfactory to the commercialinterest, and it may have been the primary object ofthe governments''On the 21st of November, 1806, Bonaparte issued hisdecree, commonly called the Berlin decree, from the factthat it bears date from the Prussian capital.Imperial Decree of the 2\st of November, 1806.Art. 1. The British islands are declared in a state ofblockade.2. All commerce and correspondence with the Britishislands are prohibited. In consequence, letters or packets,addressed either to England, to an Englishman, or in theEnglish language, shall not pass through the post office,and shall be seized.3. Every subject of England, of whatever rank and conditionsoever, who shall be found in the countries occupiedby our troops, or by those of our allies, shall be made aprisoner of war.4. All magazines, merchandise, or property whatsoever,belonging to a subject of England, shall be declaredlawful prize.5. The trade in English merchandise is forbidden; allmerchandise belonging to England, or coming from itsmanufactories and colonies, is declared lawful prize.6. One half of the proceeds of the confiscation of themerchandise and property, declared good prize by the precedingarticles, shall be applied to indemnify the merseHISTORY OF THEchants for the losses which they have suffered by the captureof merchant vessels by English cruisers.7. No vessel coming directly from England, or from theEnglish colonies, or having been there since the publicationof the present decree, shall be received into any port.8. Every vessel contravening the above clause, bymeans of a false declaration, shall be seized, and the vesseland cargo confiscated as if they were English property.9. Our tribunal of prizes at Paris is charged with thedefinitive adjudication of all the controversies which mayarise within our empire, or in the countries occupied bythe French army relative to the execution of the presentdecree. Our tribunal of prizes at Milan shall be chargedwith the definitive adjudication of the said controversies,which may arise within the extent of our kingdom ofItaly.10. The present decree shall be communicated by ourminister of exterior relations, to the kings of Spain, ofNaples, of Holland, and of Etruria, and to our allies, whosesubjects, like ours, are the victims of the injustice and thebarbarism of the English maritime laws. Our ministersof exterior relations, of war, of marine, of finances, ofpolice, and our post masters general, are charged each, inwhat concerns him, with the execution of the presentdecree."On the 11th of November, 1807, a new order in councilwas issued by the British government, in which it is declared," that all the ports and places of France and herallies, or of any other country at war with his majesty, andother ports and places in Europe, from which, althoughnot at war with his majesty, the British flag is excluded,and all ports or places in the colonies belonging to hismajesty's enemies, shall from henceforth be subject to thesame restrictions, in point of trade and navigation, withthe exceptions hereinafter mentioned, as if the same wereHARTFORD CONVENTION. 8Sactually blockaded by his majesty's naval forces in themost strict and rigorous manner : and it is hereby furtherordered and declared, that all trade in articles, which areof the produce or manufacture of the said countries orcolonies, together with all goods and merchandise onboard,and all articles of the produce or manufacture ofthe said countries or colonies, shall be captured and condemnedas prize to the captors."The order contained various other provisions, not necessaryto the object of this work, all professedly foundedupon the idea of retaliation for the French decree alludedto, and to the extravagant assumptions of power, and grossviolation of principle, and the rights of neutrals.To meet this measure of the British government, theEmperor of France, on the 11th of December, 1807,issued a new decree from his imperial palace at Milan,which from that circumstance has been called the MilanDecree. After a preamble, it declares —Art. 1. Every ship, to whatever nation it may belong,that shall have submitted to be searched by an Englishship, or on a voyage to England, or shall have paid anytax whatsoever to the English government, is thereby andfor that alone, declared to be denationalized, to have forfeitedthe protection of its king, and to have becomeEnglish property,2. Whether the ships thus denationalized by the arbitrarymeasures of the English government, enter into ourports, or those of our allies, or whether they fall into thehands of our ships of war, or of our privateers, they aredeclared to be good and lawful prizes.3. The British islands arc declared to be in a state ofblockade, both by land and sea. Every ship of whatevernation, or whatsoever the nature of its cargo may be, thatsails from the ports of England, or those of the Englishcolonies, and of the countries occupied by English troops,and proceeding to England, or to the English colonies, or86 HISTORY OF THEto countries occupied by English troops, is good and lawfulprize, as contrary to the present decree, and may be capturedby our ships of war, or our privateers, and adjudgedto the captor.4. These measures, which are resorted to only in justretaliation of the barbarous system adopted by England,which assimilates its legislation to that of Algiers, shallcease to have any effect with respect to all nations whoshall have the firmness to compel the English governmentto respect their flag. They shall continue to berigorously in force, as long as that government does notreturn to the principle of the law of nations, which regulatesthe relations of civilized states in a state of war. Theprovisions of the present decree shall be abrogated andnull, in fact, as soon as the English abide again by theprinciples of the law of nations, which are also the principlesof justice and of honour."These British orders in council, and French decrees,were all in force at the time the negotiation with Mr.Erskine commenced, and were just subjects of uneasiness,complaint and remonstrance, on the part of the UnitedStates. Property to a large amount, belonging to Americancitizens, and not liable to condemnation or capture underthe well established principles of the laws of nations, wastaken and confiscated by both parties ; and it almostseemed as if the warfare which was raging between thetwo most refined and civilized nations in Europe, woulddegenerate into downright piracy and barbarism.On the 18th of December, 1807, Mr. Jefferson communicatedto both houses of Congress the following message —The communications now made, showing the greatand increasing dangers with which our vessels, our seamen,and merchandise, are threatened on the high seasand elsewhere, from the belligerent powers of Europe, andit being of the greatest importance to keep in safety theseessential resources, I deem it my duty to recommend theHARTFORD Convention 8?subject to the consideration of Congress, who will doubtlessperceive all the advantages which may be expectedfrom an inhibition of the departure of our vessels from theports of the United States.Their wisdom will also see the necessity of makingevery preparation for whatever events may grow out of thepresent crisis."The only documents published in the state papers ashaving accompanied this message, were,1. An "Extract of a letter from the (French) GrandJudge, Minister of Justice, to the Imperial Attorney Ge ■neral for the Council of Prizes ;" — of which the followingis a translation —Paris, Sept. 18, 1807.Sir, — I have submitted to his majesty the emperorand king the doubts raised by his excellency the ministerof marine and colonies, on the extent of certain dispositionsof the imperial decree of the 21st of November, 1806,which has declared the British isles in a state of blockade.The following are his majesty's intentions on the points inquestion :1st. May vessels of war, by virtue of the imperial decreeof the 21st November last, seize on board neutral vesselseither English property, or even all merchandise proceedingfrom the English manufactories or territory ?Answer. His majesty has intimated, that as he did notthink proper to express any exception in his decree, thereis no ground for making any in its execution, in relationto any whomsoever (a Regard de qui que ce peut etre.;2dly. His majesty has postponed a decision on the questionwhether armed French vessels ought to captureneutral vessels bound to or from England, even when theyhave no English merchandise on board.Render."88 HISTORY OF THEAnd 2. A document cut from an English newspaper, theLondon Gazette of October 17, purporting to be a proclamationby the king of Great Britain, "for recalling andprohibiting British seamen from serving foreign princesand states," and dated October 16, 1807. This documentconcluded in the following manner —And we do hereby notify, that all such our subjects asaforesaid, who have voluntarily entered, or shall enter, orvoluntarily continue to serve on board of any ships of warbelonging to any foreign state at enmity with us, are andwill be guilty of high treason : and we do by this our royalproclamation declare, that they shall be punished with theutmost severity of the law."In a speech of Mr. Pickering, a member of the Senateof the United States from Massachusetts, on a resolutionto repeal all the embargo laws, on the 30th of November,1808, in allusion to the act of Congress of December,1807, laying the embargo, the following remarks are to befound —Of the French papers supposed to be brought by theRevenge, none were communicated to Congress, save aletter dated September 24M, 1807, from General Armstrongto M, Champagny, and his answer of the th of October,relative to the Berlin decree, and a letter from Render,minister of justice, to Champagny, giving the emperor'sinterpretation of that decree. These three papers, with anewspaper copy of a proclamation of the king of GreatBritain, issued in the same October, were all the paperscommunicated by the President to Congress, as thegrounds on which he recommended the embargo. Thesepapers, he said, " showed the great and increasing dangerswith which our vessels, our seamen and merchandise werethreatened on the high seas and elsewhere, from the belligerentpowers of Europe."These remarks of Mr. Pickering were made in debatein the Senate, within less than a year from the date of theHARTFORD Convention. 89message recommending an embargo, and of course, asthey were not denied or questioned, they must be taken tobe correct. It is certainly a singular circumstance, if theywere correct, that none of the documents alluded to arepublished with the message recommending the embargo,except Render's letter, and the British proclamationrecalling their seamen. In the same volume of " statepapers," published by Wait &. Sons, four hundred pagesfarther advanced in the volume, are to be found Render'sletter of the 18th of September, 1807, General Armstrong'sletter of September 24th to the minister of foreign relations,and Champagny's answer of October 7th. Whythey were not published with the message with which theywere communicated to Congress, and more especially howthey came to be placed where they are, are matters thatwe cannot explain. General Armstrong's letter is asfollows«' Paris, Sept. 24, 1807.Sir, — I have this moment learned that a new aridextended construction, highly injurious to the commerceof the United States, was about to be given to the imperialdecree of the 21st of November last. It is therefore incumbentupon me to ask from your excellency an explanationof his majesty's views in relation to this subject, andparticularly .whether it be his majesty's intention, in anydegree, to infant the obligations of the treaty now subsistingbetween the United States and the French empire .''John Armstrong.-' His Excellency the Minister ofForeign Relations."The following is M. Champagny's answer —Fontainebleau, Oct. 7, 1807.Sir, — You did me the honour, on the 24th of September,to request me to send you some explanations as to the90 HISTORY OF THEexecution of the decree of blockade of the British islands,as to vessels of the United States."The provisions of all the regulations and treaties relativeto a state of blockade have appeared applicable to theexisting circumstance, and it results from the explanationswhich have been addressed to me by the imperial procureurgeneral of the council of prizes, that his majesty hasconsidered every neutral vessel, going from English ports,with cargoes of English merchandise, or of English origin,as lawfully seizable by French armed vessels.The decree of blockade has been now issued elevenmonths. The principal powers of Europe, far from protestingagainst its provisions, have adopted them. Theyhave perceived that its execution must be complete, torender it more effectual, and it has seemed easy to reconcilethe measure with the observance of treaties, especiallyat a time when the infractions, by England, of the rightscf all-maritime powers, render their interests conimoUjand tend to unite them in support of the same cause."Champagny."His Excellency General Armstrong,Minister Plan. of the U. States."It is perfectly apparent, from the examination of theseseveral documents, that no new facts appeared respectingthe policy or measures of Great Britain, which justified orcalled for an embargo. The proclamation, allowing it tohave been a genuine state paper, showed no new or additionalmarks of animosity against the United States, ortheir commerce. It appears to have been a mere measureof precaution for the security of their seamen. Theaggravated spirit of hostility towards this country, and itscommercial interests, was to be found only in the Frenchdocuments. But as the French had at that time very littleexternal commerce, and but few vessels of any descriptionafloat, and Great Britain had the command of theHARTFORD CONVENTION. 91ocean ; under such circumstances, it was doubtless thoughtnecessary, if for nothing else, to appease the feelings ofhis imperial majesty of France, to adopt a measure whichshould involve Great Britain as well as France, in its operations.And hence the British proclamation was introduced,as furnishing evidence of " the great and increasingdangers with which our vessels, our seamen, and merchandisewere threatened on the high seas and elsewhere fromthe belligerent powers of Europe."The remark in the President's message, as far as it relatedto this document, was not true. There is nothing inthe British proclamation which showed the slightest increaseof danger to our vessels, seamen, or merchandise.That our commerce had suffered great injustice fromthe British orders of council, there can be no doubt ; andthere never was, it is presumed, any disposition amongthe opposers of the embargo, to excuse or vindicate thatinjustice. But great as it was, it in a variety of respectsfell far short of the atrocious conduct of France towards us.After the naval power of France had been destroyed by theBritish, and the nation was in effect driven from the ocean,it became an object of the highest importance to Bonaparteto prevent all commercial intercourse between GreatBritain and the continent. To accomplish this, he undertookto establish his famous Continental System — whichwas nothing less than an attempt, by the most arbitraryand oppressive measures, to shut out all British trade, merchandise,produce, and manufactures, from the nations onthe continent. His decrees, issued at Berlin, Milan, andRambouillet, were parts of the machinery by which he intendedto carry his project into effect. It is perfectly clearfrom the nature of the case, that in prosecuting this project,it must have been his intention from the beginning todisregard every principle of law, justice, and humanity,that might stand in his way. As a large part of the neutraltrade of the world was carried on through American92 HISTORY OF THEvessels, it was necessary for his purposes either to driveus from our neutrality or render the trade so hazardousas to induce us to withdraw from it. And there is muchevidence in the proceedings of our government, to show,that as far as his measures could be carried into effectagainst Great Britain, without too great a sacrifice on ourpart, Mr. Jefferson and his partisans were willing heshould succeed. Many proofs of his animosity againstGreat Britain, and of his partiality for France, will befound in this history. And whoever will take the painsto examine the public state papers of the Congress of theUnited States, or the Memoirs and Correspondence ofMr. Jefferson, published since his death, will find abundantevidence of that animosity towards the one, and thatpartiality towards the other. In addition to the evidencederived from these sources, of his abject subserviency toFrance, further proof may be adduced, from a pamphletpublished about the same period, of these transactions,entitled, " Further Suppressed Documents ;" fromwhich is copied the following article : —Extract of a letter from Mr. Armstrong to Mr. Madison.February 22, 1808.Mr. Patterson offering so good a conveyance that Icannot but employ it. Nothing has occurred here since thedate of my public dispatches (the 17th) to give to our businessan aspect more favourable than it then had ; but onthe other hand, I have come to the knowledge of two factswhich I think sufficiently show the decided character ofthe Emperor's policy with regard to us. These are first,that in a Council of Administration held a few days past,when it was proposed to modify the Decrees of November,1806, and December, 1807, (though the proposition wassupported by the whole weight of the Council,) he becamehighly indignant, and declared that these decrees shouldsuffer no change — and that the Americans should be com-HARTFORD CONVENTION. - 93pellet to tale the positive character of either allies or enemies :2d, that on the 27th of January last, twelve days afterMr. Champagny's written assurances that these Decreesshould work no change in the property sequestered until ourdiscussions with England were brought to a close, and sevendays before he reported to me verbally these very assurances,the Emperor had by a special decision confiscated tito ofour ships and their cargoes, (the Julius Henry and the Junta,)for want merely of a document not required by anylaw or usage of the commerce in which they had been engaged.This act was taken, as I am informed on a generalreport of sequestered cases, amounting to one hundred andsixty, and which, at present prices, will yield upwards ofone hundred millions of francs, a sum whose magnitudealone renders hopeless all attempts at saving it — Danes,Portuguese, and Americans, will be the principal sufferers.If I am right in supposing that the emperor has definitivelytaken his ground, I cannot be wrong in concluding that youwill immediately take yours J"Here is decisive evidence of Bonaparte's object in issuingand enforcing his decrees. It was to compel the UnitedStates to become either his allies, or his enemies ; and hence,when urged to modify those decrees by his Council ofAdministration, he became indignant, and declared theyshould suffer no change.In this same publication of " Suppressed Documents,"is the following letter —London, January 2()th, 1808.From Mr. Pinkney to Mr. Madison.Sir, — I had the honour to receive this morning yourletter of the 23d of last month, inclosing a copy of a messagefrom the President to Congress, and of their act inpursuance of it, laying an embargo on our vessels andexports. It appeared to be my duty to lose no time in94 HISTORY OF THEgiving such explanations to the British government, of thiswise and salutary measure, as your letter suggests. Andaccordingly I went to Downing-street immediately, andhad a short conference with Mr. Canning, who receivedmy explanations with great apparent satisfaction, and tookoccasion to express the most friendly disposition towards ourcountry. I availed myself of this opportunity, to mentiona subject of some importance, connected with the lateorders in council.*' I had been told, that American vessels coming intoBritish ports under warning, could not obtain any documentto enable them to return to the United States, in theevent of its being found imprudent, either to deposit theircargoes, or to resume their original voyages, although theyare not prohibited from returning, yet as the warning isendorsed on their papers, the return may be hazardous,without some British documents to prove compliance withit and give security to the voyage. Mr. C. took a note ofwhat I said, and assured me that whatever was necessaryto give the facility in question, could be done without delay ;and he added, that it was their sincere tvish to show, in everythingconnected ivith the orders in council, ivhich only necessityhad compelled them to adopt, their anxiety to accommodatethem, as far as was consistent with their object, to the feelingsand interest of the American government and people. ^^It is difficult to imagine why these documents were kepthidden from the public eye, unless it was the fear that thecountry at large, from the difference of style and sentimentbetween the two, would form opinions unfavourable to thepolicy which our government were pursuing in- relation tothe two countries. The tone of the French emperor, asconveyed in the letter of General Armstrong, was imperious,and insolent. He would force the United States totake the positive character of either allies, or enemies —he became highly indignant, and would suffer no change inhis decrees — showing conclusively, that his object was toHARTFORD CONVENTION. 95make them answer his own purposes, regardless of theireffects upon the United States.By Mr. Pinkney's letter to Mr. Madison, it appears, thatwhen the former communicated to Mr. Canning, the Britishminister, the information that Congress had establishedthe embargo, the latter "received his explanations withgreat apparent satisfaction, and took occasion to expressthe most friendly disposition towards our country."It is not necessary to show in what manner these " suppresseddocuments" were obtained for publication. It isenough for the public to know that they were obtained,and that they are genuine. Of the latter fact they mayrest assured ; the author having been furnished with themost satisfactory evidence of the fact — so much so, that itwill not be questioned by those by whose order they werekept back from the public.In a report of the committee on foreign relations in theHouse of Representatives, bearing date November 22d,1808, is the following passage —It was on the 18th of September, 1807, that a new constructionof the decree took place ; an instruction havingon that day been transmitted to the council of prizes by theminister of justice, by which that court was informed, thatFrench armed vessels were authorized, under that decree,to seize without exception, in neutral vessels, either Englishproperty, or merchandise of English growth or manufacture.An immediate explanation having been askedfrom the French minister of foreign relations, he confirmed,in his answer of the 7th of October, 1807, the determinationof his government to adopt that construction.Its first application took place on the 10th of the samemonth, in the case of the Horizon, of which the ministerof the United States was not informed until the month ofNovember ; and on the twelfth of that month he presenteda spirited remonstrance against that infraction of theneutral rights of the United States. He had, in the mean96 HISTORY OF THEwhile, transmitted to America the instruction to the councilof prizes of the 18th of September. This was receivedon the of December ; and a copy of the decision in thecase of the Horizon having at the same time reachedgovernment, the President, aware of the consequenceswhich would follow that new state of things, communicatedimmediately to Congress the alteration of the French decree,and recommended the embargo, which was accordinglylaid on the 22d of December, 1807 ; at ivhich time itwas well understood, in this country, the British orders ofcouncil of November preceding had issued, although theywere not officially communicated to cur governmentIn the " Suppressed Documents," to which referencehas been made, there is a letter from General Armstrong,in which some remarks are made which may probablyexplain the reason why those papers were not suffered tosee the light. The following is an extract from it —30^/t August, 1808.We have somewhat overrated our means of coercionof the two great belligerents to a course of justice. Theembargo is a measure calculated above any other, to keepus whole, and keep us in peace, but beyond this you mustnot count upon it. Here it is net felt, and in England (inthe midst of the more interesting events of the day) it isforgotten'However lightly it was esteemed as a measure of coercionin France, and however speedily it passed out of mindin England, it is very certain that its full force was felt athome, and it bore too hardly upon the public prosperity,as well as upon private enterprise, to be either slighted ordisregarded. Upon finding a strong spirit of oppositionto its principles, as well as to its provisions, in January,1809, Congress passed an act to enforce and make it moreeffectual, which excited a great deal of feeling, and no inconsiderabledegree of alarm through a large part of theHARTFORD Convention 97country ; and probably this measure had considerableefficacy in accomplishing the repeal of the embargo law,and of introducing the non-intercourse act in its place.But in this, as in almost all other cases of importanceunder Mr. Jefferson's administration, it is necessary to examineclosely into the subject, in order to ascertain whetherthe reasons given to the public for the recommendationof his measures are the genuine ones, and whetherthere is not something kept out of sight, which, if discovered,might give a different aspect to the matter in hand.It has been seen by the letter from General Armstrong toMr. Madison, copied from the suppressed documents, datedFebruary 22d, 1808, that Bonaparte had declared that theUnited States should be compelled to take the positivecharacter of either allies or enemies. In Mr. Jefferson'sWorks, published since his death, is a letter to Robert L.Livingston, dated Washington, October 15th, 1808, fromwhich the following is a quotation : —** Your letter of September the 22d waited here for myreturn, and it is not till now that I have been able to acknowledgeit. The explanation of his principles, givenyou by the French Emperor, in conversation, is correct, asfar as it goes. He does not wish us to go to war withEngland, knowing we have no ships to carry on that war.To submit to pay to England the tribute on our commercewhich she demands by her orders of council, would be toaid her in the war against him, and would give him justground to declare war with us. He concludes, therefore, asevery rational man must, that the embargo, the only remainingalternative, was a wise measure. These are acknowledgedprinciples, and should circumstances arisewhich may offer advantage to our country in making thempublic, we shall avail ourselves of them. But as it is notusual nor agreeable to governments to bring their conversationsbefore the public, I think it would be well to considerthis on your part as confidential, leaving to the governsHISTORY OF THEment to retain or make it public, as the general good mayrequire. Had the Emperor gone further, and said thathe condemned our vessels going voluntarily into his portsin breach of his municipal laws, we might have admittedit rigorously legal, though not friendly. But his condemnationof vessels taken on the high seas by his privateers,and carried involuntarily into his ports, is justifiable by nolaw, is piracy, and this is the wrong we complain ofagainst him."Who, after reading this language from Mr. Jefferson,can hesitate as to the real object which he intended toaccomplish by establishing an embargo ? No other coursewould have answered the purpose he had in view, whichobviously was, not the avoidance of dangers to our seamen,vessels, and merchandise, but to injure Great Britain, andbenefit Bonaparte. It would not benefit hmi if we wereto go to war with Great Britain, because such a warmust be to a great extent a war upon the ocean, and wehad no ships to meet her there. If we submitted to theterms which Great Britain demanded, it would be nothingless than paying tribute to her, which would aid her in carryingon her war with France, and therefore would beinjurious to his majesty the Emperor, and would give himjust cause of complaint against us. " He (that is Bonaparte)concludes, as every rational man must, that the embargo,the only remaining alternative, ices a wise TreasuresIn what respect wise ? Not for the protection of our seamen,vessels, and merchandise, for neither of them arealluded to in these remarks, but wise for the purposes forwhich it was intended — to benefit France, and injure GreatBritain.It is to be regretted that the letter from Mr. Livingston,to which the foregoing is an answer, was not published. Itmight have disclosed other facts and circumstances besidesthose mentioned and referred to in the answer. But thelatter contains clear and unquestionable evidence, that ireHARTFORD CONVENTION. 99she adoption of this measure it was the object of Mr. Jeffersonto throw the weight of this country, as far as he thendared to venture, into the scale of France, and againstthat of Great Britain. It appears in Bonaparte's opinion,as well as his own, that the best, and indeed the only thingwe could then do to aid the French, in their warfareagainst Great Britain, was to establish an embargo. AccordinglyMr. Jefferson recommended such a measure.But in bringing it before Congress he not only concealedhis'real motives in doing it, but he gave to Congress falsereasons for introducing it to their consideration. Suchconduct, when detected, and exposed, would destroy allconfidence in any man, in the relations of private life. Itis far more dangerous, and more to be condemned in theruler of a great nation, whose influence must of necessitybe great, and whose example cannot fail to produce a powerfuleffect upon the community at large. But the opportunityto prosecute his favourite political system towardsthe two great hostile nations of Europe was too flatteringto be lost, and he improved it in the manner that has beenrelated. He did all he could, in a secret manner, to forwardthe views and promote the interests of France, andto injure and depress those of Great Britain.Mr. Jefferson's caution to Mr. Livingston on the proprietyon his part of observing secrecy with respect to theremarks of Bonaparte, on the subject of the policy of ourgovernment towards Great Britain and France, was strikinglycharacteristic. The principles advanced by the emperorare acknowledged to be sound ; and should circumstancesarise, which may offer advantages to our countryin making them public, we shall avail ourselves of them.But as it is not usual, nor agreeable to governments tobring their conversations before the public, I think it willbe well to consider this on your part as confidential, leavingto the government to retain or make it public, as thepublic good may require." That he should not be desiresHISTORY OF THEOils of having this decisive evidence of Bonaparte's opinionin favour of the embargo, in preference to any other coursewhich the case presented, and the irresistible presumptionwhich the conversation furnishes that our administrationwere shaping their measures in such a manner as to promotethe interests of France, published to the country,and the world, is not strange. It would ill comport withthe professions which our government were constantlymaking of impartiality between the two belligerent powers,and certainly furnish Great Britain with unanswerablereasons for treating us as a secret and insidiousenemy.And as a decisive proof of the entire and absolute subserviencyof Mr. Jefferson's feelings as well as conduct toBonaparte's policy and interests, he says — " Had the emperorgone further, and said that he condemned our vesselsgoing voluntarily into his ports in breach of his municipallaws, we might have admitted it rigorously legal, thoughnot friendly." This, it is presumed, was the principle onwhich Bonaparte acted, when under his Rambouillet decree,he sequestered and confiscated, for the benefit of hisprivy purse, the immense amount of American propertywhich was in his ports at the time that decree was promulgated,and for which he never made any remuneration,considering it undoubtedly as " rigorously legale "But what must be thought of the nature and strength ofMr. Jefferson's devoted attachment to France, when in hisprivate intercourse and communications with his confidentialfriends, he makes use of such language as that inthe closing part of this letter — " But his condemnation ofour vessels taken on the high seas by his privateers, andcarried involuntarily into his ports, is justifiable by no law,is piracy. ^^ In all the complaints against Great Britain,nothing has been alledged of a more aggravated characterthan this. And yet, the general spirit and tenor of thecorrespondence with France, on the subject of her decrees,HARTFORD CONVENTION. 101and the depredations upon our commerce under them,was, during the administration of Mr. Jefferson and Mr.Madison, tame, abject, and supplicatory, obviously dictatedby strong apprehensions of giving offence, and expressedunder the influence of servility and fear.Mr. Madison came into office in March, 1809. Mr.Jefferson had bequeathed to him a series of difficulties andembarrassments with Great Britain, from which it was aperplexing task to extricate the country, and which, ifsuffered to remain in the predicament they were in at thetime he left the presidency, could scarcely fail to involve itin deeper calamities. It has been shown in what mannerthe negotiation with Mr. Rose was defeated by an attemptto induce him to transcend his instructions, and take upcontroversies to which they did not extend. Upon Mr.Madison's accession to the government, the British ministerin this country was the honourable David M. Erskine, sonof Lord Chancellor Erskine, a member of the Whig cabinetunder Mr. Fox's administration. This gentleman wasinexperienced in diplomatic services, and was not distinguishedby any uncommon talents, natural or acquired ;but that he was extremely desirous of adjusting the difficultiesbetween the two countries, cannot be doubted. Onthe 17th of April, 1809, about six weeks after Mr. Madison'sinauguration as President of the United States, headdressed a letter to Mr. Smith, Secretary of State of theUnited States, of which the following is a copy —Washington, April lath, 1809.•< Sirs — I have the honour to inform you that I havereceived his majesty's commands, to represent to thegovernment of the United States, that his majesty is animatedby the most sincere desire for an adjustment of thedifferences which have unhappily so long prevailed betweenthe two countries, the recapitulation of which might have102 HISTORY OF Theatendency to impede, if not prevent an amicable understanding.It having been represented to his majesty's government,that the Congress of the United States, in their proceedingsat the opening of the last session, had evinced anintention of passing certain laws, which would place therelations of Great Britain with the United States upon anequal footing, in all respects, with the other belligerentpowers ; I have accordingly received his majesty's commands,in the event of such laws taking place, to offer onthe part of his majesty, an honourable reparation for theaggression committed by a British naval officer in theattack on the United States frigate Chesapeake.Considering the act passed by the Congress of theUnited States on the 1st of March, (usually termed thenon-intercourse act) as having produced a state of equalityin the relations of the two belligerent powers withrespect to the United States, I have to submit, conformablyto instructions, for the consideration of the Americangovernment, such terms of satisfaction and reparation, ashis majesty is induced to believe will be accepted in thesame spirit of conciliation with which they are proposed.In addition to the prompt disavowal made by his majesty,on being apprized of the unauthorized act committedby his naval officer, whose recall, as a mark of the king'sdispleasure, from an highly important and honourablecommand immediately ensued ; his majesty is willing torestore the men forcibly taken out of the Chesapeake, andif acceptable to the American government, to make asuitable provision for the unfortunate sufferers on thatoccasion."This letter was answered by the Secretary of State onthe same day, and the propositions were accepted by thegovernment. On the following day, viz. the 18th of April,Mr Erskine addressed a second letter to Mr. Smith, inHARTFORD CONVENTION. 103which, after alluding to what had previously occurred,added the following —On these grounds and expectations, I am instructed tocommunicate to the American government, his majesty'sdetermination of sending to the United States an envoyextraordinary, invested with full powers to conclude atreaty on all the points of the relations between the twocountries.In the mean time, with a view to contribute to theattainment of so desirable an object, his majesty would bewilling to withdraw his orders in council of January andNovember 1807, so far as respects the United States, inthe persuasion that the President would issue a proclamationfor the renewal of the intercourse with Great Britain,and that whatever difference of opinion should arise in theinterpretation of the terms of such an agreement, will beremoved in the proposed negotiation."On the same day Mr. Smith wrote the following letterto Mr. Erskine —Department of State, April 18^^, 1809.Sir, — The note which I had the honour of receivingfrom you this day, I lost no time in laying before the President,who being sincerely desirous of a satisfactoryadjustment of the differences unhappily existing betweenGreat Britain and the United States, has authorized me toassure you, that he will meet with a disposition correspondentwith that of his Britannick majesty, the determinationof his majesty to send to the United States a special envoy,invested with full powers to conclude a treaty on all thepoints of the relations between the two countries."I am further authorized to assure you, that in case hisBritannick majesty should, in the mean time, withdrawhis orders in council of January and November, 1807, sofaras respects the United States, the President will notfail to issue a proclamation by virtue of the authority, and104 HISTORY OF THEfor the purposes specified in the eleventh section of thestatute, commonly called the non-intercourse act."To this, on the succeeding day, the following answerwas returned by Mr. Erskine —Washington, April Width, 1809.*' Sir, — In consequence of the acceptance, by the President,as stated in your letter dated the 18th inst. of theproposals made by me on the part of his majesty, in myletter of the same day, for the renewal of the intercoursebetween the respective countries, I am authorized to declarethat his majesty's orders in council of January andNovember, 1807, will have been withdrawn, as respects theUnited States on the 10th day of June next."On the same day Mr. Smith replied in the followingletter —Department of State, April 19, 1809.Sir, — Having laid before the President your note ofthis day, containing an assurance, that his Britannickmajesty will, on the tenth day of June next, have withdrawnhis orders in council of January and November,1807, so far as respects the United States, I have thehonour of informing you that the President will accordingly,and in pursuance of the eleventh section of the statute,commonly called the non-intercourse act, issue a proclamation,so that the trade of the United States with GreatBritain may on the same day be renewed, in the mannerprovided in the said section."In pursuance of this arrangement with the British Envoy,the following document was issued on the same day —•' By the President of the United States of America."A PROCLAMATION.*' Whereas it is provided by the 11th section of the actHARTFORD Convention. 105of Congress, entitled ' An act to interdict the commercialintercourse between the United States and Great Britainand France, and their dependencies, and for other purposes;that in case either France or Great Britain shallso revoke or modify her edicts, as that they shall cease toviolate the neutral commerce of the United States ;' thePresident is authorized to declare the same by proclamation,after which the trade suspended by the said act, and byan act laying an embargo on all ships and vessels in theports and harbours of the United States, and the severalacts supplementary thereto, may be renewed with the nationso doing. And whereas the Honourable David MontagueErskine, his Britannick majesty's envoy extraordinaryand minister plenipotentiary, has by the order and in thename of his sovereign declared to this government, thatthe British orders in council of January and November,1807, will have been withdrawn, as respects the UnitedStates, on the 10th day of June next.Now therefore, I, James Madison, President of theUnited States, do hereby proclaim, that the orders in councilaforesaid, will have been withdrawn on the said tenthday of June next; after which day the trade of the UnitedStates with Great Britain, as suspended by the act of Congressabovementioned, and an act laying an embargo onall ships and vessels in the ports and harbours of the UnitedStates, and the several acts supplementary thereto, mayberenewed.Given under my hand and the seal of the United States,at Washington, the 19th day of April, A. D. 1809, and ofthe independence of the United States the thirty-third.James Madison.By the President. R. Smith, Secretary of State."The news of this arrangement was received throughoutthe Union with the highest degree of gratification ; andthe general exultation furnished decisive evidence of the106 HISTORY^OF THEStrong desire of all descriptions of persons and a greatproportion of the politicians, to be at peace with GreatBritain. In order to adapt the laws to the new state ofthings, Congress were convened in May following, and inaddressing his message to both Houses, the President informedthem that it afforded him much satisfaction to beable to communicate the commencement of a favourablechange in our forei<?a relations ; the critical state of whichhad induced a session of Congress at that early period.After recapitulating what had occurred in regard to thearrangement with Mr. Erskine, the message says,'* The revision of our commercial laws, proper to adaptthem to the arrangement ivhich has taken place iiilh GreatBritain, will doubtless engage the early attention of Congress."In pursuance of this recommendation the laws necessaryfor the occasion were passed, and the country wasgratified with the prospect of an unshackled and undisturbedprosecution of their commercial pursuits. In ashort time, however, intelligence was received, that theBritish government had disclaimed the arrangement, onthe broad ground that their agent had violated his instructions,and that the negociation was carried on, and thearrangement concluded, without authority ; and in consequencethereof the minister was recalled. Upon receivingthis information, a second proclamation was issued, bearingdate the 3rd of August, 1809, by the President of theUnited States, declaring that the orders in council had notbeen withdrawn, agreeably to the arrangement with Mr.Erskine, and therefore the acts of Congress which hadbeen suspended, were to be considered as in force.It has just been remarked, that the arrangement, thehistory of which has been given, was rejected by the Britishgovernment, on the ground that Mr. Erskine transcended,or violated his instructions. It is understood tobe the fact, not only with reference to Great Britain, butHARTFORD CONVENTION. 107Other countries, for governments to withhold their sanctionsfrom treaties and conventions concluded in this manner.The principle is recognized by our government.And it is perfectly evident that such must be the case, orthere would be no security in the negotiations betweengovernments. Like all other acts under delegated authority,it is binding on the principal when performedwithin the scope of the commission granted to the agent.An inquiry necessarily arises here, whether our governmentwere acquainted with the extent of Mrt Erskine'sinstructions, before, or at the time of the negotiation. Thedates of the correspondence between the Secretary ofState and Mr. Erskine show, that the business was hurriedin a very extraordinary manner. The letters on both sideswere all written, the arrangement concluded, and the proclamationfounded upon that arrangement, was issued inthe course of three days. On the 31st of July, J 809, Mr.Erskine communicated to Mr. Smith, Secretary of State,the information that the British government had not confirmedthe arrangement ; at the same time, expressing theconviction which he entertained at the time of making it,that he had conformed to his majesty's wishes, and to thespirit at least of his instructions. On the 9th of Augustthe Secretary of State addressed a letter to Mr. Erskine,requesting an explanation of some communications containedin a letter from him to his government, respectingconversations with Mr. Madison, Mr. Gelatin, and Mr.Smith, on the affairs of the United States and Great Britain; and after noticing several distinct subjects of inquiryrelating to these conversations, he says — " I, however,would remark, that had you deemed it proper to have communicatedin extenso this letter, [from Mr. Canning to Mr.Erskine,] it would have been impossible for the Presidentto have perceived in its conditions, or in its spirit, that conciliatorydisposition which had been professed, and which,it was hoped had really existed." Mr. Erskine replied to108 HISTORY OF THEthis letter of Mr. Smith, on the 14th of August, and inthe course of his answer, after having noticed the severalsubjects of inquiry, he said — " Under these circumstances,therefore, finding that I could not obtain the recognitionsspecified in Mr. Canning's despatch, of the 23d of January,(which formed but one part of his instructions to me,) in theformal manner required, I considered that it would be invain to lay before the government of the United States thedespatch in question, which I was at liberty to have donein extenso had I thought proper : but as I had such stronggrounds for believing that the object of his majesty's governmentcould be attained, though in a different manner,and the spirit, at least, of my several letters of instructionsbe fully complied with, I felt a thorough conviction uponmy mind, that I should be acting in conformity with hismajesty's wishes, and accordingly concluded the late provisionalagreement on his majesty's behalf with the governmentof the United States."These remarks, on the one side and the other, are doubtlessintended to convey the idea, that at the time of thenegotiation, and until after the conclusion of the arrangement,our government were not made acquainted with thenature and extent of Mr. Erskine's instructions, but thatthey depended on his understanding of both. Among thedocuments connected with this subject, is a letter, dated^ May ^7^ 1,809, from Mr. Canning to Mr. Pinkney, the/v United States minister at London, in which is the followingI passage —I " Having had the honour to read to you in extenso, theI instructions with which Mr. Erskine was furnished, it isI not necessary for me to enter into any explanation of those\ points in which Mr. Erskine has acted not only not in conforty, but in direct contradiction to them."From this passage it is apparent, that our governmentwere, or might have been made acquainted with the natureand extent of Mr. Erskine's instructions. It was so clearlyHARTFORD CONVENTION. 109their duty to have ascertained this most important point,before entering on the negotiation, that it is not easy toimagine they could have passed it by, unless there werespecific reasons for their remaining in ignorance concerningthem. It has been seen, that in the negotiation withMr. Rose, notwithstanding his instructions were strictlyconfined to a single object, and this fact was distinctly madeknown to Mr. Monroe before Mr. Rose left England, andas distinctly communicated to our government after hisarrival, and before the negotiation was opened, still, witha full knowledge of this fact, immediately upon enteringupon a discussion of the subject of Mr. Rose's mission, thefirst attempt of the Secretary of State was to draw himinto a consideration of other subjects of controversy, whichwere not only not included in his commission, but whichhe was expressly prohibited from discussing. And thiswas attempted with a perfect knowledge on the part ofour government, that if a treaty, or an arrangement hadbeen entered into by Mr. Rose, in violation of his instructions,his government would disclaim it, even if it shouldnot otherwise be objectionable. No explanation can begiven for this course of conduct on the part of our government,except the plain, and as it is believed undeniablefact, that they did not wish to adjust the difficulties betweenthe two nations. In consequence of the determinationby our government not to negotiate, unless Mr.Rose would violate his instructions, and extend the negotiationto topics not included in his commission, it was discontinued,and reparation in the matter of the Leopardand the Chesapeake left undecided.In the case of Mr. Erskine, the negotiation was one ofgreat importance. Mr. Madison had just entered uponthe office of President of the United States. Mr. Jeffersonhad left the government surrounded with difficultiesand embarrassments. The foreign commerce of the country,under the system of embargo and non-intercourse,110 HISTORY OF THEwas destroyed, and all the various branches of domesticindustry — agricultural, mercantile, and mechanical, werein a state of deep depression, or stagnation ; and the communitywere becoming very uneasy under privations whichwere not only unnecessary, but extremely injurious andoppressive. Under such circumstances, it was a stroke ofgood policy in him, at his entrance upon the duties of chiefmagistrate, to excite popular feeling in favour of his administration; and nothing would be more likely to producesuch an effect, than the adoption of measures which wouldrelieve the nation from the multiplied evils of the restrictivepolicy. And it required no extraordinary degree offoresight to discern, that if such an arrangement as wascontemplated with Mr. Erskine should be accomplished,that it would be cordially welcomed throughout the country,and render the new chief magistrate universally popular.At the same time, if the arrangement should be rejectedby the British government, whatever the cause forrefusing to ratify it might be, it could hardly fail to rousea spirit of resentment in the United States, of a proportionateextent with the gratification which the adjustmenthad excited.The chances of a favourable result towards the popularityof the administration were altogether in their favour.If Mr. Erskine's instructions should, upon being disclosed,warrant the arrangement, the measure would be hailed ashighly beneficial to the country. If not, and the treatyshould be rejected by Great Britain, the indignation of ourcountry would be raised to a high pitch against that government,and would open an easy way to such further measuresas our government might think proper to adopt. Ifthe extent of the instructions was known to our government,before entering upon the negotiation, the subsequentproceedings were a fraud upon the nation. If it was notknown, it was a most culpable omission on the part of theadministration to engage in the negotiation in a state ofHARTFORD COiNVENTlON. 111.ignorance respecting this indispensable fact, because theconsequences could not, in the event of a want of authority,be otherwise than injurious to the nation.An attempt was made to induce Mr. Erskine to say thathe had not disclosed his instructions. His answer is equivocal,and leaves the point undecided. Whether he didor did not, does not seem to be a matter of much importance.They were shown to Mr. Pinkney in London, inextenso; and it is hardly to be supposed that he couldhave failed to communicate their contents to the governmentat Washington. If known to them, the course pursuedby them was in the highest degree unworthy, and deceptive,because they must have known that any arrangementmade in violation of instructions would be rejectedfor that reason only, if there had been no other. Nor canany good excuse be given for that ignorance, if it actuallyexisted. The government ought to have known the extentof the minister's powers before they entered upon thenegotiation.The rejection of the arrangement by the British, thoughdeclared to be upon the ground of a departure from, or aviolation of instructions, produced its natural effects in thecountry. Upon receiving intelligence of the fact, the Presidentissued his proclamation, declaring the non-intercourselaws again in force : the feelings of the communitywere greatly excited, and a strong spirit of resentment wasenkindled towards Great Britain.Mr. Erskine having been recalled, Mr. Francis JamesJackson was sent to the United States as his successor.The date of the first correspondence with him is prefixedto a letter from the Secretary of State, of the 9th of October,1809. In this letter, the Secretary adverts to certainconversations which had taken place between him andMr. Jackson, and states what he understood to be the purportof them; and adds, that "To avoid the misconceptionsincident to oral proceedings, I have also the honour112 HISTORY OF THEto intimate that it is thought expedient that our further discussionson the present occasion be in the written form."Mr. Jackson protested against this determination, as unprecedentedin the annals of diplomacy, but consented togo on with the business of his mission, rather than to haveit suspended until he could send home for further directions.In the course of his letter he remarks — ^' It wasnot known when I left England, whether Mr. Erskine had,according to the liberty allowed him, communicated toyou in extenso his original instructions. It now appearsthat he did not. But in reverting to his official correspondence,and particularly to a despatch addressed on the20th of April to his majesty's Secretary of State forforeign affairs, I find that he there states, that he hadsubmitted to your consideration the three conditions specifiedin those instructions, as the groundwork of an arrangementwhich, according to information received fromthis country, it was thought in England might be madeWith a prospect of great mutual advantage. Mr. Erskinethen reports verbatim et seriatim your observations uponeach of the three conditions, and the reasons which inducedyou to think that others might be substituted in lieu ofthem. It may have been concluded between you that theselatter were an equivalent for the original conditions ; butthe very act of substitution evidently shows that those originalconditions were in fact very explicitly communicatedto you, and by you of course laid before the President forhis consideration. I need hardly add, that the differencebetween these conditions and those contained in the arrangementof the 18th and 19th of April, is sufficientlyobvious to require no elucidation ; nor need I draw theconclusion, which I consider as admitted by all absence ofcomplaint on the part of the American government, viz.that under such circumstances his majesty had an undoubtedand incontrovertible right to disavow the act of hisminister. I must here allude to a supposition which youHARTFORD CONVENTION. 113•have more than once mentioned to me, and by which, if ithad any the slightest foundation, this right might, perhaps,have been in some degree affected. You have informedme that you understood that Mr. Erskine had two sets ofinstructions, by which to regulate his conduct ; and thatupon one of them, which had not been communicatedeither to you or to the publick, was to be rested the justificationof the terms finally agreed upon between you andhim. It is my duty, Sir, solemnly to declare to you, andthrough you to the President, that the despatch from Mr.Canning to Mr. Erskine, which you have made the basis ofan official correspondence with the latter minister, andwhich was read by the former to the American minister inLondon, is the only despatch by which the conditions wereprescribed to Mr. Erskine for the conclusion of an arrangementwith this country on the matter to which it relates."A very long letter from Mr. Smith, Secretary of State,in answer to Mr. Jackson, bears date October 19. It is alaboured attempt to obtain a diplomatic victory over theBritish ambassador, on the subjects of dispute between thetwo governments. But the latter appears to have beenthoroughly versed in his business ; and no advantage wasgained over him by Mr. Secretary Smith, in the argument.Owing perhaps to the disappointment which wasexperienced from this quarter, or to the long continuanceof the discussion, more warmth of feeling began to bemanifest. The controversy, at length, seemed to turnupon the nature and extent of the instructions given bythe British government — whether Mr. Erskine actedunder a limited, or what vias called a full power. It wascontended by Mr. Smith that Mr. Erskine supposed hehad authority to make the arrangement, and that theBritish government were in honour bound to ratify it. Mr.Jackson, in a letter to Mr; Smith, of the 23d of October,says — " I have, therefore, no hesitation in informing you,that his majesty was pleased to disavow the agreement114 HISTORY OF THEconcluded between you and Mr. Erskine, because it wasconcluded in violation of that gentleman's instructions, andaltogether without authority to subscribe to the terms ofit. These instructions, I now understand by your letter,as well as from the obvious deduction which I took theliberty of making in mine of the 11th inst. were at thetime, in substance, made known to you; no stronger illustration,therefore, can be given of the deviation from themwhich occurred, than by a reference to the terms of youragreement."On the 1st of November the Secretary of State repliedto Mr. Jackson. The following is an extract from his letterFor the first time it is now disclosed that the subjectsarranged with this government by your predecessor, areheld to be not within the authority of a minister plenipotentiary,and that not having had a ' full power distinct fromthat authority, his transactions on those subjects might ofright be disavowed by his government.' This disclosuresso contrary to every antecedent supposition and just inference,gives a new aspect to this business. If theauthority of your predecessor did not embrace the subjectsin question, so as to bind his government, it necessarilyfollows, that the only credentials yet presented by you,being the same with those presented by him, give you noauthority to bind it ; and that the exhibition of a * fullpower' for that purpose, such as you doubtless are furnishedwith, is become an indispensable preliminary tofurther negotiation ; or to speak more strictly, was requiredin the first instance by the view of the matter nowdisclosed by you. Negotiation without this preliminarywould not only be a departure from the principle of equalitywhich is the essential basis of it, but would moreoverbe a disregard of the precautions and of the self-respectenjoined on the attention of the United States by the circumstanceswhich have hitherto taken place."I need scarcely add, that in the full power alluded to,HARTFORD CONVENTION. 115as a preliminary to negotiation, is not intended to be includedeither the whole extent or any part of your instructionsfor the exercise of it. These of course, as you havejustly remarked, remain subject to your own discretion.'* I abstain from making any particular animadversionson several irrelevant and improper allusions in your letter,not at all comporting with the professed disposition toadjust in an amicable manner the differences unhappilysubsisting between the two countries. But it would beimproper to conclude the few observations to which I purposelylimit myself, without adverting to your repetition ofa language implying a knowledge on the part of thisgovernment that the instructions of your predecessor didnot authorize the arrangement formed by him. After theexplicit and peremptory asseveration that this governmenthad no such knowledge, and that with such a knowledgeno such arrangement would have been entered into, theview which you have again presented of the subject, makesit my duty to apprize you, that such insinuations areinadmissible in the intercourse of a foreign minister with agovernment that understands what it owes to itself."Mr. Jackson replied to this letter on the 4th of November;and in the course of his remarks, says — "In hisdespatch of the 23d of January, Mr. Secretary Canningdistinctly says to Mr. Erskine, 'upon receiving throughyou, on the part of the American government, a distinctand official recognition of the three abovementioned conditionshis majesty will lose no time in sending to Americaa minister fully empowered to consign them to a formaland regular treaty.'This minister would, of course, have been providedwith a full power ; but Mr. Erskine was to be guided byhis instructions, and had the agreement concluded herebeen conformable to them, it would without doubt havebeen ratified by his majesty. I must beg your very particularattention to the circumstance that his majesty's116 HISTORY OF THEratification has been withheld, not because the agreementwas concluded without a full power, but because it wasaltogether irreconcilable to the instructions on which itwas professedly founded. The question of the full powerwas introduced by yourself to give weight, by a quotationfrom a highly respected author, to your complaint of thedisavowal ; in answer to which I observed that the quotationdid not apply, as Mr. Erskine had no full power. Neverdid I imagine, or any where attempt to rest, the right ofdisavowal upon that circumstance : indubitably his agreementwould nevertheless have been ratified, had not theinstructions, which in this case took the place of a fullpower, been violated.""I am concerned to be obliged a second time to appealto those principles of publick law, under the sanction andprotection of which I was sent to this country. Wherethere is not freedom of communication in the form substitutedfor the more usual one of verbal discussion, therecan be little useful intercourse between ministers ; and one,at least, of the epithets, which you have thought proper toapply to my last letter, is such as necessarily abridges thatfreedom. That any thing therein contained may be irrelevantto the subject, it is of course competent in you to endeavourto show ; and as far as you succeed in so doing, inso far will my argument lose of its validity ; but as to thepropriety of my allusions, you must allow me to acknowledgeonly the decision of my own sovereign, whose commandsI obey, and to whom alone I can consider myselfresponsible."*' You will find that in my correspondence with you, Ihave carefully avoided drawing conclusions that did notnecessarily follow from the premises advanced by me, andlast of all should I think of uttering an insinuation, whereI was unable to substantiate a fact. To facts, such as Ihave become acquainted with them, I have scrupulouslyadhered, and in so doing I must continue, whenever theHARTFORD CONVENTION. 117good faith of his majesty's government is called in question,to vindicate its honour and dignity in the manner thatappears to me best calculated for that purpose."To this letter the Secretary of State made the followinganswer —Department of State, November 8, 1809."Sir, — In my letter of the 19th ultimo, I stated to youthat the declaration in your letter of the 11th, that the despatchfrom Mr. Canning to Mr. Erskine, of the 23d ofJanuary, was the only despatch by which the conditionswere prescribed to Mr. Erskine for the conclusion of anarrangement on the matter to which it related, was thenfor the first time made to this government. And it wasadded that if that despatch had been communicated at thetime of the arrangement, or if it had been known that thepropositions contained in it, were the only ones on whichhe was authorized to make an arrangement, the arrangementwould not have been made."In my letter of the 1st instant, adverting to the repetitionin your letter of the 23d ultimo, of a language implyinga knowledge in this government that the instructionsof your predecessor did not authorize the arrangementformed by him, an intimation was distinctly given to youthat, after the explicit and peremptory asseveration thatthis government had not any such knowledge, and thatwith such a knowledge, such an arrangement would nothave been made, no such insinuation could be admitted bythis government.Finding that in your reply of the 4th instant, you haveused a language which cannot be understood but as reiteratingand even aggravating the same gross insinuation, itonly remains in order to preclude opportunities which arethus abused, to inform you, that no further communicationswill be received from you, and that the necessity of thisdetermination will, without delay, be made known to yourgovernment. In the mean time, a ready attention will be118 HISTORY OF THEgiven to any communications, affecting the interests of thetwo nations, through any other channel that may be substituted.I have the honour to be, &.c.♦'R. Smith."Great pains were taken to excite the public feelings onthis occasion. Mr. Jackson was accused of having insultedthe government, and popular resentment was roused to sohigh a pitch, that it was considered hardly safe for him totravel through the country. On the 11th of Novemberthe following note was communicated to the Secretary ofState —Mr. Oakley, his majesty's secretary of legation, is desiredby Mr. Jackson to state to the Secretary of State,that, as Mr. Jackson has been already once most grosslyinsulted by the inhabitants of the town of Hampton, in theunprovoked language of abuse held by them to severalofficers bearing the king's uniform, when those officerswere themselves violently assaulted, and put in imminentdanger ; he conceives it to be indispensable to the safety ofhimself, of the gentlemen attached to his mission, and ofhis family, during the remainder of their stay in the UnitedStates, to be provided with special passports or safe-guardsfrom the American government. This is the more necessary,since some of the newspapers of the United States aredaily using language whose only tendency can be to excitethe people to commit violence upon Mr. Jackson's person."Congress met in November ; and on the 29th of thatmonth the President's message was sent to both houses.After giving a history of the failure of the arrangementwith Mr. Erskine, and mentioning his recall, the appointmentof a new minister, and referring to the state of thingsin the attempt to open a negotiation with him, the messagesays — The correspondence "will show also, that forgettingthe respect due to all governments, he did not refrain fromimputations on this, which required that no further communicationsshould be received from him."HARTFORD CONVENTION. 119If there are any persons who have been well acquaintedwith the course of the administration under Mr. Madison,who believe that the arrangement with Mr. Erskine wasmade with sincerity and good faith on the part of our government,and with an expectation that it would be ratified,and carried into effect by the British government, they willof course give him credit for this professed attempt to adjustthe difficulties between the two nations. But personsof a different description, who view the whole proceedingas a political manoeuvre, intended to gain popularity to anew chief magistrate in the first place, and in the resultof its being rejected by the British government, to excitethe resentment of the country against that government,will come to a different conclusion, — one very far frombeing favourable to the frankness and political candour ofthe head of our government.At all events, it left the subject of controversy betweenthe two nations, which gave rise to the negotiation, openand undecided. Its consequences will be more fully ascertainedhereafter.In the maritime war of retaliation which Great Britainand France were carrying on against each other by decreesand orders in council, it was of course an object of each tocharge its origin upon the other. In a letter from CountChampagny to General Armstrong, dated August 22d,1809, he says — " Let England revoke her declarations ofblockade against France ; France will revoke her decree ofblockade against England. Let England revoke her ordersin council of the 1 th of November, 1807, the decree of Milanwill fall of itself. American commerce will then have regainedall its liberty, and it will be sure of finding favourand protection in the ports of France. But it is for theUnited States to bring on these happy results. Can a nationthat wishes to remain free and sovereign, even balance betweensome temporary interests, and the great interests of120 HISTORY OF THEits independence, and the maintenance of its honour, of itssovereignty, and of its dignity ?"Having failed in the negotiation with Mr. Erskine, ofobtaining a revocation of the British orders in council ofJanuary and November, 1807, the President's proclamationreplaced the intercourse between the countries uponthe same footing upon which it stood previously to theopening of that negotiation. It was then thought expedientby the American government to make an experimentwith France, for the purpose of inducing the governmentof that nation to repeal the Berlin and Milan decrees.On the 1st of December, 1809, the Secretary ofState addressed a letter to General Armstrong, of whichthe following is an extract : —Inclosed you have five copies of the President's messageand of its accompanying documents. They will affordyou a view of the existing state of things here, and particularlyof the ground taken in the correspondence of theBritish minister. You will perceive that the deliberationsof congress at their present session cannot but be embarrassedby the painful consideration, that the two principalbelligerents have been, for some time, alike regardless ofour neutral rights, and that they manifest no disposition torelinquish, in any degree, their unreasonable pretensions.You will also herewith receive a copy of a letter toMr. Pinkney, which will show the light in which M.Champagny's letter is viewed by the President, and at thesame time the course of proceeding prescribed to our ministerin London. You will of course understand it to bewished that you should ascertain the meaning of theFrench government, as to the condition on which it hasbeen proposed to revoke the Berlin decree. On the principlewhich seems to be assumed by M. Champagny, nothingmore ought to be required than a recall by Great Britainof her proclamation or illegal blockades, which are of adate prior to that of the Berlin decree, or a formal declareCONVENTION. 121oration that they are not now in force. Should this be doneand be followed by an annulment of all the decrees andorders in chronological order, and Great Britain shouldafterwards put in force old, or proclaim new blockadecontrary to the law of nations, it would produce questionsbetween her and the United States, which the French governmentis bound to leave to the United States, at leastuntil it shall find it necessary to bring forward complaintsof an acquiescence on our part, not consistent with theneutrality professed by us."On the 25th of January, 1810, General Armstrongwrote the following letter to Mr. Pinkney : —A letter from Mr. Secretary Smith of the 1st of De*cumber last, made it my duty to inquire of his excellencythe duke of Cadore, what were the conditions on which hismajesty the emperor would annul his decree, commonlycalled the Berlin decree, and whether if Great Britain revokedher blockades of a date anterior to that decree, hismajesty would consent to revoke the said decree. Tothese questions 1 have this day received the following answer,which I hasten to convey to you by a special messenger.ANSWER.'* The only condition required for the revocation, by hismajesty the emperor, of the decree of Berlin, will aeraprevious revocation by the British government of herblockades of France, or part of France, [such as that fromthe Elbe to Brest, ^c] of a date anterior to that of theaforesaid decree."On the 28th of January, 1810, General Armstrongwrote the following letter to the Secretary of State.In conformity to the suggestions contained in yourletter of the first of December, 1809, I demanded whether,if Great Britain revoked her blockades of a date anteriorto the decree, commonly called the Berlin decree, his HISTORY OF THEjest the emperor would consent to revoke the said decreesTo which the minister answered, that *' the only conditionrequired for the revocation, hy his majesty, of the decree ofBern, will be a previous revocation by the British governmentof her blockade of France, or part of France,[such as that from the Elbe to Brest, &c.] of a date anteriorto that of the aforesaid decree; and that if the Britishgovernment would then recall the orders in council whichhad occasioned the decree of Milan, that decree shouldalso be annulled."On the 11th of November, 1809, Mr. Smith, Secretaryof State, wrote a letter to Mr. Pinkney, from which thefollowing is an extract : —From the enclosed copy of a letter from M. Champagnyto General Armstrong, it appears that the Frenchgovernment has taken a ground in relation to the Britishviolation of our neutral rights, not the same with that heretoforetaken, and which it is proper you should be acquaintedwith. You will observe that the terms statingthe condition on which the Berlin decree will be revoked,are not free from obscurity. They admit the construction,however, that if Great Britain will annul her illegalblockades as distinct from her orders in council, such as theblockade from the Elbe to Brest, fcc. prior to the Berlindecree, and perhaps of subsequent date, but still distinctfrom her orders in council, that France will put an end toher Berlin decree, or at least the illegal part of it. Whilsttherefore it becomes important to take proper steps, aswill be done, through General Armstrong, to ascertain thereal and precise meaning of M. Champagny's letter, it isimportant also that your interposition should be used toascertain the actual state of the British blockades, distinctfrom the orders in council, whether merely on paper orotherwise illegal, and whether prior or subsequent to theBerlin decree, and to feel the pulse of the British governmenton the propriety of putting them out of the way, iuHARTFORD CONVENTION. 123order to give force to our call on France to prepare theway for a repeal of the orders in council, by her repeal ofthat decree.In the execution of this task, I rely on the judgmentand delicacy by which I am persuaded you will be guided,and on your keeping in mind the desire of this governmentto entangle itself as little as possible in the question ofpriority in the violation of our neutral rights, and to commititself as little as possible to either belligerent as to thecourse to be taken with the other.If it should be found that no illegal blockades are nowin force, and so declared by Great Britain, or that theBritish government is ready to revoke and withdraw allsuch as may not be consistent with the definition of blockadein the Russian treaty of June, Isti, it will be desirablethat you lose no time in giving the information to GeneralArmstrong, and whatever may be the result of your inquiries,that you hasten a communication of it to me."It is very apparent from the tenor of these letters, thatthe course which the government was pursuing, was not alittle embarrassing to them. The British blockade ofMay, 1806, was prior in date to the French decree ofBerlin. And it was an object of great importance, in theview of the French government, to have it understood, thatthe Berlin decree was issued in order to retaliate upon theBritish government for the blockading order abovementioned.But that order had not been considered by thegovernment of the United Stales as a violation of theirneutral rights, at least so far as to make it the subject ofany formal or serious complaint. It will be recollected,that in the correspondence between Mr. Monroe and Mr.Fox in regard to it, at the time when the measure wasadopted, the former, as well as the latter of those statesmenviewed it as rather advantageous to neutrals thanotherwise. But after the failure of the arrangement withMr. Erskine, it was a matter of deep concern with ouri'24 HISTORY OF THEgovernment to endeavour to adjust their difficulties at least jjwith France ; or by attempting to play off one of thebelligerents against the other, to bring one, if not both ofthem to terms. For this purpose. General Armstrong wasdirected to apply to the French government, to ascertainon what terms his imperial majesty would consent torevoke the Berlin decree. His instructions, however,made it necessary for him to do something more than askthe simple general question, on what terms his majesty theemperor would annul that decree ; he was directed toinquire " whether, if Great Britain revoked her blockadesof a date anterior to tJiai decree, his majesty would consent;to revoke the said decree?" The only blockading orderof a date prior to the Berlin decree, that appears to haveformed the subject of complaint on the part of France,was that of May, 1806. Of course, as might have been,and doubtless was expected, the answer to the inquiry was,as has been already cited — " The only condition requiredfor the revocation, by his majesty the emperor, of the decreeof Berlin, will be the previous revocation by theBritish government of her blockades of France, or part ofFrance, [such as that from the Elbe to Brest, &.C.] of adate anterior to the aforesaid decree." It is very easy tpsee that the correspondence with the British government,under these circumstances, would be attended with noinconsiderable difficulty.In a letter from the Secretary of State to Mr. Pinkney,dated July 2d, 1810, he says —As the British government had constantly alleged thatthe Berlin decree was the original aggression on our neutralcommerce, that her orders in council were but a retaliationon that decree, and had, moreover, on that ground,asserted an obligation on the United States to takeeffectual measures against the decree, as a preliminary toa repeal of the orders, nothing could be more reasonablethan to expect, that the condition, in the shape last prp-HARTFORD CONVENTION. 125seated, would be readily accepted. The President is,therefore, equally disappointed and dissatisfied at theabortiveness of your correspondence with Lord Wellesleyon this important subject. He entirely approves the determinationyou took to resume it, with a view to thespecial and immediate obligation lying on the Britishgovernment to cancel the illegal blockades ; and you areinstructed, in case the answer to your letter of the 30th ofApril should not be satisfactory, to represent to the Britishgovernment, in terms temperate but explicit, that the UnitedStates consider themselves authorized by strict and unquestionableright, as well as supported by the principles heretoforeapplied by Great Britain to the case, in claiming andexpecting a revocation of the illegal blockades of France,of a date prior to that of the Berlin decree, as preparatoryto a further demand of the revocation of that decree.*' It ought not to be presumed that the British government,in reply to such a representation, will contend thata blockade, like that of May, 1806, from the Elbe to Brest,a coast of not less than one thousand miles, proclaimedfour years since, without having been at any time attemptedto be duly executed by the application of a naval force, isa blockade conformable to the law of nations and consistentwith neutral rights."On the 19th of October, 1810, the Secretary of Statewrote again to Mr. Pinkney, on the same subject. Thefollowing is an extract from his letter —Your despatch of the 24th of August, enclosing anewspaper statement of a letter from the Duke of Cadoreto General Armstrong, notifying a revocation of the Berlinand Milan decrees, has been received. It ought not to bedoubted that this step of the French government will befollowed by a repeal, on the part of the British government,of its orders in council. And if a termination ofthe crisis between Great Britain and the United States bereally intended, the repeal ought to include the system of126 HISTORY OF THEpaper blockades, which differ in name only from theretaliatory system comprised in the orders in council.From the complexion of the British prints, not to mentionother considerations, the paper blockades may howevernot be abandoned. There is hence a prospect that theUnited States may be brought to issue with Great Britainon the legality of such blockades. In such case, as itcannot be expected that the United States, founded as theyare in law and in right, can acquiesce in the validity of theBritish practice, it lies with the British government toremove the difficulty."Our government having demanded of Great Britain, therevocation of her blockading orders prior to the Berlindecree, and particularly that of May, 1806, as a conditionof renewing commercial intercourse with that nation, butwithout success ; it became an object with Mr. Madisonto adjust, if possible, his difficulties with France. Thestyle and temper in which the correspondence in relationto France were essentially different from that whichregarded Great Britain. With the latter it was peremptory,and dogmatical. With the former it was in thelanguage of great moderation, not to say of humility andsubmission. It has been seen by one of the foregoingextracts, that having insisted, in the first place, upon therevocation of the blockading order of May, 1806, ourgovernment had advanced a step further, and claimed thatthe repeal ought to include the whole system of paperblockades.On the 26th of July, 1811, Mr. Monroe, Secretary ofState, addressed a letter to Joel Barlow, who had been appointedminister to France, from which the following extractsare made — After referring to the events which hadoccurred respecting the revocation of the French decrees,and the issuing of the President's proclamation, suspendingthe non-intercourse law as it regarded France, it issaid —Hartford CONVENTION. 127"This declaration of the emperor of France was considereda sufficient ground for the President to act on. Itwas explicit, as to its object, and equally so as to its import.The decrees of Berlin and Milan, which had violated ourneutral rights, were said to be repealed, to take effect at asubsequent day, at no distant period, the interval apparentlyintended to allow full time for the communication of themeasure to this government. The declaration had, too,all the formality which such an act could admit of, beingthrough the official organ on both sides, from the Frenchminister of foreign affairs to the minister plenipotentiaryof the United States, at Paris."In consequence of this note from the French ministerof foreign affairs, of the 5th of August, 1810, the Presidentproceeded on the 2d of November following, to issuethe proclamation enjoined by the act of May 1, of the sameyear, to declare that all the restrictions imposed by itshould cease and be discontinued, in relation to France andher. dependencies ; and in confirmation of the proclamationof the President, the Congress did, on the 2d ofMarch, 1811, pass an act, whereby the non-importationsystem provided for by the 3d, &c. sections of the act entitled&:.c. was declared to be in force against Great Britain,her colonies and dependencies, fcc." As Great Britaindid not revoke or modify her edicts, in the mannerproposed, the fifth provision had no effect.I will now inquire whether France has performed herpart of this arrangement."It is understood that the blockade of the British islesis revoked. The revocation having been officially declared,and no vessels trading to them having been condemned ortaken on the high seas, it is fair to conclude that the measureis relinquished. It appears too, that no Americanvessel has been condemned in France for having beenvisited at sea by an English ship, or for having been searchedor carried into England, or subjected to impositions128 HISTORY OF THEthere. On the sea, therefore, France i« understood tohave changed her system."Although such is the light in which the conduct ofFrance is viewed in regard to the neutral commerce ofthe United States since the 1st of November last, it willnevertheless be proper for you to investigate fully the wholesubject, and see that nothing has been or shall be omittedon her part, in future, which the United States have aright to claim.Your early and particular attention will be drawn to thegreat subject of the commercial relation which is to subsistbetween the United States. The President expects that thecommerce of the United States will be placed, in the portsof France, on such a footing as to afford to it a fair market,and to the industry and enterprise of their people a reasonableencouragement. An arrangement to this effectwas looked for immediately after the revocation of the decrees; but it appears from the documents in this department,that that was not the case: on the contrary, thatour commerce has been subjected to the greatest discouragement,or rather to the most oppressive restraints; that thevessels which carried coffee, sugar, &,c. <fec. though sailingdirectly from the United States to a French port, were heldin a state of sequestration, on the principle that the tradewas prohibited, and that the importation of those articleswas not only unlawful, but criminal ; that even the vesselswhich carried the unquestionable productions of the UnitedStates were exposed to great and expensive delays, to tediousinvestigations in unusual forms, and to exorbitantduties. In short, that the ordinary usages of commerce betweenfriendly nations were abandoned.When it was announced that the decrees of Berlinand Milan were revoked, the revocation to take effect onthe 1st of November last, it was natural for our merchantsto rush into the ports of France to take advantage of amarket to which they thought they were invited. All theseHARTFORD CONVENTION. 129restraints, therefore, have been unjust in regard to theparties who suffered by them ; nor can they be reconciledto the respect which was due to this government. If Francehad wished to excite the American commerce from herports, she ought to have declared it to this government inexplicitterms, in which case due notice would have beengiven of it to the American merchants, who would eitherhave avoided her ports, or gone there at their own hazard.But to suffer them to enter her ports, under such circumstances,and to detain them there, under any pretextwhatever, cannot be justified. It is not known to whatextent the injuries resulting from those delays have beencarried. It is evident, however, that for every injury thussustained, the parties are entitled to reparation."If the ports of France and her allies are not openedto the commerce of the United States on a liberal scaleand on fair conditions, of what avail to them, it may beasked, will be the revocation of the British orders in council?In contending for the revocation of those orders, sofaras it was an object of interest, the United States hadin view a trade with the continent. It was a fair and legitimateobject and worth contending for while France encouragedit; but if she shuts her ports on our commerce,or burdens it with heavy duties, that motive is at an end.""You will see the injustice, and endeavour to preventthe necessity of bringing, in return for American cargoesBold in France, an equal amount in the produce or manufacturesof that country. No such obligation is imposedon French merchants trading to the United States. Theyenjoy the liberty of selling their cargoes for cash, and takingback what they please from this country in return,and the right ought to be reciprocal.It is indispensable that the trade be free ; and that allAmerican citizens engaged in it be placed on the samefooting ; and with this view, that the system of carryingit on by licenses granted by French agents, be immediately130 HISTORY OF THEannulled. You must make it distinctly understood by theFrench government, that the United States cannot submitto that system, as it tends to sacrifice one part of the communityto another, and to give a corrupt influence to theagents of a foreign power in our towns, which is in everyview incompatible with the principles of our government.It was presumed, that this system had been abandonedsome time since, as a letter from the duke of Cadore, ofto Mr .Russel, gave assurance of it. Should it, however,be still maintained, you will not fail to bring the subjectwithout delay before the French government, and tourge its immediate abandonment. The President havinglong since expressed his strong disapprobation of it, andrequested that the consuls would discontinue it, it is probable,if they still disregard his injunction, that he may findit necessary to revoke their executors. I mention thisthat you may be able to explain the motive to such a measure,should it take place, which, without such explanation,might probably be viewed in a mistaken light by the Frenchgovernment."'' You will be able to ascertain the various other claimswhich the United States have on France for injuries doneto their citizens, under decrees of a subsequent date tothose of Berlin and Milan, and you will likewise use yourbest exertions to obtain an indemnity for them. It is presumedthat the French government will be disposed to dojustice for all these injuries. In looking to the future,the past ought to be fairly and honourably adjusted. Ifthat is not done, much dissatisfaction will remain here,which cannot fail to produce a very unfavourable effect onthe relations which are to subsist in future between thetwo countries.The first of these latter decrees bears date at Bayonne,on the 17th of March, 1808, by which many Americanvessels and their cargoes were seized and carriedinto France, and others which had entered her ports inHARTFORD CONVENTION. 131the fair course of trade, were seized and sequestered, orconfiscated by her government. It was pretended in vindicationof this measure, that as, under our embargo law,no American vessel could navigate the ocean, all thosewho were found on it were trading on British account, andlawful prize. The fact, however, was otherwise."The Rambouillet decree was a still more unjustifiableaggression on the rights of the United States, and invasionof the property of their citizens. It bears date on the23d of March, 1810, and made a sweep of all Americanproperty within the reach of the French power. It wasalso retrospective, extending back to the 20th of May,1809. By this decree every American vessel and cargo,even those which had been delivered up to the owners bycompromise with the captors, was seized and sold. Thelaw of March list, 1809, commonly called the non-intercourselaw, was the pretext for this measure, which wasintended as an act of reprisal. It requires no reasoning toshow the injustice of this pretension. Our law regulated thetrade of the United States with other powers, particularlywith France and Great Britain, and was such a law asevery nation had a right to adopt. It was duly promulgatedand reasonable notice given of it to other powers. It wasalso impartial as it related to the belligerents. The condemnationof such vessels of France or England as cameinto the ports of the United States in breach of this law,was strictly proper, and could afford no cause of complaintto either power. The seizure of so vast a property as waslaid hold of under that pretext by the French government,places the transaction in a very clear light. If an indemnityhad been' sought for an imputed injury, the measureof the injury should have been ascertained; and the indemnityproportioned to it. But in this case no injury hadbeen sustained on principle. A trifling loss only had beenincurred, and for that loss all the American property whichcould be found was seized, involving in indiscriminate ruininnocent merchants who had entered the ports of Fiance132 HISTORY OF THEin a fair course of trade. It is proper that you should makeit distinctly known to the French government that the claimto a just reparation for these spoliations cannot be relinquished,and that a delay in making it will produce veryhigh dissatisfaction with this government, and people ofthese states.It has been intimated that the French governmentwould be willing to make this reparation, provided theUnited States would make one in return for the vesselsand property condemned under and in breach of our non-intercourselaw. Although the proposition was objectionablein many views, yet this government consented to it, tosave so great a mass of the property of our citizens. Aninstruction for this purpose was given to your predecessor,which you are authorized to carry into effect.The influence of France has been exerted to the injuryof the United States in all the countries to which herpower has extended. In Spain, Holland, and Naples, ithas been most sensibly felt. In each of those countriesthe vessels and cargoes of American merchants wereseized and confiscated under various decrees founded indifferentpretexts, none of which had even the semblanceof right to support them. As the United States never injuredFrance, that plea must fail ; and that they had injuredeither of those powers was never pretended. Youwill be furnished with the documents which relate to theseaggressions, and you will claim of the French governmentan indemnity for them.The United States have also just cause of complaintagainst France for many injuries that were committed bypersons acting under her authority. Of these the mostdistinguished, and least justifiable, are the examples whichoccurred of burning the vessels of our citizens at sea.Their atrocity forbids the imputation of them to the government.To it, however, the United States must lookfor reparation, which you will accordingly claim."The letter from which these passages are taken, wastiHARTFORD CONVENTION. 133written in July, 1811 — about nine months after the pretendedrevocation of the Berlin and Milan decrees. Itcontains a black catalogue of charges against the Frenchgovernment, the most outrageous of which, both as it regardsthe principle on which it was founded, and theamount of property piratically seized and confiscated, wasthat of the proceedings under the Rambouillet decree.That decree had been issued, and those confiscations hadbeen adjudged more than seven months prior to the pretendedrevocation of the Berlin and Milan decrees ; no remunerationhad been made, or even promised, before thatrevocation, and yet President Madison, upon receiving informationthat his majesty the emperor of France hadissued his decree respecting the revocation of the Berlinand Milan decrees, immediately suspended the non-intercourselaw with regard to France, and thus opened the way,by encouraging the renewal of the trade with that country,for further depredations, and a renewed series of piraciesupon our commerce. But because Bonaparte demandedthe repeal of the British blockading order of May, 1806,as the only condition on which he would consent to revokethose decrees, our government condescended to demandthat measure of the British, as the only terms on whichthe trade with that country could be renewed. And it wasby insisting on this pre-requisite, that the war of 1812 waseventually produced.In addition to the passages quoted from the foregoingletter, the following is a letter addressed by the Secretaryof State to Mr. Barlow, then minister at Paris, datedJuly 14, 1812—The President has seen with great surprise and concernthat the government of France had made no accommodationto the United States on any of the importantand just grounds of complaint to which you had called itsattention, according to your instructions, given at the timeof your departure, an repeated in several communicationssince. It appears that the same oppressive restraints134 HISTORY OP THEon our commerce were still in force ; that the system oflicense was persevered in ; that indemnity had not beenmade for spoliations, nor any pledge given to inspire confidencethat any would be made. More recent wrongs,on the contrary, and of a very outrageous character, havebeen added to those with which you were acquainted whenyou left the United States. By documents forwarded toyou in my letter of the 21st of March, you were informedof the waste of our commerce, made by a squadron fromNantes, in January last, which burnt many of our vesselstrading to the Peninsula. For these you were also instructedto demand redress.It is hoped that the government of France, regardingwith a prudent foresight the probable course of events,will have some sensibility to its interest, if it has none tothe claims of justice, on the part of this country."The task of reconciling the expressions in this letter,with the declarations so often made and repeated by ourgovernment to that of Great Britain, when calling uponthe latter to revoke their orders of council, on the groundsof an engagement to proceed pari passu with France inrepealing her decrees which violated our neutral rights,must be left to those who are not easily staggered withinconsistencies, or disturbed with contradictions. It is atask which any man not immediately interested in theresult, and who wishes to preserve a reputation for veracity,will not undertake, or covet.On the 27th of July, 1811, Mr. Monroe communicatedin a letter to Jonathan Russell, his appointment as charged'affaires of the United States at London. Mr. Russellreached London in November of that year. On the 14thof February, 1812, he wrote to Mr. Monroe, that at thattime there had been exhibited no evidence of a dispositionon the part of the British government to repeal the ordersin council. On the 9th of the same month, he also wroteas follows — "I have the honour to,transmit to you enclosed,a copy of a letter, dated 29th ult. from Mr. Barlow, and aHARTFORD CONVENTION. 135copy of the note in wh'nih I yesterday communicated thatletter to the Marquis Wellesley."Although the proof of the revocation of the French decrees,contained in the letter of Mr. Barlow, is, when takenby itself of no very conclusive character, yet it ought, whenconnected with that previously exhibited to this government,to be admitted as satisfactorily establishing thatrevocation; and in this view I have thought it to be myduty to present it here."On the 4th of March, 1812, Mr. Russell wrote a letterto Mr. Monroe, from which the following is copied —"Since my letters of the 19th and 22d ultimo, which Itrust will have extinguished all expectation of any changehere, the motion of Lord Landsdown on the 28th of February,and that of Mr. Brougham yesterday, have beenseverally debated in the respective houses of parliament.I attended the discussions on both, and if any thing waswanting to prove the inflexible determination of the presentministry to persevere in the orders in council withoutmodification or relaxation, the declarations of the leadingmembers of administration on these occasions must placeit beyond the possibility of a doubt. In both houses theseleaders expressed a disposition to forbear to canvass, in thepresent state of our relations, the conduct of the UnitedStates towards England, as it could not be done withoutreproaching her in a manner to increase the actual irritation,and to do away what Lord Bathurst stated to be thefeeble hopes of preventing war.In the house of commons, Mr. Rose virtually confessedthat the orders in council were maintained to promote thetrade of England at the expense of neutrals, and as a measureof commercial rivalry with the United States. WhenMr. Canning inveighed against this new (he must havemeant newly acknowledged) ground of defending theseorders, and contended that they could be justified only onthe principle of retaliation, on which they were avowedly136 HISTORY OF THEinstituted, and that they were intended to produce theeffects of an actual blockade, and liable to all the incidentsof such blockade — that is, that they were meantonly to distress the enemy— and that Great Britain hadno right to defeat this operation by an intercourse withthat enemy which she denied to neutrals ; Blr. Percivalreplied, " that the orders were still supported on theprinciple of retaliation, but that this very principle involvedthe license trade ; for as France by her decrees had saidthat no nation should trade with her which traded withEngland, England retorted, that no country should tradewith France but through En<jrland. He asserted thatneither the partial nor even the total repeal of the Berlinand Milan decrees, as they related to America, or to anyother nation, or all other nations, would form any claimon the British government, while the continental system, socalled, continued in operation. He denied that this systemor any part of the Berlin and Milan decrees were merelymunicipal, 'i hey had not been adopted in time of peacewith a view to internal regulation, but in a time of war,with a hostile purpose towards England. Every clauseand particle of them were to be considered of a natureentirely belligerent, and as such, requiring resistance andauthorising retaliation on the part of Great Britain. Itwas idle and absurd to suppose that Great Britain wasbound, in acting on the principle of retaliation in thesetimes, to return exactly and in form like fur like, and tochoose the object and fashion the mode of executing it preciselyby the measures of the enemy. In adopting these measures,France had broken through all the restraints imposedby the laws of nations, and trodden under foot the greatconventional code received by the civilized world as prescribingrules for its conduct in war as well as in peace.In this state of things England was not bound any longerto shackle herself with this code, and by so doing becomethe unresisting victim of the violence of her enemy, but she9('i»-HARTFORD CONVENTION. 137was herself released from the laws of nations, and left atliberty to resort to any means within her power to injureand distress that enemy, and to bring it back to an observanceof the" jus gentium which it had so egregiously andwantonly violated. Nor was England to be restricted anymorein the extent than in the form of retaliation; but shehad a right, both as to the quantity and manner, to inflictupon the enemy all the evil in her power, until this enemyshould retrace its steps, and renounce, not only verballybut practically, its decrees, its continental system, andevery other of its belligerent measures incompatible withthe old acknowledged laws of nations. Whatever neutralsmight suffer from the retaliatory measures of England, waspurely incidental, and as no injustice was intended to them,they had a right to complain of none ; and he rejoiced toobserve that no charge of such injustice had that nightbeen brought forward in the house. As England wascontending for the defence of her maritime rights, and forthe preservation of her national existence, which essentiallydepended on the maintenance of those rights, shecould not be expected, in the prosecution of this great andprimary interest, to arrest or vary her course, to listen tothe pretensions of neutral nations, or to remove the evils,however they might be regretted, which the imperiouspolicy of the times indirectly and unintentionally extendedto them.As the newspapers of this morning give but a veryimperfect report of this speech of Mr. Percival, I havethought it to be my duty to present you with a more particularaccount of the doctrines which were maintained init, and which so vitally affect the rights and interests ofthe United States.I no longer entertain a hope that we can honourablyavoid war."On the 30th of May, 1812, Mr. Foster addressed a longletter to Mr. Monroe, in which he reviewed the wholelas HISTORY OF THEground of controversy between the United States andGreat Britain. This document is too long to be copied infull. It commences in the following manner —Notwithstanding the discouraging nature of the conversationwhich I had the honour to have with you a fewdays since at your office, and the circumstance of yourcontinued silence in regard to two letters from me, furnishingadditional proof of the existence of the French decrees,nevertheless there does now appear such clear and convincingevidence in the report of the duke of Hassan,dated the 10th of March, of the present year, of thosedecrees having not only never been rescinded, but of theirbeing recently extended and aggravated in the republicationof them contained in that instrument, that I cannotbut imagine it will seem most important to the Presidentthat it should be communicated to Congress, withoutdelay, in the present interesting crisis of their deliberations; and therefore hasten to fulfil the instructions of mygovernment, in lading before the government of the UnitedStates the enclosed Moniteur of the IGth of last March, inwhich is contained that report, as it was made to the rulerof France, and communicated to the conservative senate.This report confirms, if any thing were wanting toconfirm, in the most unequivocal manner, the repeated assertionsof Great Britain, that the Berlin and Milan decreeshave never been revoked, however some partial andinsidious relaxations of them may have been made in afew instances, as an encouragement to America to adoptasystem beneficial to France, and injurious to Great Britain,while the conditions on which alone it has been declaredthat those decrees will ever be revoked, are hereexplained and amplified in a manner to leave us no hopeof Bonaparte having any disposition to renounce the systemof injustice which he has pursued, so as to make itpossible for Great Britain to give up the defensive measuresshe has been obliged to resort to.HARTFORD CONVENTION. 139I need not remind you, sir, how often it has in vainbeen urged by Great Britain, that a copy of the instrumentshould be produced, by which the decrees of Bonapartewere said to be repealed, and how much it has beendesired that America should explicitly state that she didnot adopt the conditions on which the repeal was offered."It is now manifest that there was never more than aconditional offer of repeal made by France, which we hada right to complain that America should have asked usto recognise as absolute, and which, if accepted in its extentby America, would only have formed fresh matter ofcomplaint, and a new ground for declining her demands."Mr. Foster then attempts to show, by a series of argumentation,that the Berlin and 3Iilan decrees had not infact been revoked; and. he then proceeds as follows: —I will not now trouble you, sir, with many observationsrelative to the blockade of May, 1806, as the legality of thatblockade, assuming the blockading force to have been sufficientto enforce it, has latterly not been questioned by you.I will merely remark that it was impossible Great Britainshould receive, otherwise than with the utmost jealousy,the unexpected demand made by America for therepeal of the blockade as well as of the orders in council,when it appeared to be made subsequent to, if not in consequenceof, one of the conditions in Bonaparte's pretendedrepeal of his decrees, which condition was our renouncingwhat he calls ' our new principles of blockade ;' thatthe demand on the part of America was additional andnew, is sufficiently proved by a reference to the overtureof Mr. Pinkney, as well as from the terms on which Mr.Erskine had arranged the dispute with America relative tothe orders in council. In that arrangement ;nothing wasbrought forward with regard to this blockade. Americawould have been contented at that time without any referenceto it. It certainly is not more a grievance, or aninjustice, now, than it was then. Why thea is the renun-140 HTfSTORY OF THEcitation of that blockade insisted upon now, if it was notnecessary to insist upon it then ? It is difficult to find anyanswer but by reference to subsequent communicationsbetween France and America, and a disposition in Americato countenance France in requiring the disavowal of thisblockade, and the principles upon which it rested, as thecondition sine qua non of the repeal of the Berlin and Milandecrees. It seems to have become an object with America,only because it was prescribed as a condition byFrance.On this blockade, and the principles and rights uponwhich it was founded, Bonaparte appears to rest the justificationof all his measures for abolishing neutrality, andfor the invasion of every state which is not ready, withhim, to wage a war of extermination against the commerceof Great Britain.America, therefore, no doubt saw the necessity of demandingits renunciation, but she will now see that it is inreality vain either for America or Great Britain to expectan actual repeal of the French decrees, until Great Britainrenounces, first, the basis, viz. the blockade of 1806,on which Bonaparte has been pleased to found them ;next, the right of retaliation as subsequently acted uponin the orders in council ; further, until she is ready to receivethe treaty of Utrecht, interpreted and applied by theduke of Bassano's report as the universal law of nations ;and finally, till she abjures all the principles of maritimelaw which support her established rights, now more thanever essential to her existence as a nation."I am commanded, sir, to express on the part of hisroyal highness the prince regent, that while his royal highnessentertains the most sincere desire to conciliate America,he yet can never concede that the blockade of May,1806, could justly be made the foundation, as it avowedlyhas been, for the decrees of Bonaparte ; and further, thatHARTFORD CONVENTION. 141the British government must ever consider the principles onwhich that blockade rested, (accompanied as it vj^as byan adequate blockading force,) to have been strictly consonantto the established law of nations, and a legitimateinstance of the practice which it recognises.*' Secondly, that Great Britain must continue to rejectthe other spurious doctrines promulgated by France in theduke of Bassano's report, as binding upon all nations. Shecannot admit, as a true declaration of public law, that freeships make free goods, nor the converse of that proposition,that enemy's ships destroy the character of neutral .property in the cargo : she cannot consent, by the adoptionof such a principle, to deliver absolutely the commerce ofFrance from the pressure of the naval power of Great Britain,and by the abuse of the neutral flag, to allow herenemy to obtain, without the expense of sustaining a navyfor the trade and property of French subjects, a degree offreedom and security, which even the commerce of herown subjects cannot find under the protection of the Britishnavy.She cannot admit, as a principle of public law, thatarms and military stores are alone contraband of war, andthat ship timber and naval stores are excluded from thatdescription. Neither can she admit without retaliation,that the mere fact of commercial intercourse with Britishports and subjects should be made a crime in all nations,and that the armies and decrees of France should bedirected to enforce a principle so new and unheard ofin war.Great Britain feels, that to relinquish her just measuresof self-defence and retaliation, would be to surrenderthe best means of her own preservation and rights, andwith them the rights of other nations, so long as Francemaintains and acts upon such principles."Such was the state of things between the United Statesand Great Britain, at the beginning of June, 1812, that it142 HISTORY OF THEwas apparent the former were resolved on a war with thelatter. On the 1st of June, the President of the UnitedStates transmitted a message to Congress, in which he reviewedthe difficulties which had occurred, and those whichthen existed, and described in strong language the aggressionswith which we had been visited by that nation. Towardsthe conclusion he makes the following remarks —'* Such is the spectacle of injuries and indignities whichhave been heaped on our country ; and such the crisiswhich its unexampled forbearance and conciliatory effortshave not been able to avert. It might, at least, have beenexpected, that an enlightened nation, if less urged by moralobligations, or invited by friendly dispositions on thepart of the United States, would have found, in its trueinterest alone, a sufficient motive to respect their rightsand their tranquility on the high seas ; that an enlargedpolicy could have favoured that free and general circulationof commerce, in which the British nation is at all timesinterested, and which, in times of war, is the best alleviationof its calamities to herself, as well as tother belligerents; and more especially that the British cabinet wouldnot, for the sake of a precarious and surreptitious intercoursewith hostile markets, have persevered in a courseof measures which necessarily put at hazard the invaluablemarket of a great and growing country, disposed tocultivate the mutual advantages of an active commerce."Other councils have prevailed. Our moderation andconciliation have had no other effect than to encourage perseverance,and to enlarge pretensions. We behold ourseafaring citizens still the daily victims of lawless violencecommitted on the great common highway of nations, evenwithin sight of the country which owes them protection.We behold our vessels, freighted with the products of oursoil and industry, or returning with the honest proceeds ofthem, wrested from their lawful destinations, confiscatedby prize courts, no longer the organs of public law, butHARTFORD CONVENTION. 143the instruments of arbitrary edicts ; and their unfortunatecrews dispersed and lost, or forced or inveigled, in Britishports, into British fleets; whilst arguments are employed,in support of these aggressions, which have no foundationbut in a principle equally supporting a claim to regulateour external commerce in all cases whatsoever."We behold, in fine, on the side of Great Britain, astate of war against the United States; and on the side ofthe United States, a state of peace towards Great Britain.Whether the United States shall continue passive underthese progressive usurpations, and these accumulatingwrongs ; or, opposing force to force in defence of theirnational rights, shall commit a just cause into the hands ofthe Almighty Disposer of events; avoiding all connectionswhich might entangle it in the contests or views of otherpowers, and preserving a constant readiness to concur inan honourable re-establishment of peace and friendship,is a solemn question, which the constitution wisely confidesto the legislative department of the government. In recommendingit to their early deliberations, I am happy inthe assurance, that the decision will be worthy the enlightenedand patriotic councils of a virtuous, a free, and apowerful nation."On the 3d of June, the Committee on Foreign Relationsof the House of Representatives made a long report onthe foregoing message. After recapitulating various chargesof aggression upon our neutral rights by the Britishnation, the committee in their manifesto say —In May, 1806, the whole coast of the continent, fromthe Elbe to Brest, inclusive, was declared to be in a stateof blockade. By this act, the well established principlesof the law of nations, principles which have served foragesas guides, and fixed the boundary between the rightsof belligerents and neutrals, were violated. By the law ofnations, as recognised by Great Britain herself, no blockadeis lawful unless it be sustained by the application of144 HISTORY OF THEan adequate force ; and that an adequate force was appliedto this blockade, in its full extent, ought not to be pretended.Whether Great Britain was able to maintain legally,so extensive a blockade, considering the war in which sheis engaged, requiring such extensive naval operations, isa question which it is not necessary at this time to examine.It is sufficient to be known that such force was notapplied, and this is evident from the terms of the blockadeitself, by which, comparatively, an inconsiderable portionof the coast only was declared to be in a state of strictand rigorous blockade. The objection to the measure isnot diminished by that circumstance. If the force was notapplied, the blockade was unlawful, from whatever causethe failure might proceed. The belligerent who institutesthe blockade cannot absolve itself from the objection toapply the force, under any pretext whatever. For a belligerentto relax a blockade which it could not maintain,with a view to absolve itself from the obligation to maintainit, would be a refinement in injustice, not less insultingto the understanding than repugnant to the law of nations.To claim merit for the mitigation of an evil whichthe party either had not the power, or found it inconvenientto inflict, would be a new mode of encroaching onneutral rights. Your committee think it just to remark,that this act of the British government does not appear tohave been adopted in the sense in ivhich it has been since construed.On consideration of all the circumstances attendingthe measure, and particularly the character of the distinguishedstatesman who announced it, we are persuadedthat it was conceived in a spirit of conciliation, and intendedto lead to an accommodation of all differences between theUnited States and Great Britain. His death disappointedthat hope, and the act has since become subservient toother purposes. It has been made by his successors a pretextfor that vast system of usurpation which has so longoppressed and harassed our commerce.HARTFORD Convention. 145The next act of the British government which claimsour attention, is the order of council of January 7, 1807, bvwhich neutral powers are prohibited trading from one portto another of France, or her allies, or any other countrywith which Great Britain might not freely trade. By thisorder, the pretension of England, heretofore disclaimedby every other power, to prohibit neutrals disposing ofparts of their cargoes at different ports of the same enemy,is revived, and with vast accumulation of injury. Everyenemy, however great the number, or distant from eachother, is considered one, and the like trade even withpowers at peace with England, who, from motives ofpolicy, had excluded or restrained her commerce, was alsoprohibited. In this act, the British government evidentlydisclaimed all regard for neutral rights. Aware that themeasures authorized by it could find no pretext in anybelligerent right, none was urged. To prohibit the saleof our produce, consisting of innocent articles, at any portof a belligerent, not blockaded; to consider every belligerentas one, and subject neutrals to the same restraintswith all, as if there was but one, were bold encroachments.But to restrain, or in any manner interfere with our commercewith neutral nations, with whom Great Britain wasat peace, and against whom she had no justifiable cause ofwar, for the sole reason that they restrained or excludedfrom their ports her commerce, was utterly incompatiblewith the pacific relations subsisting between the twocountries.We proceed to bring into view the British order incouncil of November 11, 1807, which superseded everyother order, and consummated that system of hostility onthe commerce of the United States which has been sinceso steadily pursued. By this order, all France, and herallies, and every other country at war with Great Britain,or with which she was not at war, from which the Britishflag was excluded, and all the colonies of her enemies, were146 HISTORY OF THEsubjected to the same restrictions as if they were actuallyblockaded in the most strict and rigorous manner ; and alltrade in articles, the produce and manufacture of the saidcountries and colonies, and the vessels engaged in it, weresubjected to capture and condemnation as lawful prize.To this order certain exceptions were made, which weforbear to notice, because they were not adopted from aregard to neutral rights, but were dictated by policy topromote the commerce of England, and so far as they relatedto neutral powers, were said to emanate from theclemency of the British government.It would be superfluous in your committee to state, thatby this order the British government declared direct andpositive war against the United States. The dominion ofthe ocean was completely usurped by it, all commerce forbidden,and every flag driven from it, or subjected to captureand condemnation, which did not subserve the policyof the British government by paying it a tribute, and sailingunder its sanction. From this period the UnitedStates have incurred the heaviest losses, and most mortifyinghumiliations. They have borne the calamities of warswithout retorting them on its authors.So far your committee has presented to the view ofthe house, the aggressions which have been committed underthe authority of the British government on the commerceof the United States. We will now proceed to otherwrongs which have been still more severely felt. Amongthese is the impressment of our seamen, a practice whichhas been unceasingly maintained by Great Britain in thewars to which she has been a party since our revolution.Your committee cannot convey in adequate terms thedeep sense which they entertain of the injustice and oppressionof this proceeding. Under the pretext of impressingBritish seamen, our fellow citizens are seized in Britishports, on the high seas, and in every other quarter to whichthe British power extends; are taken on board BritishHARTFORD CONVENTION. 147men of war, and compelled to serve there as British subjects.In this mode our citizens are wantonly snatchedfrom their country and their families ; deprived of theirliberty, and doomed to an ignominious and slavish bondage; compelled to fight the battles of a foreign country,and often to perish in them. Our flag has given them noprotection; it has been unceasingly violated, and our vesselsexposed to danger by the loss of the men taken fromthem. "Your committee need not remark, that whilethis practice is continued, it is impossible for the UnitedStates to consider themselves an independent nation.Every new case is a new proof of their degradation. Itscontinuance is the more unjustifiable, because the UnitedStates have repeatedly proposed to the British governmentan arrangement which would secure to it the controul ofits own people. An exemption of the citizens of theUnited States from this degrading oppression, and theirflag from violation, is all that they have sought.Your committee would be much gratified if they couldclose here the detail of British wrongs ; but it is their dutyto recite another act of still greater malignity than any ofthose which have already been brought to your view. Theattempt to dismember our Union, and overthrow our excellentconstitution by a secret mission, the object of whichwas to foment discontents and excite insurrection againstthe constituted authorities and laws of the nation, as latelydisclosed by the agent employed in it, affords full proof thatthere is no bound to the hostility of the British governmenttowards the United States: no act, however unjustifiable,which it luoidd not commit to accomplish their ruin. Thisattempt excites the greater horrour, from the considerationthat it was made while the United States and GreatBritain were at peace, and an amicable negotiation wasdepending between them for the accommodation of theirdifferences, through public ministers regularly authorizedfor the purpose.148 HISTORY OF THEThe United States have beheld with unexampled forbearancethis continued series of hostile encroachments ontheir rights and interests, in the hope, that yielding to theforce of friendly remonstrances, often repeated, the Britishgovernment might adopt a more just policy towards them ;but that hope no longer exists. They have also weighedimpartially the reasons which have been urged by theBritish government in vindication of tlioso encroachments,and found in them neither justification nor apology.The British government has alleged, in vindication ofthe orders in council, that they were resorted to as a retaliationon France, for similar aggressions committed byher on our neutral trade with the British dominions. Buthow has this plea been supported ? The dates of Britishand French aggressions are well known to the world.Their origin and progress have been marked with toovide and destructive a waste of the property of our fellowcitizens, to have been forgotten. The decree of Berlin, ofNovember 21st, 1806, was the first aggression of Francein the present war. Eighteen months had then elapsedafter the attack made by Great Britain on our neutraltrade with the colonies of France and her allies, and sixmonths from the date of the proclamation of May, 1806.Even on the 7th of January, 1807, the date of the firstBritish order in council, so short a term had elapsed afterthe Berlin decree, that it was hardly possible that theintelligence of it should have reached the United States.A retaliation which is to produce its effect by operating ona neutral power, ought not to be resorted to till the neutralhad justified it, by a culpable acquiescence in the unlawfulact of the other belligerent. It ought to be delayed untilafter sufficient time had been allowed to the neutral to remonstrateagainst the measures complained of, to receivean answer, and to act on it, which had not been done inthe present instance. And when the order of November11th was issued, it is well known that a minister of FranceHARTFORD CONVENTION. 149had declared to the minister plenipotentiary of the UnitedStates at Paris, that it was not intended that the decreeof Berlin should apply to the United States. It is equallywell known that no American vessel had then been condemnedunder it, or seizure been made, with which theBritish government was acquainted. The facts prove incontestablythat the measures of France, however unjustifiablein themselves, were nothing more than a pretextfor those of England. And of the insufficiency of that pretext,ample proof has already Been affianced by the Britishgovernment itself, and in the most impressive form Althoughit was declared that the orders in council were retaliatoryon France for her decrees, it was also declared,and in the orders themselves, that owing to the superiorityof the British navy, by which the fleets of France and herallies were confined within their own ports, the Frenchdecrees were considered only as empty threats."It is no justification of the wrongs of one power, thatthe like were committed by another ; nor ought the fact,if true, to have been urged by either, as it could afford noproof of its love of justice, of its magnanimity, or even ofits courage. It is more worthy the government of a greatnation, to relieve than to assail the injured. Nor can a repetitionof the; wrongs by another power repair the violatedright or wounded honour of the injured party. An utterinability alone to resist, could justify a quiet surrender ofour rights, and degrading submission to the will of others.To that condition the United States are not reduced, nordo they fear it. That they ever consented to discuss witheither power the misconduct of the other is a proof of theirlove of peace, of their moderation, and of the hope whichthey still indulged, that friendly appeals to just and generoussentiments would not be made to them in vain. Butthe motive was mistaken, if their forbearance was imputedeither to the want of a just sensibility to their wrongs, or adetermination, if suitable redress v*'as not obtained, to re-150 HISTORY OF THEsent them. The time has now arrived when this systemof reasoning must cease. It would be insulting to repeatit. It would be degrading to hear it. The United Statesmust act as an independent nation, and assert their rights,and avenge their wrongs, according to their own estimateof them, with the party who commits them, holding it responsiblefor its own misdeeds, unmitigated by those ofanother.For the difference made between Great Britain andFrance, by the application of the non-importation act againstEngland only, the motive has been already too often explained,and is too well known to require further illustration. Inthe commercial restrictions to which the United States resortedas an evidence of their sensibility, and a mild retaliationof their wrongs, they invariably placed both powerson the same footing, holding out to each in respect to itself,the same accommodation, in case it accepted the conditionoffered, and in respect to the other the same restraint if itrefused. Had the British government confirmed the arrangementwhich was entered into with the British ministerin 1809, and France maintained her decrees, withFrance would the United States have had to resist, withthe firmness belonging to their character, the continuedviolation of their rights. The committee do not hesitateto declare, that France has greatly injured the UnitedStates, and that satisfactory reparation has not yet beenmade for many of those injuries. But that is a concernwhich the United States ivill look to and settle for themselves.The high character of the American people is a sufficientpledge to the world that they will not fail to settle it, onconditions which they have a right to claim.More recently the true policy of the British governmenttowards the United States, has been completely unfolded.It has been publicly declared by those in power,that the orders in council should not be repealed until theFrench government had revoked all its internal restraintsHARTFORD CONVENTION. 151on the British commerce ; and that the trade of the UnitedStates with France and her allies, should be prohibiteduntil Great Britain was also allowed to trade with them.By this declaration it appears, that to satisfy the pretensionsof the British government, the United States mustjoin Great Britain in the war with France, and prosecutethe war until France should be subdued ; for without hersubjugation, it were in vain to presume on such a concession.The hostility of the British government to thesestates has been still further disclosed. It has been mademanifest that the United States are considered by it as thecommercial rival of Great Britain, and that their prosperityand growth are incompatible with her welfare. Whenall these circumstances are taken into consideration, it isimpossible for your committee to doubt the motives whichhave governed the British ministry in all its measures towardsthe United States since the year 1805. Equally isit impossible to doubt, longer, the course which the UnitedStates ought to pursue towards Great Britain.From this review of the multiplied wrongs of the Britishgovernment since the commencement of the presentwar, it must be evident to the impartial world, that thecontest which is now forced on the United States, is radicallya contest for their sovereignty and independence.Your committee will not enlarge on any of the injuries,however great, which have had a transitory effect. Theywish to call the attention of the House to those of a permanentnature only, which intrench so deeply on our mostimportant rights, and wound so extensively and vitally ourbest interests, as could not fail to deprive the United Statesof the principal advantages of their revolution, if submittedto. The controul of our commerce by Great Britainin regulating, at pleasure, and expelling it almost from theocean ; the oppressive manner in which these regulationshave been carried into effect, by seizing and confiscatingsuch of our vessels, with their cargoes, as were said to152 HISTORY OF THEhave violated her edicts, often without previous warningof their danger ; the impressment of our citizens from onboardour own vessels on the high seas, and elsewhere, andholding them in bondage till it suited the convenience oftheir oppressors to deliver them up, are encroachments ofthat high and dangerous tendency, which could not fail toproduce that pernicious effect : nor would these be the onlyconsequences that would result from it. The British governmentmight, for a while, be satisfied with the ascendencythus gained over us, but its pretensions would soon increase.The proof which so complete and disgraceful a submissionto its authority would afford of our degeneracy, could notfail to inspire confidence, that there was no limit to which'its usurpations, and our degradation, might not be carried.Your committee, believing that the freeborn sons ofAmerica are worthy to enjoy the liberty which their fatherspurchased at the price of so much blood and treasure,and seeing in the measures adopted by Great Britain,a course commenced and persisted in, which must lead toa loss of national character and independence, feel no hesitationin advising resistance by force ; in which the Americansof the present day will prove to the enemy and to theworld, that we have not only inherited that liberty whichour fathers gave us, but also the will and the power to maintainit. Relying on the patriotism of the nation, and confidentlytrusting that the Lord of Hosts will go with us to battlein a righteous cause, and crown our efforts with success,your committee recommend an immediate appeal to arms."This manifesto was followed by an act of Congress, containinga formal declaration of war, in the following words :"^n act declaring War between the United Kingdom ofGreat Britain and Ireland, and the dependencies thereof,and the United States of America and their territories.Be it enacted, &,c. that war be and the same is herebydeclared to exist between the United Kingdom of GreatHARTFORD CONVENTION. 153Britain and Ireland, and the dependencies thereof, and theUnited States of America and their territories ; and thatthe President of the United States is hereby authorized touse the whole land and naval force of the United States tocarry the same into effect, and to issue to private armedvessels of the United States commissions or letters ofmarque and general reprisal, in such form as he shallthink proper, and under the seal of the United States,against the vessels, goods, and effects of the governmentof the said United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland,and the subjects thereof." — [Approved, June 18th, 1812.]On the next day, viz. June 19th, 1812, the followingproclamation was issued : —By the President of the United States of America —A Proclamation.'* Whereas the Congress of the United States, by virtueof the constituted authority vested in them, have declaredby their act bearing date the isti day of the presentmonth, that war exists between the United Kingdom ofGreat Britain and Ireland, and the dependencies thereof,and the United States of America and their territories ;now, therefore I, James Madison, President of the UnitedStates of America, do hereby proclaim the same to allwhom it may concern : and I do specially enjoin on allpersons holding offices, civil or military, under the authorityof the United States, that they be vigilant and zealous indischarging the duties respectively incident thereto : and Ido moreover exhort all the good people of the United States,as they love their country ; as they value the precious heritagederived from the virtue and valour of their fathers ;as they feel the wrongs which have forced on them thelast report of injured nations ; and as they consult the bestmeans, under the blessing of Divine Providence, of abridgingits calamities, that they exert themselves in preservingorder, in promoting concord, in maintaining the authorityand efficacy of the laws, and in supporting and invigoratesHISTORY OF THEing all the measures which may be adopted by the constitutedauthorities, for obtaining a speedy, a just, and aohonourable peace.Done at Washington, the 19th day of June, 1812, &-c."James Madison.By the President. James Monroe, Sec. of State."On the 18th of June, 1812, the day on which Congressdeclared war against Great Britain, Mr. Russell, UnitedStates charge d'affaires at London, wrote as follows to theSecretary of State —London, June IS, 1812.I hand you herein the Times of yesterday, containingthe debate in the House of Commons on the precedingevening, relative to the orders in council. From this debateit appears that these measures are to be abandoned,but as yet no official extinction of them has been announced.The time already elapsed since the declaration ofLord Castlereagh, excites a suspicion that either the promisedrevocation will not take place, or what is more probable,some other measure, equally unjust, is now underconsideration, to replace those which are to be revoked."I hope, until the doings here are ascertained with certaintyand precision, there will be no relaxation on ourpart."On the 30th of June Mr. Russell wrote as follows —I have at length had the satisfaction to announce toyou, in my letters of the 26th instant, the revocation ofthe orders in council.You will, without doubt, be somewhat surprised thatthis is founded on the French decree of the 28th of Aprils1811.The real cause of the revocation is the measures ofour government. These measures have produced a degreeof distress among the manufacturers of this countrythat was becoming intolerable ; and an apprehension ofHARTFORD CONVENTION. 155still greater misery, from the calamities of war, drovethem to speak a language which could not be misunderstoodor disregarded."The following correspondence and documents will explainMr. Russell's allusion to the French decree of the28th of April, 1811.Extract of a letter from Mr. Barlow, to the duke ofBassano, dated May 1, 1812.It is much to be desired that the French governmentwould now make and publish an authentic act, declaringthe Berlin and Milan decrees, as relative to the UnitedStates, to have ceased in November, 1810, declaring thatthey have not been applied in any instance, since that time,and that they shall not be so applied in future."It has already been shown, that whatever our governmentthought of blockades in 1799, in 1806, and forsome time afterwards, they were very little disturbedby that which the British government had establishedfrom the Elbe to Brest ; nor, as far as their public documentsshow, was it ever considered worthy of seriousremonstrance or complaint, until it became necessary toexercise their diplomatic skill between Great Britainand France. The importance of it, as bearing an earlierdate than the Berlin decree, to the French government,has already been mentioned. It will be recollected, thatin January, 1810, the French minister, in answer to a notefrom General Armstrong on the subject, had expressed thewillingness of his majesty the emperor to repeal his decrees,on condition that the British government would revoketheir blockades of France of a date prior to the Berlindecree. In the mean time, however, his imperial majestyhad issued a third decree more extravagant in its object,and more injurious to the neutral rights of the UnitedStates than either the Berlin or Milan decree. Itbears date at Rambouillet, March 23d, 1810, and is of thefollowing tenour —156 HISTORY OF THE"Napoleon, &c. &c. &c. Considering that the governmentof the United States, by an act dated the 1st ofMarch, 1809, which forbids the entrance of the ports, harbours,and rivers of the said states, to all French vessels,orders —1st. That after the 20th of May following, vessels underthe French flag, which shall arrive in the UnitedStates, shall be seized and confiscated as well as their cargoes: 2d. That after the same epoch, no merchandise orproduce, the growth or manufacture of France or her colonies,can be imported into the said United States from anyforeign port or place whatsoever, under penalty of seizure,confiscation, and a fine of three times the value of themerchandise : 3d. That American vessels cannot go to anyport of France, of her colonies, or dependencies : We havedecreed, and do decree as follows:"Art. 1. All vessels navigating under the flag of theUnited States, or possessed in whole or in part by any citizenor subject of that power, which, counting from the20th of May, 1809, have entered, or shall enter into theports of our empire, of our colonies, or of the countriesoccupied by our arms, shall be seized, and the product ofthe sales shall be deposited in the surplus fund (caissed'amortissement.)There shall be excepted from this regulation, the vesselswhich shall be charged with despatches, or with commissionsof the government of the said States, and whoshall not have either cargoes or merchandise on board."American property to a large amount was seized underthis extraordinary decree, and declared forfeited. On the5th of July following Mr. Secretary Smith addressed a letterto General Armstrong, from which the following extractis taken —The arrival of the John Adams brought your lettersof the 1st, Sec. and 16th of April."From that of the 16th of April it appears that theHARTFORD CONVENTION. 157seizures of the American property, lately made, had beenfollowed lip by its actual sale, and that the proceeds hadbeen deposited in the emperor's caisse prive. You havepresented in such colours the enormity of this outrage,that I have only to signify to you, that the President entirelyapproves the step that has been taken by you, andthat he does not doubt that it will be followed by you, orthe person who may succeed you, with such farther interpositionsas may be deemed advisable. He instructs youparticularly to make the French government sensible ofthe deep impression made here hy so signal an aggression onthe principles of Justice and of good faith, and to demandevery reparation of which the case is susceptible. If it benot the purpose of the French government to remove everyidea of friendly adjustment with the United States, it wouldseem impossible but that a reconsideration of this violentproceeding must lead to a redress of it as a preliminaryto a general accommodation of the differences between thetwo countries."At the date of the last communication from Mr. Pink-ney,he had not obtained from the British government anacceptance of the condition on which the French governmentwas willing to concur, in putting an end to all theedicts of both against our neutral commerce. If he shouldafterwards have succeeded, you will of course, on receivinginformation of the fact, immediately claim from the Frenchgovernment the fulfillment of its promise, and by transmittingthe result to 3Ir. Pinkney, you will co-operate withhim in completing the removal of all the illegal obstructionsto our commerce."Among the documents now sent is another copy of theact of Congress, repealing the non-intercourse law, butauthorizing a renewal of it against Great Britain, in caseFrance should repeal her edicts and Great Britain shouldrefuse to follow her example, and vice versa. You havebeen already informed that the President is ready to HISTORY OF THEexcise the power vested in him for such a purpose, as soonas the occasion shall arise. Should the other experiment,in the hands of Mr. Pinkney, have failed, you will makethe act of Congress, and the disposition of the President,the subject of a formal communication to the Frenchgovernment, and it is not easy to conceive any ground,even specious, on which the overture specified in the actcan be declined.If the non-intercourse law, in any of its modifications,was objectionable to the emperor of the French, that lawno longer exists.If he be ready, as has been declared in the letter ofthe duke of Cadore of February 14, to do justice to theUnited States, in the case of a pledge on their part not tosubmit to the British edicts, the opportunity for makinggood the declaration is now afforded. Instead of submission,the President is now ready, by renewing the non-intercourseact against Great Britain, to oppose to herorders in council a measure, which is of a character thatought to satisfy any reasonable expectation. If it shouldbe necessary for you to meet the question whether thenon-intercourse will be renewed against Great Britain, incaseshe should not comprehend, in the repeal of her edicts,her blockades, which are not consistent with the law ofnations, you may, should it be found necessary, let it beunderstood, that a repeal of the illegal blockades of a dateprior to the Berlin decree, namely, that of May, 1806, milhe included in the condition required of Great Britain, thatparticular blockade having been avowed to be comprehendedin, and of course identified with the orders incouncil. With respect to blockades of a subsequent dateor not, against France, you will press the reasonablenessof leaving them, together with future blockades not warrantedby public law, to be proceeded against by theUnited States in the manner they may choose to adopt.As has been heretofore stated to you, a satisfactory pro-hartfordConvention. 159vision for restoring the property lately surprised andseized by the order or at the instance of the French government,must be combined icith a repeal of the French edicts,with a view to a non-intercourse with Great Britain : sucha provision being an indispensable evidence of the justpurpose of France towards the United States. And youwill, moreover, be careful, in arranging such a provisionfor that particular case of spoliations, not to weaken theground on which a redress of others may be justly pursued."From the numerous quotations which have been made,and from a great number of passages which might beadded, it is perfectly obvious, that our negotiations respectingthe revocation of the British orders in council weregreatly embarrassed by the form of the inquiry made ofthe French minister by General Armstrong, by order ofthe Secretary of State, in January, 1810. That inquirywas not limited to what were the conditions on which hismajesty the emperor would annul the Berlin decree, but itwas asked whether he woidd do so if Great Britain revokedher blockades of a date anterior to that of the Berlin decree ?The subject was alluded to very often in the course of thecorrespondence ; and on the 26th of March, 1810, LordWellesley, in answer to an inquiry whether the blockadeof May, 1806, had been withdrawn, said — " The blockade,notified by Great Britain in May, 1806, has never beenformally withdrawn. It cannot therefore be accuratelystated, that the restrictions which it established, restaltogether on the order of council of the 7th of January,1807 : they are comprehended under the more extensiverestrictions of that order. No other blockade of the portsof France was instituted by Great Britain, between theI6th of May, 1806, and the 7th of January, 1807, exceptingthe blockade of Venice, instituted on the 27th of July,1806, which is still in force." It seems from this declarationof the British minister, that every thing except aformal revocation had taken place, the decree, as Mr,160 HISTORY OF THEPinkney justly considered it, had been absorbed in theorders of council of January, 1807. But as this last orderof council was of a subsequent date to the Berlin decree, itwould not have answered the object which the Frenchgovernment had in view, which, as has been already remarked,was to obtain an admission, at least by implication,that the British government first adopted the policyof interfering with the rights of neutrals. For no otherpurpose than that of enabling the French government togain this advantage over the British, was this subject of controversyfirst started, and afterwards continued between theparties; thus adding one more proof, that our governmentdeemed it expedient at all times to keep on hand somedistinct subject of controversy with Great Britain. In confirmationof the idea that the blockading order of May,1806, was not in force, Mr. Pinkney wrote to GeneralArmstrong on the 6th of April, 1810, in the followingmanner — " I do not know whether the statement containedin my letter of the 27th of last month will enableyou to obtain the recall of the Berlin decree. Certainlythe inference from that statement is that the blockade of1806 is virtually at an end, being merged and comprehendedin an order in council, issued after the date of theedict of Berlin. I am, however, about to try to obtain aformal revocation of that blockade (and that of Venice,) orat least a precise declaration that they are not in force.It is not a little remarkable, that our government shouldhave shown such a degree of meekness and humility towardsFrance, whilst they were manifesting such a loftyair, and such a peremptory tone, in their correspondencewith Great Britain. The treatment they received fromthe French government was not only supercilious andhaughty, but the language of their official communications,in relation to the very subject in discussion, contemptuousand insulting. On the 17th of February, 1810, GeneralArmstrong addressed a letter to the Secretary of State,HARTFORD CONVENTION. 161enclosing a note which he had received from M. Champagny,from which the following passages are extracted :His majesty could place no reliance on the proceedingsof the United States, who having no ground of complaintagainst France, comprised her in their acts of exclusion,and since the month of May have forbidden theentrance of their ports to French vessels, under the penaltyof confiscation. As soon as his majesty was informed ofthis measure, he considered himself bound to order reprisalson American vessels not only in his territory, butlikewise in the countries which are under his influence.In the ports of Holland, of Spain, of Italy, and of Naples,American vessels have been seized, because the Americanshave seized French vessels. The Americans cannot hesitateas to the jjart uihich they are to take. They oughteither to tear to pieces the act of their independence, and tobecome again as before the revolution, the subjects of England,or to take such measures as that their commerce and industryshould not be trifled (tariffs) by the English, which rendersthem more dependent than Jamaica, which at least has its assemblyof representatives and its privileges. Men without justpolitical views, (sans politique,) without honour, without energy,may alledge that payment of the tribute imposed byEngland may be submitted to because it is light ; but whywill they not perceive that the English will no sooner haveobtained the admission of the principle, than they willraise the tariff in such a way that the burden, at first light,becoming insupportable, it will then be necessary to fightfor interest, after having refused to fight for honour.'The undersigned avows with frankness, that Francehas every thing to gain from receiving well the Americansin her ports. Her commercial relations with neutrals areadvantageous to her. She is in no way jealous of theirprosperity ; great, powerful and rich, she is satisfied when,by her own commerce, or by that of neutrals, her exportedHISTORY OF THE .nations give to her agriculture and her fabricks the properdevelopment.It is now thirty years since the United States of Americafounded, in the bosom of the new world, an independentcountry, at the price of the blood of so many immortalmen, who perished on the field of battle to throw offthe leaden yoke of the English monarch. These generousmen were far from supposing, when they thus sacrificedtheir blood for the independence of America, thatthere would so soon be a question whether there should beimposed upon it a yoke more heavy than that which theyhad thrown off, by subjecting its industry to a tariff ofBritish legislation, and to the orders in council of 1807.If then the minister of America can enter into anengagement, that the American vessels will not submit tothe orders in council of England of November, 1807, norto any decree of blockade, unless this blockade should bereal, the undersigned is authorized to conclude every speciesof convention tending to renew the treaty of commercewith America, and in which all the measures properto consolidate the commerce and the prosperity of theAmericans shall be provided for."It is also remarkable, that the same Administrationswhose dignity was so suddenly affronted, and whose resentmentwas so greatly roused, by a single expression inMr. Jackson's letter, relating to the rejection of the arrangementwith Mr Erskine, as to refuse to hold any intercoursewith that minister, should have borne, with suchphilosophical meekness and coolness, the foregoing languageof M. Champagny. It is not easy to imagine phraseologymore insolent, or sentiments more degrading toour government and country. And yet General Armstrongwas not recalled; nor, in examining the correspondencerelating to this subject, has any order even to remonstrateagainst the indignity offered to both been discovered.In a little more than a month after the date of this let-hartfordCONVENTION. 163her, the Rambouillet decree, which has already been cited,was issued. No one who reads it can hesitate about itstrue character ; which was Utile better than a License tocommit piracy, in a manner the most base and infamous.On the 5th of August following, General Armstrongreceived a note from the duke of Cadore, (Champagny)containing a formal declaration that the Berlin and Milandecrees were both revoked, and that after the 1st of Novemberensuing they would cease to have effect. Thisnote is couched in language equally extraordinary withthat from which we have copied the foregoing extracts.The following passages are quoted —"Sir — I have laid before his majesty, the emperor andking, the act of Congress of the 1st of May, taken fromthe gazette of the United States, which you have sent tome.His majesty could have wished that this act, and allthe other acts of the government of the United States,which interest France, had always been officially madeknown to him. In general, he has only had a knowledge ofthem indirectly, and after a long interval of time. Therehave resulted from this delay serious inconveniences, whichwould not have existed if these acts had been promptlyand officially communicated."The emperor had applauded the general embargo, laidby the United States on all their vessels, because thatmeasure, if it has been prejudicial to France, had in it atleast nothing offensive to her honour."The act of the 1st of March has raised the embargo,and substituted for it a measure the most injurious to theinterests of France.This act, of which the emperor knew nothing untilvery lately, interdicted to American vessels the commerceof France, at the time it authorized that to Spain,Naples, and Holland, that is to say, to the countries underFrench influence, and denounced confiscation against all164 HISTORY OF THEFrench vessels which should enter the ports of America.Reprisal was a right, and commanded hy the dignity ofFrance, a circumstance on which it was impossible to makea compromise (de transigir.) The sequester of all theAmerican vessels in France has been the necessary consequenceof the measure taken by Congress.Now Congress retrace their steps, (revient sur ses pas ;)they revoke the act of the 1st of March; the ports ofAmerica are open to French commerce, and France is nolonger interdicted to the Americans. In short, Congressengages to oppose itself to that one of the belligerentpowers which should refuse to acknowledge the rights ofneutrals.In this new state of things, I am authorized to declareto you, sir, that the decrees of Berlin and Milan are revoked,and that after the first of November they will ceaseto have effect; it being understood that, in consequence ofthis declaration, the English shall revoke their orders incouncil, and renounce the new principles of blockade whichthey have wished to establish, or, that the United States,conformably to the act you have just communicated, shallcause their rights to be respected by the English."It is with the most particular satisfaction, sir, that Imake known to you this determination of the emperor.His majesty loves the Americans. Their prosperity andtheir commerce are within the scope of his policy."The independence of America is one of the principaltitles of glory to France. Since that epoch the emperoris pleased in aggrandizing the United States, and, under allcircumstances, that rvhich can contribute to the independence,to the prosperity, and the liberty of the Americans, the emperorwill consider as conformable with the interests of hisempire'sOn the 2d day of November, 1810, the President issuedhis proclamation, giving notice that the French decreeswere revoked. After the usual recital, referring to theHARTFORD CONVENTION. 165act of Congress, authorizing him to adopt that measure,the proclamation says —And whereas it has been officially made known to thisgovernment, that the edicts of France violating the neutralcommerce of the United States have been so revokedas to cease to have effect on the first of the present month :Now, therefore, I, James Madison, President of the UnitedStates, do hereby proclaim that the said edicts of Francehave been so revoked as that they ceased on the said firstday of the present month to violate the neutral commerceof the United States ; and that, from the date of thesepresents, all the restrictions imposed by the aforesaid actshall cease and be discontinued in relation to France andher dependencies."Thus it appears, that after this long train of negotiationand effort, the French government had succeeded, in cooperationwith ours, in bringing the United States to aspecies of issue with Great Britain. This was taking onemore important step towards the open conflict which eventuallyoccurred between the countries. A little further attentionwill be necessary to the correspondence of GeneralArmstrong, relating to this adjustment.It has been seen, that upon the issuing of the Rambouilletdecree, a large amount of American property withinthe reach of French authority was seized and confiscated,and the avails were placed in the imperial privy purse. Onthe 10th of September, 1810, General Armstrong addresseda letter to the Secretary of State, in which he says, thatby a letter from the duke of Cadore, a copy of which wasenclosed, " it will be seen that the decree of Rambouilletis not in operation, and that American ships entering theports of France before the 1st of November next, will bejudged under the decrees of Berlin and of Milan. In aparagraph in the same letter, under the date of September12th, he says — " I have the honour to enclose copies oftwo other letters from the duke of Cadore, one of which166 HISTORY OF THEis an answer to my note of the 8th instant. To the questionwhether we had any thing to expect in reparation forpast wrongs ? they reply, that their act being of reprisal,the law of reprisal must govern ; in other words, thatif you confiscate French property under the law of non-intercourse,they will confiscate your property under their decree ofRambouillet.^^ The words underscored is the verbal explanationwhich accompanied the letter./THE DUKE OF Adore tO GENERAL ARMSTRONG.Paris, September 7lh, 1810.a Sir, — You have done me the honour to ask of me, byyour letter of the 20th of August, what will be the lot ofthe American vessels which may arrive in France beforethe 1st of November.His majesty has always wished to favour the commerceof the United States. It was not without reluctancethat he used reprisal towards the Americans whilehe saw that Congress had ordered the confiscation of allFrench vessels which might arrive in the United States.It appears that Congress might have spared to hismajesty and his subjects this mortification (ce disagreement)if in place of that harsh and decisive measure, which leftto France no choice, they had used some palliative, suchas that of not receiving French vessels, or of sending themaway, after a delay of so many days.As soon as his majesty was informed of this hostileact, he felt that the honour of France, involved in thispoint, could not be cleansed (ne pouvait etre lave) but bya declaration of war (which) could not take place but bytedious explanations.The emperor contented himself with making reprisals;and in consequence, he applied to American vesselswhich came to France, or to countries occupied by theIHARTFORD CONVENTION. 167French armies, word for word, the regulations of the actof Congress.Since the last measures by which that hostile act isrepealed, his majesty hastens to cause it to be made knownto you that he anticipates that which may re-establish harmonywith the United States, and that he repeals his decreesof Berlin and 3Iilan, under the conditions pointed outin my letter to you, of the 5th of August.During tJiis interval, the American vessels whichshall arrive in France will not be subjected to confiscation; because the act of Congress, which had served as amotive to our reprisals, is repealed ; but these vessels willbe subjected to all the effects of the Berlin and Milan decrees; that is to say, they will be treated amicably, if theycan be considered as Americans, and hostilely, if they havelost their national character (sails se sont laisse donationby submitting to the orders in council of the Britishgovernment."On the 7th of September, 1810, General Armstrongwrote a letter to the duke of Cadore, from which the followingpassages are copied —"Your excellency will not think me importunate if Ishould employ the last moments of my stay in Paris, inseeking an explicit declaration on the following joints :1. Has the decree of his majesty of the 23d of searchlast, enjoining acts of reprisal against the commerce of theUnited States on account of their late law of non-intercourse,been recalled ?2. What will be the operation (on the vessels of theUnited States) of his majesty's decree of July last, forbiddingthe departure of neutral ships from the ports ofFrance, unless provided with imperial licenses'? Are theselicenses merely substitutes for clearances.^ or do they prescriberegulations to be observed by the holders of themwithin the jurisdiction of the United States ?Do they confine the permitted intercourse to two ports168 HISTORY OF THEonly of the said States, and do they enjoin that all shipmentsbe made on French account exclusively ?Is it his majesty's will, that the seizures made in theports of Spain and other places, on the principle of reprisal,shall become a subject of present or future negotiationbetween the two governments ? or, are the acts alreadytaken by his majesty to be regarded as conclusive againstremuneration ?I need not suggest to your excellency the interest that |both governments have in the answers that may be givento these questions, and how nearly connected they arewith the good understanding which ought to exist betweenthem. After the great step lately taken by his majestytowards an accommodation of differences, we are not atliberty to suppose that any new consideration will arise,which shall either retard or prevent the adoption of measuresnecessary to a full restoration of the commercialintercourse and friendly relation of the two powers."The following is the reply to the foregoing note —THE DUKE OF Adore tO GENERAL ARMSTRONG.'paris, Sept. 12i/«, 1810.I have received your letter of the 7th of September.That which I wrote to you the same day answered thefirst of the questions you put to me. I will add to what Ihave had the honour to write to you, that the decree of the23d of March, 1810, which ordered reprisals in consequenceof the act of Congress of the 1st of March, 1809,was repealed as soon as we Averse informed of the repealof the act of non-intercourse passed against France.On your second question I hasten to declare to you,that American vessels loaded with merchandise the growthof the American provinces, will be received without difficultyin the ports of France, provided they have not sufferedtheir flag to lose its national character, by submitting to theHARTFORD CONVENTION. lOS)acts of the British council; they may in like manner departfrom the ports of France. The emperor has given licensesto American vessels. It is the only flag which has obtainedthem. In this his majesty has intended to give a proof ofthe respect he loves to show to the Americans. If he issomewhat dissatisfied (pen satisfaite) that they have notas yet been able to succeed in causing their flag to be respected,at least he sees with pleasure that they are farfrom acknowledging the tyrannical principles of Englishlegislation."The American vessels which may be loaded on accountof Frenchmen, or on account of Americans, will beadmitted into the ports of France. As to the merchandiseconfiscated, it having been confiscated as a measure of reprisal,the principles of reprisal must be the late in that affairs''The government of Great Britain considered the revocationof the Berlin and Milan decrees as not absolute,but conditional, and therefore declined repealing theirorders in council. On the 23d of July, 1811, Mr. Monroe,Secretary of State, addressed a long letter to Mr. Foster,the British minister, on the general controversy. After alludingto what occurred respecting the French decrees, heremarks, "Great Britain still declines* to revoke heredicts, on the pretension that France has not revokedhers. Under that impression she infers that the UnitedStates have done her injustice by carrying into effect thenon-importation against her.The United States maintain that France has revokedher edicts so far as they violated their neutral rights, andwere contemplated by the law of May 1st, 1810, and haveon that ground particularly claimed, and do expect ofGreat Britain a similar revocation.The revocation announced officially by the Frenchminister of foreign affairs, to the minister plenipotentiaryof the United States at Paris, on the 5th of August, 1810,was in itself sufficient to justify the claim of the United170 HISTORY OF THEStates to a correspondent measure from Great Britain-shehad declared that she would proceed pari passu hitthe repeal with France, and the day being fixed when therepeal of the French decrees should take effect, it was reasonableto conclude that Great Britain would fix the sameday for the repeal of her orders. Had this been done, theproclamation of the President would have announced therevocation of the edicts of both powers at the same time ;and in consequence thereof, the non-importation wouldhave gone into operation against neither. Such too isthe natural course of proceeding in transactions betweenindependent states ; and such the conduct which they generallyobserve towards each other. In all compacts betweennations, it is the duty of each to perform what itstipulates, and to presume on the good faith of the otherfor a like performance. The United States having madea proposal to both belligerents, were bound to accept acompliance from either, and it was no objection to theFrench compliance, that it was in a form to take effect ata future day, that being a form not unusual in laws andother public acts. Even when nations are at war andmake peace, this obligation of mutual confidence exists,and must be respected. In treaties of commerce, bywhich their future intercourse is to be governed, the obligationis the same. If distrust and jealousy are allowed toprevail, the moral tie which binds nations together, in alltheir relations, in war as well as in peace, is broken.Great Britain has declined proceeding pari passu withFrance in the revocation of their respective edicts. Shehas held aloof, and claims of the United States proof notonly that France has revoked her decrees, but that she continuesto act in conformity with the revocation.You urge only as an evidence that the decrees are riotrepealed, the speech of the emperor of France to the deputiesfrom the free cities of Hamburg, Bremen, and Lu-beck; the imperial edict dated at Fontainbleau, on theHartford Convention. 17119th of October, 1810; the report of the French ministerof foreign affairs dated in December last, and a letter ofthe minister of justice to the president of the council ofprizes of the 25th of that month.There is nothing in the first of these papers incompatiblewith the revocation of the decrees, in respect to theUnited States. It is distinctly declared by the emperor inhis speech to the deputies of the Hanse Towns, that theblockade of the British islands shall cease when the Britishblockades cease ; and that the French blockades shall ceasein favour of those nations in whose favour Great Britain revokeshers, or who support their rights against her pretension,as France admits the United States will do by enforcingthe non-importation act. The same sentiment isexpressed in the report of the minister of foreign affairs.The decree of Fontainbleau having no effect on the highseas, cannot be brought into this discussion. It evidentlyhas no connection with neutral rights."The letter from the minister of justice to the presidentof the council of prizes, is of a different character. It relatesin direct terms to this subject, but not in the sense inwhich you understand it. After reciting the note fromthe duke of Cadore of the 5th of august last, to the Americanminister at Paris, which announced the repeal of theFrench decrees, and the proclamation of the President inconsequenceof it, it states that all causes arising underthose decrees after the 1st of November, which were thenbefore the court, or might afterwards be brought before it,should not be judged by the principles of the decrees, butbe suspended until the '2d of February, when the UnitedStates having fulfilled their engagement, the captures shouldbe declared void, and the vessels and their cargoes bedelivered up to their owners. This paper appears to affordan unequivocal evidence of the revocation of the decrees,so far as relates to the United States, By instructing theFrench tribunal to make no decision until the 2d of FebrisHISTORY OF THEmary, and then to restore the property to the owners on rparticular event which has happened ; all cause of doubton that point seems to be removed. The United Statesmay justly complain of delay in the restitution of that property,but that is an injury which affects them only. GreatBritain has no right to complain of it. She was interestedonly in the revocation of the decrees by which neutralrights would be secured from future violation ; or if shehad been interested in the delay, it would have affordedno pretext for more than a delay in repealing her orderstill the 2d February. From that day, at farthest, theFrench decrees would cease. ; At the same day ought herorders to have ceased."On the 26th of July, Mr. Foster replied to Mr. Monroe.The following are extracts from his letter : —"You urge, sir, that the British government promisedto proceed pari passu with France in the repeal of heredicts. It is to be wished you could point out to usany step France has taken in the repeal of hers. GreatBritain has repeatedly declared that she would repealwhen the French did so, and she means to keep to thatdeclaration."I have stated to you that we could not consider theletter of August 5th, declaring the repeal of the Frenchedicts, provided we revoked our orders in council, or Americaresented our not doing so, as a step of that nature;and the French government knew that we could not ; theirobject was, evidently, while their system was adhered to inall its rigour, to endeavour to persuade the American governmentthat they had relaxed from it, and to induce herto proceed in enforcing the submission of Great Britain tothe inordinate demands of France. It is to be lamentedthat they have but too well succeeded ; for the UnitedStates government appear to have considered the Frenchdeclaration in the sense in which France wished it to beHARTFORD CONVENTION. 173taken, as an absolute repeal of her decrees, without advertingto the conditional terms which accompanied it."To the ambiguous declaration in M. Champagny'snote, is opposed the unambiguous and personal declarationof Bonaparte himself. You urge that there is nothingincompatible with the revocation of the decrees, in respectto the United States, in his expressions to the deputies ofthe free cities of Hamburg, Bremen, and Lubeck ; that itis distinctly stated in that speech that the blockade of theBritish islands shall cease when the British blockades cease,and that the French blockade shall cease in favour of thosenations in whose favour Great Britain revokes hers, or whosupport their rights against her pretension.It is to be inferred from this and the correspondingparts of the declaration alluded to, that unless GreatBritain sacrifices her principles of blockade, which arethose authorized by the established law of nations, Francewill still maintain her decrees of Berlin and Milan, whichindeed the speech in question declares to be the fundamentallaws of the French empire.I do not, I confess, conceive how these avowals of theruler of France can be said to be compatible with the repealof his decrees in respect to the United States. Tf theUnited States are prepared to insist on the sacrifice byGreat Britain of the ancient and established rules of nifiri-time war practised by hei", then, indeed, they may avoidthe operation of the French decrees ; but otherwise, accordingto this document, it is very clear that th(;y are stillsubjected to them.The decree of Fontainbleau is confessedly founded onthe decrees of Berlin and Milan, dated the J 9th of October,1810, and proves their continued existence. Thereport of the French minister of December 8, announcingthe perseverance of France in her decrees, is still furtherin confirmation of them, and a reversal of the letter of theminister of justice of the 25th last December, confirms me174 HISTORY OF THEin the inference I drew from it ; for, otherwise, why shouldthat minister make the prospective restoration of Americanvessels taken after the 1st November to be a consequenceof the non-importation, and not of the Frenchrevocation? If the French government had been sincere,they would have ceased infringing on the neutral rightsof America after the 1st November: that they violatedthem, however, after that period, is notorious.Your government seem to let it be understood that anambiguous declaration from Great Britain, similar to thatof the French minister, would have been acceptable tothem. But, sir, is it consistent with the dignity of a nationthat respects itself to speak in ambiguous language ?The subjects and citizens of either country would, in theend, be the victims, as many are already, in all probability,who, from a misconstruction of the meaning of the Frenchgovernment, have been led into the most imprudent speculations.Such conduct would not be to proceed /Xi-npassu with France in revoking our edicts, but to descendto the use of the perfidious and juggling contrivances ofher cabinet, by which she fills her coffers at the expenseof independent nations. A similar construction of proceedingpan passu might lead to such decrees as those ofRambouillet or of Bayonne, to the system of exclusion orof licenses ; all measures of France against the Americancommerce, in nothing short of absolute hostility.""I have now followed you, I believe, sir, through thewhole range of your argument, and on reviewing thecourse qf it, I think I may securely say, that no satisfactoryproof has as yet been brought forward of the repealof the obnoxious decrees of France, but on the contrary,that it appears they continue in full force ; consequentlythat no grounds exist on which you can with justice demandof Great Britain a revocation of her orders in council; that we have a right to complain of the conduct of theAmerican government in enforcing the provisions of theHartford Convention. 175act of May, 1810, to the exclusion of the British trade, andafterwards in obtaining a special law for the same purpose,though it was notorious at the time that France stillcontinued her aggressions upon American commerce, andhad recently promulgated anew her decrees, suffering notrade from this country but through licenses publickly soldby her agents, and that all the suppositions you haveformed of innovations on the part of Great Britain, or ofher pretensions to trade with her enemies, are whollygroundless. 1 have also stated to you the view his majesty'sgovernment has taken of the question of the blockadeof May, 1806, and it now only remains that I urgeafresh the injustice of the United States' government perseveringin their union with the French system, for thepurpose of crushing the commerce of Great Britain."A still more extended correspondence ensued relatingto this subject, in which it was contended on the part ofthe American government, that the French decrees wereactually repealed, and on that of the British government,that the professed act of repeal by the French emperorwas a mere deception, and that the decrees were still inforce; and this was urged as the reason why the Britishorders in council were not formally revoked. The causewhich lay at the bottom of the difficulty in adjusting thecontroversy respecting the edicts of Great Britain, whichit was contended violated our neutral rights, was the demandon our part of the revocation of the blockading orderof May, 1806; the circumstances attending which havealready been adverted to. In a letter from the Marquisof Wellesley to Mr. Pinkney, dated December 29th, 1810,his lordship says — " By your explanation it appears, thatthe American government understands the letter of theFrench minister as announcing an ab-flute repeal, on the1st of November, 1810, of the French decrees of Berlinand Milan ; which repeal, however, is not to continue inforceunless the British government, within a reasonable176 Histoire OF THEtime after the 1st of November, 1810, shall fulfil the twoconditions stated distinctly in the letter of the Frenchminister. Under this explanation, if nothing more hadbeen required from Great Britain for the purpose of securingthe continuance of the repeal of the French decrees,than the repeal of our orders in council, I should not havehesitated to declare the perfect readiness of this governmentto fulfil that condition. On these terms the Britishgovernment has always been sincerely disposed to repealthe orders in council. It appears, however, not only bythe letter of the French minister, but by your explanation,that the repeal of the orders in council will not satisfyeither the French or the American government. TheBritish government is further required, by the letter of theFrench minister, to renounce those principles of blockadewhich the French government alleges to be new. A referenceto the terms of the Berlin decree will serve toexplain the extent of this requisition. The Berlin decreestates, that Great Britain " extends the right of blockadeto commercial unfortified towns, and to ports, harbours,and mouths of rivers, which according to the principles andpractice of all civilized nations, is only applicable to fortifiedplaces." On the part of the American government, 1understand you to require that Great Britain should revokeher order of blockade of May, 1806. Combining your requisitionwith that of the French minister, I must concludethat America demands the revocation of that order ofblockade as a practical instance of our renunciation of thoseprinciples of blockade which are condemned by the Frenchgovernment. Those principles of blockade Great Britainhas asserted to be ancient and established by the laws ofmaritime war, acknowledged by all civilized nations, andon which depend the most valuable rights and interests ofthis nation. If the Berlin and Milan decrees are to beconsidered as still in force, unless Great Britain shall renouncethese established foundations of her maritimeHARTFORD CONVENTION. 177rights and interests, the period of time is not yet arrived,when the repeal of her orders in council can be claimedfi'om her, either with reference to the promise of thisgovernment, or to the safely and honour of the nation."Mr. Pinkney replied to Lord Wellesley on the 14th ofJuly, 1811. In alluding to that part of his lordship's letterwhich has been above cited, he says — "If I comprehendthe other parts of your lordship's letter, they declarein effect, that the British government will repeal nothingbut the orders in council, and that it cannot at present repealeven them, because, in the first place, the French governmenthas required, in the letter of the duke of Cadoreto General Armstrong, of the 5th of August, not only thatGreat Britain shall revoke those orders, but that she shallrenounce certain principles of blockade (supposed to beexplained in the preamble to the Berlin decree) whichFrance alleges to be new ; and in the second place, becausethe American government has (as you conclude) demandedthe revocation of the British order of blockadeof May, 1806, as a practical instance of that same renunciation,or, in other words, has made itself a party, not openlyindeed, but indirectly and covertly, to the entire requisitionof France, as you understand that requisition.It is certainly true that the American governmenthas required, as indispensable in the view of its acts ofintercourse and non-intercourse, the annulment of theBritish blockade of May, 1806 ; and further, that it hasthrough me declared its confident expectation that otherblockades of a similar character (including that of theisland of Zealand) will be discontinued. But by what processof reasoning your lordship has arrived at the conclusion,that the government of the United States intendedby this requisition to become the champion of the edict ofBerlin, to fashion its principles by those of France while itaffected to adhere to its own, and to act upon some partnershipin doctrines, which it would fain induce you to HISTORY OF THEknowledge, but could not prevail upon itself to avow, I amnot able to conjecture. The frank and honourable characterof the American government justifies me in saying that,if it had meant to demand of Great Britain an abjurationof all such principles as the French government may thinkfit to disapprove, it would not have put your lordship to thetrouble of discovering that meaning by the aid of combinationsand inferences discountenanced by the language ofits minister, but would have told you so in explicit terms.What I have to request of your lordship, therefore, is thatyou will take our views and principles from our own mouths,and that neither the Berlin decree, nor any other act ofany foreign state, may be made to speak for us what wehave not spoken for ourselves."In a letter from Mr. Pinkney to Mr. Smith, Secretaryof State, of the 17th of January, 1811, in alluding to theletter from which the above passages are cited, he says —"My answer to lord Wellesley's letter was written underthe pressure of indisposition, and the influence of moreindignation than could well be suppressed." As the agentof his government, it was doubtless the duty of Mr. Pink-neyto make the best of the case he had on hand. But itwill be made apparent, before this examination is finished,that the British minister was not entirely destitute of reasonfor his suggestion respecting that which was called "apartnership in doctrines." It is sufficient for the presentto remark, that the circumstance of the American governmenthaving introduced, as a preliminary to their negotiationsrespecting the appeal of the British orders in council,the British blockading order of May, 1806, prevented theadjustment of that question, and was the means of keepingalive the spirit of hostility, until it terminated in thewar of 1812.In a letter from the Marquis of Wellesley to Mr. Pink-ney,dated February 11th, 1811, he again adverts to thissubject, and says — " Great Britain has always insisted uponHARTFORD CONVENTION. 179her right of self-defence against the system of commercialwarfare pursued by France, and the British orders of councilwere founded upon a just principle of retaliation againstthe French decrees. The incidental operation of the ordersof council upon the commerce of the United States,(although deeply to be lamented) must be ascribed exclusivelyto the violence and injustice of the enemy, whichcompelled this country to resort to adequate means of defence.It cannot now be admitted that the foundation ofthe original question should be changed, and that the measureof retaliation adopted against France should now berelinquished, at the desire of the United States, withoutany reference to the actual conduct of the enemy."The intention has been repeatedly declared of repealingthe orders of council, whenever France shall actuallyhave revoked the decrees of Berlin and Milan, and shallhave restored the trade of neutral nations to the conditionin which it stood previously to the promulgation of thosedecrees. Even admitting that France has suspended theoperation of those decrees, or has repealed them, with referenceto the United States, it is evident that she has notrelinquished the conditions expressly declared in the letterof the French minister under date of the 5th of August,1810. France therefore requires that Great Britain shallnot only repeal the orders of council, but renounce thoseprinciples of blockade which are alleged in the same letterto be new ; an allegation which must be understood to referto the introductory part of the Berlin decree. If GreatBritain shall not submit to these terms, it is plainly intimatedin the same letter that France requires America toenforce them.To these conditions, his royal highness, on behalf ofhis majesty, cannot accede. No principles of blockadehave been promulgated or acted upon by Great Britainpreviously to the Berlin decree, which are not strictly conformableto the rights of civilized war, and to the approved180 HISTORY OF THEusages and law of nations. The blockades established bythe orders of council rest on separate grounds, and arejustified by the principles of necessary retaliation, in whichthey originated."That the French decrees were not in truth repealed onthe 1st of November, 1810, was further inferred by theBritish government, from the fact that Bonaparte had establishedthe practice of requiring the American vesselsto take out licenses, before they could be admitted intoFrench ports, and that they should take in for their returncargoes two-thirds of the quantity in French silks andwines. On the 16th of January, 1811, Mr. Russell, charged'affaires of the United States at Paris, wrote to Mr. Smith,Secretary of State, as follows —•'Your letter of the 8th of November, relative to thepowers given by this government to its consuls in the UnitedStates, under its decree concerning licenses, was receivedby me on the 11th instant, and the next day 1 communicatedits contents to the duke of Cadore in a note, acopy of which you will find enclosed."The following is a copy of the note above alluded to —MR. RUSSELL tO THE DUKE OF Adore.Paris, January 12, 1811.Sir, — The public journals and letters from GeneralArmstrong have announced to the American governmentan imperial decree, by which permission is to be grantedto a stated number of American vessels, to import intoFrance from certain ports in the United States, the articlestherein specified, and to export in return such productionsof the French empire as are also enumerated insaid decree. This trade, it would appear, is to be carriedon under the authority of imperial licenses, and can onlybe perfected by the act of the French consul residing withinthe jurisdiction of the United States at the specified ports.HARTFORD CONVENTION. 181The United States have no pretension of right to objectto the operation of commercial regulations, strictlymunicipal, authorised by the French government to takeeffect within the limits of its own dominions ; but I am instructedto state to you the inadmissibility, on the part ofthe United States, of such a consular superintendence asthat which is contemplated by this decree respecting atrade to be carried on under licenses.France cannot claim for her consuls, either by treatyor custom, such a superintendence. They can be permittedto enjoy such legitimate functions only as are sanctionedby public law, or by the usage of nations growingout of the courtesy of independent states.Besides, the decree in (question professes to invest certainconsuls with a power which cannot be regularlyexercised in the United States without the tacit permissionof the American government ; a permission that cannotbe presumed, not only because it is contrary to usage,but because consuls thus acting would be exercising functionsin the United States in virtue of French authorityonly, which the American government itself is not competentto authorise in any agents whatever."If the construction given by the government of theUnited States to this decree be correct, the government ofFrance should not for a moment mislead itself by a belief,that its commercial agents will be permitted to exercise theextraordinary power thus intended to be given to them."That the American government were much annoyed bythis attempt of his imperial majesty of France to regulateand controul our trade with that country, in such a manneras to make it answer his own purposes, cannot be doubted.That they complain with great moderation and fear, is notamatter of surprise to any person who is acquainted withthe occurrences of that period.The duke of Cadore, in reply to the foregoing letterfrom Mr. Russell, on the 18th of January, 1811, said —182 HISTORY OF THEI have read with much attention your note of the 12thof January, relative to the Licenses intended to favour thecommerce of the Americans in France. This system hadbeen conceived before the revocation of the decrees ofBerlin and Milan had been resolved upon. Now circumstancesare changed by the resolution taken by the UnitedStates, to cause their flag and their independence to be respected,that which has been done before this last epoch,can no longer serve as a rule under actual circumstances."Ten months after this, however, viz. on the 21st of November,1811, in a letter from the Secretary of State toMr. Barlow, then minister in France, the following languageis used —The trade by licenses must be abrogated. I cannottoo strongly express the surprise of the President, afterthe repeated remonstrances of this government, and moreespecially after the letter of the duke of Cadore of thelast, informing him that that systemwould fall with the Berlin and Milan decrees, that it stillshould be adhered to. The executors of the consuls whohave granted such licenses, would long since have beenrevoked, if orders to them to discontinue the practice hadnot daily been expected, or in case they were not received,the more effectual interposition of Congress to suppress it.It will certainly be prohibited by law, under severe penalties,in compliance with the recommendation of the President,if your despatches by the Constitution do not provethat your demand on this subject has been duly attended to."The recommendation of the President here alluded tobythe Secretary of State, it is presumed is in the followingpassage of the executive message at the opening of Congress,on the 5th of November ; — that is about a fortnightbefore the date of the foregoing letter —The justice and fairness which have been evinced onthe part of the United States towards France, both beforeand since the revocation of her decrees, authorised an ex-hartfordCONVENTION. 183petition that her government would have followed upthat measure, by all such others as were due to our reasonableclaims, as well as dictated by its amicable professions.No proof, however, is yet given, of an intention torepair the other wrongs done to the United States; and particularlyto restore the great amount of American propertyseized and condemned under edicts, which though notaffecting our neutral relations, and therefore not enteringinto questions between the United States and other belligerents,were nevertheless founded in such unjust principles,that the reparation ought to have been prompt andample.In addition to this, and other demands of strict righton that nation, the United States have much reason to bedissatisfied with the rigorous and nncxjjecfed restrictions towhich their trade with the French dominions has been subjected; and ivhich, if not discontinued, will require at leastcorresponding restrictions on importations from France intothe United States.''^There is nothing in this message like a call upon Congressto interpose and suppress the license trade undersevere penalties. That trade is doubtless alluded to,though not by name, in the paragraph last quoted ; but itspeaks of " rigorous and unexpected restrictions, which ifnot discontinued, will require at least corresponding restricton our part. In other words, instead of revokingconsular executors, which was so boldly threatenednearly a year before, an attempt was made to frightenBonaparte by the hint of establishing a license trade withFrance !It has been the object of this work to show, by quota-nationsfrom the public documents of the government, thatwhilst the administration were endeavoring by their language,as well as by their acts, to irritate the British government,they were manifesting towards France either astrong and unreasonable brass, or a servile and unmanly184 HISTORY OF THEfear. Some additional evidence in support of these positionsmay be derived from another, but an undoubtedlycorrect and credible source.In the year 1811, Mr. Robert Smith, who had held theoffice of Secretary of State for a number of years underMr. madison, in consequence of some disagreement ormisunderstanding between these two personages, left thatoffice, and retired to private life. Soon after the occurrenceof that event, Mr. Smith published an address tothe people of the United States, containing the reasonsfor his resignation. Among other statements in his publicationare the following —"The non-intercourse law of the last session was alsothe device of Mr. Madison. It too was introduced by presidentialmachinery.Should this statute be viewed, as it ought to he, in connexionwith and as emanating from the law of May, 1810,then will we have to look for the "/ac^" required by thatlaw, namely, the actual revocation of the Berlin and Milandecrees."If this revocation did in fact take place, as declaredby the proclamation, then the act of May, communicatedas it had been by the executive to the two belligerentpowers, did become ipso facto a compact between the UnitedStates and France, and in that case neither party had aright to disregard, or by law to change, its stipulated termsand conditions, as this government confessedly did by thenon-intercourse act of the last session.""If, however, the emperor of the French did not in factrevoke, as declared by the proclamation, the Berlin andMilan decrees, the act of May did not become a compactbetween the United States and France, and in that casehis imperial majesty had no claim against this government,founded upon that statute, to enforce the non-intercourseagainst the other belligerent.What, then, was the evidence which had induced Con-hartfordCONVENTION. 185dress to consider these decrees repealed, and which hadaccordingly induced them to pass the non-intercourse law?To the President, in this as in every other case touchingGur foreign relations, the legislature must necessarily havelooked for information and recommendation From himthey had in due form received what, they imagined, theywere officially bound to consider as satisfactory evidenceof the repeal of these decrees, namely, Its proclamationand his message containing a recommendation to enforcethe act of May, 1810. In respect then to this evidence, andin pursuance of this recommendation, did Congress pass theact called the non-intercourse law of the last session.This non-intercourse law, let it be distinctly kept inmind, was passed after the arrival at Washington of thenew French minister, viz. on the second day of March,1811."Notwithstanding the precise protestation, solemnlycommunicated to the French government, and openly promulgatedto the whole world, in virtue of the letters fromthe State Department of June and July, 1810, that "a satisfactoryprovision for restoring the property, lately surprisedand seized by the order or at the instance of theFrench government, must be combined with a repeal of theFrench edicts, vnih a view to a non-intercourse with GreatBritain, yet it is a fact, that before the passing of the non-intercourselaw of the last session, viz. on the 20th of February,1811, the French government did officially and formally,through their minister, Mr. Serrurier, communicateto this government their fixed determination not to restorethe property that had been so seized. And moreover,from the information which had been received by Mr.Madison, prior to the date of the non-intercourse law, itwas at the time of passing it, evident to my mind, that theBerlin and Milan decrees had not been revoked, as had beendeclared by the proclamationThe following draught of a letter to General HISTORY OF THEstrong was accordingly prepared by me immediately afterthe letter of the duke of Cadore, to which it refers, hadbeen received. It was in the usual form laid before thePresident for his approbation. He, however, objected to thesending of it. And as there is reason to believe that thisvery letter constituted part of the ground of the hostility ofMr. Madison to me, it is but proper to give it publicity.Copy of the draught of the letter proposed to he sent toGeneral Armstrong.^^ Department <.f State, June — , 1810."Gen. Armstrong, — Your letters of the — with theirrespective enclosures were received on the 21st day of May."In the note of the duke of Cadore nothing can be perceivedto justify the seizure of the American property inthe ports of France and in those of her allies. The facts aswell as the arguments, which it has assumed, are confutedby events known to the world, and particularly by that moderationof temper which has invariably distinguished theconduct of this government towards the belligerent nations."After a forbearance equalled only by our steady observanceof the laws of neutrality and of the immutableprinciples of justice, it is with no little surprise that thePresident discerns in the French government a dispositionto represent the United States as the original aggressor.An act of violence which under existing circumstances isscarcely less than an act of war, necessarily required anexplanation, which would satisfy not only the United States,but the world. But the note of the duke of Cadore, insteadof a justification, has not furnished even a plausiblepalliation or a reasonable apology for the seizure of theAmerican property.There has never been a period of time when theUnited States have ceased to protest against the Britishorders in council. With regard to the resistance whichthe United States may have deemed it proper to opposeHARTFORD CONVENTION.lo such unlawful restrictions, it obviously belonged to theAmerican government alone to prescribe the mode. If asystem of exclusion of the vessels and merchandise of thebelligerent powers from our ports has )been preferred towar, if municipal prohibition has been resorted to insteadof invasive retaliation, with what propriety can the emperorof the French pretend to see in that method of proceedingany thing else than a lawful exercise of sovereignpower ? To construe the exercise of this power into acause of warlike reprisal is a species of dictation, which,could it be admitted, would have a tendency to subvertthe sovereignty of the United States.France has converted our law of exclusion into a pretextfor the seizure of the property of the citizens of the UnitedStates. This statute was also in force against the vessels ofGreat Britain. If its operation had been considered by theFrench government as of sufficient efficacy to justify thispretended reprisal, that very operation, as it would havebeen more severely felt by Great Britain, ought also tohave been considered as constituting a resistance to herorders, the non-existence of which resistance has beenstated by the duke of Cadore as the pretext for the act ofviolence exercised on the American property. The UnitedStates having resisted the British orders, the real groundof complaint would seem to be, not so much that the Americangovernment has not resisted a tax on their navigation,as that it has likewise resisted the French decrees,which had assumed a prescriptive power over the policyof the United States, as reprehensible as the attempt of theBritish government to levy contributions on our trade wasobnoxious. Placed in a situation where a tax was proclaimedon the one hand, and a rule of action prescribedon the other, the United States owed it to their own honourto resist with corresponding measures the cupidity of theone and the presumption of the other. When the Americangovernment sees in the provisions of the British orders188 HISTORY OF THEan assumption of maritime power in contravention of thelaw of nations, how can it fail also to perceive in theFrench decrees the adoption of a principle equally derogatoryand injurious to the neutral character of the UnitedStates ?The pretension of subjecting American navigation to ia tax, as advanced by the British order of November,1807, was in reality withdrawn by the order of the 26th ofApril, 1809. Yet ten months subsequent to the recall ofthat pretension, its alleged existence is made the basis ofreproach against the American government by the emperorof the French. It would be fruitless to comment uponthe disposition to insist upon the prevailing influence of afact which no longer exists ; which, when it did exist, wasuniformly combated ; and the final extinction of whichwas the manifest consequence of the measures of thisgovernment.If the American government had seized French vessels,as erroneously asserted in the note of the duke ofCadore, the occurrence could only have been attributed tothe temerity of their owners or commanders, who, after aprevious notification, from the 1st of March to the 20th ofMay, of the act of exclusion, would have strangely presumedupon impunity in the violation of a prohibitory municipal lawof the United States. Had France interdicted to our vesselsall the ports within the sphere of her influence, andhad she given a warning of equal duration with that givenby our law, there would have been no cause of complainton the part of the United States. The French governmentwould not then have had the opportunity of exercising itspower in a manner as contrary to the forms as to the spiritof justice, over the property of the citizens of the UnitedStates.*' It was at all times in the power of France to suspend,with regard to herself, our acts of exclusion, of which shecomplains, by simply annulling or modifying her decrees.HARTFORD CONVENTION. 189Propositions to this effect have been made to her governmentthrough you. They were not accepted. On thecontrary, a policy was preferred which was calculated toproduce any other result than that of a good understandingbetween the two countries. By the act of Congressof the last session an opportunity is again afforded to hisimperial majesty to establish the most amicable relationsbetween the United States and France. Let him withdrawor modify his decrees ; let him restore the propertyof our citizens so unjustly seized, and a law of the UnitedStates exists which authorizes the President to promotethe best possible understanding with France, and to imposea system of exclusion against the ships and merchandiseof Great Britain in the event of her failing to conformto the same just terms of conciliation. In fine, as theemperor will now be acquainted with the fact that noFrench vessels have been unlawfully seized in the ports ofthe United States, as the law of exclusion against thecommerce of France is no more in operation, there can beno longer a solitary reasonable pretext for procrastinatingthe delivery of the American property, detained by theFrench government, into the possession of the respectiveowners."These observations you will not fail to present to theview of the French government, in order that the emperormay learn that the United States insist upon nothing buttheir acknowledged rights, and that they still entertain adesire to adjust all differences with the government ofFrance upon a basis equally beneficial and honourable toboth nations.I have the honour to be, &.c."R. Smith."It seems, from a passage above quoted, that Mr. S.Tiith,who as Secretary of State had full opportunity to becomeacquainted with all the correspondence, and every fact in190 HISTORY OF THEpossession of the government, relative to our relations andintercourse, political and commercial, with France, hadcome to the conclusion that the allegation in the President'sproclamation, that the Berlin and Milan decrees hadbeen revoked, was not true. He says, "From the informationthat had been received hy Mr. Madison, prior to thedate of the non-intercourse law, it was, at the time ofpassing it, evident to my mind, that the Berlin and Milandecrees had not been revoked, as had been declared by theproclamation." It is not a little remarkable, that thePresident should have been convinced that those decreeshad bee-n revoked, by evidence of so slight a character asto produce a directly opposite effect upon the Secretary'smind, viz. that such a revocation had not taken place.Mr. Smith goes on to say —Previously to the meeting of Congress last autumn, Iexpressed to Mr. Madison my apprehension that the emperorof France would not bona ^</e fulfil the just expectationsof the United States; that our commerce would beexposed in his ports to vexatious embarrassments, and thattobacco and cotton would probably not be freely admitted intoFrance. He entertained a different opinion, and, indeed,was confident that the Berlin and Milan decrees would bonafide cease on the first day of November, 18J0, and thatfrom that day our commercial relations with France wouldbe incumbered with no restrictions or embarrassmentswhatever. I nevertheless told him that my impressionswere such that I would have a conversation with GeneralTurret upon the subject in my interview with him in relationto certificates of origin. In the course of the correspondencewhich thence ensued, I was greatly checked bythe evident indications of utter indifference on the part ofMr. Madison. Instead of encouraging, he absolutely discouragedthe making of any animadversions upon GeneralTurret's letter of December 12th, Isis."This letter was written by the Secretary of State, im-hartfordCONVENTION. 191mediately after the receipt by our government of the letterfrom the duke of Cadore, which has been quoted in thiswork, and in which such language as the following wasmade use of — " The Americans cannot hesitate as to thepart which they are to take. They ought either to tear topieces the act of their independence, and so become again asbefore the revolution the subjects of England'" — '' Men withoutJust political views, without honour, without energy, mayallege that payment of the tribute imposed by Englandmay be submitted to because it is light" — " it will then benecessary to fight for interest after having refused to fightfor honour'sMr. Smith's letter has been copied at length, that theremay be no mistake, nor any charge of unfairness concerningits language, or its import. No dispassionate personwho reads the correspondence to which it relates, andcalls to mind the haughty, insolent, and rapacious conductof the French government towards the United States, theviolation of our neutral rights, and the plunder of ourcommerce, will be able to find any thing in it, which, inregard either to language or sentiment, under the circumstancesof the case, would be considered intemperate,or even improper. And certainly, when compared withmany parts of the correspondence with Great Britain, itmust be viewed as tame and spiritless. Much less oughtit to have been treated as if it contained a spirit of hostilityin the executive department, and calling for resentmenttowards as high and responsible an officer as the Secretaryof State. But what was the result ?Instead of the animadversions," says Mr. Smith, " containedin the foregoing letter, the President directed theinsertion of simply the following section in my letter of the5th of June, 1810.As the John Adams is daily expected, and as yourfurther communications by her will better enable me to adaptto the actual state of our affairs with the French government ^192 HISTORY OF THEthe observations proper to be fade in relation to their seizureof our property, and to the letter of the duke of Cadore ofthe 14th of February, it is by the President deemed expedientnot to make at this time any such animadversions. Icannot, however, forbear informing you, that a high indignationis felt by the President, as well as by the public, atthis act of violence on our property, and at the outrage,both in the language and in the matter, of the letter of theduke of Cadore, so justly portrayed in your note to himof the 10th of March.It is worthy of notice," adds Mr. Smith, " that thelast sentence of the above section was merely a communicationto General Armstrong, personally, as to the impressionmade here by that outrage of the French government,and that it was not an instruction to him to make the emperorof France acquainted with the high indignation felt onthe occasion by the President and the nation. It simplyshows, that our executive had, at that time, but just resolutionenough to impart to his own minister the sentimentsof indignation that had been here excited by the enormousoutrage of the Rambouillet decree, and by the insultingaudacity of the duke of Cadore's letter."Mr. Smith, in his exposition, goes on to remark"It is within the recollection of the American people,that the members of Congress, during the last session,were much embarrassed as to the course most proper tobe taken with respect to our foreign relations, and thattheir embarrassments proceeded principally from the defectin the communications to them as to the views of the emperorof the French. To supply this defect was the great desideratum.At a critical period of their perplexities thearrival at Norfolk of an Envoy Extraordinary from Francewas announced. Immediately thereon all their proceedingstouching our foreign relations were suspended. Theirmeasures, as avowed by themselves and as expected bythe nation, were then to be shaped according to the informCONVENTION. 193nation that might be received from Mr. Serruricr, especiallyas he necessarily must have left France long afterthe all-important first day of November. Upon his arrivalat Washington, and immediately after he had beenaccredited, knowing, as I did, the impatience of Congressand of my countrymen, I lost no time in having with hima conference."At this conference, Mr. Smith informed Mr. Terrierthat he would address a note to him, propounding the severalquestions he had put to him in conversation, and layhis answer before the President. He accordingly preparedsuch a letter, and submitted it to the President for his approbation,when, he says, he was "to his astonishment toldby him that it would not he expedient to send to Mr. Serrurierany such node. His deportment throughout this interviewevinced a high degree of disquietude, which occasionallybetrayed him into fretful expressions;" — and he sayshe "entreated him, but in a manner the most delicate, notto withhold from Congress any information that might beuseful to them at so momentous a juncture." He thengives the following as a copy of the letter which he hadprepared —Department of State, February 20, 1811."Sir, — Desirous of laying before the President withthe utmost precision the substance of our conference ofthis day, and knowing that verbal communications are notunfrequently misunderstood, I consider it proper to proposeto you in a written form the questions which I have hadthe honour of submitting to you in conversation, namely :"1st. Were the Berlin and Milan decrees revoked in wholeor in part on the fifth day of last November ? Or havethey at any time posterior to that day been so revoked?Or have you instructions from your government to give tothis government any assurance or explanation in relationto the revocation or modification of those decrees ?194 HISTORY OF THE2d. Do the existing decrees of France admit into Frenchports, with or without licenses, American vessels ladenwith articles not the produce of the United States, andunder what regulations and conditions ?"3d. Do they admit into French ports, with or withoutlicenses, American vessels laden with articles not the produceof the United States, and under what regulations andconditions ?"4th. Do they permit American vessels with or withoutlicenses, to return from France to the United States, andupon what terms and conditions ?"5th. Is the importation into France of any articles, theproduce of the United States, absolutely prohibited ? Andif so, what are the articles so prohibited, and especiallyare tobacco and cotton ? ,"6th. ')A2csQ yon instructions from your government togive to this government any assurance or explanation inrelation to the American vessels and cargoes seized underthe Rambouillet decree VIt will be remarked that the inquiries in this letter wereintended to draw from the French minister information respectingthe great points of complaint and controversybetween the United States and France, viz. whether theBerlin and Milan decrees were actually repealed; whetherthe practice of granting licenses to the American tradewas continued, and to .what extent; whether Americanproduce was admitted into French ports, and on whatterms; and whether he was instructed to give any explanationrespecting the American property seized under theRambouillet decree!* These were subjects of the highestinterest to our citizens, and the government spent a greatdeal of time, in one form and another, in complaining ofthe treatment our country had received, that our countrymenhad been plundered of their property, and interruptedin their commerce; and particularly on the subject of therepeal of the Berlin and Milan decrees, they had not onlyHARTFORD CONVENTION. 195insisted upon it that such a repeal had taken place, but thePresident had formally and officially proclaimed it to thenation ; and yet, when his confidential minister, the organof communication and intercourse with foreign governments,proposed to make specific inquiries of the Frenchminister on these several subjects, in order to ascertain theprecise facts concerning them, he was told by the President,*that it would not be expedient to send to Mr. Serrurierany such note." Who can doubt respecting the kind anddegree of influence which was exercised over Mr. Madison,when he refused to adopt the only course that existed, bywhich the information that was necessary could be obtained? Who can avoid the conclusion that it proceeded eitherfrom a servile fear of, or a most unwarrantable and reprehensibleattachment to France?Among the extraordinary occurrences of the period, oneof the most remarkable was that which has been calledthe Henry plot. The history of that memorable affair maybecollected from the following documents.On the 9th of March, 1812, President Madison transmittedthe following message to both houses of Congress.I lay before Congress copies of certain documentswhich remain in the department of state. They provethat, at a recent period, whilst the United States, notwithstandingthe wrongs sustained by them, ceased not to observethe laws of peace and neutrality towards GreatBritain, and in the midst of amicable professions and negotiationson the part of the British government, through itspublic minister here, a secret agent of that government wasemployed in certain states, more especially at the seat ofgovernment in Massachusetts, in fomenting disaffection tothe constituted authorities of the nation, and in intricacieswith the disaffected, for the purpose of bringing about resistanceto the laws, and, eventually, in concert with a Britishforce, of destroying the Union and forming the eastern partthereof into a political connection with Great Britain,196 HISTORY OF THE'* In addition to the effect which the discovery of such aprocedure ought to have on the public councils, it will notfail to render more dear to the hearts of all good citizens,"that happy union of these states, which, under divine Providence,is the guaranty of their liberties, their safety, theirtranquillity, and their prosperity."This message was accompanied by a large number ofdocuments, from which a few extracts only will be copied.The following is the first in the seriesPhiladelphia, Feb. 20, 1812.Sir — Much observation and experience have convincedme, that the injuries and insults with which the UnitedStates have been so long and so frequently visited, andwhich cause their present embarrassment, have been owingto an opinion entertained by foreign states — ' That in anymeasure lending to wound their pride, or provoke their hostis |jlcity, the government of this country could never induce agreat majority of its citizens to concur'' And, as many ofthe evils which flow from the influence of this opinion onthe policy of foreign nations, may be removed by any actthat can produce unanimity among all parties in America, Ivoluntarily tender to you, sir, such means as I possesstowards promoting so desirable and important an object;which, if accomplished, cannot fail to extinguish, perhapsforever, those expectations abroad, which may protractindefinitely, an accommodation of existing differences, andcheck the progress of industry and prosperity in this risingempire.I have the honour to transmit herewith the documentsand correspondence relating to an important mission, inwhich I was employed by Sir James Craig, the late of the British provinces in North America,in the winter of the year 1809.The publication of these papers will demonstrate aHARTFORD CONVENTION. 197fact not less valuable than the good already proposed ; itwill prove that no reliance ought to be placed on the professionsof good faith of an administration, which, by aseries of disastrous events, h^s fallen into such hands as aCastlereagh, a Wellesley, or a Liverpool — I should rathersay, into the hands of the stupid subalterns, to whom thepleasures and the indolence of those ministers have consignedit. In contributing to the good of the United Statesby an exposition, which cannot (I think) fail to solve and meltall division and disunion among its citizens ; I flatter myselfwith the fond expectation, that when it is made public in England,it will add one great motive to the many that alreadyexist, to induce that nation to withdraw its confidence frommen, whose political career is a fruitful source of injury andembarrassment in America ; of injustice and misery in Ireland; of distress and apprehension in England ; and contemptevery where.In making this communication to you, sir, I deem itincumbent on me, distinctly and unequivocally to state,that I adopt no party views ; that I have not changed anyof my political opinions ; that I neither seek nor desire thepatronage nor countenance of any government, nor of anyparty; and that in addition to the motives already expressed,/ am influenced hy a just resentment of the perfidyand dishonour of those who first violated the conditions uponwhich I received their confidence; who have injured me, anddisappointed the expectations of my friends ; and left menochoice, but between a degrading acquiescence in injustice,and a retaliation which is necessary to secure to memy own respect.This wound will be felt where it is merited ; and if SirJames Craig still live, his share of the pain will excite nosympathy among those who are at all in the secret of ourconnection.I have the honour to be, <kc. <fec.J. Henry.To James Monroe, Esq. Secretary of State."198 HISTORY OF THE"MR. Roland, SECRETARY TO SIR JAMES CRAIG, GovernourGENERAL OF CANADA, TO MR. Henry*'Most secret and confidential.Quebec, January 26, 1809.My Dear Sir — The extraordinary situation of thingsat this time in the neighbouring states, has suggested to thegovernor in chief, the idea of employing you on a secretand confidential mission to Boston, provided an arrangementcan be made to meet the important end in view,without throwing an absolute obstacle in the way of yourprofessional pursuits. The information and political observationsheretofore received from you, were transmittedby his excellency to the secretary of state, who has expressedhis particular approbation of them ; and there isno doubt that your able execution of such a mission as Ihave above suggested, would give you a claim not only onthegovernour-general,butonhis majesty's ministers, whichmight eventually contribute to your advantage. You willhave the goodness therefore to acquaint me, for his excellency'sinformation, whether you could make it convenientto engage in a mission of this nature, and what pecuniaryassistance would be requisite to enable you to undertake itwithout injury to yourself.At present it is only necessary for me to add, that thegovernour would furnish you with a cypher for carrying onyour correspondence ; and that in case the leading party inany of the states wished to open a communication with thisgovernment, their views might be communicated throughyou.I am, with great truth and regard, &c.Herman W. Roland,"HARTFORD CONVENTION. i9&"SIR JAMES CRAIG to MR. HENRY.*' most secret and confidential.Quebec, February 6, 1809.Sir — As you have so readily undertaken the service,which I have suggested to you, as being Hkely to be attendedwith much benefit to the public interests, I am torequest that with your earliest conveniency you will proceedto Boston.The principal object that I recommend to your attention,is the endeavour to obtain the most accurate informationof the true state of affairs in that part of the Union,which from its wealth, the number of its inhabitants, andthe known intelligence and ability of several of its leadingmen, must naturally possess a very considerable influenceover, and will indeed probably lead the other eastern statesof America, in the part that they may take at this importantcrisis.I shall not pretend to point out to you the mode bywhich you will be most likely to obtain this important information; your own judgment, and the connection whichyou may have in the town, must be your guide. I think ithowever necessary to put you on your guard against thesanguineness of an aspiring party ; the federalists, as Iunderstand, have at all times discovered a leaning to thisdisposition, and their being under its particular influence atthis moment, is the more to be expected from their havingno ill founded ground for their hopes of being nearer theattain-ment of their object than they have been for someyears past.In the general terms which I have made use of in describingthe object which I recommend to your attention,it is scarcely necessary that I should observe, I include thestate of the public opinions, both with regard to their internalpoliticks, and to the probability of a war with England;200 HISTORY OF THEthe comparative strength of the two great parties intowhich the country is divided, and the views and designs ofthat which may ultimately prevail.*' It has been supposed that if the federalists of the easternstates should be successful in obtaining that decidedinfluence which may enable them to direct the publickopinion, it is not improbable that rather than submit to acontinuance of the difficulties and distress to which they arenow subject, they will exert that influence to bring about aseparation of the general union. The earliest informationon this subject may be of great consequence to our government,as it may also be, that it should be informed, how farin such an event they ivoiild look up to England for assistance,or be disposed to enter into a connection with us."Although it would be highly inexpedient that you shouldin any manner appear as an avowed agent, yet if you couldcontrive to obtain an intimacy with any of the leadingparty, it may not be improper that you should insinuate,though with great caution, that if they should wish to enterinto any communication with our government through me, youare authorized to receive any such, and will safely transmitit to me; and as it may not be impossible that they shouldrequire some document by which they may be assured thatyou are really in the situation in which you represent yourself; I enclose a credential to be produced in that view;but I most particularly enjoin and direct that you do notmake any use of this paper, unless a desire to that purposeshould be expressed, and unless you see good groundfor expecting that the doing so may lead to a more confidentialcommunication than you can otherwise look for."In passing through the state of Vermont, you will ofcourse exert your endeavours to procure all the informationthat the short stay you will probably make there willadmit of. You will use your own discretion as to delayingyour journey, with this view, more or less, in proportion toyour prospects of obtaining any information of consequence.HARTFORD CONVENTION. 201I request to hear from you as frequently as possible ;and as letters directed to me might excite suspicion, itmay be as well, that you put them under cover to Mr.and as even the addressing letters always tothe same person might attract notice, I recommend yoursometimes addressing your packet to the chief justice here,or occasionally, though seldom, to Mr. Ryland, but neverwith the addition of his official description. I am, &.c.James H. Craig."Copy of the • Credentials' given by Sir James Craig toMr. Henry.[Seal.]"The bearer, Mr. John Henry, is employed by me, andfull confidence may be placed in him for any communicationwhich any person may wish to make to me in the businesscommitted to him. In faith of which, I have givenhim this under my hand and seal at Quebec, this 6th dayof February, 1809.» J. Craig."Mr. Henry, according to the account contained in hiscorrespondence, after having received his instructions,proceeded to Burlington, in Vermont, where he passed afew days, apparently listening to such conversations, andchit-chat, as occurred in his hearing. In a letter fromthat place, he says he found the embargo laws were consideredas unnecessary, oppressive, and unconstitutional ;and that, in his opinion, if Massachusetts should take anybold step towards resisting their execution, Vermont wouldjoin her ; and he adds —I learn that the governor of this state is now visitingthe towns in the northern section of it ; and makes no secretof his determination, as commander in chief of themilitia, to refuse obedience to any command from the generalgovernment, which can tend to interrupt the good202 HISTORY OF THEunderstanding that prevails between the citizens 6f Vermontand his majesty's subjects in Canada."On the 19th of February he dated a letter from Windsor,Vermont, where he says the federal party declared,that in the event of a war, the state of Vermont wouldtreat separately with Great Britain ; and that the democratswould risk every thing in preference to a coalitionwith that nation.On the 5th of March, he writes from Boston, and says,'* It does not yet appear necessary that I should discoverto any person the purpose of my visit to Boston ; nor is itprobable that I should be compelled, for the sake of gainingmore knowledge of the arrangements of the federalparty in these states, to avow myself as a regular authorizedagent of the British government, even to those individualswho would feel equally bound with myself to preservewith the utmost inscrutability so important a secretfrom the public eye. I have sufficient means of informationto enable me to judge of the proper period for offeringthe co-operation of Great Britain, and opening a correspondencebetween the governor-general of BritishAmerica and those individuals who, from the part theytake in the opposition to the national government, or theinfluence they may possess in any new order of things thatmay grow out of the present differences, should be qualifiedto act on behalf of the northern states. An apprehensionof any such state of things as is presupposed bythese remarks begins to subside, since it has appeared bythe conduct of the general government that it is seriouslyalarmed at the menacing attitude of the northern states."On the 7th of March, he wrote again from Boston.The following is an extract from his letter. "I havealready given a decided opinion that a declaration of waris not to be expected : but, contrary to all reasonable calculation,should the Congress possess spirit and independenceenough to place their popularity in jeopardy by soHARTFORD CONVENTION. 203Strong a measure, the legislature of massachusetts willgive the tone to the neighboring states ; will declare itselfpermanent, until a new election of members ; invite a Congressto be composed of delegates from the federal states,and erect a separate government for their common defenceand common interest. This congress would probably beginby abrogating the offensive laws and adopting a planfor the maintenance of the power and authority thus assumed.They would by such an act be in a condition tomake or receive proposals from Great Britain; and Ishould seize the first moment to open a correspondencewith your excellency. Scarce any other aid would be necessary,and perhaps none required, than a few vessels ofwar, from the Halifax station, to protect the maritimetowns from the little navy which is at the disposal of thenational government. What permanent connection betweenGreat Britain and this section of the Republic wouldgrow out of a civil commotion, such as might be expected,no person is prepared to describe ; but it seems that a strictalliance must result of necessity. At present, the oppositionparty confine their calculations merely to resistance ;and I can assure you that at this moment, they do notfreely entertain the project of withdrawing the easternstates from the Union, finding it a very unpopular topick;although a course of events, such as I have already mentioned,would inevitably produce an incurable alienationof the New-england from the southern states.The truth is, the common people have so long regardedthe constitution of the United States with complacency,that they are now only disposed in this quarter to treat itlike a truant mistress, whom they would for a time putaway on a separate maintenance, but without further andgreater provocation would not absolutely repudiate."The series of letters is continued until the 25th of May,when the 14th in number was written at Boston. By thattime Mr. Henry appears to have been fully convinced that/204 HISTORY OF THEhis mission was not likely to terminate successfully. Hesays — if I beg leave to suggest, that in the present state ofthings in this country, my presence can contribute verylittle to the interests of Great Britain." And it seemsthat his employers were under a similar impression; foron the 4th of May, Mr. Secretary Ryland wrote to him inaformal manner that his speedy return was hoped for, asthe object of his journey seemed to be at an end. And onthe 12th of June, he addressed his letter. No. 15, to thegovernor-general from Montreal, informing him of hisarrival at that city.These papers were referred, in the House of Representatives,to the committee on foreign relations; whomade the following report —"The committee of foreign relations, to whom was referredthe President's message of the 9th instant, coveringcopies of certain documents communicated to him by aMr. John Henry ; beg leave to report, in part —"That although they did not deem it necessary or properto go into an investigation of the authenticity of documentscommunicated to Congress on the responsibility ofa co-ordinate branch of the government, it may, nevertheless,be satisfactory to the house to be informed, that theoriginal papers, with the evidences relating to them, inpossession of the Executive, were submitted to their examination,and were such as fully to satisfy the committeeof their genuineness."The circumstances under which the disclosures ofHenry were made to the government, involving considerationsof political expediency, have prevented the committeefrom making those disclosures the basis of any proceedingagainst him. And from the careful concealment,on his part, of every circumstance which could lead to the discoveryand punishment of any individuals in the UnitedStates (should there be any such) who were criminally connectedwith him, no distinct object was presented to the com-HARTFORD CONVENTION'. 205mitted by his communication, for the exercise of thepower with which they were invested of sending for personsand papers."On being informed, however, that there was a foreignerin the city of Washington, who lately came to thiscountry from Europe, with Henry, and was supposed to bein his confidence, the committee thought proper to sendfor him. His examination, taken under oath, and reducedto writing, they herewith submit to the house."The transaction disclosed by the President's message,presents to the minds of the committee conclusive evidencethat the British government, at a period of peace, and duringthe mod friendly professions, have been deliberately and perfidiouslypursuing measures to divide these States, and to involveour citizens in all the guilt of treason, and the horrorsof a civil war. It is not, however, the intention of thecommittee to dwell upon a proceeding, which, at all times,and among all nations, has been considered as one of themost aggravated character ; and which, from the natureof our government, depending on a virtuous union of sentiment,ought to be regarded by us with the deepest abhorrence."This report was accompanied by the testimony of theforeigner alluded to in it, and who signs the deposition asCount Edward de Crimson, taken and reduced to writingbv the committee.Upon the publication of the message and the papersconnected with it, the following document was communicatedto the President in the following message —•' I lay before Congress a letter from the envoy extraordinaryand minister plenipotentiary of Groat Britain, tothe Secretary of State."James Madison."Mr. Foster to Mr. Monroe. Washington, March 11th, 1812.The undersigned, his Britannia majesty's envoy extrasHISTORY OF THEordinary, and minister plenipotentiary to the United States,has read in the public papers of this city, with the deepestconcern, the message sent by the President of the UnitedStates to Congress on the 9th instant, and the documentswhich accompanied it."In the utter ignorance of the undersigned as to all thecircumstances alluded to in those documents, he can onlydisclaim most solemnly, on his own part, the having hadany knowledge whatever of the existence of such a mission,or of such transactions as the communication of Mr. Henryrefers to, and express Wis conviction, that from what heknows of those branches of his majesty's government withwhich he is in the habit of having intercourse, no countenancewhatever was given by them to any schemes hostileto the internal tranquility of the United States."The undersigned, however, cannot but trust that theAmerican government and the Congress of the UnitedStates will take into consideration the character of the individualwho has made the communication in question, andwill suspend any further judgment on its merits until thecircumstances shall have been made known to his majesty'sgovernment.(Signed) Aug. J. Foster."John Henry was born a subject of Great Britain. For awhile, he had resided in this country, and held a commissionin the army of the United States. Having left the service,by his own account he resided for some time in Vermont,and afterwards returned to his natural allegiance, and becamea resident of Canada. There, in the beginning ofthe year 1809, if his own account is to be credited, he wasemployed by Sir James H. Craig, governor of Canada, torepair to Boston, for the purpose of ascertaining whetherthe federal politicians of the New England states, particularlythose of Massachusetts, were desirous of withdrawingfrom the Union, and forming a close connection withHARTFORD Convention. 207Great Britain. Accordingly in the month of February ofthat year, he commenced his journey, and after spendingtime in Vermont, and passing through Nev Hampshire,he reached Boston early in the month of search.Having taken his station in the New England capital, heopened his correspondence with his employers in Canada.His first letter is dated March 5th, 1809. In that he remarked,that it had not thus far appeared necessary forhim to discover to any person the object of his visit ; norwas it probable that he should find it necessary, for thepurpose of gaining a knowledge of the arrangements ofthe federal party, to avow himself as a regular authorisedagent of the British government, even to those who wouldkeep the secret — that he had sufficient means of informationto enable him-to judge of the proper time for offeringthe co-operation of Great Britain, and opening a correspondencebetween the governor-general of British America,and disaffected individuals in Massachusetts. Accordingly,he remained unknown at Boston till the 25th ofMay following, when he wrote to his principals at Quebec,that it would be unnecessary for him in the existing state ofthings, and unavailing also, to attempt to carry into effect theoriginal purposes of his mission. He was soon recalled fromthat mission, and returned to Canada; and in 1811 wasin England, petitioning the British government for compensationfor his services abovementioned. For somecause or other, the ministry declined paying him ; but referredhim to the governor of Canada, on the ground thatthey had not discovered any wish on the part of Sir JamesCraig that Henry's claims for compensation should he referredto the mother country, and because no allusion wasmade to any Iciml of arrangement or agreement that hadbeen made by that officer with him.It is certainly a very extraordinary circumstance, that inthe absence of all proof that the British government ever208 HISTORY OF THEhad the least knowledge of Henry's mission until longafter it was finished, that the President should have madeuse of the following language, when speaking of the documentswhich accompanied his message to Congress —They prove that, at a recent period, whilst the UnitedStates, notwithstanding the wrongs sustained by them,ceased not to observe the laws of peace and neutralitytowards Great Britain, and in the midst of amicable professionsand negotiations on the part of the British government,through its public minister here, a secret agent of thatgovernment was employed in certain states, more especiallyat the seat of government ii Massachusetts, in fomentingdisaffection to the constituted authorities of the nation, and inintrigues itith the disaffected, for the purpose of bringingabout resistance to the laws, and, eventually, in concert with aBritish force, of destroying the Union and forming the easternpart thereof into a political connection with Great Britain''The committee on foreign relations, to whom the messageand documents were referred, in their report, makethe following remarks — " 'I've transaction disclosed by thePresident's message, presents to the minds of the committee,conclusive evidence, that the British government, at aperiod of peace, and during the most friendly professions,have been deliberately and perfidiously pursuing measures todivide these States, and to involve our citizens in all the guiltof treason, and the horrors of a civil car"At the time of this occurrence, it is very apparent froma review of the general state of things, and from the characterand course of their measures, that the governmentof this country had resolved on a war with Great Britain.Having formed that determination, it was natural for themto pursue such a course as would be likely to excite thepublic resentment towards thai nation. This affair ofHenry, in any other light in which it might be considered,was calculated to disgrace the American government.HARTFORD CONVENTION. 209Hence it was doubtless viewed as indispensable to the accomplishmentof the main object, that Henry's plot shouldbe charged over to the British government, as an attempton their part to produce discord and division among theStates. And both President Madison, and the committeeon foreign relations, make the bold, unqualified, and certainlyunfounded assertion, that the documents connectedwith the transaction prove such a flagitious attempt on thepart of the British government to destroy the Union, involvethe citizens in the guilt of treason, and the horrorsof a civil war, and to form a political connection in theeastern states with Great Britain. But so far from thisbeing true, there is no satisfactory evidence that the Britishgovernment ever knew of the employment of Henry by thegovernor-general of Canada, that he ever visited Bostonfor such a purpose, or that they even knew there was sucha man in existence. And when called upon by Henry forcompensation for his services, the minister at London referredhim back to the colonial government, by which hehad l>een employed, with the remark, that it did not appearthat Sir James Craig had ever expressed a wish thatHenry should apply for his pay to the government of themother country, or that any arrangement for that purposehad been even alluded to. From whence then doesthe inference arise, that this was a measure for whichthe British government was chargeable ? Merely fromthe remark in Ryland's letter, which has been alludedto.Is there not, however, strong ground for the belief, thatone important object of this absurd, ridiculous, and disgracefultransaction, was to fix a degree of odium uponthe New England states, and especially upon a certainclass of New England politicians ? It was well knownthat a large majority of the people of those states wereopposed to the approaching declaration of war. It wasnot believed by those who were the best informed on the210 HISTORY OF THEsubject, that the real object of hostilities was avowed bythose who were the most earnestly bent on bringing thewar upon the nation. They were perfectly aware of thekind of influence which was exercising to bring it to pass,and as they could not justify such a measure, under suchcircumstances, to their consciences, they were steadily andfirmly opposed to it. To excite the feelings of the countryagainst them, no more efficacious mode could be devised,than to accuse them of being false to their country — to representthem as intriguing with the power which was in soshort a time intended to be the open and declared enemyof the United States, to destroy the Union, and to re-unitea part of its territory and inhabitants to the British nation.The miserable farce got up by Henry furnished the mostplausible opportunity to accomplish the object ; and it waslaid hold offer that purpose with the utmost avidity. Toshow how utterly unfounded this whole plot against NewEngland was, it will be remarked, that during the wholeperiod of Henry's residence in Boston, it does not appearthat he ever conversed with a single individual respectingthe object of his mission, that any overtures of the kindalluded to were ever made to him ; nor does he mentionthe name of even a solitary person, who ever uttered, evenby accident, a sentence of disaffection to the Union of theStates, or of a wish to form a connection with Great Britain.And the committee on foreign relations, in theirreport on this subject, say — '' The circumstances underwhich the disclosures of Henry were made to the government,involving considerations of political expediency, haveprevented the committee from making those disclosuresthe basis of any proceeding against him. And from thecareful concealment, on his part, of every circumstancewhich could lead to the discovery and punishment of anyindividuals in the United States (should there be any such)who were criminally connected with him, no distinct objectwas presented to the committee by his communication forHARTFORD CONVENTION. 211the exercise of the power with which they were invested,of sending for persons and papers."In this state of things, without the slightest evidence, orany possible clue, which would warrant even the suspicionof guilt in a single inhabitant of Massachusetts, or of NewEngland at large, nothing remained but to leave them exposedto the conjectures of those who seemed to considerit a species of patriotism to upbraid and reproach the inhabitantsof those states as the enemies of their country.Henry, in this transaction, was accompanied by a foreignadventurer, who called his name Crimson ; and who,to give dignity to the enterprise, added the title of count tohis escutcheon. He went through a long examination,under oath, before the committee of foreign relations ; butfor what particular purpose his testimony was published,unless it was to swell the amount of the documents, it isnot easy to say. The President of the United States rewardedthe profligate Henry with the sum of fifty thousandDOLLARS, for this contemptible disclosure of his ownbaseness, and for the purpose of enabling himself to producean effect upon popular feeling and opinion in favourof his favourite measure of war.It is much to be regretted, that for the honour of thecountry, and the character of the government, this wholeproceeding was ever suffered to sec the light. It ought tohave occurred in secret session, and been buried in deepoblivion. Unfortunately it was found expedient to publishthe documents to the world ; and they must of course foreverremain as evidence of the unworthy spirit by whichthe government. was actuated on that memorable occasion.It must be acknowledged, however, that it was well designedto increase the animosity of the country against theBritish government, and to have some influence in recentceiling: the country to the idea of u war with that nation.But after such an insidious attempt to vilify and traducethe inhabitants of New England, it can scarcely lea HISTORY OF THEter of surprise, that when these same New England menwere called upon to advance money, for the purpose of enablingthe government to prosecute the war which they hadthus unnecessarily and rashly undertaken, they shouldwithhold their aid. If any thing further was necessary toinduce them to pursue such a course, beyond a conscientiousconviction that the war was unjustifiable, the treat-|jment they had received from the government in this foulattempt, founded on the testimony of an unprincipled anddaring foreign swindler, to blast their reputations, and renderthem odious to their country and the world, this transactionwas su^cient to confirm them in that course.Such was the origin of the war of 1812. In order thatits character may be fully understood, and duly appreciated,a review of the policy and measures of the government,which finally terminated in that measure, has beenexhibited.The first conclusion to be drawn from that review is,that the real object in view in engaging in hostilities witGreat Britain, at the precise time when those hostilitiescommenced, was not specified in the manifesto publishedby the American government. The grounds for declaringwar, as stated in that document, were twofold — the edictof Great Britain which violated our neutral rights — and impressment.The orders in council, which were the subjectof such loud complaints on the part of the United States,!were dated in January and November, 1807. The wawas declared in June, 1812 — four years and a half aftethe date of the latest of those edicts. The order of Januarywas avowedly adopted by the British government, asmeasure of retaliation for the French decree of the precedingNovember, called the Berlin decree ; and the orderof November was issued professedly in retaliation for theFrench decree of Milan. In May, 1806, the British orderfor blockading the coast from the river Elbe to Brest wasadopted. The French government declared that theHARTFORD CONVENTION. 213Berlin decree was issued as a measure of retaliation forthe abovementioned blockading order. The order ofMay, 1806, was issued during the administration of Mr.Fox, the whig minister, and the great friend of this country.He declared to Mr. Monroe, at that time our ministerat the court of London, that the order was intended tooperate beneficially, and not injuriously to neutrals. Andthis view of the measure was communicated to our governmentby Mr. Monroe ; and no complaint of its injusticewas made at Washington for some years afterwards.The non-intercourse law contained a provision which authorisedthe President, in case either France or Great Britainshould so revoke or modify her edicts, as that they shouldcease to violate the neutral commerce of the United States, todeclare the same by proclamation ; after which the tradesuspended by said act, and by an act laying an embargo onall ships and vessels in the ports and harbours of the UnitedStates, and the several acts supplementary thereto,might be renewed with the nation so doing. Here is theground, and the only ground on which the President wasempowered by that act to adjust the existing difficultieswith those nations, and renew friendly and commercial intercoursewith them.When the arrangement was made with Mr. Erskine, inApril, 1809, it was stipulated by him, on the part of theBritish government, that in consequence of the acceptanceby the President of the proposals made by him onthe part of the King, for the renewal of the intercoursebetween the respective countries, he was authorised to declarethat the orders in council of January and November,1807, would be withdrawn, as respected the United States,on the 10th day of June then next — that is 1809. In consequenceof this assurance by the British minister, thePresident, on the 19th of April, 1807 — the day after thearrangement was completed — issued his proclamation, declaringthat those orders in council would, on the 10th of214 HISTORY OF THE .June following, have been withdrawn, and that the tradeof the United States, which had been suspended by thenon-intercourse act, might after that day be renewed.In the correspondence relative to this arrangement, notaword was said en the part of the United Slates aboutthe blockading order of May, 380G, nor was the slightestallusion made to the subject of impressment. The negotiationthroughout was confined entirely to the abovementionedorders in council, they were considered as the onlygrounds on which the intercourse had been suspended ;and upon their removal, the way was clear for its re-establishment.Such was the construction put upon the lawby the President, when he approved the principles of thearrangement, and issued his proclamation in pursuance ofthe provisions of the non-intercourse act.On the 23d of May, 1809, immediately after this arrangementhad been concluded, Congress were, in consequenceof it, convened, and the result of the negotiationwas communicated to both houses by the President, in amessage bearing that date. The following is an extractfrom that document.On this first occasion of meeting you, it affords memuch satisfaction to be able to communicate the commencementof a favourable change in our foreign relations ;the critical state of which induced a session of Congress atthis early period."In consequence of the provisions of the act interdictingcommercial intercourse with Great Britain and France,our ministers at London and Paris were, without delay,instructed to let it be understood by the French and Britishgovernments, that the authority vested in the Executive,to renew commercial intercourse with their respectivenations, would be exercised in the case specified by that act.*' Soon after these instructions were despatched, it wasfound that the British government, anticipating, fromearly proceedings of Congress, at their last session, theHARTFORD CONVENTION. 215State of our laws, which has had the effect of placing thetwo belligerent powers on a footing of equal restrictions,and relying on the conciliatory disposition of the UnitedStates, had transmitted to their legation here, provisionalinstructions, not only to offer satisfaction for the attack on thefrigate Chesapeake, and to make known the determinationof his Britannick majesty to send an envoy extraordinarywith powers to conclude a treaty on all the points betweenthe two countries, but, moreover, to signify his willingness,in the meantime, to withdraw his orders in council, in thepersuasion that the intercourse with Great Britain wouldbe renewed on the jjart of the United States."These steps of the British government led to the correspondenceand the proclamation now laid before you ;by virtue of which, the commerce between the two countrieswill be venerable after the tenth day of June next."The revision of our commercial laws, proper to adaptthem, to the arrangement which has taken place with GreatBritain, will doubtless engage the early attention of Congress."In pursuance of the above suggestion, Congress immediatelypassed the following act —Be it enacted, &,c. That from and after the passingthis act, all ships or vessels owned by citizens or subjectsof any foreign nation with which commercial intercourseis permitted by the act entitled 'An act to interdict thecommercial intercourse between the United States andGreat Britain and France, and their dependencies, andfor other purposes,' be permitted to take on board cargoesof domestic or foreign produce, and to depart withthe same for any port or place with which such intercourseis, or shall, at the time of their departure, respectively, bethus permitted, in the same manner, and on the same conditions,as is provided by the act aforesaid, for vesselsowned by citizens of the United States; any thing in saidact, or in the act laying an embargo on all ships and vestHISTORY OF THEsels in the ports and harbours of the United States, or inany of the several acts supplementary thereto, to the contrarynotwithstanding." This act was approved May 30th,1809.An act was also passed at the same session, continuingin force certain sections of the non-intercourse law untilthe end of the then next session of Congress, with a proviso,that nothing therein contained should be construed toprohibit any trade or commercial intercourse which hadbeen, or might be permitted in conformity with the provisionsof the eleventh section of the non-intercourse act.The eleventh section was that which authorised the Presidentto suspend the operation of the edicts of the belligerentnations, upon their revoking or modifying their edictsso that they should cease to violate our neutral rights.Here then is a solemn declaration, in the first place, bythe President, and in the second, by Congress, that theBritish blockading order of May, 1806, was not an edictthat violated our neutral rights in April and May, 1809,and the inference is equally strong, that at the same timeimpressment was not then considered a justifiable cause ofivar,because it was not alluded to either in the arrangementwith Mr. Erskine, in the President's proclamation suspendingthe non-intercourse law, or in that law, or in the proceedingsof Congress, when engaged in adapting the commerciallaws of the United States to that arrangement.Having seen that the British blockading order of May,1806, was not considered by our government, in the arrangementwith Mr. Erskine, as one of the edicts of thatnation which violated our neutral rights, but was afterwardsintroduced into the manifesto of the government,which laid the foundation of the President's proclamationof war, it becomes an object of importance to inquirewhen that decree began to be considered as a justifiableground of hostilities. It will be recollected, that in December,1809, General Armstrong was instructed by theHARTFORD CONVENTION. 2l7President, to inquire of the duke of Cadore, on what conditionshis majesty the emperor of France would consentto annul the Berlin decree; and whether, if Great Britainrevoked her blockades, of a date anterior to that decree,his majesty would consent to revoke the said decree. Inaletter from Mr. Smith, Secretary of State, to Mr. Pinkie,then our minister to the British court, dated July 5th,1810, it is said — "In explaining the extent of the repeal,which, on the British side, is required, you will be foundedby the same principle. You will accordingly let it be distinctlyunderstood, that it must necessarily include an annulmentof the blockade of May, 1806, which has beenavowed to be comprehended in, and identified with the ordersin council ; and which is palpably at variance withthe law of nations. This is the explanation which will begiven to the French government on this point by our ministerat Paris, in case it should there be required."The letter then proceeds to state reasons why "the Britishgovernment ought to revoke every other blockade restingon proclamations or diplomatic notifications, and not onthe application of a naval force adequate to a real blockade."The second of these reasons was the following — "Withoutthis enlightened precaution, it is probable, and may indeedbe inferred from the letter of the duke of Cadore toGeneral Armstrong, that the French government will drawGreat Britain and the United States to issue on the legalityof such blockades, hy acceding to the act of Congress, with aCONDITION, that a repeal of the blockades shall accompany arepeal of the orders in council, alleging that the orders andblockades differing little, if at all, otherwise than in name,a repeal of the former, leaving in operation the latter, wouldbe a mere illusion." To ascertain the point of time, then,when the blockading order of 3Iay, 1806, began to assumethe importance which it afterwards acquired, resort mustbe had to the negotiation between General Armstrong, inJanuary, 1810, on the subject of revoking the Berlin and218 HISTORY OF THEMilan decrees, in which the French government were, interms Utile short of explicit, invited to include the order ofMay, 1806, in their demand for the repeal of the Britishorders in council. And to satisfy every unprejudiced mind,that there was a full and thorough understanding betweenour government and that of France on this subject, thepassage from the letter of Secretary Smith to Mr. Pink-ney,of the 5th of July, 1810, distinctly proves. " TheFrench government," says the letter, " will draw GreatBritain and the United States to issue on the legality of suchblockades, by acceding to the act of Congress, with a condition,that a repeal of the blockading orders shall accompanya repeal of the orders in council." Here, it is foretold,not only that the French government will draw GreatBritain and the United States to issue on the legality of theblockades, but the very terms on which that issue would bemade are predicted — they will accede to the act of Congress,with a condition, that the repeal of the blockadingorders shall accompany the repeal of the orders in council.This was precisely the course pursued by the French government— they did attach a condition to their nominalrevocation of the Berlin and 3Iilan decrees, that the blockadingorders, meaning emphatically that of May, 1806,should be withdrawn also.From that time forward, this order made a prominentfigure in the various correspondence and negotiations betweenthe United States and the British governments.The British government refused to consider the Frenchconditional revocation of their orders, as bringing themselveswithin the terms of a declaration that the Britishgovernment had made, that they would proceed pari passuwith the French government in removing their edictswhich interfered with the rights of neutrals ; and insistedthat the blockading order of May, 1806, did not violatethose rights. The demand for the repeal of that orrHARTFORD CONVENTION. 219was, however, persisted in by the United States, until it wasterminated by the earthenthe committee of foreign relations were engagedin drawing the manifesto, proceeding as the governmentdid upon false principles, they felt themselves under thenecessity of making as large a display of British aggressionsas they could, introducing into the catalogue of grievances,a variety of subjects which had nothing to do withthe causes of war. Those causes were then reduced totwo — the orders in council, and impressment. In discussingthe former, it was impossible for the committee topass by the blockading order of May, 1806, as that hadbeen one of the prime causes of the crisis which the affairsof the country had reached. To assert in the face of thefacts which were publicly known to exist, and to whichallusion has already been made, viz. that the order wasdeclared by Mr. Fox, the British minister, to be intendedto benefit neutrals, an opinion assented to by Mr. Monroe,that it was not considered as violating our neutral rightsin the negotiation with Mr. Erskine — and had not beencomplained of as such by our government, until the rejectionof that arrangement by the British government. Itcertainly required some dexterity to work this ground ofcomplaint into the form of such a charge against the Britishas to make it appear to the country, and the civilizedworld, as a justifiable cause of war. The passage fromthe manifesto of the committee has been already cited. Butit is expedient to advert to it and to the subject again.The committee say, " In May, 1806, the whole coastof the continent, from the Elbe to Brest, inclusive, was declaredto be in a state of blockade." This they consideredas a violation of the law of nations, as no blockade is recognizedby that law, unless it is supported by an adequateforce. Such a force, they contend, was not applied. Butto make such a blockade a good cause of war on the partof the United States, it must, in its operations, have violHISTORY OF THElated specifically the neutral rights of our country. Thegovernment of the United States could never be justifiedin going to war for the purpose of vindicating mere abstractprinciples ; nor would the country ever have supportedsuch a war. The non-intercourse law was foundedentirely upon the principle that the edicts of Great Britainand France violated our neutral rights. Pressed with thisview of the subject, and conscious that the evidence of thefacts to which allusion has been made were in the possessionof the public, the committee were constrained to saythey thought it just " to remark that this act of the Britishgovernment does not appear to have been adopted in the sensein which it has since been construed. On consideration of allthe circumstances attending the measure, and particularlythe character of the distinguished statesman who announcedit, we are persuaded that it was conceived in a spiritof conciliation, and intended to lead to an accommodationof all differences between the United States and Great Britain.His death disappointed that hope, and the act hassince become subservient to other purposes. It has beenmade by his successors a pretext for that vast system ofusurpation, which has so long oppressed and harassed ourcommerce."It is very much doubted, whether the history of modernwars can produce, in all the variety of manifestoes whichthey have given rise to, such an extraordinary cause ofwar as that abovementioned. Here it is acknowledged bythe committee of foreign relations, that the blockadingorder of May, 1806, was conceived in a spirit of conciliation,and intended to lead to an accommodation of all differencesbetween the United States and Great Britain ;but by the construction put upon it by those who succeededMr. Fox in the British ministry, it has been made the pretextfor the system of usurpation which has so long oppressedand harassed American commerce. For nearlyfour years after the adoption of this measure, it was not,HARTFORD CONVENTION. 221as far as appears, made the subject of any complaint bythe government of the United States. The manner andthe occasion of its being made a ground of remonstrance,has been stated. It was after the rejection of the Erskinearrangement, and upon the commencement of negotiationswith the French government, respecting the revocation ofthe Bern and Milan decrees. In no instance that is recollected,was it complained of as having been the causeof positive mischief to American commerce ; but the reasoningwas directed altogether to the nature of the blockade,and intended to show that it was not legitimate, becausenot supported by an adequate force. On this pointthe governments were at issue, and both appear to havedepended very much upon assertion — one affirming, andthe other denying the application of such a force. Noevidence has been discovered, in the examination of allthe correspondence upon the subject, that the successors ofMr. Fox ever put a different construction upon the measurefrom that which he confessedly intended it shouldbear. The declaration, therefore, of the committee offoreign relations, appears to have been gratuitous, andwithout any foundation in fact. That so important andresponsible an act as that of a declaration of war by onecivilized and Christian power against another, should beplaced upon such a false and unfounded basis as this, canonly excite surprise in the mind of every lover of truthand justice.It will be recollected, that the orders in council, whichformed one of the avowed causes of the war, were actuallyrepealed by the British government within five days afterthe declaration of war. A very little delay on the part ofthe American government would have removed thisground of controversy, and left nothing for this country tocontend for but freedom from impressment. The Frenchemperor Iliad authorized his minister to declare to theAmerican government, that the Berlin and Milan decrees222 HISTORY OF THEwere revoked on the 1st of November, 1810. Upon thisannunciation, application was made by our government tothat of Great Britain, to follow the example set by France,and repeal their orders in council. This was refused onthe part of Great Britain, on the ground that the revocationof the French decrees was not absolute, but was conditional.This question gave rise to repeated and laboureddiscussions between the two governments, the Americannegotiators maintaining with great zeal that the repealwas absolute, and those of Great Britain contending withequal pertinacity that it was conditional. It has beenshown by extracts fronlkhe official correspondence, thatafter Mr. Barlow had AVm^d at Paris, as envoy from theUnited States, viz. in May, '1812, he pressed the Frenchminister with great earnestness for an absolute revocationof the Berlin and Milan decrees. Such a revocation, itwas known, would remove the only obstacle to a repeal ofthe British orders in council. On the 1st of May, 1812,Mr. Barlow addressed a letter to the duke of Bassano, inwhich, after adverting to the fact that the British governmentrefused to repeal the orders in council, on the groundthat the French decrees were not revoked ; he says — " Itis much to be desired that the French government wouldnow make and publish an authentic act, declaring the Berlinand Milan decrees, as relative to the United States, tohave ceased in November, 1810." In a letter to Mr.Monroe, Secretary of State, dated May 12th, 1812, hesays — " I found from a pretty sharp conversation with theduke of Bassano, that there twas a singular reluctance toanswering my note of the 1st of May. Some traces of thatreluctance you will perceive in the answer which finallycame, of which a copy is here enclosed."It is stated, that in the course of the conversation alludedto, the duke produced a decree of the emperor, datedApril 28th, 1811, more than a year previously, declaringthe Berlin and Milan decrees definitively revoked, and toHARTFORD CONVENTION. 223date from the Jst of November, 1810. This, as might havebeen expected, surprised the American minister, though hemade no comment on the fact of its concealment. Uponbeing inquired of by Mr. Barlow, whether the decree hadever been published, he was informed by the duke thatit had not ; but was assured it had been communicated toMr. Parlour's predecessor at that court, and had been transmittedto the French minister in this country, with orders tohave it communicated to our government. Mr. Barlowinformed the duke, that it was not among the archives ofthe legation; and requested that he might be furnishedwith a copy ; which request was complied with.Upon receiving the information of this singular transaction,the French minister in this country was applied to,but he had no knowledge of such a decree, until he receivedthe information from home, of what had occurredbetween Mr. Barlow and the duke of Bassano. Underthese circumstances, a call for information was made inthe House of Representatives upon the President for information,who referred the subject to the Secretary ofState, and whose report has already been alluded to, asfar as it related to this subject. It fitly confirmed thestatement made by Mr. Barlow, that nothing was knownto the American government respecting the existence ofsuch a decree, before they received the information of whathad passed between the duke of Bassano and Mr. BarlowWhen the course which our government had pursued towardsboth the French and the British, is taken into consideration,it is easy to imagine that the receipt of thesecommunications must have proved the source of severemortification to them. The declaration of the Frenchminister, that the decree of April 28th, 1811, had actuallybeen passed at the time of its date, no uninterested personwill for a moment believe. That it had been communicatedto Mr. Barlow's predecessor at the court of France,cannot be true ; and the assertion that it had been transeptHISTORY OP THEmitted to the French minister, is not to be credited. Thereis no room to doubt, that it was a mere pretence, got upfor the occasion, and intended to answer a particular purpose,which will be alluded to hereafter.The Secretary of State, in his report on the subject,shows strong marks of chagrin, arising either from thefact that the matter had become public, or at the unfoundeddeclaration of the French minister, that the decree hadbeen passed and communicated at a period so long antecedentto its actual promulgation, in the manner as is aboverelated. But instead of manifesting the proper degree ofdignity and spirit, which such an attempt at imposition obviouslydemanded, the Secretary of State enters upon along and laboured series of reasoning, to prove that therepeal of their orders in council by the British government,was not the result of the final revocation of theFrench decrees, but of other causes, although "it wasmade the ground of their repeal" by that government.It is difficult to reason conclusively against facts. TheBritish government had uniformly declared that the Frenchdecree of revocation of August, 1810, to take effect on the1st of November, 1810, was conditional only, and thereforethey refused to repeal their orders in council. Thatit would be conditional, was declared a good while beforeit took place by our government, when they predicted thatFrance would draw the United States and Great Britainto issue on this subject, by revoking her decrees "with acondition, that a repeal of the blockades should accompanya repeal of the orders in council." That it was conditional,was proved by the terms of the decree. But the Americangovernment insisted that it was a condition subsequent,and therefore formed no apology for their refusal to proceedpari passu with the French in removing their edicts.But the language of the French decree of the date ofApril 28th, 1811, whenever it was passed, by necessaryimplication admits that the decree of August, 1810, wasHartford CONVENTION. 225•not such a revocation as the British demanded. It is therecalled a definitive revocation. A definite act of this kind,leaves room for a strong inference, that what had previouslyoccurred was conditional, or at least not absolute.The British government had resisted the demand of theAmerican government, for the repeal of the orders in council,from August, 1810, to May, 1812, on the specific groundthat the, French decree of revocation of the former datewas conditional. But upon receiving official intelligencethat France had definitively revoked her decrees, the Britishorders in council were repealed. To suppose that this actwas produced by the apprehension that the American governmentwere approaching a more serious and threateningcrisis towards them, appears like a mere attempt toescape from an awkward and uncomfortable dilemma, intowhich our administration had plunged themselves. Amore just and liberal spirit than that which adopted thisconstruction, would have ascribed the measure to somemore manly motive than that of fear. Great Britain hadbraved too many dangers inconceivably greater than thatof a war with the United States, to have been alarmed bythe threat of a war with them.Impressment was the second, and the only additionalcause of war, set forth in the report of the committee onforeign relations. The practice of impressing Americanseamen, by the British, had been a ground of just complaint,almost from the commencement of the Frenchrevolutionary wars. The strong resemblance in the characterand language of British and American seamen,rendered it somewhat difficult to discriminate betweennatives of the two countries. And it is not probablethat naval officers, in a time of war, and when hostilitieswere sharpened by the most active and powerfulpassions that ever influence the human mind or conduct,would be very scrupulous in deciding the question of origin,where the evidence must have been in its nature doubtful,226 HISTORY OF THEand in its application very difficult. Nor in such wars asthose which raged so long, and with such virulence, betweenGreat Britain and France, during that memorableperiod, is it strange that less regard should be had to thepersonal or political rights of neutrals, than the latterwould have an unquestionable right to demand. Boththese nations considered themselves as struggling for existence; and of course, both acted, in a variety of exigencies,on the principle of self-preservation. Under suchcircumstances, they considered the law of nations as anobject of secondary importance. A multitude of instancesmight be adduced in the conduct of both nations, in whicha total disregard of the law of nations, and the rights ofneutrals, was manifested. As soon as the evils of impressmentwere seriously felt by American seamen, complaintsand remonstrances from time to time were forwarded toboth governments, and efforts to open negotiations weremade, for the purpose of adjusting the difficulty by treaty ;but all without effect.It will be recollected, that the treaty agreed upon withGreat Britain, in 1806, by Messrs. Monroe and Pinkney,was rejected by Mr. Jefferson, without ever consulting theSenate, professedly on the ground that it contained ncrstipulation against impressment. In the letter whichaccompanied the treaty, those commissioners, when givingthe reasons why they concluded to form a treaty withoutsuch a provision, remark — "On the 9th instant, we receivedfrom the British commissioners the note which theyhad promised us in the last interview, which we havefound to correspond in all respects with what we had beentaught to expect." — " When we take into view all that haspassed on this subject, we are far from considering the noteof the British commissioners as a mere circumstance ofform. We persuade ourselves that by accepting the invitationwhich it gives, and proceeding in the negotiationwe shall place the business almost, if not altogether, on asHARTFORD CONVENTION. 227good a footing as we should have done by treaty, had theproject which we offered them been adopted."Mr. Monroe, in his letter of February, 1808, writtenafter his return to this country, says — " I have always believed,and still do believe, that the ground on which thatinterest was placed by the paper of the British commissionersof November 8, 1806, and the explanations whichaccompanied it, was both honourable and advantageous tothe United States ; that it contained a concession in theirfavour, on the part of Great Britain, on the great principlein contestation, never before made by a formal and obligatoryact of the government, which was highly favourableto their interest; and that it also imposed on her the obligationto conform her practice under it, till a more completearrangement should be concluded, to the just claimsof the United States."By this paper it is evident that the rights of the UnitedStates were expressly to be reserved ; and not abandoned,as has been most erroneously supposed ; that the negotiationon the subject of impressment was to be postponedfor a limited time, and for a special object only, and to berevived as soon as that object was accomplished ; and inthe interim, that the practice of impressment was to correspondessentially with the views and interests of theUnited States."By the rejection of this treaty, this difficult and irritatingsubject was left open to all the abuses to which itwas unfortunately liable. The consequence was, that complaintsof impressment continued, until the subject becamethe ground of open war with Great Britain. Indeed, withina few days after the declaration of war, it became, by therepeal of the orders in council, the only existing cause ofwar. That war, in the course of two years and a half,cost the United States from thirty to fifty thousand lives,and more than a hundred millions of dollars ; and whenpeace was determined upon, a treaty was made, and ratios* HISTORY OF THEfind, not only without any provision against impressmentbut without its containing the slightest allusion to thatsubject. The treaty of Messrs. Monroe and Pinkney wasaccompanied by the note, or paper, above referred to, inwhich the British commissioners made the declarationsalready cited, and agreed to postpone the subject of impressmentfor a limited time, after which it was to berevived. It is remarkable, that in the last letter of instructionsbut one to the American commissioners whonegotiated the treaty of peace in 1814, they were expresslyinstructed, if the British commissioners would not agree toa provision against it in the treaty, to stipulate that itshould be postponed to a future opportunity ; thus bringingour government back, after all its correspondence, and itsmultiplied attempts at negotiation, its complaints, remonstrances,and threats, and its immense expense of bloodand treasure, to the precise position in which they stoodwhen Mr. Jefferson rejected Messrs. Monroe and Pink-ney'streaty in 1808. But that position was far morehumiliating to the United States, than the ground theyheld at the period just mentioned. War had been wagedto obtain security against impressment, and they had beenreduced to the necessity, after a controversy of two yearsand a half duration for that sole object, to make a peacewithout obtaining the smallest degree of that security.This review of the policy and measures of the UnitedStates government, during the administrations of Mr. Jeffersonand Mr. Madison, has been undertaken for the purposeof establishing the principal proposition advanced inthe early part of this work, viz. That an ardent and overweeningattachment to revolutionary France, and an implacableenmity to Great Britain, were the governing principlesof those two distinguished individuals. That their conductat the head of the government was influenced andcontrolled by feelings of this description, will be admittedHARTFORD CONVENTION. 229by all who consider the evidence adduced as sufficient toprove the truth of the proposition.In the case of Mr. Jefferson, his own declarations containedin his posthumous works, have been cited in supportof the proposition. The evidence itself cannot becontradicted or impeached. Whether it proves the pointor not, the reader will determine for himself, upon carefullyexamining its weight and import. • But much additionalproof is to be found in the public state papers of hisadministration. His report to Congress, just before heresigned the office of Secretary of State, in 1793, laid thefoundation of the commercial resolutions, introduced tothe House of Representatives of the United States, by Mr.Madison, then a member of that body, and afterwards hissuccessor to the chief magistracy of the Union. Thoseresolutions were avowedly designed to detach the UnitedStates from their commercial relations with Great Britain,and transfer their foreign trade to France.An attempt has been made to show, by an appeal tohistorical evidence, that it was a part of Mr. Jefferson'spolicy, for the purpose of influencing public feeling, anddirecting public opinion, to retain at all times some matterof dispute or controversy with Great Britain on hand,which might keep the feelings of the government and peopleof both countries in a state of fretfulness and irritation.When the treaty of 1794 was negotiated by Mr. Jay, Mr.Jefferson, though out of office, was decidedly opposed toits ratification. And when he found it had received theapprobation of the Senate, and the final sanction of theExecutive, he wished its execution might be defeated inthe House of Representatives, though such a result wouldmost obviously have involved the exercise of an unconstitutionalpower-thattreaty expired soon after he came into the ad ministrationof the government ; but though the British governmentrepeatedly offered to renew it, he instructed his230 HISTORY OF TieSminister at that court to decline the offer ; thus choosingto leave the important subject of the trade to the Britishcolonies open, and exposed to all the bickering and controversywhich must naturally grow out of such an unsettledstate of things.The Convention for establishing the boundary line betweenthe United States and the British territories adjoiningthem, which was negotiated and concluded by Mr.King, in the year 1803, was not ratified, leaving unsettleda dispute which has never been adjusted to this day.In 1S07, Mr. Rose was sent by the British governmentto this country, to make reparation for the injury we hadreceived by the attack on the frigate Chesapeake ; his instructionsconfined his negotiations to that subject alone,and this was well known to our government ; but when, aftera fruitless attempt to induce him to transcend his powers,by discussing other subjects of dispute, the negotiationwas broken off, and the controversy left unadjusted.When Mr. Jackson came as envoy from Great Britain,our cabinet very soon satisfied themselves that he was tooexperienced and adroit a diplomatist to be overreached orcircumvented, and they accused him of insulting our government,and he was dismissed, though authorized toadjust the affair of the frigate Chesapeake.In 1811, four years after that affair had happened, theoffer to renew the negotiations on that subject was made ;and finally, though with a very ill grace, and in a very undignifiedmanner, our government accepted the same termsof reparation which they might have received from Mr.Rose if they had not broken off the negotiation with him.It is believed that this is the only controversy of any momentthat was ever settled with Great Britain during theadministrations of Mr. Jefferson and Mr. Madison.In December, 1807, Messrs. Monroe and Pinkney concludeda treaty with Great Britain, on all the points indispute between the countries, except that of impressment,HARTFORD Convention 231and an informal understanding was agreed to on that subject.This treaty was rejected, without even submitting itto the consideration of the Senate ; thereby throwing openfor controversy all the questions between the governments,professedly because one was left unadjusted ; — and thatone remains unadjusted to this day.The arrangement with Mr. Erskine was made undercircumstances which furnish room for very strong suspicions,at least, that its ratification by Great Britain wasnot expected by our government. If our government werenot acquainted with the nature and extent of Mr. Erskine'sinstructions, they were chargeable with gross negligenceof duty in not previously obtaining the necessary information.If they were acquainted with them, they are justlyliable to a charge of a much more heinous character.The "restrictive system," as it was called — that is, thesystem of embargo and non-intercourse — was obviouslyadopted in pursuance of the general policy of Bonaparte,and for the purpose of furthering his views of hostilityagainst; Great Britain. It was necessarily calculated toinjure the trade of Great Britain, without materially affectingthat of France, as the latter was scarcely able tokeep even a merchant vessel afloat on the ocean. Theevidence in support of this general allegation against ourgovernment, is derived from many sources, but most specificallyfrom Mr. Jefferson's letter to Mr. Livingston,which has been quoted.It will be necessary to extend this recapitulation somewhatfurther —Upon the failure of Erskine's arrangement, our government,as has been seen, immediately turned their attentiontowards the adjustment of their difficulties with France.By a series of servile and humiliating conduct towardsthe haughty and imperious ruler of that nation, they becameinvolved in his unprincipled policy, and were subjectedto his influence and controul. This is abundantly232 HISTORY OF THEproved by the public documents which have been cited.In the year 1811, when it was well known that Bonapartewas making preparations upon the most extensive scale toinvade the Russian dominions, for the purpose of forcingthe emperor Alexander to submit to such terms as the formershould prescribe, or to hurl him from his throne, themeasures of our government began to assume a warlikeappearance ; and advancing step by step, with the lapse oftime and the progress of events, nearly at the same momentwhen the French army commenced its march for thenorth, the United States declared war against Great Britain.That the course pursued by our government wasintended to operate as a diversion in favour of France, bydividing the British forces, and in some measure distractingthe attention of their government from the great theatreof war in Europe, is too apparent to be questioned byany person possessed of a frank and independent mind.It might have been considered as a good political manoeuvre,had it been certain that Bonaparte would succeed inhis enterprise. But he failed ; and the consequences weresoon seen in the change of tone assumed by our government.It is true, they endeavoured to hold out to thecountry the appearance of courage and confidence concerningthe result of the war; but the secret history of thetimes shows that they were greatly alarmed at their situation,surrounded as it was with difficulties and dangers,and their conduct was obviously influenced less by couragethan it was by despair; and hence alone can it be accountedfor, that they so suddenly and so essentially changedtheir tone in the instructions given to their commissioners,who were endeavouring to negotiate for peace, and instructedthem to give up all that the war was professedlymade for, and to take up with a simple peace, if that couldbe obtained.Coupled with these remarks, by way of recapitulation,the attempt to excite the angry passions and resentmentsHARTFORD Convention. 233of the country, by the disclosure of the affair of JohnHenry, should not be lost sight of. It was, indeed, a mereepisode in the principal work, having no connection withthe grievances of which our government complained, andwas not even named in the government manifesto as oneof the causes of war. It was, however, eagerly seizedhold of by the administration as a part of the machinerywhich was used for the purpose of producing an effect uponthe public mind — for that purpose it was set in motion,and after suffering themselves to be grossly duped andswindled by a couple of sharpers out of fifty thousand dollars,the whole plot, and its actors, were suffered to dieaway, and be forgotten ; or remembered only to excitefeelings of contempt and disgust for the policy and objectsof those by whom the farce was prepared for public exhibition.Such is a brief history of the origin and causes of the warof 1812. The evidence on which it rests is derived from\ the public documents of the government — from state paperspublished by their authority, and from other sourcesequally creditable. Its authenticity, therefore, cannot bedoubted ; and the only question that can be raised is, whetherit is sufficient to establish the point for which it is adduced.On this subject, if the author is not greatly deceived,there will be little room for dispute. The chain ofevidence is, in his opinion, entire, its credit unimpeachable,and its force irresistible.The next object to which the attention of the readerwill be turned is the manner in which the operations of thewar were conducted.On the 10th of April, 1812, a little more than twomonths before the formal declaration of war, but after itwas perfectly obvious that such a measure was determinedupon. Congress passed an act, of which the following areextracts —I. Be it enacted, &fc. That the President of the234E HISTORY OF THEUnited States be, and he is hereby authorised to require ofthe executives of the several states and territories, to takeeffectual measures to organize, arm, and equip, accordingto law, and hold in readiness to march at a moment'swarning, their respective proportions of one hundred thousandmilitia, officers included, to be apportioned by thePresident of the United States, from the latest militia returnsin the department of war ; and, in cases where suchreturns have not been made, by such other data as he shalljudge equitable.II. That the department of militia aforesaid shall beofficered out of the present militia officers, or others, at theoption and discretion of the constitutional authority in therespective states and territories ; the President of theUnited States apportioning the general officers among therespective states and territories, as he may deem proper.'• IV. That the President of the United States be, andhe hereby is, authorized to call into actual service any part,or the whole, of said detachment, in all the exigenciesprovided by the constitution."On the 15th of April, 1812, the Secretary of War wroteto the Governor of Connecticut, and it is to be presumedto the governors of the other states, as follows —War Department, 15th April, 1812."HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR OF THE STATE OFCONNECTICUT.Sir — I am instructed by the President of the UnitedStates, to call upon the executives of the several states totake effectual measures to organize, arm and equip accordingto law, and hold in readiness to march at a moment'swarning, their respective proportions of one hundredthousand militia, officers included, by virtue of an actof Congress, passed the 10th inst. entitled, * an act toHARTFORD CONVENTION. 235authorize a detachment from the militia of the UnitedStates.' "This therefore is to require your excellency to takeeffectual measures for having three thousand of the militiaof Connecticut (being her quota) detached and dulyorganized in companies, battalions, regiments, brigadesand divisions, within the shortest period that circumstanceswill permit, and as nearly as possible in the following proportionsof artillery, cavalry and infantry, viz. one twentiethpart of artillery ; one twentieth part of cavalry; andthe residue infantry. There will, however, be no objectionon the part of the President of the United States, to the admissionof a proportion of riflemen, duly organized in a distinctcorps, and not exceeding one tenth part of the wholequota of the states respectively. Each corps shall be properlyarmed and equipped for actual service.When the detachment and organization shall havebeen effected, the respective corps will be exercised underthe officers set over them ; but will not remain embodied,or be considered as in actual service, until by subsequentorders they shall be directed to take the field.Your excellency will please to direct that correctmuster rolls and inspection returns be made of the severalcorps, and that copies thereof be transmitted to this departmentas early as possible.I have the honor to be,Sir, very respectfully,Your obedient servant,'* William Eustis."Immediately after the declaration of war was passed,the members of the House of Representatives of theUnited States, who were in the minority on that question,published an address on that subject to their constituents.In that document, which is drawn up with much force ofreasoning and talent, the following is given as the principal236 HISTORY OF TTfFreason for adopting that mode of communicating their sentimentsto those to whom they were addressed —The momentous question of war with Great Britain isdecided. On this topic, so vital to your interests, the rightof public debate, in the face of the world, and especially oftheir constituents, has been denied to your representatives.They have been called into secret session on this most interestingof all your public relations, although the circumstancesof the time and of the nation afforded no onereason for secrecy, unless it be found in the apprehensionof the effect of public debate on public opinion ; or ofpublic opinion on the result of the vote.Except the message of the President of the UnitedStates, which is now before the public, nothing confidentialwas communicated. That message contained no factnot previously known. No one reason for war was intimated,but such as was of a nature public and notorious.The intention to wage war and invade Canada, had beenlong since openly avowed. The object of hostile menacehad been ostentatiously announced. The inadequacy ofboth our army and navy for successful invasion, and theinsufficiency of the fortifications for the security of our seaboard,were every where known. Yet the doors of Congresswere shut upon th people. They have been carefullykept in ignorance of the progress of measures, untilthe purposes of the administration were consummated, andthe fate of the country sealed. In a situation so extraordinary,the undersigned have deemed it their duty by noact of their's to sanction a proceeding so novel and arbitrary.On the contrary, they made every attempt, intheir power, to attain publicity for their proceedings. Allsuch attempts were vain. When this momentous subjectwas stated, as for debate, they demanded that the doorsshould be opened.'* This being refused, they declined discussion ; beingperfectly convinced, from indications too plain to be mis-hartfordCONVENTION. 237understood, that in the house, all argument with closeddoors was hopeless ; and that any act giving implied validityto so flagrant an abuse of power, would be little lessthan treachery to the essential rights of a free people."The allusion to the unprepared condition of the countryand government for a war, and especially with Great Britain,in the abovementioned address, was perfectly wellfounded. Great Britain, at that time, had absolute dominionover the ocean. No other power in Europe was in asituation to annoy our commerce or invade our country.We had a sea-coast of about two thousand miles extentexposed to hostile visits, and of course to depredations,from a maritime enemy; our principal sea-ports and harbourswere in a great measure unprotected ; vve had asmall standing army, scattered in many directions, andovera vast extent of country, and of course incapable ofbeing brought to act with efficiency upon any specific pointand a small navy ; we were to a great degree unprovidedwith the ordinary materials of offensive war, and particularlywith the indispensable ingredient of money. No partof the country was more open and exposed to the visits anddepredations of an enemy, than the territory borderingupon the New England coast. The fortifications werehardly entitled to the name; and the garrisons employedin them were merely nominal, and so few in numbers, asto be incapable of resisting any serious attack from a welldisciplined and well provided enemy. In such a state ofthings, letters of the following import were addressed bythe Secretary of War to the governors of Massachusettsand ConnecticutWar Department, June 12, 1812.Sir — I am directed by the President to request yourexcellency to order into the service of the United States,on the requisition of Major General Dearborn, such part238 HISTORY OF THEof the quota of militia from the state of Massachusetts,detached conformably to the act of April 10, 1812, as hemay deem necessary for the defence of the sea-coast."With great respect, I have the honor to be"Your excellency's obedient servant,W. EUSTIS."To the foregoing letter. Governor Griswold of Connecticutreturned the following answer —Lyme, 11 th June, 1812."THE HONOURABLE THE SECRETARY OF WAR.Sir— I had the honour, this afternoon, to receive yourletter of the 12th instant, communicating to me the requestof the President, that I would order into the serviceof the United States, on the requisition of Major GeneralDearborn, such part of the quota of militia from the stateof Connecticut, detached conformably to the act of Congressof April 10th, 1812, as he may deem necessary forthe defence of the sea-coast."In obedience to which request, I shall, on the requisitionof General Dearborn, execute without delay therequest of the President.With great respect, I have the honour to beYour obedient servant,"Roger Griswold."On the 22d of June, General Dearborn addressed thefollowing letter to Governor Strong of Massachusetts —Head Quarters, Boston, June 22d, 1812."TO HIS EXCELLENCY CALEB STRONG.Sir — I have received instructions from the Presidentof the United States, to call on your Excellency for suchHartford Convention. 239part of the quota of the militia of Massachusetts, whichwas detached conformably to the act of Congress of April10, 1812, as I may deem necessary for the defence of thesea-coast : and I have now the honour of requesting yourExcellency to order fourteen companies of artillery, andtwenty-seven companies of infantry into the service of theUnited States, for the defence of the ports and harbours ofthis state, and the harbour of Newport in the state of Rhode-island.The companies are intended for the followingports and harbours in the following proportions. For Passamaquoddyone company of artillery and two companiesof infantry, to be commanded by a major. For Mathiasone company of artillery. For Castine one company ofartillery and two companies of infantry, to be commandedby a major. For Damariscotta and Wiscasset two companiesof artillery. For Kennebunk one company of artillery.For Portland two companies of artillery and twocompanies of infantry, to be commanded by a major. ForMarblehead, Salem, Cape Ann, and Newburyport, twocompanies of artillery and two companies of infantry.For Boston, four companies of artillery and eight companiesof infantry, with a lieutenant-colonel and one major.For the defence of Rhode-island eight companies of infantry,with a lieutenant-colonel and one major.Having received official information that war has beendeclared by Congress against Great Britain, your Excellencywill perceive the expediency of giving facility tosuch measures of defence as the crisis demands ; and as thedefence of the sea-coast of New-england is by the generalgovernment confided to my direction, I shall with confidencerely on all the aid and support that the respectivegovernors of the New-england states can afford ; and in aspecial manner on that of the Commander-in-chief of theimportant state of Massachusetts. And I shall at all timesreceive with the greatest pleasure and readiness any HISTORY OF THEVice or information that your Excellency may be pleased tocommunicate.** With respectful consideration, I am, fcc.H. Dearborn."The following letter of the same date, was addressed toGovernor Griswold of Connecticut —Head Quarters, Boston, June 22, 1812.•' TO HIS EXCELLENCY ROGER GRISWOLD.Sir — Having received instructions from the Presidentof the United States, to call on your excellency for suchpart of the quota of the militia, which was detached from thestate of Connecticut, conformably to the act of Congress,of April the 10th, 1812, as I may deem necessary for thedefence of the sea-coast ; I have now the honor of requestingyour Excellency to order into the service of the UnitedStates, two companies of artillery, and two companies ofinfantry, to he placed under the command of the commandingofficer at Fort Trnmhidl, near Near-London ; and one companyof artillery, to be stationed at the battery, at the entranceof the harbour of New-Haven. Having receivedofficial information tatar has been declared by Congressagainst Great Britain, I shall rely with confidence on theaid and support of your Excellency, in giving effect tomeasures of defence on the sea-coast, which has been confidedto my direction by the general government; and Ishall, at any time, receive with the greatest pleasure andreadiness, any advice or information you may please tocommunicate.With great respect I have the honour to be,Your Excellency's most obedient servant,H. Dearborn, Major General*'HARTFORD CONVENTION. 241By the letter to the governor of Massachusetts, a requisitionwas made for forty-one companies — fourteen of artillery,and twenty-seven of infantry. They were orderedto different places, in that state, and in Rhode-island.Two lieutenant-colonels were called for from the militia ;but no officer of a higher grade. The order to the governorof Connecticut was for five companies — two of artilleryand three of infantry, but no officers of any descriptionwere included in the call. On the contrary, four of thecompanies were expressly directed " to be placed underthe command of the commanding officer at Fort Trumbull,near New-london," who was an officer of the UnitedStates army, of the rank of captain, and the other at thebattery at the entrance of New-Haven harbour, wherethere was a United States officer stationed.The governor of Massachusetts did not consider thecall made by the President of the United States, throughGeneral Dearborn, as warranted by the constitution, andtherefore did not detach the men agreeably to his requisition.The general reasons by which he was influenced,are contained in the following extract from the speech deliveredby him to the legislature of the state, who wereconvened in October, 1812, for the purpose of deliberatingon the events which had recently occurred —"The Constitution of the United States declares, thatCongress may provide for calling forth the militia to executethe laws of the Union, suppress insurrections, andrepel invasions,' and the act of Congress of April 10th,1812, authorising a detachment of 100,000 of the militia,empowers the President to ' call into actual service anypart, or the whole of said detachment, in all the exigenciesprovided by the constitution.' From these clauses inthe constitution and the law of April 10th, the Presidentderives his authority to call the militia of the states intoactual service ; and except in the exigencies abovementioned,he can have no authority by the constitution to do242 HISTORY OF THEii. But there was no suggestion, either in the letter avoir*the War Department, above referred to, or in those fromGeneral Dearborn, that this state or Rhode-island was invaded,or in imminent danger of invasion ; or that eitherof the exigencies recognised by the constitutional laws ofthe United States existed. If such declaration could havebeen made with truth, it would undoubtedly have beenmade.General Dearborn plainly supposed, that in consequenceof the act declaring war, he was authorized byvirtue of the power given him by the President, to requireany part or the whole of our detached militia to be calledout and marched to such places in this and the other statesas he might think proper. If this construction of the constitutionis correct, the President and Congress will beable at any time, by declaring war, to call the whole militiaof the United States into actual service, to march themto such places as they may think fit, and retain them inservice as long as the war shall continue. It is declaredindeed by the aforesaid act of April 10th, thatched said detachmentshall not be compelled to serve a ' longer timethan six months after they aiiive at the place of rendezvous.'But if the mere act of declaring war gives a rightto the national government to call the militia into service,and detain them six months, it must give a right to detainthem six years, if the war continues so long ; and the nationalgovernment has the same authority to call out thewhole, as a part of the militia.""Although many of the most important attributes ofsovereignty are given by the constitution to the governmentof the United States, yet there are some which still belongto the state governments ; of these, one of the most essentialis the entire control of the militia, except in the exigenciesabove mentioned ; this has not been delegated tothe United States — it is therefore reserved to the statesrespectively ; and whenever it shall be taken from them.HARTFORD CONVENTION. 243and a consolidation of the military force of the states shallbe effected, the security of the state governments will belost, and they will wholly depend for their existence uponthe moderation and forbearance of the national government."I have been fully disposed to comply with the requirementsof the constitution of the United States and thelaws made in pursuance of it, and sincerely regretted thatany request should be made by an officer of the nationalgovernment to which I could not constitutionally conform.But it appeared to me that the requisition aforesaid wasof that character; and I was under the same obligation tomaintain the rights of the state, as to support the constitutionof the United States. If the demand was not warrantedby the constitution, I should have violated my dutyin a most important point, if I had attempted to enforceit, and had thereby assisted in withdrawing the militiafrom the rightful authority of the state. Besides, if themeasure was not required by the constitution, it wouldhave been oppressive, as the militia must have been calledfrom their occupations to places remote from their homes,and detained in the service during the busy season of theyear."The governor of Connecticut, upon receiving GeneralDearborn's letter of June 22d, in pursuance of the practiceupon extraordinary occasions in that state, immediatelyconvened the Council, and submitted the correspondence,and the whole subject, to their consideration, fortheir opinion and advice, in the following message —"Gentlemen of the council, — The agitation whichhas been produced by the late measures of Congress, undoubtedlyrequires great caution in every step which maybetaken by the government of this state. And it wouldafford me particular satisfaction, if the Council would atthis meeting, direct their attention to this novel situation244 HISTORY OF THEof our affairs, and communicate to me their advice respectingthe general course which it is proper for the Executiveto pursue, under those emergencies which mayprobably arise. But the particular object for which I havethought it my duty to convene you at this time, is to requestyour advice respecting the course which it is proper to takewith a requisition of the national government, communicatedthrough the medium of General Dearborn, for detachingfive companies of the drafted militia, for the defenceof New-london and New-Haven.The order for detaching three thousand men, beingthe quota of this state under the act of Congress of the10th of April, was received and immediately executed.Since which I received a letter from the Secretary of War.communicating a request from the President, that as manyof the detached troops as General Dearborn should requirefor the defence of the sea-coast might be orderedinto the service of the United States. General Dearbornhas now made his requisition, and requested four companiesto march for New-london, and one for New-Haven,and to be placed under the command of the officers commandingat those posts.My answer to the second letter from the Secretary ofWar was necessarily expressed in general terms that therequest of the President should be executed, as I had noright to presume that any thing would be required whichwas not warranted by the Constitution and the law. Thedemand however, now made, presents several importantconsiderations. It becomes a question whether the militiacan be constitutionally and legally demanded until one ofthe contingencies enumerated in the Constitution shall havearisen. And whether a requisition, to place any portionof the militia under the command of a continental officer,can be executed. Other questions, especially important,may arise from the same subject.Relying, gentlemen, on your advice in this emergencyHARTFORD CONVENTION. 245I have to request your serious and deliberate attention toevery point connected with it."Roger Griswold.Harlfonh June 29, 1 8 1 2."The body of men who composed the Council of Connecticut,formed one of the houses of the legislature of thatstate, and consisted of the lieutenant-governor, and twelveassistants. They took the matter into their consideration,and after due deliberation, came to the following result —At a meeting of the governor and council of the state of Connecticut,at Hartford, on the 29th of June, A. D. 1812.'< His excellency the governor has requested of thisboard advice respecting the course which it is properto take on a requisition of the national government, com-communicated through the medium of General Dearborn, fordetaching five companies of the militia, drafted under theact of Congress of the 10th of April last, for the defenceof New-london and New-Haven. The order for this draftof three thousand men was received, and immediatelyexecuted. On the 12th of instant June, the Secretary ofWar requested of the Governor that as many of the militiathus drafted as General Dearborn should require for thedefence of the sea-coast, should be ordered into the serviceof the United States. Presuming that nothing would berequired which was not warranted by the constitution andthe law, assurance was given of a compliance with thisrequest. The council entirely approve of the promptitudewith which the Governor has thus manifested his readinessto comply with all legal and constitutional requisitions, apromptitude always shown by the Government of Connecticut.General Dearborn now requests that four companiesof the militia drafted as stated, be detached for the fort atNew-london, and one company for the fort at Newhaven,to be put under the command of the officers of the army246 HISTORY OF THEof the United States, stationed at those posts. His excellencythe Governor has requested the ' serious and deliberateattention ' of this board to the following questions,arising out of the requisition of General Dearborn, — 'Canthe militia be legally and constitutionally demanded untilone of the contingencies enumerated in the constitutionshall have arisen ? And can a requisition, to place anyportion of the militia under the command of a continentalofficer, be executed ? The council, impressed with thegreat importance of these questions, have seriously anddeliberately examined them, and in compliance with therequest of the Governor, now present to him the result oftheir deliberations."The constitution of the United States has wisely ordainedthat Congress may provide for calling forth themilitia to execute the lais of the Union, siqipress insurrections,and repel invasions. The acts of Congress of February,1795, and of April, 1812, in strict pursuance of theconstitution, provide for calling forth the militia into theactual service, in the exigencies above named.This board is not informed that the requisition of GeneralDearborn, said to be in pursuance of that of theSecretary of War of the 12th of instant June, is groundedon a declaration made by the President of the UnitedStates, or notice by him given, that the militia are requiredto execute the lais of the Union, suppress insurrections, orrepel invasions, or that the United States are in imminentdanger of invasion. As none of the exigencies recognizedby the constitution and laws of the United States areshown to exist, this board deem his excellency the Governorto be, of right, the commander in chief of themilitia of this state, and that they cannot thus be withdrawnfrom his authority.The council to the second inquiry observe, that theconstitution of the United States provides that the appointmentof the officers of the militia shall be reservedHARTFORD Convents. 247to the states respectively. In the event of their beingcalled forth into the actual service of the United States, inany of the exigencies specified, the laws of the UnitedStates provide, that they are to be called forth as amilitia, furnished with officers by the state. The militiaorganized under the act of the 10th of April, from whichthe detachment in question is required, have been regularly,and in conformity to law, formed into a division,consisting of brigades, regiments, battalions, and companies.The requisition of General Dearborn is, thatfive companies, which constitute a battalion, be detached,four of which are required for the fort at New-london,and one for the fort at New-Haven, to he put underthe command of the officers there stationed. The councildo not perceive in the constitution or laws of the UnitedStates, any warrant for thus taking from the officersduly appointed by the state, the men under their controul,and thus impairing, and as the case may be, eventuallydestroying the military force of the state. Nor dothey perceive any law authorizing the officers of the armyof the United States to detach from a body of draftedmilitia, now organized with constitutional officers, a portionof its men, and thus weaken and, as the case maybe,annihilate the detachment. They do perceive, however,that a compliance with such a requisition mighttransfer the militia of the respective states into the armyof the United States, and that thus the officers of the militiamight be left without any command, except in name,and that the respective states might thus be deprived ofthe militia which the constitution has granted to them. Inthis view of this interesting subject, the council advise hisexcellency the governor not to comply with the requisitionof General Dearborn."In view of this result, made from a conviction that itis just and conformable to the constitution, the Councilfeel entirely disposed to give ample assurance that this248 HISTORY OF THEstate will ever support the national government in all constitutionalmeasures, and presume that in case of invasion,or imminent danger of invasion, the governor ^viil deemit expedient to make such provision for the protection ofthe sea-coast by the militia of the state, in co-operationwith the military force of the United States, as the publicexigency may require, and as is warranted by law."In regard to other matters in the governor's communication,the Council forbear to remark particularly, relyingwith perfect confidence on the wisdom of his Excellency,to pursue such a course, in any emergencies whichmay arise, as becomes the chief magistrate of a free andenlightened people, and imploring the blessings of the Godof our fathers for protection in the midst of the calamitiesof war.Passed in the CouncilJune 29th, 1812."Thomas Day, Secretary'"The call upon the governor of Massachusetts, it hasbeen seen, was for forty-one companies. These companies,upon the most moderate estimate of their numbers,must have contained between three and four thousandmen, including officers, non-commissioned officers, musicians,&.C. ; and of course they would have formed a division,and would have had a legal right to be commandedby a major-general. Instead of which, the highest officernamed in the order was a lieutenant-colonel. The orderto the governor of Connecticut was more explicit. It requiredfive companies, which would form a battalion, andbe entitled to a major's command. Instead of which, noofficer of any rank or description is named or called for,but four of the companies were directed to be placed immediatelyunder the command of the United States officercommanding at Fort Trumbull, near New-london, andHARTFORD CONVENTION. 249the fifth under the United States officer of the garrison atNew-Haven.In both cases, the orders were not warranted by the constitutionof the United States. The reasoning on the natureand objects of the requisition, in the foregoing resultof the deliberations of the Council of Connecticut, is conclusive.And the principle for which they contended, isone of the most interesting description to the safety of themilitia, and the rights and security of the individual states.By the constitution of the United States, Congress havepower to call forth the militia of the states only in threeemergencies, viz. "To execute the laws of the union, suppressinsurrections, and repel invasions." But to guardagainst any possible mischief that might arise, either tothe several states, when thus temporarily deprived of theirnatural protectors, or to that portion of the inhabitantswho compose the militia, it was provided in the constitution,that Congress should have power "To provide for organizing,arming, and disciplining the militia, and for governingsuch parts of them as may be employed in the serviceof the United States, reserving to the states respectively theappointment of the officers, and the authority of training themilitia according to the discipline prescribed by Congress."This provision is not only plain and explicit, but in thehighest degree important to the militia, and to the statesto which they belong. If when called into the service ofthe United States, they were to be taken from the superintendenceof their own officers, and placed under thecommand of United States officers, they would, to all intentsand purposes, become incorporated into the standingarmy of the nation, be shut up in garrisons, be commandedby officers of the standing army, and be subject to thesame government with the standing army — or in otherwords, to that 'severe and sanguinary code, the " Rulesand Articles of War." By those rules and articles it is provided,— that " All officers serving by commission from the250 HISTORY OF THEauthority of any particular state, shall on all detachments,courts-martial, or other duty, wherein they may be employedin conjunction with the regular forces of the UnitedStates, take rank next after all officers of the like gradein said regular forces, notwithstanding the commissions ofsuch militia or state officers may be older than the commissionsof the officers of the regular forces of the UnitedStates." From this provision, it is apparent, that it wasintended, by the order of General Dearborn, to put themilitia of Connecticut into the United States forts at New-londonand New-Haven, under the immediate commandof United States officers, to perform garrison duty, in thesame manner as if they had been regularly enlisted intothe standing army of the United States. No propositioncan be more plain than this, — that if this project had succeeded,an unquestionable and most important provisionof the constitution would have been violated, and the rightsof the militia, in an equal degree, not have been merelyinfringed, but sacrificed.The consequences of such an attempt on the part of thenational government, had it been carried into effect, mayperhaps be considered at the present time with a greaterdegree of coolness and deliberation, than could have beenexpected when the country was under the agitation andexcitement which a state of war naturally produces, andwhich party feelings and passions are well calculated greatlyto increase and extend. If the New-england stateshad given up their militia, at the requisition of the Presidentof the United States, and in a total disregard of thefederal constitution, a precedent would have been establishedthat might, and, one day or other, in all probabilitywould, have proved fatal to the liberties of the country.By the act of Congress of April 10th above alluded to, thePresident was authorized, at his own discretion, to callinto the public service one hundred thousand militia. liewas constituted the sole judge of the time when they shouldHARTFORD CONVENTION. 251be ordered into the field, and of the numbers that shouldbe called for on any given occasion. By depriving themof their constitutional right to be commanded by their ownofficers, and placing them under that of officers of the regulararmy, they might be pent up in garrisons, or sent toany distant point of military operations which the Presidenthimself, or Major-general Dearborn should thinkproper to designate. In this way, the several states wouldhave been stripped of their natural and constitutional defenders,and left exposed to all the variety of evils whichsuch a condition necessarily presupposes, while the militiathemselves would have been subjected to all the hardshipsand degradation which are always experienced in standingarmies.Nor was this all. By the rules and articles of war it isprovided, that — " The officers and soldiers of any troops,whether militia or others, being mustered and in pay ofthe United States, shall, at all times, and in all places,when joined, or acting in conjunction with the regularforces of the United States, be governed by these rules andarticles of war, and shall be subject to be tried by courtsmartial, in like manner with the officers and soldiers inthe regular forces, save only that such courts martial shallhe composed entirely of militia officers.''^ By omitting in theorder issued by General Dearborn to the Governor of Connecticut,to include officers, and placing the men under theexclusive command of United States officers, the importantprovision above recited from the rules and articles ofwar, securing to the militia the privilege of being tried incourts martial by militia officers, would have been entirelyevaded, because no such officers would have been in theservice, of whom such courts could have been formed. Andin the case of Massachusetts, by ordering out orde officersof a lower grade than the laws required, and a muchsmaller number than the number of troops demanded, thebenefit intended to be secured to the militia by the foregoesHISTORY OF THEing- provision, would have been in a great measure lost tothem, because there might not have been, in various supposablecases, militia officers in the service, of whom thecourts martial could have been formed.On the 15th of July, 1812, General Dearborn wrote lettersof the following tenor to the governors of Massachusettsand Connecticut —Head Quarters, Boston, July 15, 1812.Having received orders to leave the sea-coast, where Iwas ordered for the purpose of taking the necessary measuresfor placing the towns and garrisons in a state ofdefence against the invasion or attack of the enemy, andto repair to Albany — it becomes my duty again to requestyour excellency to order out such part of your states' quotaof detached militia as the present state of war requires.The numbers I had the honour to state to your excellency,in my letter of the 22d ult. As other objects will requirethe service of a great part of the regular troops, it will he-comemy duty to order them from the sea-hoard, and, ofcourse, I must leave some part of the coast icith less protectionagainst those depredating parties of the enemy, that mayattempt invasion for the ?nere purpose of plunder, than prudencewould have justified, if a suitable number of the militiashould not be ordered out in conformity with the viewsand intentions of the President of the United States, asheretofore expressed. If your excellency shall consider itexpedient to have the militia turned out for the proposedpurposes, I will with pleasure afford all the aid in mypower, for effecting the intended objects, consistently withthe orders I have received. As early an answer as yourexcellency can make convenient, will be desirable.I have the honor to be,Very respectfully, your Excellency'sMost obedient servant,•' H. Dearborn, Major Generals'-HARTFORD CONVENTION. 253It will be recollected, that when the war was declared,it was professedly for the purpose of forcing Great Britainto revoke her orders in council, and to abandon the practiceof impressment. In order to accomplish these objects,the nation at large was subjected to the various calamitieswhich an offensive war necessarily brings upon any country.But the Atlantic coast was exposed to all the evilswhich a powerful maritime enemy, having the absolutecommand of the ocean, might be disposed to inflict upona defenceless foe. It would have been natural, under suchcircumstances, to expect that the government which haddeclared the war, would at least have taken all possiblecare to guard against invasions and depredations alongthe sea-shore ; — especially as the large towns and cities,and the oldest and wealthiest settlements, lay very near tothe ocean, and of course were peculiarly exposed to hostileattacks. Instead of which, within less than a month afterthe declaration of war, the letter above recited was forwardedby the commander in chief of the American armyto the chief magistrates of two of the New-england states,informing them that he had received orders to leave thesea-coast, and to repair to Albany ; and adding, that as otherobjects besides the defence of the coast would require theservice of a great part of the regular troops, it would becomehis duty to order those troops from the sea-board,and that this must leave some part of the coast with lessprotection against those depredating parties of the enemy,who might attempt invasion for the mere purpose of plunder,than prudence hould justify. Hence he urges the detachmentof the militia, which had been previously calledfor. If any new or additional motive could have been necessaryto induce those states to proceed with the strictestcaution, and to guard against any unconstitutional demandfor the militia, it might have been found in this letter.The coast of New-england, stretching from New-brunswickto the border of the state of New York, may be HISTORY OF THEordered as between six and seven hundred miles in length;and the property upon it which would be exposed to thedepredations of an enemy, was undoubtedly many timesgreater than lay in the same predicament upon the coastsouth of New York, to the Gulf of Mexico. And yet, thesmall force which the national government had stationedupon that coast, was ordered away in pursuit of other objects— that is the conquest of Canada — and the inhabitantsleft exposed to the miseries of invasion and depredation.And this measure of depriving the eastern coast of theUnited States troops, in a time of war, which had beenstationed there for their protection and security in a timeof peace, was adopted at the very moment when, if theassertion of the chief magistrate of the Union was to becredited, there was the greatest need of their exertions forthe public safety ; for in a letter from the Secretary ofWar to Lieutenant Governor Smith of Connecticut, datedJuly 14th, 1812 — one day after the date of the foregoingletters to the governors of Massachusetts and Connecticutthat officer says he was instructed by the President tostate to Governor Smith, that there vas at that time, imminentdanger of the invasion of the country; and this wasadvanced as a reason why the militia of those states shouldbe ordered out agreeably to the call made by GeneralDearborn.Could any thing be more preposterous than such conductas this ? Had it been in the power of the governmentof the United States to conquer the Canadass, they wouldhave been worthless compared with the value of the countryand the settlements upon the New-england coast. Andevents very speedily proved the weakness and absurdity ofthe attempts to invade and subdue the British provinces.Disaster and disgrace overtook our forces ; and the conquestof the Canadass, weak and unprotected as they were,was soon fovmd to be altogether chimerical. Instead ofvictors, our forces were led from the field as prisoners ofHARTFORD CONVENTION. 255war ; and the people on the frontiers were placed in greathazard of invasion, from the very enemy against whomoffensive war had been declared.Little as the New-england states had been satisfied withthe origin of the war, they had still less reason to be pleasedwith the manner of carrying it on. In a very short time itbecame apparent that they must defend themselves, or beleft at the mercy of the foreign enemy. It was equallyapparent, that if the President of the United States hadthe constitutional right to call forth the hundred thousandmilitia, under the act of Congress of April lOth, 1812, putthem under command of United States officers, and marchthem to any point or station which he might think proper,the states would have been entirely deprived of their naturaland legitimate means of defence, and left exposed to theinroads of the enemy wherever they should think proper tovisit their coasts, and invade their territory. It thereforebecame a matter of not only constitutional right, but ofself-security in the New-england states, exposed as theywere, to meet the evils with which they were threatenedat the threshold. Accordingly, in Connecticut, the opinionand advice of the council of the state were taken ; and inMassachusetts, in pursuance of the practice of that statein times of emergency, the case was submitted to the suprime court of the state, for their decision upon the followingquestions —1. Whether the commanders in chief of the militia ofthe several states have a right to determine whether anyof the exigencies contemplated by the constitution of theUnited States exist, so as to require them to place the militia,or any part of it, in the service of the United States,at the request of the President, to be commanded by him,pursuant to acts of Congress ?"2. Whether, when either of the exigencies exist authorizingthe employing the militia in the service of theUnited States, the militia thus employed can be lawfully256 HISTORY OF THEcommanded by any officers but of the militia, except bythe President of the United States ?"The court, consisting of three very eminent judges, viz.Theophilus Parsons, Samuel Sewell, and Isaac Parker,gave it as their opinion, that the commanders in chief ofthe several states had the right to decide whether any ofthe constitutional exigencies existed, which authorized thecalling forth of the militia. In our judgment, there weremany strong reasons in favour of this opinion ; one ofwhich may be found in the following letter from theSecretary of War to Lieutenant-governor Smith, of Connecticut—War Department, July 14^A, 1812.Sir, — I have the honour to acknowledge your letter ofthe 2d inst. The absence of his excellency GovernorGriswold, ' on account of ill health,' is seriously to be regretted,particularly at this important crisis, when hisprompt assurances of obeying the requisition of the President,to call into the service of the United States such detachmentsof militia as might be required, conformably tothe act of April 10th, 1812, through General Dearborn,are interrupted and suspended by your honour.The reason assigned for refusing to execute the engagementsof his excellency Governor Griswold, appearnot less extraordinary than the act itself. After a declarationof war against a nation possessed of powerful andnumerous fleets, a part of which were actually on ourcoast, had been promulgated, and officially communicatedto the executive of the state, the assertion made by yourhonour, ' that the governor is not informed that the UnitedStates are in imminent danger of invasions was not to havebeen expected. To remove all doubt from your mind onthis subject, / ann instructed by the President, to state to youthat such danger actually exists ; and to request that the requisitionof General Dearborn, made by his special authorCONVENTION. 257city for calling into the service of the United States certaindetachments of militia from the state of Connecticut, beforthwith carried into effect.The right of the state to officer the militia, is clearlyrecognized in the requisition of General Dearborn. Thedetachments, when marched to the several posts assignedthem, with their proper officers appointed conformably tothe laws of the state, will command, or be commanded,according to the rules and articles of war, and the usagesof service.I have the honour to be,'' Respectfully, sir, your obedient servant,W. EUSTIS.*' His Honor John Cotton Smith,Sharon, Connecticut."At the date of this letter, war had been declared butfour weeks. The fact that such an event had occurredwas not known to the government of Great Britain, andof course, no measures could have been adopted by thatgovernment for the invasion of our country, or even for theprosecution of hostile measures of any description towardsthe United States. With what propriety then could it besaid, that this country was in imminent danger of invasionon the 14th of July, 1812 ? It was not true. " Imminentdanger" means danger near at hand, threatening, immediate.Under no circumstances could an order for theinvasion of the territory of the United States be expectedfrom Great Britain in less than five or six weeks after the14th of July. Whatever danger, therefore, there mighthave been of eventual invasion, it was then remote, andnot imminent ; and therefore the declaration in the letterabove alluded to was not warranted by facts. But it is tobe presumed from the circumstances of the case, that if ithad been considered necessary at the time, the same declarationwould have been made when General Dearborn258 HISTORY OF THEwrote his letters to the governors of Massachusetts andConnecticut, calling for the respective quotas of militiafrom those states, viz. on the 22d of June, four days afterthe declaration of war.On the Itt of July General Dearborn addressed thefollowing letter to Lieutenant Governor Smith —Head Quarters, Boston, July 17, 1812."HON. JOHN COTTON SMITH.Sir, — Being disposed to obviate as far as my authorityextends, the objection to turning out the companies, requiredfrom the state of Connecticut, in my letter to GovernorGriswold of the 22d June ult. I renew my requisitionto your honor as acting governor in the absence of hisexcellency Governor Griswold, and request that you wouldturn out the number of companies proposed in my letterabove alluded to; and that those companies destined forFort Trumbull may be commanded by one of the majorsthat shall have been detached with your state's quota.I have the honour. Sir, to be respectfullyYour most obedient servant,H. Dearborn, Major General's''To this letter, the following answer was returned —'lyme, 22d August, 1812.Sir, — Your two letters of the 15th and 17th of Julywere put into my hands immediately after my return fromthe state of New York ; but accidentally were left at Hartford,without having been acknowledged. No inconveniencehowever could have resulted, as the answer to theletter of the Secretary of War, of the 14th of July, expressedthe determination of the government of this state,on the points you had suggested.HARTFORD CONVENTION. 259** I have therefore only to express my satisfaction of thereadiness with which you proposed to give the commandof the companies required for New-london, to a major ofour own ; together with your disposition to make everynecessary provision for the defence of the sea-coast. Andon all occasions, I shall be happy to co-operate with you insuch measures as our defence may require.I have the honour to be, with high respect,Your obedient and humble servant,(Signed) " Roger Griswold."General Dearborn."On the 4th of August, 1812, Governor Griswold againconvened the council, and submitted to their considerationthe letter of the Secretary of War of the 14th, and thoseof the 15th and 17th of July from General Dearborn, whichhave already been quoted, and received from them the followingreport —"Lit a meeting of the Governor and Council of the state of Connecticut,held at Hartford on the fourth day of August, Jl. D. 1812.A letter from the Secretary of War addressed to hishonor the Lieutenant-governor, dated July 14th, 1812,and two letters from Major-general Dearborn, one datedJuly 15th, addressed to his excellency the Governor, andone dated July 17th, addressed to his honor, the Lieuten-ant-Governor, have been submitted by his excellency theGovernor to this board, for their consideration and advice.They all relate to the subject of ordering five companiesof the militia of this state into the service of the UnitedStates. It is obvious that the claim for the services of themilitia is made on the ground that war has been declaredby the Congress of the United States against Great Britain.No place in this state, or in the United States, hasbeen particularly designated as in danger of being invaded.The answer which exists is that alone which arises froma state of war thus declared ; and exists throughout the260 HISTORY OF THEUnited States, and will continue, so long as the war shalllast. To provide against this supposed danger of invasionfive companies of militia are required.They are required to do ordinary garrison duty at theforts at New-london and New-Haven. Upon the sameprinciple, that the militia may be called for, to march tothese places and do this duty, they may be called for, tomarch to any place within the United States, to performthe same duty, and this, from time to time, and at all times,during the continuance of the war. It will not escapeattention that this requisition is not made for a portion ofthe militia, most convenient to thejylaceof danger or scene ofaction, pursuant to the act of Congress, approved February28th, 1795, but is made upon the Governor of this state,for a portion of the militia detached, pursuant to an act ofCongress passed the 10th day of April, 1812, and liableby the terms of that act, to be called into the service ofthe United States, when, and only when one of the exigenciesprovided hy the Constitution shall occur. By the Constitutionof the United States, those exigencies are, to executethe Laws of the Union, suppress Insurrections, and repelInvasions. It is believed that the militia of this statewould be among the first to perform their constitutionalduties, and not among the last to understand and justlyappreciate their constitutional rights. Should any portionof this state be invaded or menaced with invasion by aforeign power, the militia would not wait for a requisition,but hasten with alacrity to the place invaded or threatened,to meet and repel it. Of this spirit his excellency theGovernor would doubtless receive prompt evidence, in theexecution of the laws of this state, should the necessityunhappily arise. But if the Congress of the United Stateshave seen fit to exercise the power to declare war, beforethey have carried into execution another provision of theConstitution to raise and support armies, it does not followthat the militia are bound to enter their forts and garrisonsIHARTFORD CONVENTION. 261to perform ordinary garrison duty, and wait for an invasion,which may never happen.*' Whatever may be the disposition of this state, or themilitia thereof, to render voluntary services under stateauthority to carry on the war in which this country is unhappilyengaged, it is surely important that when demandsare made by the administration of the government of theUnited States, they should be found to be strictly withinthe constitution of the United States, and while obedienceshall be promptly yielded to all its requirements, that theconstitution and sovereignty of this state should not beimpaired or encroached upon — That the powers delegatedto the United Slates m^y be exercised, and the powers'reserved to the states respectively may be retained.And as no information has been given, and none is in possessionof this board, that any part of this state is invaded,or that any other danger exists than that which arises froma declaration of war made by the Congress of the UnitedStates against Great Britain, and the suggestion that apart of her fleet has been on the coast of the United States,and as the militia are called for, not to repel invasion, butto perform ordinary garrison duty, the Council are ofopinion that it does not consist with 'the powers retained'by this state to order its militia into the service of theUnited States, on the requisition of any of the officers ofthe United States, in a case not demanded by the constitution.And until such case occurs, the Council advise hisexcellency the Governor to retain the militia of this stateunder his own command, and decline a compliance withthe requisition of the Secretary of War and Major-generalDearborn. Passed in the Council."Attest. Thomas Day, Secretary's''In this state of things, Governor Griswold called anextra session of the General Assembly of Connecticut, onthe fourth Tuesday of August, 1812, on which occasion hetransmitted to them the following message —262 HISTORY OF THEMessage of his Excellences Governor Griswold, to the GeneralAssembly, with the Documents accompanying the same.** Gentlemen of the council, mr. speaker, andgentlemen of the house of representatives.Several important matters, growing out of the warin which we are unhappily engaged, appear to demand theimmediate attention of the legislature ; and although awareof the expense and inconvenience attending a meeting ofthe General Assembly at this season of the year, and at atime so near the fall session, yet, I trust, that on a full examinationof all the circumstances, it will appear that themeasure has become highly expedient. To render ourpublic concerns, however, intelligible, it will be necessaryto unfold the events which have attended us.It is known to the Assembly, that on the 10th of Aprillast, Congress passed an act to detach one hundred thousandmilitia for the service of the United States, and thatthree thousand men, the quota of this state, agreeably tothe orders of the President, were promptly detached, andheld in readiness, for the exigencies pointed out by theconstitution and the law.The act of Congress, and the measures regarding it,were communicated at the last session, and will be againlaid before you. After your adjournment, a letter wasreceived from the War Department, dated June 12th,transferring the duty of calling for the men to GeneralDearborn, and requesting that his requisition might thereforebe complied with.*' As nothing appeared in this communication, but awish of the President to confide this duty to an officer ofrank, who it was understood, would be charged with thegeneral command of the troops in the northern states, andas it could not be expected that the President would authorizean order which should be repugnant to the constCONVENTION. 263tuition ; I did not hesitate to inform the Secretary of War,that any requisition which the President might makethrough General Dearborn should be complied with.Soon after these transactions, at a time when I waspursuing a journey for my health, a letter was receivedfrom General Dearborn, requiring four companies of thedrafted militia to march, and to be placed under the commandof the officer commanding at Fort Trumbull at New-london,and one company to march for the battery nearNew-Haven. An attention to the terms of General Dearborn'sletter fully satisfied me, that the requisition was unconstitutionaland could not be complied with. I had longnoticed that important provision in the constitution of theUnited States, which authorizes the President to call intoservice the militia, ' to repel invasions, suppress insurrections,and to aid in the execution of the laws ;' and it waswith satisfaction I had noticed that the act of Congresshad strictly followed the principle of the constitution."But although I entertained no doubts regarding myduty, yet as I viewed the step which it became necessaryto take, highly important, it became proper for me to obtainthe reasonings and opinions of the Council on theoccasion."That body was accordingly convened at Hartford, andit gave me great satisfaction to find that their opinionsconcurred with my own. Thinking it necessary, however,to pursue my journey, his honor. Governor Smith, was sogood as to take the charge of the correspondence whichhad become necessary on the occasion ; and by his letterto the Secretary of War of the 2d of July, communicatedthe opinion entertained in this state, and our determinationrespecting the requisition.The Secretary in reply, dated July 14th, in languageunusual, and altogether unexpected, appeared to claim apromise, contained in my letter of the 12th of June, toexecute any requisition which should be made by General264 HISTORY OF THEDearborn. This strange insinuation, which originated inexpressions of civility to the President, and could not withdecency have been omitted, was repelled.In a letter from the War Department, the subjectwas also placed in a point of view which appeared to requirea new consideration; and a second meeting of theCouncil was accordingly deemed necessary. The gentlemencomprising that body were again fully consulted, andevery view of the subject has been taken of which it appearedsusceptible, and we have been confirmed in theopinion which we first formed, and the Council has again j|;advised that nothing has taken place to justify me in exe- Icutting the requisition of General Dearborn. "All the papers, to which I have referred, together witha general proclamation, concisely explaining the factswhich have taken place, and the views which have beenentertained at this important period, will be now communicatedfor your inspection.The importance of this measure, both as it regardsthe security of the state, and as it may also form a precedenton future occasions, rendered it highly important toconsult the General Assembly."But the inconvenience of convening so large a body,and the early period of the fall session, induced me to submitto the temporary disadvantage of a delay, rather thansubject the immediate representatives of the people to somuch inconvenience. Several new circumstances, however,having arisen, which it appeared to me could notwith propriety admit of delay; I have thought it my dutyat this time to convene the legislative body, and I availmyself of the occasion to solicit your immediate attentionto the proceedings of the council, and your deliberate opinionon the measure which has been taken. This becomesmore immediately important, from the consideration, thatif any errors have been committed, they may, at this time,be corrected without much inconvenience.HARTFORD CONVENTION. 2d5*the necessity of obtaining supplies of military storeson this emergency, in addition to those already on hand,will be universally felt ; and finding the price and scarcityrapidly increasing, I thought no consideration could justifya delay in calling the attention of the legislature immediatelyto that subject. It can scarcely be necessary toinform you that military stores are not to be expectedfrom the general government ; and that we have reasonto expect that the regular troops will be principally calledfrom the sea-coast, and of course the state will be left todefend itself, if exposed to foreign invasion.It may also be observed that it is unwise to dependaltogether upon the general government for the defenceof our sea-coast.The extensive territory which it has been the nationalpolicy to grasp within our jurisdiction, and the great numberof points requiring defence, together with an unhappydisposition to enlarge our extended frontier by new conquests,will probably demand all the military force in thepower of government for similar objects. This appearsto be the determination at this time, and the importantbusiness of garrisoning the coast must be left to the militia,or neglected.But if these essential interests are disregarded, wemust not neglect ourselves ; and I trust that the presentoccasion will furnish the best reasons for improving themilitia both in organization and discipline, and for obtainingample supplies of arms and military stores, and placingourselves on the best footing for defence. It is also properto avail ourselves of every principle in the constitution forTendering our means effectual and the least inconvenient.Among other provisions in the constitution, it will befound, that in time of war the states may organize andsupport a military force of their own, and which cannot,under any circumstances, be controlled by the generalgovernment, and which may undoubtedly be applied in all266 HISTORY OF THEcases to the defence of the State. Whether such a forcewill become immediately necessary, the general assemblywill judge ; but as the subject can be examined and a planpartially digested without expense, and measures commencedfor the speedy execution of the principle at anearly but future session, I feel it ray duty to recommendthat subject to your consideration."In recommending this measure, it is far from my intentionto propose that the state troops should at any timeduring the war be withheld from aiding the national andneighbouring state forces in the common defence ; but toincrease the strength of those corps, and particularly toapply that body of men to our own defence, should ourfrontier at any future time be unhappily abandoned."Nor will it be understood that whilst I feel it my dutyto recommend the necessary preparation for arraying everydescription of constitutional and military force which maybeproper for our defence, that [ wish to urge a step whichmay interfere with any liberal measure which the generalgovernment may take for the same object.To the general government we must and ought to lookfor our security ; and I trust that the time will come whena full knowledge of our resources will place the safety ofour sea-coast on that naval defence which alone is capableof giving it complete security.Although it has been thought correct in this state, oreordinary occasions, for the state government to leave thenational councils to pursue their own measures withoutinterference, yet I submit to your consideration whetherthis is not an occasion on which that principle should bedispensed with, and whether it is not proper that the generalassembly should, by a plain and decisive address to thePresident, express their own opinion and that of their constituentson the important questions which have recentlyoccurred."It is certainly necessary that the public opinion shouldHARTFORD CONVENTION. 267sae known by the President on the question of war ; and itis presumed, when expressed by the legislature of a state,it will be respected.Whatever events, however, may take place, you maybesatisfied that the faithful preservation of the publicpeace, a rigid and prompt execution of the laws underwhich we happily live, and which form our security, togetherwith a strict adherence to our form of governmentand of the constitution of the United States, will composethe basis of the administration of government in this state.Trusting, gentlemen, that the God of our fathers willnot desert us on this occasion, and that our safety is inHim, I have only to implore his guidance in all our proceedings,and his smiles on all our deliberations.Roger Griswold.Extra Session, 4th Tuesday of August, 1812."This message was accompanied by the correspondencebetween the United States officers, civil and military, towhich reference has been made, and extracts from whichhave been copied ; and thus the whole was placed beforethe legislature of that state for their consideration. Thesedocuments were referred to a joint committee of the twohouses, who made a long and able report on the generalsubject, and concluded by recommending the followingresolution —Resolved, that the conduct of his excellency the governor,in refusing to order the militia of this state intothe service of the United States, on the requisition of theSecretary of War and Major-general Dearborn, meetswith the entire approbation of this assembly."This resolution was adopted and passed by both houses.The general assembly also, in pursuance of the suggestionin the executive message, united at the same session in adeclaration, in which they say, that "they believe it to bethedeliberate and solemn sense of the people of the state268 HISTORY OF THEthat " the war was unnecessary." The following passageis extracted from the abovementioned document —"To the United States is delegated the power to callforth the militia to execute the laws, to suppress insurrection,and repel invasion. To the states respectively isreserved the entire controul of the militia, except in thecases specified. In this view of that important provisionof the constitution, the legislature fully accord with the decisionof his excellency the governor in refusing to complywith the requisition of the general government for a portionof the militia. While it is to be regretted that anydifference of opinion on that subject should have arisen,the conduct of the chief magistrate of this state, in maintainingits immunities and privileges, meets our cordialapprobation. The legislature also entertain no doubt thatthe militia of the state will, inter the direction of the ,be ever ready to perform their duty to thestate and nation in peace or war. They are aware thatin a protracted war, the burden upon the militia may becomealmost insupportable, as a spirit of acquisition andextension of territory appears to influence the councils ofthe nation, which may require the employment of thewhole regular forces of the United States in foreign con jquest, and leave our maritime frontier defenceless, or tobe protected solely by the militia of the states.At this period of anxiety among all classes of citizens,we learn with pleasure that a prominent cause of the waris removed by a late measure of the British cabinet. Therevocation of the orders in council, it is hoped, will be metby a sincere spirit of conciliation on the part of our administration,and speedily restore to our nation the blessingsof a solid and. honourable peace."Almost immediately after the close of this session ofthe general assembly of Connecticut, an election of membersof the house of representatives of that state occurred,when the returns showed, as far as evidence of publicHARTFORD CONVENTION. 269opinion can be derived from such a source, that the peopleof the state, by a very large majority, approved the coursepursued by the governor and council with regard to themilitia, and the measures adopted by the legislature atthe extra session in the preceding month of August. Theparties in the house stood — Federalists 163, Democrats 36leaving a majority of Federalists of 127.At the regular session, which was held in October following,an act was passed to establish a military corps forthe defence of the state. By it, the commander in chiefof the state was authorised to raise, by voluntary enlistments,a military corps for the defence and protection ofthe state, to suppress insurrections and repel invasion, andcompel obedience to the laws of the state, and of theUnited States, to consist of two regiments of infantry, fourcompanies of artillery, and four troops of horse, to serveduring the war, unless sooner discharged by law.This act of the legislature was carried into effect, anda corps of about two thousand men was raised under it,who were completely officered and equipped, and in thecourse of the war performed very essential services to theUnited States, as well as to the state to which they belonged.In July, 1812, the governor of Massachusetts issued ageneral order to the militia of that state, in which, aftersome preliminary remarks on the state of the country, anddirecting that the detachment often thousand men shouldbe completed without delay — it is added, — that as thatbody of men, being to be raised throughout the state, couldnot be assembled to repel a sudden invasion, and it wouldbe extremely burdensome to keep them constantly in service,and if they were assembled, they would not be adequateto the defence of the exposed points on a coast ofseveral hundred miles in extent, — it was ordered that theofficers of the whole militia of the state hold themselves,and the militia under their command, inconstant readiness270 HISTORY OF THEto assemble, and march to any part or parts of the state.Congress assembled at Washington on the 4th of November,1812. In the message to the houses on that occasion,the disputes with the New-england states relativeto the militia were referred to in the following manner : —Among the incidents to the measures of the war, I amconstrained to advert to the refusal of the governors ofMassachusetts and Connecticut, to furnish the requireddetachments of militia towards the defence of the maritimefrontier. The refusal was founded on a novel and unfortunateexposition of the provisions of the constitution relatingto the militia. The correspondences which will be beforeyou, contain the requisite information on the subject. Itis obvious that if the authority of the United States to callinto service and command the militia for the public defence,can be thus frustrated, even in a state of declared war, andof course under apprehensions of invasion preceding tear,they are not one nation for the purpose most of all requiringit ; and that the public safety may have no other resource,than in those large and permanent military establishmentswhich are forbidden by the principles of ourfree government, and against the necessity of which themilitia were meant to be a constitutional bulwark."This part of the message, which wears somewhat theappearance of a denunciation, was referred to a committeeof the Senate, of which William Beguiles, of Virginia, waschairman, whose feelings were strongly in favour of theadministration, and in support of their measures, and particularlyof the war. That this gentleman, from the peculiarityof his temper, as well as the feelings and sentimentsentertained by him, would gladly have seized this opportunityto manifest his animosity against the New-englandpoliticians, no one acquainted with him can doubt. Butafter keeping the subject before the committee during thewhole session, it was suffered to pass away without anyreport, or even the recommendation of a resolution of censCONVENTION. 271sure upon the course pursued by the governments of theNew-england states.And it is apparent, from the language of the messageitself, that the President found some difficulty in placingthe subject in a satisfactory manner before the nationallegislature. It says, " the refusal of the governors of Massachusettsand Connecticut to furnish the required detachmentsof militia towards the defence of the maritime frontier,was founded on a novel and unfounded exposition ofthe provisions of the constitution relating to the militia Ifthe exposition given by those governors was novel, it wasprobably owing to the fact, that no such call for the militiahad previously been made. Being made under suchcircumstances, it must necessarily have been novel. Thatit was unfortunate, depends upon the question whether itwas sound, and conformable to the letter and spirit of theconstitution ? If such was its character, however unfortunateit may have been for the policy of the administration,or the objects they lead in view, it must be considered asquite otherwise for the country, and emphatically so forthe militia — which will be allowed to be objects of muchhigher moment than the views or the popularity of anyindividuals for the time entrusted with the administrationof the government.The militia are composed of the whole male inhabitantsof the states, between the ages of eighteen and forty-five —that is, of the active physical force of the union. Theyare the inhabitants of the states in which they reside, andthey belong to the several states. By the second sectionof the second article of the constitution of the United States,it is provided that — '^^The President shall be commanderin chief of the navy and army of the United States, andof the militia of the several states, when called into theactual service of the United States." Here the militiaare described, in the constitution itself, as belonging to theseveral states, and the national government have no authorHISTORY OF THEcity over them, beyond that which the several states haverelinquished to them in the constitution. Any attempt onthe part of the national government, or of the President,to exercise such authority beyond that granted to them inthe constitution, would be usurpation, and would renderthe individuals exercising it liable to the consequences ofan usurpation of power.The only cases mentioned in the constitution, in whichthe congress have the power to call the militia of the statesinto their service, are " to execute the laws of the Union,suppress insurrections, and repel invasions." These arecases in which the existence of the government and thesafety of the country are in danger, and to preserve themthis extraordinary power was vested in the national government.But aware of the danger that might arise inplacing the whole military force of the country under thecommand of the national executive, it was wisely and prudently,and it may be added, fortunately provided, that theappointment of the officers of the militia should be reservedto the states respectively. By this reservation, the individualstates were secured against the danger of havingtheir own military forces taken from-under their own immediateauthority and controul, and placed under the commandof men who, if so disposed, might turn them againstthe governments to which they belonged, and the communitiesof which they formed a part, and thus subvert anddestroy their freedom and independence. It wa^manifest-ly the object of President Madison, when he called uponthe governors of Massachusetts and Connecticut for theirquotas of militia, under the act of Congress of April 10th,1812, to take them away from their own officers, appointedunder state authority, and put them under the commandof United States officers, because, as has been shown, hetook care in the call upon the first of those magistrates,to designate no officer of the rank which the number oftroops required ; and in the call upon the second of them,HARTFORD CONVENTION. 273to designate no officer of any rank, but to order the mento be placed immediately under the command of the UnitedStates officers in the garrisons at New-london andNew-Haven. That such was his object appears to beclear and unquestionable, not only from the circumstancesalready alluded to, but from the language of the messageabove recited. It is there said — " It is obvious that if theauthority of the United States to call into service and commandthe militia for the public defence, can be thus frustrated,even in a state of declared war, and of course underapprehensions of invasion preceding war, they are not onenation for the purpose most of all requiring it." The objectwas not only to call the militia into service, but intothe command of the United States. A defeat in the attemptto accomplish these objects, President Madison says,would show that the United States were not one nationfor the purpose most of all requiring it. " In such a stateof things," he adds, "the public safety may Ive no otherresource than in those large and permanent military establishmentswhich are forbidden by the principles of ourfree government, and against the necessity of which themilitia were meant to be a constitutional bulwark." Whatis meant by the expression of " apprehensions of invasionpreceding war" is not very apparent. The constitutioncontains no provision for calling forth the militia, in thecase of " apprehension c^ invasion preceding war." Thelanguage of that instrument is "to repel invasion." Itdoes not require a military force to repel an invasionwhich exists only in the fears or imagination of an individual,even if that individual should be placed at the headof the government ; and above all things, when such aninvasion is apprehended before war takes place.As it regards the militia, no doubt can be entertainedby those who are uninfluenced by party feelings or selfishinterests, the conduct of the governors of Massachusettsand Connecticut will be considered as of the highest HISTORY OF THE.portance. The duties of the militia of the several statesto the United States, are described in the clause of theconstitution which has been quoted. They are few, andeasily understood. When there occurs, in any portion ofthe Union, such a degree of resistance to the execution ofthe laws of the United States, as cannot be overcome bythe ordinary means which the laws provide, it is the dutyof the national government to call forth the militia to enforcethat execution. In the event of a domestic insurrectionagainst the government, which is too formidable tobe quelled in any other mode, resort must be had to themilitia for the accomplishment of the object. And whenthe country is invaded by a foreign enemy, upon a constitutionalcall from the national government, it is the dutyof the militia to repair to the place where the hostile inroadhas occurred, and repel the invader. Beyond thesespecific services, the United States have not, and cannothave, any claim upon the militia for military services.But there is nothing in the constitution that implies apower in the President of the United States to call themilitia into the field, when there are in his mind apprehensionsof an invasion by a foreign nation, preceding war.Much less is there any authority in the constitution to takethe militia from their homes, and away from their officers,shut them up in garrisons, under the command of UnitedStates officers, subject to the services and the duties of astanding army, and liable to the provisions and penaltiesof the "Rules and Articles of War." If there is anythingvaluable in being secured against any future attemptto exercise this unconstitutional power over the militia, ifthere is any gratification to the minds of free citizens of afree republic, in being exempt from all liability to the degradationof being forced into a standing army, and heldin bondage under tho despotic government which alwayscontrouls and regulates standing armies, they will be indebtedfor these privileges and this security to the firm.HARTFORD CONVENTION. 275independent, dignified stand taken by those virtuous andupright New-england magistrates.On the 2d of August, 1812, the United States frigateConstitution, commanded by Captain Isaac Hull, sailedon a cruise from the harbour of Boston. On the 19th ofthat month he fell in \\\'.\i the British frigate Guerriere,Captain Dares, and af r a short but severe engagementcaptured her. This brilliant achievement, as was perfectlynatural, caused great exultation throughout the country,and particularly among the friends of the administration ;and much merit was claimed on their behalf for such asplendid victory over the "Empress of the ocean." Noperson probably doubted that the Constitution, as well asothers of our ships of war, had been ordered to cruise inquestof the enemy, in order to give them specimens ofour skill and bravery upon their favourite element. Asfar as can be ascertained, no such orders were given, certainlyin the case of the abovementioned vessel.At the time when war was declared, the Constitutionlay at Annapolis in Maryland. On that day, the followingletter was addressed from the Navy Department to CaptainHull—*' NaiJy Department, 18th of June, 1812.This day war has been declared between the Unitedempire of Great Britain, Ireland, and their dependencies,and the United States of America, and their territories.And you are, with the force under your command, entitledto every belligerent right — to attack, and capture, and todefend. You will use the mo-st despatch to reach New York,after you have made up your complement of men, <fec. atAnnapolis. In your way from thence, you will not fail tonotice the British flag, should it present itself. I am informedthat the Belvedere is on our coast, but you are notto understand me as impelling you to battle, previously toyour having confidence in your crew, unless attacked ; or276 HISTORY OF THEwith a reasonable prospect of success, of which you are |!to be, at your discretion, the judge.*' You are to reply to this, and inform me of yourprogress."P» Hamilton."Captain Hull, of the United States Frigate Constitution."On the 3d of July, 1812, the following letter was writtento Captain Hull —^^ Navy Department, 3d July, 1812.'* As soon as the Constitution is ready for sea, you willweigh anchor, and proceed to New York.If on your way thither, you should fall in with anenemy's vessel, you will be guided in your proceedings byyour own judgment, bearing in mind however, that youare not voluntarily to encounter a force superior to yourown. On your arrival at New York, you will report yourselfto Commodore Rodgers. If he should not be in thatport, you will remain there till further orders."P. Hamilton."Captain Isaac Hull, Annapolis."These orders extended no further than to sailing theConstitution from Annapolis to New-york ; and great careis taken by the Secretary of the Navy to let Captain Hallunderstand, that upon the passage to the latter port,he must act upon his own discretion, if he should fall inwith any British vessels — that he was not to be understoodas impelling Captain Htdl to battle, previously to laingconfidence in his creiv, unless attacked; that he must act uponhis own Judgment, at the same time not voluntarily to encountera force superior to his oim. Here is certainly apraise-worthy degree of precaution, manifested by theSecretary of the Navy, against risk and responsibility,but no encouragement to fighting. That any further orderswere given to Captain Hull, between the 3d of JulyHARTFORD CONVENTION. 277and the 2d of August, is hardly to be supposed. If therewere such, they can be produced. If there were not, allthe credit of this gallant exploit is due to Captain Hull,and not the slightest portion of it to the administration.No special credit, however, was ever given to that braveand meritorious officer, on the score of his having goneupon this enterprise upon his own responsibility, and withoutthe orders of the government. A satisfactory reasonmay be given for this reserve on the part of the latter onthis subject. The Constitution having sailed without orders,had she been unsuccessful, the misfortune would havebeen justly ascribed to the rashness of her commander;if successful, the country would of course suppose that shehad been ordered by the government on the cruise, and theglory of the victory would redound to their credit, as wellas to that of the officers and crew.This sketch of the manner in which the government ofthe United States commenced their warlike operations inthe eastern states, will satisfy any person that it was notcalculated to render the war, or the administration, popularin that portion of the Union. The plan of removing theUnited States troops from the Atlantic coast, in order tomarch them to the frontiers of Canada, and thus leave theinhabitants for several hundred miles upon the coast exposedto the horrors of invasion, could not, in the natureof things, reconcile them to a war which they originallyconsidered unnecessary and extremely impolitic. Theresult of the choice of representatives for the state legislaturein Connecticut, in September, 1812, showed what wasthe tone of public feeling in that state. Governor Griswolddied during the October session of the general assembly,and of course was placed beyond the reach of humanapplause or censure, for the share he had borne in thetransactions which have been alluded to. But the votesof the freemen of that state, during the remainder of thewar, showed, in the most conclusive manner, their decided278 HISTORY OF THEapprobation of the measures he had recommended, andthe course he had pursued, for the security of the militia,and for the protection and preservation of the constitutionalrights of the state.And such also was the state of things in Massachusetts.In 1812, at an election which was held more than twomonths before the declaration of war, Governor Strongwas chosen by a majority of 1,370 votes only. In 1813,he received a majority of 13,974. In 1814, though opposedby a federalist of distinguished talents and character,his majority was 10,421. In October, 1814, thehouse of representatives of the state legislature passed aresolution approving of Governor Strong's conduct, in relationto the defence of the state, by a vote of 222 to 59.At the same session, a resolution authorising the governorto raise ten thousand men for the defence of the state,passed the same body by a vote of 252 to 71.In the month of June, 1813, a detachment of ships fromthe United States navy, consisting of the frigates UnitedStates and Macedonian, and the sloop of war Hornet,under the command of Commodore Decatur, in attemptingto pass through Long Island Sound to the ocean,found a British squadron at the entrance into the Sound,of such force that it became necessary for the former totake refuge in New-london harbour. As the garrisons inand near that port were not sufficient to resist the Britishsquadron on that station, strong apprehensions were entertainedthat the latter would force their way into theharbour, for the purpose of destroying the United Statesships. Those ships, by way of precaution, were moved upthe river Thames, several miles above New-london ; andapplication was immediately made to Governor Smith, thesuccessor to Governor Griswold, for a military force todefend the city of New-london, and to protect the UnitedStates squadron. Orders were issued without delay forthe detachment of a large body of militia, to be stationedHARTFORD COIN Mention. 279at and near New-london. This detachment, drawn partlyfrom the troops raised for the defence of the state, andthe residue from the militia, were speedily in the field, andwere placed under the command of Major-general Williamsof the militia ; and from that time until the departureof the squadron from the harbour of New-london,which was not until after the peace, a large military forcewas kept in service by the state, for the security of theUnited States ships of war blockaded at New-london.During the year 1813, Brigadier General Burbeck, ofthe United States army, commanded in the "military district,"in which Connecticut was included. This meansthat he resided as titular commander of a certain portionof country which for the occasion was called a " militarydistrict," but in which the United States had very fewtroops, — the appointment having been, beyond a doubt, forthe purpose of having a United States officer on the spot,to take the command of the militia whenever they mightbe ordered into the service of the nation. No difficulty,however, occurred during that year, between GeneralWilliams and General Burbeck on the score of precedence ;and at the close of the year, the expenses of the campaignwere allowed and paid by the United States.In 1814, General Burbeck having been removed to anotherstation, the command at New-london was placed inthe hands of Brigadier-general Gushing. The harbour ofNew-london was still blockaded, and the United States'squadron still required protection. In the month of April,a body of sailors and marines from the British fleet in theSound, entered Connecticut river, and landed at a villagein the town of Saybrook, a few miles above the mouth ofthe river, where they destroyed a considerable number ofmerchant vessels, which were there laid up, and retreatedbefore any force was brought to attack or resist them. Atthis time Long-island Sound was under the absolute controulof the British cruisers. In August following, an HISTORY OF THEtack was made upon Stonin|^ton, the easternmost town mConnecticut, bordering on the sea-shore, by a number ofBritish armed ships under the command of CommodoreHardy, which was repulsed with great gallantry by a smallbody of militia, hastily assembled there for the purpose.This movement of the enemy excited strong apprehensionsfor the safety of the squadron in the Thames ; and acall was forthwith made by General Cushing upon GovernorSmith for a detachment of militia for its security.On the 4th of July, 1814, the following circular wasaddressed to the governors of several of the states —War Department, July 14th, 1814.Sir, — The late pacification in Europe, offers to theenemy a large disposable force, both naval and military,and with it the means of giving to the war here, a characterof new and increased activity and extent.Without knowing with certainty that such will be itsapplication, and still less that any particular points willbecome the objects of attack, the President has deemed itadvisable, as a measure of precaution, to strengthen ourselveson the line of the Atlantic, and (as the principalmeans of doing this will be found in the militia) to invitethe executive of certain states to organize and hold in readiness,for immediate service, a corps of 93,500 men,under the laws of February, 1795, and the Isti of April,1814.The enclosed detail will show your excellency what,under this requisition, will be the quota ofAs far as uniform volunteer companies can be found,they will be preferred.The expediency of regarding (as well as in the designationsof the militia as of their places of rendezvous) thepoints, the importance or the exposure of which will bemost likely to attract the views of the enemy, need but besuggested.HARTFORD CONVENTION. 281^* A report of the organization of your quota, when completed,and of its place or places of rendezvous, will beacceptable.I have the honour to be, &lc.John Armstrong."** His Excellency the Governor of ."'* Detail of militia service, under the requisition of July4th, 1814. Connecticut, 3 regiments, viz. 300 artillery,2,700 infantry, total 3,000. General staff, 1 Major General,1 Brigadier General, 1 Deputy Quartermaster General,1 Assistant Adjutant General."By this order from the War Department, it appears that3,000 men were considered as forming a division, or inother words, a Major General's command. This wouldof course make 1,500 a brigade, or Brigadier General'scommand. The requisition from General Gushing, uponGovernor Smith, was for seventeen hundred of the threethousand men specified in the official call from the Secretaryof War — outnumbering a brigade, and thereforehaving a legal claim to be commanded by a Major General] — and this more especially as there was but one BrigadierGeneral detailed in that order. Doubtless BrigadierGeneral Gushing believed that no officer of higher rankthan himself was necessary, and therefore took care in hisrequisition, not to call for any officer who should take rankabove himself. In the course of the summer, in consequenceof the alarm produced by the hostile operations ofthe British, other detachments of the militia were orderedto various other points, until the whole number in the serviceamounted to twenty-three or twenty-four hundredmen. This was considerably larger than that of the precedingyear. Being therefore warranted in the measureby the example of 1813, when the whole number of menwas smaller, and by the conduct of the national govern282 HISTORY OF THEment in paying the troops of that year, as well as by thelarge body of men in the field, a Major General was orderedto take the command. And when, in addition to these considerations,it is recollected that all, or nearly all the expenseof both years was incurred in defence of the nationalproperty vested in Decatur's squadron, no person couldhave suspected that so material a distinction child havebeen drawn between the cases, as that the expenses ofone year would have been paid without hesitation, andthose of the other peremptorily refused. Such, however,was the fact ; and the state was left, after all the burdenswhich had been thrown upon them by a war, the justice ofwhich they questioned, and the policy of which they entirelycondemned, to provide for the support of the wholebody of militia ordered into the service of the UnitedStates, and essentially for the security of their ships ofwar, during the year 1814. The change of conduct in thegovernment of the United States on the foregoing subject,may perhaps be accounted for, at least in part, by the occurrenceof peace just after the close of the year 1814.The intelligence that peace had been concluded, relievedthem from all apprehensions of further embarrassmentsfrom the continuance of hostilities ; and this afforded anopportunity for the administration to manifest their resentmentfor the measures pursued in the Jew-Englandstates, on the subject of the war, and particularly in regardto the militia.In the year 1817 agents were appointed by the state ofMassachusetts, to present the claim of that state for a remunerationfor the expenditure which had been incurredfor the various detachments of militia for the defence ofthe state, during the war. After alluding to the call byGeneral Dearborn, in 1812, which has already been advertedto, those agents, in the representation accompanyingtheir claim, remark —The next request received by the governor, was inHARTFORD CONVENTION. 283July, 1814, when the probability of attack having increased,the general requested eleven hundred men might beordered out for the defence of the more exposed parts ofthe sea-coast — this order was complied with, the troopsplaced under the authority of the United States, and theservice performed ; part of the said troops, to the numberrequested by General Dearborn, having been stationed atCastine and Mathias, prior to the capture of those placesby the enemy."On the 5th of September, 1814, General Dearbornagain made a requisition on the governor of massachusetts*,for a body of militia, when the general order No. 2, herewithpresented, was issued on the 6th of the same month,and every measure taken to guard against the attacks ofthe enemy, — a considerable body of the elite of the militiafrom the interior, was ordered into immediate service,and marched and encamped on the sea-board, and thewhole of the militia were enjoined to hold themselves inconstantreadiness, and were called upon 'by every motiveof the love of country, of honour, and sympathy for theirfellow-citizens, who might be suffering the perils of war,to maintain the most perfect state of preparation, and tomove when called to the scene of action with the utmostcelerity ;' but the difficulties which had arisen, and thecomplaints that had been made, from placing the militiain the immediate service of the United States, under UnitedStates officers, on former occasions, had been such asto induce the belief, it would be inexpedient, if not hazardous,to repeat the order, without having the power toenforce it ; an arrangement was, however, subsequentlymade with General Dearborn, to place part of the militiain the forts of the United States in the harbour of Boston,under the direction of his son. General H. A. S. Dearborn,and the very efficient body of troops aforementioned, werestationed in the vicinity of the forts.A fourth requisition was made by General Dearborn284 HISTORY OF THEto guard the prisoners at Pittsfield, but the same causesas in the other case, in addition to the belief, that in themidst of a thickly settled population, the danger of escapefrom the existing guard, or of insurrection, did not requirea compliance with the call — the event verified the soundnessof the opinion.These are all the calls for the militia which are knownto have been made, and it is believed it can be shown, thatthe omission to place the militia in the service of the UnitedStates was a matter of form rather than of fact — thatthe protection of the country was never for a momentabandoned, and that the militia were assembled and inreadiness to act, whenever emergencies appeared to requirethem, that the arrangements adopted were judicious,and in several instances predicated upon the wishes of theofficers of the United States, or of those who had the confidenceof the general government." —The authorities of Massachusetts and Connecticut havebeen so often charged with having refused to order outthe militia of those states, upon the call of the Presidentof the United States, and they have been go frequently andso loudly reproached for this conduct, that there are goodreasons for believing that a great proportion of the inhabitantsof the United States, and especially that large numberof them who have come upon the stage of active lifesince the close of the war of 1812, have been fully impressedwith the idea that the militia of those states werenever in the field during the war, but were entirely w withheldfrom the public service. The facts which have beenstated will serve to remove such an impression, whereverit may exist. The militia were never withheld from thepublic service, but in both states, when the exigencies ofthe times required, were in large numbers in the field.And in Connecticut, they were not merely encamped forthe purpose of preventing or repelling invasion, but theywere out in large numbers, for two successive seasons, for•4JHARTFORD CONVENTION. 285the purpose of defending the property of the United States,and preventing the destruction of the squadron of armedships in the harbour of New-london. The refusal of thegovernors of those states to order out the niihtia, at therequisition of General Dearborn, in 1812, was on widelydifferent ground. That ground has been already alludedto. It was solely because an attempt was made to takethe militia away from their own officers, and to place themunder the command of officers of the United States, thusdepriving the states of their natural defenders, and themilitia of their constitutional right, and in fact incorporatingthem into the standing army. Probably they wereinduced to take this course, by a wish to change the characterof the war from defensive to offensive ; and to accomplishthis object, the absurd and ridiculous project ofattempting to conquer the Canadass was devised. Theresult proved, that the character of the war was not easilyaltered. The first campaigns on that frontier, showed itto be as truly defensive on the inland frontier, as it wasupon the Atlantic coast.There was nothing in the mode of conducting the warthat was in the slightest degree calculated to secure theconfidence of the country, and especially of that part ofit where it was the most unpopular. Neither the plan ofgeneral operations, nor the character of the men appointedto carry them into effect, had any tendency to convince theopponents of the war, that it would prove to be either honourableor advantageous to the United States. The militaryoperations against Upper Canada, which was the firstobject of hostile movements, were not only disastrous, butinthe highest degree disgraceful. One army, with itscommander-in-chief, was captured almost without firing ashot ; and very little reputation was gained the first seasonalong the whole line of the inland frontier.Instances of great bravery and good conduct occasionallyoccurred; but nothing appeared which manifested HISTORY OF THEextinguished military talents, skill, or experience. In thePresident's message at the opening of Congress in November,]812, it is said —"With these blessings [that is health, plenty, &c.] aremingled the pressures and vicissitudes incident to the stateof war into which the United States have been forced, bythe perseverance of a foreign power in its system of injusticeand aggression."Previous to its declaration it was deemed proper, as ameasure of precaution and forecast, that a considerableforce should be placed in the Michigan territory, with ageneral view to its security, and, in the event of war, suchoperations in the uppermost Canada as would interceptthe hostile influence of Great Britain over the savages,obtain the command of the lake on which that part ofCanada borders, and maintain co-operating relations withsuch forces as might be most conveniently employed againstother parts. Brigadier General Hull was charged withthis provisional service; having under his command a bodyof troops, composed of regulars, and of volunteers fromthe state of Ohio. Having reached his destination afterhis knowledge of the war, and possessing discretionaryauthority to act offensively, he passed into the neighbouringterritory of the enemy, with a prospect of easy and victoriousprogress. 'Vie expedition nevertheless terminatedunfortunately, not only in a retreat to the town and fort ofDetroit, but in the surrender of both, and of the gallantcorps commanded by that officer. The causes of this painfulreverse will be investigated by a military tribunal.Our expectation of gaining the command of the lakes,by the invasion of Canada from Detroit, having been disappointed,measures were instantly taken to provide onthem a naval force superior to that of the enemy. Fromthe talents and activity of the officer charged with thisobject, every thing that can be done may be expected.Should the present season not admit of complete success.HARTFORD CONVENTION. 287the progress made will ensure for the next a naval ascendancy,there it is essential to our permanent peace with,and control over the savages."The mortification arising from the disasters on theCanada frontier, were in some measure alleviated by thesuccess of some of our armed ships upon the ocean. Thevictory obtained by the frigate Constitution, under thecommand of Captain Hull, over the British frigate Guer-riere, in the month of August, had a tendency to soothethe irritable feelings of the administration, as well as thoseof their friends who were ardently devoted to the prosecutionof the war. Other brilliant achievements at seaoccurred, in a high degree honourable to our naval character; but the capture of a few armed ships was calculatedrather to prolong, than to shorten the contest ; andto heighten, rather than allay the fears of the states uponthe sea-coast, of hostile visits and depredations from theenemy.No doubt can rest on any mind, that the government ofthe United States expected to make a serious impressionon Great Britain, by carrying the war into the Britishprovinces. It appears by the above quotation from thePresident's message, that General Hull was entrustedwith discretionary pov.'ers to act offensively," and thatthe object was to get " the command of the lakes by theinvasion of Canada from Detroit." And this may serveto explain the reasons why orders were given to GeneralDearborn, at so early a stage of the war, to march theregular troops away from the Atlantic coast to the Canadafrontier, leaving the former entirely exposed to the invasionsof the enemy, unless repelled by the forces of theindividual states adjoining that coast. Eventually thoseinvasions were made. It has been seen that Savbrookand Bennington in Connecticut were the subjects of them,and attempts were made to effect landings at other placesbordering upon Long Island Sound. In Massachusetts,288 HISTORY OF THECalling, Mathias, and Passport, in the District of Maine,were all taken possession oi' by British forces, and theadjoining country, to a considerable extent, was threatenedwith subjugation, and of course was kept in a stateof great alarm and apprehension.In 1814, when invasions had actually occurred, and depredationswere threatened along the New-england coast,an 1 those states were left to depend exclusively upon theirown means of defence, while the burdens arising from themilitary arrangements for their own security were becomingmore and more severe, at such a moment, when thelegal pecuniary demands of the government were fullyexacted, the supplies and pay of the militia were withdrawnby the orders of the national government, and thewhole weight of supporting them was, in a petulant fit ofresentment, thrown upon the states. By this time defensivemeasures had become absolutely necessary, not onlyto secure the property, but the persons of the inhabitantsalong the coast. The character of the war, whether thatwar was originally necessary or unnecessary, just or unjust,had ceased to be an object of discussion or consideration.The inhabitants of the states where the declarationof war had been most pointedly condemned, were nowplaced in situations where considerations of a differentnature came home with full force to their circumstancesand feelings. Self-defence, the protection of their familiesand fire-sides, became objects of immediate and pressingnecessity to the people near the Atlantic shore; and nosacrifices of a pecuniary nature, or of personal feeling,could stand in the way of individual or domestic security.It would not be practicable, without far transcendingthe limits of this work, to give a minute and circumstantialhistory of the manner in which the military operationsin the New-england states were conducted. In July,1813, the British squadron ofl' New-london was reinforcedby the addition of several armed vessels, and con-hartfordCONVENTION-289sister of two ships of the line, two frigates, a. brig, and anumber of transports. This, of course, excited greatalarm among the inhabitants, as that city was far moreexposed to an attack from the water, than the ships belongingto Decatur's squadron. On the first week in JulyGovernor Smith had been employed in detaching a bodyof militia to New-london, and had left Hartford, the seatof government, for his residence in the western part of thestate, when he received information from General Bur-beck,the United States officer commanding at New-london,informing him that orders had been received from theSecretary of War for the discharge of the militia at thatplace. In less than a week after the receipt of the order,and the consequent dismission of the troops, the additionalforce which has been mentioned, arrived, and joined theBritish squadron. The alarm produced by this event, andthe exposure of the city of New-london to an attack, inducedGeneral Burbeckto dispatch an express to GovernorSmith, and request a detachment of militia for the protectionof that city. A similar application was made on behalfof the inhabitants of New-london; and orders wereimmediately issued for a strong body of the militia to repairto that station. On the 20th of the same monthGovernor Smith convened the council, to confer with themon the state of affairs, and to submit to them the measureshe had adopted in the emergency which had so recentlyoccurred. They unanimously approved of his conduct;and advised him to detach an additional body of mf?n forthe defence of New-london.How this dismission of the militia, and the subsequentsudden call for a new detachment, all occurring within thecompass of a single week, is to be accounted for, has notbeen explained. Whether it was owing to a fit of caprice,or to some other cause which it was thought on the scoreof prudence required concealment, remains among themysteries of the period. Until an explanation is made,290 HISTORY OF THEthe public must be left to form their own conclusions. Towhatever other cause it may be ascribed, no person willcharge it to the account of an eager solicitude, on the partof the national government, to protect the inhabitants onthe sea-coast of the state, against the inroads of theenemy.In his speech at the opening of the session of the generalassembly of that state in October, 1813, GovernorSmith alluded to the occurrences which have been mentioned,in the following manner —The cause which first occasioned the array of a militaryforce at New-london has not ceased to operate.Accordingly, at the request of the general government, aconsiderable body of troops has been kept at that station,I have endeavoured, conformably to the advice of thecouncil, to divide the duty between the militia and themilitary corps, and to spread detachments of the formerover the several brigades. To men, however, who areaccustomed to different pursuits, the service could not beotherwise than burdensome. The remark is particularlyapplicable to the regiments in the neighbourhood of New-london.From their proximity to the scene of action, theywere of course first brought into the field, and althoughthey were dismissed as speedily as circumstances wouldpermit, yet the frequent alarms, produced by sudden augmentationof the enemy's force, as frequently compelledthem to return. They have therefore suffered losses andprivations which could be equalled only by the patienceand magnanimity with which they were endured. Theirhardships were unhappily increased by an occurrence,which, as it is intimately connected with these events, oughtnot to pass unnoticed. An order from the war departmentfor the dismission of all the militia then on duty,arrived at the moment a detachment from the distant brigadeswas on the march to relieve those who had been sorepeatedly called into service. Believing the general go-hartfordCONVENTION. governmenthad the right of determining what degree offorce would suffice to protect the national property, andunwilling to obtrude the services of our citizens upon thepublic when they were not desired, especially in a seasonso very important to our husbandmen, I issued instructionsgiving full effect to the order. Scarcely howeverhad the disbanded troops reached their several homes, beforea request for the militia was renewed, enforced by anurgent petition from the principal inhabitants of New-londonand Groton. This combined application I felt nodisposition to refuse. The requisite aid was immediatelyordered : but from the necessity of the case, men who hadbeen just discharged, were obliged to repair again to thepost of danger, and to remain until a new detachmentcould be levied and brought to their relief. The groundof this procedure is hitherto unexplained."In the course of the session, a joint committee of thetwo houses was appointed to take into consideration thesubject of the war, who made a report, from which thefollowing passage is copied —The committee cannot forbear to express their opinionon a subject intimately connected with the object of theirappointment. They consider the general plan of warfareadopted by the Administration of the National Government,as not conformable to the spirit of the constitutionof the United States. That instrument was formed, andadopted, among other things, for the express purposeOF PROVIDING FOR THE COMMON DEFENCE OF THE Nation.The war in which we are now engaged, was declaredhy the government of the United States. The contestis with a nation possessed of an immense naval force,and capable of annoying us in no other manner than bymeans of that force. To its attacks a long extent of seacoast,stretching from one extremity of the nation to theother, and containing a vast proportion of its populationand wealth, was peculiarly exposed. Against the dangers292 HISTORY OF THEand calamities of a war thus declared, and with such anenemy, the inhabitants of the cities, towns, villages, andplantations along that coast, had an undoubted and imperativeright to such protection as the nation could provideInstead of which, the regular forces have been, almostwithout exception, ordered away from the Atlantic frontier,to the interior of the country, for the purpose of carryinghostilities into the territory of unoffending provinces,and in pursuit of conquests, which, if achieved, would probablyproduce no solid benefit to the nation ; while the seacoastis left exposed to the multiplied horrors usually producedby an invading and exasperated enemy."The events and transactions of 1814, immediately connectedwith the military operations in Connecticut, havebeen already adverted to. The burthens thrown upon theNew-england states at the commencement of the war in1812, had been increasing in weight and severity throughthe two following years, until, by the refusal of the nationalgovernment to fin-nisi supplies and pay for thetroops employed in the defence of the coast, and particularlyin Connecticut to protect the naval squadron nearNew-london, had become nearly intolerable. In themeantime the national government, embarrassed by thefruits of their own rashness, in declaring war when theywere totally unprepared with the means of carrying it onwith the least prospect of success, were driven to the necessityof raising money by loans, and this at an extravagantrate of premiums to the lenders. As a large portionof the wealth of the country was in the hands of men whoconsidered the war not only unnecessary but unjust, applicationwas of course made to this description of persons toadvance the means of defraying the expenses to which itnecessarily subjected the government. Voluntary loans byindividuals who viewed the controversy in the light whichhas been alluded to, were to a gif!^t extent declined, andmuch clamour was raised, throughout a large part of theHARTFORD CONVENTION. 293country, against them, for their want of patriotism in thiscourse of conduct. It is a little remarkable that a chargeof this description should be preferred, under the circumstancesof the case, against individuals who were situatedas the capitalists in the New-england states were. Thegovernment had, in their opinion, plunged the nation intoa war unnecessarily, and without having previously madethe requisite preparations for carrying it on with any reasonablehope of success. The war had exposed them tothe most serious calamities from a naval enemy ; and toincrease the evils under which they laboured, the governmenthad withdrawn their troops from the sea-coast,more immediately liable to hostile visitation, and left themto defend themselves, or to suffer all the horrors of invasion,while the national forces which ought to have defendedand protected them, were despatched to a distant region,on a quixotic expedition, after adventures in no waylikely to raise the reputation of the government, or to promotethe substantial interests of the country. And to addto all these, during the year 1814, when the dangers werethe most threatening, and the fears of the inhabitants onthe coast were excited to the highest pitch, the government,in a fit of splenetic resentment, withheld all suppliesof provisions and pay from the large bodies of militia thusforced into the field in .self-defence. It certainly waspresuming much when that government called upon thewealthy men of the eastern states to lend them money toexpend in attempts to subdue the British provinces, atthe same moment that the families and firesides of thelatter were exposed to the inroads and devastations of anexasperated foe. Nor would an appeal to the feelings ofpatriotism be likely to add much force to a call of this description.But on what ground is it, that men are bound by feelingsof patriotism, to lend their money to the governmentto carry on a war, the effects of which are in the most HISTORY OF THEtree degree disastrous to them, and the principle of whichthey conscientiously an-d utterly condemn ? As good citizens,they will of course yield obedience to the laws; andif the laws exact money from them to support the war,they will pay it. But voluntary loans stand upon a verydifferent basis. As honest men, they cannot, consistentlywith their integrity, voluntarily contribute their aid in prosecutingan unjust and unnecessary war, because such acourse of conduct would involve them in the guilt, as wellas the calamities of the controversy. Besides, is a manto be forced, under any circumstances, to lend money tohis government ? The idea is incompatible with the plainestprinciples of freedom. In the dark ages, the despoticsovereigns of Europe did not hesitate, by the most crueltortures, to force one class of their subjects to advancethem money, whenever they thought proper to make sucha requisition. But in modern times, the practice of forcingcontributions, from members of civilized communities,is left exclusively to highway robbers and associationsof banditti. Civilized governments dare not raisemoney in this mode. On the broad principle of freedom,freemen have a perfect and unquestionable right to withholdtheir contributions of money from any object, let therequisition proceed from what source it may. It has beenurged in reference to this subject, that the character of thecountry was at stake, and every man was bound, let hispolitical principles or feelings have been what they might,to bury those principles and feelings, and support the war,and save the reputation of the country. The opposers ofthe war viewed the matter in a somewhat different light.The administration of the national government, and theirimmediate partizans and supporters, made the war. Itwas their war, and not that of the country. A large portionof the country was opposed to it, and used every effortto prevent its occurrence. Their remonstrances were notlistened to, and the war was declared. The responsibilityHARTFORD CONVENTION. 295of it, therefore, rested upon those who brought it upon thenation. It was not, then, the character of the countrythat was at stake, except so far as the country was responsiblefor the acts of its government — but it was the characterof the administration. It is probable that the opposersof the war did not, under the peculiar circumstancesof the case, consider themselves bound to make any extraordinaryefforts or sacrifices to save the reputation of anadministration in whom they never placed confidence, andwhose misuse of the powers with which they had been entrusted,had reduced them to a state of great peril, andsubjected them to the most lively apprehensions. Theprinciple contended for by those who claimed it to be theduty of capitalists, whether they approved or disapprovedof the war, upon the broad ground of public spirit and patriotismto advance their money to carry on the war, maybebrought to a test respecting which there is very littleroom for mistake. Laws were passed early in the controversy,authorising the government to accept the servicesof volunteer troops. Probably such services were offeredin a variety of instances ; but did any man ever pretendthat the great body of the militia throughout the Union,were bound, by a regard to the character of the country,voluntarily to shoulder their muskets and march into thefield .'' It is certain that men are of more importance in awar than even money, because the latter is wanted almostexclusively for the purpose of obtaining the former. Butwhat proportion even of the able-bodied then of the UnitedStates, who were the supporters of the administration, andof course of the war, ever tendered their personal servicesin the field to the government ? And who ever thought ofreproaching and reviling them, because they preferredstaying at home, to risking their lives in the camp, as enemiesto their country, or even as wanting in the properfeelings of patriotism ? When the war in Europe wasbrought to a close by the downfall of Bonaparte, and the296 HISTORY OF THEoverthrow of his imperial power and tyranny, then the authorsof the war between the United States and GreatBritain became seriously alarmed for their popularity, aswell as for the safety of the country. Under the excitementwhich their well grounded fears for their own safetyproduced, they made every exertion in their power toenlist the nation at large in the contest. The meansadopted for this purpose, were not of the most reputablekind. Instances of gross imposition upon the people atlarge are exhibited in the course of this work, which willjustify this assertion ; while the original policy which led tothe war, and the objects for which it was professedly declared,must satisfy every reasonable and dispassionatemind, that its character was not national. In addition tothis, the fact that it was political, and intended to answerthe purposes of politicians of a daring and ambitious character,was well known at the time to those most intimatelyacquainted with the public affairs of the nation.In the course of the year 1814, the progress of the warupon the sea-coast became in the highest degree alarmingand destructive. It appeared to be the object of the Britishto render hostilities as distressing to the inhabitants,especially upon the southern division of the Union, as theravages of invading armies could make them. It is notthe object of this work to give a history of the war. Thesubject is alluded to for the purpose of showing how miserablyit was conducted on the part of the United States,and how the inhabitants along the Atlantic shore were leftexposed to its depredations and miseries, while the nationalgovernment were either totally unable, or not disposedto yield them any protection. In the month ofAugust, having entire command of the Chesapeake Bay,the British landed a force in the state of Maryland, andmoved forward towards the city of Washington, the seatof the United States government. An attempt was madeby the militia of that state to resist them, particularly atHARTFORD CONVENTION. 297Bladensburgh, but without success ; and their progresstowards the capital was so rapid, that the President, andother high officers of the government, were under the necessityof fleeing into the country with great precipitation,to avoid falling into the hands of the enemy. During thetime in which they held possession of the city of Washington,they destroyed the public buildings, and committedother depredations, in a manner and to an extent, thatwould have better characterized an armed body of Vandals,than the well disciplined forces of a modern civilizedgovernment. At the same time, a squadron of armedships sailed up the Potomac, and took possession of thecity of Alexandria, where they contented themselves withcarrying away all public and private naval stores, theshipping then in port, and merchandise of every description.These enterprises were followed by an attack uponthe city of Baltimore, where the British were repulsedwith considerable loss ; and among the officers who werekilled on that occasion, was General Ross, the commandingofficer of the expedition. It was also well understood,that the plan of their operations included attacks upon theother principal cities and towns upon the sea-coast, suchas Charleston, Savannah, &.c. and the character of thewar was rapidly degenerating into a system of barbarousinvasion of towns and villages, the plundering of privateinhabitants, and the burning of vessels, stores, fcc. andspreading ruin and desolation along the sea-shore.The disasters of 1814 showed, in the most conclusivemanner, the incapacity, or indisposition of the nationalgovernment to protect the country against the calamitiesbrought upon it by the war into which they had plunged it ;and the uncivilized manner in which it was carried on duringthat year, greatly alarmed the fears of the people, whocould not but see that the inhabitants more immediatelyexposed to the inroads of naval squadrons, were in dangerof experiencing the most severe misfortunes and sufferings298 HISTORY OF THEAnd what added much to the general anxiety, was thepublication of a message from the President to congress,in the month of October of that year, containing an accountfrom the American commissioners for negotiatingpeace at Ghent, of the extravagant demands of the Britishcommissioners, of certain principles as the basis of negotiation.By a despatch from the former, dated August19th, 1814, it was stated, that it was demanded as a sinequa non on the part of Great Biitam, that the Indians whohad been engaged in hostilities on the side of that nation,and against the United States, " should be included in thepacification ; and as incident thereto, the boundaries oftheir territories should be permanently established." Theobject of this requisition was stated to be, "that theIndians should remain as a permanent barrier betweenour western settlements and the adjacent British provinces,to prevent them from being conterminous to eachother : and that neither the United States nor Great Britainshould ever thereafter have the right to purchase oracquire any part of the territory, thus recognized as belongingto the Indians."It was stated further, that there should be a revision ofthe boundary line between the dominions of Great Britainand the United States ; and in explanation of this requisition,it was said that — " Experience had proved that thejoint possession of the lakes, and a right, common to both nations,to keep tip a naval force on them, necessarily producedcollisions, and rendered peace insecure. As Great Britaincould not be supposed to expect to make conquests in thatquarter, and as that province was essentially weaker thanthe United States, and exposed to invasion, it was necessaryfor its security that Great Britain should require thatthe United States shoidd hereafter keep no armed naval forceon the western lakes, from Lake Ontario to Lake Superior yboth inclusive ; that they should not erect any fortified or militarypost or establishment on the shores of those lakes ; and:&iHARTFORD CONVENTION. 299that they should not maintain those u-hich are already existing.This must be considered, they said, as a moderatedemand, since Great Britain, if she had not disclaimedthe intention of any increase of territory, might, with propriety,have asked a cession of the adjacent Americanshores. The commercial navigation and intercourse wouldbe left on the same footing as heretofore. It was expresslystated, in answer to a question (by the Americancommissioners) that Great Britain was to retain the rightof having an armed naval force on those lakes, and ofholding military posts and establishments on their shores."This last demand, respecting the exclusive occupationof the lakes, was not stated as a sine qua non; the Britishcommissioners, when inquired of respecting that point,declined giving a positive answer.The message and documents relating to this subject, sofaras the executive thought proper to make them public,were published without delay ; and as was doubtless expectedand intended, they excited much feeling throughoutthe Union. Not an individual in the United States,however decidedly he might originally have been opposedto the declaration of war, and however strongly he mighthave disapproved the general policy and measures of theadministration, could fail of rejecting such extravagantdemands as the basis of a treaty of peace. Overlookingwhat had passed, there was a general determination toresist such a requisition at every hazard. Some otherfacts relating to this subject, of which the community atlarge have, even to this day, been kept in ignorance, maynow with much propriety be adverted to. A letter fromWashington, dated October 15th, 1814, from a gentlemanof the highest respectability, and directed to his friend,contains the following passage —The instructions to our commissioners were communicatedand read on the 14th. They are voluminous, andcontain a great deal of reasoning. The greatest part are300 HISTORY OF THEordered to he printed. The subjects of blockade and impressment,after the fall of Bonaparte, were entirely abandoned.With respect to security on the lakes, our commissioners wereinstructed to make the same demands of the British, as theyhave made on us — that is, that the British shall keep no forcethere, iDhile fine might keep as large a force as ice thoughtproper. Some of the party say, that the British must havehad a knowledge of these instructions, and that ,instead of finding out other people's secrets at London,has probably lost his own."It is doubted whether a more singular occurrence thanthis ever took place in the history of any government. Thewar was declared against Great Britain, at a time, andunder circumstances as irritating to that government, ascan well be imagined. It was also against the decidedopinions and feelings of a large portion of our own countrymen.But events had occurred which had changed theface of things, and gave that nation the vantage groundagainst us ; and it therefore became necessary to excitethe resentment of the people of the United States, andunite them in opposition to the extravagant demands ofthe enemy as the price of peace. For those purposes theinstructions containing these demands, were communicatedto Congress, and the country, as the sine qua non, theonly basis on which Great Britain would consent to negotiatefor a treaty of peace ; and as has been remarked, itproduced the intended effect — the country was greatly excited,and manifested a determination, under no circumstances,to yield to such requisitions. Now it seems thatthough \xe declared the war, and were in a state of alarmfor the result, yet onr commissioners were instructed to makethe same extravagant demands of the British, that theymade of us ; but the instructions to our commissionerswere never presented to the British negotiators, and werekept back from the public, while those of the British weredistributed through the country, to rouse the public indigoHARTFORD CONVENTION. 301nation. Nor have the instructions relating to this particularsubject ever been published to this time.The facts now disclosed warrant the belief, that theBritish government had, by some means or other, becomeacquainted with the nature of the instructions to our commissioners,and therefore shaped theirs to meet them.But the British commissioners having disclosed their instructions,ours had address enough to keep their own outof sight, doubtless for the purpose of enabling the Presidentto produce a strong effect upon the public mind, andto induce all descriptions of people to unite in oppositionto such extravagant demands. The effect was produced;but it was the result of a gross imposition, not to sayfraud, upon the people of the United States.The situation in which the state of Connecticut wasplaced early in the year 1814, may be in some measureascertained from the following extract from the speechdelivered by Governor Smith to the legislature of thatstate, at the opening of their session in the month of May.I am not informed that any effectual arrangementsare made by the national government to put our sea-coastinto a more respectable state of defence. Should the planof the last campaign be revived, and especially should thewar retain the desolating character it has been made toassume, the states on the Atlantic border cannot be insensibleto the dangers which await them. ' To provide forthe common defence' was an avowed, and it may withtruth be said the chief purpose for which the present constitutionwas formed. How far this object is promoted byaiming at foreign conquest, and resigning our most wealthyand populous frontier to pillage and devastation, becomesa momentous inquiry. Whatever measures, gentlemen,you may think proper to adopt on the occasion, I feel assuredthey will flow from an equal regard to your ownrights and to the interests of the Union. In any event, Iam persuaded that we shall place no reliance on the HISTORY OF THEbalance of a declared enemy, and that if the aid to whichwe are entitled is withheld, the means which God hasgiven us will be faithfully employed for our safety."It is with concern I lay before you an official accountof the destruction of a very considerable number of privatevessels at Saybrook, by a detachment from the Britishsquadron. The misfortune is embittered by the reflectionthat it would probably have been prevented by a smallforce stationed at Fort Fenwick, at the entrance of Connecticutriver. It will be recollected that a guard, authorisedby the United States, was kept at that post nearly thewhole of the last season. It was dismissed early in December.Information of the exposed condition of thesevessels, and of the consequent apprehensions of the townfor its own safety, was duly transmitted to the war department,and the attention of the government to the importantobjects was earnestly solicited. It was presumed, asthere were regular troops in the vicinity, either that therequest would be promptly complied with, or if such anarrangement was inconvenient, that this government wouldbe frankly and seasonably apprized of it. In the latterevent the force of the state would have been applied notless readily to the protection of the persons and propertyof our citizens, than it had been to the defence of the nationalsquadron. Under these circumstances then existing,the Council, whom I particularly consulted, could not thinkit advisable for the state government to interfere."The war having been declared for the reasons assisted,and hostilities having commenced, and prosecuted, it hasnot been an object of importance to trace the course ofthe administration with regard to the mode of conductingit, but to ascertain the principles on fVhich they would bewilling to bring it to a close. It will be borne in mind,that immediately after the declaration of war was published,and long before the news of that event could havereached England, the orders in council were repealed byHARTFORD CONVENTION. 303the British government, leaving no other acknowledge-edcause of war except the subject of impressment. Thestrong language used by the President, and the Secretaryof State, on various occasions, has been noticed. Afterthe offer of mediation by the emperor of Russia, the President,professing to entertain no doubts that Great Britainwould accede to the proposition, nominated commissionersto negotiate under that mediation, and furnished them witha long set of instructions, relative to the formation of atreaty of peace. Those instructions related principally tothe subject of impressment. In the course of them it issaid — "I have to repeat, that the great object which youhave to secure, in regard to impressment, is, that our fla'shall protect the crew:' — Again — "Upon the whole subjectI have to observe, that your first duty will be to concludea peace with Great Britain, and that you are authorized todoit, in case yon obtain a satisfactory stipulation against impressment,one which shall secure, under our flag, protection tothe crew. The manner in which it may be done has beenalready stated, with the reciprocal stipulations which youmay enter into, to secure Great Britain against the injuryof which she complains. If this encroachment of GreatBritain is not provided against, the United States have appealedto arms in vain. If your efforts to accomplish itshould fail, all further negotiations will cease, and you willreturn home without delay''These instructions bear date April 15th, 1813.The British government having declined the offer ofRussian mediation, a proposition was made to open a negotiationat Gothenburg. This having been agreed to, instructionswere made out to the United States commissionersaccordingly. In those instructions, after a referenceto those previously given, when it was supposed the negotiationswould have been held at St. Petersburg, and adeclaration that they were to be considered as applicable,except where modified by the present, to the negotiations304 HISTORY OF THEabout to take place; the following passage occurs — "Onimpressment, as to the right of the United States to beexempted from it, I have nothing new to add. The sentimentsof the President have undergone no change on that importantsubject. This degrading practice must cease; ourslag must protect the crew, or the United States cannot considerthemselves an independent nation's''On the I4th of February, 1814, additional instructionswere forwarded to the commissioners, in which the followingpassage appears — " By an article in the former instructions,you were authorised in making a treaty to preventimpressment from our vessels, to stipulate, provideda certain specified term could not be agreed on, that itmight continue in force for the present war in Europeonly. At that time it seemed probable that the war mightlast many years. Recent appearances, however, indicatethe contrary. Should peace be made in Europe, as thepractical evil of which we complain in regard to impressmentwould cease, it is presumed the British governmentwould have less objection to a stipulation to forbear thatpractice for a specified term, than it would have, shouldthe war continue. In concluding a peace with Great Britain,even in case of a previous general peace in Europe,it is important to the United States to obtain such a stipulation."It will be recollected, that the letter from which the precedingpassage is copied, was written after the failure ofBonaparte's Russian expedition, and the disastrous retreatof his forces from Moscow. On the 24th of March, 1814,the Secretary of State wrote a short letter to the commissioners,in which he says — " If a satisfactory arrangementcan be concluded with Great Britain, the sooner it can beaccomplished the happier for both countries. If such anarrangement cannot be obtained, it is important for theUnited States to be acquainted with it without delay."When the war was declared by the United States, inHARTFORD COiWENTION- 3051812, Bonaparte was just preparing to invade Russia withan immense army, and with every expectation of humbling,at least, if not of dethroning the sovereign of thatvast and powerful empire. It requires the exercise ofmuch charity towards this government to believe that theydid not seize that opportunity to throw their weight intothe scale against Great Britain, who was supporting Russiaagainst France, and whose influence and power had uptothat time prevented the absolute subjugation of thewhole continent of Europe by the French. Hence it maybeaccounted for, that after the defeat which the ambitiousemperor of that nation experienced in Russia, thetone of the United States government so suddenly changedon the subject of the negotiations for peace, and the stillgreater change after he was dethroned in 1814. Thiswill be manifest from the style of the letter just quoted,and still more so from one from the Secretary of State tothe commissioners, dated June 25th, 1814 —"It is impossible, with the lights which have reachedus, to ascertain the present disposition of the British governmenttowards an accommodation with the UnitedStates. We think it probable that the late events inFrance may have had a tendency to increase its pretensions."At war with Great Britain, and injured by France,the United States have sustained the attitude founded onthose relations. No reliance was placed on the goodoffices of France, in bringing the war with Great Britainto a satisfactory conclusion. Looking steadily to an honourablepeace, and the ultimate attainment of justicefrom both powers, the President has endeavoured, by aconsistent and honourable policy, to take advantage of everycircumstance that might projiwtc that result. He, nevertheless,knew that France held a place in the political system ofEurope and of the world, which, as a check on England,could not fail to he useful to us. What effect the late events306 HISTORY OF THEmay have had, in these respects, is the important circumstanceof which you are doubtless better informed than wecan be.It was inferred from the general policy of Russia, andthe friendly sentiments and interposition of the emperor,that a respect for both would have much influence, withthe British cabinet, in promoting a pacific policy towardsus. The manner, however, in which it is understood thata general pacification is taking place ; the influence GreatBritain may have in modifying the arrangements involvedin it ; the resources she may be able to employ exclusivelyagainst the United States ; and the uncertainty of theprecise course which Russia may pursue in relation to thewar between the United States and Great Britain, naturallyclaim attention, and raise the important question, inreference to the subject of impressment, on which it is presumedyour negotiations will essentially turn, whetheryour powers ought not to be enlarged, so as to enable youto give to those circumstances all the weight to which theynay be entitled. On full consideration, it has been decided,that in case no stipulation can be obtained from theBritish government at this moment, when its pretensionsmay have been much heightened by recent events, andthe state of Europe be most favourable to them, eitherrelinquishing the claim to impress from American vessels,or discontinuing the practice, even in consideration of theproposed exclusion from them of British seamen, you mayconcur in an article, stipulating, that the subject of impressment,together with that of commerce between the twocountries, be referred to separate negotiation, to be undertakenwithout delay, at such place as you may be ableto agree on, preferring this city, if to be obtained."Two days after the date of the preceding letter, viz.June 27th, 1814, the Secretary of State addressed a letterto the American commissioners, in which is the followingpassage —HARTFORD CONVENTION. 307On mature consideration it has been decided, thatunder all the circumstances above alluded to, incident teaprosecution of the war, you may omit any stipulation on thesubject of impressment, if found indispensably necessary toterminate it. You will, of course, not recur to this expedientuntil all your efforts to adjust the controversy in amore satisfactory manner have failed. As it is not theintention of the United States, in suffering' the treaty to besilent on the subject of impressment, to admit the Britishclaim thereon, or to relinquish that of the United Slates,it is highly important that any such inference be entirelyprecluded, by a declaration or protest in some form orother, that the omission is not to have any such effect ortendency. Any modification of the practice to preventabuses, being an acknowledgment of the right in GreatBritain, is utterly inadmissible."On the 11th of August, 1814, the Secretary of State,in a letter to the commissioners, says — "By my letters ofthe 25th and 27th of June, of which another copy is nowforwarded, the sentiments of the President, as to the conditionson which it will be proper for you to conclude atreaty of peace are made known to you. It is presumedthat either in the mode suggested in my letter of the 25thof June, which is much preferred, or by permitting thetreaty to be silent on the subject, as is authorized in theletter of the 27th of June, the question of impressmentmay be so disposed of, as to form no obstacle to a pacification.This government can go no further, because it willmake no sacrifice of the rights or honour of the nation."It is worthy of notice, that the negotiations between theBritish and American commissioners, related almost exclusivelyto subjects which had no connection with the causesof the war. The declaration of war was founded on theorders in council, and impressment. The first were repealedwithin a week from the date of the declaration ofwar, leaving nothing to contend about but impressment.308 HISTORY OF THEIn one of the earliest communications from the commissionersof the United States to those of Great Britain,when the negotiations opened at Ghent, and which wasdated the 24th of August, 1814, is contained the followingpassage — " The causes of the war between the United Statesand Great Britain having disappeared hy the maritime pacificationof Europe, the government of the United States doesnot desire to continue it in defence of abstract principles,which have, for the present, ceased to have any practical effect.The undersigned have been accordingly instructed to agreeto its termination, both parties restoring whatever theymay have taken, and both reserving all their rights, inrelation to their respective seamen."It is to be presumed that the commissioners made useof this language, in pursuance of the, powers contained intheir instructions. But who will undertake to reconcile itwith that adopted by the committee of foreign relations inJanuary, 1813? Referring to the repeal of the orders ofcouncil in June, 1812, as having removed one of the causesof the war, leaving only that of impressment, the committeesay — "Had the executive consented to an armistice onthe repeal of the orders in council, without a satisfactoryprovision against impressment, or a clear and distinct understandingwith the British government to that effect,your committee would not have hesitated to disapprove it.The impressment of our seamen being deservedly considereda principal cause of the war, the war ought to be prosecuteduntil that cause was removed." — " War havingbeen declared, and the case of impressment being necessarilyincluded as one of the most important causes, it isevident that it must be provided for in the pacification :the omission of it in a treaty of peace would not leave iton its former ground: it would in effect be an absoluterelinquishment." — "It is an evil which ought not, whichcannot be longer tolerated." — "It is incompatible withtheir (the United States) sovereignty. It is subversive ofHARTFORD CONVENTION. 309the main pillars of their independence. The forbearanceof the United States under it has been mistaken for pusillanimity."Notwithstanding these, and many other specimens ofstrong language, and a professed predetermination, on thepart of our government, to prosecute the war until a specificagreement, in a formal treaty, should be obtainedfrom Great Britain, renouncing both the right and thepractice of impressment, the moment Bonaparte was overthrown,and his power subverted, the subject dwindled intoan abstract principle, not worth the trouble of further controversy.In September, 1814, Congress were convened by theexecutive at an earlier day than had been fixed at the previousadjournment ; and on the 20th of that month thePresident's message was received by the houses. Afteralluding to the reasons for the early meeting, one of whichwas the manner in which the war was carried on, manifestinga spirit of hostility more violent than ever, the Presidentremarks —This increased violence is best explained by the twoimportant circumstances, that the great contest in Europe,for an equilibrium quarantine all its states against theambition of any, has been closed without any check onthe overbearing power of Great Britain on the ocean ; andthat it has left in her hands disposable armaments, withwhich, forgetting the difficulties of a remote war againsta free people, and yielding to the intoxication of success,with the example of a great victim to it before her eyes,she cherishes hopes of still further aggrandizing a poweralready formidable in its abuses to the tranquillity of thecivilized and commercial world.But, whatever may have inspired the enemy withthese more violent purposes, the public councils of a nation,more able to maintain than it was to acquire its independence,and with a devotion to it, rendered more310 HISTORY OF THEardent by the experience of its blessings, can never deliberatebut on the means most effectual for defeating theextravagant views or unwarrantable passions with whichalone the war can now be pursued against us."It is very apparent from the language above cited, thatPresident Madison had become seriously alarmed by thecourse of events in Europe, the downfall of Bonaparte,and the destruction of his imperial despotism, and that hetherefore considered it necessary to excite the country tomake more vigorous exertions in carrying on the war, thefolly and fruitlessness of which now stared him full in theface. That he expected the war would render powerfulassistance in the accomplishment of the great object whichthe French emperor had in view — viz. the humiliation, ifnot the absolute subjugation of Great Britain, cannot bedoubted. And that the disappointment in his expectationsfrom this quarter not only mortified, but alarmedhim, is very apparent. " The closing of the great contestin Europe," he says, " without producing any check onthe overbearing power of Great Britain on the ocean, hasleft in her hands disposable armaments, with which, forgettingthe difficulties of a remote war against a free people,she cherishes hopes of still further aggrandizing apower already formidable to the tranquillity of the civilizedand commercial world." That our government expectedto have an important agency in producing that check tothe power of Great Britain, when they undertook the war,nobody who is acquainted with the history and circumstancesof the case can doubt. But it is a little extraordinarythat the President should allude to the war as if itwere one for which they were responsible, apparently desirousof keeping out of sight the fact, that it was forcedupon them by us, and that under circumstances calculatedgreatly to excite their feelings, and enkindle their resentmentagainst this country.But the language of the next paragraph is still moreHARTFORD CONVENTION. 311extraordinary. The message, with apparent gratification,states, that as a nation, we were, in 1814, more able tomaintain our independence than ice were originally to acquireit ; and that having experienced the blessings of independence,we could deliberate on nothing " but the mosteffectual means of defeating the extravagant views andunwarrantable passions with which alone the war couldbe pursued against us." It was understood that the war,when declared, was to vindicate our rights, not to defendour independence. Whatever encroachments might havebeen committed against our neutral character, and thosewere the injuries complained of, there was no attempton the part of Great Britain to destroy our national independence,and reduce us to the condition of colonies. Ifour political character as a foreign independent people wasin danger, it was the effect of the indiscreet declaration ofa war by our government, at a time when they were en-entirelyunprepared to prosecute it with vigour, or withany reasonable prospect of success. And if at the end ofthe second year after the commencement of hostilities, insteadof an ostensive, it had become a defensive war, itwas in the most emphatically manner disgraceful to thoseby whom it was forced upon the country.After reviewing the events of the war, the message, interms not the most explicit, but sufficiently clear, whentaken in connection with other circumstances, to be understood,speaks in the following language : —"To meet the extended and diversified warfare adoptedby the enemy, great bodies of militia have been taken intoservice, for the public defence, and great expenses incurred.That the defence every where may be; both more convenientand more economical. Congress will see the necessityof immediate measures for filling the ranks of theregular army and of enlarging the provision for specialcorps, mounted and unmounted, to be engaged for longerperiods of service than are due from the militia. I HISTORY OF THEnestle renew, at the same time, a recommendation o^ suchchanges in the system of the militia, as by classing and discipliningfor the most prompt and active service the portionsthe most capable of it, will give to that great resource forthe public safety, all the requisite energy and efficiency."This subject was referred by the house of representativesto the military committee, who of course applied tothe Secretary of War for the purpose of ascertaining theviews and wishes of the administration with regard tothese suggestions. That office was then filled by JamesMonroe, afterwards President of the United States. Havingbut recently entered upon the duties of his office, hewas not able to reply to the committee until the Itt ofOctober, at which time he submitted his report, of whichthe following is an extract : —1. That the present military establishment, amountingto 62,448 men, be preserved and made complete, and thatthe most efficient means authorised by the constitution andconsistent with the general rights of our fellow citizens beadopted, to fill the ranks, with the least possible delay.2. That a permanent force, consisting of at least 40,000men, in addition to the present military establishment, beraised for the defence of our cities and frontiers, under anengagement by the executive with such corps that it shallbe employed in that service within certain specified limits,and that a proportional augmentation of general officersof each grade, and other staff, be provided for."This report was accompanied by a long letter from theSecretary, addressed to the chairman of the military committee,explaining the views and sentiments of the executivedepartment on the subject at large, under the generalhead of "Explanatory Observations.""In providing a force necessary to bring this war to ahappy termination, the nature of the crisis in which weareinvolved, and the extent of its dangers, claim partibusCONVENTION. 313lar attention. If the means are not fully adequate to theend, discomfiture must inevitably ensue."It may be fairly presumed, that it is the object of theBritish government, by striking at the principal sources ofour prosperity, to diminish the importance, if not to destroythe political existence of the United States. If anydoubt remained on this subject, it has been completely removedby the despatches from our ministers at Ghent,which were lately laid before Congress."A nation contending for its existence against an enemypowerful by land and sea, favoured in a peculiar mannerby extraordinary events, must make great sacrifices.Forced to contend again for our liberties andindependence,we are called on for a display of all the patriotism whichdistinguished our fellow citizens in the first great struggle.It may be fairly concluded, that if the United States sam-liceany right, or make any dishonourable concession to thedemands of the British government, the spirit of the nationwill be broken, and the foundations of their union an I independenceshaken. The United States must relinquish no right,or perish in the struggle. There is no intermediate groundto rest on. A concession on one point, leads directly to thesurrender of every other. The result of the contest cannotbe doubtful. The highest confidence is entertained thatthe stronger the pressure, and the greater the danger, themore firm and vigorous will be the resistance, and themore successful and glorious the result."It is the avowed purpose of the enemy to lay wasteand destroy our cities and villages, and to desolate ourcoast, of which examples have already been afforded. Itis evidently his intention to press the tear along the icicleextent of our sea-board, in the hope of exhausting equally thespirit of the people and the national resources. There isalso reason to presume, that it is the intention to press thewar from Canada on the adjoining states, while attemptsare made on the city of New York, and other important314 HISTORY OF THEpoints, with a view to the main project of dismembermentor subjugation. It may be inferred likewise to be a partof the scheme, to continue to invade this part of the Union,while a separate force attacks the state of Louisiana, inthe hope of taking possession of the city of New-Orleans,and of the mouth of the Mississippi, that great inlet andkey to all that portion of the United States lying westwardof the Allegheny mountains. The peace in Europe havinggiven to the enemy a large disposable force, has essentiallyfavoured these objects."The advantage which a great naval superiority givesto the enemy, by enabling him to move troops from onequarter to another, from Maine to Mississippi, a coast oftwo thousand miles extent, is very considerable. Even asmall force moved in this manner for the purposes avowedby the British commanders, cannot fail to be sensibly feltmore especially by those who are most exposed to it. Itis obvious, if the militia are to be relied on principally forthe defence of our cities and coasts against their predatoryand desolating incursions, wherever they may be made,that by interfering with their ordinary pursuits of industry,it must be attended with serious interruption and loss to-them,and injury to the public, while it greatly increasesthe expense. It is an object, therefore, of the highest importance,to provide a regular force, with the means oftransporting it from one quarter to another along our coast,thereby following the movements of the enemy with thegreatest possible rapidity, and repelling the attack whereverit may be made. These remarks are equally true a»to the militia service generally under the present organizationof the militia, and the short terms of service prescribedby law. It may be stated with confidence, that atleast three times the force in the militia has been employedat our principal cities along the coast, and on the frontier,in marching to and returning thence, that would have beennecessary in regular troops; and that the expense attendHARTFORD CONVENTION. 315ing it has been more than proportionably augmented, fromthe difficulty, if not the impossibility, of preserving thesame degree of system in the militia, as in the regularservice."But it will not be sufficient to repel these predatoryand desolating incursions. To bring the war to an honourabletermination, we must not be contented with defendingourselves. Different feelings must be touched, and apprehensionsexcited in the British government. By pushingthe war into Canada, we secure the friendship of the Indiantribes, and command their services, otherwise to beturned by the enemy against us; we relieve the coast fromthe desolation which is intended for it, and we keep in ourhands a safe pledge for an honourable peace."It follows from this view of the subject, that it will benecessary to bring into the field the next campaign, notless than 100,000 regular troops. Such a force, aided, inextraordinary emergencies, by volunteers and militia, willplace us above all inquietude as to the final result of thiscontest. It will fix on a solid and imperishable foundationour union and independence, on which the libertiesand happiness of our fellow citizens so essentially depend.It will secure to the United States an early and advantageouspeace.The return of the regular force now in service, laidbefore you, will show how many men will be necessary tofill the present corps ; and the return of the numericalforce of the present military establishment, will show howmany are required to complete it to the number proposed.The next and most important inquiry is, how shall thesemen be raised ? Under existing circumstances, it is evidentthat the most prompt and efficient mode that can bedevised, consistent with iheequal rights of every citizen,ought to be adopted. The following plans are respectfullysubmitted to the consideration of the committee. Being316 HISTORY OF THEdistinct in their nature, I will present each separately, withthe considerations applicable to it."By the extreme consternation which it is manifest fromthe language of this document the administration felt, atfacing the dangers and calamities they had brought uponthe country, it would seem that they must have engagedin the war without the remotest idea that they could failof success in its progress and termination. This confidenceof theirs undoubtedly rested upon the full assurancethey entertained, that Bonaparte would succeed in his expeditionagainst Russia, and after having subdued his greatnorthern foe, that he would have nothing to do but to turnhis whole force against Great Britain, in which event, thedownfall of the latter might be considered as absolutelycertain. The circumstances of the case were, by an untowardseries of occurrences, reversed, and instead of theemperor of Russia having been humbled and subdued, thatcalamity fell upon the emperor of France ; and thus GreatBritain became extricated from the European controversyand was at liberty to bring all her force to bear upon theUnited States. It was not unnatural that men, whoseviews were at the outset so shortsighted, and who took somuch for granted, should, at such a material change ofcircumstances, when their eyes were opened upon the dangersand difficulties with which they were surrounded, becomeseriously alarmed and perplexed with such unexpectedembarrassments. From the lofty ground of a nationwhich had declared an offensive war, at the end of alittle more than two years, we were reduced to one " contendingfor existence, against an enemy powerful by landand sea," and " favoured in a peculiar manner by extraordinaryevents." Let it be remembered, that the British nationwere, in October, 1814, no more powerful by land or sea,than they were in June, 1812.' And if those who precipitatedthe United Slates into the war, had possessed a little moremoderation of feeling, had entertained a smaller degreeHARTFORD CONVENTION. 317of devotion to France, and not quite so much animosityao-uinst Great Britain, they would not have rushed headlong",influenced by a mad calculation of future events, intoa contest whic'.i might so easily and so speedily bring themto the extreme of danger, and this when so absolutely unprovidedwith the means of carrying on the war, andbringing themselves honourably out of the conflict.But a most extraordinary sentiment is contained in thisdocument — extraordinary, when the facts connected withit are taken, into consideration. The President of theUnited States, speaking through the medium of the Secretaryof War, says in this letter — " It may be fairly concluded,that if the United States sacrifice any rigid, ormake any dishonourable concession to the demands of theBritish government, the spirit of the nation will be broken,and the foundation of their union and independence shaken.The United States must relinquish no right, or perish in thestruggle. There is rio intermediate ground to rest on. Itwill be borne in mind, that the war was declared in orderto force the British government to revoke their orders ofcouncil, and to give up the practice of impressment. Theorders of council were revoked within five days after thedeclaration of war, leaving no avowed subject of controversybut that of impressment. A determination not tosubmit to this any longer, was manifested throughout theconflict ; and our public agents of all descriptions, whohad any thing to do with the subject of the controversy,were instructed never to agree to any treaty of peacewhich did not contain a specific provision, that the Britishgovernment should relinquish that practice. And in agreat number of instances, many of which have beenquoted, instructions to this effect were given to their commissioners,appointed to negotiate for peace, and languageequally strong with that just cited from the letter of theSecretary of War, was used in their instructions on thesubject. Now let it be remembered, that on the 27th of318 HISTORY OF THEJune, 1814, nearly four months before the date of this reportof the Secretary of War, instructions had been sent by thePresident of the United States, to the commissioners at Ghent,through the medium of James Monroe, then Secretary ofState, and in October following Secretary of War, in whichthose commissioners are told that — " On mature considersration it has been decided, that wider all the circumstancesabove alluded to, incident to a prosecution of the war, youmay omit any stipulation on the subject of impressment, ijfound indispensably necessary to terminate it That is, theonly subject of controversy, about which the country hadbeen engaged in a war for nearly two years and a half, atan expense of more than a hundred millions of dollars,and from thirty to fifty thousand lives, was formally abandonedin June ; — and in October following, it was declaredthat rather than relinquish any right, ive ought to make upour minds to perish in the struggle. This can be viewed inno other light than that of an attempt, on the part of theadministration, to impose upon Congress the belief, thatwe were fighting for existence, and that we ought to perishrather than surrender a single right, when at the samemoment, the only ground of controversy had been long previouslyabandoned by that same administration, for the solepurpose of extricating themselves from the war.The following is Mr. Secretary Monroe's " First Plan."*' Let the free male population of the United States,between eighteen and forty-five years, be formed intoclasses of one hundred men each, and let each class furnishmen for the war, within thirty days after theclassification, and replace them in the event of casualty.The classification to be formed with a view to theequal distribution of property among the several classes.If any class fails to provide the men required of it,within the time specified, they shall be raised by draft onthe whole class ; any person being thus drafted being allowedto furnish a substitute.HARTFORD CONVENTION. 319*' The present bounty in land being allowed to each recruit,and the present bounty in money, which is paid toeach recruit by the United States, to be paid to each draftby all the inhabitants within the precinct of the classwithin which the draft may be made, equally according tothe value of the property which they may respectivelypossess ; and if such bounty be not paid within days,the same to be levied on all the taxable property of thewhole precinct.The recruits to be delivered over to the recruitingofficer in each district, to be marched to such places ofgeneral rendezvous as may be designated by the departmentof war.Thai this plan will he efficient cannot he doiihted. It isevident, that the men contemplated may soon be raised byit. Three modes occur, by which it may be carried intoeffect. 1st. By placing the execution of it in the handsof the county courts throughout the United States. 2d.By relying on the militia officers in each county. 3d. Byappointing particular persons in each county for that purpose.It is believed that either of these modes would befound adequate.Nor does there appear to be any well-founded objectionto the right in Congress to adopt this plan, or to itsequality in its application to our fellow-citizens individually.Congress have a right, by the constitution, to raiseregular armies, and no restraint is imposed in the exerciseof it, except in the provisions which are intended to guardgenerally against the abuse of power, with none of whichdoes this plan interfere. It is proposed, that it shalloperate on all alike, that none shall be exempt from it exceptthe chief magistrate of the United States, and thegovernors of the several states.It would be absurd to suppose that Congress could notcarry this power into effect, otherwise than by acceptingthe voluntary service of individuals. It might happen that320 " HISTORY OF THEan army could not be raised in that mode, whence thepower would have been granted in vain, 'i've safety ofthe state might depend an such an army. Long continuedinvasions conducted by regular well disciplined troops, canbest be repelled by troops kept constantly in the field, andequally well disciplined. Courage in an army is in a greatmeasure mechanical. A small body well trained, accustomedto action, gallantly led on, often breaks three orfour times the number of more respectable and morebrave, but raw and undisciplined troops. The sense ofdanger is diminished by frequent exposure to it withoutharm, and confidence, even in the timid, is inspired by aknowledge that reliance may be placed on others, whichcan grow up only by service together. The grant toCongress to raise armies was made with a knowledge ofall these circumstances, and with the intention that itshould take effect. The framers of the constitution, andthe states who ratified it, knew the advantage which anenemy might have over us, by regular forces, and intendedto place their country on an equal footing.The idea that the United States cannot raise a regulararmy in any other mode than by accepting the voluntaryservice of individuals, is believed to be repugnant tothe uniform construction of all grants of power, and equallyso to the first principles and leading objects of the federalcompact. An unqualified grant of power gives themeans necessary to carry it into effect. This is an universalmaxim which admits of no exception. Equallytrue is it that the conservation of the state is a duty paramountto all others. The commonwealth has a right tothe service of all its citizens, or rather, the citizens composingthe commonwealth have a right collectively and individuallyto the service .of each other, to repel any dangerwhich may be menaced. The manner in which the serviceis to be apportioned among the citizens, and renderedby them, are objects of legislation. All that is to beHartford COiWENTION. 321dreaded in such case, is the abuse of power, and happilyour constitution has provided ample security against thatevil.In support of this right in Congress, the militia serviceaffords a conclusive proof and striking example. Theorganization of the militia is an act of public authority, notavoluntary association. The service required must beperformed by all, under penalties which delinquents pay.The generous and patriotic perform them cheerfully. Inthe alacrity with which the call of the government hasbeen obeyed, and the cheerfulness with which the servicehas been performed throughout the United States bythe great body of the militia, there is abundant cause torejoice in the strength of our republican institutions, andin the virtue of the people."The plan proposed is not more compulsive than themilitia service, while it is free from most of the objectionsto it. The militia service calls from home, for long terms,whole districts of country. None can elude the call. Fewcan avoid the service, and those who do are compelled topay great sums for substitutes. This plan fixes on no onepersonally, and opens to all who choose it a chance of decliningthe service. It is a principal object of this plan toengage in the defence of the state the unmarried andyouthful, who can best defend it, and best be spared, andto secure to those who render this important service, anadequate compensation from the voluntary contribution ofthe more wealthy in every class. Great confidence is entertainedthat such contribution will be node in time toavoid a draft. Indeed it is believed to be the necessaryand inevitable tendency of this plan to produce that effect.The limited power which the United States have inorganizing the militia may be urged as an argument againsttheir right to raise regular troops in the mode proposed.If any argument could be drawn from that circumstance,I should suppose that it would be in favour of an opposite322 HISTORY OF THEconclusion. The power of the United States over themilitia has been limited, and that for raising regular armiesgranted without limitation. There was doubtlesssome object in this arrangement. The fair inference seemsto be, that it was made on great consideration; that thelimitation in the first instance was intentional, the consequenceof the unqualified grant of the second."But it is said that by drawing the men from the militiaservice into the regular army, and putting them under regularofficers, you violate a principle of the constitution,,which provides that the militia shall be commanded bytheir own officers. If this was the fact, the conclusionwould follow. But it is not the fact. The men are notdrawn from the militia, but from the population of thecountry : when they enlist voluntarily, it is not as militiamenthat they act, but as citizens. If they arc drafted, itmust be in the same sense. In both instances they areenrolled in the militia corps, but that, as is presumed, cannotprevent the voluntary act in one instance, or the compulsivein the other. The whole population of the UnitedStates within certain ages belong to these corps. If theUnited States could not form regular armies from them,they could raise none.In proposing a draft as one of the modes of raisingmen in case of actual necessity, in the present great emergencyof the country, I have thought it my duty to examinesuch objections to it as occurred, particularly those ofa constitutional nature. It is from my sacred regard forthe principles of our constitution that I have ventured totrouble the committee with any remarks on this part ofthe subject."Should it appear that this mode of raising recruitswas justly objectionable on account of the tax on property,from difficulties which may be apprehended in the execution,or from other causes, it may be advisable to declinethe tax, and for the government to pay the whole bounty'"HARTFORD CONVENTION. 323Large extracts have been made from this extraordinary-document,for the purpose of placing before the communitya state paper, which is probably but little known, andwhich contains sentiments and doctrines of the most extravagantand dangerous description.The proposition here made is, to divide the free malepopulation of the United States into classes of 100 meneach, each class to furnish men. This classificationto be made with a view to an equal distribution ofproperty among the classes. If any class should fail toprovide the men within 30 days after the classification,they were to be raised by draft on the class. The bounty-givento recruits by the United States in money, was to bepaid by the inhabitants belonging to the class within whichthe draft was made, according to the value of the propertythey might possess ; and if not paid within the time specifiedby law, it was to be levied on all the taxable propertyof the said inhabitants. The recruits thus obtained,were to be delivered over to the recruiting officer in eachdistrict, and marched to such places of general rendezvousas the Secretary of War might direct.This whole system is founded upon the simple basis ofarbitrary power in the national government over the militiaof the states. Voluntary enlistments are entirely discarded,and a hundred men, arbitrarily classed together,and their property as arbitrarily assessed, are to be forcedto raise a specified number of soldiers from the list ofnames in their class, and pay them their bounty-money,and, in case of failure, to pay a round sum of money, in factas a penalty, to be levied and collected from their property,an 1 applied, of course, to the use and benefit of the UnitedStates. This was a conscription of the most detestablekind, intended to be introduced into a nation living undera written constitution of government, and nominallyenjoying the benefit of laws to protect their persons andproperty against the arbitrary exactions of despotic power.324 HISTORY OF THEAlthough rather more insidious in the manner, it was intendedto be equally efficacious in its effects with the conscriptionestablished in France by Bonaparte, — the objectof it being two-fold — first, to recruit the regular army byforce from the militia, and secondly, to replenish the treasuryof the United States, not by a forced loan, but by anexaction from a certain portion of the community, equallyunwarranted by the constitution of the country as is thedemand of a man's purse upon the highway by a footpad.In the first place, the attempt to force the militia intothe regular service of the United States, to perform dutyas soldiers of the standing army, was in direct violationof the national constitution. It has already been contended,and it is believed has been shown in this work, that themilitia belong to the several states, and not to the UnitedStates — that the latter have only a limited power over themilitia, in certain cases specified in the constitution, andthat beyond those cases, the United States have no authoritywhatever over them. A statesman of distinguishedtalents, a few weeks after the date of this letter of theSecretary of War, made the following remarks in theHouse of Representatives of the United States — " Onegeneral principle is, that the militia of the several statesbelong to the people and government of the states — andnot to the government of the United States. I considerthis as a proposition too clear to require illustration, or toadmit of doubt. The militia consist of the whole peopleof a state, or rather of the whole male population capableof bearing arms; including all of every description, avocation,or age. Exemption from militia duty is a merematter of grace. This militia, being the very people,belong to the people or to the state governments, for theiruse and protection. They were theirs at the time of therevolution, under the old confederation — and when thepresent form of government was adopted. Neither thepeople nor their state governments have ever surrenderedHARTFORD CONVENTION. 325this their property in the militia to the general government,but have carefully kept and preserved their general dominionor control, for their own use, protection, and defence.They have, i^; is true, granted or lent (if I may usesuch an expression) to Congress a special concurrent authorityor power over the militia in certain cases; whichcases are particularly set down — guarded — limited andrestricted, as fully as the most scrupulous caution, and theuse of the most apt and significant words our languageaffords could limit and restrict them. The people havegranted to Congress a right to call forth the militia in certaincases of necessity and emergency — a right to arm andorganize them — and to prescribe a plan, upon which theyshall be disciplined and trained. When they are calledinto the service of the United States (and they cannot becalled unless upon the happening of one of the contingenciesenumerated) they are to be under the command ofthe President. Hence it follows, that the general power,authority, or jurisdiction, remains i^j the state governments.A special, qualified, limited, and concurrent poweris vested in Congress, to be exercised when the event happens,and in the manner pointed out, prescribed, and limitedin the constitution. And hence it also follows, thatthis delegated power cannot be executed upon any otheroccasions, nor in any other ways, than those prescribed bythe constitution"*This reasoning may challenge refutation. If its force isadmitted, or if it cannot be overthrown, it must necessarilyfollow that there is no authority in the constitution, underthis oran other mask, to draft the militia away from thestates, and force them into the standing army of theUnited States, to do duty as regular soldiers of that army.But, says the Secretary of War — " Congress have aright, by the constitution, to raise regular armies, and noSpeech of the Hon. Richard Stockton, in the House of Representatives,United States, December 10, 1814.326 HISTORY OF THErestraint is imposed in the exercise of it, except in the provisionswhich are intended generally to guard against theabuse of power, with none of which does this plan interfere."This is a broad and sweeping declaration. Whatis the usual mode of raising or recruiting armies ? Byvoluntary enlistments ; and there can be no other modeadopted in this free country, compatible with the rightsand liberties of the citizens. Would the Secretary of Warhave contended for the authority in the general government,under the power to raise armies, to issue an orderto the several states to send into the service of the UnitedStates four able-bodied soldiers from every hundred menbetween the ages of 18 and 45, to be placed in the ranksof the standing army, and under the command of the officersof that army, to pay each man a hundred dollarsbounty, or in failure to do so, to pay to the national governmenta hundred dollars for each man ? But both areequally constitutional ; and if the power for which he contendsis warranted by the constitution, the case abovestated is warranted also.Another constitutional difficulty lay in the way of theSecretary of AVar, and it was so important, as well as soobvious, that he could not avoid bestowing a moment'sattention to it. " But it is said, that by drawing the menfrom the militia service into the regular army, and puttingthem under regular officers, you violate a principle of theconstitution, which provides that the militia shall be commandedby their own officers. If litis was the fact, theconclusion would follow. But it is not the fact. The menare not drawn from the militia, but from the population ofthe country: when they enlist voluntarily, it is not as militiamenthat they act, but as citizens. If they are drafted,it must be in the same sense. In both instances they areenrolled in the militia corps, but that, as is presumed, cannotprevent the voluntary act in one instance, or the compulsivein the other. The whole population of the UnitedHARTFORD CONVENTION. 327States, within certain ages, belong to these corps. If theUnited States could not form regular armies from them,they could raise none."To establish the constitutionally of his plan, then, itwas incumbent on the Secretary of War to establish theposition, that there is a real and substantial difference betweenthe citizens as a body, and the militia. He says themen who by his plan were to be drafted for the regulararmy, " were not to be drawn from the militia, but fromthe population of the coimtry.'" And his argument restsentirely upon the soundness of this proposition. Whothen are the militia ? The militia, in the most extensivesense of the word, consist of the whole male population ofa state capable of bearing arms. According to the lawsof congress, they are made up of all the able-bodied menof the country, between the ages of 18 and 45. This restrictionof the meaning of the term is founded upon theidea that those who are under the age of 18 are too youngto endure the fatigues and perform the services of a militarylife, and those above 45 are too old. If the first aretoo young, and the last are too old, as militiamen, certainlythey are equally so as citizens. And the Secretaryof War adopts the same language with that of the law, indescribing that part of the population from which his conscripts,or drafts, are to be taken. He says, let the freemale population of the United States, between 18 and 45years, he formed into classes. Now, when the whole malepopulation between those ages are formed into classes ascitizens, for the purpose of making the drafts, it may beasked where are the militia ? Suppose the plan had provided,that instead of four or six recruits from each class,the whole number of the class had been included. Wherewould the militia of the states have been in that case ? Butif the constitution gave authority to congress to draft fourfrom every hundred of the citizens, in a greater entersHISTORY OF THEagency, bj the same mode of reasoning, it could haveauthorised a draft of fifty, or even the whole hundred.The most abstruse logic, the nicest metaphysical reasoningthat the human mind is capable of devising, cannever raise this argument above the level of gross and obviousabsurdity. It therefore, as a necessary consequence,leaves the administration liable to the charge of a secondattempt to force the militia into the service of the UnitedStates, in violation of the constitution, by taking themaway from the states to which they belong, depriving themof their constitutional right to be commanded by their ownofficers, ordering them to be marched where the Secretaryof War might direct, and reducing them to the degradedcondition of regular soldiers in a standing army. TheSecretary of War acknowledges that such will be the conclusion,if the men thus drafted are taken from the militia.That they must he taken from the militia, if takenat all, has, it is believed, been demonstrated. It then mustfollow that the plan violated the constitution.But," says the Secretary of War, " it would be absurdto suppose that Congress could not carry this powerinto effect, otherwise than by accepting the voluntary serviceof individuals. It might happen that an army couldnot be raised in that mode, whence the power would havebeen granted in vain. The safety of the state might dependon such an army." The language of the constitutionis — " Congress have power to raise and support armies."The argument of the Secretary is, that having the powerto raise armies, if it cannot be done by voluntary enlistment,it may, as a matter of necessity, be done by force ;and hence the attempt to establish this system. There isno allegation in this letter, that the militia had refused toenlist. Indeed, such an allegation could not have beentruly made on the occasion, for this was a mere projectbefore a committee, ndt having been reported, and ofcourse no call could have been made under it upon theHARTFORD Convention. 329militia to enlist. As far, therefore, as the soundness ofthe argument depends on necessity, it must fail, becauseno experiment to obtain voluntary enlistments had beenmade. It is, however, perfectly obvious, that there was afurther object in view, in driving this measure with somuch force. Money was wanted as well as men ; and inone mode or the other the government intended to obtainit. They meant to force the inhabitants to advance themmoney in the shape of a bounty to the conscripts, or in thecharacter of a penalty if they failed in procuring the men.If the bill for raising the eighty thousand men, which wasbrought before the Senate by Mr. Giles, had in the firstplace provided for opening recruiting quarters, the menmight have voluntarily enlisted, and then there wouldhave been no opportunity to extort the money from theinhabitants.The very next clause of the constitution after that forraising and supporting armies, is in the following words —Congress shall have power to provide and maintain anavy." Providing a navy, is exactly equivalent to raisingan army; and maintaining a navy to supporting an army.Congress have a right," says the Secretary of War, " bythe constitution, to raise regular armies, and no restraintis imposed by the exercise of it." Hence he infers theright, if men do not voluntarily enlist, to force them by adraft, in other words, by a conscription, into the ranks ofthe regular army. Congress have the power also to providea navy, and there is no restraint imposed upon its exercise.By the same course of reasoning, they mightorder each state to provide, that is to build and equip, aseventy-four gun ship, and hand it over to the UnitedStates, as a constituent part of their naval force. And asin the case of the conscript, tl>e bounty was to be paid bythe classes, so in the case of the ships, it might be orderedthat the states should lay in the stores, or furnish themeans to pay the men. This would fall distinctly within330 HISTORY OF THEthe idea of maintaining a navy ; and therefore, agreeablyto the mode of reasoning adopted by the Secretary ofWar, would be constitutional.The Secretary of War carries his doctrine to a stillgreater length. He says — " An unqualified grant ofpower gives the means necessary to carry it into effect.This is an universal maxim which admits of no exception.Equally true is it that the conservation of the state is aduty paramount to all others." These are latitudinariansentiments, especially when it is considered that they comefrom a source which has always contended obstinately forthe doctrine of " strict construction," and for the principlethat all power not expressly granted to the United States,is reserved to the several states. However, they serveto show, that men who in some situations are the mostpertinacious in their adherence to certain general principles,will, when placed in different situations, bend easilyto circumstances, and adopt those of a more liberal description.In this case, however, the construction is veryliberal, under the maxim that " the conservation of thestate is a duty paramount to all others;" and, therefore,men may be forced not only without constitutional authority,but in the very face of it, from the militia of thestates, into the regular army, under the pretence that thecommonwealth is in danger. An inquiry naturally ariseshere, what composes the state ? The answer of course isthe people of the state. The state is made up of the people;and the government belongs to the people. This isso universally acknowledged, that it has become a meretruism. And it is founded upon the fundamental principleof our system, that the people are the source of power.No man dare dispute the soundness of this maxim. Onthe contrary, the very rulers of our country, those in whosehands the powers of government, from time to time areplaced, call themselves the servants of the people. Howeversolemn or momentous, then, the duty of conservingHARTFORD CONVENTION. 331the State may be, it is very questionable whether the servantsof the people have the right to insist upon it thattheir masters shall, under all circumstances, be forced toperform the duty of conserving themselves and their government— that the question whether they will or will not,should not even be put to them, but they are ordered bythe power of conscription to march to the field, for thepurpose of taking care of their own interests, at the commandof their servants.The mode proposed by the Secretary of War, for carryingthis project into effect, is indicative not only of agreat want of judgment and discretion in its abettors, butof a total disregard of the constitutional rights of the citizens." Three modes occur," says that officer, " by whichit may be carried into effect. 1. By placing the executionof it in the hands of the county courts throughout theUnited States. 2. By relying on the militia officers ineach county. 3. By appointing particular persons ineach county for that purpose." Suppose each of thesebodies should decline to execute their commission, whatwould in that case become of the conscription? If thecounty courts, or the militia officers, had undertaken thetask in some states, or at least in one, viz. in Connecticut,the legislature of the state would, without ceremony, haverevoked their commissions, and thus deprived them of allauthority.But suppose either conscript body had accepted thecommission, and had gone on to class the militia, andniade the drafts, in what mode would they have leviedand collected the bounty in the one case, or the penalty inthe other ? The plan says, the bounty shall be " paid toeach draft by all the inhabitants within the precinct of theclass, equally, according to the value of the property theymay respectively possess ;" and if" not paid withindays, the same to be levied on all the taxable property ofthe said inhabitants." The property of one hundred men332 iirsTORY OF theis to be assessed. Oi>e niiffht be worth half a million ofdollars, and one not more than ten dollars, and the otherninety-eight would be set at various sums between the twoextremes. In what manner is this to be levied and collected? Who is to decide the legal questions that mayarise, render the judgment, and issue the execution? Isthe property to be taken according to the different degreesof indebtedness in the class, and sold at auction, orby private sale ? The constitution says — " In suits atcommon law, where the value in controversy shall exceedtwenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved."This, however, may not be considered as acivil claim, but as partaking more of a criminal nature.The right of trial by jury is also secured to all persons incriminal cases.The truth is, the whole scheme was not only unconstitutional,and oppressive in the most extravagant degree,and totally at variance with the rights and liberties of thecitizens, but it was in an equal degree preposterous andabsurd. And when it was modified, and reduced somewhatto form, in a bill introduced by Mr. Giles into thesenate, for the purpose of raising eighty thousand men forthe army, after long debate, and great efforts by the friendsof the administration, and the zealous supporters of thewar, the measure could not be carried through the houses,and of course failed.But it served to show to the nation at large, that thosewho plunged the country into the war, when they foundtheir popularity in danger, were prepared to adopt theboldest and the most unconstitutional measures to savetheir own reputations, and to preserve their power. Andit was equally well calculated to excite the greatest alarmin the citizens at large, not merely for the preservation ofthe constitutional authority of the government, but fortheir own personal security, rights, and liberties ; and toHARTFORD CONVENTION. 333teach them the absolute necessity of watching over theirown freedom and safety.In pursuance of what appears to have been the generalplan of operations, viz. forcing men into the service, theSecretary of the Navy also made a report, in answer to aresolution of the senate, " for the better organization ofthe navy of the United States." Among many other thingscontained in that document, is the following passage —There is another branch of the service which appearsto me to merit the serious deliberation of the legislature,with regard to the establishment of some regular system,by which the voluntary enlistments for the navy may deriveoccasional enforcement from the services of thoseseamen who, pursuing their own private occupations, areexempt, by their itinerant habits, from public service ofany kind. In my view, there would be nothing incompatiblewith the free spirit of our free institutions, or therights of individuals, if registers, with a particular descriptiverecord, were kept in the several districts, of all theseamen belonging to the United States, and provisionmade by law for classing and calling into the public service,in succession, for reasonable stated periods, suchportions or classes as the public service might require ;and if any individual so called should be absent at thetime, the next in succession should perform the tour ofduty of the absentee, who should, on his return, be liableto serve his original tour, and his substitute be exemptfrom his succeeding regular tour of duty.In the military service, should the ranks not be filled byrecruits, the deficiency of regular force may be filled upby drafts of militia to assemble at a given tinge and place ;not so in the naval service, it depends exclusively uponvoluntary enlistments, upon which there is no reliance forany given object, at any time or place. Hence the mostimportant expeditions may utterly fail, though every HISTORY OF THEbible exertion shall have been made to carry them intoeffect."This was advancing another step in the policy of conscription.Having, as was probably supposed, devised aplan for forcibly turning the militia into regular soldiers,and recruiting the standing army by a large body of conscripts,the next attempt was to supply the deficiencies ofthe navy by a similar process. That was, in effect, toestablish by law, what even in Great Britain has neverhad any higher sanction than that of practice, viz. — a systemof impressment — that very abuse, for which, when proceedingfrom another nation towards us, we had carriedon a most expensive and disastrous war of nearly twoyears and a half continuance. And it is worthy of notice,that the Secretary of the Navy speaks of the right ofdrafting the militia, proposed by the Secretary of War,as an established legal right, and makes use of it as anargument to justify his plan of impressment.At the same time that these attempts were making bythe administration to establish conscription and impressmentby law, a measure was brought before the Senate ofa kindred character, and of a common origin. It wascalled a bill, " making further provision for filling theranks of the army of the United States." The first sectionof the bill provided, that recruiting officers should beauthorised to enlist into the army of the United Statesany free, effective, able-bodied men, between the age ofeighteen and fifty years.The second section repealed so much of former acts, asrequired the consent in writing of the parent, master, orguardian, to authorise the enlistment of persons undertwenty-one years of age, provided masters of apprenticeswho enlist should receive a certain portion of the bounty-money.This measure excited great alarm in many parts of thecountry. It was considered as aiming a direct blow at theHARTFORD CONVENTION. 335legislative prerogatives of the several states, by the assumptionof a power never granted to the United States,but most clearly belonging to the several states. By thelaws of the individual states, parents have an absoluteright to the services of their children, until they arrive atthe age of twenty-one years. This right is founded onthe duty of protection and support on the one side, and ofobedience and service on the other. In the case of apprentices,the relationship is formed by positive contractbetween the parties; and the constitution contains no authorityfor Congress to interfere in the private concerns ofindividuals under the jurisdiction of the several states, todestroy the nearest and most interesting and importantrelationships of domestic life, or to vacate contracts enteredinto between individuals, concerning the ordinary businessof life. But the fears of parents were excited to the highestdegree, by this bold and arbitrary attempt to destroythe moral character and welfare of their children — to takethem from under parental care and controul, and placethem in the purlieus of a camp, and in the midst of thecontaminating atmosphere of a regular army.It was clearly perceived, that if Congress could thusinterfere with the internal affairs of the states, annul theauthority of their laws in cases of such importance as thedomestic relations of the inhabitants, and set aside obligations,legal, moral, and social, of the most interesting andmomentous character, there could be no further questionabout the nature of the government. It must be consideredas a fearful and unrelenting despotism, restrained by noconstitutional authority, and regulated and controuled solelyby its absolute and sovereign will and pleasure.The legislature of Connecticut were in session when informationwas received of the propositions before Congressfor establishing a conscription and for enlisting minors.That information produced a great degree of excitement,and the constitutional means of guarding the rights of the336 HISTORY OF THE•militia, and of parents, guardians, and masters, becamean object of serious consideration and examination. Inthe course of the session the following measure was adoptedunanimously in the council, and in the House of Representativesby a vote nearly unanimous, there being butsix in the minority."Resolution.'* Whereas a plan of the Secretary of the Departmentof War, for filling up the regular army of the UnitedStates, has been submitted to the Congress of the UnitedStates, now in session, and a bill for an act to carry a partof the same into execution is pending before the House ofRepresentatives of the United States, the principles ofwhich plan and bill, if adopted, will place at the disposalof the administration of the United States government,not only all the militia of this state, but the troops raisedfor the defence of this state at a period when the statewas left unprotected — and by the principles of Which oursons, brothers, and friends, are made liable to be deliveredagainst their will, and hy force, to the marshals and recruitingofficers of the United States, to be employed, notfor our own defence, but for the conquest of Canada, orupon any foreign service upon which the administrationmay choose to send them; or impose upon the people ofthis state 'a capitation or other direct fax'' limited by norules but the will of officers appointed by the President ofthe United States.^^ Aid whereas the principles of the plan and bill aforesaid,are, in the opinion of this assembly, not only intolerablyburdensome and oppressive, but utterly subversiveof the rights and liberties of the people of this state, andthe freedom, sovereignty, and independence of the same,and inconsistent with the principles of the constitution ofthe United States.^' Andivhereas it will become the imperious duty of theHARTFORD CONVENTION. 337legislature of this state to exert themselves to ward off ablow so fatal to the liberties of a free people —"resolved by this Assembly — that in case the plan andbill aforesaid, or any other bill on that subject, containingthe principles aforesaid, shall be adopted, and assume theform of an act of Congress, the Governor of this state ishereby requested forthwith to convoke the General Assembly; and to avoid delay, he is hereby authorised to issuehis proclamation, requiring the attendance of the membersthereof, at such time and place as he may appoint, to theend that opportunity may be given to consider what measuresmay be adopted to secure and preserve the rightsand liberties of the people of this state, and the freedom,sovereignty and independence of the same."The events of 1814 have been already referred to.They had excited strong consternation throughout a largeportion of the country, and particularly in the New-englandstates, where the exposure to invasion was pre-eminentlygreat, and where the consequences which mustensue such a hostile visitation, must necessarily prove inthe highest degree disastrous. The national governmenthad withdrawn almost all their troops from the Atlanticfrontier, and had provided nothing for the safety of theinhabitants beyond a single military officer of some rank,(and perhaps a small number of soldiers,) to take theoversight of a certain specified portion of territory whichwas called a "military district." In a pamphlet publishedin Boston in 1823, it is said — " In the summer of 1814,the war, which before had not approached nearer than thegreat northern lakes, at length fell unexpectedly and inan alarming manner upon the borders of Massachusetts.The English, in considerable force, captured Castine, asmall town at the mouth of the Penobscot, and in a shorttime had the absolute control of all that part of Mainewhich lies to the eastward of that great river. Intelligencewas shortly received by express at head quarters in338 HISTORY OF THEBoston, that the enemy was preparing to execute withoutdelay a more extensive invasion, and it therefore becamenecessary to take measures of immediate and vigorousdefence. Under these distressing and disastrous circumstances,Governor Strong resolved to assemble the membersof the legislature. The general court accordinglymet on the 5th day of October of the same year ; and hisexcellency commenced his message in the followingwords :^— " Since your last adjournment such importantchanges have taken place in the state of our public affairs,and the war in which we have been unhappily involvedhas assumed an aspect so threatening and destructive, thatthe council unanimously concurred with me in opinion thatan extraordinary meeting of the legislature was indispensable."" Two days after the session began, viz. onthe 7th of October, a resolution approving the governor'sconduct as it related to the defence of the state, passedthe house by a vote of 222 to 59. On the i3th of Octoberanother resolution, authorising the governor to raise tenthousand men for the defence of the state, passed thehouse by a vote of 252 to 71."In addition to all the other calamities with which thecountry was visited, in the year 1814, a large proportion ofthe banks in the states south of New-england had refusedto pay their notes in specie, in consequence of which thepaper currency issued by such banks greatly depreciated,strong fears prevailed that they were insolvent, andthe alarm became almost universal. As a natural resultof the excitement which was caused by this state ofthings, business of all kinds was greatly impeded andembarrassed, if not entirely suspended ; to such a degreehad the fears of the community been raised, that the individualwho was under the necessity of travelling fromNew York to Boston, found himself subjected to seriousloss, as well as great inconvenience, in consequence of thedoubts entertained of the security of the notes circulatedHARTFORD CONVENTION. 339by the banks of the former city. The state of Connecticut,bordering upon the state of New York, and having a constantintercourse with its inhabitants, and especially relyingupon the city of New York as the great market fortheir marketable commodities, received New-york bankpaper almost exclusively in payment for those commodities; and it soon became a question of much importance,whether it was safe for the state of Connecticut to receivea depreciated and depreciating currency of another state,in payment of taxes, which, by the extraordinary expendituresin support of the war, and especially in paying themilitia, had become extremely burthensome. From thehigh tone which, in their public communications, theAmerican government had assumed, when treating of thesubject of peace, it was impossible to foresee, or even tocandidate the probable duration of the war. If they adheredto their demands, it appeared likely to be interminable,for the British, having been extricated from thewar with France, were left at full liberty to devote theirundivided attention to that with the United States. Andhad our government held out — had they not in their instructionsto their agents, who were employed in negotiatingfor peace, empowered them to abandon everyground and principle for which the war was professedlyundertaken, there is no room to doubt that the year 1815would have been the most fearful period that had evermarked our national history. The events of 1814 manifesteda spirit of resentment on the part of the British,from which it was easy to perceive that the worst passionswould attend, and the most vindictive spirit be exhibited,in the further prosecution of the war. There was nothing,therefore, in the prospect, that was calculated to afford theslightest relief to the apprehensions of the country, respectingthe hostile movements of the enemy, during theapproaching season. On the contrary, as the means forcarrying on the war were in a great meas' ^ exhausted,340 HISTORY OF THEthe government had become alarmed for their own popularity,and were obviously preparing to resort to themost desperate, as well as the most unconstitutional measures,to save themselves from the odium which theycould scarcely hope to avoid, if hostilities should continuethrough another year, and the utmost alarm prevailed concerningthe result. The situation of the New-englandstates was in the highest degree critical and dangerous.The services of the militia, for two years, had been extremelysevere, they were constantly taken from theirfarms and their ordinary occupations, and in addition toall the losses which such a state of things must necessarilyproduce, they were subjected to the hardships andhazards of a camp, and the life of a soldier. In the meantime,the United States had withheld all supplies for themaintenance of the militia for the year 1814, both in Massachusettsand Connecticut, and thus forced upon thestates the burden of supporting the troops employed indefending their coasts from invasion, and their towns frombeing sacked and pillaged. And all this time, the taxeslaid to carry on the war were exacted from those stateswith the most rigorous strictness ; and when, under allthese circumstances, the monied institutions in a large partof the country were stopping payment, when their creditwas shaken, their notes depreciated, and their solvencydoubted, the capitalists of the New-england states, becausethey did not deem it expedient to risk their privatefortunes by loaning money to the government, which hadwilfully and against all remonstrances, brought thesemultiplied calamities upon themselves, as well as uponthe nation, were reviled as enemies to their country andas traitors to its government. It had become perfectlyapparent, that if the New-england states were rescuedfrom the effects of these calamities at all, it must depend,as far as human means were concerned, upon their ownexertions, and that they could not place the least depend-hartfordCONVENTION. 341once on the national government. Indeed, they had beenrepeatedly told that such was the state of things by thenational government.In Massachusetts, the danger to which the inhabitantsnear the sea-coast were exposed, had spread an alarmthroughout the commonwealth. Early in the ye-ar 1814,memorials from a great number of towns, from the interioras well as near the coast, were forwarded to the legislature,praying that body to exert their authority to protectthe citizens in their constitutional rights and privileges,and suggesting the expediency of appointing delegates," to meet delegates from such other states as mightthink proper to appoint them, for the purpose of devisingproper measures to procure the united efforts of the commercialstates, to obtain such amendments and explanationsof the constitution as will secure them from furtherevils."These memorials were referred to a joint committee ofthe Senate and House of Representatives, who made areport, of which the following, in relation to the proposedconvention, is an extract — " The committee are convincedof the right, and think the legislature ought to vindicate it,of acting in concert with other states, in order to producea powerful, and, if possible, an irresistible claim for suchalterations as will tend to preserve the Union, and restoreviolated privileges, yet they have considered that there arereasons which render it inexpedient at the present momentto exercise this power.The committee entertain no doubt, that the sentimentsand feelings expressed in the numerous memorials andremonstrances which have been committed to them, arethe genuine voice of a vast majority of the citizens of thiscommonwealth."This report bears date February 4th, 1814, and wasadopted in the Senate by a vote of 23 to 8, and in theHouse of Representatives, of 178 to 43.342 HISTORY OF THEOn the 16th of October the House of Representativespassed the following resolution, by a vote of 2G0 to 90 —Resolved, That twelve persons be appointed as delegatesfrom this Commonwealth, to meet and confer withdelegates from the other New-england states, or anyother, upon the subject of their public grievances andconcerns ; and upon the best means of preserving our resources; and of defence against the enemy ; and to deviseand suggest for adoption by those respective states such measuresas they may deem expedient ; and also to take measures,if they shall think it proper, for procuring a conventionof delegates from all the United States, in order torevise the Constitution thereof, and more effectually tosecure the support and attachment of all the people, byplacing all upon the basis of fair representation."The Senate having concurred in passing this resolution,on the 18th of October the Houses in convention electedthe delegates by a vote of 226 to 67. The legislaturedirected the President of the Senate, and the Speaker ofthe House of Representatives, to make known as speedilyas possible, to the different governments of the Union theproceedings of the government of that state. Accordinglythe following letter was written by those two officers of thegovernment to the executive magistrates of the otherstates. —Boston, October 17th, 1814.Sir, — Your Excellency will herewith receive certainresolutions of the legislature of Massachusetts, which youare respectfully requested to take the earliest occasion tolay before the legislature of your state, together with thisletter, which is intended as an invitation to them, to appointdelegates, if they shall deem it expedient, to meetsuch others as may be appointed by this and other states,at the time and j)lacc expressed in these resolutions.The several objects of the proposed conference are,HARTFORD CO.\VEL\TION. 343first, to deliberate upon the dangers to which the easternsection of the Union is exposed by the course of the war,and which there is too much reason to believe will thickenround them in its progress, and to devise, if practicable,means of security and defence which may be consistentwith the preservation of their resources from total ruin,and adapted to their local situation, mutual relations andhabits, and not repugnant to their obligations asMEMBERS OF THE Union. When Convened for this object,which admits not of delay, it seems also expedient to submitto their consideration, the inquiry, whether the interestsof these states demand that persevering endeavoursbe used by each of them to procure such amendments, to beeffected in the national constitution, as may secure to themequal advantage, and whether, if in their judgment thisshould be deemed impracticable, under the existing provisionsfor amending that instrument, an experiment maybemade without disadvantage to the nation, for obtaininga convention from all the states in the Union, or such ofthem as approve of the measure, with a view to obtain suchamendment.It cannot be necessary to anticipate objections to themeasure which may arise from jealousy or fear. This legislatureis content, for its justification, to repose on thepurity of its own motives, and upon the known attachmentof its constituents to the national union, and to the rights andindependence of their country.'* We have the honor to be, &lc."John Phillips,President of the Senate of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.Timothy Bigelow,Speaker of the House of Representatives of said Commonwealth."The documents from the legislature of Massachusetts,which have just been quoted, were transmitted to the legislaturesof Connecticut and Rhode Island. The General344 HISTORY OF THEAssembly of Connecticut were then in session, and thedocuments were communicated to the two houses, and bythem were referred to a joint coinntittee, who thereuponmade the following report —At a General Assembly of the State of Connecticut,holden at New-Haven, in said state, on the second Thursdayof October, in the year of our Lord one thousand eighthundred and fourteen.To the Honourable the General Assembly now in session.The committee to whom was referred the speechof his excellency the governor, with the documents accompanyingthe same, and also his excellency's message, presentinga communication from the governour of Massachusetts; further report, —'* That the condition of this state demands the most seriousattention of the Legislature. We lately enjoyed, incommon with the other members of the national confederacy,the blessings of peace. The industry of our citizens,in every department of active life, was abundantly rewarded; our cities and villages exhibited indications ofincreasing wealth ; and the foreign relations of the Unionsecured our safety and nourished our prosperity.The scene is now reversed. We are summoned tothe field of war, and to surrender our treasures for our defence.The fleets of a powerful enemy hover on ourcoasts ; blockade our harbours ; and threaten our townsand cities with fire and desolation.When a commonwealth suddenly falls from a state ofhigh prosperity, it behoves the guardians of its interests toinquire into the cause of its decline, and, with deep solicitude,to seek a remedy.In the latter part of the last century, a spirit of daringenterprise — impatient of restraint — regardless of the sanctionsof religion — hostile to human happiness, and aspiringto supreme power — overturned many ancient governments; made Europe a scene of carnage, and threatenedHARTFORD CONVENTION. 345With ruin all which was valuable in the civilized world.The history of its progress and decline is familiar to everymind. Nations without the reach of the immense physicalpower which it embodied, were tainted by its corruptions; and every state and province in Christendom has feltits baneful influences. By the pure principles inheritedfrom our fathers, conducive, at once, to the preservation ofliberty and order, this state has been eminently exempt, inits interior policy, from this modern scourge of nations.In thus withstanding this potent adversary of all ancientestablishments, while many monarchies have been subverted,we have exhibited to the world the highest evidencethat a free constitution is not inconsistent with thestrength of civil government, and that the virtue of a peopleis the best preservation of both.Occupying a comparatively small territory, and naturallyassociating, during the revolutionary war, with stateswhose views were identified with ours, our interests andinclinations led us to unite in the great national compact,since defined and consolidated by the constitution of theUnited States. We had justly anticipated, from thatunion, the preservation and advancement of our dearestrights and interests ; and while the father of his country,and those other great and wise men, — who, mindful of theirhigh duties, and regardless of local and party considerations,consulted the happiness of the commonwealth,guided our councils, we were not disappointed in our expectations.The federal government, in which our ownvenerable statesmen were conspicuous, was revered inevery nation. An American in foreign lands, was honouredfor his country's sake : a rich and virtuous populationwas rapidly reducing the limits of our extensive wilderness; and the commerce of America was in every sea."But a coalition, not less evident than if defined by thearticles of a formal treaty, arose between the national administrationand that fearful tyrant in Europe, who was346 HISTORY OF THEaspiring to the dominion of the world. No means, howeverdestructive to the commerce and hazardous to thepeace of this coiintr}^ were left unattempted, to aid hisefforts and unite our interests and destinies with his.From this fatal cause, we are bereft of the respectablestanding we once held in the councils of the nation ; impoverishedby a long course of commercial restrictions;involved in an odious and disastrous war ; and subjectedto all the complicated calamities which we now deplore.Thus driven from every object of our best hopes, andbound to an inglorious struggle in defence of our dwellingsfrom a public enemy; we had no apprehension, much aswe had suffered from the national government, that itwould refuse to yield us socii protection as its treasuresmight afford. Much less could we doubt, that those disbursements,which might be demanded of this state, wouldbe passed to our credit on the books of the treasury. Suchhowever has not been the course adopted by the nationalagents. All supplies have been withdrawn from the militiaof this state, in the service of the United States. Thegroundless pretext for this unwarrantable measure, was,their submission to an officer assigned them by the commanderin chief, in perfect conformity with military usage,and the principles of a request from the President himself,under which a party of them were detached. The injusticeof that measure, by which we were compelled to sustainalone the burden of supplying and paying our ownforces, in the service of the United States — a service renderednecessary to defend our territory from invasion — ishighly aggravated by the consideration, that the dangerswhich called them to the field, and the concentration ofthe enemy's forces on our coasts, have resulted from theships of the United States having taken refuge in our waters.Were this the only instance evince of the disregardof the administration to the just claims and best interestsof this state, — the only ground to fear that we areHARTFORD CONVENTION. 347forgotten in their councils, except as subjects of taxationand oppression, — we should choose to consider it an instanceanomalous and solitary — still yield lliem our confidence,and hope for protection to the extent of their power,in this season of unusual calamity."Protection is the first, and most important claim of thesestates on the government of the nation. It is a primarycondition, essential to the very obligation of every compactbetween rulers and their subjects. To obtain that, as aprincipal object, Connecticut became a member of the nationalconfederacy. In a defensive war, a governmentwould stand justified, after making a fair application of itspowers to that important end ; — for it could do no more.But when a government hastily declares war, without providingthe indispensable means of conducting it — want ofmeans is no apology for refusing protection. In such acase, the very declaration of war, is, of itself, a breach ofthe sacred obligation; inasmuch as the loss of protectionby the subject, is the natural and inevitable consequenceof the measure. When that war annihilates the only revenuesof the nation, the violation of the original contractis still more palpable. If waged for foreign conquest, andthe wreck of the national treasures devoted to a fruitlessinvasion of the enemy's territory, the character of the actis more criminal, but not more clear.Whatever may be the disposition of the national Executivetowards this state, during the sequel of the war, suchis the condition of the public finances, that constant andvery great advances must be made from our state treasury,to meet the expenditures necessary for our own defence."But the utmost efforts of this state, under the most favourablecircumstances for raising revenue, would be hardlyadequate to the costly operations of defending, against agreat naval power, a sea-coast of more than one hundredand twenty miles in length ; much less, at this inauspiciousperiod, when the distresses of the people are enhanced by348 HISTORY OF thethe embarrassments of our monied institutions, and thecirculating medium constantly diminishing, can any thingbe spared consistently with our safety. Yet the nationalgovernment are dooming us to enormous taxation, withoutaffording any just confidence that we shall share in theexpenditures of the public revenue. The invasion of Canadais perseveringly pursued, our coasts left defenceless,and the treasures of the country exhausted on more favouredpoints of the national frontier. To meet those demands,and, at the same time, to defend ourselves, is impossible.Whatever we may contribute, we have no reasonableground to expect protection in return.*the people of this state have no disloyalty to the interestsof the Union. For their fidelity and patriotism, theyflay appeal, with confidence, to the national archives fromthe commencement of the revolutionary war."In achieving the independence of the nation, they borean honourable part. Their contingent in men and moneyhas ever been promptly furnished, when constitutionallyrequired. Much as they lament the present unnaturalhostilities with Great Britain, they have, with characteristicobedience to lawful authority, punctually paid the latetaxes imposed by the general government. On every lawfuldemand of the national Executive, their well-disciplinedmilitia have resorted to the field. The public enemy, wheninvading their shores, has been met at the water's edge,and valiantly repulsed. They duly appreciate the greatadvantages which would result from the federal compact,were the government administered according to the sacredprinciples of the constitution. They have not forgotten theties of confidence and affection, which bound these statesto each other during their toils for independence ; — northe national honour and commercial prosperity, which theymutually shared, during the happy years of a good administration.They are, at the same time, conscious of theirrights and determined to defend them. Those sacred li-hartfordCONVENTION. 349berths — those inestimable institutions, civil and religions,which their venerable fathers have bequeathed them, are,with the blessing of Heaven, to be maintained at everyhazard, and never to be surrendered by tenants of the soilwhich the ashes of their ancestors have consecrated."In what manner the multiplied evils, which we feeland fear, are to be remedied, is a question of the highestmoment, and deserves the greatest consideration. Thedocuments transmitted by his excellency the Governor ofMassachusetts, present, in the opinion of the committee,an eligible method of combining the wisdom of New-england,in devising, on full consultation, a proper courseto be adopted, consistent with our obligations to the UnitedStates. The following resolutions are, therefore, respectfullysubmitted."Signed by order,"Henry Champion, Chairman:'General Assent, October Session, 1814."In the House of Representatives, the foregoing reportis accepted and approved."Attest. Charles Venison, Cleric"Concurred in by the Upper House.Attest. Thomas Day, Secretary:'Resolved, That seven persons be appointed Delegatesfrom this state, to meet the delegates of the Commonwealthof Massachusetts, and of any other of the New-englandstates, at Hartford, on the 15th day of Decembernext, and confer v.'ith them on the subjects proposedby a resolution of said Commonwealth, communicated tothis legislature, and upon any other subjects which maycome before them, for the purpose of devising and recommendingsuch measures for the safety and welfare of thesestates, AS MAY consist with our obligations as memBears OF THE NATIONAL UnION.350 HISTORY OF TieResolved, That his excellency the Governor be requestedto transmit the foregoing report and resolutionsto the Executives of the New-england states.This Assembly do appoint his honour Chauncey Goodrich,the honourable James Hillhouse, the honourableJohn Treadwell, the honourable Zcplianiah Swift, the honourableNathaniel Smith, the honourable Calvin Goddardand the honourable Roger M. Sherman, Delegates fromthis state, to meet the Delegates of the Commonwealth ofMassachusetts a. id of any other of the New-england states,at Hartford, on the fifteenth day of December next, andconfer with them on the subjects proposed by a resolutionof said Commonwealth, communicated to this Legislature,and upon any other subjects which may come before them,for the purpose of devising and recommending such measuresfor the safety and welfare of these states as may consistwith our obligations as members of the national Union."The above and foregoing are true copies of record,restrained and certified under the seal of the state, byThomas Day, Secretary:'The following is an account of the proceedings of thelegislature of Rhode-island on this subject —'* State of Rhode-f stand andProvidence Plantations.•' In General Assembly, October Session, A. D. 1814.•* Whereas this General Assembly, having long witnessedwith regret and anxiety, the defenceless situation ofthis state, did, at their last session, request his excellencythe governor to communicate with the executives of ourneighbouring sister states upon the subject of our commondefence by our mutual co-operation : and whereas thosestates feeling equally with us the common misfortunes,and the necessity of united exertions, have appointed andHARTFORD CONVENTION. 351invited us to appoint delegates to meet and confer uponour calamitous situation, and to devise and recommendwise and prudent measures for our common relief.Resolved, That this General Assembly will appoint fourdelegates from this state, to meet at Hartford in the stateof Connecticut, on the fifteenth day of December next, andconfer with such delegates as are or shall he appointed byother states, upon the common dangers to which thesestates are exposed, upon the best means of co-operatingfor our mutual defence against the enemy, and upon themeasures which it may be in the power of said states, consistentlywith their obligations to adopt, to restore and secureto the people thereof, their rights and privileges underthe constitution of the United States.True copy — witness,Henry Bowen, .SfcV^.""Both houses having joined in grand committee, choseDaniel Lyman, Samuel Ward, Benjamin Hazard, andEdward Mantou, Esquires, delegates from this state, tomeet at Hartford in the state of Connecticut, on the fifteenthday of December next, and confer with delegatesfrom other states, pursuant to a resolution for this purposepassed at the present session.True copy — witnessHenry Bowen, Sec'rj/."On the 15th of December, 1814, the Convention met atHartford, in the state of Connecticut. There were twelvemembers from Massachusetts, viz. George Cabot, NathanDane, William Prescott, Harrison Gray Otis, TimothyBigelow, Joshua Thomas, Samuel Sumner Wilde, JosephLyman, George Bliss, Stephen Longfellow, Jun. DanielWaldo, and Hodijah Baylies. From Connecticut therewere seven members, viz. Chauncey Goodrich, JohnTreadwell, James Hillhouse, Zephaniah Swift, Nathaniel352 HISTORY OF THESmith, Calvin Goddard, and Roger Blinot Sherman. FromRhode Island there were four, viz. Daniel Lyman, SamuelWard, Edward Manton, and Benjamin Hazard. Threepersons, viz. Benjamin West and Mills Olcott, from New-hampshire,and William Hall, Jun. of Vermont, who appearedas delegates chosen by local conventions in thosestates, were also admitted as members. Immediately uponbeing assembled, they proceeded to the choice of officers.George CaLot, a member from Massachusetts, was chosenpresident, and the author of this work secretary. Havingthus become organized, they proceeded in the performanceof the business for which they had been delegated ; andafter a session of three weeks, embodied the result of theirlabours in the following report —The delegates from the legislatures of the states of massachusetts,Connecticut and Rhode-island, and from the counties of Graftonand Cheshire in the state of JVeic-Hampshire and the county ofWindham in the state of Vermont, assembled in convention, begleave to report the following resxdt of their conference.The convention is deeply impressed with a sense of thearduous nature of the commission which they were appointedto execute, of devising the means of defence againstdangers, and of relief from oppressions proceeding fromthe acts of their own government, without violating constitutionalprinciples, or disappointing the hopes of a sufferingand injured people. To prescribe patience andfirmness to those who are already exhausted by distress,is sometimes to drive them to despair, and the progresstowards reform by the regular road, is irksome to thosewhose imaginations discern, and whose feelings prompt,to a shorter course. But when abuses, reduced to a system,and accumulated through a course of years, have pervadedevery department of government, and spread corruptionthrough every region of the state ; when these areHARTFORD CONVENTION. 353clothed with the forms of law, and enforced by an executivewhose will is their source, no summary means of reliefcan be applied without recourse to direct and openresistance. This experiment, even when justifiable, cannotfail to be painful to the good citizen ; and the successof the effort will be no security against the danger of theexample. Precedents of resistance to the worst administration,are eagerly seized by those who are naturallyhostile to the best. Necessity alone can sanction a resortto this measure ; and it should never be extended in durationor degree beyond the exigency, until the people, notmerely in the fervour of sudden excitement, but after fulldeliberation, are determined to change the constitution.It is a truth, not to be concealed, that a sentiment prevailsto no inconsiderable extent, that administration havegiven such constructions to that instrument, and practisedso many abuses under colour of its authority, that thetime for a change is at hand. Those who so believe, regardthe evils which surround them as intrinsic and incurabledefects in the constitution. They yield to a persuasion,that no change, at any time, or on any occasion, canaggravate the misery of their country. This opinion mayultimately prove to be correct. But as the evidence onwhich it rests is not yet conclusive, and as measuresadopted upon the assumption of its certainty might be irrevocable,some general considerations are submitted, in thehope of reconciling all to a course of moderation and firmness,which may save them from the regret incident tosudden decisions, probably avert the evil, or at least insureconsolation and success in the last resort.The constitution of the United States, under the auspicesof a wise and virtuous administration, proved itselfcompetent to all the objects of national prosperity comprehendedin the views of its framers. No parallel canbe found in history, of a transition so rapid as that of theUnited States from the lowest depression to the highest354 HISTORY OF THEfelicity) — from the condition of weak and disjointed republics,to that of u great, united, and prosperous nation.Although this high state of public happiness has undergonea miserable and affecting reverse, through the prevalenceof a weak and profligate policy, yet the evils andaffections which have thus been induced upon the country,are not peculiar to any form of government. The lustand caprice of power, the corruption of patronage, theoppression of the weaker interests of the community bythe stronger, heavy taxes, wasteful expenditures, and unjustand ruinous wars, are the natural offspring of badadministrations, in all ages and countries. It was indeedto be hoped, that the rulers of these states would notmake such disastrous haste to involve their infancy in theembarrassments of old and rotten institutions. Yet allthis have they done ; and their conduct calls loudly fortheir dismission and disgrace. But to attempt upon everyabuse of power to change the constitution, would be toperpetuate the evils of revolution."Again, the experiment of the powers of the constitutionto regain its vigour, and of the people to recover fromtheir delusions, has been hitherto made under the greatestpossible disadvantages arising from the state of the world.The fierce passions which have convulsed the nations ofEurope, have passed the ocean, and finding their way tothe bosoms of our citizens, have afforded to administrationthe means of perverting public opinion, in respect toour foreign relations, so as to acquire its aid in the indulgenceof their animosities, and the increase of their adherents.Further, a reformation of public opinion, resultingfrom dear-bought experience, in the southern Atlanticstates, at least, is not to be despaired of. They will havefelt, that the eastern states cannot be made exclusivelythe victims of a capricious and impassioned policy. Theywill have seen that the great and essential interests of thepeople are common to the south and to the east. TheyHARTFORD CONVENTION. 355will realize the fatal errors of a system which seeks revengefor commercial injuries in the sacrifice ot commerce,and aggravates by needless wars, to an immeasurableextent, the injuries it professes to redress. Theymay discard the influence of visionary theorists, and recognizethe benefits ©fa practical policy. Indications ofthis desirable revolution of opinion, among our brethrenin those states, are already manifested. While a hoperemains of its ultimate completion, its progress should notbe retarded or stopped, by exciting fears which mustcheck these favourable tendencies, and frustrate the effortsof the wisest and best men in those states, to acceleratethis propitious change.Finally, if the Union be destined to dissolution, by reasonof the multiplied abuses of bad administrations, it should,if possible, be the \ work of peaceable times, and deliberateconsent. Some new form of confederacy should be substitutedamong those states which shall intend to maintaina federal relation to each other. Events may prove thatthe causes of our calamities are deep and permanent.They may be found to proceed, not merely from the blindnessof prejudice, pride of opinion, violence of party spirit,or the confusion of the times ; but they may be traced toimplacable combinations of individuals, or of states, tomonopolize power and office, and to trample without remorseu|ionthe rights and interests of commercial sectionsof the Union. Whenever it shall appear that these causesare radical and permanent, a separation, by equitable arrangement,will be [preferable to an alliance by constraint,among nominal friends, but real enemies, inflamed bymutual hatred and jealousy, and inviting, by intestine divisions,contempt and aggression from abroad. But a severanceof the Union by one or more states, against the willof the rest, and especially in a time of war, can be justifiedonly by absolute necessity. These are among the principalobjections against precipitate measures tending to dish356 HISTORY OF THEunite the states, and when examined in connection withthe farewell address of the Father of his country, theymust, it is believed, be deemed conclusive.Under these impressions, the convention have proceededto confer and deliberate upon the alarming state of publicaffairs, especially as affecting the interests of the peoplewho have appointed them for this purpose, and they arenaturally led to a consideration, in the first place, of thedangers and grievances which menace an immediate orspeedy pressure, with a view of suggesting means of presentrelief; in the next place, of such as are of a more remoteand general description, in the hope of attaining futuresecurity.Among the subjects of complaint and apprehension,which might be comprised under the former of these propositions,the attention of the convention has been occupiedwith the claims and pretensions advanced, and the authorityexercised over the militia, by the executive andlegislative departments of the national government. Also,upon the destitution of the means of defence in which theeastern states are left ; while at the same time they aredoomed to heavy requisitions of men and money for nationalobjects.The authority of the national government over the militiais derived from those clauses in the constitution whichgive power to Congress ' to provide for calling forth themilitia to execute the laws of the Union, suppress insurrectionsand repel invasions ;' — Also ' to provide for organizing,arming, and disciplining the militia, and for governingsuch parts of them as may be employed in the serviceof the United States, reserving to the states respectivelythe appointment of the officers, and the authority of trainingthe militia according to the discipline prescribed byCongress.' Again, ' the President shall be commanderin chief of the army and navy of the United States,and of the militia of the several states, when called intoHARTFORD CONVENTION. 357the actual service of the United States'' In these specifiedcases only, has the national government any power overthe militia ; and it follows conclusively, that for all generaland ordinary purposes, this power belongs to the statesrespectively, and to them alone. It is not only with regret,but with astonishment, the convention perceive that undercolour of an authority conferred with such plain and preciselimitations, a power is arrogated by the executivegovernment, and in some instances sanctioned by the twohouses of congress, of control over the militia, which ifconceded will render nugatory the rightful authority of theindividual states over that class of men, and by placing atthe disposal of the national government the lives and servicesof the great body of the people, enable it at pleasureto destroy their liberties, and erect a military despotismon the ruins.*' An elaborate examination of the principles assumed forthe basis of these extravagant pretensions, of the consequencesto which they lead, and of the insurmountableobjections to their admission, would transcend the limitsof this report. A few general observations, with an exhibitionof the character of these pretensions, and a recommendationof a strenuous opposition to them, must not,however, be omitted.It will not be contended that by the terms used in theconstitutional compact, the power of the national governmentto call out the militia is other than a power expresslylimited to three cases. One of these must exist, as acondition precedent to the exercise of that power — Unlessthe laws shall be opposed, or an insurrection shall exist,or an invasion shall be made, congress, and of consequencethe President as their organ, has no more power over themilitia than over the armies of a foreign nation.But if the declaration of the President should be admittedto be an unerring test of the existence of these cases,this important power would depend, not upon the truth of358 HISTORY OF THEthe fact, but upon executive infallibility. And the limitationof the power would consequently be nothing morethan merely nominal, as it might always be eluded. Itfollows therefore that the decision of the President in thisparticular cannot be conclusive. It is as much the dutyof the state authorities to watch over the rights reserved,as of the United States to exercise the powers which aredelegated.The arrangement of the United States into militarydistricts, with a small portion of the regular force, underan officer of high rank of the standing army, with power tocall for the militia, as circumstances in his judgment mayrequire ; and to assume the command of them, is not warrantedby the constitution or any law of the United States.It is not denied that Congress may delegate to the Presidentof the United States the power to call forth the militiain the cases which are within their jurisdiction — But hehas no authority to substitute military prefects throughoutthe Union, to use their own discretion in such instances.To station an officer of the army in a military district withouttroops corresponding to his rank, for the purpose oftaking command of the militia that may be called into service,is a manifest evasion of that provision of the constitutionwhich expressly reserves to the states the appointmentof the officers of the militia ; and the object of detachingsuch officer cannot be well concluded to be anyother than that of superseding the governor or other officersof the militia in their right to command.Time power of dividing the militia of the states intoclasses, and obliging such classes to furnish by contract ordraft, able-bodied men, to serve for one or more yearsfor the defence of the frontier, is not delegated to Congress.If a claim to draft the militia for one year forsuch general object be admissible, no limitation can beassigned to it, but the discretion of those who make thelaw. Thus, with a power in Congress to authorize suchHARTFORD CONVENTION. 339a draft or conscription, and in the Executive to decideconclusively upon the existence and continuance of theemergency, the whole militia may be converted into astanding army disposable at the will of the President ofthe United States.The power of compelling the militia, and other citizensof the United States, by a forcible draft or conscription,to serve in the regular armies as proposed in a lateofficial letter of the Secretary of War, is not delegatedto Congress by the constitution, and the exercise of itwould be not less dangerous to their liberties, than hostileto the sovereignty of the states. The efibrt to deducethis power from the right of raising armies, is a flagrantattempt to pervert the sense of the clause in the constitutionwhich confers that right, and is incompatible withother provisions in that instrument. The armies of theUnited States have always been raised by contract, neverby conscription, and nothing more can be wanting to agovernment possessing the porter thus claimed to enableit to usurp the entire control of the militia, in derogationof the authority of the state, and to convert it by impressmentinto a standing army.It may be here remarked, as a circumstance illustrativeof the determination of the Executive to establish an absolutecontrol over all descriptions of citizens, that theright of impressing seamen into the naval service is expresslyasserted by the Secretary of the Navy in a latereport. Thus a practice, which in a foreign governmenthas been regarded with great abhorrence by the people,finds advocates among those who have been the loudest tocondemn it.The law authorising the enlistment of minors and apprenticesinto the armies of the United States, without theconsent of parents and guardians, is also repugnant to thespirit of the constitution. By a construction of the powerto raise armies, as applied by our present rulers, not only3G0 HISTORY OF THEpersons capable of contracting are liable to be impressedinto the army, but those who are under legal disabilitiesto make contracts, are to be invested with the capacity, inorder to enable them to annul at pleasure contracts madein their behalf by legal guardians. Such an interferencewith the municipal laws and rights of the several states,could never have been contemplated by the framers of theconstitution. It impairs the salutary control and influenceof the parent over his child — the master over his servantthe guardian over his ward — and thus destroys the mostimportant relations in society, so that by the conscriptionof the father, and the seduction of the son, the power ofthe Executive over all the effective male population of theUnited States is made complete.Such are some of the odious features of the novel systemproposed by the rulers of a free country, under thelimited powers derived from the constitution. What portionof them will be embraced in acts finally to be passed,it is yet impossible to determine. It is, however, sufficientlyalarming to perceive, that these projects emanatefrom the highest authority, nor should it be forgotten, thatby the plan of the Secretary of War, the classification ofthe militia embraced the principle of direct taxation uponthe white population only ; and that, in the house of representatives,a motion to apportion the militia among thewhite population exclusively, which would have been in itsoperation a direct tax, was strenuously urged and supported.In this whole series of devices and measures for raisingmen, this convention discern a total disregard for theconstitution, and a disposition to violate its provisions, demandingfrom the individual states a firm and decidedopposition. An iron despotism can impose no harder servitudeupon the citizen, than to force him from his homeand his occupation, to wage offensive wars, undertaken togratify the pride or passions of his master. The exampleHARTFORD CONVENTION. 361of France has recently shown that a cabal of individualsassuming to act in the name of the people, may transformthe great body of citizens into soldiers, and deliver themover into the hands of a single tyrant. No war, not heldin just abhorrence by the people, can require the aid ofsuch stratagems to recruit an army. Had the troopsalready raised, and in great numbers sacrificed upon thefrontier of Canada, been employed for the defence of thecountry, and had the millions which have been squanderedwith shameless profusion, been appropriated to their payment,to the protection of the coast, and to the naval service,there would have been no occasion for unconstitutionalexpedients. Even at this late hour, let governmentleave to New-england the remnant of her resources, andshe is ready and able to defend her territory, and to resign- the glories and advantages of the border war to thosewho are determined to persist in its prosecution.That acts of Congress in violation of the constitutionare absolutely void, is an undeniable position. It doesnot, however, consist with respect and forbearance duefrom a confederate state towards the general government,to fly to open resistance upon every infraction of the constitution.The mode and the energy of the opposition,should always conform to the nature of the violation, theintention of its authors, the extent of the injury inflicted,the determination manifested to persist in it, and the dangerof delay. But in cases of deliberate, dangerous, andpalpable infractions of the constitution, affecting the sove-I. reign of a state, and liberties of the people ; it is notonly the right but the duty of such a state to interpose itsauthority for their protection, in the manner best calculatedto secure that end. When emergencies occur whichare either beyond the reach of the judicial tribunals, or1 too pressing to admit of the delay incident to their forms,states which have no common umpire, must be their ownjudges, and execute their own decisions, It will thus be362 HISTORY OF THEproper for the several states to await the ultimate disposalof the obnoxious measures recommended by the Secretaryof War, or pending before Congress, and so to use theirpower according to the character these measures shallfinally assume, as effectually to protect their own sovereignty,and the rights and liberties of their citizens.The next subject which has occupied the attention ofthe convention, is the means of defence against the commonenemy. This naturally leads to the inquiries, whetherany expectation can be reasonably entertained, thatadequate provision for the defence of the eastern stateswill be made by the national governments Whether theseveral states can, from their own resources, provide forself-defence and fulfil the requisitions which are to be expectedfor the national treasury ? and, generally, whatcourse of conduct ought to be adopted by those states, inrelation to the great object of defence.Without pausing at present to comment upon thecauses of the war, it may be assumed as a truth, officiallyannounced, that to achieve the conquest of Canadian territory,and to hold it as a pledge for peace, is the deliberatepurpose of administration. This enterprize, commencedat a period when government possessed the advantageof selecting the time and occasion for making asudden descent upon an unprepared enemy, now languishesin the third year of the war. It has been prosecuted withvarious fortune, and occasional brilliancy of exploit, butwithout any solid acquisition. The British armies havebeen recruited by veteran regiments. Their navy commandsOntario. The American ranks are thinned by thecasualties of war. Recruits are discouraged by the unpopularcharacter of the contest, and by the uncertainty ofreceiving their pay.In the prosecution of this favourite warfare, administrationhave left the exposed and vulnerable parts ofthe country destitute of all the efficient means of defencepHARTFORD CONVENTION. 363The main body of the regular army has been marched tothe frontier. The navy has been stripped of a great partof its sailors for the service of the lakes. Meanwhile theenemy scours the sea-coast, blockades our ports, ascendsour bays and rivers, makes actual descents in various anddistant places, holds some by force, and threatens all thatare assailable with fire and sword. The sea-board offour of the New-england states, following its curvatures,presents an extent of more than seven hundred miles,generally occupied by a compact population, and accessibleby a naval force, exposing a mass of people and propertyto the devastation of the enemy, which bears a greatproportion to the residue of the maritime frontier of theUnited States. This extensive shore has been exposedto frequent attacks, repeated contributions, and constantalarms. The regular forces detached by the nationalgovernment for its defence are mere pretexts for placingofficers of high rank in command. They arc besides confinedto a few places, and are too insignificant in numberto be included in any computation.*' These states have thus been left to adopt measures fortheir own defence. The militia have been constantly kepton the alert, and harassed by garrison duties, and otherhardships, while the expenses, of which the national governmentdecline the reimbursement, threaten to absorball the resources of the states. The President of the UnitedStates has refused to consider the expense of the militiadetached by state authority, for the indispensable defenceof the state, as chargeable to the Union, on theground of a refusal by the Executive of the state to placethem under the command of officers of the regular army.Detachments of militia placed at the disposal of the generalgovernment, have been dismissed either without pay,or with depreciated paper. The prospect of the ensuing*'campaign is not enlivened by the promise of any alleviationof these grievances. From authentic documents,364 HISTORY OF thecxtortefl by necessity from those whose inclination mightlead them to conceal the embarrassments of the government,it is apparent that the treasury is bankrupt, and itscredit prostrate. So deplorable is the state of the finances,that those who feel for the honour and safety of thecountry, would be willing to conceal the melancholy spectacle,if those whose infatuation has produced this stateof fiscal concerns had not found themselves compelled tounveil it to public view."If the war be continued, there appears no room forreliance upon the national government for the supply ofthose means of defence which must become indispensableto secure these states from desolation and ruin. Nor is itpossible that the states can discharge this sacred duty fromtheir own resources, and continue to sustain the burdenof the national taxes. The administration, after a longperseverance in plans to bailee every effort of commercialenterprize, had fatally succeeded in their attempts at theepoch of the war. Commerce, the vital spring of New-england'sprosperity, was annihilated. Embargoes, restrictions,and the rapacity of revenue officers, had completedits destruction. The various objects for the employmentof productive labour, in the branches of businessdependent on commerce, have disappeared. The fisherieshave shared its fate. Manufactures, which governmenthas professed an intention to favour and to cherish, as anindemnity for the failure of these branches of business,are doomed to struggle in their infancy with taxes and obstructions,which cannot fail most seriously to affect theirgrowth. The specie is withdrawn from circulation. Thelanded interest, the last to feel these burdens, must prepareto become their principal support, as all other sourcesof revenue must be exhausted. Under these circumstances,taxes, of a description and amount unprecedented inthis country, are in a train of imposition, the burden ofwhich must fall with the heaviest pressure upon the statesHARTFORD CONVENTION. 365east of the Potomac. The amount of these taxes for theensuing year cannot he estimated at less than five millions ofdollars upon the New-england states, and the expenses of thelast year for defence in Massachusetts alone, approaches toone million of dollars.From these facts, it is almost superfluous to state theirresistible inference that these states have no capacity ofdefraying the expense requisite for their own protection,and, at the same time, of discharging the demands of thenational treasury.The last inquiry, what course of conduct ought to beadopted by the aggrieved states, is in a high degree momentous.When a great and brave people shall feel themselvesdeserted by their government, and reduced to thenecessity either of submission to a foreign enemy, or ofappropriating to their own use those means of defencewhich are indispensable to self-preservation, they cannotconsent to wait passive spectators of approaching ruin,which it is in their power to avert, and to resign the lastremnant of their industrious earnings to be dissipated insupport of measures destructive of the best interests ofthe nation."this convention will not trust themselves to expresstheir conviction of the catastrophe to which such a stateof things inevitably tends. Conscious of their high responsibilityto God and their country, solicitous for the continuanceof the Union, as well as the sovereignty of the states,unwilling to furnish obstacles to peace — resolute never tosubmit to a foreign enemy, and confiding in the Divinecare and protection, they will, until the last hope shall beextinguished, endeavor to avert such consequences.With this view they suggest an arrangement, whichmay at once be consistent with the honour and interest ofthe national government, and the security of these states.This it will not be difficult to conclude, if that governmentshould be so disposed. By the terms of it these states366 HISTORY OF THEmight be allowed to assume their own defence, by the militiaor other troops. A reasonable portion, also, of thetaxes raised in each state might be paid into its treasury,and credited to the United States, but to be appropriatedto the defence of such state, to be accounted for with theUnited States. No doubt is entertained that by such anarrangement, this portion of the country could be defendedwith greater effect, and in a mode more consistent witheconomy, and the public convenience, than any which hasbeen practised.*' Should an application for these purposes, made to Congressby the state legislatures, be attended with success, 'and should peace upon just terms appear to be unattainable,the people would stand together for the common defence,until a change of administration, or of disposition inthe enemy, should facilitate the occurrence of that auspiciousevent. It wouM be inexpedient for this Conventionto diminish the hope of a successful issue to such an application,by recommending, upon supposition of a contraryevent, ulterior proceedings. Nor is it indeed within theirprovince. In a state of things so solemn and trying asmay then arise, the legislatures of the states, or conventionsof the whole people, or delegates appointed by themfor the express purpose in another Convention, must actas such urgent circumstances may then require.'* But the duty incumbent on this Convention will nothave been performed, without exhibiting some generalview of such measures as they deem essential to securethe nation against a relapse into difficulties and dangers,should they, by the blessing of Providence, escape from "their present condition, without absolute ruin. To thisend a concise retrospect of the state of this nation underthe advantages of a wise administration, contrasted withthe miserable abyss into which it is plunged by the profligacyand folly of political theorists, will lead to some practicalconclusions. On this subject, it will be recollected*HARTFORD CONVENTION. 867that the immediate influence of the Federal Constitutionupon its first adoption, and for twelve succeeding years,upon the prosperity and happiness of the nation, seemedto countenance a belief in the transcendency of its perfectionover all other human institutions. In the cataloo-ueof blessings which have fallen to the lot of the most favourednations, none could be enumerated from which ourcountry was excluded — a free Constitution, administeredby great and incorruptible statesmen, realized the fondesthopes of liberty and independence — The progress of agriculturewas stimulated by the certainty of value in theharvest — and commerce, after traversing every sea, returnedwith the riches of every clime. A revenue, securedby a sense of honour, collected without oppression, andpaid without murmurs, melted away the national debt;and the chief concern of the public creditor arose from itstoo rapid diminution. The wars and commotions of theEuropean nations, and their interruptions of the commercialintercourse afforded to those who had not promoted,but who would have rejoiced to alleviate their calamities,a fair and golden opportunity, by combining themselves tolay a broad foundation for national wealth. Although occasionalvexations to commerce arose from the furious collisionsof the powers at war, yet the great and good menof that time conformed to the force of circumstances whichthey could not control, and preserved their country in securityfrom the tempests which overwhelmed the oldworld, and threw the wreck of their fortunes on theseshores. Respect abroad, prosperity at home, wise lawsmade by honoured legislators, and prompt obedience yieldedby a contented people, had silenced the enemies of republicaninstitutions. The arts flourished — the scienceswere cultivated — the comforts and conveniences of lifewere universally diffused — and nothing remained for succeedingadministrations but to reap the advantages and368 HISTORY OF THEcherish the resources flowing from the policy of theirpredecessors.But no sooner was a new administration establishedin the hands of the [party opposed to the Washington policy,than a fixed determination was perceived and avowedof changing a system which had already produced thesesubstantial fruits. The consequences of this change, forafew years after its commencement, were not sufficient tocounteract the prodigious impulse towards prosperity,which had been given to the nation. But a steady perseverancein the new plans of administration, at length developedtheir weakness and deformity, but not until a majorityof the people had been deceived by flattery, and inflamedby passion, into blindness to their defects. Underthe withering influence of this new system, the declensionof the nation has been inform and rapid. The richestadvantages for securing the great objects of the constitutionhave been wantonly rejected. While Europe reposesfrom the convulsions that had shaken down her ancientinstitutions, she beholds with amazement this remotecountry, once so happy and so envied, involved in a ruinouswar, and excluded from intercourse with the rest ofthe world.*' To investigate and explain the means whereby thisfatal reverse has been effected, would require a voluminousdiscussion. Nothing more can be attempted in this reportthan a general allusion to the principal outlines of thepolicy which has produced this vicissitudes Among thesemay be enumerated —First. — A deliberate and extensive system for reflectinga combination among certain states, by exciting localjealousies and ambition, so as to secure to popular leadersin one section of the Union, the controul of public affairsin perpetual succession. To which primary object mostother characteristics of the system may be reconciled.Secondly. — The political intolerance displayed andHARTFORD CONVENTION. 369avowed in excluding from office men of unexceptionablemerit, for want of adherence to the executive creed.*' Thirdly. — The infraction of the judiciary authorityand rights, by depriving judges of their offices in violationof the constitution.Fourthly. — The abolition of existing taxes, requisiteto prepare the country for those changes to which nationsare always exposed, with a view to the acquisition of popularfavour.Fifthly. — The influence of patronage in the distributionof offices, which in these states has been almost invariablymade among men the least entitled to such distinction,and who have sold themselves as ready instrumentsfor distracting public opinion, and encouraging administrationto hold in contempt the wishes and remonstrancesof a people thus apparently divided.Sixthly. — The admission of new states into the Unionformed at pleasure in the western region, has destroyedthe balance of power which existed among the originalStates, and deeply affected their interest.Seventhly. — The easy admission of naturalized foreigners,to places of trust, honour or profit, operating asan inducement to the malcontent subjects of the old worldto come to these States, in quest of executive patronage,and to repay it by an abject devotion to executive measures.Eighthly. — Hostility to Great Britain, and partialityto the late government of France, adopted as coincidentwith popular prejudice, and subservient to the main object,party power Connected with these must be rankederroneous and distorted estimates of the power and resourcesof those nations, of the probable results of their controversies,and of our political relations to them respectively.Lastly and principally. — A visionary and superficialtheory in regard to commerce, accompanied by a realhatred but a feigned regard to its interests, and a ruinous370 HISTORY OF THEperseverance in efforts to render it an instrument of coercionand war.But it is not conceivable that the obliquity of any administrationcould, in so short a period, have so nearlyconsummated the work of national ruin, unless favouredby defects in the constitution."To enumerate all the improvements of which that instrumentis susceptible, and to propose such amendmentsas might render it in all respects perfect, would be a taskwhich this convention has not thought proper to assume.They have confined their attention to such as experiencehas demonstrated to be essential, and even among these,some are considered entitled to a more serious attentionthan others. They are suggested without any intentionaldisrespect to other states, and are meant to be such as allshall find an interest in promoting. Their object is tostrengthen, and if possible to perpetuate, the union of thestates, by removing the grounds of existing jealousies, andproviding for a fair and equal representation, and a limitationof powers, which have been misused.The first amendment proposed, relates to the apportionmentof representatives among the slave holdingstates. This cannot be claimed as a right. Those statesare entitled to the slave representation, by a constitutionalcompact. It is therefore merely a subject of agreement,which should be conducted upon principles of mutualinterest and accommodation, and upon which no sensibilityon either side should be permitted to exist. It hasproved unjust and unequal in its operation. Had thiseffect been foreseen, the privilege would probably not havebeen demanded ; certainly not conceded. Its tendency infuture will be adverse to that harmony and mutual confidencewhich are more conducive to the happiness andprosperity of every confederated state, than a mere preponderanceof power, the prolific source of jealousies andcontroversy, can be to any one of them. The time mayHARTFORD CONVENTION. 371therefore arrive, when a sense of magnanimity and justicewill reconcile those states to acquiesce in a revision of thisarticle, especially as a fair equivalent would result to themin the apportionment of taxes."The next amendment relates to the admission of newstates into the Union.This amendment is deemed to be highly important,and in fact indispensable. In proposing it, it is not intendedto recognize the right of Congress to admit new stateswithout the original limits of the United States, nor is anyidea entertained of disturbing the tranquillity of any statealready admitted into the Union. The object is merely to \restrain the constitutional power of Congress in admitting \new states. At the adoption of the constitution, a certain {balance of power among the original parties was considerred to exist, and there was at that time, and yet is among ;those parties, a strong affinity between their great andgeneral interests. — By the admission of these states thatbalance has been materially affected, and unless the practicebe modified, must ultimately be destroyed. Thesouthern states will first avail themselves of their newconfederates to govern the east, and finally the westernstates, multiplied in number, and augmented in population,will control the interests of the whole. Thus for the sakeof present power, the southern states will be common suffererswith the east, in the loss of permanent advantages.None of the old states can find an interest in creating prematurelyan overwhelming western influence, which may ,hereafter discern (as it has heretofore) benefits to be derivedto them by wars and commercial restrictions."The next amendments proposed by the convention,relate to the powers of Congress, in relation to embargoand the interdiction of commerce.Whatever theories upon the subject of commercehave hitherto divided the opinions of statesmen, experiencehas at last shown that it is a vital interest in the United372 HISTORY OF THEStates, and that its success is essential to the encouragementof agriculture and manufactures, and to the wealth,finances, defence, and liberty of the nation. Its welfarecan never interfere with the other great interests of thestate, but must promote and uphold them. Still thosewho are immediately concerned in the prosecution of commerce,will of necessity be always a minority of the nation.They are, however, best qualified to manage anddirect its course by the advantages of experience, and thesense of interest. But they are entirely unable to protectthemselves against the sudden and injudicious decisions ofbare majorities, and the mistaken or oppressive projects ofthose who are not actively concerned in its pursuits. Ofconsequence, this interest is always exposed to be harassed,interrupted, and entirely destroyed, upon pretence of securingother interests. Had the merchants of this nationbeen permitted by their own government to pursue an innocentand lawful commerce, how different would havebeen the state of the treasury and of public credit! Howshort-sighted and miserable is the policy which has annihilatedthis order of men, and doomed their ships to rotinthe docks, their capital to waste unemployed, and theiraffections to be alienated from the government which wasformed to protect them ! What security for an ample andunfailing revenue can ever be had, comparable to thatwhich once was realized in the good faith, punctuality,and sense of honour, which attached the mercantile classto the interests of the government ! Without commerce,where can be found the aliment for a navy ; and withouta navy, what is to constitute the defence, and ornament,and glory of this nation ! No union can be durably cemented,in which every great interest does not find itselfreasonably secured against the encroachment and combinationsof other interests. When, therefore, the past systemof embargoes and commercial restrictions shall havebeen reviewed — when the fluctuation and inconsistency ofHARTFORD CONVENTION. 373public measures, betraying a want of information as wellas feeling in the majority, shall have been considered, thereasonableness of some restrictions upon the power of abare majority to repeat these oppressions, will appear to beobvious."The next amendment proposes to restrict the powerof making offensive war. In the consideration of thisamendment, it is not necessary to inquire into the justiceof the present war. But one sentiment now exists in relationto its expediency, and regret for its declaration isnearly universal. No indemnity can ever be attained forthis terrible calamity, and its only palliation must be foundin obstacles to its future recurrence. Rarely can the stateof this country call for or justify offensive war. The geniusof our institutions is unfavourable to its successfulprosecution ; the felicity of our situation exempts us fromits necessity. In this case, as in the former, those moreimmediately exposed to its fatal effects are a minority ofthe nation. The commercial towns, the shores of ourseas and rivers, contain the population whose vital interestsare most vulnerable by a foreign enemy. Agriculture,indeed, must feel at last, but this appeal to its sensibilitycomes too late. Again, the immense population whichhas swarmed into the west, remote from immediate danger,and which is constantly augmenting, will not be aversefrom the occasional disturbances of the Atlantic states.Thus interest may not unfrequently combine with passionand intrigue, to plunge the nation into needless wars, andcompel it to become a military, rather than a happy andflourishing people. These considerations, which it wouldbe easy to augment, call loudly for the limitation proposedin the amendment.Another amendment, subordinate in importance, butstill in a high degree expedient, relates to the exclusionof foreigners hereafter arriving in the United States fromthe capacity of holding offices of trust, honour, or profit.374 HISTORY OF THE"That the stock of population already in these states18 amply sufficient to render this nation in due time sufficientlygreat and powerful, is not a controvertible question.Nor will it be seriously pretended, that the national deficiencyin wisdom, arts, science, arms, or virtue, needs tobe replenished from foreign countries. Still, it is agreed,that a liberal policy should offer the rights of hospitality,and the choice of settlement, to those who are disposed tovisit the country. But why admit to a participation in thegovernment aliens who were no parties to the compact —who are ignorant of the nature of our institutions, andhave no stake in the welfare of the country but what isrecent and transitory ? It is surely a privilege sufficient,to admit them after due probation to become citizens, forall but political purposes. To extend it beyond these limits,is to encourage foreigners to come to these states as candidatesfor preferment. The Convention forbear to expresstheir opinion upon the inauspicious effects which have alreadyresulted to the honour and peace of this nation,from this misplaced and indiscriminate liberality."The last amendment respects the limitation of the officeof President to a single constitutional term, and hiseligibility from the same state two terms in succession.Upon this topic it is superfluous to dilate. The love ofpower is a principle in the human heart which too oftenimpels to the use of all practicable means to prolong itsduration. The office of President has charms and attractionswhich operate as powerful incentives to this passion.The first and most natural exertion of a vast patronage isdirected towards the security of a new election. The interestof the country, the welfare of the people, even honestfame and respect for the opinion of posterity, aresecondary considerations. All the engines of intrigue, allthe means of corruption are likely to be employed for thisobject. A President whose political career is limited to asingle election, may find no other interest than will be pro-hartfordCONVENTION. 375noted by making it glorious to himself, and beneficial tohis country. But the hope of re-election is prolific oftemptations, under which these magnanimous motives aredeprived of their principal force. The repeated electionof the President of the United States from any one state,affords inducements and means for intrigues, which tendto create an undue local influence, and to establish thedomination of particular states. The justice, therefore, ofsecuring to every state a fair and equal chance for theelection of this officer from its own citizens is apparent,and this object will be essentially promoted by preventingan election from the same state twice in succession."Such is the general view which this Convention hasthought proper to submit, of the situation of these states,of their dangers and their duties. Most of the subjectswhich it embraces have separately received an ample andluminous investigation, by the great and able assertors ofthe rights of their country, in the national legislature*, andnothing more could be attempted on this occasion than adigest of general principles, and of recommendations suitedto the present state of public affairs. The peculiar difficultyand delicacy of performing even this undertaking,will be appreciated by all "who think seriously upon thecrisis. Negotiations for peace are at this hour supposedto be pending, the issue of which must be deeply interestingto all. No measures should be adopted which mightunfavourably affect that issue ; none which should embarrassthe administration, if their professed desire for peaceis sincere ; and none which on supposition of their insincerity,should afford them pretexts for prolonging the war,or relieving themselves from the responsibility of a dishonourablepeace. It is also devoutly to be wished, that anoccasion may be afforded to all friends of the country, ofall parties, and in all places, to pause and consider theawful state to which pernicious counsels and blind passionshave brought this people. The number of those who per-376 nisToiiY OF theclive, and who are ready to retrace errors, must, it is believed,be yet sufficient to redeem the nation. It is necessaryto rally and unite them by the assurance that no hostilityto the constitution is meditated, and to obtain theiraid in placing it under guardians who alone can save itfrom destruction. Should this fortunate change be effected,the hope of happiness and honour may once more dispelthe surrounding gloom. Our nation may yet be great,our union durable. But should this prospect be utterlyhopeless, the time will not have been lost which shall haveripened a general sentiment of the necessity of moremighty efforts to rescue from ruin, at least some portionof our beloved country.Therefore resolved,That it be and hereby is recommended to the legislaturesof the several states represented in this Convention,to adopt all such measures as may be necessary effectuallyto protect the citizens of said states from theoperation and effects of all acts which have been or maybepassed by the Congress of the United States, whichshall contain provisions, subjecting the militia or othercitizens to forcible drafts, conscriptions, or impressments,not authorised by the constitution of the United States.'unresolved, That it be and hereby is recommended tothe said Legislatures, to authorize an immediate andearnest application to be made to the government of theUnited States, requesting their consent to some arrangement,whereby the said states may, separately or in concert,be empowered to assume upon themselves the defenceof their territory against the enemy ; and a reasonableportion of the taxes, collected within said States, maybepaid into the respective treasuries thereof, and appropriatedto the payment of the balance due said states, andto the future defence of the same. The amount so paidinto the said treasuries to be credited, and the disburse-hartfordCONVENTION. 377ments made as aforesaid to be charged to the UnitedStates.'^^ Resolved, That it be, and hereby is, recommended tothe legislatures of the aforesaid states, to pass laws (whereit has not already been done) authorizing the governors orcommanders-in-chief of their militia to make detachmentsfrom the same, or to form voluntary corps, as shall be mostconvenient and conformable to their constitutions, and tocause the same to bo well armed, equipped, and disciplined,and held in readiness for service : and upon the request ofthe governor of either of the other states to employ thewhole of such detachment or corps, as well as the regularforces of the state, or such part thereof as may be requiredand can be spared consistently with the safety of the state,in assisting the state, making such request to repel any invasionthereof which shall be made or attempted by thepublic enemy.^^ Resolved, That the following amendments of the constitutionof the United States be recommended to thestates represented as aforesaid, to be proposed by themfor adoption by the state legislatures, and in such cases asmay be deemed expedient by a convention chosen by thepeople of each state.And it is further recommended, that the said statesshall persevere in their efforts to obtain such amendments,until the same shall be effected. >First. Representatives and direct taxes shall be apportionedamong the several states which may be includedwithin this Union, according to their respective numbersof free persons, including those bound to serve for a termof years, and excluding Indians not taxed, and all otherpersons.Second. No new state shall be admitted into theUnion by Congress, in virtue of the power granted by theconstitution, without the concurrence of two thirds of bothhouses.378 HISTORY OF THE*' Third. Congress shall not have power to Jay anyembargo on the ships or vessels of the citizens of theUnited States, in the ports or harbours thereof, for morethan sixty days.Fourth. Congress shall not have power, without theconcurrence of two thirds of both houses, to interdict thecommercial intercourse between the United States andany foreign nation, or the dependencies thereof.Fifth. Congress shall not make or declare war, orauthorize acts of hostility against any foreign nation, withoutthe concurrence of two thirds of both houses, exceptsuch acts of hostility be in defence of the territories of theUnited States when actually invaded.Sixth. No person who shall hereafter be naturalized,shall be eligible as a member of the senate or house ofrepresentatives of the United States, nor capable of holdingany civil office under the authority of the UnitedStates.Seventh. The same person shall not be elected presidentof the United States a second time ; nor shall thepresident be elected from the same state two terms in succession.Resolved, That if the application of these states to thegovernment of the United States, recommended in afore-goingresolution, should be unsuccessful, and peace shouldnot be concluded, and the defence of these states shouldbe neglected, as it has been since the commencement ofthe war, it will, in the opinion of this convention, be expedientfor the legislatures of the several states to appointdelegates to another convention, to meet at Boston in thestate of Massachusetts, on the third Thursday of Junenext, with such powers and instructions as the exigency ofa crisis so momentous may require.*' Resolved, That the Hon. George Cabot, the Hon.Chauncey Goodrich, and the Hon. Daniel Lyman, or anytwo of them, be authorized to call another meeting of thisHARTFORD CONVENTION.convention, to be holden in Boston, at any time beforenew delegates shall be chosen, as recommended in theabove resolution, if in their judgment the situation of thecountry shall urgently require it.George Cabot,Nathan Dane,William Prescott,Harrison Gray Otis,Timothy Bigelow,Joshua Thomas,Samuel Supine Wilde,Joseph Lyman,Stephen Longfellow, Jun.Daniel Waldo,Hodijah Baylies,George Bliss.^Massachusetts.Chauncey Goodrich,John Treadwell,James Hillhouse,Zephaniah Swift,Nathaniel Smith,Calvin Goddard,Roger Minot Sherman.> Connecticut.Daniel Lyman,Samuel Ward,Edward Manton,Benjamin Hazard,>• Rhode-island,Benjamin West,Mills Olcott.William Hall, Jun.> N. Hampshire.Vermont."This document was immediately published, and extensivelycirculated through the country. It was looked forwith much anxiety, and of course was read with great avidi-380 HISTORY OF THEty. The expectations of those who apprehended it wouldcontain sentiments of a seditious, if not of a treasonablecharacter, were entirely disappointed. They looked invain for either the one or the other, and were obliged toacknowledge that no such sentiments were to be found init. Equally free was it from advancing doctrines whichhad a tendency to destroy the union of the states. Onthe contrary, it breathed an ardent attachment to the integrityof the republic. Its temper was mild, its tonemoderate, and its sentiments were liberal and patriotic.Many leading members of the party who had always adheredto the administration and supported the war, didnot hesitate to declare that it was an able and unexceptionabledocument ; and politicians of every party, and of alldescriptions, agreed that it displayed great ability, and contained,principles and sentiments of much importance tothe welfare of the nation.In a very short time after the publication of the report,the country was surprised with the news of peace. Themanner in which the intelligence of this event was receivedthroughout the country, afforded a striking commentaryupon the character of the war, and the light inwhich it was viewed by the nation at large. Without waitingto learn what were the provisions of the treaty, or toascertain whether the objects for which the war was professedlydeclared had been accomplished, a general spirit,not merely of rejoicing, but of exultation, broke out inevery part of the country. Mutual congratulations at therestoration of peace were exchanged by all descriptions ofpoliticians, bonfires were kindled, and illuminations wereexhibited over a large portion of the Union. Nobodyseemed to manifest any anxiety about the provisions of thetreaty — the war was at an end, and peace was established ;and beyond those main points, scarcely any individual appearedto be disposed to inquire or examine-almostat the same moment of time when the news ofHARTFORD CONVENTION. 381peace reached the seat of government intelligence wasreceived of the repulse of the British forces at New-orleans.Although this event occurred some time after thetreaty of peace was signed, and the war was ended, yetits brilliancy wa'S considered as a proof of merit in theadministration in the manner of conducting the war. Theflush of feeling which this victory occasioned, drew thepublic attention away from the treaty of peace, and thevast expense of treasure and blood which the war hadgiven rise to ; and the administration and their devotedfriends, with their usual skill, turned it to their own account.As a never-failing source of profit to the leadersof the party in power, the public resentment was excitedagainst the opposers of the war, and particularly against theNew-england states, and the Hartford Convention becamethe theme of universal calumny and reproach. The report,dignified, able, and unobjectionable as it was so generallyacknowledged to be, had no efficacy in shielding the statesfrom the most opprobrious charges, and the Conventionfrom the foulest reproaches. Not being able to find anythingto justify this virulence in the report, it was allegedwith as much apparent confidence as if it had been knownto be a matter of fact, that although the report itself containedno evidence of treason, or even of sedition, yet thehistory of their secret proceedings, whenever they shouldbe made public, would disclose an abundance of proof ofthe existence of both. When the Convention adjournedon the 5th of January, 1815, it was supposed that it mightbe necessary for them to hold a second meeting. Withthat expectation, when they adjourned, they did not thinkit expedient to remove the injunction of secrecy underwhich the members had been laid at the commencementof the session ; and the journal was sealed, and placed forsafe keeping in the hands of the President. When it wasfound that it was not likely to be published, the charge ofmeditated sedition and treason was repeated in every quartsHISTORY OP THEter, certain specific measures partaking of such a characterwere boldly asserted to have been brought before theConvention, and urged upon the members for their adoption.And to give plausibility to their declarations, someof the stories went so far as to stat the manner inwhich the mischievous propositions were rejected, and toname the individual member or members by whose exertionsand influence the intended object was defeated.Notwithstanding the impossibility that facts of this kindcould be disclosed, except by some of the members, or bythe secretary, as no others were ever present at any of theproceedings, the tale, in spite of its absurdity, appeared togain credit abroad in the community, and added one moreitem to the long catalogue of falsehoods and slanders thatwere circulated about the proceedings and character of theConvention. At length it was thought expedient to placethe journal in the office of the Secretary of State of Massachusetts,for the inspection of ail persons who might feelcuriosity enough to examine it. It was afterwards publishedin pamphlets, and in newspapers ; but it did notstop the clamours of those who were unwilling to lose sopowerful an engine of partizan warfare as this had longbeen. Like the name of " Federalist," it answered themost valuable purpose among demagogues, and unprincipledpoliticians ; it was used with great efll'ect ; the weak,the designing, and the wicked, still made use of the HartfordConvention as a countersign of party, and as a watch-avoidto rally the ignorant and the vicious around thestandard of the ambitious ; and even now, there is an apparentuneasiness among that description of people, at the• idea that they may be obliged to give up this their favouritetopic of reproach upon their political opponents.The following is a copy of that document.HARTFORD CONVENTION. 383Secret Journal of the Hartford Convention.Hartford, Thursday, Dec. 15, 1814.This being the day appointed for the meeting of theConvention of Delegates from the New-england states,assembled for the purpose of conferring on such subjectsas may come before them, the following persons, fromthose states, met in the council chamber of the state house,in Hartford, in the state of Connecticut, viz. —From the state of Massachusetts, Messrs. George Cabot,William Prescott, Harrison Gray Otis, Timothy Bigelow,Nathan Dane, George Bliss, Joshua Thomas, HodijahBaylies, Daniel Waldo, Joseph Lyman, Samuel S. Wilde,and Stephen Longfellow, Jun.From the state of Rhode-island, Messrs. Daniel Lyman,Benjamin Hazard, and Edward Manton.From the state of Connecticut, Messrs. Chauncey Goodrich,James Hillhouse, John Treadwell, Zephaniah Swift,Nathaniel Smith, Calvin Goddard, and Roger M. Sherman.From the state of New-hampshire, Messrs. BenjaminWest, and Mills Olcott."Upon being called to order by Mr. Cabot, the personspresent proceeded to choose, by ballot, a PresidentMessrs. Bigelow and Goodrich were appointed to receiveand count the votes given in for that purpose, who reportedthat Mr. George Cabot, a member from Massachusetts,was unanimously chosen.On motion, voted, that the Convention proceed to thechoice of a person to be their Secretary, who is not a memberof the Convention ; and the votes having been receivedand counted, Theodore Dwight, of Hartford, was declaredto be chosen unanimously.Messrs. Otis, Hillhouse, and Lyman, were appointeda committee to examine the credentials of the members384 HISTORY OF THEreturned to serve in the convention, and report the namesof such as they should find duly qualified ; who, havingattended to the subject of their said appointment, madethe following report : —The committee appointed to examine the credentialsof the members returned to serve in the convention nowassembled at Hartford, have attended to that service, andfind the following persons to have been elected membersthereof by the respective legislatures of the followingstates ; — From Massachusetts, George Cabot, WilliamPrescott, Harrison Gray Otis, Timothy Bigelow, StephenLongfellow, Jun. Daniel Waldo, George Bliss, NathanDane, Hodijah Baylies, JoshuaThomas, Joseph Lyman, andSamuel S. Wilde. From Rhode-island, Daniel Lyman,Samuel Ward, Benjamin Hazard, and Edward Manton.From Connecticut, Chauncey Goodrich, James Hillhouse,John Treadwell, Zephaniah Swift, Calvin Goddard, NathanielSmith, and Roger Minot Sherman.The committee also report, that at a conventionalmeeting of twenty towns in the county of Cheshire, in thestate of New-hampshire, Hon. Benjamin West was electedto meet in this convention ; and at a conventional meetingof delegates from most of the towns in the county ofGrafton, and from the town of Lancaster, in the county ofCoos, Mills Olcott, Esq. was elected to meet in this convention; and the committee are of opinion, that the abovenamed persons are entitled to take their seats as membersof this convention.On motion, voted, that said report be accepted andapproved.On motion of Mr. Otis, voted, that the convention beopened with prayer, and that the delegates from the stateof Connecticut be requested to invite a clergyman belongingto the town of Hartford to perform that service.*' On motion, voted, that Messrs. Goddard, Bigelow, andHARTFORD CONVENTION. 385Lyman, be a committee to prepare rules of proceeding forthis Convention.The Convention was opened with prayer by the Rev.Dr. Strong, of Hartford.*' On motion, voted, that this Convention be adjournedto 3 o'clock, P. M. of this day, then to meet at this place.Thursday, Dec. 15, 3 o'clock, P. M.The Convention met agreeably to adjournment.The committee appointed to prepare rules of proceeding,proper to be observed by this Convention, &.c. made thefollowing report.The committee appointed to prepare rules and orders,proper to be observed by this Convention, during its continuance,ask leave to report the following; which arerespectively submitted.Calvin Goddard, per Order.1. The meetings of this Convention shall be openedeach morning, by prayer, which it is requested may boperformed, alternately, by the chaplains of the legislatureof Connecticut, residing in the city of Hartford.2. The most inviolable secrecy shall be observed byeach member of this Convention, including the Secretary,as to all propositions, debates, and proceedings thereof,until this injunction shall be suspended or altered.*' 3. The secretary of this Convention is authorized toemploy some suitable person to serve as a door-keeperand messenger, together with a suitable assistant, if necessary,neither of whom are, at any time, to be madeacquainted with any of the debates or proceedings of theboard.'• 4. That the president of this Convention be authorizedto regulate and direct the debates and proceedings thereof,in such manner as may seem to him discreet and proper,and to name all their committees.386 HISTORY OF THE*' On motion, voted, that said report be accepted andapproved."On motion, voted, that a committee of five be appointedto inquire what subjects will be proper to be consideredby this Convention, and report such propositionsfor that purpose, as they may think expedient, to the Convention,tomorrow morning.The following persons were appointed on that committee:Messrs. Goodrich, Otis, Lyman, of Rhode Island,Swift, and Dane.On motion, voted, that this Convention be adjourned to10 o'clock tomorrow morning; then to meet at this place.Friday, December 16, 1814.The Convention met, agreeably to adjournment.The Convention was opened with prayer by the Rev.Dr. Strong.Mr. Ward, a member from the State of Rhode Island,attended, and took his seat in the Convention.The committee appointed to inquire what subjectswill be proper to be considered by the convention, and toreport such propositions for that purpose, as they maythink expedient, respectfully report :'*' That your committee deem the following to be propersubjects for the consideration of the Convention : —The powers claimed by the executive of the United States,to determine, conclusively, in respect to calling out themilitia of the states into the service of the United States ;and the dividing the United States into military districts,with an officer of the army in each thereof, with discretionaryauthority from the executive of the United States,to call for the militia to be under the command of suchofficer. The refusal of the executive of the United Statesto supply, or pay the militia of certain states, called outfor their defence, on the grounds of their not having beencalled out under the authority of the United States, or notHARTFORD CONVENTION. 387having been, by the executive of the state, put under thecommand of the commander over the military district. Thefailure of the government of the United States to supplyand pay the militia of the states, by them admitted to havebeen in the United States' service. The report of theSecretary of War to Congress, on filling the ranks of thearmy, together with a bill, or act, on that subject. A billbefore Congress, providing for classing and drafting themilitia. The expenditure of the revenue of the nation inoffensiveoperations on the neighbouring provinces of theenemy. The failure of the government of the UnitedStates to provide for the common defence ; and the consequentobligations, necessity and burdens, devolved onthe separate states, to defend themselves; together withthe mode, and the ways and means, in their power foraccomplishing the object.'*' On motion, voted, that said report be accepted andapproved. On motion, voted, that a committee of threebe appointed to obtain such documents and informationas may be necessary for the use and consideration of theConvention, and may be connected with their proceedings.Mr. Hillhouse, Mr. Bliss, and Mr. Hazard, were appointedon that committee. On motion, voted, that the Rev.Dr. Perkins be invited to attend in turn with the othergentlemen already invited, as chaplains. On motion,voted, that the injunction of secrecy, as to the proceedingsof yesterday, be removed. On motion, voted, that theconvention be adjourned to 3 o'clock, P. M. of this day,then to meet in this place.Three clock, P. M. — The Convention met agreeablyto adjournment. After spending the afternoon in variousdiscussions of important subjects, on motion, voted, thatthis Convention be adjourned till tomorrow, 10 o'clock,A. M. then to meet at this place.888 HISTORY OF THESaturday, December 17, 1814,** The Convention met, agreeably to adjournment.'• Time Convention was opened with prayer, by the Rev.Dr. Strong. After spending the forenoon in discussingthe first section of the report of the committee made onFriday, on motion, voted, that when this Convention adjourn,it be adjourned till Monday next. On motion,voted, that this Convention be adjourned till Monday next,at 10 o'clock, A. M. then to meet at this place.'^^ Monday, Deceiver 19, 1814.'* The Convention met, agreeably to adjournment. TheConvention was opened with prayer, by the Rev. Mr.Chase.On motion, voted, that a committee of five be appointedto prepare and report a general project of such measuresas it may be proper for this Convention to adopt.Messrs. Smith, Otis, Goddard, West, and Hazard,were appointed to be of that committee.** On motion, voted, that this Convention be adjournedtill 3 o'clock this afternoon, then to meet at this place.•' Three (/cloc'c, P. M. — The Convention met agreeablyto adjournment. On motion, voted, that the Rev. Mr.Cushman be invited to attend in turn with the other gentlemenalready invited, as chaplains.After spending the afternoon in discussing the report,the committee, on motion, voted, that this Convention beadjourned till tomorrow morning, 10 o'clock, then to beheldat this place.Tuesday, December 20, 1814.*' The Convention met, agreeably to adjournment. TheConvention was opened with prayer, by the Rev. Dr.Strong. The committee appointed to prepare and reportageneral project of such measures as it may be properHARTFORD CONVENTION. 389for this Convention to adopt, made a report, which waslaid in and read. After discussing several articles of thesaid report, the further consideration of it was postponeduntil the afternoon. On motion, voted, that this Conventionbe adjourned till 3 o'clock this afternoon, then tomeet at this place.Three o^ clock, P. M. — The Convention met, pursuantto adjournment. The Convention resumed the considerationof the report of the committee, which was postponedin the forenoon ; and after discussion through the afternoon,the same was postponed until the morning. Onmotion, voted, that this Convention be adjourned until tomorrowmorning, 10 o'clock, A. M. then to meet at thisplace.Wednesday, December 21, 1814.The Convention met, pursuant to adjournment. TheConvention was opened with prayer, by the Rev. Mr.Chase. The Convention resumed the consideration of thereport postponed yesterday. After spending the time of theforenoon in the discussion of the report of the committee,the further consideration was postponed to the afternoon.On motion, voted, that this Convention be adjourned to 3o'clock this afternoon, then to meet at this place.Three o'clock, P. M. — The Convention met, pursuantto adjournment. The Convention resumed the considerationof the report of the committee, which was postponedin the forenoon. On motion, voted that a committee ofseven be raised to prepare a report illustrative of the principlesand reasons which have induced the Convention toadopt the results to which they have agreed. Mr. Otis,Mr. Smith, Mr. Sherman, Mr. Dane, Mr. Prescott, Mr.West, and Mr. Hazard, were appointed on that committee.On motion, voted, that this Convention be adjourned tiltomorrow morning, 10 o'clock.390 HISTORY OF THEThursday, December 22, 1814.•* The Convention met, pursuant to adjournment. TheConvention was opened with prayer, by the Rev. Dr. Perkins.The Convention resumed the consideration of thereport of the committee, postponed last evening. Afterspending the forenoon in discussing said report, the furtherconsideration was postponed till this afternoon. Onmotion, voted, that this Convention be adjourned till 3o'clock, then to meet at this place.Three o'clock, P. M. — The Convention met agreeablyto adjournment. The Convention resumed the considerationof the report of the committee, which was postponedin the forenoon. After spending the afternoon in discussingsaid report, the further consideration thereof was postponed.On motion, voted, that this Convention be adjournedtill tomorrow morning, 10 o'clock, then to meetat this place.Friday, December 23, 1814.«' The Convention met pursuant to adjournment. TheConvention was opened with prayer by the Kev. Mr.Chase. The Convention resumed the consideration of thereport of the committee, which was postponed yesterday.After spending the forenoon in discussing the report of thecommittee, the further consideration thereof was postponeduntil tomorrow. On motion, voted, that this Conventionbe adjourned until tomorrow morning, 10 o'clock, then tomeet at this place.Saturday, December 24, 1814.»' The Convention met, pursuant to adjournment. TheConvention was opened with prayer, by the Rev. Dr. Perkins.The president communicated an address from anumber of citizens belonging to the county of Washington,in the state of New York, which was read. On mo-hartfordCONVENTION. 391tion, voted, that the said address be referred to the committeeappointed on the 21st inst.The Convention resumed the consideration of the reportof the committee, which was postponed yesterday.On motion, voted, that another member be added to thecommittee appointed on the 21st inst. Mr. Sherman beingnecessarily absent. Mr. Swift was appointed on saidcommittee.The report of the committee which was laid in on the20th instant, having been under discussion at the severalmeetings of the Convention, and having been amended,was adopted, and referred to the committee appointed onthe 21st to report ; which report is as follows, viz.The committee appointed to prepare and report a generalproject of such measures as it may be proper for thisConvention to adopt, respectfully report :1. That it will be expedient for this convention toprepare a general statement of the unconstitutional attemptsof the executive government of the United Statesto infringe ujjpn the rights of the individual states, in regardto the militia, and of the still more alarming claimsto infringe the rights of the states, manifested in the letterof the Secretary of War, and in the bills pending beforeCongress, or acts passed by them, and also to recommendto the legislatures of the states, the adoption of the mosteffectual and decisive measures, to protect the militia andthe states from the usurpations contained in these proceedings.2. That it will be expedient, also, to prepare a statement,exhibiting the necessity which the improvidence andinability of the general government have imposed uponthe several states, of providing for their own defence, andthe impossibility of their discharging this duty, and at thesame time fulfilling the requisitions of the general government;and also, to recommend to the legislatures of theseveral states, to make provision for mutual defence, and892 HISTORY OF THEto make an earnest application to the government of theUnited States, with a view to some arrangement, wherebythe states may be enabled to retain a portion of the taxeslevied by Congress, for the purposes of self-defence, andfor the reimbursement of expenses already incurred, onaccount of the United States.3. That it is expedient to recommend to the severalstate legislatures, certain amendments to the constitutionof the United States, hereafter enumerated, to be by themadopted and proposed. (The remainder of this article inthe report was postponed.)"1. That the power to declare or make war, by theCongress of the United States, be restricted.2. That it is expedient to attempt to make provisionfor restraining Congress in the exercise of an unlimitedpower, to make new states, and admit them into thisUnion.3. That the powers of Congress be restrained in layingembargoes, and restrictions on commerce.4. That a president shall not be elected from the samestate two terms successively.*' 5. That the same person shall not be elected presidenta second time."G. That an amendment be proposed, respecting slaverepresentation, and slave taxation.On motion, voted, that this Convention be adjournedto Monday afternoon, three o'clock, then to meet at thisplace.Monday December 26, 1814.** The Convention met, pursuant to adjournment. TheConvention was opened with prayer, by the Rev. Mr.Woodbine, of Hadley, Massachusetts. The committeenot being prepared to lay in their report, on motion, voted,that this Convention be adjourned till tomorrow morning,ten o'clock, then to meet at this place.HARTFORD CONVENTION. 393*' Tuesday, December 27, 1814."The Convention met, pursuant to adjournment. TheConvention was opened with prayer, by the Rev. Dr. Perkins.The committee not being prepared to lay in theirreport, on motion, voted, that this Convention be adjournedtill this afternoon, three o'clock, then to meet at this place.Three o'clock, P. M. — The Convention met pursuantto adjournment. The committee not being prepared tolay in their report, on motion, voted, that this Conventionbe adjourned till tomorrow morning, ten o'clock, then tomeet at this place.Wednesday, December 28, 1814.The Convention met, pursuant to adjournment. TheConvention was opened with prayer, by the Rev. Mr.Chase. A certificate of the proceedings of a Conventionin the county of Windham, in the state of Vermont, appointingthe Hon. William Hall, Jun. to represent the peopleof that county in this Convention, was read. On motion,voted, that the Hon. William Hall, Jun. is entitled to a seatin this Convention; and that the Hon. Mr. Olcott, of New-hampshire,be requested to introduce Mr. Hall, for thepurpose of taking his seat.Mr. Hall, a member from the county of Windham,in the state of Vermont, attended, and took his seat inthe Convention. The report of the committee not beingprepared, on motion, voted, that this Convention be adjournedto three o'clock, this afternoon ; then to meet atthis place.Three o'clock, P. M. — The Convention met pursuantto adjournment. The report of the committee not being-prepared,upon motion, voted, that this Convention be adjournedtill tomorrow morning, ten o'clock.394 HISTORY OF THEThursday, December 29, 1814.The Convention met, pursiiaiit to adjournment. TheConvention was opened with prayer, by the Rev. DrStrong. On motion, voted, that the following propositionbe referred to the committee appointed on the 21st instant.'that the capacity of naturalized citizens to hold officesof trust, honour, or profit, ought to be restrained; andthat it is expedient to propose an amendment to the Constitutionof the United Stages, in relation to that subject.'The report of the committee not being prepared, onmotion, voted, that this Convention be adjourned till threeo'clock this afternoon, then to meet at this place.Tkrce o'clock, P. M. — The Convention met, pursuantto adjournment. The report of the committee not beingprepared, on motion, voted, that this Convention be adjourned1 till tomorrow morning, ten o'clock, then to meetat this place.'friday, December SO, 1814."The Convention met, pursuant to adjournment. ThsConvention was opened with prayer, by the Ilcv. Dr. Perkins.The committee appointed on the 21st instant presentedtheir report, which was read twice. The forenoonbavin"- been spent in reading the report, on motion, voted,that this Convention be adjourned till three o'clock thisafternoon, then to meet at this place.'^ Three o'clock, P. M. — The Convention met, pursuantto adjournment. After spending the afternoon in discussingthe report, the subject was postponed. On motion,voted, that this Convention be adjourned till to-morrowmorning, ten o'clock, then to meet at this place.'saturday, December 31, 1814.The Convention met, pursuant to adjournment. TheConvention was opened with prayer, by the Kev. Mr.HARTFORD CONVENTION. 395Chase. The Cnnvpiitioii resigned the consideration ofthe resort, postponed yesterday. On motion, voted, thata committee, to consist of tliiee, be appointed to procurethat part of the report which relates to the militia, printedconfidentially. Messrs. Goodrich, Lyman, of Massachusetts,and Goddard, were appointed on that committee.After having spent the forenoon in considering the report,the further consideration thereof was postponed. On motion,voted, that this Convention be adjourned till half pasttwo o'clock this afternoon, then to tneet at this place.Three o'clock, P. M. — The Convention met, pursuantto adjournment. The Convention resumed the considerationof the report of the Committee, which was postponedin the forenoon. After having spent the afternoon in discussingthe report of the committee, the further considerationthereof was postponed. On motion, voted, that acommittee of three persons be appointed to ascertain whatexpenses have been incurred in this Convention, which itis necessary for them to defray, and to report the mode ofdischarging them. Mr. Goddard, 3Ir. Prescott, and Mr.Ward, were appointed on that committee. On motion,voted, that the first eight pages of the report be recommittedto the committee which reported it, to reconsiderthe same. On motion, voted, that the same committee reportsuch documents and articles as they may think proper,to compose an appendix to the report.On motion, voted, that this Convention be adjournedtill Monday morning, ten o'clock, then to meet at this place.*' Monday, January 2, 1815.** The Convention met, pursuant to adjournment. TheConvention was opened with prayer, by the Kev. Mr.Chase. The Convention resumed the consideration of thereport of the committee which was postponed from Saturday.After spending the forenoon in discussing the report,the further consideration thereof was postponed, Oq396 HISTORY OF THEmotion, voted, that this Convention bp, adjourned till halpast two o'clock this afternoon, then to meet at this place**' Half past two o'clock, P. M. — The Convention met, pursuantto adjournment. The Convention resumed the considerationof the report of the committee which was postponedin the forenoon. After spending the afternoon indiscussing the report of the committee, the further considerationthereof was postponed. On motion, voted, thatthis Convention be adjourned till tomorrow morning, nineo'clock, then to meet at this place.Tuesday, January 3, 1815.The Convention met, pursuant to adjournment. TheConvention was opened with prayer, by the Rev. Dr. Perkins.The Convention resumed the consideration of thereport of the committee which was postponed yesterday.After spending the forenoon in discussing the report of thecommittee, the same was postponed till the afternoon. Onmotion, voted, that this Convention be adjourned till threeo'clock this afternoon, then to meet at this place.Three o'' clock, P. M. — The Convention met, pursuantto adjournment. The Convention resumed the considerationof the report of the committee, which was postponedin the forenoon. After discussing and amending the reportof the committee, voted, that the same be accepted andapproved. On motion, resolved, that the injunction ofsecrecy, in regard to all the debates and proceedings ofthis Convention, except in so far as relates to the reportfinally adopted, be, and hereby is, continued. On motion,voted, that a committee of three persons be appointed toconsider and report what measures it will be expedient torecommend to the states, for their mutual defence. Mr.Prescott, Mr. Wilde, and Mr. Manton, were appointed onthe committee."On motion, voted, that Mr. Sherman be added to thecommittee for superintending the printing of the report.HARTFORD CONVENTION. 397On motion, voted, that this Convention be adjourned tilltomorrow morning, ten o'clock, then to meet at this place.'• Wednesday, January 4, 1815.The Convention met, pursuant to adjournment. TheConvention was opened with prayer, by the Rev. Mr.Chase. On motion, voted, that certain documents beforethe Convention, be published, with the following title,Statements prepared and jmhlished, hy order of the Conventionof delegates, held at Hartford, Dec. 15, 1814, andprinted hy their order''On motion, voted, that Mr. Goodrich be dischargedfrom any further services on the committee to superintendthe printing of the report, (fcc. On motion, voted, thatanother member be added to that committee. Mr. Otiswas appointed to that place. The committee appointedto report what measures it will be expedient to recommendto the states, for their mutual defence, presented a report,which was read. On motion, voted, that the said reportbe accepted and approved. On motion, voted, that thisConvention be adjourned till three o'clock this afternoon,then to meet at this place.Three o'clock, P. M. — The Convention met, pursuantto adjournment On motion, voted, that two copies of thereport of the Convention, subscribed by all the memberswho shall be disposed to sign the same, be forwarded toeach of the governors of the states of Massachusetts,Connecticut, Rhode Island, New-hampshire, and Vermont; one of which to be for the private use of the saidgovernors, and with a request that the other, at some propertime, may be laid before the legislatures of the statesaforesaid.Mr. Goodrich submitted the following resolution to theConvention. Resolved, That the thanks of the Conventionbe presented to the Hon. George Cabot, in testimonyof the respectful sense they entertain of his conduct whilstpresiding over their deliberations.398 HISTORY OF THE*' On the question being put by the secretary, it passedin the affirmative, infamously. On motion, voted, thatthe Conversion be adjourned till 7 o'clock, this evening,then to meet at this place.Seven (dock, P. M. — The committee met, pursuantO adjournment. On motion, voted, that the report, asamended, and the resolves accompanying the same, beaccepted and approved. On motion, voted, that the delegatesfrom Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Rhode Island,take two copies of the report of the Convention, and deliverthe same to the governors of those states, agreeablyto the vote of the Convention passed this day, and that thepresident be requested to transmit two copies of the reportto the governors of the states of New-hampshire andVermont, together with a copy of the vote of the Conventionaforesaid.On motion, voted, that at the close of the Convention,the journal be committed to the care of the president.On motion, voted, that the Convention be adjourned tillto-morrow morning, 9 o'clock, then to meet at this place.•' Thursday, January 5, 1815 — d o'clock, A. M.The Convention met, pursuant to adjournment — aftersolemn prayer, by the Rev. Dr. Strong, on motion, voted,that this Convention be adjourned without day.•' Attest, Theodore Dwight, Secretary's'This document, when placed in the secretary's office atBoston, was accompanied by a certificate of the following''tenor, viz.I George Cabot, late president of the Convention, assembledat Hartford, on the fifteenth day of December,3814, do hereby certify, that the foregoing is the originaland only journal of the proceedings of that Convention ;and that the twenty-seven written pages, which composeit, and the printed report, comprise a faithful and completeHARTFORD CONVENTION. 399record of all the motions, resolutions, votes, and proceedings,of that Convention. And I do further certify, thatthis journal has been constantly in my exclusive custody,from the time of the adjournment of the Convention, to thodelivery of it into the office of the Secretary of this Commonwealth.George Cabot.'boston, Nov. lath, 1S19."By adverting to the Report, it will be seen that theConvention, in their proceedings, and in the result, keptstrictly within the limits of their commissions. They conferredupon the general subjects referred to them for consideration; and after mature deliberation, and the exerciseof the utmost caution, discretion, and sound judgment,they embodied their views, their sentiments, and their conclusions,in a document which has been admired, and whichwill be admired, even by future generations, as one of theablest for wisdom and talent that our country has everproduced.After a concise, but forcible review of the policy of thegovernment previously to the declaration of war, the Conventiontake a survey of the state of things after that event,and of the calamities which it had brought upon the nation; and close with recommending to the legislatures bywhom they were appointed, the following resolutions :'resolved, That it be and is hereby recommended tothe legislatures of the several states represented in thisConvention, to adopt all such measures as may be necessaryeffectually to protect the citizens of said states fromthe operation and effects of all acts which have been or maybepassed by the Congress of the United States, which shallcontain provisions subjecting the militia or other citizensto forcible drafts, conscriptions, or impressments, not authorisedby the Constitution of the United States.^v400 HISTORY OF THE*' Resolved, That it be and hereby is recommended tothe said legislatures to authorise an immediate and earnestapplication to be made to the Government of the UnitedStates, requesting their consent to some arrangement,whereby the said states may separately or in concert, beempowered to assume upon themselves the defence of theirterritory against the enemy ; and a reasonable portion ofthe taxes collected within said states, may be paid into therespective treasuries thereof, and appropriated to the paymentof the balance due said states, and to the future defenceof the same. The amount so paid into the said treasuriesto be credited, and the disbursements made asaforesaid, to be charged to the United States.Resolved, That it be, and it hereby is recommendedto the legislatures of the aforesaid states, to pass laws(where it has not already been done) authorising the Governorsor Commanders in chief of their militia, to makedetachments from the same, or to form voluntary corps, asshall be most convenient and conformable to their constitutions,and to cause the same to be well armed, equipped,and disciplined, and held in readiness for service; and uponthe request of the Governor of either of the other states,to employ the whole of such detachment or corps, as wellas the regular forces of the state, or such part thereofas may be required, and can be spared consistently withthe safety of the state, in assisting the state making suchrequest, to repel any invasion thereof which shall be madeor attempted by the public enemy."The other resolutions recommended by the Conventionto their several legislatures, consisted of various propositionsfor amending the Constitution of the United States,a practice which has been extensively engaged in by differentstates, almost throughout the Union, and which isharmless in itself; and as the mode of amending that instrumentis pointed out by itself, it is not necessary toHARTFORD CONVENTION. 401allude to them in the present work. Nor have the otherswhich we have copied been considered as reprehensiblein themselves. To recommend to the legislatures of thestates to adopt such measures as might be necessary toprotect their citizens from forcible drafts, conscriptions,and impressment, cannot fail to meet with the approbationnot only of that great body of citizens who are immediatelyexposed to the effects of such unconstitutionalmeasures, but of all upright, just, and virtuous people, ofevery age, and in whatever circumstances of life.The next resolution falling directly within the provisionwhich has been quoted, will be as little likely to meet withobjections from any quarter. It recommends an applicationto Congress, for permission to assume upon themselvesthe defence of their own territory, and to appropriate aportion of the taxes collected within those states, to paythe balance due the states for money already advanced indefending their coasts, and to defray any further expensesattending their future efforts for the same object.The third resolution recommends to the legislatures ofthe several states which they represented, to pass laws forforming volunteer corps, and to cause them to be armedand equipped, and held in readiness for service, and if necessityrequired, to assist each other in defending themselvesagainst the inroads of the enemy.This recommendation pursues the course pointed out bythe administration, soon after the commencement of thewar, when they called upon Massachusetts to send a bodyof militia to Rhode Island, to defend the town and port ofNewport in the latter state.The case of the Hartford Convention appears, then, tobe summarily as follows: — It was legitimate in its origin,in no respect violating any provisions of the constitutionof the United States, either in its letter or its spirit. Thecommissions given to the members were scrupulously-guardedagainst any unconstitutional conduct on the part402 HISTORY OF THEof the Convention, giving them authority only to confertogether, and recommend such measures to their principalsas they might deem expedient, taking care to govern themselvesby a regard to the duties and obligations which thestates owed to the United States. The account of theirproceedings shows that they punctiliously observed the injunctionscontained in their instructions ; and the result oftheir deliberations proves their conduct to have been, ioevery respect, strictly constitutional.Notwithstanding the vast amount of calumny and reproachthat has been bestowed upon the Hartford Conventionby the ignorant and the worthless, it will not be ahazardous assumption to say, that henceforward no manwho justly estimates the value of his character for truthand honesty, and who, of course, means to sustain such acharacter, will risk his reputation by the repetition of suchfalsehoods respecting that body, as have heretofore beenuttered with impunity. No man, with the facts before him,can do this, without sacrificing all claim to veracity, andof course, to integrity and honour. Nor will the subterfugethat the journal and report of the Convention do notcontain the whole of their proceedings, save him from thedisgrace of wilfully disregarding the truth. Nearly nineteenyears have elapsed since the Convention adjourned,and no proof has been adduced, and nothing nearer proofsthan the unsupported assertions of the corrupt journals ofpolitical partizans, of any measure having been adoptedor recommended by the Convention, besides those containedin the journal and the report. If there was anytreason, proposed or meditated, against the United States,at the Convention, it must have been hidden in as deepand impenetrable obscurity, as the fabulous secrets of freemasonryare said to be buried, otherwise some traces ofit would have been discovered and disclosed to the publicbefore this late period. No such discovery having bees■ HARTFORD CONVENTION. 403made, the inference must necessarily be, that no suchtreasonable practice or intention existed.But, in the nature of things, nothing could have beentransacted by the Convention, beyond what appears intheir journal and report. They were a public body— agrand committee appointed by the legislatures of threedistinct states, to confer, and report. The subjects oftheir conference must appear in their journal, otherwisethey could never obtain a legitimate existence. And thereport must, in like manner, contain the entire result oftheir deliberations, because nothing that did not appearembodied in that document, could, in the nature of things,form a part of their proceedings, and be laid before theirprincipals. It is then absurd to pretend that there wereother proceedings, which have been kept out of sight, orsuppressed, and never revealed, because nothing that wasthus kept back could have formed any part of their proceedings.The internal evidence of the case is therefore sufficientto show the groundlessness of the charge that a part ofthe proceedings of the Convention were suppressed. Butthe certificate of Mr. Cabot has been quoted, which assertsin direct and positive terms, that the journal contains "afaithful and complete record of all the motions, resolutions,votes, and proceedings of that Conventions'' If this certificateis false, there were, at the time it was made, at leasttwenty individuals of the highest respectability in existence,who would have been able to prove its falsity. Thereare no less than twelve such individuals now living, whoare able to impeach its correctness, if it asserts that whichis not true. Mr. Cabot was a man of the highest respectabilityfor understanding, integrity, and talents. He hadmore reputation to lose than scores together of those whowould impeach his veracity can lay claim to or boast of.His declaration on any subject would have been taken fortruth, wherever he was well known, with as much confirmHISTORY OF THEhence as if it had been sanctioned by the most solemnoath. Here it is impeached by nothing but the unsupportedassertions or suggestions of political partizans — menwithout manners, without principles, and of course withoutreputation.In January, 1831, the published of a newspaper in theState of Connecticut, was prosecuted before the SuperiorCourt of that State for a libel. The article which wasthe foundation of the prosecution, contained an allusion tothe Hartford Convention. Although that allusion wasnot the basis of the charge, yet the opportunity was improvedto draw from one of the members of that bodysome facts respecting its character and conduct. Themember referred to was Roger Minot Sherman, a lawyerof great eminence, and a gentleman of the highest respectabilityof character, both professional and personal. Hewas regularly summoned as a witness, on a collateralpoint, and not material to the issue before the court, andwas examined at length. There is very little doubt thatthe object was, to ascertain from this source, whether therewas any thing treasonable, or seditious, in the proceedingsof the Convention. In the course of his testimony hesaid —There was not, to the best of my recollection, a singlemotion, resolution, or subject of debate, but what appearsill the Journals'' In answer to a question put to him, hereplied — " I believe I know their proceedings perfectly,and that every measure, done or proposed, has been publishedto the world. ^^But it may be said, that both Mr. Calot and 3Ir. Shermanwere members of the Convention, and however hightheir standing in the community, as men of the purestmorals, and the most unsullied integrity, may have been,still they must be considered as involved in its guilt, ifguilt actually existed, and therefore they are witnessesinterested in the question, and not entitled to theHARTFORD CONVENTION. 405full measure of credit which would otherwise be dueto them. It then only remains for the only individual whowas present at the Convention, and was not a member,and who alone had the opportunity to be fully acquaintedwith all their proceedings, to give his testimony. Thistestimony is not offered because the exigencies of the caseinany sense require it. If a hundred disinterested individualsof the most unquestioned integrity could be found,who were as well acquainted with the facts as the twopersons who have already been named, and who shouldconcur in their declarations, their united testimony wouldnot add a particle of strength to that of Messrs. Cabotand Sherman, where the characters of the latter wereknown. But if a disinterested witness should be keptback, who might be produced, an inference might bedrawn by some caviller, from that circumstance, unfavourableto the character and conduct of the Convention.Such a witness is the author of this work — the Secretaryof the Convention ; and he feels it a duty which he owesto truth, and the characters of as respectable, patriotic,and virtuous a body of men, as ever were collected on anyoccasion, to say, in the most positive and unhesitatingmanner, and with all the solemnity which the nature ofthe case requires, that the Journal and the Report ofTHE Co.^ENTION, CONTAIN A FULL, Complete, AND .SpecificACCOUNT OF ALL THE MOTIONS, VOTES, AND ProceedingsOF THE Convention. And he will add, thatno proposition was made in the Convention to divide theUnion, to organize the New England States into a separategovernment, or to form an alliance with Great Britain,or any other foreign power ; on the contrary, everymotion that was made, every resolution that was offered,and every measure that was adopted, was, in principleand in terms, strictly confined within the limits of the instructionsfrom the several legislatures by whom the delegateswere appointed. And when the Report was adopted,406 HISTORY OF THEit was by an unanimous vote, sanctioned by the signatureof every member.The effect of this declaration upon the public mindwill of course be left to the decision of the public.The legislative acts of Massachusetts, Connecticut, andRhode Island, containing provisions for the appointmentof Delegates to meet in Convention, and stating the generalobjects of the measure, specifying the powers and authoritiesby which their conduct should be regulated, andprescribing the limits within which they were to be confined,it will be recollected were passed in the month ofOctober, 1814. The condition of the country at large,and particularly that of the New England States upon theAtlantic coast, has been alluded to and explained. Atthat time, the towns upon the sea-shore were exposed tohostile invasion by the enemy's naval forces — several ofthe towns had been captured, some places had been attackedby their ships, property to a great amount destroyed,the whole extent of the coast, from the border of Sew-Yorkto Passport, had been essentially abandoned by the UnitedStates troops, and the defence of it thrown upon the individualstates — those states had large bodies of men in thefield, guarding the towns, defending the forts, and protectingthe inhabitants, at a most enormous sacrifice of time andmoney ; and in the darkest and most threatening periodof the war, the United States government had withdrawntheir supplies for the militia, and forced the states to supporttheir own men in the national service. At the sametime, the taxes imposed and collected by thjp governmentof the United States, for the expenses of the war, wereextremely burthensome ; and to add to the general massof calamity, the currency of the country had become deranged,and depreciated to such a degree, that the mostextensive distress was threatened from that fruitful sourceof evil.Just at this moment, the despatches from the Commis-hartfordCONVENTION. 407sinners at Ghent were published, showing that such extravagantdemands were made by the British, as the basisof negotiation, that there was scarcely a ray of hope thatpeace would be obtained. And such was the language of theexecutive members of our government. The letter of theSecretary of War to the military Committee of the Houseof Representatives, from which extracts have been made,was dated October 17th, 1814. In that extraordinarydocument, every effort was made to alarm the country,not only with regard to the continuance of the war, andthe hopelessness of peace, but to convey the idea that itwould thenceforward be a war of the most violent, desperate,and dangerous description — that we were fightingonly for our liberty and independence, but for existences— and that if we made any dishonourable concession toGreat Britain, the spirit of the nation would be broken,and the foundation of our liberty and independence shaken.In addition to all these considerations, the manner ofconducting the war had been such from the beginning, asto manifest great inability in the administration and theiragents, and to destroy all confidence, not only in their principles,but in their capacity for conducting the affairs ofthe nation.Under such circumstances, and with such a prospectfor the ensuing year, the New England States were underthe necessity, for their self-preservation, to consult ton-ether,for the purpose, if practicable, of devising and adoptingsome system of operations which might conduce to theirown safety. The situation of Massachusetts, Rhode Island,and Connecticut, rendered it indispensably necessary thatthey should take preliminary measures of this description,previously to the opening of another campaign. The Presidenthad directed a call to be made upon Massachusetts,at a very early stage of the war, to furnish men for thedefence of Newport, in Rhode Island. At that time thedanger of invasion was inconceivably less than it was in408 HISTORY OF THEOctober, 1814. What part of the New England coastwould be the object of the next hostile visit, could not beknown, or conjectured. But that there was at that time*' imminent danger of invasion," could not be denied, ordoubted. And that the whole extent of the coast was leftdestitute of the means of defence, was a fact not to bequestioned.Under circumstances like these, the general subject waspresented to the consideration of those states. If defendedat all, they must defend themselves. This was theimport of the correspondence which the national governmenthad carried on with those states from the beginning.The danger was common to them, and it was thereforeabsolutely necessary, in the performance of the duty whichthe national government had forced upon them, that somegeneral plan of operations should be devised, which wouldbe the most likely to accomplish the object in view. TheNew England States, therefore, in adopting the course theywere pursuing, were not volunteers. The national governmenthad withdrawn from them all the means of defencewhich they possessed, and then informed them they mustdefend themselves. And having brought those states intothis predicament, they did not even furnish them withtheir advice in regard to the manner in which their defencewas to I)e conducted. They left it to themselves tosupply the means, and to use them in the manner whichthey might suppose would best accomplish the object inview. They adopted the plan of holding a convention ofdelegates, who should meet and consult upon tip greatsubject of defending their coasts from invasion, their townsfrom being sacked and plundered, their property from beingwasted and destroyed, their houses and their homesfrom being pillaged and broken up, and their familiesfrom being scattered or massacred. To proceed withthe utmost prudence and caution, they selected the wisestand most virtuous members of their several communitiesHARTFORD CONVENTION. 409men of great experience, sound principles, mature age,holding large stakes in the public welfare, and highly esteemedfor integrity, public services, and patriotism. Andto render the matter perfectly secure, the legislatures bywhom the delegates were appointed, took care to furnishthem with commissions, specifically prescribing the dutieswhich they were to perform, and the limits within whichthey were to operate. In Massachusetts, their delegateswere instructed " to devise, if practicable, means of securityand defence ichich may be consistent with the preservation oftheir resources from total ruin, and adapted to their localsituation, mutual relations and habits, not repugnant toTHEIR OBLIGATIONS AS Members OF THE UnION." Theresolution of the legislature of Connecticut was equallyspecific and guarded. Their delegates were instructed tomeet those of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts andof other states who should appoint, and " confer with themon the subjects proposed by a resolution of said Commonwealth,and upon any other subjects which may come beforethem, for the purpose of devising and recommendingsuch measures for the safety and welfare of these statesAS MAY CONSIST WITH OUR OBLIGATIONS AS MEMBERS OFTHE NATIONAL Union." The Rhode Island legislatureinstructed their delegates to confer with such delegates asare or shall be appointed by other states, upon the commondangers to which these states are exposed, upon thebest means of co-operating for our mutual defence againstthe enemy, and upon the measures which it may be in thepower of said states, consistently with their obligations,to adopt, to restore and secure to the people theirrights and privileges under the Constitution of the UnitedStates:'The great object of the states, then, in calling a convention,was, to confer on the practicability of devising meansof security and defence — that is, to perform the task whichthe national government had thrown upon them in Isis,410 HISTORY OF THEand which had been left upon them down to tbje time ofappointing delegates to meet in convention, and which hadnow become so imperative that there was no room toavoid it. But, at the same time, in holding this conference,nothing was to be done that was not compatible withthe duties and obligations of the states as members of theUnion. These commissions were precisely similar intheir character to powers of attorney, in which the principalsgive the agents authority to perform certain actsspecified in the instruments. To the extent of that authoritythe agents may act, and no further. If the agentstranscend those limits, whatever they may attempt to performbeyond the scope of their authority is not bindingupon the principals, and of course is void. In these commissions,however, the delegates were not clothed withpower to do any thing except to confer with their associates,for the purpose of devising means for the defenceand security of the states which they represented. Whateverconclusions they might eventually come to, must ofcourse be reported to the legislatures by whom they wereappointed and commissioned, for them to adopt or reject,as they might think expedient. Here, it will be recollected,were the representatives of three states. Upon receivingtheir report, one state might adopt, another mightreject, and a third might not do either, but adopt in part,and reject in part ; or the three might reject the wholereport.But whatever was done, or recommended to be done,was to be governed by the principles of loyalty to theUiiion and Government of the United States. This limitationof power confined the Convention strictly withinconstitutional limits. The constitution provides that " 'Nostate shall, without the consent of Congress, lay any dutyon tonnage, keep troops or ships of war in time of peace,enter into any agreement or compact with another state,,or with a foreign power, or engage in war, unless actualHARTFORD CONVENTION. 411\y invaded, or in such imminent danger as will not admitof delay." Had the Convention disregarded their authorityso far as to recommend the adoption of either of theseprohibited acts, without the previous consent of Congress,their recommendation would have been void, for the wantof power in themselves even to advise such a course. Inaddition to which, their recommendation of any coursewould not have bound the legislatures. To give it anyvalidity, the latter bodies must have adopted it, and madeit their own.Having given a history of the war, and of the mannerin which it was conducted on the part of the United States,with the view of placing before the public a correct accountof the events which led to the assembling of theHartford Convention, it may be well to devote a few momentsto its termination by the treaty of peace.On the 18th of February, 1815, the President of theUnited States transmitted a message to both houses ofCongress, of which the following is an extract —1 lay before Congress copies of the treaty of peace andamity between the United States and his Britannic majesty,which was signed by the commissioners of both parties atGhent, on the 24th of December, 1814, and the ratificationsof which have been duly exchanged.While performing this act, I congratulate you, andour constituents, upon an event ickich is highly honourableto the nation, and terminates with peculiar felicity, a campaignsignalized by the most brilliant successes.The late war, although reluctantly declared by Congress,had become a necessary resort, to assert the rightsand independence of the nation. It has been waged witha success which is the natural result of the wisdom of the legislativecouncils, of the patriotism of the people, of thepublic spirit of the militia, and of the valour of the militaryand naval forces of the country. Peace, at all timesa blessing, is peculiarly welcome, therefore, at a period412 HISTORY OF THEwhen the causes for the war have ceased to operate, whenthe government has demonstrated the efficiency of itspowers of defence, and when the nation can review itsconduct without regret, and without reproach."The only cause of war, at the end of five days after itsdeclaration, was that of the impressment of our seamenby British cruisers. The prevention of this evil was consideredby our government an object of sufficient importanceto justify the expenditure of the treasure and blood whichwas caused by the war. Many declarations of the governmenthave been quoted in this work, from both the executiveand legislative departments, intended to impress uponthe minds of the public at large, as well as upon those ofthe commissioners for negotiating a peace, the indispensableimportance of obtaining security against the furtheradoption of the practice. As late as January, 1814, theSecretary of State informed the plenipotentiaries at gothenburg[that " The sentiments of the President had undergoneno change on that important subject. This degradingpractice must cease : our flag must protect thecrew, or the United States cannot consider themselves anindependent nation." In January, 1613, the committeeof foreign relations of the House of Representatives say,"War having been declared, and the case of impressmentbeing necessarily included as one of the most importantcauses, it is evident that?7 imtsl be provided for in the pacification:the omission of it in a treaty of peace would notleave it on its former ground: it would in effect he an absoluterelinquishment — " It is an evil ickich ought not, whichcannot be longer tolerated — " It is incompatible with theirsovereignly. It is subversive of the main pillars of their in-dcp'Jndence.^^ But the case of impressment was not providedfor in the pacification. So far from it, the subjectis not once mentioned, or even alluded to in the wholecourse of the treaty. So far, then, from gaining this,which was avowedly the sole object of the war when itHARTFORD CONVENTION. 413was declared, as well as when these various declarationswere made, and this strong language was used, it must,according to those declarations, be considered as havingbeen left on worse ground than that on which it stood uponbefore the war; — indeed, as having been absolutely relinquished; for no stipulation was entered into, no agreementmade, not even an informal understanding was hadwith regard to it, and the evil which could not be longertolerated, which was incompatible v.'ith our sovereignty,and subversive of the main pillars of our independence,was entirely unnoticed at the conclusion of the war andthe negotiations for peace. And this was, in fact, the effectof an "absolute relinquishment" of the subject bythe positive order of the President. It has been seen,that in a letter of instructions from the Secretary of Stateto the commissioners, dated June 27th, 1814, the latterwere informed, that if they should find it indispensablynecessary in order to terminate the war, they might omitany stipulation in the treaty on the subject of impressment.And yet notwithstanding all this — notwithstanding no singleobject for which the war was declared was accomplished,and the treaty of peace has no reference to such object,the President, in a public message to Congress, declares,that the peace was an event "highly honourable to thenation," and that it terminated "with peculiar felicity acampaign signalized by the most brilliant successes'*Even the subject of impressment, for the purpose ofgetting rid of which it had been exclusively maintained,almost from the beginning, had been formally abandoned,and the controversy had in October, 1814, in fact, thoughsecretly, assumed its true character, which was that of awar for the support of the personal popularity of the nationaladministration, and not for the protection of therights and honour of the nation. Having in terms relinquishedthe idea of obtaining security against impressmentin the treaty of peace, the only object was to retire414 HISTORY OF THEfrom the contest with as little loss of reputation, to thosewho involved the country in it, as the nature of the casewould admit. To accomplish this object, the attempt toforce the militia into the regular army, in defiance of theexpress provisions and principles of the constitution, wasmade. It was defeated by the patriotic and independentstand taken at the outset by the New-england governments; and to those governments is it solely owing, thata precedent so dangerous to the liberties of the countrywas not established.It is not an easy matter to reconcile the foregoing declarationsof the chief magistrate of the United States withthe facts which have been alluded to. How is it possiblethat a peace could be " highly honourable to the nation,"when the single object for which the war was carried onwas not accomplished ? The fact that we gained splendidnaval victories, and that the British were repulsed at New-orleans,do not prove it. M'Donough's victory on LakeChamplain was a brilliant achievement, as well as the repulseof the British at New-Orleans. But the latter eventoccurred in January, 1815, two weeks after the treaty ofpeace was signed, and therefore could not with proprietybe considered as having terminated the campaign. Butagainst these signal victories the capture of the city ofWashington, the destruction of the public buildings, andthe flight of the officers of the government, must be placedas a set-off. Besides, it must be borne in mind, that thewar was on our part an offensive war ; and was wagedprofessedly for the vindication of national rights. Thevictory of New-Orleans, which has been considered as themost brilliant event achieved by our land forces during thewar, was the fruit of a defensive battle merely, fought uponour own ground, and for the protection of one of our owncities. The event, therefore, however reputable to thoseby whom the battle was fought, reflects no credit on theadministration and their friends, who declared the war.HARTFORD CONVENTION, 415To have gained honour to themselves, required somethingmore than mere defensive operations. That we were ablein that one instance to defend ourselves, furnishes veryslight evidence of the wisdom of our legislative councils,by whom the war was declared. As far as it went, itproved the efficiency of the powers of the government inself-defence. But there were many events in the courseof the war which demonstrated the opposite fact — whichshowed its inefficiency for defence. And this inefficiencywas acknowledged in the calls made by the administrationfor the militia, in which it was stated expressly, thatthe regular troops were ordered from the Atlantic coast,and of course, that the coast would be left without defence,unless the militia were detailed upon the service.The truth is, the peace, so far from being highly honourableto the country, was in an equal degree disgraceful.The mere circumstance that "the causes for the war hadceased to operate," proves nothing. Those causes wouldhave ceased to operate in the same manner, whenever apeace should take place in Europe, as certainly without awar on our part against Great Britain, as with it. Such apeace, it was well known, must first or last occur, becausea perpetual war was not in the nature of things to be expected.War between this country and Great Britain, atthe time, was calculated to put off the peace in Europe, ratherthan to accelerate it. Peace eventually occurred, bythe final overthrow of the great Disturber of that quarterof the globe — the man in whose favour the war wasintended to operate — a short time after the treaty ofGhent between the United States and Great Britain, andwas brought to pass by the great and decisive battle ofWaterloo, on the 18th day of June, 1815 — the anniversaryof the Declaration of War hy she United States againstGreat Britain. This country is in a worse condition as itregards security in any future war, against impressmentby the British, than it would have been if the treaty nego-416 HISTORY OF THE 'tiated by Messrs. Monroe and Pinkney had been ratified;and much worse than it would have been if the war hadnot been declared. That treaty was accompanied by aninformal understanding entered into by the commissioners,that at some future time impressment should become thesubject of further negotiation. Now we have no securityeven for that privilege ; but if an occasion should everhereafter occur, which should render it convenient for theBritish to engage anew in the practice, they could do itwithout infringing the stipulations of a treaty, or even violatingan informal understanding. The United Stateswould then have as strong an inducement to engage in asecond war, for the purpose of forcing Great Britain togive up the practice, as they had in that of ]812 — that is,if impressment was the real cause of the war. In thatevent, they may have another opportunity to go througha warfare of two years and a half more ; and then makea peace " highly honourable to the country," without gainingthe object for which the war was made, and ascribethe result to "the wisdom of the legislature," and "thecessation of the causes of the war."But this result proves, in the most conclusive manner,the correctness of the views of those who were opposed tothe war. They contended that the country was utterlyunprepared for war, and therefore ought not to rush intoit, foreseeing that its effects would be disastrous, andits termination disreputable to the government, and thecountry. They did not believe that the real causes of thewar were alleged in the manifesto which preceded it ; andthe event showed that their belief was well founded. Inshort, judging of the character of the war, the capacity ofthose who were the appointed agents to conduct it, andthe fact of its being brought to a close without securingone of its avowed objects, and all intelligent and uprightpeople must justify the opposers of the war in withholdingtheir sanction from its justice, and their approbationHARTFORD CONVENTION. 417from the sentiment that peace was " highly honourableTO THE COUNTRY."The readers of this work have now had a full opportunityto become acquainted with the causes which gave riseto the Hartford Convention, the duties which that Conventionwere called upon to perform, the principles by whichthey were governed in their proceedings, and the mannerin which they performed those duties. It will also havebeen jipir.pivfid, that it has not been the object of the authorto frame an apology either for the Convention, or forthe legislative authorities by whom the Convention wasappointed. His object has been by the simple force oftruth, to stop the mouth of calumny, to turn the currentof falsehood back upon its authors, to free historical evidencefrom the mists in which it has for so many yearsbeen involved and obscured, and if possible, to kindle ablush of shame on the cheek of political fraud and profligacy.Instead of apologizing for the New-england Statesfor their conduct during the late unprincipled war, he entertainsnot a doubt that the example which was set bythose states, when they were drawn into competition withthe national government, the unshaken resolution whichthey manifested in support of their own rights, and particularlyin defence of the rights of the militia, will be themeans of protecting that large and most important classof citizens from all future attempts to deprive them oftheir constitutional rights, and to force them, at the willof a despotic administration, into the ranks of a standing-army.Had not the New-england States made a firm standin defence of their constitutional privileges and prerogatives,the next war in which the nation shall be engaged,would have reduced the individual states under the powerand placed them at the inercy of the national government.All that would have been necessary to the accomplishmentof the object, would be a declaration, whether true or false,that the country was in danger of invasion, and a demand418 . HISTORY OF THEfor any number of the militia which the Executive mightthink proper to order, to be placed under the command ofUnited States officers, and made liable to be marched toany rendezvous which the President, or any subordinateofficer under him should direct. This would at a strokedeprive the states of their militia — their only safeguardagainst tyranny and oppression ; aud the national governmentwould at once be in possession of a power sufficientto overthrow their liberties and independence.Mr. Giles's bill, introduced into the Senate, in October,1814, was founded upon Mr. Monroe's plan for a conscription.It provided for raising eighty thousand men for theUnited States service. The manner in which they were tobe obtained has been stated. The object was to makethem regular soldiers, to be placed under the command ofUnited States officers, and of course to remove them beyondthe limits and controul of state authority, put themin garrisons, march them to the frontiers, or to any otherpoint to which they might be ordered by the Secretary ofWar. This would of course subject them to the militarydespotism which is centered in, and exercised under the"Rules and Articles of War." This vast body of men,far more numerous than the United States ever had in thefield on any former occasion, either in the revolutionarywar, or since, would have been under the absolute directionand controul of the President of the United States,and liable to be employed in any service upon which hemight think proper to detach them. What security wouldthe country have had against such a formidable force, inthe hands of a daring, ambitious, unprincipled warrior,who was disposed to plant the standard of his own authorityon the ruins of his country's freedom f The questionneed not be answered. The condition of the New-englandstates may be alluded to, in the room of a more specificreply to this inquiry. Pressed along the whole lengthof the coast by the fleets and forces of a flushed and vialHARTFORD CONVENTION. 419active foe, robbed of their militia, and exhausted of theirmeans for carrying on military operations against eithera foreign* or domestic enemy, they would have been at themercy of whatever " military Chieftain " might have happenedto be commander-in-chief. What would, undersuch circumstances, have been their fate, might, underdifferent circumstances, have been the fate of other states.Nor would it be a difficult task for an ambitious soldier, atthe head of such a force, to subvert every vestige of republicanismin our national government, and place himselfat the head of a military despotism.Speculations of this kind, in a time of peace, and whenneither war, nor even rumours of war, exist, may be consideredextravagant. But as the last war was undertakenfor political and personal interests, another may be wagedfor reasons equally unwarrantable and reprehensible. Themeasures of the administration during the war of 1812,will justify the remarks that have been made, and the speculationsthat have been suggested. It is true that Mr.Madison was not much of a hero, and in all probabilitywould have hesitated, even under the circumstances supposed,before he would have placed himself at the head ofthe army, the raising of which Mr. Giles's bill contemplated,and made a daring effort to conquer and enslave hiscountry. But he had nerve enough to commence his militarycareer, by a series of bold attempts to violate the constitutionof his country. And as the war advanced, anddifficulties and dangers multiplied around him, his couragerose to a higher pitch, until he was, in a desperate moment,induced to aim a fatal blow at some of the mostimportant provisions and principles of the great charter ofits freedom.It is, however, believed, that it was not originally hiswish to plunge the nation into a war. He received thegovernment from the hands of his immediate predecessor,embarrassed with all the difficulties which the HISTORY OF THEter had planted around it ; and in conducting its foreignaffairs, it was next to impossible for him to change itscourse, without sacrificing his popularity with the leadersof the party which had placed him at its head. The firstfour years of his presidential life would expire in 1813 ;and unfortunately some bold and ambitious politicianshad set their minds on war — with what expectation ofadvantage it is difficult to imagine. Apprehensive thathis nerves might shrink from such a fearful responsibility,it was asserted at the time, and is not known ever tohave been contradicted, or questioned, that he was informedby the individuals alluded to, that unless he recommendeda war with Great Britain, the Western Stateswould not support his re-election. The declaration ofwar was accordingly recommended, and proclaimed. Theconsequence was, the whole Union was agitated and distressedfor two years and a half, by the calamities and thefears necessarily attendant on a state of war. The nationincurred a debt of more than a hundred millions of dollars,the payment of which, at the end of eighteen years,has scarcely been completed, and the country lost, accordingto the best estimate that could be made, more thanthirty thousand lives. Considering the war, then, as intendedto secure an election, and not to vindicate therights, nor to promote the general welfare of the country,it would not be safe reasoning to conclude, that merelybecause Mr. Madison was not bred in a camp, and didnot like to " look on scenes of blood and carnage," thathe had not nerve enough to prostrate the constitution andliberties of his country. The facts which have been adducedin this history have shown, that when the aspect ofthings became darkened, and the war began to assume amore threatening and formidable appearance to the countryat large, and of course to his personal popularity, hedid not hesitate to recommend a series of measures, which,had they been carried into effect, would have been asHARTFORD CONVENTION. 421complete and fatal a triumph over the constitution, as couldhave been effected by a dispersion, with force and arms,of the legislative houses, and shutting up the halls of Congress.Had Mr. Giles's bill passed into a law, the powerof accomplishing these results would have been placed inthe hands of the executive. It would be but a poor answerto say that he would not have abused the power.The argument will carry but little force, when it is recollected,that the power which was in his hands was abused ;and in one instance, the very existence of the constitutionwas placed in extreme jeopardy. But the precedentwould have remained ; and the first "Military Chieftain"who had been bred in a camp, and was not afraid tolook on blood and carnage," and who had succeeded intakingthe reins of government into his own hands, wouldhave it in his power, under its sanction, after havingplunged the nation into a war, to conquer and enslave hiscountry.For the escape from these evils, the United States areindebted to the firm and patriotic stand taken by the NewEngland States, in defence of their constitutional rightsand privileges. There is very little probability, at leastfor half a century to come, that another such attempt willbe made against their liberties and independence. Thatprobability is much strengthened by the consideration,that the attempt which was made during the late war wasso signally defeated. Deeply concerned as all the individualstates in fact were in the result of the controversybetween the New England States and the United States,in 1812, and during the war, no particular class of inhabitantswere so directly and deeply interested, as the wholebody of militia throughout the Union. Nothing savedthem from being forced, during the late war, into the ranksof the regular army, but the independent conduct of thechief magistrates of the three New England States, viz.Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Rhode Island. The HISTORY OF THE &c.ness of those public officers, approved and supported asthey were by the legislatures of their several jurisdictions,checked the progress of the national government towardsthe establishment of Conscription and Impressment, bylegislative acts wearing the forms of law. And it shouldbe borne in mind, that when these efforts were made toviolate the constitutional rights of the states, and of themilitia, the war had ceased to be a contest for the vindicationof any national right whatever.APPENDIXIt may not be uninteresting, to give the community atlarge some general information respecting the charactersof the individuals who composed the Hartford Convention,For that purpose, the following very brief sketches havebeen prepared.George Cabot was a native of Massachusetts, and adescendant of one of the discoverers of a portion of thiscontinent. He was a man of strong powers of mind, extensiveknowledge, dignified manners, the strictest integrity,and the purest morals. He was a warm friend tothe independence of his country during the revolutionarycontest ; and soon after the adoption of the constitution ofthe United States, he was appointed a senator in Congressfrom the state of Massachusetts. He was an able,upright, judicious, and disinterested statesman, andhad a thorough knowledge of the principles of the government,and the great interests of the country. Hismind was elevated far above the arts of intrigue ; he disdainedpolitical cunning and chicanery; his principles weresound and pure, and his conduct disinterested and independent.For many years previously to 1814, he had declined publicoffice, and had taken no active part in politics, until the424 APPENDIX.dangers of the country, and particularly those by whichNew-england was surrounded, induced him to consent toattend the Convention at Hartford. He was unanimouslychosen to preside in that assembly ; and throughout itssession, he performed the duties of his office in the mostacceptable and dignified manner. His life was prolongedseveral years after the close of the war ; and he maintainedthe same high reputation that he had previously acquiredto the end of his days, enjoying the universal esteemand respect of his friends, and of the community wherehe had passed a long and virtuous life. Few men understoodmore thoroughly the principles of the government,or the important interests of the country ; and no man wasever more divested of selfishness, in his exertions topromote its welfare.Nathan Dane was bred to the bar, and practised lawfor many years with a high reputation for learning, integrity,and talents. He was a firm friend to his countryduring the revolutionary war, and was a member of Congressfrom Massachusetts, under the confederation, wherehe performed eminent services, — particularly in procuringthe insertion of a provision in the ordinance establishingterritorial governments over the territories northwest ofthe Ohio river, which forever excluded slavery from thoseregions. He was also for many years a member of thestate legislature; and at all times, through a long and usefullife, enjoyed extensively the confidence of his fellow-citizensin the town, county, and state where he resides.He is still living ; and though at a very advanced age, isstill engaged in rendering important services to the community,by the publication of valuable works on subjectsof an interesting nature, and by distributing with a liberalhand the fruits of his own industry and talents, in supportof the public institutions of the state.APPENDIX. , 425William Prescott was a son of Colonel Prescott, sodistinguished in the annals of his country for heroic braveryand conduct, — especially at the battle of Bunker'sHill, on the 17th of June, 1775, — for devoted patriotism,and an ardent zeal for the independence of his native land.Mr. Prescott was educated for the bar, and settled early inlife in the town of Salem, in the county of Essex. Here herose to great distinction as a learned counsellor, and anable advocate. He then removed to Boston, where heattained to great eminence as one of the most distinguishedmembers of the profession. He has been a member ofthe House of Representatives, and of the senate of thestate legislature, and was sure of an election wheneverhe would consent to be a candidate. No man ever had ahigher reputation for strict integrity, personal worth, orpublic virtue; and very few men of his elevated standingfor talents, or moral worth, were more entirely free fromevery feeling of ambition, or the desire of official distinctionor influence.Harrison Gray Otis was born at Boston, and is abranch of the same family with James Otis, one of themost active and eloquent patriots of that city, at thebeo-innino- of the revolution. He was bred to the bar, andwas distinguished for his talents and eloquence in his profession.He came young into public life ; has been a representativeto congress, often a member of the legislatureof the state, a senator to congress, and finally mayor ofthe city. In all these stations, he wag highly respected andesteemed as an eloquent speaker, an able statesman, andan upright politician.Few individuals have been placed more frequently inconspicuousstations before the public than this gentleman.Possessed of fine talents, of captivating oratory, and persuasiveeloquence, he has always been able to command the respect,and to a great extent the esteem of his political APPENDIX.parents ; while he has possessed in an eminent degreethe attachment and the confidence of his political friendsand associates.Timothy Bigelow was a highly respectable lawyer,esteemed for his integrity in his professional pursuits ;was for many years elected a member of the state legislature,and for nearly an equal period was annually chosenspeaker of the house of representatives ; and having declineda further election to that office, was appointed amember of the executive council of the state. Few menhave more fully possessed the confidence of their constituentsthan Mr. Bigelow.Joshua Thomas held the office of judge of probate inthe county of Plymouth, in Massachusetts, the duties ofwhich he executed for many years with much reputation,enjoying the confidence of the community in an uncommondegree. This office rendered him ineligible to thelegislature, otherwise there is no doubt he would have beenelected to a seat in one house or the other, as often as hewould have consented to become a candidate for popularfavour.Joseph Lyman was by profession a lawyer, and pursuedthe practice for many years with a respectable characterfor integrity and talents. For a very considerableperiod he has held the office of sheriff of the county towhich he belongs, which renders him ineligible to a seatin the legislature. He was elected a member of the convention,which was held a number of years since, for thepurpose of suggesting amendments to the state constitution.He has always enjoyed the respect and confidenceof the community, particularly that part of it where he hasalways resided, and still is esteemed for his public andprivate virtues. *APPENDIX. 427George Bliss was an eminent lawyer, distinguishedin the profession for extensive learning, unwearied industry,uncommon intelligence, the strictest integrity, and themost unshaken independence both of principle ibid of conduct.In private life he possessed a most estimable andexemplary character. He was repeatedly elected to thestate legislature, and was often a member of the executivecouncil of the state. No man ever passed throughlife with a fairer reputation for integrity, or in a more entirepossession of the confidence of the community in whichhe resided.Daniel Waldo is an inhabitant of Worcester, in thestate of Massachusetts, where he was early in life establishedas a merchant. In all the business and intercourseof life, he has maintained a most respectable and irreproachablecharacter. He has been a member of the statesenate, and could always be elected when he would sufferhimself to be named as a candidate for that office. Affluentin his circumstances, he has usually found sufficientemployment in superintending his private affairs. Beingof an unambitious disposition, he has, to a great extent,left the political concerns of the country to others, contentinghimself with the quiet pursuits and occupations ofprivate life, and in doing good to his fellow men.Samuel Sumner Wilde was bred to the bar, wherehe maintained a highly respectable character for learning,talents, and integrity. No better evidence of his highstanding in the profession could be given, than his appointmentto a seat on the bench of the supreme court of Massachusetts— a court which has always ranked among themost distinguished in our country, and which within a fewyears previously had been ornamented by a Parsons, aStrong, a Sedgwick, a Sewell, and other jurists of an eminentcharacter. This place Mr. Wilde has filled for428 APPENDIX.many years, with reputation to himself, and with the fullapprobation of the community.HoDiJAH Baylies was an officer of much merit in therevolutionary army, and served with reputation until theestablishment of his country's independence. For manyyears he has held the office of judge of probate, in thecounty in which he resided, which disqualified him for legislativeemployment, otherwise from his well establishedcharacter for sound understanding, solid talents, and unimpeachableintegrity, he would doubtless have been oftenselected by his fellow citizens for places of trust and importance.Stephen Longfellow, Jun. was bred to the bar, andresided in the city of Portland, now in the state of Maine.As a lawyer, he has been considered as at the head of hisprofession, for talents and integrity. He has also beenelected to the house of representatives of the UnitedStates, where his talents were fully displayed, the respectabilityof his character acknowledged, and his disinterestednessand integrity duly appreciated.Chauncey Goodrich was educated for the bar, andwas for many years a practitioner of the highest respectability,for learning, talents, and integrity. He was repeatedlya member of the legislature of Connecticut, andheld successively a seat in both of its branches. Early inlife he was several times elected a member of the houseof representatives of the United States, and subsequentlywas appointed a senator in congress. From the latterstation he was chosen Lieutenant-governor of the state —an office which he held till his death. Rarely has anyindividual passed through so many scenes in public lifewith a higher reputation, and a more unimpeachable character.Thoroughly acquainted with the public concerns,APPENDIX. 429both of the state to which he belonged, and of the UnitedStates, no statesman ever pursued with a more singleeye the interests of his country. Unshaken in his principles,cool and determined in his conduct, nothing could inducehim to deviate a hair's-breadth from the path of rectitude,or swerve in the slightest degree from the moststrict integrity of purpose. On all occasions, even duringthe highest strife of party spirit, and in the most animatingand exciting moments of debate, he never lost sightof the most rigid decorum of manners ; and his political opponentsinvoluntarily yielded him their esteem and respect.John Treadwell, in private life, was a model of personalworth, and in public, was universally esteemed forhis sound understanding, unquestionable integrity, andsterling worth. He spent a great part of his life in theservice of the public — having filled successively the placesof representative and councillor in the state legislature,and the offices of lieutenant-governor and governor ofthe state. He was also for a long period a judge of thecourt of common pleas, in the county in which he resided,and for a good many years was the presiding judge of thattribunal. In all the offices which he filled, and in all thepublic services which he performed, his life passed withouta stain. He was a whig in the revolution, a patriotof the Washington school in politics, a plain republican inhis principles and manners, conscientiously upright in allhis intercourse with his fellow men, and he possessed, inavery extensive degree, the respect and confidence of thegreat body of the community in whose service he spenthis days.James Hillhouse. Very few men in the UnitedStates have been more extensively known in public lifethan this gentleman. He was for many years a practisinglawyer of celebrity, a member of the state legislature, and430 APPENDIX.for nearly twenty years connected with the national government,either as a representative, or a senator in Congress.In both those stations his character stood high forintegrity, firmness, and independence. During the revolutionarywar he fought bravely for his country ; and inthe pursuit of peace, he was distinguished for activity, intelligence,and public spirit. Few men ever possessedgreater energy of character — no man ever excelled himin industry and perseverance, in whatever pursuit andemployment he might be engaged.Zephaniah Swift was a lawyer, distinguished forlearning and talents. For many years he was activelyand extensively engaged in the duties of his profession ;during which he was successively a member of the state legislature,speaker of the house of representatives, and arepresentative in congress. Subsequently he was a judge,and for a number of years chief judge of the supremecourt of the state, where he acquired a high reputationfor learning, talents, integrity, and independence.Nathaniel Smith was one of the most extraordinarymen of his time. With few advantages of early education,he became a student of law ; and after a regular periodof preparation was admitted to the bar. By theforce of great native powers of mind, and a most commandingforensic eloquence, he soon rose to the head ofthe profession, and was for a number of years consideredas one of the most distinguished lawyers and advocates inthe state. He was elected a member of the house ofrepresentatives of the United States ; and afterwards,for a number of years, was a judge of the supreme court ofthe state. In every situation in which he was called toact, the extraordinary talents with which he was enduedwere manifest ; whilst his whole life was marked for purityof morals, strict integrity, and a devoted attachmentAPPENDIX. 431to the interests of the state to which he belonged, and tothe welfare of the United States.Calvin Goddard was born in Massachusetts, but waseducated for the bar in Connecticut, where he first settledin the practice of law, and almost immediately rose toeminence in the profession. Possessed of distinguishedtalents, his practice soon became extensive, when at anearly period he was elected a member of the house ofrepresentatives of the United States, where he servedwith much reputation for four successive years. At theend of that time he declined a third election. Upon leavingCongress he resumed the practice of law, which he followedwith great success for a number of years. He was repeatedlyelected to the state legislature, and for a number ofyears was an active and influential member of the council,the higher branch of that body. Whilst a member ofthat house, he was appointed a judge of the supremecourt of the state, and continued on the bench until theformation of the new state constitution, when he returnedto the bar, and has been engaged till the present time inthe business of his original profession, with a high characterfor learning, talents, and integrity.Roger Minot Sherman was bred to the bar; and immediatelyupon his admission to practice became distinguishedfor abilities of a superior order. He has beenrepeatedly elected to the state legislature, and for a numberof years was a member of the council. Few men inthe profession in any part of the country have a higherreputation, or possess forensic talents of a more distinguisheddescription. Such has been his reputation forpurity of morals, strict professional and personal integrity,and for the unimpeachableness of his character, that hehas always possessed the confidence of the community,432 APPENDIX.all parties having paid him the tribute of their esteem andrespect.Daniel Lyman was a native of Connecticut. Early inthe revolutionary war he joined the army, and served tillthe establishment of independence by the peace of 1783.He rose to the rank of major, and sustained a high reputationfor military talents and bravery. After the peacehe settled in the practice of law in Rhode Island, wherehe became distinguished for integrity and talents in theprofession, and was eventually appointed Chief-justice ofthe Supreme Court of the state ; a place that he filled foranumber of years with much reputation, and to the entiresatisfaction of the community whose laws he wascalled to administer.Samuel Ward was the son of Governor Ward of RhodeIsland. He received his education at the university ofthat state ; and in the year 1774 joined the army of theUnited States, having received the commission of captainat eighteen years. In 1775 he joined General Arnold onhis expedition against Quebec, and went with him on thatmost severe and dangerous enterprize ; and after enduringhardships almost inconceivable, he arrived before Quebecin December of that year. In the subsequent attack uponthat city he was made a prisoner ; but afterwards wasexchanged, and returned to his country, and served in thearmy, having been promoted to the rank of colonel, tillpeace was restored, and our independence was acknowledged.He afterwards became engaged in trade, andvisited the East Indies and Europe.In the year 1786, Colonel Ward was elected, with ColonelBowen, a delegate to the convention, which met atAnnapolis, in Maryland, in September of that year, forthe purpose of taking into consideration the trade and commerceof the United States, and to endeavour to agree onAPPENDIX. 433some uniform system in their commercial intercourse.Colonel Ward proceeded as far as Philadelphia, where heascertained that the convention had adjourned.In private life Colonel Ward sustained a most estimablecharacter ; and as a soldier and patriot, his reputation waswithout a stain.Benjamin Hazard was a native of Rhode Island, andwas educated to the bar. In the profession, he has longranked among the most respectable practitioners in thestate for integrity aud talents. He has for many yearsbeen elected by his fellow-citizens of Newport to a seat inthe state legislature, and is justly considered as one of themost distinguished members of that body. His private worthis universally acknowledged, and he is justly consideredas one of the most respectable citizens of his native state.Edward Manton was a native of Rhode Island.He was of an unambitious disposition, and rarely ruinedin the political discussions and agitations. His principleswere sound, stable, and independent — such as were commonto the friends of the Union and Constitution of theUnited States. His character as a man and a patriotwas marked by sterling integrity, strict probity, and greatmoral worth ; and he enjoyed the respect and confidenceof the community in a degree proportioned to his modestand unobtrusive merit.Benjamin West was a native of New-hampshire, andwas bred to the bar. He practised for many years withdistinguished reputation, and was considered as at thehead of the profession in that state. His integrity wasuniversally admitted, and his talents as generally acknowledged.In his intercourse with the community he wasgreatly esteemed; and in the private relations of life hischaracter was in a high degree estimable and interesting.APPENDIX.Mills Olcott was a native of New-hampshire, anda son of the Hon. Chief-justice Olcott of that state. Heis himself a lawyer of respectable talents and character,and much esteemed for his private worth, his unimpeachableintegrity, and estimable character. It is understoodthat he has for a good many years withdrawn from politicallife, enjoying in retirement the advantages of socialintercourse, and the unobtrusive round of domestic tranquilityand happiness.William Hall, Jun. was an inhabitant of Vermont,and his business that of a merchant. In the midst of extensiveconcerns he found leisure to devote his attentionoccasionally to public affairs. He was frequently a memberof the state legislature ; and might have been much moreextensively employed in the service of his fellow citizens,if he had been disposed to pursue the life of a politician.No man ever enjoyed a reputation more entirely free fromall reproach than this gentleman. He was universallyesteemed and respected by all good men, who had the opportunityto become acquainted with his character, manners,and moral excellence.It may not be amiss to compare the conduct of the New-englandStates during the war of 1812, with that of anotherstate, at a much later period. It is well known, thata portion of the inhabitants of South Carolina were, for aconsiderable time, greatly excited on the subject of whathas been familiarly called the "tariff policy " of the nationalgovernment. That policy had for its object the encouragementand protection of domestic manufactures. For this 1purpose laws were passed laying heavy duties upon certainkinds of foreign manufactures, with the view of cna-APPENDIX. 435being American citizens to foster and support their own industry.For a number of years very little complaint ofinjustice, or even of hardship, in the operation of the system,was heard from any quarter. At length, however, itbecame the subject of clamour among politicians, who residedin those parts of the country where manufacturingis not pursued, and where, from the peculiar situation andcircumstances of the community, there is very little reasonto expect that the industry of the labouring class ofthe inhabitants will take that direction. By the unweariedefforts of some of their influential citizens, and particularlyof those whose attention was devoted to their political concerns,a great degree of warmth was enkindled, loud andthreatening complaints were uttered, the laws laying dutieson merchandise for the encouragement of Americanindustry were openly denounced as unconstitutional, andtherefore not obligatory upon the people, and threats ofopen and direct opposition to the execution of the laws alludedto were heard from every quarter. At the sametime, the constitutional authority of the national judiciaryto determine questions of this description was denied, thepower of the individual states to decide, each for itself,was avowed, and the right of seceding from the Union, asthe necessary consequence of these doctrines, was claimedand vindicated.Among the distinguished leaders in this crusade againstthe Union and constitution of the United States, was RobertY. Hayne, then a senator from South Carolina in thecongress of the United States, and now governor of thatstate. In the year 1830, and whilst he was a member ofthe senate, the celebrated debate on the nominal subjectof the public lands occurred in that body. This gentlemantook an active and decided part in that debate ; andin two successive speeches, put forth the whole strengthof his talents, and the full powers of his eloquence. Inthe course of one of those speeches he alluded, among a436 APPENDIX.multitude of other subjects, to that of the Hartford Convention; and after depicting the calamities of the country,at the time the Convention assembled, in glowing colours,he represented the conduct of the eastern states, in relationto the war, in as reprehensible a light as the force oflanguage would enable him. For the facts to support hisstatements, he relied principally upon a book entitled*' The Olive Branch" published at a time not far distantfrom the meeting of the Convention — a work of almostall others intended to subserve party purposes, the leastentitled to credit. On such an authority, he proceeded in astrain of great vehemence to make the following remarks :As soon as the public mind was sufficiently preparedfor the measure, the celebrated Hartford Convention wasgot up ; not as the act of a few unauthorized individuals,but by authority of the legislature of Massachusetts; andas has been shown by the able historian of that Convention,in accordance with the views and wishes of the partyof which it was the organ. Now, sir, I do not desire tocall in question the motives of the gentlemen who composedthat assembly ; I knew many of them to be in private lifeaccomplished and honourable men, and I doubt not therewere some among them who did not perceive the dangeroustendency of their proceedings. I will even go further,and say, that if the authors of the Hartford Conventionbelieved, that ' gross, deliberate, and palpable violationsof the constitution' had taken place, utterly destructive oftheir rights and interests, I should be the last man to denytheir right to resort to any constitutional measures for redress.But, sir, in any view of the case, the time when,ad the circumstances under which that Convention assembled,as well as the measures recommended, rendertheir conduct, in my opinion, wholly indefensible.Let us contemplate, for a moment, the spectacle thenexhibited to the view of the world. I will not go over thedisasters of the war, nor describe the difficulties in whichAPPENDIX. 43?the government was involved. It will be recollected, thatits credit was nearly gone, Washington had fallen, thewhole coast was blockaded, and an immense force collectedin the West Indies, was about to make a descent, whichit was supposed we had no means of resisting. In thisawful state of our public affairs, v/hen the governmentseemed to be almost tottering on its base, when GreatBritain, relieved from all her other enemies, had proclaimedher purpose of 'reducing us to unconditional submission'— we beheld the peace party in New-england (in thelanguage of the work [The Olive Branch] before us)pursuing a course calculated to do more injury to theircountry, and to render England more effective servicethan all her armies. Those who could not find it in theirhearts to rejoice at our victories, sang ' Te Den' at theKing's chapel in Boston at the restoration of the Bourbons.Those who would not consent to illuminate theirdwellings for the capture of the Guerriere, could give visibletokens of their joy at the fill of Detroit. The ' beaconfires' of their hills were lighted up, not for the encouragementof their friends, but as signals to the enemy;and in the gloomy hours of midnight the very lights burnedblue. Such were the dark and portentous signs of thetimes which ushered into being the renowned HartfordConvention. That Convention met, and from their proceedingsit appears that their chief object was to keepback the men and money of New-england from the serviceof the Union, and to effect radical changes in the government— changes that can never be effected without adissolution of the Union."In adverting to Mr. ITayne's speech on this occasion,the object has not been to examine into the justice of hisremarks, the correctness of his statements, or the soundnessof his conclusions. The subject has been noticed foravery different purpose. It is to give that gentleman, andthe state of South Carolina, an opportunity to view themesAPPENDIX.selves in their own mirror. The ground on which theHartford Convention stood, is to be foinid in the precedingpages of this work. If the facts and evidence which havebeen adduced do not justify the Ive-England States inconvening that assembly, and in the fullest manner warranttheir proceedings, and the result of their deliberationsand labours, they will doubtless be condemned. But if,in any of these particulars, they suffer in a comparison withthe state of South Carolina, in the measures more recentlyadopted by the latter in opposition to the laws of the UnitedStates, it will certainly excite no small degree of surprise.In South Carolina, though for a few years past, therehave been great complaints of oppression arising from theoperation of the revenue laws of the United States, yet theactual degree of suffering could not be easily and preciselyascertained. The real ground of complaint appeared tobe against the acts of Congress laying what are called protectiveduties ujjon foreign merchandise, for the purposeof encouraging and protecting domestic manufactures.The constitutional authority to lay duties of this descriptionwas denied by the politicians of that state; and havingfailed after various attempts in Congress to obtaina repeal of those acts, the state determined to take thematter into their own hands, and force the national governmentto yield to their demands, or to secede from theUnion, and establish an independent government. Accordinglythe legislature of the state passed an act, callingupon the people to elect delegates to a Convention, to takethe subject into consideration, and provide a remedy forthe (evils which they experienced. Under the authorityof this act delegates were chosen, and the Conventionassembled ; and after due deliberation, they adopted thefollowing ordinance : —An ordinance to nullify certain acts of the Congressof the United States, purporting to be the laws laying dutiesand imposts on the importation of foreign commodities.APPENDIX. ' 439Whereas the Congress of the United States, by variousacts purporting to be acts laying duties and impostson foreign imports, hut in reality intended for the protectionof domestic manufactures, and the giving of bountiesto classes and individuals engaged in particular employment,at the expense and to the injury and oppression ofother classes and individuals, and by wholly exemptingfrom taxation certain foreign commodities, such as are notproduced or manufactured in the United States, to afforda pretext for imposing higher and excessive duties on articlessimilar to those incited to be protected, hath exceededits just powers under the constitution, which conferson it no authority to afford such protection, and hathviolated the true meaning and intent of the constitution,which provides for equality in imposing the burdens of taxationupon the several states and portions of the confederacy.And whereas the said Congress, exceeding its justpower to impose taxes and collect revenue for the purposeof effecting and accomplishing, hath raised and collectedunnecessary revenues, for objects unauthorised by the constitution.We, therefore, the people of the State of South Carolinain convention assembled, do declare and ordain, and itis hereby declared and ordained, that the several acts andparts ofactsofthe Congress of the United States, purportingto be laws for the imposing of duties and imposts on the importationsof the United States, and more especially anact entitled 'An act in alteration of the several acts imposingduties on imports,' approved on the nineteenth dayof May, one thousand eight hundred and twenty-eight,and also an act entitled 'an act to alter and amend theseveral acts imposing duties on imports,' approved on thefourteenth day of July, one thousand eight hundred andthirty-two, are unauthorised by the constitution of theUnited States, and violate the true meaning thereof, andare null and void, and no law, not binding upon this state,440 APPENDIX.its officers or citizens; and all promises, contracts, andobligations, made or entered into, with the purpose to securethe duties imposed by said acts, and all judicial proceedingswhich shall be hereafter had in affirmance thereof,are, and shall be, held utterly null and void."And it is further ordained, that it shall not be lawfulfor any of the constituted authorities, whether of this stateor of the United States, to enforce the payment of dutiesimposed by the said acts within the limits of this state ;but that it shall be the duty of the legislature to adoptsuch acts as may be necessary to give full effect to thisordinance, and to prevent the enforcement and arrest theoperation of the said acts and parts of acts of the Congressof the United States within the limits of this state,from and after the first day of February next, and the dutyof all other constituted authorities, and of all persons residingor being within the limits of this state, and they arehereby required and enjoined to obey and give effect to thisordinance, and such acts and measures of the legislatureas may be passed or adopted in obedience thereto."And it is further ordained, that in no case of law orequity, decided in the courts of this state, wherein shallbe drawn in question the authority of this ordinance, orthe validity of such act or acts of the legislature as may bepassed for the purpose of giving effect thereto, or the validityof the aforesaid acts of Congress, imposing duties,shall any appeal be taken, or allowed, to the SupremeCourt of the United States, nor shall any copy of the recordbe permitted or allowed for that purpose; and if anysuch appeal shall be attempted to be taken, the courts ofthis state shall proceed to execute and enforce their judgments,according to the laws and usages of the state,without reference to such attempted appeal ; and the personsattempting to take such appeal may be dealt with foracontempt of the court.*' And be it further enacted, that all persons now hold-appendix.441ing any office of honor, profit, or trust, civil or military,under this state, shall within such time as the legislaturemay prescribe, take, in such manner as the legislaturemay direct, an oath well and truly to obey, execute, andenforce this ordinance, and such act or acts of the legislatureas may be passed in pursuance thereof, according tothe true intent and meaning of the same; and on the neglector omission of any such person or persons so to do,his or their office or offices shall be forthwith vacated, andshall be filled up, as if such person or persons were dead,or had resigned ; and no person hereafter elected to anyoffice of honour, profit, or trust, civil or military, shall, untilthe legislature shall otherwise provide and direct, enteron the execution of his office, or be in any respect competentto discharge the duties thereof, until he shall in likemanner have taken a similar oath; and no juror shall bechannelled in any of the courts of this state, in any causein which shall be in question this ordinance, or any act ofthe legislature passed in pursuance thereof, unless he shallfirst, in addition to the usual oath, have taken an oaththat he will well and truly obey, execute, and enforce thisordinance, and such act or acts of the legislature as maybepassed to carry the same into operation and effect, accordingto the true intent and meaning thereof.And we, the people of South Carolina, to the end thatit may be fully understood by the government of the UnitedStates, and the people of the co-states, that we aredetermined to maintain this, our ordinance and declaration,at every hazard, do further declare that we will notsubmit to the application of force, on the part of the federalgovernment, to reduce this state to obedience; but thatwe will consider the passage by Congress of any act authorisingthe employment of any military or naval forceagainst the state of South Carolina, her constituted authoritiesor citizens, or any act abolishing or closing theports of this state, or any of them, or otherwise obstructsAPPENDIX.ing the free ingress and egress of vessels to and from thesaid [ports ; or any other act on the part of the federalgovernment to coerce the state, shut up her ports, destroyher commerce, or to enforce the acts hereby declared tobe null and void, otherwise than through the civil tribunalsof the country, as inconsistent with the longer continuanceof South Carolina in the Union : and that thepeople of this state will thenceforth hold themselves absolvedfrom all further obligation to maintain or preservetheir political connection with the people of other states,and will forthwith proceed to organize a separate government,and do all other acts and things which sovereignand independent states may of right do."Mr. Hayne found himself under the necessity of makinga concession in his speech, in favour of the New EnglandStates, in consequence of the general principles whichhe maintained, and the course that the state to which hebelonged were about to pursue. " If," said he, " the authorsof the Hartford Convention believed that 'gross, deliberate,and palpable violations of the constitution' hadtaken place, utterly destructive of their rights and interests,I should be the last man to deny their right to resortto any constitutional measures for redress." The authorsof the Hartford Convention not only believed, but theyhad positive and undeniable proof, that such violations ofthe constitution had in fact taken place. The evidenceof this is contained in the body of this work. The Presidentof the United States violated the constitutional rightsand privileges of the New England States, in demandingdetachments of their militia, to be placed under the commandof United States officers — in attempting to raisetroops from the militia by a conscription, and seamen byimpressment — and to enlist minors without the consent oftheir parents, guardians, and masters. These are plain,specific cases — they were "gross, deliberate, and palpable"— and they were calculated utterly to destroy theAPPENDIX. 443rights against which they were directed. The argumentthen is finished, as far as that statement is concerned.But this is not the principal object to be accomplishedill adverting to the case of South Carolina. The designis to compare the conduct of that state, in the year 1832,with that of the New England States, in the year 1814.The New England States "believed" that the nationalgovernment had not only violated the constitution, in theseveral particulars above-mentioned, but they had, bytheir mode of carrying on the war, thrown upon thosestates the necessity of defending their coast, their towns,and their families, against the hostile visits and invasionsof the enemy, and at the same time refused to furnishthem with either men or money for their own protection.From the commencement of hostilities, those states hadbeen informed that they must defend themselves — and thishad been repeated from time to time, until, in the languageof Mr. Hayne, " the credit of the government was nearlygone, Washington had fallen, the whole coast was blockaded,and an immense force, collected in the West Indies,was about to make a descent, which it was supposed wehad no means of resisting." This was a state of things asfully understood and realized in New England, in the autumnof 1814, as it was by Mr. Hayne when this speechwas delivered in the Senate, in 1830. They had sevenhundred miles of sea-coast to defend, with no other meansthan those which they were able themselves to furnish;and even of those, the national government, by the mostunconstitutional and despotic measures, were endeavouringto deprive them. Under sucji circumstances, the HartfordConvention was appointed, and instructed to deviseand recommend the best means in their power of preservingtheir resources, to enable the states to fulfil the taskwhich the national government had imposed upon them,but, to let every thing be done in a manner consistent withtheir duties and obligations to the United States. And the444 APPENDIX.most important measure recommended by the Conventionwas, that the New England States, thus deserted andabandoned by the government of the United States, shouldmake application to Congress, for permission to use theirown men, and their own money, in defence of their ownterritory — their towns, their property, and their fire-sides,against the invasions of the enemy. " Their chief object,"says Mr. Hayne, " was to keep back the men and themoney of New England from the service of the Union.The history of the case proves incontestably, that this wasan unfounded assertion. " Their chief object was," to employtheir men and their money in the service of the UnitedStates — for it was the duty of the United States toprovide both men and money, for the defence of the statesagainst the enemy which they had brought upon them."But," says Mr. Hayne, " the tinije when, and the circumstancesunder which, that Convention assembled, aswell as the measures they recommended, render their conductwholly indefeasible." This is seriously narrowing theground of complaint against the Convention, yielding theright, at least by necessary implication, and objecting onlyto the expediency of the time when they were convened.But so far from this being a well founded objection againstcalling the Convention, it was the time, and the circumstances,which not only justified the measure, but whichrendered it indispensably necessary. The danger whichhung over the states was immediate; and the circumstanceswere of so threatening and alarming a character,that preparation to ward ofl' that danger could not safelybe postponed for a single day. And such was the importof the language used by the administration, in all the callsthey made upon the New England States, to provide themeans for their own defence.But what says the " Ordinance" of the South CarolinaConvention ? That document declares the laws of Congresstherein referred to, and which arc commonly calledIAPPENDIX. 445the tariff laws, null and did, and not binding upon the peopleof that state — it declares all promises, contracts, andobligations, for the securing of the duties imposed by thoselaws, and all judicial proceedings in affirmance of suchpromises, contracts, and obligations, also null and void —that it shall not be lawful for the constituted authorities ofSouth Carolina, or of the United States, to enforce thepayment of such duties within that state, but it shall betheduty of the legislature to adopt measures for preventingthe collection of the duties, and to arrest the operationof the acts of Congress within that state, and all the authoritiesand all the people are enjoined to obey and giveeffect to the Ordinance. It then proceeds to declare, thatthe validity of the Ordinance shall not be drawn in questionin any court in the state, that no appeal shall be allowedfrom the stale court to the Supreme Court of theUnited States, that no copy of the record of the statecourt shall be allowed to be taken for the purposes of anappeal ; and if any attempt to appeal should be made, thestate court should proceed to execute their own judgmentswithout regard to such appeal, and the person attemptingto take it should be punishable for a contempt of court.The Ordinance advances still further, and declares, thatall officers, civil and military, shall take an oath to obeythe Ordinance, and for omitting to do so, their offices shallbe vacated, and filled anew, as in the case of death or resignation; and no juror shall be channelled, in any causein which the Ordinance shall be drawn into question, withouthaving first taken an oath to obey and enforce theOrdinance. And, finally, it is declared, that the state willnot submit to the application of force, on the part of theUnited States, to reduce them to obedience ; but if Congressshould undertake to employ military or naval forceagainst them, to shut up their ports, destroy their commerce,or resort to any other means of enforcing the lawswhich the Ordinance orders to be null and void, other than446 APPENDIX.through the civil tribunals of the country, such a coursewill render the longer continuance of South Carolina inthe Union inconsistent, and that they will thenceforth holdthemselves absolved from all further connection with theother states, and will proceed to organize a separate independentgovernment.This is the case of South Carolina, placed in contrastwith that of the New England States. The documentwhich contains these provisions, was prepared under theeye, if not by the hand of the same Mr. Hayne, who pronouncedthe conduct of the authors of the Hartford Convention" utterly indefensible." This declaration referredto the time when, and the circumstances under which, theHartford Convention assembled. That time, and thosecircumstances, have been repeatedly alluded to and describedin the course of this work. They were alarmingand portentous, fraught with danger and distress to thecountry, and foreboding ruin to the Union and Constitution.Far different were the times and the circumstances whenthe South Carolina Convention passed their ordinance.Their time was a time of peace and prosperity. The countrywas pressed by no enemy from without, and by no tumultor insurrection within. Agriculture, commerce, andmanufactures, were flourishing beyond all former example,and the country was advancing in numbers, wealth,and power, in a degree surprising to ourselves, and astonishingto all other nations. If there is any peculiar meriton the part of South Carolina, in choosing this halcyonperiod, for making such arrogant claims, and for throwingthe Union into a state of discord, fermentation, and animosity,when all things else were at peace, it would notbe anii^s if those grounds were more explicitly stated. Atpresent, they will be disallowed by every virtuous, intelligent,and patriotic mind. The Hartford Convention recommendedno measure which had the slightest tendencyto prostrate the national constitution, or to destroy the^ RD-94APPENDIX. 447Union. Every sentiment expressed in the South Carolinaordinance was hostile to the constitution, and every measureproposed or adopted, was calculated to dissolve theUnion. The propositions of the Hartford Convention,were to obtain the consent and approbation of the generalgovernment to their principal measures; the SouthCarolina ordinance denied the authority of that governmentto controul them in the case about which they complained,and defied their power to execute their laws.The Hartford Convention recommended an application toCongress for permission to raise troops for the defence oftheir coasts ; the South Carolina ordinance provided forthe raising of a body of men to oppose by force of arms theexecution of the laws of Congress, and to raise the standardof rebellion against the government of the nation.If Mr. Hayne thought the conduct of the authors of theHartford Convention " utterly indefensible," what musthe think of the authors of the South Carolina Ordinance?About the facts in the two cases there is no room for dispute.The conclusions which those facts will fairly warrant,will be drawn by the community.ERRATA.The reader is requested to correct the following errors in the foregoing paget.Page 28, line 14 from the top, read king instead of kings.32, line 8 from the bottom, read strain instead of train.46, line 9 from the top, read 1804 instead of 1801.126, line 19 from the top, after the word France, the words teas conducted are omitted.166, line 7 from the top, instead of " is," after " underscored," read contain.218, line 4 from the top, omit the words " and," to the end of the line.219, line 14 from the top, insert at the beginning of the sentence, /t required »oimiassurance.221, line 4 from the top, read have been stated.225, line 2 from the top, read definitive instead of definite.302, line 8 from the bottom, read hostilities having been comraoDcedi.361, line 17 from the bottom, read with th* respect.