H E L- E N,A TALE.BYMARIA EDGEWORTH,IN THREE VOLUMES.VOL III.LONDON:RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET.1834.1^,ENGLISH SCHOOLUBRARV^OXFORD.9H E L E N.CHAPTER I.The overwrought state of Helen'^s feelingswas relieved by a walk with Beauclerc, notin the dressed part of the park, but in whatwas generally undiscovered country : a dingle,a bosky dell, which he had found out in hisrambles, and which, though so little distantfrom the busy hum of men, had a wonderfulair of romantic seclusion and stillness — thestillness of evening. It was a fine. evening,though it was in the very end of autumn : thesun had not set ; its rich, red light yet lingeredon the still remaining autumn tints upon thetrees. The birds hopped fearlessly from boughto bough, as if this sweet spot were all theirown. The cattle were quietly grazing blow,or slowly winding their way to the watering-place.VOL. HI. B//2 HELEN.By degrees, the sounds of evening faded 'away upon the ear; a faint chirrup here andthere from the few birds not yet gone to roost,and now only the humming of the flies overthe water, were to be heard.It was perfect repose, and Beauclerc andHelen sat down on the bank to enjoy it together.The sympathy of the woman he loved,especially in his enjoyment of the beauties ofnature, was to Beauclerc an absolute necessaryof life. Nor would he have been contentedwith that show taste for the picturesque, whichis, as he knew, merely one of a modern younglady's many accomplishments. Helenass tastewas natural, and he was glad to feel it so true,and for him here alone expressed with suchpeculiar heightened feeling, as if she had in allnature now a new sense of delight.He had brought her here, in hopes that shewould be struck with this spot, not only becauseit was beautiful in itself and his discovery,but because it was like another bushydell and bosky bourne, of which he had beenfrom childhood fond, in another place, of whichhe hoped she would soon be mistress. ^^ Soon !IHELEN. 3very soon, Helen !^ he repeated, in a tonewhich could not be heard by her with indifference.He said that some of his friends in Londontold him that the report of their intendedunion had been spread everywhere — (by LadyKatrine Hawksbyby probably, as Cecilia, whenLady Castlefort departed, had confided to her,to settle her mind about Beauclerc, that he wascoming over as Miss Stanley's acknowledgedlover). And since the report had been sospread, the sooner the marriage took place thebetter ; at least, it was a plea which Beauclercfailed not to urge, and Helen's delicacy failednot to feel.She sighed — she smiled. The day wasnamed, and, the moment she consented to behis, nothing could be thought of but him.Yet, even while he poured out all his soul —while he enjoyed the satisfaction there is inperfect unreservedness of confidence, Helenfelt a pang mix with her pleasure. She feltthere was one thing she could not tell him : hewho had told her everything — all his faultsand follies. " Oh ! why'' thought she, " whyb27 Helenscannot I tell him everything? I, who have nosecrets of my own — why should I be forced tokeep the secrets of another ?"In confusion, scarcely finished, these ideascame across her mind, and she sighed deeply.Beauclerc asked why, and she could not tellhim ! She was silent ; and he did not reiteratethe indiscreet question. He was sure shethought of Lady Davenant ; and he now spokeof the regret he felt that she could not bepresent at their marriage, and Lord Davenanttoo ! Beauclerc said he had hoped that LordDavenant, who loved Helen as if she were hisown daughter, would have been the person toact as her father at the ceremony. But theGeneral, his friend and her's, would now,Beauclerc said, give her to him, and would,he was sure, take pleasure in thus publiclymarking his approbation of his ward'schoice.They rose, and going on down the path tothe rivers side, they reached a little covewhere he had moored his boat, and they returnedhome by water — the moon just visible,the air so still ; all so placid, so delightful —HELEN. 5and Beauclerc so happy, that she could notbut be happy ; yes — quite happy too.They reached the shore just as the lampswere lighting in the house. As they went in,they met the General, who said, ** In goodtime;" and he smiled on Helen as she passed.** It is all settled'' whispered Beauclerc tohim ; " and you are to give her away''With pleasure," said the General.As Helen went up-stairs, she said to herself,^^ I understand the General's smile ; he thinksI have followed his advice; he thinks I havetold all — and I — I can only be silent."There was a great dinner-party, but theGeneral, not thinking Cecilia quite equal to it,had engaged Mrs. Holdernesse, a relation ofhis own, to do the honours of the day.Lady Cecilia came into the drawing-roomin the evening, but, after paying her complimentsto the company, she gladly followedthe General's advice, and retired to the music-room;Helen went with her, and Beauclercfollowed; Lady Cecilia sat down to play atecarte with him, and Helen tuned her harp.The General came in for a few minutes, he6 HELEN.said, to escape from two young ladies who hadhalf talked him dead about craniology. Hestood leaning on the mantelpiece, and lookingover the game.Lady Cecilia wanted counters, and shebegged Beauclerc to look for some which shebelieved he would find in the drawer of atable that was behind him. Beauclerc openedthe drawer, but no sooner had he done so, than,in admiration of something he discovered there,he exclaimed, *^ Beautiful ! beautiful ! and howlike!"It was the miniature of Helen, and, besidesthe miniature, further back in the drawer.Lady Cecilia saw— how quick is the eye ofguilty fear ! — could it be ? — yes — one ofthe fatal letters — the letter ! Nothing butthe picture had yet been seen by the Generalor by Beauclerc : Lady Cecilia stretched behindher husband, whose eyes were upon the miniature,and closed the drawer. It was allshe could do, it was impossible for her toreach the letter.Beauclerc, holding the picture to the light.HELEN. 7repeated, ** Beautiful ! who did it ? whom is itfor ? General, look ! do you know it ?^Yes, to be sure," replied the General;Miss Stanley''You have seen it before ?^Yes," said the General coldly.It is very like, who did it ?*"I did it** cried Lady Cecilia, who nowrecovered her voice.'* You, my dear Lady Cecilia ! whom for ?for me ? is it for me ?"For you ? It may be, hereafter, perhaps*"** Oh thank you, my dear Lady Cecilia !''cried Beauclerc.If you behave well, perhaps'' added she.The General heard in his wife's tremuloustone, and saw in her half confusion, half attemptat playfulness, only an amiable anxietyto save her friend, and to give her time torecover from her dismay. He at once perceivedthat Helen had not followed the coursehe had suggested ; that she had not told Beauclerc,and did not intend that he should betold the whole truth. The General looked8 HELEN.extremely grave; Beauclerc gave a glanceround the room.Here is some mystery' said he, now firstseeing Helen's disconcerted countenance. Thenhe turned on the General a look of eagerinquiry. " Some mystery, certainly ,** saidhe, ^^with which I am not to be made acquainted?"*"*If there be any mystery," said the General,*•* with which you are not to be made acquainted,I am neither the adviser nor abettor.Neither in jest nor earnest am I ever anadviser of mystery''While her husband thus spoke* Lady Ceciliamade another attempt to possess herselfof the letter. This time she rose decidedly,and, putting aside the little ecarte table whichwas in her way, pressed forward to the drawer,saying something about '^ counters'' Hercashmere caught on Helen's harp, and, in hereager spring forward, it would have beenoverset, but that the General felt, turned, andcaught it.'* What are you about, my dear Cecilia ?what do you want ?"HELEN. 9Nothing, nothing, thank you, my dear ;nothing now''Then she did not dare to open the drawer,or to let him open it, and anxiously drew awayhis attention by pointing to a footstool whichshe seemed to want.^^ Gould not you ask me for it, my dear,without disturbing yourself? What are menmade for P''Beauclerc, after a sort of absent effort tojoin in quest of the footstool, had returnedeagerly to the picture, and looking at it moreclosely, he saw the letters C. D. written insmall characters in one comer ; and, just as hiseye turned to the other corner. Lady Cecilia,recollecting what initials were there, startedup and snatched it from his hand.Oh, Granville l"^ cried she, " you must notlook at this picture any more, till I have donesomething to it''Beauclerc was trying to catch another lookat it, when Cecilia cried out,Take it, Helen ! take it !" and she held itup on high, but as she held it, though sheB 510 HELEN.turned the face from him, she forgot, quiteforgot that Colonel D'Aubigny had written hisname on the back of the picture ; and thereit was in distinct characters such as couldbe plainly read at that height, " For HenryD'Aubigny.'' Beauclerc saw and gave oneglance at Helen. He made no further attemptto reach the picture.Lady Cecilia, not aware of what he had seen,repeated,Helen ! Helen ! why don't you take it ?snow ! now V*Helen could not stir. The General took thepicture from his wife's hand, gave it to MissStanley, without looking at her, and said toLady Cecilia,Pray keep yourself quiet, Cecilia. Youhave done enough, too much, to-day; sitdown'' said he, rolling her arm-chair close, andseating her. " Keep yourself quiet, I beg*"I beg," in the tone of " I insist."She sat down, but catching a view ofBeauclerc was alarmed by his aspect — andHelen! her head was bent down behind theharp. Lady Cecilia did not know yet dis-helen.11tinct what had happened. The Generalpressed her to lean back on the cushions whichhe was piling up behind her. Beauclerc madea step towards Helen, but, checking himself, heturned to the ecarte table.Those counters, after all, that we werelooking for ^"As he spoke he pulled open the drawer.The General with his back to him was standingbefore Lady Cecilia, she could not see whatBeauclerc was doing, but she heard the draweropen, and cried out,*^ Not there, Beauclerc ; no counters there —you need not look there."But before she spoke, he had given asudden pull to the drawer, which brought itquite out, and all the contents fell upon thefloor, and there was the fatal letter, open, andthe words " My dear too dear Henry'' instantlymet his eyes ; he looked no farther, but inthat single glance the writing seemed to himto be Lady Cecilia and quick his eye turnedupon her. She kept perfectly quiet, andappeared to him perfectly composed. His eyethen darted in search of Helen ; she had sunkIS HELEN.upon a seat behind the harp. lYirough theharp strings he caught a glimpse of her face,all pale*— crimsoned it grew as he advanced:she rose instantly, took up the letter, and,without speaking or looking at any one, toreit to pieces.Beauclerc stood in motionless astonishment.Lady Cecilia breathed again. The General'scountenance expressed ^^ I interfere no farther.'' He left the room, and Beauclerc, withoutanother look at Helen, followed him.For some moments after Lady Cecilia andHelen were left alone, there was a dead silence.Lady Cecilia sat with her eyes fixed upon thedoor through which her husband and Beauclerchad passed. She thought that Beauclercmight return; but when she found that hedid not, she went to Helen, who had coveredher face with her hands.^^My dearest friends said Lady Cecilia,"thank you! thank you! — you did the bestthat was possible !^'** O Cecilia'' exclaimed Helen, "to whathave you exposed me ?^How did it all happen !^ continued Cecilia.«#1HELEN. 18Why was not that letter burnt with the rest ?How came it there ? Can you tell me ?''^^ I do not knows said Helen, ^^ I cannotrecollects But after some effort, she rememberedthat in the morning, while the Generalhad been talking to her, she had in her confusion,when she took the packet, laid the pictureand that letter beside her on the arm of thechair. She had, in her hurry of putting theother letters into her bag, forgotten this andthe picture, and she supposed that they hadfallen between the chair and the wall, and thatthey had been found and put into the table-drawerby one of the servants.Helen was hastening out of the room, Ceciliadetained her.Do not go, my dear, for that would lookas if you were guilty, and you know you areinnocent. At the first sound of your harpBeauclerc will return — only command yourselffor one hour or twos*'Yes, it will only be for an hour or two"'said Helen brightening with hope. " Youwill tell the General to-night. Do you thinkGranville will come back ? Where is the harpI4f HELEN.key ? — I dropped it — there it is*" She began totune the harp.Crack went one string— then another.« That is lucky," said Lady Cecilia, " itwill give you something to do, my love, if thepeople come in.**'THb Aide-de-camp entered. ^^ I thought Iheard harp-strings going"" said he."Several! — yes," said Lady Cecilia, standingfull in his way.^^ Inauspicious sounds for us ! bad omensfor my embassy. — Mrs. Hpldemesse sent me"'I know"" said Lady Cecilia, " and you willhave the goodness to tell her that Miss Stanley'sharp is unstrung""Can I be of any use. Miss Stanley ?"" saidhe, moving towards the harp.** No, no'" cried Lady Cecilia, " you are inmy service, — attend to me"*Dear me. Lady Cecilia ! I did not hearwhat you said*"That is what I complain of— hear menow""aI am all attention, I am sure. What areyour commands ?""IIHELEN. 15She gave him as many as his head couldhold. A long message to Mrs. Holdernesse,and to Miss Holdernesse and Miss Anna abouttheir music-books, which had been left in thecarriage, and were to be sent for, and duetsto be played, and glees, for the Major andLady Anne Ruthven.^^ Good Heavens ! I cannot remember anymore** cried the Aide-de-camp.^^ Then go off, and say and do all thatbefore you come back against said Lady Cecilia.What amazing presence of mind youhaven't said Helen. " How can you say somuch, and think of everything ?"The Aide-de-camp performed all her beheststo admiration, and was rewarded by promotionto the high office of turner-over general of theleaves of the music books, an office requiring,as her ladyship remarked to Miss Holdernesse,prompt eye and ear, and all his distinguishedgallantry. By such compliments she fixed himto the piano-forte, while his curiosity and allhis feelings, being subordinate to his vanity,were prevented from straying to Miss Stanleymmmmmifi• I '^^16 HELEN.and her harp-stringing, a work still doing —still to do.All the arrangement succeeded as LadyCecilia^s^s arrangements usually did. Helenheard the eternal buzz of conversation and theclang of instruments, and then the harmonyof music, all as in a dram, or as at thetheatre, when the thoughts are absent or thefeelings preoccupied ; and in this dreamy stateshe performed the operation of putting inthe harp-strings quite well : and when she wasat last called upon by Cecilia, who gave herdue notice and time, she sat and played automatically,without soul or spirit — but so do somany others. It passed " charmingly,'^ till adoor softly opened behind her, and she saw theshadow on the wall, and some one stood, andpassed from behind her. There was an end ofher playing; however, from her just dread ofmaking a scene, she commanded herself sopowerfully, thats, except her timidity, nothingwas observed by the company, and that timiditywas pitied by the good natured Mrs. Holewho said to her daughter, *^ Anne,we must not press Miss Stanley any more;,HELEN. 17she, who is always so obliging, is tired noweShe then made way for Helen to pass, who,thanking her with such a look as might begiven for a life saved, quitted the harp, andthe crowd, closing behind her, happily thoughtof her no more. She retreated to the darkestpart of the room, and sat down. She did notdare to look towards what she most wished tosee. Her eyes were fixed upon the face of theyoung lady singing, and yet she saw not onefeature of that face, while she knew, withoutlooking, or seeming to look, exactly whereBeauclerc stood. He had stationed himself inadoorway into the drawing-room ; there, leaningback against the wall, he stood, and neverstirred. Helen was so anxious to get one clearview of the expression of his countenance, thatat last she ventured to move a little, and frombehind the broad back of a great man she looked: Beauclerc's eyes met her's. How differentfrom their expression when they were sitting onthe bank together but a few short hours before !He left the doorway instantly and placed himselfwhere Helen could see him no more.Of all the rest of what passed this evening18 HELEN.she knew nothing ; she felt only a sort of astonishmentat everybody's gaiety, and a sense ofthe time being intolerably long. She thoughtthat aU these people never would go away —that their carriages never would be announced.But before it came to that time, General Clarendoninsisted upon Lady Cecilia'^s retiring.I must** said he, " play the tyrant, Cecilia ;you have done too much to-day — Mrs. Holdernesseshall hold your place."He carried Cecilia off, and Helen thought,or fancied, that he looked about for her. Oldto escape, she followed close behind. TheGeneral did not offer his arm, or appear to noticeher. When she came to the door leadingto the staircase, there was Beauclerc, standingwith folded arms, as in the music-room: hejust bowed his head, and wished Lady Ceciliaa good night, and waited, without a word, forHelen to pass, or not to pass, as she thoughtfit. She saw by his look that he expectedexplanation ; but, till she knew what Ceciliameant to do, how could she explain ? To saynothing — to bear to be suspected,— was all shecould do, without betraying her friend. ThatHELEN. 19word betray — that thought ruled her. Shepassed him : *^ Good Night's she could not thensay. He bowed as she passed, and she heardno " Good Night ^ — ^no sound. And there wasthe General in the hall to be passed also,before she could reach the staircase up whichGedlia was going. When he saw Helen, witha look of surprise — as it seemed to her, of disapprovingsurprise — he said, " Are you gone,Miss Stanley rThe look, the tone, struck cold to her heart.He continued — " Though I drove Ceciliaaway, I did not mean to drive you away too.It is early*"** Is it ? I thought it was very later*'No — and if you can I hope you willreturned*' There was meaning in his eye, whichshe well understood.Thank you,^ said she ; " if I can, certainly''I hope you can and wills** Oh ! thank you ; but I must first ''see Cecilia, she was going to say, but, afraid ofimplicating her, she changed the sentence to —I must first consider *"I20 Helen.Consider ! what the devil T thought he,and his countenance was instantly angrilysuited to the thought.Helen hesitated.Do not let me detain — distress you farther,Miss Stanley, unavailingly ; and since Ishall not have the pleasure of seeing you againthis evenings concluded he, in a constrainedvoice, ^' I have the honour to wish you a goodnight."He returned to the music-room.HELEN. 21CHAPTER II.Helen instantly went to Cecilia's room ;Felicie was. with her. Helen expected LadyCedOia would dismiss her instantly ; but Mademoisellewas chattering. Helen had sometimesthought Cecilia let her talk too much, but tonightit was insufferable. Helen was too impatient,too anxious, to bear it. ^' Cecilia, mydear, I want to speak to you alone, as soon asyou can, in my own room**As soon as possible Cecilia answered inaVoice not natural. And she came, but notas soon as possible — shut the door behind her,shewing that she had not dismissed Felicie,and, with hair dishevelled, as if hastening backto her room, said, ^^ I am in a hurry ; theGeneral ordered me to make haste, and not tobe an hour undressingI will not keep you a moments saidV22 HELEN.Helen. " I am in as great a hurry as you canbe. Beauclerc is waiting for me''Waiting for you at this time of night !Oh ! my dear, he cannot be standing there withhis arras folded all this time''Helen repeated what the General had said,and ended with, " I am determined to return."No, no," Lady Cecilia said. The Generalcould not advise her going back at this time ofnight. And with rapidity and confusion, shepoured out a multitude of dissuasive arguments,some contradicting the others.** At this time of night ! The world is notgone, and Beauclerc is in the midst of themby this time, you may be sure. You don'tthink he is standing alone there all this time.You could not speak to him before all theworld — don't attempt it. You would onlyexpose yourself. You would make a sceneat last — indo all, and come to disgrace, andruin me and yourself. I know you would,Helen. And if you were to send for him —into the library— alone ! the servants wouldknow it — and the company gone ! And afterHELEN. Sall,for you my dear, to make the first advanceto reconciliation! If he is angry— Idon't think that would be quite — dignified;quite like you, Helen'"^^ The General thinks it right, and I amsure he would not advise any thing improperundignified. It does not signify, Cecilia,I am determined — I will go.'*'' Trembling,she grew absolutely desperate from fear.I am afraid you have forgot your promise,Cecilia ; you said that if I could bear it for onehour, it would be over. Did not you promiseme that, if any difficulty came between meand — '^ She stopped short. She had feltindignant ; bu when she looked at Cecilia, andsaw her tears, she could not go on.'' Oh, Helen r cried Cecilia, " I do not askyou to pity me. You cannot know what Isuffer — you are innocent — and I have done sowrong ! You cannot pity me'*I do, I dos cried Helen, " from the bottomof my heart. Only trust me, dear Cecilia ;let me go down ^"Lady Cecilia sprang between her and thet34 HELEN.door. *^ Hear me I hear me, Helen ! Do notgo to-night, and, cost what it will — cost mewhat it may, since it has come to this betweenyou, I will confess all this night — - 1 will tellall to the General, and clear you with himand with Granville. What more can you ask ?-— what more can I do, Helen ? And willyou go ?*"No, no, my dear Cecilia. Since you promiseme this, I will not go nowe*^ Be satisfied then, and rest — for me thereis no rest*" so saying, Cecilia slowly left theroom.Helen could not sleep — this was the secondwretched night she had passed in that mostmiserable of all uncertainty — whether she wasright or wrong.In the morning, to Helen's astonishment,Celia's first words were about a dream — " Oh,my dear Helen ! I have had such a dream ! Ido not usually mind dreams in the least, but Imust own to you that this has made an impression! My dear, I can hardly tell it ; Ican scarcely bear to think of it. I thoughtthat Clarendon and I were sitting together, andfHELEN. 25my hand was on his shoulder; and I hadworked myself up — I was just going to speak.He was winding up his watch, and I leanedforward to see his face better. He looked upand it was not him : it was Colonel D'Au-bigny come to life. The door opened, Clarendonappeared — his eyes were upon me ; but Ido not know what came afterwards ; all wasconfusion and fighting. And then I was withthat nurse my mother recommended, and aninfant in her arms. I was going to take thechild, when Clarendon snatched it, and threwit into the flames. Oh ! I awoke with ascream rHow glad you must have been," saidHelen, ** to awake and find it was only adream !"** But when I screamed,'^ continued Cecilia,^^ Clarendon started up, and asked if I was inpain. * Not of body,' I said ; — and then — oh,Helen ! then I thought I would begin. * Notof body,' I said, * but of mind;' then I added,I was thinking of Helen and Beauclerc' Clarendonsaid, * So was I ; but there is no use inthinking of it ; we can do na good.' * Then,'VOL. III. ck26 HELEN.I said, ^ suppose, Clarendon — only supposethat Helen, without saying anything, wereto let this matter pass off with Beauclerc ?''-««* Clarendon answered, ^ It would not passoff with Beauclerk — * Buts said I, * I donot mean without any explanation at alL Onlysuppose that Helen did not enter into anyparticulars, do not you think, Clarendon, thatthings would go on well enough ?' — ' No,^ hesaid decidedly, ^ no — ^ Do you mean,' said I,^ that things would not go on at all ?** — * I donot say, not at all,^ he answered ; ^ but wellthey would not go on.' " >,.i:. " 1 am sure the General is rights said JEJelen.Then," continued Lady Cecilia, "sen Iput the question differently. I wanted to feelmy way, to try whether I could possibly ventureupon my own confession. * Consider itthis way. Clarendon's I said. ^ Take it forgranted that Helen did somehow arrange thatBeauclerc were to be satisfied without anyformal explanation.' — * Formal !' said he. — * Iwill not say formal,' said I ; ' but without afull explanation : in short, suppose that frommere timidity, Helen could not, did not, examHELEN. 27aptly tell him the whole before marriage — putit off till afterwards — then told him all candidly; do you think, Clarendon, that if youwere in Beauclerc's place (I quite stammeredwhen I came to this) — do you think you couldpardon, or forgive, or esteem, or love,* I intendedto end with, but he interrupted me with' I do not know,* very shortly ; and added,^ I hope this is not what Miss Stanley intendsto do*"Oh ! what did you answer?" cried Helen.*^^ I said I did not know. My dear Helen,it was the only thing I could say. Whatwould Clarendon have thought, after all mysupposes if I had said anything else ? he musthave seen the truth."^^ And 'that he is not to sees said Helen :^^ and how false he must think me !^^No, no ; for I told him*' continued LadyCecilia,' ^^ that I was sure you wished alwaysto tell the whole truth about every thing, butthat there might be circumstances where youreally could not ; and where I, knowing allthe circumstances, could not advise it. Hesaid, * Cecilia, I desire you will not advise orc2ItsHELEN,interfere any farther in this matter. Promiseme, Cecilia!' He spoke sternly, and I promisedas fast as I could. ^ Do nothing, saynothing more about it,' he repeated ; " andnow, after that, could I go on, Helen ?''^* No, indeed ; I do not think you could.My dear Cecilia, I really think you could not**said Helen, much moved.And do you forgive me, my dear, good'* But seeing Helen change colour. LadyCecilia, following her eye, and looking out ofthe window, started up, exclaiming, ^* There isBeauclerc ! I see him in my mother's . walk.I will go to him this minute ; yes, I will trusthim — I will tell him all instantly'*Helen caught hold of her, and stopped her.Surprised, Cecilia said, " Do not step me. Imay never have the courage again if stoppednow. Do not stop me, Helen''^^ I must, Cecilia. General Clarendon desiredyou not to interfere in the matter'*But this is not interfering, only interposingto prevent mischief."But, Cecilia," continued Helen eagerly,*' another reason has just struck me."HELEN. S9I wish reasons would not strike you. Letme go. Oh, Helen ! it is for you."*'And it is for you I speak, Cecilia saidHelen, as fast as she could. *^ If you toldBeauclerc, you never could afterwards tell theGeneral; it would be a new difficulty. Youknow the General could never endure yourhaving confessed this to any man but himselftrusted Beauclerc rather than your husbands''Cecilia stopped, and stood silent.My dear Cecilia," continued Helen, " youmust leave me to my own judgment now ;'' and,breaking from Cecilia, she left the room. Shehurried out to meet Beauclerc. He stoppedon seeing her, and then came forward with anair of evident deliberation.'* 9o you wish to speak to me. Miss Stanley !''^^ Miss Stanley !" cried Helen ; " is it cometo this, and without hearing me !"Without hearing you, Helen ! Was notI ready last night to hear you ? Withouthearing you ! Have not you kept me in torture,the worst of tortures — suspense Whydid not you speak to me last night ^"^tSO HELEN.I could not''Why, why ?''I cadet tell youy^ said she.Then I can tell you, Helen''« You can !"And will. Helen, you could not speak tometill you had consulted — arranged — settledwhat was to be said — what not to be said —what told — what left untold."Between each half sentence he darted looksat her defying hers to contradict -— and shecould not contradict by word or look.'you could not speak," continued he passionately,'^ till you had well determined whatwas to be told — what left untold to meiTo me, Helen, your confiding — devoted —acceptedlover ! for I protest before Heaven,had I knelt at the altar with you, Helen Stanley,not more yours, not more mine could I^, have deemed you — not more secure of yourlove and truth — your truth, for what is lovewithout it ! — not more secure of perfect felicitycould I have been on earth than I was whenwe two sat together but yesterday eveningon that bank. Your words — your looks —HELEN. 31aod still your looks-but what signify tears !—Tears, womens tears ! Oh ! what is woman !and what is man that believes in her?weaker still I''** Hear me ! — shear me r** Hear you ? — No, Helen, do not now askme to hear you,— Do not force me to hear you.Do not debase, do not sully, that perfectimage of truth. — Do not sink yourself, Hen,from that height at which it was my entrancedfelicity to see you. Leave me okie blessed, onesacred illusion. No,^ cried he, with increasingvehemence, '^ say nothing of all you haveprepared — not one arranged word conned overin your midnight and your morning consultations,"pointing back to the window of herdressing-room, where he had seen her andLady Cecilia.You saw," Helen began—Yes. — Am I blind, think you ? — I wishI were. — Oh ! that I could be gun the believing,fond, happy dupe I was but yesterdayevening V^Dupe r repeated Helen. " But pour outall — all, dear Granville. Think — say — whati33 HELEN.you will — reproach — abuse me as you please*It is a relief — take it — for I have none to give'*None !'* cried he, his tone suddenly changing," no relief to give ! — What ! have younothing to say ? — No explanation ? — Whyspeak to me then at all ?^** To tell you so at once — to end your suspense— to tell you that I cannot explain. Themidnight consultation and the morning, werenot to prepare for you excuse or apology, butto decide whether I could tell you the whole ;and since that cannot be, I determined not toenter into any explanation. I am glad thatyou do not wish to hear any*''* Answer me one question," said he: — " thatpicture — did you give it to Colonel D'Au-bigny ?-No. That is a question I can answer.No — he stole it from Cecilia's portfolio. Askme no more**One queen one more — I cannot tell you anythingmore*'She was silent for a moment, he withdrewhis eyes, and she went on.6iHELEN. 33*' Granville ! I must now put your love andesteem for me to the test. If that love bewhat I believe it to be ; if your confidence inme is what I think it ought to be, I am nowgoing to try it. There is a mystery which Icannot explain. I tell you this, and yet Iexpect you to believe that I am innocent ofanything wrong but the concealment. Thereare circumstances which I cannot tell you."*^But why ? ^ interrupted Beauclerc. —Ought there to be any circumstances whichcannot be told to the man to whom you haveplighted your faith ? Away with this ' cannotthis mystery! Did not I tell you everyfolly of my life— every fault ? And what isthis ? —-in itself, nothing ! — concealment ! Helen "She was going to say, " If it concerned onlymyself'' — but that would at once betray Cecilia,and she went on. — "If it were in myopinion right to tell it to you, I would. Onthis point, Granville, leave me to judge andact for myself. This is the test to which Iput your love — put mine to any test you will,but if your confidence in me is not sufficientc6'}S4 HELEN.to endure this trial, we can never be happytogether."She spoke very low : but Beauclerc listenedwith such intensity that he could not onlydistinguish every syllable she said, but coulddistinctly hear the beating of her heart, whichthrobbed violently, in spite of all her efforts tobe calm.** Can you trust me ?'^ concluded she.I cans*' cried he. " I can — I do! ByHeaven I do I I think you an angel, andlegions of devils could not convince me of thecontrary. I trust your word — I trust thatheavenly countenance — I trust entirely ''He offered, and she took his offered hand.I trust entirely. Not one question moreshall I ask — not a suspicion shall I have : youput me to the test, you shall find me standit."** Can you ?" said she ; " you know howmuch I ask. I acknowledge a mystery, andyet I ask you to believe that I am not wrong."I knows said he ; '' you shall see." And,both in happiness once more, they returned tothe house.HELEN. S5^^ I love her a thousand times better thanever** thought Beauclerc, " for the independenceof mind she shews in thus braving myopinion, daring to set all upon the cast— somethingnoble in this ! I am to form my own j judgmentof her and I will, independently of whatany other human being may say or think. TheGeneral, with his strict, narrow, conventionalnotions, has not an idea of the kind of womanI like, or of what Helen really is. He sees inHelen only the discreet proper-behaved younglady, adapted, so nicely adapted, to her placein society, to pitch and notch in, and to be ofno sort of value out of it. Give me a bangable to stand alone, to think and feel, decideand act, for herself. Were Helen only whatthe General thinks her, she would not be forme;while she is what I think her, I love —I adore !^ And when he saw his guardian,Beauclerc declared that, though Helen hadentered into no explanations, he was perfectlysatisfied.The General answered, " I am glad you aresatisfied*Beauclerc perceived that the General was36 / HELEN.not ; and, in spite of all that he had just beensaying to himself, this provoked and disgustedhim. His theory of his own mind, if not quitefalse, was still a little at variance with his practice*His guardians opinion swayed him powerfully,whenever he believed that it was notdesigned to influence him; when the opinionwas repressed, he could not rest without drawingit out. " Then, you think. General'' saidhe, ^^ that some explanation ought to have beenmade ?''No matter what I think, Granville, theaffair is your's. If you are satisfied, that is allthat is necessary."Then even, because left on their own pointof suspension to vibrate freely, the diamond-scalesof Beauclerc's mind began to move, fromsome nice, unseen cause of variation. ^^ But,"said he, ^* General Clarendon, no one can judgewithout knowing facts."** So I apprehend'' said the General.I may be of too easy faith," replied Beauclerc.— [No reply.] "This is a point of honour."— [No denial.] ^* My dear General, ifthere be anything which weighs with you, andHELEN. 37which you know and I do not I think, as myfriend and my guardian, you ought to tell itto me."^^ Pardon mess said the General, turningaway from Beauclerc as he spoke, and strikingfirst one heel of his boot against the scraper atthe hall-door, then the other — ^^ pardon me,Granville, I cannot admit you to be a betterjudge than I am myself of what I ought to doornot to do."The tone was dry and proud, but beauclerkprovoked imagination conceived it tobe also mysterious ; the scales of his mindvibrated again, but he had said he would trust-— trust entirely, and he would : yet he couldnot succeed in banishing all doubt, tiU an ideastarted into his head — " That writing was LadyCecilia's ! I thought so at the first moment,and I let it go again. It is heres, and Helen iskeeping her secret : — but could Lady Ceciliabe so ungenerous — so treacherous?" However,he had declared he would ask no questions; he was a man of honour, and he wouldask none — none even of himself — a resolutionwhich he found it surprisingly easy to keep38 HELEN.when the doubt concerned only Lady Cecilia.Whenever the thought crossed his mind, hesaid to himself, *^ I will ask nothing — suspectnobody ; but if it is Lady Cecilia^s^s affair, it isall the more generous in Helen." And so,secure in this explanation, though he neverallowed to himself that he admitted it, his trustin Helen was easy and complete, hiB passionfor her increased every hour.But Lady Cecilia was disturbed even by theperfect confidence and happiness of Beauclerkmanner towards Helen. She could not butfear that he had guessed the truth ; and itseemed as if everything which happened tendedto confirm him iu his suspicions : for, wheneverthe mind is strongly interested on* any subject,something alluding to it seems wonderfully, yetaccidentally, to occur in everything that weread, or hear in common conversation, and soitnow happened ; things were continually saidby persons wholly unconcerned, which seemedto bear upon her secret. Lady Cecilia frequentlyfelt this with pangs of shame, remorse,and confusion ; and, though Beauclerc did notwatch, or play the spy upon her countenance.HELEN. 89be could not help sometimes observing theflitting colour — * the guilty changes of counterdance -— » the assumed composure : but soon sheeither perceived that his attention Twas directedtowards her, or by practice she had acquiredmore self-command, for scarcely had he settledhis conviction when it was shaken by differentappearances. Lady Cecilia's looks were now,when any dangerous allusions occurred, directedtowards Helen, so as to turn Beauclerksuspicions from herself : that mind, once so artless,began to be degraded — her spirits sank ;she felt that she " had lost the sunshine of asoul without a mystery !«The day fixed for the marriage approached ;Lady Cecilia had undertaken the superintendenceof the trotLsseaUf and Felicie was in anxiousexpectation of its arrival. Helen hadwritten to the Collingwoods to announce theintended event, asking for the good Bishop'ssanction, as her guardian, and regretting thathe could not perform the ceremony. She hadreceived from Lady Davenant a few lines, writtenjust before she sailed, warm with all theenthusiasm of her ardent heart, and full of40 HELEN.expectation that Helen's lot would be one ofthe happiest this world could afford.All seemed indeed to smile upon her prospects,and the only clouds which dimmed thesunshine were Cecilia^s^s insincerity, and her feelingthat the General thought her acting unhandsomelyand unwisely towards his ward ; but sheconsoled herself with the thought that he couldnot judge of what he did not know, that she didnot deserve his displeasure, that Granville wassatisfied, and if he was, why should not GeneralClarendon be so too ?Much more serious, however, was the painshe felt on Cecilia's account. She reproachedherself with betraying the trust Lady Davenanthad reposed in her. That dreadful prophecyseemed now accomplishing: Cecilia's naturalgenerosity, that for which Helen had ever mostloved and admired her, the brightest, fairestparts of her character, seemed failing now;what could be more selfish than Cecilia's presentconduct towards herself, more treacherousto her noble-minded, her confiding husband!The openness, the perfect unreserve betweenthe two friends, was no longer what it hadHELEN. 41been. Helen, however, felt the constraint betweenthem the less as she was almost constantlywith Beauclerc, and in her young happinessshe hoped all would be right. Ceciliawould tell the General, and they would be asintimate, as affectionate, as they had ever been.One morning General Clarendon, stoppingCecilia as she was coming down to breakfast, announcedthat he was obliged to set off instantlyfor London, on business which could not bedelayed, and that she must settle with MissStanley whether they would accompany himor remain at Clarendon Park. He did notknow, he said, how long he might be detained.Cecilia was astonished, and excessively curious; she tried her utmost address to discoverwhat was the nature of his business, in vain.All that remained was to do as he requiredwithout more words. He left the room, andCecilia decided at once that they had betteraccompany him. She dreaded some delay ; shethought that, if the General went alone totown, he might be detained Heaven knows howlong, and though the marriage must be postponedat all events, yet if they went with the42 HELEN.General, the ceremony might be performed intown as well as at Clarendon Park ; and shewith some difficulty convinced Helen of this.Beauclerc feared nothing but delay. Theywere to go. Lady Cecilia announced their decisionto the General, who . immediately set off,and the others in a few hours followed him.HELEN. 48CHAPTER III.'^ In my youth, and through the prime of manhood, Inever entered London without feelings of hope and pleasure.It was to me the grand theatre of intellectual activity,the field for every species of enterprise and exertion,the metropolis of the world, of business, thought, and action.There, I was sure to find friends and companions,to hear the voice of encouragement and praise. There,society of the most refined sort offered daily its banquets tothe mind, and new objects of interest and ambition wereconstantly exciting attention either in politics, literature, orscience."These feelings, so well described by a manof genius, have probably been felt more or lessby most young men who have within them anyconsciousness of talent, or any of that enthusiasm,that eager desire to have or to givesympathy, which, especially in youth, characterisesnoble natures.But after even one or two seasons in a greatmetropolis these feelings often change long44 HELEN.before they are altered by age. GranvilleBeauclerc had ah-lady persuaded himself thathe now detested as much as he had at firstbeen delighted with, a London life.From his metaphysical habits of mind, andfrom the sensibility of his temper, he had beentoo soon disgusted by that sort of general politenesswhich, as he said, takes up the timeand place of real friendship ; and as for the intellectualpleasures, they were, he said, too superficialfor him ; and his notions of independence,too, were at this time quite incompatiblewith the conventional life of a great capital.His present wish was to live all the year roundin the country, with the woman he loved, andin the society of a few chosen friends.Helen quite agreed with him in his taste forthe country ; she had scarcely ever known anyother life, and yet had always been happy ; andwhatever youthful curiosity had been awakenedin her mind as to the pleasures of London, hadbeen now absorbed by stronger and more tenderfeelings. Her fate in life, she felt, was fixed,and wherever the man she loved wished to reside,that, she felt, must be her choice. WithiIrrHELEN. 45these feelings they arrived at General Clarendon'sdelightful house in town.Helens apartment, and Cecilia^s^s, were ondifferent floors, and had no communicationwith each other. It was of little consequence,as their stay in town was to be but short, yetHelen could not help observing that Ceciliadid not express any regret at it, as formerlyshe would have done ; it seemed a symptom ofdeclining affection, of which, every the slightestindication was marked and keenly felt byHelen, the more so because she had anticipatedthat such must be the consequence of all thathad passed between them, and there was nowno remedy.Among the first morning visitors admittedwere Lady Castlefort and Lady KatrineHawksbyby. They did not, as, it struck Cecilia,seem surprised to see that Miss Stanley wasMiss Stanley still, though the day for the marriagehad been announced in all the papers asfixed ; but they did seem now full of curiosityto know how it had come to pass, and therewas rather too apparent a hope that somethingwas going wrong. Their first inquisitive lookA46 HELEN.was met by Lady Cecilia's careless glance inreply, which said better than words couldexpress,Nothing the matter, do not flatter yourselves'*Then her expertness at general answerswhich give no information, completely baffledthe two curious impertinents. They could onlylearn that the day for the marriage was notfixed, that it could not be definitively namedtill some business should be settled by theGeneral.Law business they supposed, of course.Lady Cecilia " knew nothing about it. Lawyersare such provoking wretches, with theirfast bind fast find. Such an unconscionablelength of time as they do take for their parchmentdoings, heeding nought of that little impatientflapper Cupid''Certain that Lady Cecilia was only playingwith their curiosity, yet unable to circumventher. Lady Katrine changed the conversation,and Lady Castlefort preferred a prayer, whichwas, she said, the chief object of her visit, thatLady Cecilia and Miss Stanley would come toJHELEN. 47her on Monday ; die wn^ to have a few friends —a very small party, and independently of thepleasure she should have in seeing them, itwould be advantageous perhaps to Miss Staneley, as Lady Castlefort, in her softest voice,added, " For from the marriage being postponedeven for a few days, people might talk,and Mr. Beauclerc, and Miss Stanley appearingtogether would prevent anybody's thinkingthere was any little Nothing so propernow as for a young lady to appear with herfutur ; so I shall expect you, my dear Cecilia,and Miss Stanley,^-— and so saying, she departed.Helen's objections were aU overruled, andwhen the engagement was made known to Beauclerc,he shrugged, and shrank, and submitted ;observing, ^^ that all men, and all women, mustfrom the moment they come within the precinctsof London life, give up their time andtheir will to an imaginary necessity of goingwhen we do not like it, where we do not wish,to see those whom we have no desire to see,and who do not care if they were never to seeus again, except for the sake of their own reputeHELEN.nation of playing well their own parts in thegrand farce of mock civilitiesHelen was sorry to have joined in making disengagementfor him which he seemed so muchto dislike. But Lady Cecilia, laughing, maintainedthat half his reluctance was affectation,and the other half a lover-like spirit of monopoly,in which he should not be indulged, andinstead of pretending to be indifferent to whatthe world might think, he ought to be proudto shew Helen as a proof of his taste.In dressing Helen this night, Felicie, excitedby her Lady's exhortations, displayedher utmost skill. Mademoiselle Felicie hada certain petite metaphysical de toilette ofwhich she was justly vain. She could talk,and as much to the purpose as most people ofle genre classique,**' and " le genre roman-piques''of the different styles of dress thatsuit different styles of face ; and while " sheworked and wondered at the work she made,"she threw out from time to time her ideas on thesubject to form the taste of Helen's little maid.Rose, who, in mute attention, held the lightand assiduously presented pins.Not your pin so fast one after de otherHELEN. 49Miss Rose — Tenez ! tenez r cried Mademoiselle." You think in England alway too muchof your pin in your dress, too little of ourtaste — too little of our elegance too much ofyour what you call tidiness or God know what !But never you mind dat so much. Miss Rose ;and you not prim up your little mouth, butlisten to me. Never you put in one pin beforeyou ask yourself, Miss Rose, what for I do it ?In every toilette that has taste there is aboveall — tenez — a character — a sentiment tobe support ; suppose your lady is to besuperbe, or she will rather be elegant, orcharmante, or interessante, or distinguish — •well, dat is aU ^er^ well, and you dress to thatidee, one or oder — well, very well — butnone of your wat you call odd. No, no, never.Miss Rose — that is not style noble ; 'twillonly become de petit minois of your Englishoriginal. I wash my hand of dat always*"The toilette superbe Mademoiselle held to betheeasiest of all those which she had namedwith favour, it may be accomplished by anycommon hands ; but head is requisite to reachthe toilette distinguish. The toilette superbeVOL. III. D50 * HELEN.requires only cost — a toilette distinguish demandscare.There was a happiness as well as care inFelicie's genius for dress, which, ever keepingthe height of fashion in view, never lost sightof nature, adapting, selecting, combining toform a perfect whole, in which art itself concealedappeared only, as she expressed it, inthe sublime of simplicity. In the midst of allher talking, however, she went on with the earcentral business, and as she finished, pronouncedPrecepts commence, exemple achieve."When they arrived at Lady Castlefort's,Lady Cecilia was surprised to find a line ofcarriages, and noise, and crowds of footmen.How was this ? She had understood that itwas to be one of those really small parties,those select 'reunions of some few of the highand mighty families who chance to be in townbefore Christmas — " But how is this P*^ LadyCecilia repeated to herself as she entered thehall, amazed to find it blazing with light, acrowd on the stairs, and in the ante-room acrowd, as she soon felt, of an unusual sort. Itwas not the soft crush of aristocracy, theyHELEN. ' 51found hard unaccustomed citizen elbows,—strange round-shouldered, square-backed menand women, so over-dressed, so bejewelled, socoarse — shocking to see, impossible to avoid ;not one figure, one face. Lady Cecilia had everseen before ; till at last, from the midst of thethrong emerged a fair form — a being as itseemed of other mould, certainly of differentcaste. It was one of Cecilia^s^s former intimatesLady Emily Greville, whom she had not seensince her return from abroad. Joyfully theymet, and stopped and talked ; she was hasteningaway. Lady Emily said, " after having beenan hour on duty ; Lady Castlefort had madeit a point with her to stay after dinner, shehad dined there, and had stayed, and now guardwas relieved."^^ But who are all these people P What is allthis, my dear Lady Emily ?" asked Cecilia.^* Do not you know ? Louisa has trappedyou into coming, then, to-night without tellingyou how it is ?"*** Not a word did she tell me, I expected tomeet only our own worlds*'A very different world you perceive this !d252 HELEN.A sort of farce this is to the ^ Double Distressa comedy ; — in short, one of Lord Castlefort^sbrothers is going to stand for the City, andcitizens and citoyennes must be propitiated.When an election is in the case all other thingsgive place ; and, besides, he has just married thedaughter of some amazing merchant, worth Idon't know how many* plums; so le petitBossu who is proud of his brother, for he isreckoned the genius of the family ! made it apoint with Louisa to do this. She put upher eyebrows and stood out as long as shecould, but Lord Castlefort had his way, for heholds the purse you know, — and so she wasforced to make a party for these Goths andVandals, and of course she thought it best todoit directly, out of season, you know, whennobody will see it — and she consulted me whetherit should be large or small ; I advised alarge party, by all means, as crowded as possible''Yes, yes, I understand'' said Cecilia ;*^ to hide the shame in the multitude : vastlywell, very fair all this, except the trapping usinto it, who have nothing to do with it."HELEN. 53Nothing to do with it ! pardon me/^ criedLady Emily. " It could not have been donewithout us. Entrapping us ! — do not youunderstand that we are the baits to the traps ?Bringing those animals here, wild beasts ortame, only to meet one another, would havebeen " doing business no hows We are whatthey are * come for to see,' or to have it tosay that they have seen the Exclusives, exquisite,or Transcendental, or whatever elsethey call us*"** Lady Emily Greville's carriage r was nowcalled in the ante-room.** I midst go, but first make me known toyour friend Miss Stanley, you see I know herbyinstinct ;*" but " Lady Emily Greville'scarriage !'' now resounded reiterated, and gentlemenwith cloaks stood waiting, and as sheput hers on, Lady Emily stooped forward andwhispered,I do not believe one word of what theysay of hers and she was off, and Lady Ceciliastood for an instant looking after her, andconsidering what she could mean by thoselast words. Concluding, however, that she54 HELEN.had not heard aright, or had missed someintervening name, and that these words, inshort, could not possibly apply to Helen,Lady Cecilia turned to her, they resumedtheir way onward, and at length they reachedthe grand reception-room.In the middle of that brilliantly lightedsaloon, immediately under the centre chandelier,was ample verge and space enough re-«^served for the elite of the world ; circle it wasnot, nor square, nor form regularly defined, yetthe bounds were guarded. There was no wayof getting to the further end of the saloon, or tothe apartments open in the distance beyond it,except by passing through this enclosed space,in which one fair entrance was practicable,and one Sample exit full in view on the oppositeside. Several gentlemen of fashionablebearing held the outposts of this privilegedplace, at back of sofa, or side of fauteuil, stationary,or wandering near. Some chosen fewwere within ; a caryatides gentleman leaned oneach side of the fireplace, and in the centre ofthe rug stood a remarkably handsome man, offine figure, perfectly dressed, his whole air ex-helen.55exquisitely scornful, excruciatingly miserable, andloftily abstract.^Twad wonderful, Was strange, twas passingstrange ! how one so lost to all sublunaryconcerns, so far above the follies of inferiormortals, as he looked, came here — so extremelywell-dressed too ! How happenedit? so nauseating the whole, as he seemed,.^ so wishing that the business of the world weredone !With half-closed dreamy eyelids he lookedsilent down upon two ladies who sat oppositeto him, rallying, abusing, and admiring him tohis vanities content.They gave him his choice of three names,r£nnuy6, le Frondeur, or le Blast.L^Ennuy^ ? he shook his head ; t09 common;he would have none of it.Le Frondeur? no; too much trouble; heshrugged his abhorrence.Le Blast? he allowed, might be too true.But would they hazard a substantive verb PHe would give them four-and-twenty hours toconsider, anH be would take twenty-four himselfto decide. They should have his definiteHELEN.time tomorrow, and he was sliding away, butLady Castlefort, as he passed her, cried,'* Going, Lord Beltravers, going are you ?^•in an accent of surprise and disappointment ;and she whispered ^^ I am hard at work here,acting Receiver General to these city worthies ;and you do not pity me— cruel l's and shelooked up with languishing eyes, that so beggedfor sympathy. He* threw upon her one lookof commiseration, reproachful.Pity you, yes ! But why will you do thesethings ? and why did you bring me here to dothis horrid sort of work ?" and he vanished.Lady Cecilia Clarendon and Miss Stanleynow appeared in the offing and now reachedthe straits : Lady Castlefort rose with vivacityextraordinary, and went forward several steps.^^ Dear Cecilia ! Miss Stanley, so good !Mr. Beauclerc, so happy ! the General couldnot ? so sorry !'* Then with hand pressed onheres, " Miss Stanley, so kind of you to come.Lady Grace, give me leave — Miss Stanley — .Lady Grace Bland'' and in a whisper, " LordBeltravers' aunt."Lady Grace, with a haughty drawbackHELEN. 57motion, and a supercilious arching of herbrows, wasHappy to have the honour'' Honoursally prolonged, and some guttural soundsfollowed, but further words, if words theywere, which she syllabled between snuffling andmumbling, were utterly unintelligible ; andHelen, without being " very happy'' or happyat all, only returned bend for bend.Lady Cecilia then presented her to a groupof sister graces standing near the sofas ofmammas and chaperons — not each a differentgrace, but similar each, indeed upon the verysame identical pattern air of young-ladyfashion — well-bred, and apparently well-natured.No sooner was Miss Stanley madeknown to them by Lady Cecilia, than, smilingjust enough, not a muscle too much, theymoved ; the ranks opened softly, but sufficiently,and Helen was in the group ; amongst them,but not of them — and of this she became immediatelysensible, though without knowinghow or why.One of these daughters had had expectationslast season, from having been frequently Mr.d558 HELEN.Beauclerc's partner, and the mother was nowfanning herself. opposite to him. But Helenknew nought of this : to lev all was apparentlysoft, smooth, and smiling. While,whenever any of the unprivileged multitude,the city monsters, passed near this high-born,high-bred group, they looked as though therights of pride were infringed, and, smilingscorn, they dropped from half-closed lipssuch syllables of withering contempt, as theythought these vulgar victims merited: carelessif they heard or not, rather rejoicing tosee the sufferers wince beneath the woundswhich they inflicted in their pride and pompof sway.Pride !" thought Helen, " was it pride ?If pride it was, how unlike what she had beentaught to consider the proper pride of aristocracy; how unlike that noble sort which shehad seen, admired, and loved ! Helen fanciedwhat Lady Davenant would have thought, howignoble, how mean, how vulgar she would haveconsidered these sneers and scoffs from thenobly to the lowly born. . How unworthy oftheir rank and station in society ! They whoHELEN. 59ought to be the first in courtesy, because thefirst in fashion ; they who ought to form thebright links between rank and rank in society,thus rudely severing them asunder ! And forwhat? The petty, selfish, vulgar triumph ofthe moment.As these thoughts passed rapidly in Helen'smind, she involuntarily looked towards Beauclerc;but she was so encompassed by herpresent companions that she could not discoverhim. Had she been able to see hiscountenance, she would have read in it atonce how exactly he was at that instant feelingwith her. More indignant than herself,for his high chivalrous devotion, to the faircould ill endure the readiness with which thegentlemen, attendants at ottoman or sofa, lenttheir aid to mock and to embarrass everypassing party of the city tribe, mothers andtheir hapless daughter-train.At this instant Lady Bancroft, who, if shehad not good breeding, certainly had good-nature,came up to Beauclerc, and whisperedearnestly, and with an expression of stronginterest in her countenance.60 HELEN.As you love her, do not heed one wordyou hear anybody say this night, for it's allon purpose to vex you ; and 1 ain as certainas you are it's all false — all envy And thereshe goes, Envy herself in the black jaundicedcontinued she, looking at Lady KatrineHawksbyby, who passed at that instant.Good Heavens l"^ cried Beauclerc, " whatcan ""No, no,'^ interrupted Lady Bancroft,"no, no, do not ask — better not; best youshould know no more — only keep your temperwhatever happens. Go you up the hill, likethe man in the tale, and let the black stonesbawl themselves hoarse — dumb. Go you on,and seize your pretty singing thinking bird —the sooner the better. So fare you well''And she disappeared in the crowd. Beauclerc,to whom she was perfectly unknown,(though she had made him out,) totally at aloss to imagine what interest she could take inHelen or in him, or what she could possiblymean, rather inclined to suppose she was a madwoman,and he forgot everything else as hesaw Helen with Lady Cecilia emerging fromHELEN. 61the bevy of young ladies and approachinghim.They stopped to speak to some acquaintance,and he tried to look at Helen as if he were anindifferent spectator, and to fancy what heshould think of her if he saw her now forthe first time. He thought that he shouldbe struck not only with her beauty, but withher graceful air — her ingenuous countenance,so expressive of the freshness of natural sensibility.She was exquisitely well dressed too,and that, as Felicie observed, goes for much,even with your most sensible men. Altogetherhe was charmed, whether considering her aswith the eyes of an unblessed stranger or withhis own. And all he heard confirmed, and, althoughhe would not have allowed it, strengthenedhis feelings. He heard it said that, thoughthere were some as handsome women in theroom, there were none so interesting ; and someof the young men added, " As lovely as LadyBlanche, but with more expressions' A citizen,with whom Beauclerc could have shakenhands on the spot, said, "There 's one of thehigh-bred, now, that 's well-bred too.**'62 HELEN.In the height of the rapture of his feelingshe overtook Lady Cecilia, who, telling himthat they were going on to another room, deliveredHelen to his care, and herself takingthe arm of some ready gentleman, they proceededas fast as they could through the crowdto the other end of the room.This was the first time Helen had ever seenLady Cecilia in public, where certainly sheappeared to great advantage. Not thinkingabout herself, but ever willing to be pleased ; sobright, so gay, she was as sunshine which seemedto spread its beams wherever she turned. Andshe had something to say to everybody, or toanswer quick to whatever they said or looked,happy always in the apropos of the moment.Little there might be, perhaps, in what shesaid, but there was all that was wanted, justwhat did for the occasion. In others thereoften appeared a distress for something to say,or a dead dullness of countenance opposite toyou. From others, a too fast hazarded broadsideof questions and answers — glads and sorryin chain-shots that did no execution, becausethere was no good aim — congratulationsHELEN. 6Sand condolences playing at cross purposes —These were mistakes, misfortunes, which couldnever occur in^Lady Gecilia^s natural grace andacquired tact of manner.Helen was amused, as she followed her, inwatching the readiness with which she knewhow to exchange the necessary counters in thecommerce of society ; she was amused, till herattention was distracted by hearing, as she andBeauclerc passed, the whispered words — '^ /pramessi sposi^-^look — La belUJiancee.^'* Thesewords were repeated as they went on, andLady Cecilia heard some one say, ^^ I thoughtit was broken off; that was all slander then ?"She recollected Lady Emily words, and, terrifiedlest Helen should hear more of — she knewnot what, she began to talk to her as fast asshe could, while they were stopped in the doorwayby a crowd. She succeeded for the momentwith Helen ; she had not heard the lastspeech, and she could not, as long as LadyCecilia spoke, hear more ; but Beauclerc againdistinguished the words ^^ Belle fiancee T andas he turned to discover the speaker, a fatmatron near him asked, ^^ Who is it ?^ and the64 HELEN.daughter answered, ^^ It is that handsome girl,with the white rose in her hairs*' — ** Hush l"said the brother, on whose arm she leaned ;^' Handsome is that handsome does*"Handsome does ! thought Beauclerc ; andthe mysterious warning of his unknown friendrecurred to him. He was astonished, alarmed,furious ; but the whispering party had passedon, and just then Lady Cecilia descrying Mr.Churchill in the distance, she made towardshim. Conversation sure to be had in abundancefrom him. He discerned them fromafar, and was happily prepared both with aready bit of wit and with a proper greeting.His meeting with Lady Cecilia was, of course,just the same as ever. He just took it upwhere he left off at Clarendon Park ; no difference,no hiatus. His bow to Beauclerc andHelen, to Helen and Beauclerc, joined in onelittle sweep of a congratulatory motion, wasincomparable : it said everything that a bowcould say, and more. It implied such a happyfreedom from envy or jealousy ; such a politeacquiescence in the decrees of fate; such aHELEN. 65philosophic indifference; Such a cool, sarcasticsuperiority to the event ; and he began toLady Cecilia with one of his prepared impromptus.At the instant your ladyship came up, Iam afraid I started, actually in a trance, I dobelieve. Methought I was — where do youthink ? In the temple of Jaggernaut.''^Why ?'' said Lady Cecilia smiling.Methought,'^ continued Horace, " that Iwas in the temple of Jaggernaut — that onestrange day in the year, when all castes meet,when all distinction of castes and ranks is forgotten—-the abomination of mixing them alltogether permitted, for their sins no doubt —high caste and low, from the abandoned Pariato the Brahmin prince, from their Billingsgateand Warrington Without, suppose, up to theirSt. James's Street and Grosvenor Square,mingle, mingle, ye who mingle may, whitespirits and grey, black spirits and blue. Now,pray look around : is not this Jaggernaut nightwith Lady Castlefort .?"And you'' said Lady Cecilia ; " are not«(66 HELEN.you the great Jaggernaut himself, driving overallin your triumphant chariot of sarcasm, andcrushing all the victims in your way ?^This took with Horace; it put him inspirits,in train, and he fired away at LadyCastlefort, whom he had been flatteringd Voutrance five minutes before.^^ I so admire that acting of sacrifice in yourbelle i^ousine to-night ! Pasta herself could notdo it better. There is a look of ^ Oh, ye justgods ! what a victim am IV and with thoseupturned eyes so charming I Well, and seriouslyit is a sad sacrifice. Fathers haveflinty hearts by parental prescription ; but husbands— petit Bosses especially — should havemercy, for their own sakes; they should notstrain their marital power too faresButs' said Lady Ceci^a, " it is curious,that one born and bred such an ultra exclusiveas Louisa Castlefort, should be obliged afterher marriage immediately to open her doorsand turn ultra liberal, or an universal suffragesall in consequence of these mesalliances^*True, true," said Churchill, with a solemn,pathetic shake of the head. ^^ Gentlemen andHELEN. 67noblemen should consider before they makethese low matches to save their studs, or theirsouls, or their entailed estates. Whatever bethenecessity, there can be no apology for outragingall instance. Necessity has no law,but it should have some decency. Think ofbringing upon a foolish elder brother — Butwe won be personal'*No, don't pray, Horace'' said Lady Cecilia,moving on.'^ But think, only think, my dear LadyCecilia; think what it must be to be ^ and to be *dear sister' by suchbodies as these in public." *Sad ! sad !" said Lady Cecilia.The old French nobility," continuedChurchill, " used to call these low money-matches* mettre du fumier sur nos terres.' "Dirty work at best," said Lady Cecilia.But still," said Horace, " it might bedone with'decency if not with majesty."But in the midst of all this," said LadyCecilia, " I want some ice very much for myself,and for Helen more."I have a notion we shall find some here,"k.i.68 HELEN.replied he, ** if you will come on this way —in this sanctum sanatorium of Lady Katrine^s.'*^He led them on to a little inner apartment,where, as he said. Lady Katrine Hawksbyby andher set do always scandal take, and sometimestea. — ** Tea and ponce continued he, "^^ youknow, in London now is quite a la Franchise,and it is astonishing to me, who am but a man,what strong punch ladies can take""** Only when it is iced*" said Lady Cecilia,smiling.'* Be it so'' said he, — " Very refreshingice, and more refreshing scandal, and here wehave both in perfection. Scandal, hot and hot,and ice cold and cold."By this time they had reached the entranceto what he called Lady Katrine's sanctum saneor um,' where she had gathered round the icedpunch and tea-table a select party, whom shehad drawn together with the promise of theother half of a half-published report, — a reportin which " / process Spot" and " Labelle Jiancie^ were implicated !Stop here one moment," cried Churchill,one moment longer. Let us see before werr-I-HELEN. 69are seen. Look Id, look in pray, at this group.Lady Katrine herself on the sofa, finger up —holding forth ; and the deaf old woman stretchingforward to hear, while the other, with theuntasted punch, sits suspended in curiosity.^ What can it be ?* she says, or seems to say.Now, now, see the pretty one's hands and eyesuplifted, and the ugly one, with that look ofhorror, is exclaiming, ^ You don't say so, mydear Lady Katrine !' Admirable creatures !Cant and scandal personified ! I wish Wilkiewere here — worth any money to him."And he should call it * The scandal party,' '^said Lady Cecilia. " He told me he never couldventure upon a subject unless he could give it agood name'sAt this moment Lady Katrine, having finishedher story, rose, and awaking from the abstractionof malice, she ^ looked up and sawHelen and Lady Cecilia, and, as she came forward,Churchill whispered between them,Now — now we are going comfortably toenjoy, no doubt, Madame de Seine's pleasure< de mal dire du pirochain,^ at the right hour too.**'Churchill left them there. Lady Katrine70 HELEN.welcoming her victims— her unsuspicious victims— he slid off to the friends round the tea-tableto learn from " Cant'' what " Scandalhad been telling. Beauclerc was gone to inquirefor the carriage. The instant Helenappeared, all eyes were fixed upon her, and^* Belle fiancee was murmured round, andCecilia heard — " He's much to be pitied*'At this moment Lord Castlefort went up toHelen ; she had always been a favourite of his ;he was grateful to her for her constant kindnessto him, and, peevish though the little manmight be, he had a good heart, and he shewed itnow by instantly taking Helen out of the midstof the starers, and begging her opinion upona favourite picture of his, a Madonna. — Wasit a Raffaelle, or was it not? He and Mr.Churchill, he said, were at issue about it. Inshort, no matter what he said, it engrossedHelen's attention, so that she could not hearanything that passed, and could not be seenby the starers ; and he detained her in conversationtill Beauclerc came to say — ^^ The marriageis ready. Lady Cecilia is impatientLord Castlefort opened a door that led atHELEN. 71once to the staircase, so that they had not torecross all the rooms, but got out immediately.The smallest service merits thanks, and Helenthanked Lord Castlefort by a look which heappreciated.Even in the few words which Beauclerc hadsaid as he announced the carriage, she had perceivedthat he was agitated ; and, as he attendedher in silence down the stairs, his look wasgrave and preoccupied; she saw he was displeased,and she thought he was displeasedwith her. When he had put them into thecarriage, he' wished them good night.** Are not you coming with us ?'* cried LadyCecilia.** No, he thanked her, he had rather walk,and'' he added — « I shall not see you atbreakfast — I am engaged''Home !" said Lady Cecilia drawing upthe glass with a jerk.Helen looked out anxiously. Beauclerc hadturned away,. but she caught one more glanceof his face as the lamp flared upon it — shesaw, and she was sure that " Something isvery much the matter— I am certain of it.^L72 HELEN.Nonsense, my dear Helen,* said Lady Cecilia; ^^ the matter is, that he is tired to death,as I am sure I am/^'* There's more than that's said Helen, " heis angry,* — and he sighed.*^ Now Helen, do not torment yourself aboutnothing,* said Cecilia, who, not being sure whetherBeauclerc had heard anything, had notlooked at his countenance or remarked histone; her mind was occupied with what ledpassed while Helen was looking at the Madonna.Lady Cecilia had tried to make out themeaning of these extraordinary staring andwhisperings — Lady Katrine would not tellher anything distinctly, but said,Strange reports — so sorry it had got intothe papers, those vile libellous papers ; of courseshe did not believe — of Miss Stanley. Afterall, nothing very bad — a little awkward onlymight be hushed up. Better not talk of itto-night ; but I will try, Cecilia, in the morning,to find those paragraphs for you.*Lady Cecilia determined to go as early aspossible in the morning, and make out thewhole ; and, had she plainly told this to Helen,iHELEN. 73it would have been better for all parties : butshe continued to talk of the people they hadseen, to hide her thoughts from Helen, whoall the time felt as in a feverish dream, watchingthe lights of the carriage flit by like fieryeyes, while she thought only of the strangewords she had heard, and why they shouldhave made Beauclerc angry with her.At last they were at home. As they wentin. Lady Cecilia inquired if the General hadcome in ? — Yes, he had been at home forsome time, and was in bed. This .was a relief.Helen was glad not to see any ones' or to beobliged to say anything more that night. LadyCecilia bade her *^ be a good child, and gotosleep'' How much Helen slept may beleft to the judgment of those who have anyimagination.VOL. III. E74 HELEN.CHAPTER IV.** M ILADI a une migraine affreuse this mornings''said Felicie, addressing herself on thestairs to Rose. " Mille amities de sa part toyour young lady, Miss Rose, and miladi recommendto her to follow a good example, and totake her breakfast in her bed, and then to takeone good sleep till you shall hear midi sonnetMiss Stanley, however, was up and dressedat the time when this message was brought toher, and a few minutes afterwards a footmancame to the door, to give notice that theGeneral was in the breakfast-room, waiting toknow whether Miss Stanley was coming downor not. The idea of a tête-à-tête breakfastwith him was not now quite so agreeable as itwould have been to her formerly, but shee wentdown. The General was standing with hisback to the fire, newspapers hanging from hisHELEN. 75hand, his look ominously grave. After " Goodmornings had been exchanged with awfulsolemnity, Helen ventured to hope that therewas no bad public news.*' No public news whatever said the General.Next, she was sorry to hear that Cecilia had** such a bad headache "Tired last night," said the General.'^ It was, indeed a tiresome, disagreeableparty ,^ said Helen, hoping this would lead tohow so ? or why ? but the General drily answered,** Not the London seasons and wenton eating his breakfast in silencea constraint and awe came upon her,that she felt it would be taking too great aliberty, in his present mood, to put sugar andcream into his tea, as she was wont in happiertimes. She set sugar-bowl and cream beforehim, and whether he understood, or noticednot her feelings, she could not guess. Hesugared, and creamed, and drank, and thought,and spoke not. Helen put out of his way asupernumerary cup, to which he had alreadygiven a push, and she said, *^ Mr. Beauclercdoes not breakfast with us.^^E 276 HELEN.So I suppose'' said the General, ** as henot here."lie said he was engaged to breakfast''« With some of his friends, I suppose," saidthe General.There the dialogue came to a full stop, andbreakfast, uncomfortably on her part, and witha preoccupied air on his, went on in absolutesilence. At length the General signified to theservant who was in waiting, by a nod, and alook towards the door, that his further attendancewas dispensed with. At another time Helenwould have felt such a dismissal as a relief, forshe disliked, and recollected that her uncleparticularly disliked, the fashion of having servantswaiting at a family breakfast, which hejustly deemed unsuited to our good old Englishdomestic habits ; but somehow it happenedthat at this moment she was rather sorry whenthe servant left the room. He returned howeverin a moment, with something which he fanciedto be yet wanting ; the General, after glancingat whatever he had brought, said, ** Thatwill do, Cockburn ; we want nothing more."Cockbum placed a skreen between him andHELEN. 77the fire ; the General put it aside, and, lookingat him, said sternly — " Gockburn, no intelligencemust ever go from my house to anynewspapers**Cockburn bowed — " None shall, Sir, ifI can prevent it; none ever did from me,General**** None must ever go from any one in myfamily-^ look to it**Cockburn bowed again respectfully, but witha look of reservation of right of remonstrance,answered by a look from his master, of " Nomore must be said** Yet Cockburn was afavourite; he had lived in the family fromthe time he was a boy. He moved hastilytowards the door, and having turned the handle,rested upon it and said, ^' General, I cannotanswer for others**Then, Cockburn, I must find somebodywho can**Cockburn disappeared, but after closing thedoor the veteran opened it again, stood, andsaid stoutly, though seemingly with some impedimentin his throat — " General Clarendon,do me the justice to give jne full powers**78 HELEN.** Whatever you require : say, such are yourorders from me, and that you have full powerto dismiss whoever disobeys*' Cockburn bowed,and withdrew satisfied.Another silence, when the General hastilyfinishing his breakfast took up the newspaper,and said,I wished to have spared you the pain ofseeing these, Miss Stanley, but it must bedone now.'* There have appeared in certain papers,paragraphs alluding to Beauclerc and to you ;these scandalous papers I never allow to entermy house, but I was informed that there weresuch paragraphs, and I was obliged to examineinto them. I am sorry to find thatthey have some of them been copied into mypaper to-day."He laid the newspaper before her. Thefirst words which struck her eye were thedreaded whispers of last night ; the paragraphwas as follows : —In a few days will be published the Memoirsof the late Colonel D' * ♦ ♦ ♦, comprisinganecdotes and original love-letters;HELEN. 79which will explain the mysterious allusionslately made in certain papers to ^ La belleFiancee'* and * Jpromessi sposu' "What !'' exclaimed Helen ; " the letters !published !^The General had turned from her as sheread, and had gone to his writing-desk, whichwas at the furthest end .of the room ; he unlockedit, and took from it a small volume,and turning over the leaves as he slowly approachedHelen, he folded down some pages,laid the volume on the table before her, andthen said,^^ Before you look into these scandalous memoirs.Miss Stanley, let me assure you, thatnothing but the necessity of being empoweredby you to say what is truth and what is falsehood,could determine me to give you thisshocks*'She was scarcely able to put forward herhand ; yet took the book, opened it, looked atit, saw letters which she knew could not beCecilia'^s, but turning another leaf, she pushedit from her with horror. It was the letter —beginning with ** My dear — too dear Henry'80 HELEN.«* In print I'' cried she ; " In print ! published!^'Not published yet, that I hope to be ableto prevents said the General.Whether she heard, whether she could hearhim, he was not certain, her head was bentdown, her hands clasping her forehead. Hewaited some minutes, then sitting down besideher, with a voice of gentleness and ofcommiseration, yet of steady determination, hewent on.I must speak, and you mit hear me,Helen, for your own sake, and for Beauclerksake."'« Speak'' cried she, " I hear."Hear then the words of a friend, who willbe true to you through life — through life anddeath, if you will be but true to yourself,Helen Stanley — a friend who loves you as heloves Beauclerc ; but he must do more, he mustesteem you as he esteems Beauclerc, incapableof anything that is false*'Helen listened with her breath suspended,not a word in reply.Then I ask "HELEN. 81She put her hand upon his arm, as if tostop him; she had a foreboding that he wasgoing to ask something that she could not,without betraying Cecilia, answer.If you are not yet sufficiently collected,I will wait ; take your own time — My questionis simple — I ask you to tell me whether allthese letters are your's or not ?''*' No'' cried Helen, " these letters are notmine''** Not all," said the General : ** this first oneI know to be yours, because I saw it in yourhandwriting; but I am certain all cannot beyours : now will you shew me which are, andwhich are not."I will take them to my own room, andconsider and examine."** Why not look at them here. Miss Stanley ?"She wanted to see Cecilia, she knew shecould never answer the question without consultingher, but that she could not say ; still shehad no other resource, so, conquering her trembling,she rose and said, *^ I would rathergoto ^"Not to Cecilia," said he ; " to that I 82 HELEN.sect : what can Cecilia do for you ? what canshe advise, but what I advise, that the plaintruth should be told ?''« If I could ! O if I could !" cried Helen.** What can you mean ? Pardon me, MissStanley, but surely you can tell the plain fact ;you can recollect what you have written— atleast you can know what you have not written.You have not yet even looked beyond a fewof the letters — pray be composed — be yourself*This business it was that brought me totown. I was warned by that young lady, thatpoetess of Mr. Churchill's, whom you madeyour friend by some kindness at Clarendonpark — I was warned that there was a bookto come out, these Memoirs of Colonel D'Au-bigny, which would contain letters said to beyours, a publication that would be highly injuriousto you. I need not enter into detailsof the measures I consequently took ; but Iascertained that Sir Thomas D'Aubigny, theelder brother of the Colonel, knows nothingmore of the matter than that he gave a manuscriptof his brother which he had neverread, to be published : the rest is a miserableHELEN. 83intrigue between booksellers and literary manufacturers,I know not whom ; I have not beenable to get to the bottom of it ; sufficient formy present purpose I know, and must tell you.You have enemies who evidently desire to destroyyour reputation, of course to break yourmarriage. For this purpose the slanderouspress has been set at work, the gossipingpart of the public has had its vile curiosityexcited, the publication of this book is expectedin a few days: this is the only copy yet completed,I believe, and this I could not get fromthe bookseller till this morning ; I am now goingto have every other copy destroyed directly.'^Oh my dear, dear friend, how can I thankyou''Her tears gushed forth.^^ Thank me not by words, Helen, but byactions; no tears, summon your soul — be yourself''** O if I could but retrieve one false step !" —she suddenly checked herself. He stood aghastfor an instant, then recovering himself sl§ helooked upon her and marked the nature of heremotion, he said :84 HELEN.*' There can be no false step that you couldever have taken that cannot be retrieved.There can have been nothing that is irretrievable,except falsehoodsFalsehood ! No'' cried she, " I will notsay what is false — therefore I will not say anything*"^^ Then since you cannot speaks continuedthe General, *^ will you trust me with the lettersthemselves.'^ Have you brought them totown with you ?*"The original letters ?^Yes, those in the packet which I gave toyou at Clarendon Park." •*' They are burned''All ? — one, this first letter, I saw you tear ;did you burn all the rest ?"They are burned," repeated she, colouringall over. She could not say, *^ / burned them."He thought it a poor evasion. " They areburned," continued he, " that is, you burnedthen : unfortunate. I must then recur to myfirst appeal. . Take this pencil, and mark, Ipray you, the passages that are your's. I maybecalled on to prove the forgery of these pas-helen.85sages : if you do not shew me, and truly, whichare yours, and which are not, how can I answerfor you, Helen ?""One hours said Helen, — "only leave mefor one hour, and it shall be doneeWhy this cowardly delay ?"I ask only one hour — only leave me forone hour'*• I obey. Miss Stanley, since it must be so.I am gone.^He went, and Helen felt how sunk shewas in his opinion, — sunk for ever, she feared !but she as yet could not think distinctly, hermind was stunned ; she felt that she must waitfor somebody, but did not at first recollectclearly that it was for Cecilia. She leanedback on the sofa, and sank into a sort ofdreamy state. How long she remained thusunconscious she knew not; but she was rousedat last by the sound, as she fancied, of acarriage stopping at the door : she started up,but it was gone, or it had not been. She perceivedthat the breakfast things had been removed,and, turning her eyes upon the clock,she was surprised to see how late it was. She86 HELEN.snatched up the pages which she hated totouch, and ran up-stairs to Cecilia's room,—door bolted ; — she gave a hasty tap — noanswer ; another louder, no answer. She raninto the dressing-room for Felicie, who camewith a face of mystery, and the smile triumphantof one who knows what is not to beknown. But the smile vanished on seeing MissStanley's face.Bon Dieu ! Miss Stanley — how pale ! maisquest ce que c'est? Mon Dieu, quest ce quec'est done .?''Is Lady Cecilia'*s door bolted within side ?*"said Helen.No, only lock by me'' said MademoiselleFelicie. " Miladi charge me not to tell youshe was not dere. And I had de presentimentyou might go up to look for her in her room.Her head is got better quite. She is aU upand dress ; she is gone out in the carriage, andvirile soon be back, no doubt. I know not towhere she go, but in my opinion to my LadyKatrine. If you please, you not mention I saydat, as miladi charge me not to speak of disto you. Apparemment quelque petit myslere.^/HELEN. 87Poor Helen felt as if her last hope was gone,and now, in a contrary extreme from the dreamytorpor in which she had been before, she wasseized with a nervous impatience for the arrivalof Cecilia, though whether to hope or fearfrom it, she did not distinctly know. She wentto the drawing-room, and listened and listened,and watched and watched, and looked at theclock, and felt a still increasing dread thatthe General might return before Lady Cecilia,and that she should not have accomplished herpromise. She became more and more impatient.As it grew later, the rolling of carriages increased,and their noise grew louder, and continuallyas they came near she expected that onewould stop at the door.She expected and expected, and feared, andgrew sick with fear long deferred. At last onecarriage did stop, and then came a thunderingknock — louder, she thought, than usual ; butbefore she could decide whether it was Ceciliaor not, the room-door opened, and the servanthad scarcely time to say, that two ladies whodid not give their names had insisted uponbeing let up — when the two ladies entered.\t ^88 HELEN.One in the extreme of foreign fashion, butan Englishwoman, of assured and not prepossessingappearance : the other, half hid behindher companion, and all timidity, struckHelen as the most beautiful creature she hadever beheld.A thousand pardons for forcing yourdoors said the foremost lady ; " but I bearmy apology in my hand : a precious little boxof Roman cameos from a friend of Lady CeciliaClarendon's, which I was desired to delivermyself'Helen was, of course, sorry that Lady Ceciliawas not at home.^^ I presume I have the honour of speakingto Miss Stanley," continued the assured lady,and she gave her card " Comtesse de St. Cy-mons*'Then half-turning to the beauty, whonow became visible—" Allow me to mention —Lady Blanche ForestersAt that name Helen did not start, but shefelt as if she had received an electric shock.How she went through the necessary forms ofcivility she knew not ; but even in the agonyof passion the little habits of life hold theirHELEN. 89sway. The customary motions were made, andwords pronounced ; yet when Helen looked atthat beautiful Lady Blanche, and saw howbeautiful ! there came a spasm at her heart.The Comtesse, in answer to her look towardsa chair, did not ^^ choose to sit down -^could not stay — would not intrude on MissStanley'' So they stood, Helen supportingherself as best she could, and preserving, apparently,perfect composure; seeming to listento what farther Madame: de St. Cymon wassaying*; but only the sounds reached her ear,and a general notion that she spoke of thebox in her hand. She gave Helen some messageto Lady Cecilia, explanatory of her waitingor not waiting upon her ladyship, to allwhich Helen answered with proper signs ofcivility ; and while the Comtesse was goingon, she longed to look again at Lady Blanche,but dared not. She saw a half curtsey and areceding motion ; and she knew they weregoing, and she curtsied mechanically. She feltinexpressible relief when Madame de St. Cymonturned her back and moved towards the door.Then Helen looked again at Lady Blanche,90 HELEN.and saw again her surpassing beauty and perfecttranquillity. The tranquillity gave hercourage, it passed instantaneously into herself,through her whole existence. The Comtessestopped in her way out, to look at achina table. "Ha! beautiful! Sfivre! —enamel — by Jaquetot, is it not ?^Helen was able to go forward, and answer toall the questions asked. Not one word fromthe Lady Blanche ; but she wished to hear thesound of her voice. She tried — she spoke toher; but to whatever Helen said, no answercame, but the sweetest of smiles. The Comtesse,with easy assurance and impertinent ill-breeding,looked at all that lay in her way, andtook up and opened the miniature pictures thatwere on the table.** Lady Cecilia Clarendon — charming ! —Blanche, you never saw her yet. Quite charming,is not it .?''Not a word from Lady Blanche, but a smile,a Guido smile. Another miniature taken upby the curious Comtesse. " Ah ! very likeindeed ! not flattered though. Do you knowit, Blanche— eh ?"HELEN. 91It was Beauclerc.Lady Blanche then murmured some fewwords indistinctly, in a very sweet voice, butshewed no indication of feeling, except, asHelen gave one glance, she thought she saw aslight colour, like the inside of a shell, delicatelybeautiful; but it might be only thereflection from the crimson silk-curtain nearwhich she stood : it was gone, and the pictureput down ; and in a lively tone from the Comtesse^^ Au revoir and exit, a graceful bendfrom the silent beauty, and the vision vanished.Helen stood for some moments fixed to thesomewhere they left her. She questioned herinmost thoughts. " Why was I struck somuch, so strangely, with that beauty — sopainfully? It cannot be envy; I never wasenvious of any one, though so many I haveseen so much handsomer than myself. Jealousy? surely not ; for there is no reason forit — no possibility of danger. Yet now, alas !when he has so much cause to doubt me ! perhapshe might change. He seemed so displeasedlast night, and he has never been hereall the morning !^92 Helen.She recollected the look and accent of Madamede St. Cymon, as she said the words^' au revoir Helen did not like the words,or the look. She did not like anything aboutMadame de St. Cymon : ^^ Something so assured,so impertinent ! And all that unintelligiblemessage about those cameos ! — a mereexcuse for making this unseasonable pushingvisit — just pushing for the acquaintance.The General will never permit though — thatis one comfort. But why do I say comfort ?'^Back went the circle of her thoughts to thesame point—" What ran I do .? — the Generalwill return, he will find I have not obeyed him.But what can be done till Cecilia returns ? Ifshe were but here, I could mark — we couldsettle. O Cecilia! where are you? But,"thought she, " 1 had better look at the whole.I will have courage to read these horribleletters."To prevent all hazard of further interruption,she now went into an inner room, boltedthe doors, and sat down to her dreaded task.And there we leave her.HELEN. 93CHAPTER V.That Fortune is not nice in her morality,that she frequently favours those who do notadhere to truth more than those who do, weHave early had occasion to observe. But whetherFortune may not be in this, as in all therest, treacherous and capricious; whether shemay not by her first smiles and favours lureher victims on to their cost, to their utterundoing at last, remains to be seen.It is title to inquire what has become ofLady Cecilia Clarendon. Before we followher on her very early morning visit to hercousins, we must take leave to pause one momentto remark, not in the was of moralisingby any means, but simply as a matterof history, that the first little fib in whichLady Cecilia, as a customary licence of speech,indulged herself the moment she awoke this94 HELEN.morning, though it seemed to answer its purposeexactly at the time, occasioned her ladyshipa good deal of superfluous toil and troubleduring the course of the day. In reply tothe first question her husband had asked, orinevasion of that question, she had answered,My dear love, don't ask me any questions,for I have such a horrid headache, that Ireally can hardly speaks".Now a headache, such as she had at thatmoment, certainly never silenced any woman.Slighter could not be — scarce enough to swearby. There seemed no great temptation to prevaricationeither, for the General's question wasnot of a formidable nature, not what the lawyerscall a leading question, rather one that led tonothing. It wad only'* Had you a pleasant party at Lady Castle-fort'slast night, my dear Cecilia ?^But with that prescience with which somenicely foresee how the truth, seemingly mostinnocent, may do harm, her Ladyship forebodedthat, if she answered straight forward —"no'' — that might lead to — why? how .^^ orHELEN. 95wherefore ? — and this might bring out the historyof the strange rude manner in which Labelle Jiancte had been received. That need notnecessarily have followed, but, even if it had, itwould have done her no harm, — rather wouldhave served at once her purpose in the bestmanner possible, as time will show.Her husband, unsuspicious man, asked nomore questions, and only gave her the veryadvice she wished him to give, that she shouldnot get up to breakfast — that she should restas long as she could. Farther, as if to forwardher schemes, even without knowing them,he left the house early, and her headache convenientlygoing off, she was dressed with alldespatch-carriage at the door as soon ashusband out of sight, and away she went,as we have seen, without Helen's hearing, seeing,or suspecting her so well contrived andexecuted project.She was now in good spirits. The infectionof fear which she had caught, perhaps fromthe too sensitive Helen, last night, she hadthrown off this morning. It was a sunny day.96 HELEN.and the bright sunshine dispelled, as ever vfithher, any black notions of the night, all melancholyideas whatsoever. She had all the constitutionalhopefulness of good animal spirits.Bit though no fears remained, curiosity wasas strong as ever. She was exceedingly eagerto know what had been the cause of all thesestrange appearances. She guessed it must besome pitiful jealousy of Lady Katrine^s — somepoor spite against Helen. Any thing thatshould really give Beauclerc uneasiness, shenow sincerely believed to be out of the question.Nonsense — only Helen and Beauclerc'slove of tormenting themselves — quite nonsense !And nonsense ! three times ejaculated, quitesettled the matter, and assured her in the beliefthat there could be nothing serious to be apprehended.In five minutes she should be at thebottom of all things, and in half an hour returntriumphant to Helen, and make her laugh ather cowardly self. The carriage rolled on.Lady Cecilia's spirits rising as she movedrapidly onwards, so that by the time she arrivedat Lady Castlefort'^s she was not only in goodbut in high spirits.HELEN. 97To her asking, *' Not at home neverechoed. Even at hours undue, such as thepresent, she, privileged, penetrated. Accordingly,unquestioned, unquestioning, the alertstep was let down, opened wide was the hall-door,and lightly tripped she up the steps ; butthe first look into the hall told her that companywas in the house already — yes — a breakfast— all were in the breakfast room, exceptLady Castlefort, not yet come down — above,the footman believed, in her boudoir. To theboudoir Cecilia went, but Lady Castlefort wasnot there, and Cecilia was surprised to hear thesound of music in the drawing-room. LadyCastlefort's voice singing. While she waitedin the next room for the song to be finished,Cecilia turned over the books on the table,richly gilt and beautifully bound, except onein a brown paper parcel, which seemed unsuitedto the table, yet excited more attention thanall the others, because it was directed " Private— for Lady Katherine Hawksbyby — to bereturned before two o"" clock.'''* What could itbe ? thought Lady Cecilia. But her attentionwas now attracted by the song which LadyVOL. III. p98 HELEN.Castlefort seemed to be practising ; the wordswere distinctly pronounced, uncommonly distinctly,so as to be plainly heard—Had we never loved so kindly,Had v/e never loved so blindly,Never met, or never parted.We had ne'er been broken-hearted."As Cecilia listened, she cast her eyes upon acard which lay on the table — " Lord Bertramand a new light flashed upon her, a lightfavourable to her present purpose ; for since theobject was altered with Lady Castlefort, sinceit was not Beauclerc any longer, there wouldbe no further ill-will towards Helen. LadyCastlefort was not of the violent vindictive sort,with her there was no long-lasting cepit amoureux.She was not that fury, a woman scorned,but that blessed spirit, a woman believing herselfalways admired. " Soft, silly, sooth — not one ofthe hard, wicked, is Louisa thought Cecilia.And as Lady Castlefort, slowly opening thedoor, entered, tipaid, as if she knew some particularperson was in the room, Cecilia could nothelp suspecting that Louisa had intended hersong for other ears than those of her dear cousin,and that the superb negligence of her dressJHELEN. 99iras not unstudied ; but that well-prepared, !well-according sentimental air, changed in- ^instantly on seeing — not the person expected,and with a start, she exclaimed, '^ Cecilia Clastendon !''*^ Louisa Castlefort V cried Lady Cecilia,answering that involuntary start of confusion ^with a well-acted start of admiration. ^^ LouisaCastlefort, si belle si belle, so beautifullydressed !''"Beautifully dressed! — nothing extraordinary!^ said Lady Castlefort, advancing with ahalf embarrassed, half nonchalant air, — "Onemust make something of a toilette de matin,you know, when one has people to breakfastsSo elegant, so negligent r continued LadyCecilia.There is the point'' said Lady Castlefort.^^ I cannot bear anything that is studied incostume, for dress is really a matter of so littleconsequence ! I never bestow a thought uponit. Angelique rules my toilette as she pleases'"*^ Angelique has the taste of an angel freshfrom Paris," cried Lady Cecilia.*^ And now tell me, Cecilia'' pursued Ladyp 2100 Helen.Castlefort, quite in good humour, 'tell me,my dear, to what do I owe this pleasure ? whatmakes you so nationale ? It must be somethingvery extraordinary."Not at all, only a little matter of curiosity'"Then, from Lady Castlefort, who had hitherto,as if in absence of mind, stood, therewas a slight *' Won't you sit .?^ motion.No no, I can't sit, can't stay," said LadyCecilia.A look quickly visible, and quickly suppressed,shewed Lady Castlefort's sense of relief;then came immediately greater pressing tosit down, " Pray do not be in such a hurry.""But I am keeping you: have you breakfasted?"Taken coffee in my own room," said LadyCastlefort."But you have people to breakfast; mustnot you go down ?"No no, I shall not go down, for this isKatrine's affair, as I will explain to you."Lady Cecilia was quite content, without anyexplanation, and sitting down, she drew herchair close to Lady Castlefort, and said,HELEN. 101Now, my dear, my little matter of curiosity.Stay, my dear, first I must tell you aboutKatrine — now confidentially — very.^Lady Cecilia ought to have been aware thatwhen once her dear cousin Louisa littleheart opened, and she became confidential,very, it was always of her own domestic grievancesshe began to talk, and that, once thesluice opened, out poured from the deep reservoirthe long-expected minute drops of monthsand years.You have no idea what a life I lead withKatrine — now she is grown blue''^^ Is she ?'' said Lady Cecilia, quite indifferent.*^ Deep blue ! shocking : and this is a bluebreakfast, and all the people at it are bluebores, and a blue bore is, as Horace Churchillsays, one of the most mischievous creaturesbreathing ; and he tells me the only way ofhindering them from doing mischief is byringing them ; but first you must get rings.Now, in this case, for Katrine not a ring tobe had for love or money. So there is no hopefor me."102 HELEN.<cNo hope for me'' thought Lady Cecilia,throwing herself back in her chair, submissive,but not resigned.If it had but pleased Heaven'' continuedLady Castlefort, " in its mercy, to have sentKatrine a husband of any kind, what a blessingit would have been ! If she could buthave been married to anybody — now anybody''^" Anybody is infinitely obliged to you," saidCecilia, ^^ but since that is out of the question,let us say no more about it — no use."No use ! that is the very thing of which Icomplain ; the very thing which must ever—ever make me miserable'Well, well, my dear** cried Lady Cecilia,no longer capable of patience ; ^* do not bemiserable any more just now; never mindKatrine just now."Never mind her ! Easy for you to say,Cecilia, who do not live with Katrine Hawksbyby,and do not know what it is to have such aplague of a sister, watching one, — watching'every turn, every look one gives — worse than ajealous husband. Can I say more ?"HELEN. 103No'' cried Cecilia ; *' therefore say nomore about it. I understand it all perfectly,and I pity you from the bottom of my heart :so now, my dear Louisa ■ ' ^I tell you, my dear Cecilia," pursued LadyCastlefort, continuing her own thoughts, " Itell you, Katrine is envious of me. Envy hasbeen her fault from a child. Envy of poor me !£envy, in the £erst place, of whatever goodlooks it pleased Providence to give me'' — Aglance at the glass. — ^^ And now Katrineenvies me for being Lady Castlefort. Heavenknows ! now, Cecilia, and you know, she neednot envy me so when she looks at Lord Castle-fort; that is, what she sometimes says herself,which you know is very wrong of her to say tothe —• unnecessary too, when she knows I hadno more hand in my marriage "Than heart !" Cecilia could not forbearsaying.Than heart !" readily responded LadyCastlefort ; ^^ never was a truer word said.Never was there a more complete sacrifice thanmy mother made of me ; you know, Cecilia, apoor, young, innocent, helpless sacrifice, if everthere was one upon earth."104 HELEN.To a coronet," said Lady Cecilia.Absolutely dragged to. the altar," continuedLady Castlefort." In Mechlin lace, that was some comfort,"said Cecilia laughing, and she laughed on inhope of cutting short this sad chapter of sacrifices.But Lady Castlefort did not understandraillery upon this too tender point. " I don'tknow what you mean by Mechlin laces criedshe pettishly. " Is this your friendship forme,Cecilia ?''Cecilia, justly in fear of losing the reward ofall her large lay-out of flattery, fell to protestingthe tenderest sympathy. " But only nowit was all over, why make her heart bleedabout what could not be helped !"Cannot be helped ! Oh ! there is the verything I must ever, ever mourn."The embroidered cambric handkerchief wastaken out of the bag ; no tears, indeed, came,but there were sobs, and Cecilia not knowinghow far it might go, apprehending that herladyship meditated hysterics, seized a smelling-bottle,threw out the stopper, and presentedit close under the nostrils. The good ^^ SeUHELEN. 105poignant d'^Angleterrey^* of which Felicie alwaysacknowledged the unrivalled potency, didtheir business effectually. Back went theheady with an exclamation of ^* That's enough !Oh, oh ! too much ! too much, Cecilia !^Are you better, my dear ?'^ inquired Cecilia; *' but, indeed, you must not give way tolow spirits ; indeed you must not : so now, tochange the conversation, Louisa "^Not so fast, Lady Cecilia; not yet ;" andnow Louisa went on with a medical maundering.As to low spirits, my dear Cecilia, I mustsay I agree with Sir Sib Pennyfeather, whotell me it is not mere common low spirits, butreally all mind, too much mind ; mind preyingupon my nerves. Oh I I knew it myself. Atfirst he thought it was rather constitutional;poor dear Sir Sib ! he is very clever. Sir Sib ;and I convinced him he was wrong; and sowe agreed that it was all upon my mind — all,all !— .'^At that instant a green parrot, who had beenhalf asleep in the comer, awoke on LadyCastlefort^s pronouncing, in an elevated tone,All, all !" and conceiving himself in somef5106 HELEN.way called upon, answered, ** Poll ! Poll ! bito' sugar, Poll !"No small difficulty had Lady Cecilia at thatmoment in keeping her risible muscles in order ;but she did, for Helenass sake, and she was rewarded,for after Lady Castlefort had, all unconsciousof ridicule, fed Poll from her amberbonbonniere^ and sighed out once more ^^ Mind !too much mind !" she turned to Cecilia, andsaid, *^ But, my dear, you wanted something ;you had something to ask me.^^At once, and as fast as she could speak.Lady Cecilia poured out her business aboutHelen Stanley. She told of the ill-bred mannerin which Helen had been received lastnight ; inquired why the words process sposiand belle fiancee were so oddly repeated, as ifthey had been watchwords, and asked what wasmeant by all those strange whisperings in thesanctum sanatorium.Katrine's set," observed Lady Castlefortcoolly. " Just like them ; just like her !"*' I should not care about it in the leastsaid Lady Cecilia, " if it were only Katrine'sill-natures or their ill-breeding. Ill-breedingHELEN. 107always recoils on the ill-bred, and does nobodyelse any harm But I should be glad to bequite clear that there is nothing more at thebottom."Lady Casdefort made no reply, but took upa bunch of seals, and looked at each of themone after another.Lady Cecilia, more afraid now than she hadyet Jbeen.that there was something at the bottom,still bravely went on, " What is it ? Ifyou know, tell me at once.^Nay, ask Katrine,^ said Lady Castlefort.No, I ask you, I would rather ask you,for you are good-natured, Louisa — so tellme.*' But I dare say it is only slanders said thegood-natured Louisa.Slander !'^ repeated Lady Cecilia, " slander,did you say ?''Yes ; what is there to surprise you somuch in that word ? did you never hear of sucha thing ? I am sure' I hear too much of it ;Katrine lives and breathes and fattens upon it :as Churchill says, she eats slander, drinksslander, sleeps upon slander."108 HELEN.'< But tell me, what of Helen ? that is all Iwant to hear'' cried Lady Cecilia : " Slander !of Helen Stanley ! what is it that Katrinesays about poor Helen ? what spite, whatvengeance, can she have against her, tell me,tell me."^^ If you wG^ild ask one question at a time,I might be able to answer you'' said LadyCastlefort. " Do not hurry me so ; you fidgetmy nerves. First as to the spite, you knowyourself that Katrine, from the beginning,never could endure Helen Stanley ; for my part,I always rather liked her than otherwise, andshall defend her to the last."« Defend her r^' But Katrine was always jealous of her,and lately worse than ever, for getting into herplace, as she says, with you ; that made herhate her all the more."Let her hate on, that will never make melove Helen the less."So I told her; and besides, Miss Stanleyis going to be married."To be sure ; — well ?"And Katrine naturally hates everybodyHELEN. 109that is going to be married. If you were tosee the state she is in always reading theannouncements of marriages in high life!Churchill, I do believe, had Miss Stanleyintended match put into every paper continually,on purpose for the pleasure of plaguingKatrine ; and if you could have seen her longface, when she saw it announced in the CourtGazette — good authority, you know — really itwas pitiable'I don't care, I don't care about that — Ohpray go on to the facts about Helen''Well, but the fact is as I tell you ; youwanted to know what sufficient cause for vengeance,and am not I telling you ? If youwould not get into such a state of excitement! — as Sir Sib says excitements shouldbe avoided. La ! my dear," continued LadyCastlefort, looking up at her with unfeignedastonishment, ^^ what agitation ! why, if itwere a matter that concerned yourself "** It concerns my friend, and that is thesame thing."** So one says ; but — you look really, such acolour."110 HELEN.** No matter what colour I look' cried Cecilia; ** go on''^^ Do you never read the papers ?" said LadyCastlefort.Sometimes," said Lady Cecilia ; " but Ihave not looked at a paper these three days ;was. there any thing particular P tell me."^^ My dear ! tell you ! as if I could rememberby heart all the scandalous paragraphs Iread." She looked round the room, and notseeing the papers, said, ^^ I do not know whathas become of those papers ; but you can findthem when you go home."She mentioned the names of two papers,noted for being personal, scandalous, andscurrilous.Are those the papers you mean ?" criedLady Cecilia ; " the General never lets theminto the house."That is a pity — that 's hard upon you,for then you never are, as you see, au courantdu jour, and all your friends might be abusedto death without your knowing it, if somekind person did not tell you."^^ Do tell me, then, the substance ; I don'twant the words."JHELEN. Ill*^ But the words are all. Somehow it isnothing without the words*"In her now excited state of communicativeness,Lady Castlefort rose and looked all aboutthe room for the papers, saying, " They werehere, they were there, all yesterday ; Katrine hadthem shewing them to Lady Bashan in themorning, and to aU her blue set afterwards —Lord knows what she has done with them. Sotiresome looking for things ! how I hate it.^She rang the bell and inquired from thefootman if he knew what had become of thepapers. Of course he did not know, could notimagine — servants never know, nor can imaginewhat have become of newspapers — but he wouldinquire.While he went to inquire. Lady Castlefortsank down again into her bertie, and againfell into admiration of Cecilia^s^s state of impatience.*' How curious you are ! Now I am neverreally curious about anything that does notcome home to myself; I have so little interestabout other people."This was said in all the simplicity of selfishlyHELEN.ness, not from candour, but from mere absenceof shame, and utter ignorance of what othersthink -— what others feel, which always characterises,and often betrays the selfish, evenwhere the head is best capable of supplying thedeficiencies of the heart. But Louisa Castleforthad no head to hide her want of heart ; whileCecilia, who had both head and heart, lookeddown upon her cousin with surprise, pity, andcontempt, quick succeeding each other, in asort of parenthesis of feeling, as she moved hereyes for a moment from the door on whichthey had been fixed, and to which they recurred,while she stood waiting for the appearanceof those newspapers.The footmen entered with them. " In Mr.Tantrums room they were, my lady""Lady Cecilia did not hear a word that wassaid, nor did she see that the servant laid a noteon the table. It was well that Louisa hadthat note to read, and to answer, while Cecilialooked at the paragraphs in these papers : elseher start must have been seen, her exclamationmust have been heard; it must have beenmarked, that the whole character of her emo-HELEN. listion changed from generous sympathy with herfriend, to agony of fear for herself.The instant she cast her eyes on that much-readpaper, she saw the name of ColonelD'Aubigny ; all the rest swam before her eyes.Lady Castlefort, without looking up from herwriting, asked — What day of the month?Cecilia could not answer, but, recalled to herselfby the sound of the voice, she now tried to readshe scarcely read the words, but some waytook the sense into her mind at a glance.114 HELEN.CHAPTER VI.The first of these paragraphs caught the eyeby its title in capital letters.^< LA BELLE FIANCEE.Though quite unknown in the Londonworld, this young lady cannot fail to excitesome curiosity among our fashionables as thesuccessful rival of one whom the greatest painterof the age has pronounced to be the fairestof the fair— the Lady B. F * * * * * Thisnew Helen is, we understand, of a respectablefamily, niece to a late Dean, distinguished forpiety much and viri more. It was reportedthat the niece was a great heiress, but after theproposal had been made, it was discovered thatBirth had made away with every shilling ofher fortune. This made no difference in theeyes of her inamorato, who is as rich as he isHELEN. 115generous, and who saw with the eyes of ayouth ^ Of Age to-morrow His guardian, awary general, demurred — but nursery tacticsprevailed. The youiig lady, though she hadnever been out bore the victory from him ofmany campaigns. The day for the marriage .was fixed as announced by us But wearecondemned to state that a postponement ofthis marriage for mysterious reasons has takenplace. Delicacy forbids us to say more atpresent''Delicacy, however, did not prevent theirsaying in the next paper in a paragraph headed," Mystery solved''^* We understand that in the course of a fewdays will appear the ' Memoirs of the late ColonelD— — y ; or, Reminiscences of a Roue,well known in the Fashionable world.'** This little volume bids fair to engross theattention of the higher circles, as it contains,besides innumerable curious, personal, andsecret anecdotes, the original love-letters of acertain belle fiancee, now residing with a noblefamily in Grosvenor Square."116 HELEN.Lady Cecilia saw at once the whole dreadfuldanger — her own letters to Colonel D^Au-bigny they must be ! How could they havegot them ? They would be seen by her husband— published to the whole world — if theGeneral found out they were her's, he wouldcast her off for ever. If they were believed tobe Helen's — Helen was undone, sacrificed toher folly, her cowardice. " Oh ! if I had buttold Clarendon, he would have stopped thisdreadful, dreadful publication."And what falsehoods it might contain, shedid not even dare to think. All was remorse,terror, confusion — fixed to the spot like onestupefied, she stood.Lady Castlefort did not see it — she hadbeen completely engrossed with what she hadbeen writing, she was now looking for her mostsentimental seal, and not till she had pressedthat seal down and examined the impression,did she look up or notice Cecilia — then struckindeed with a sense of something unusual,—My dear'' said she, " you have no ideahow odd you look — so strange, Cecilia — quiteSbahie r Giving two pulls to the bell as sheHELEN. 117ispoke, and her eyes on the door, impatient forthe servant, she added — ** After all, Cecilia,Helen Stanley is no relation even — only afriend. Take this note — ^ to the footman whoanswered the bell; and the moment he leftthe room, continuing, in the same tone, to LadyCecilia, she said — ** You will have to give herup at last — that's all; so you had better makeyour mind up to it''When Lady Cecilia tried to speak, she feltas if her tongue cleaved to the roof of hermouth ; and when she did articulate, it was inasort of hoarse sound. " Is the book pubwished'' She held the paper before LadyCastlefort's eyes, and pointed to the name shecould not utter.** D'Aubigny's book — is it published, do youmean'' said Lady Castlefort. "Absolutelypublished, I cannot say, but it is all in print,I know. I do not understand about publishing.There's something about presentationcopies : I know Katrine was wild to have onebefore anybody else, so she is to have the firstcopy, I know, and, I believe, is to have itthis very morning for the people at this breaksHELEN.fast : it is to be the bonne bouche of thebusiness*« What has Katrine to do with it ? — Oh,tell me, quick !"^^ Dear me, Cecilia, what a fuss you are in !you make me quite nervous to look at you.You had better go down to the breakfast-room,and you will hear all about it from the fountainhead''Has Katrine the book or not ?" cried LadyCecilia.^^ Bless me ! I will inquire, my dear, if youwill not look so dreadful'' She rang, andcoolly asked— ^^ Did that man, that bookseller,Stone, send any parcel or book this morning,do you know, for Lady Katrine ?"^* Yes, my Lady ; Antrum had a parcelfor Lady Katrine — it is on the table, I believe'*Very well." The man left the room.Lady Cecilia darted on the brown paper parcelshe had seen directed to Lady Katrine, andseized it before the amazed Louisa could preventher. " Stop, stop !" cried she, springingforward, ** stop, Cecilia ; Katrine will neverforgive me !"HELEN. 119But Lady Cecilia, seizing a penknife, cutthe first knot.^^ Oh, Cecilia, I am undone if Katrine comesin I Make haste, make haste ! I can only letyou have a peep or two. We must do it upagain as well as ever,^ continued Lady Castlefort,while Lady Cecilia, fast as possible,went on cut, cut, cutting the packthread tobits, and she tore off the brown paper cover,then one of silver paper that protected the silkbinding.Lady Castlefort took up the outer cover andread, " To be returned before two o'clock." —'< What can that mean ? Then it is only lent ;not her own. Katrine will not understand thiswill be outrageously disappointed. I 'msure I don't care. But here is a note fromStone, however, which may explain it.^ Sheopened and read —'^ Stone's respects -» existing circumstancesmake it necessary her ladyship's copy shouldbe returned. Will be called for at two o'clock."*^ Cecilia, Cecilia, make haste ! But Katrinedoes not know yet — Still she may comeup." Lady Castlefort rang and inquired,120 HELEN.r*^ Have they done breakfast ?*^Breakfast is over, ray lady'' said the servantwho answered the bell, but Antrumthinks the gentlemen and ladies will not be upimmediately, on account of one of the ladiesbeing performing a poem''Very well, very good," added her ladyship,as the man left the room. ^^ Then, Cecilia,you will have time enough, for when oncethey begin performing, as Sylvester calls it,there is no end of it."^^ Oh Heavens !" cried Cecilia, as she turnedover the pages, " Oh Heavens ! what is here ?Such absolute falsehood ! Shocking, shocking!" she exclaimed as she looked on, terrifiedat what she saw : ^^ Absolutely false — aforgery."Whereabouts are you ?" said Lady Castle-fort,approaching to read along with her.^^ Oh, do not read it," cried Cecilia, and shehastily closed the book."What signifies shutting the book, my dear,"said Louisa, " as if you could shut people'seyes ? I know what it is ; I have read it."Read it !"HELEN. 121^^ Read it ! I really can read, though itseems to astonish you."*« But it is not published ?""One can read in manuscript."And did you see the manuscript ?"I had a glimpse. Yes — I know morethan Katrine thinks I know."** O tell me, Louisa; tell me all," criedCecilia.I will, but you must never tell that I toldit to you." 'Speak, speak," cried Cecilia.It is a long story," said Lady Castlefort.^^ Make it short then. * O tell me quick,Louisa !"There is a literary Lessons des cartes saidLady Castlefort, a little vain of knowing a literarydessous des cartes ; ^' Churchill being atthe head of every thing of that sort, you know,the bookseller brought him the manuscriptwhich Sir Thomas D'Aubigny had offered him,and wanted to know whether it would do ornot. Mr. Churchill answer was, that it wouldnever do without more pepper and salt, meaninggossip and scandal, and all that. ButVOL. III. G122 HELEN.you are reading on, Gedlia, not listening tome.«ccI am listening, indeed'"Then never tell how I cameo know everything.Katrine's maid has a lover, who is, asshe phrases it, one of the gentlemen connectedwith the press. Now, my Angelique, whocannot endure Katrine^s maid, tells me thatthis man is only a wonder-makers a half-crownparagraph writer. So, through Angelique,and indeed from another person "^ shestopped ; and then went on — " throughAngelique it all came up to me.^^All what ?^ cried Cecilia ; " go on, go ontothe facts*"** I will, if you will not hurry me so. Theletters were not in Miss Stanley's handwriting*"^^ No ! I am sure of .that's' said Cecilia.^^ Copies were all that they pretended to be ;so they may be forgeries after all, you sees^^ But how did Katrine or Mr. Churchillcome by the copies ?*"** I have a notion, but of this I am notquite sure^-*I have a notion, from somethingHELEN. 12SI was tdd by — in short I suspect that Carlos,Lady Davenant's page, somehow got at them,and gave them, or had them given to theman who was to publish the book. LadyKatrine and Churchill laid their heads together;here, in this very sanctum sanatorium.They thought I knew nothing, but I kneweverything. I do not believe Horace had anythingto do with it, except saying that thelove-letters would be just the thing for thepublic if they were bad enough. I remember,too, that it was he who added the second title,Reminiscences of a Bou6,^ and said somethingabout alliteration artful aid. And now,^^concluded Lady Castlefort, ^^ it is coming tothe grand catastrophe, as Katrine calls it.She has already told the story, and to-day shewas to give all her set what she calls oculardemonstration. Cecilia, now, quick, finish;they will he here this instant. Give me thebook ; let me do it up this minutes** JTo, no ; let me put it up," cried LadyCelia keeping .possession of the book and thebrown paper. *' I am a famous hand at doingHELEN.up a parcel, as famous as any Bond Streetshowman : your hands are not made for suchwork."Anybody but Lady Castlefort would havediscerned that Lady Cecilia had some furtherdesign, and she was herself afraid it would beperceived; but, taking courage from seeingwhat a fool she had to ded with, Lady Ceciliawent on more boldly : ^^ Louisa, I must havemore packthread ; this is all cut to bits''* I will ring and ask for some*^^ No, no ; do not ring for the footman ; bemight observe that we had opened the parcel.Cannot you get a string without ringing?Look in that baskets** None there, I knows said Lady Castlefort,without stirring.In your own room then; Angelique has«some.((How do you know P''^^ I know ! never mind how. Oo, and shewill give you packthread. I must have it be •fore Katrine comes up. So go, Louisa, go.^*^ Go,'^ in the imperative mood, operated,and she went ; she did not know why.HELEN. 125That instant Lady Cecilia drew the book outof the half-folded paper, and quick, quick,tore out page after page — every page of thoseletters that concerned herself or Helen, andinto the fire thrust them, and as they blazedheld them down bravely— had the boldness towait till all was black : all the while she trembled,but stood it, and they were burnt, and thebook in its brown paper cover was left on thetable, and she down stairs, before Lady Castle-fortesdressing-room door opened, and she crossedthe hall without meeting a soul except the manin waiting there. The breakfast-room was atthe back of the house looking into the gardens,and her carriage at the front-door had neverbeen seen by Lady Katrine, or any of her blueset. She cleared out of the house into her carriage— and off " To the Park'' said she.She was off but just in time. The wholetribe came out of the breakfast-room before shehad turned the comer of the street. She threwherself back in the carriage and took breath,congratulating herself upon this hairbreadth'scape. For this hour, this minute, she hadescaped ! — she was reprieved !126 HELEN.And now what was next to be done ? Thiswas but a momentary reprieve. Another copywould be had — no, not till tomorrow though.The sound of the 'words that had been readfrom the Booksellers note by Lady Castlefort,though scarcely noticed at the time, recurred toher now ; and there was hope something mightto-day be done to prevent the publication. Itmight still be kept for ever from her husbandsand from Beauclerk knowledge. One stratagemhad succeeded— others might.She took a drive round the Park to composethe excessive flurry of her spirits. Lettingdown all the glasses, she had the fresh airblowing upon her, and ere she was half round,she was able to think of what yet remained todo.Money ! Oh ! any money she couldcommand she would give to prevent this publication.She was not known to the Bookseller— no matter. Money is money fromwhatever hand. She would trust the matterto no one but herself, and she would go immediately— not a moment to be lost.To Stone's, the Bookseller's*'HELEN. 127Arrived. " Do not give my name; only say,a lady wants to speak to Mr. Stone'sThe people at Mr. Stones did qot know thelivery or the carriage, but such a carriage andsuch a lady commanded the deference of theshowman.^^ Please to walk in, Madam,^^ and by thetime she had walked in, the man changedMadam into your Ladyship— '^ Mr. Stone willbe with your Ladyship in a moment— only inthe warehouse. If your ladyship will please towalk up into the back drawing-room— there'sa fire''The maid followed to blow it ; and whilethe bellows wheezed and the fire did not bum,Lady Cecilia looked out of the window ineag^ expectation of seeing Mr. Stone returningfrom the warehouse with all due celerity.No Mr. Stone, however, appeared ; but therewas a good fire in the middle of the courtyard,as she observed to the maid who was plyingthe wheezing bellows; and who answeredthat they had had a great fire there this hourpast, " burning of papers'' And at that mos128 HELEN.ment a man came out with his arms full ofa huge pile — sheets of a book, Lady Cecilia sawit was thrown on the fire. Then came outand stood beside the fire — could she be mistaken? — impossible — it was like a dream —the General !Cecilia's first thought was to run away beforeshe should be seen ; but the next moment thatthought was abandoned, for the time to executeit was now past. The messenger sent acrossthe yard had announced that a lady in the backdrawing-room wanted Mr. Stone. Eyes hadlooked up — the General had seen and recognisedher, and all she could now do was, torecognise him in return, which she did aseagerly and gracefully as possible.The General came up to her directly, not alittle astonished that she, whom he fancied athome in her bed, incapacitated by a headachethat had prevented her from speaking to him,should be here, so far out of her usual haunts,and, as it seemed, out of her element — " Whatcan bring you here, my dear Cecilia ?"The same purpose which, if I rightly spell,brought you here, my dear General," and herHELEN. 129eye intelligently glanced at the burning papersin the yard.Do you know then, Cecilia, what thosepapers are ? How did you know ?*"Lady Cecilia told her history, keeping asstrictly to facts as the natures of the case admitted.Her headache, of course, she hadfound much better for the sleep she had taken.She had set o£P, she told him, as soon asshe was able, for Lady Castlefort^s, to inquireinto the meaning of the strange whispers of thepreceding night. Then she told of the scandalousparagraphs she had seen ; how she hadlooked over the book; and how successfullyshe had torn out and destroyed the wholechapter ; and then how, hoping to be able toprevent the publication, she had driven directlyto Mr. Stone's.Her husband, with confiding, admiring eyes,looked at her and listened to her, and thoughtall she said so natural, so kind, that he couldnot but love her the more for her zeal of friendship,though he blamed her for interfering,in defiance of his caution. ^^ Had you consultedme, or listened to me, my dear Cecilia,g5130 HELEN.this morning, I could have saved you all thistrouble ; I should have told you that I wouldsettle with Stone, and stop the publication, asI have done''** But that copy which had been sent toLady Katrine, surely I did some good therebyburning those pages ; for if once it had gotamong her set, it would have spread like wildfire,you know, Clarendon."He acknowledged this, and said, smiling —Be satisfied with yourself, my love ; I acknowledgethat you made there a capital coupde mainsJust then, in came Mr. Stone with an accountin his hand, which the General steppedforward to receive, and, after one glance at theamount, he took up a pen, wrote, and signedhis name to a cheque on his banker. Mr.Stone received it, bowed obsequiously, andassured the General that every copy of theoffensive chapter had been withdrawn from thebook and burnt — " that copy excepted whichyou have yourself. General, and that whichwas sent to Lady Katrine Hawksbyby, which,we expect in every minute, and it shall be sentHELEN. 131to Grosvenor Square immediately. I will bringit myself, to prevent all dangersThe General, who knew there was no dangerthere, smiled at Cecilia, and told the booksellerthat he need take no further troubleabout Lady Weariness copy ; the man bowed,and Lodging again at the amount of the cheque,retired well satisfied.^' You come home with* me, my dear Clarendon,do not you ?^^ said Lady Cecilia.They drove off. On their way, the Generalsaid-*-" It is always difficult to decide whetherto contradict or to let such publications taketheir course : but in the present case, to stopthe scandal instantly and completely was theonly thing to be done. There are cases ofhonour, when women are concerned, where lawis too slow : it must not be remedy, it must beprevention. If the finger of scorn dares topoint, it must be — cut off.'^ After a pause ofgrave thought, he added — " Upon the mannerin which Helen now acts will depend her happiness— her character — her whole future life."Lady Cecilia summoned all her power toprevent her from betraying herself: the danger132 HELEN.was great, for she could not command her fearsso completely as to hide the look of alarm withwhich she listened to the General ; but in hiseyes her agitation appeared no more than wasnatural for her to feel about her friend.My love' continued he, " if Helen isworthy of your affection, she will shew it now.Her only resource is in perfect truth : tell herso, Cecilia — impress it upon her mind. Wouldto Heaven I had been able to convince her ofthis at first ! Speak to her strongly, Cecilia ;as you love her, impress upon her that myesteem, Beauclerk love, the happiness of herlife, depend upon her truth !^ As he repeatedthese words, the carriage stopped at their owndoor.HELEN. 133CHAPTER VII.Wb left Helen in the back drawing-room,the door bolted, and beginning to read herdreaded task. The paragraphs in the newspaperswe have seen, were sufficiently painful,but when she came to the book itself — to theletters — she was in consternation, greater eventhan what she had felt in the General^s presenceunder the immediate urgency of his eye andvoice. Her conviction was that in each ofthese letters, there were some passages, someexpressions, which certainly were Gecilia^s, butmixed with others, which as certainly werenot hers. The internal evidence appeared toher irresistibly strong: and even in thosepassages which she knew to be Gecilia^s writingsit too plainly appeared that, howeverplayfully, however delicately expressed, therewas more of real attachment for Colonel D'^Au-134 HELEN.bigny than Cecilia had ever allowed Helen tobelieve ; and she felt that Cecilia must shrinkfrom General Clarendon^s seeing these as herletters, after she had herself assured him thathe was her first love. The falsehood was hereso indubitable, so proved, that Helen herselftrembled at the thought of Cecilia^s^s acknowledgingthe plain facts to her husband.The time for it was past. Now that they werein print, published perhaps, how must he feel !If even candid confession were made to him,and made for the best Motives, it would tohim appear only forced by necessity — forced,as he would say to himself, because her friendwould not submit to be sacrificed.Such were Helen's thoughts on reading thetwo or three first letters, but, as she went on,her alarm increased to horror. She saw thingswhich she felt certain Cecilia could never havewritten ; yet truth and falsehood were so mixedup in every paragraph, circumstances whichshe herself had witnessed so misrepresented,that it was all 'to her inextricable confusion.The passages which were to be marked couldnot now depend upon her opinion, her belief;HELEN. 135they must rest upon Gecilia^s integrity — andcould she depend upon it ? The impatiencewhich she had felt for Lady Cecilia^s^s returnnow faded away, and merged in the more painfulthought that, when she did come, the suspensewould not end — the doubts would neverbe satisfied.She lay down upon the sofa and tried torest, kept herself perfectly still, and resolvedto think no more ; and, as far as the power ofthe mind over itself can stay the ever-risingthoughts, she controlled hers, and waited witha sort of forced, desperate composure for theevent.Suddenly she heard that knock, that ring,which she knew announced Lady CeciUa^s return.But not Cecilia alone; she heard theGeneral also coming up stairs, but Cecilia first,who did not stop for more than an instantat the drawing-room door, — she looked in, asHelen guessed, and seeing that no one wasthere, ran very quickly up the next flight ofstairs. Next came the General ; — on hearinghis step, Helen's anxiety became so intense,that she could not at the moment he came near,136 HELEN.catch the sound or distinguish which way hewent. Strained beyond its power, the facultyof hearing seemed suddenly to fail — all wasconfusion, an indistinct buzz of sounds. Thenext moment, however, recovering, she plainlyheard his step in the front drawing-room, andshe knew that he twice walked up and down thewhole length of the room, as if in deep thought.Each time as he approached the folding-doorsshe was breathless. At last he stopped, hishand was on the lock — she recollected that thedoor was bolted, and as he turned the handleshe, in a powerless voice, called to tell him, butnot hearing her, he tried again, and as the doorshook she again tried to speak, but could not.Still she heard, though she could not articulate.She heard him say,Miss Stanley, are you there ? Can I seeyou''But the words— the voice seemed to comefrom afar — sounded dull and strange. Shetried to rise from her seat — found a difficultymade an export — stood up — she summonedresolution — struggled — hurried across the room—drew back the bolt — threw open the door —fiELEN, 137and that was all she could do. In that sortstrength and consciousness failed—she fell forwardand fainted at the general's feet.He raised her up, and laid her on a sofa inthe inner room. He rang for her maid, andwent Op-stairs to prevent Cecilia's being alarmed.He took the matter coolly; he had seenmany fainting young ladies, he did not like themhis own Cecilia excepted — in his mind alwaysexcepted from every unfavourable suspicion regardingthe sex. Helen, on the contrary, was atpresent subject to them all, and under the cloudof distrust, he saw in a bad light everythingthat occurred ; the same appearances which, inhis wife, he would have attributed to the sensibilityof true feeling, he interpreted in Helenas the consciousness of falsehood, the proof ofcowardly duplicity. He went back at once tohis original prejudice against her, when, as hefirst thought, she had been forced upon himin preference to his own sister. He had beenafterwards convinced that she had been perfectlyfree from all double-dealing ; yet now heslid back again, as people of his character oftendo, to their first opinion.138 HELBTT.^' I thought so at first, and I find, as I usuallydo, that my first thought was right."What had been but an adverse feeling wasnow considered as a prescient judgment. Andhe did not go up-stairs the quicker for thesethoughts, but calmly and coolly, when hereached Lady Cecilia's dressing-room, knockedat the door, and, with all the precautions necessaryto prevent her from being alarmed, toldher what had happened. " You had betternot go down, my dear Cecilia, I beg you willnot. Miss Stanley has her own maid, ill theassistance that can be wanted. My dedit isnot fit for you. I desire you will not go down''But Lady Cecilia would not listen, could notbe detained; she escaped from her husbandand ran down to Helen. Excessively alarmedshe was, and well she might be, knowing herselfto be the cause, and not certain in any wayhow it might end.She found Helen *)ei little recovered, but stillpale as white marble ; and when Lady Ceciliatook her hand, it was still quite cold. Shecame to herself but very slowly, never in herlife having fainted before. For some minutesHELEN. 1S9she did cot recover perfect consciousness;or clear recollection. She saw figures of personsmoving about her, she felt them as iftoo near, and wished them away ; wanted air,but could not say what she wished. She wouldhave moved, but her limbs would not obey herwill. At last, when she had with efibrt halfraised her head, it sunk back again before shecould distinguish all the persons in the room.The shock of cold water on her forehead revivedher ; then, coming clearly to power ofperception, she saw Cecilia bending over her.But still she could not speak, and yet sheunderstood distinctly, saw the affectionateanxiety, too, in her little maid Besets countenance; she felt that she loved Rose, and thatshe could not endure Felicie, who had nowcome in, and was making exclamations, andadvising various remedies, all of which, whenoffered, Helen declined. It was not merelythat Felicie^s talking, and tone of voice, andsuperabundant action, were too much for her ;but that Helen had at this moment a sort ofintuitive perception of insincerity, and of exaggeration.In that dreamy state, hovering140 HELEN.between life and death, in which people are oncomingout of a swoon, it seems as if there wasneed for a firm hold of reality ; the senses andthe understanding join in the struggle, andbecome most acute in their perception of whatis natural or what is unnatural, true or false,•in the expressions and feelings of the bystanders.Lady Cecilia understood her look, and dismissedFelicie, with all her smelling-bottles.Rose, though not ordered away, judiciouslyretired as soon as she saw that her serviceswere of no further use, and that there wassomething upon her young lady's mind, forwhich hartshorn and sal volatile could be ofno avail.Cecilia would have kissed her forehead, butHelen made a slight withdrawing motion, andturned away her face; the next instant, however,she looked up, an taking Cecilia^s^s hand,pressed it kindly, and said,You are more to be pitied than I am ; sitdown, sit down beside me, my poor Cecilia ;how you tremble ! and yet j'^ou do not knowwhat is coming upon you."*'HELEN. 141Yes, yes, I do — I do," cried Lady Cecilia,and she eagerly told Helen all that had passed,ending with the assurance that the publicationhad been completely stopped by her dear Clarendon; that the whole chapter containing theletters had been destroyed, that not a singlecopy had got abroad. ^^ The only one in existenceis thisbe said she, taking it up as she spoke,and she made a movement as if going to tearout the leaves, but Helen checked her hand,** That must not be, the General desired " ^And almost breathless, yet distinctly, sherepeated what the General had said, that hemight be called upon to prove which partswere forged, and which true, and that she hadpromised to mark the passages.*^ So now, Cecilia, here is a pencil, and markv^hat is and what is not yours''Lady Cecilia instantly took the pencil, andin great agitation obeyed.Oh, my dear Helen, some of these theOeneral could not think yoiirs. Very wickedthese people have been ! — so the General said ;he was sure, he knew, all could* not be yours''♦* Finish ! my ' dear Cecilia," interrupted14S HELEN.Helen ; ** finish what you have to do, and inthis last trial, give me this one proof of yoursincerity. Be careful in what you are nowdoing, mark truly — oh, Cecilia ! every wordyou recollect — as your conscience tells you.Will you, Cecilia ? this is all I ask, as I am toanswer for it — will you ?"Most fervently she protested she would. Shehad lio difficulty in recollecting, in distinguishingher own; and at first she marked truly,and was glad to separate what was at worstonly foolish girlish nonsense from things whichhad been interpolated to make out the romance ;things which never could have come from hermind.There is some comfort in having our ownfaults overshadowed, outdone by the greaterfaults of others. And here it was flagrantwickedness in the editor, and only weaknessand imprudence in the writer of. the realletters. Lady Cecilia continually solaced herconscience by pointing out to Helen,, f^s shewent on, the ibUy, literally the folly of the deceptionshe had practised on her husband, ibidher exclamations against herself we isp vehe-HELEN. 148ment that Helen would not add to her pain bya single reproach, since she had decided thatthe time was past for urging her confession tothe General. She now only said,'^ Look to the future, Cecilia, the past wecannot recal. This will be a lesson you cannjBver forget*Oh, never, never can I forget it. Youhave saved me, HelensTears and protestations followed these words,and at the moment they were all sincere ; andyet, can it be believed P even in this last trial,when it came to this last proof, Lady Ceciliawas not perfectly true She purposely avoidedputting her mark of acknowledgment to any ofthose expressions which most clearly provedher love for.Colond D^Aubigny ; for she stillsaid to herself that the time might come, thoughat present it could not be, when she mightmake a confession to her husband, • — in his joyat the birth of ^ son, she thought she mightventure 4 she still looked forward to doing justiceto ,her friend at some future period, and tomake this easier *to make this possible — as shesaid to. herself she must now leave out certain144 HELEN.expressions, which might, if acknowledged, remainfor ever fixed in Clarendon's mind, andfor which she could never be forgiven.Helen, when she looked over the pages, observedamong the unmarked passages some ofthose expressions which she had thought wereCecilia^s^s, but she concluded she was mistaken ;Ishe could not believe that her friend could atsuch a moment deceive her, and she was evenashamed of having doubted her sincerity, andher words, look, and manner, now gave assuranceof perfect, unquestioning confidence.This delicacy in Helen struck Lady Ceciliato the quick. Ever apt to b^ more touched byher refined feelings than by any strong appealto her reason or her principles, she was nowshocked by the contrast between her own palteringmeanness and her friends confiding generosity.As this thought crossed her mind, shestretched out her hand again for the book, tookup the pencil, and was going to mark thetruth; but, the impulse past, cowardice prevailed,and cowardice whispered, " Helen islooking at me, Helen sees at this moment whatI am doing, and, after having marked them asJHELEN. 145not mine, how can I now acknowledge them ?it is too late — it is impossible."'* I have done as you desired"" continuedshe, " Helen, to the best of my ability. I havemarked all this, but what can it signify nowmy dear, except ?"*'Helen interrupted her. " Take the book tothe General this moment, will you, and tell himthat all the passages are marked as he desired —Stay, I had better write""She wrote upon a slip of paper a messageto the same expect, having well considered thewords by which she might, without furtherstep in deception, save her friend, and takeupon herself the whole blame — the whole hazardousresponsibility.When Cecilia gave the marked book toGeneral Clarendon, he said, as he took it, *^ Iam glad she has done this, though it is unnecessarynow, as I was going to tell her if shehad not fainted; unnecessary, because I havenow in my possession the actual copies of theoriginal letters ; I found them here on my return.That good little poetess found them formeat the printer's — but she could not disco-vol.III. H146 HELEN.ver — I have not yet been able to trace wherethey came from, or by whom they were copied'*O let me see them," cried Lady Cecilia.Not yet, my love," said he ; *' you wouldknow nothing more by seeing them ; they are inafeigned hand evidently .'^But*' interrupted Cecilia, *' you cannotwant the book now, when you have the lettersthemselves f * and she attempted to draw it fromhis hand, for she instantly perceived the dangerof the discrepancies between her marks and thletters being detected. She made a strongereffort to withdraw the book, but he held itfast.Leave it with me now, my dear ; I wantit ; it will settle my opinion as to Helen'struth''Slowly, and absolutely sickened with apprehension,Lady Cecilia withdrew. When shereturned to Helen, and found how pale she wasand how exhausted she seemed, she entreatedher to lie down again and try to rest.Yes, I believe I had better rest before Isee Granville," said Helen ; '* where can hehave been all day ?"HELEN. 147^* With some friend of bis, I suppose' saidCecilia, and she insisted on Helenass sayingno more, and keeping herself perfectly quiet.She farther suggested that she had better notappear at dinner.It will be only a family party, *some of theGeneral's relations. Miss Clarendon is to behere, and she is one, you know, trying to thespirits ; and she is not likely to be in her mossuave humour this evening, as she has beenunder a course of the tooth-ache, and has beenall day at the dentist^s.^^Helen readily consented to remain in herown room, though she had not so great adread of Miss Clarendon as Lady Ceciliaseemed to feel. Lady Cecilia was indeed inthe greatest terror lest Miss Clarendon shouldhave heard some of these reports about Helenand Beauclerc, and would in her blunt wayask directly what they meant, and go on withsome of her point-blank questions, which Ce-»cilia feared might be found unanswerable.However, as Miss Clarendon had only justcome to town from Wales, and come onlyabout her teeth, she hoped that no reportsH 2148 HELEN.could have reached her ; and Cecilia trustedmuch to her own address and presence of mindin moments of danger, in turning the conversenation the way it should go.But things were now come to a point wherenone of the little skilful interruptions or luckyhits, by which she had so frequently profitedavail her farther than to delay whatinst be. Passion and character pursue theircourse unalterably, unimpeded by small externalcircumstances ; interrupted they may bein their progress, but as the stream opposedbears against the obstacle, sweeps it away, orfoams and passes by.Before Lady Cecilia'^s toilette was finishedher husband was in her dressing-room ; came inwithout knocking, — a circumstance so unusualwith him, that Mademoiselle Felicie's eyesopened to their utmost orbit, and, withoutwaiting for word or look, she vanished, leavingthe bracelet half clasped on her lady's arm.** Cecilia !" said the General.He spoke in so stern a tone that she trembledfrom head to foot ; her last falsehood about theletters — all her falsehoods, all her concealmentsHELEN. 149were, she thought, discovered; unable to supportherself she sank into bis arm. He seated her,and went on in a cool inexorable tone, ** CeciHa, I ara determined not to sanction by anytoken of my public approbation this marriage,which I no longer in my private consciencedesire or approve ; I will not be the person togive Miss Stanley to my wards'Lady Cecilia almost screamed: her selfishfears forgotten, she felt only terror for herfriend. She exclaimed, " Clarendon, will youbreak off the marriage ? Oh ! Helen, what willbecome of her! Clarendon, what can youmean ?"'^ I mean that I have compared the passagesthat Helen marked in the book, with thosecopies of the letters which were given to thebookseller before the interpolations were madethe letters as Miss Stanley wrote them. Thepassages in the letters and the passages markedin the. book do not agrees*^ Oh, but she might have forgotten, it mightbe accident'* cried Cecilia, overwhelmed withconfusion.No, Cecilia'' pursued the Oeneral in a150 HELEN.tone which made her heart die within her;^* no, Cecilia, it is not accident, it is design.I perceive that every strong expression, everyword, in short, which could shew her attachmentto that man, has been purposely markedas not her own, and the letters themselvesprove that they were her own. The truth isnot in her""In an agitation which prevented all power ofthought, Cecilia exclaimed : ^^ She mistook —she mistook ; I could not, I am sure, recollect ;she asked me if I remembered any." •*• She consulted you, then ?'^.She asked my advice, — told me that ''I particularly requested her," interruptedthe General, ** not to ask your advice ; I desiredher not to speak to you on the subject —not to consult you. Deceit — double-dealingin every thing she does, I find""No, no, it is my fault ; everything I sayand do is wrong'' cried Lady Cecilia. " Irecollect now — it was just after her faintingwhen I brought the book, and when she tookit to mark she really was lot able. It wasnot that she consulted me, but I forced myHELEN. 151counsel upon her. I looked over the letters, andsaid what I thought — ^if anybody is wrong, it isI, Clarendon. Oh, do not visit my sins uponHelen so cruelly ! — do not make me the causeof her ruin, innocent creature ! I assure you,if you do this, I never could forgive myselfThe General looked at her in silence : shedid not dare to meet his eyes, desperatelyanxious as she was to judge by his countenancewhat was passing within. He clasped for herthat bracelet which her trembling hands werein vain attempting to close.Poor thing, how its heart beats !" said herhusband, pressing her to him as he sat downbeside her. Cecilia thought she might ventureto speak. — " You know, my dear Clarendon, Inever oppose — interfere with — any determinationof yours when once it is fixed ^^This is fixed'' interrupted the General.But after all you have done for her thisvery day, for which I am sure she — I am sureI thank you from my soul, would you nowundo it all ?"She is saved from public shame'' said theGeneral ; ^^ from private contempt I cannot152 HELEN.save her: who can save those who have nottruth ? But my determination is fixed ; it isuseless to waste words on the subject. Estheris come ; I must go to her. And now, Cecilia,I conjure you, when you see Beauclerc — Ihave not seen him all day — I do not knowwhere he has been — I conjure you — I commandyou not to interfere between him and Helen'*But you would not have me give her up !I should be the basest of human beings."I do not know what you mean, Cecilia ;you have done for her all that an honourablefriend could do**I am not an honourable friends was Cecilia'sbitter consciousness, as she pressed herhand upon her heart, which throbbed violentlywith contending fears."You have done all that an honourablefriend could do; more must not be done,"continued the General. " And now recollect,Cecilia, that you are my wife a^ well as MissStanley's friend ;" and, as he said these wordshe left the room.HELEN. 153CHAPTER VIII.That knowing French minister, Louis,whose power is said to have been maintainedby his surpassing skill in collecting and spreadingsecret and swift intelligence, had in his payvarious classes of unsuspected agents, ,fe„ofag.»«,er., U.g„.ge.™ r^ .nn.liners, hairdressers and barbers — dentists, hewould have added, had he lived to our times ;and not all Paris could have furnished himwith a person better suited to his purpose thanthe most fashionable London dentist of the day,St. Leger Swift. Never did Frenchman exceedhim in volubility of utterance, or in gesturesignificant, supplying all that words might fearor fail to tell ; never was he surpassed by prattlingbarber or privileged hunchback in ancientor modem story, Arabian or Persian ; but he wastoot a malicious, only a coxcomb scandal-mopger,h5154 HELEN.■triumphing in his sf avoir dire, St. Leger Swiftwas known to everybody — knew everybody inLondon that was to be or was not to be known,every creature dead or alive that ever hadbeen, or was about to be celebrated, fashionable,or rich, or clever, or notorious, roueor murderer, about to be married or aboutto be hanged — for that last class of personsenjoys in our days a strange kind of heroiccelebrity, of which Voltaire might well havebeen jealous. St. Leger was, of course, handand glove with all the royal family ; everyillustrious personage — every most illustriouspersonage — had in turn sat in his chair ; he hadhad all their heads, in their turns, in his hands,and he had capital anecdotes and 'sayings ofeach, with which he charmed away the sense ofpain in loyal subjects. But with scandal forthe fair was he specially provided. Never didman or woman skim the surface tittle-tattle ofsociety, or dive better, breathless, into familymysteries; none, with more careless air, couldat the same time talk and listen -— extract yournews and give you his on dit or tell the secretwhich you first reveal. There was in him andHELEN. 155about him such an air of reckless, cordial coxcombry,it warmed the coldest, threw themost cautious off their guard, brought outfamily secrets as if he had been one of yourfamily — your secret purpose, as though he hadbeen a secular father confessor ; as safe everythingtold to St. Leger Swift, he would swearto you, as if known only to yourself : he wouldswear, and you would believe, unless peculiarlyconstituted, as was the lady who, thismorning, took her seat in his chair —Miss Clarendon. She was accompanied byher aunt, Mrs. Pennant.** Ha ! old lady and young lady, fresh fromthe country. Both, I see, persons of family'sof condition," said St. Leger to himself. Onthat point his practised eye could not mistake,even at first glance; and accordingly it wasreally doing himself a pleasure, and theseladies, as he conceived it, a pleasure, a, service,and an honour, to put them, immediately ontheir arrival in town, au courant du jour.Whether to pull or not to pull a tooth that hadoffended, was tl\je professional question beforehim.]56 HELEN.Miss Clarendon threw back her head, andopened her mouth.*^ Fine teeth, fine ! Nothing to complain ofhere surely ,** said St. Leger. *' As fine ashow of ivory as ever I beheld. 'Pon myreputation, I know many a fine lady whowould give-all but her eyes for such aset."^' I must have this tooth out,'^ said MissClarendon, pointing to the offender.I see ; certainly, ma'am, as you say."I hope, sir, you don't think it necessary''said her tender-hearted aunt ; ^^ if it could beany way avoided ^" •By all means, madam, as you say. Wemust do nothing without considerations'I have considered, my dear aunt'' saidMiss Clarendon. ^^ I have not slept thesethree nights."^^ But you do not consider that you caughtcold getting up one night for me ; and it maybeonly an accidental cold, my dear Esther.I should be so sorry if you were to lose a tooth.Don't be in a hurry ; once gone, you cannotget it back again."HELEN. 157** Never was a truer, wiser word spoken,madame said St. Leger, swiftly whisking himselfround, and as if looking for some essentialimplement. " May be a mere twinge, accidentalcold, rheumatism ; or may be Mydear madame (to the aunt,) "I will troubleyou ; let me pass. I beg pardon — one wordwith you,^ and with his back to the patient inthe chair, while he rummaged among ivory*handled instruments on the table, he went onin a low voice to the aunt— "Is she nervous?is she nervous, eh, eh, eh ?"Mrs. Pennant looked, but did not hear, forshe was a little deaf.** Yes, yes, yes ; I see how it is, A wordto the wise'' replied he, with a nod of intelligence." EvCTy lady 's nervous now-&-days,more or less. Where the deuce did I put thisthing? Yes, yes — nerves; — all the same tome; know how to manage. Make it a principleprofessional, to begin always by talking awaynerves. You shall see, you shall see, my dearestmadam; you shall soon see — you shallhear, you shall hear how I '11 talk this younglady — your niece — out of her nerves fairly.158 HELEN.Beg pardon, Miss , one instant. I amsearching for — where have I put it ?— ^'^^ I beg your pardon, sir: I am a littledeaf,^^ said Mrs. Pennant."Deaf— hey? Ha! a little deaf. Soeverybody is now-a-days ; even the most illustriouspersonages, more or less. Death anddeafness common to all — mors omnibus. I haveit. Now, my dear young lady, let us haveanother look and touch at these beautifulteeth. Your head will do very— vastly well,my dear ma'am — Miss um, um, nm I*^hoping the name would be supplied. But thatMiss Clarendon did not tell.So raising his voice to the aunt as he wenton looking, or seeming to look, at the niecestooth, he continued rapidly — " From Wales .you are, ma'am? a beautiful country Wales,ma'am. Very near being born there myself,like, ha, ha, ha ! that Prince of Wales — firstPrince — Carnarvon Castle — you know thehistorical anecdote. Never saw finer teeth,upon my reputation. Are you ladies, may Iask, for I Ve friends in both divisions-^— are youNorth or South Wales, eh, eh ?'*'South, sir. Llangollen'"HELEN. 159aAy, South. The most picturesque certainly.Llansillen, Llansillen ; know it ; knoweverybody ten miles round. Respectable people— all — very ; most respectable people comeup from Wales continually. Some of ourbest blood from Wales, as a great personageobserved lately to me, Thick, thick ! notthicker blood than the Welsh. His late Majesty,apropos was pleased to say to meonce ^** But," interrupted Miss Clarendon, " whatdo you say to my tooth ?^'^* Sound as a roach, my dear ma'am ; I willensure it for a thousand pound s."*^** But that, the tooth you touch, is not thetooth I mean ; pray look at this, sir?^^^^ Excuse me, my dear madam, a little inmy lights said he to the aunt, " May I begthe favour of your name ?"^^ Pennant ! ah ! ah ! ah !*" with his hands inuplifted admiration, " I thought so — Pennant.I said so to myself, for I know so many Pennants— great family resemblance — Great naturalistot that name — any relation ? Oh yesNo — I thought so from the first. Yes —160 HELBNiand can assure you, to my private certainknowledge, that man stood high on the pinnacleof favour with a certain Royal personage, — for,often sitting in this very chair —Keep your mouth open— a little longer —little wider, my good Miss Pennant. Here 'sa little something for me to do, nothing of anyconsequence — only touch and go — nothingto be taken away, no, no, must not lose oneof these fine teeth. That most illustrious personagesaid one day to me, sitting in this verychair — * Swift,' said he, * St. Leger Swift,' familiarly,condescendingly, colloquially — * St.Leger Swift, my good fellow,' said he.But positively, my dear Miss — um, um,if you have not patience — you must sit still—pardon me, professionally I must be peremptory.Impossible I could hiirt — can't conceive— did not touch — only making a perquisitiondisquisitions say what you please,but you are nervous, ma'am ; I ani^nly takinga general survey.Apropos — general survey — General — afriend of mine. General Clarendon is just cometo town. My ears must have played me falseHELEN. 161but I thought my man said something likeClarendon when he shewed you up ?^^No answer from Miss Clarendon, who heldher mouth open wide, as desired, resolved notto satisfy his curiosity, but to let him blunderon.*^ Be that as it may, General Clarendon^scome to town* fine teeth he has too — and afine kettle of fish — not very elegant, but expressivestill — he and his ward have made, of thatmarriage announced. Fine young man though,that Beauclerc — finest young man, almost, Xever saw !"But here Mr. St. Leger Swift, starting suddenly,withdrawing his hand from Miss Clarendon'smouth, exclaimed,My finger, ma'am ! but never mind, nevermind, all in the day's work. Casualty — contingencies— no consequence. But as I wassaying, Mr. Granville Beauclerc ""Then poured out, on the encouragement ofone look of curiosity from Mrs. Pennant, all theon dits of Lady Katrine Hawksbyby, and all herchorus, and all the best authorities; and St,Leger Swift was ready to pledge himself to the16S HELEN.truth of every word. He positively knew thatthe marriage was off, and thought, as everybodydid, that the young gentleman was welloff too; for besides the young lady's greatfortune turning out not a sous — and here hesupplied the half-told tale by a drawn up uglyface and shrugging gesture.^* Shocking ! shocking ! aU came to an eclat'^ esclandre ; a scene quite, last night, I amtold, at my friend Lady Castlefort'^s. Sad —sad — so young a lady ! But to give you ageneral idea, love-letters to come out in theMemoirs of that fashionable Roue — • friend ofmine too— fine fellow as ever breathed — onlya little — you understand; Colonel D^AubignyPoor D'Aubigny, height ! — only if the bookcomes out — Miss Stanley y ' '^Mrs. Pennant looked at her niece in benevolentanxiety ; Miss Clarendon was firmly silent ;but St. Leger, catching from the expression ofboth ladies countenances, that they were interestedin the contrary direction to what hehad anticipated, turned to the right about, andobserved.HELEN. 16S^^ This may be all scandal, one of the innumerabledaily false reports that are alwaysflying about town; scandal all, I have nodoubt — Your head a little to the right, if youplease — And the publication will be stopped,of course, and the young Iady''s friends-youare interested for her, I see ; so am I-alwaysam for the young and fair, that ^s my foible ;and indeed, confidently I can inform you— -If you could keep your head still, my dearmadam""But Miss Clarendon could bear it no longer ;starting from under his hand, she exclaimed,'^ No more, thank you-no more at present,sir; we can call another day -* no more ;^ andadded as she hastily left the room, ^^ Betterbear the toothache and ran down stairs. Mrs.Pennant slipped into the dentist hand, as hepulled the bell, a double fee ; for though shedid not quite think he deserved it much, yetshe felt it necessary to make amends for hernieces way of running ofi^, which might not bethrust quite civil.Thank you, nla'am — thank ye, ma'am —164 Helensnot the least occasion — don't say a word aboutit— Young lady's nervous, said so from the firstsNerves ! nerves ! all — open the door thereNerves all'' were the last words, at the topof the stairs, St. Leger Swift was heard to say.And the first words of kind Mrs. Pennant, assoon as she was in the carriage and had drawnup the glass, were, " Do you know, Esther mydear, I am quite sorry fbr this poor Miss Stanley.Though I don't know her, yet, as youdescribed her to me, she was such a pretty,young, interesting creature ! I am quite sorry".^^ I don't believe a word of it," said MissClarendon.^^ But even to haVe such things said must beso distressing to her and to her lover, yourfriend Mr. Beauclerc — so very distressing !"I hope they are not such fools as to bedistressed about such stuff. All this insufferabletalking man's invention, I dare say."** Why do people tell such things !" saidMrs. Pennant. *^ But, my dear Esther, veiisupposing it to be all false, it is shocking tohave such things spoken of. I city the pooryoung lady and her lover. Do you not think.HELEN. 165my dear, we shall be able to enquire into thetruth of the matter from your brother thisevening? He must know, he ought to knowabout it ; whether the report be true or false, heshould he saw his note, she never even tooknotice that he did not particularly mention her.180 HELEN.The flowers from him were enough ; she knewhis sincerity so well, trusted to it so completely,that she was quite sure, if he had beenangry with her, he would not have sent thesetokens of his love, — slight tokens though theywere, all sufficient for her. Her fears hadt;^en but one direction, and in that directionthey were all dispelled. He would be at breakfasttomorrow, when she should know wherehe had been, and what had detained him fromher the whole of this day. She told Ceciliathat she was now quite well, but that shewould not attempt to go down stairs. AndCecilia left her happy, so far at least ; andwhen she was alone with her flowers, shedoubly enjoyed them, inhaling the fragranceof each which she knew he particularly liked,and thanking him in her heart for the carefulchoice, for she was certain that they were notaccidentally put together. Some of them wereassociated with little circumstances known onlyto themselves, awakening recollections of bright,happy moments, and selected, she was sure,with reference to a recent conversation theyhad had on the language of flowers.HELEN. 181Whether Helen fancied half this, or whetherit was all true, it had the effect of soothing andpleasing her anxious, agitated mind, and shewas the more ready to indulge in that pleasantreverie, from all that she had previously sufferedherself, and all that she feared Beauclerchad yet to endure. She knew too well howmuch these reports would affect him — and hearthem he must. She considered what trials hehad already borne, and might still have to bear,for her sake, whatever course she might nowpursue. Though soon, very soon, the wholewould be told to him, yet still, though shemight stand clear in his eyes as to the mainpoints, he must, and would blame her weaknessin first consenting to this deception — he whowas above deceit. She had not absolutely toldbut she had admitted a falsehood ; she hadacted a falsehood. This she could not extenuate.Her motive at first, to save Lady Davenant'slife, was good ; but then her weaknessafterwards, in being persuaded time after timeby Cecilia, could not well be excused. Shewas conscious that she had sunk step by step,dragged down that slippery path by Cecilia,182 HELEN.instead of firmly making a stand, as she oughtto have done, and upholding by her own integrityher friends failing truth.With returning anguish of seif-reproach, shewent over and over these thoughts; she consideredthe nfany unforeseen circumstances thathad occurred. So much public shame, somuch misery had been brought upon herselfand on all she loved, by this one false step IAnd how much more might still await her,notwithstanding all that best of friends, theGeneral, had done ! She recollected howmuch he had done for her .'—-thinking of hertoo, as he must, with lowered esteem, andthat was the most painful thought of all; —to Beauclerc she could and would soon clearher truth, but to the General — never, perhaps,completely !Her head was leaning on her hand, as shewas sitting deep in these thoughts, when shewas startled by an unusual knock at her door.It was Cockbum with a packet, which GeneralClarendon had ordered him to deliverinto Miss Stanley^s^s own hands.The instant she saw the packet she knewHELEN. 183that it contained the book and on opening itshe found manuscript letters inserted betweenthe marked pages, and there was a note fromGeneral Clarendon.She trembled — she foreboded ill.The note began by informing Miss Stanleyhow the enclosed manuscript letters came intoGeneral Clarendon's hands from a person whomMiss Stanley had obliged, and who had hopedin return to do her some service. The Generalnext begged Miss Stanley to understandthat these letters had been put into his possessionsince his conversation with her atbreakfast-time ; his only design in urging herto mark her share in the printed letters hadbeen to obtain her authority for serving herto the best of his ability ; but he had sincecompared them : — and then came referenceswithout comment, to the discrepancies betweenthe marked passages, the uniform character ofthe omissions, followed only by a single noteof admiration at each, from the General^s pen.And at last, in cold polite phrase, came hisregret that he had not been able to obtainthat confidence which he had trusted he had184 HELEN.deserved, and his renunciation of all future interferencein her affairs •^or concerns ^ had beenwritten, but a broad dash of the pen haderased the superfluous words ; and then came theinevitable conclusion, on which Helenass eyesfixed, and remained immoveable for some time—That determination which General Clarendonhad announced to his wife in the first heatof indignation, but which. Lady Cecilia hadhoped, could be evaded, changed, postponed,would not at least be so suddenly declaredto Helen ; therefore she had given her no hint,had in no way prepared her for the blow, —and with the full force of astonishment it cameupon her —^^ General Clarendon cannot have the pleasurehe had proposed to himself j of giving MissStanley at the altar to his ward. He cannotby any public act of his attest his consent tothat marriage, of which, in his private opinion,he no longer approvesAnd he is right. O Cecilia !*• was Helen'sfirst thought, when she could think after thisshock — not of her marriage, not of herselfHELEN. 185not of Beauclerc, but of Cecilia's falsehood —Cecilia's selfish cowardice, she thought, andcould not conceive it possible, could not believeit, though it was there. "Incredible — yetproved — there — there — before her eyes —brought home keen to her heart ! after all ! atsuch a time — after her most solemn promise,with so little temptation, so utterly false — withevery possible motive that a good mind couldhave to be true — in this last trial — her friend'swhole character at stake — ungenerous — base !O Cecilia ! how different from what I thoughtyou — or how changed ! And I have helpedto bring her to this ! — I — I have been thecause. — I will not stay in this house — I willleave her. To save her — to save myself —save my own truth and my own real characterlet the rest go as it will — the world thinkwhat it may ! Farther and farther, lower andlower, I have gone ; I will not go lower, I willstruggle up again at any risk, at any sacrifice.This is a sacrifice Lady Davenant would approveof: she said that if ever I should beconvinced that General Clarendon did not wish186 HELEN.me to be his guest — if he should ever ceaseto esteem me — I should go, that instant —and I will go. But where ?*"To whom could she fly, to whom turn ? TheCollingwoods were gone ; all her uncles friendspassed rapidly through her recollection. Sinceshe had been living with General and LadyCecilia Clarendon, several had written to inviteher ; but Helen knew a little more of the worldnow than formerly, and she felt that there wasnot one, no, not one of all these to whom shecould now, at her utmost need, turn and say,^^ I am in distress, receive me ! my character isattacked, defend me ! my truth is doubted, believein me !^And, her heart beating with anxiety, shetried to think what was to be done. There wasan old Mrs. Medlicott, who had been a housekeeperof her uncle's, living at Seven Oaksshe would go there — she should be safe —she should be independent. She knew that shewas then in town, and was to go to Seven Oaksthe next day ; she resolved to send Rose early inthe morning to Mrs. Medlicott^s lodging, whichHELEN. 187was near Grosvenor Square, to desire her to callat General Clarendon's as she went out of town,at eight o'clock. She could then go with her toSeven Oaks, and, by setting out before Ceciliacould be up, she should avoid seeing her again.There are minds which totally sink, andothers that wonderfully rise under the urgencyof strong motive and of perilous circumstance.It is not always the mind apparently strongestor most daring that stands the test. The firmof principle are those most courageous in timeof need. Helen had determined what hercourse should be, and, once determined, she wascalm.She sat down and wrote to General Clarendon.Miss Stanley regrets that she cannot explainto General Clarendon the circumstancesvtrhich have so much displeased him. She assureshim that no want of confidence has been,on her part, the cause ; but she cannot expectthat, without further explanation, he shouldgive her credit for sincerity.188 HELEN.She feels that with his view of her conductand in his situation his determination is right,that it is what she has deserved, that it is justtowards his ward and due to his own character.She hopes, however, that he will not think it necessaryto announce to Mr. Beauclerc his determinationof withdrawing his approbation andconsent to his marriage, when she informs him,that it will now never be by her claimed or accepted.** She trusts that General Clarendon will permither to take upon herself the breaking off thisunion. She encloses a letter to Mr. Beauclerc,which she begs may be given to him tomorrow.General Clarendon will find she has dissolvedtheir engagement as decidedly as hecould desire, and that her decision will be irrevocable.** And since General Clarendon has ceased toesteem her. Miss Stanley cannot longer accepthis protection, or encroach upon his hospitality.She trusts that he will not consider it as anywant of respect, that she has resolved to retirefrom his family as soon as possible.She is certain of having a safe and respectable.189able home with a former housekeeper of heruncle Dean Stanley's, who will call for her ateight o'clock tomorrow, and take her to SevenOaks, where she resides. Miss Stanley hasnamed that early hour, that she may not meetMr. Beauclerc before she goes ; she wishes alsoto avoid the struggle and agony of parting withLady Cecilia. She entreats General Clarendonwill prevent Lady Cecilia from attempting to seeher in the morning, and permit her to go unobservedout of the house at her appointed hour.So now farewell, my dear friend — yes,friend, this last time you must permit me tocall you, for such I feel you have ever been,and ever would have been, to me, if my follywould have permitted. Believe me — notwithstandingthe deception of which I acknowledgeI have been guilty towards you, Oeneral Clarendon— I venture to say, believe we, I am notungrateful. At this instant, my heart swellswith gratitude, while I pray that you may behappy — happy as you deserve to be. But youwill read this with disdain, as mere idle words :so be it. Farewell !Helen Stanley."190 HELEN.Next) she was to write to Beauderc himsel£Her letter was as follows : — -With my whole heart, dear Granville, Ithank you for the generous confidence you haveshown towards me, and for the invariable steadinessof your faith and love. For your sake,I rejoice. One good has at least resulted fromthe trials you have gone through : you mustnow and hereafter feel sure of your own strengthof mind. With me it has been different, for Ihave not a strong mind. I have been all weakness,and must now be miserable but wickedI will not be— and wicked I should be if I tookadvantage of your confiding love. I must disappointyour affections-but your confidence 1 willnot betray. When I put your love to thattest which it has so nobly stood, I had hopedthat a time would come when all doubts wouldbe cleared up, and when I could reward yourconstancy by the devotion of my whole happylife — but that hope is past : I cannot prove myinnocence — I will no longer allow you to takeit upon my assertion. I cannot indeed, withtruth, even assert that I have done no wrong ;HELEN. 191for though I am not false, I have gone on stepby step in deception, and might go on, I knownot hove far, nor to what dreadful consequences,if I did not now stop — and I do stop. On myown head be the penalty of my fault — uponmy own happiness — my owt* character : I willnot involve yours — therefore we part. Youhave not yet heard all that has been said ofme ; but you soon will, and you will feel, asI do, that I am not fit to be your wife.Your wife should not be suspected ; I havebeen — I am. All the happiness I can everhave in this world must henceforth be in thethought of having saved from misery »- if notsecured the happiness of those I love. Leaveme this hope — Oh, Granville, do not tell me,do not make me believe that you will neverbe happy without me ! You will — indeedyou will. I only pray Heaven that you mayfind love as true as mine, and strength to abideby the truth !** Do not write to me — do not try to persuademe to change my determination : it isirrevocable. Further writing or meeting couldbe only useless anguish to us both. Give me192 HELEN.the sole consolation I can now have, and whichyou alone can give — let me hear from Ceciliathat you and your noble-minded guardian are,after I am gone, as good friends as you werebefore you knew me.I shall be goh? from this house before youare here again ; I cannot stay where I can donogood, and might do much evil by remainingeven a few hours longer. As it is, comfort yourgenerous heart on my account, with the assurancethat I am sustained by the consciousnessthat I am now, to the best of my power, doingright."Adieu, Granville ! Be happy ! you can —you have done no wrong. Be happy, and thatwill console Yojir true friend, -Helen Stanley*"This, enclosed to General Clarendon, shesent by Cockburn, who delivered it to his masterimmediately.Though she could perfectly depend upon hermaid Rose's fidelity, Helen did not tell her thatshe was going away in the morning, to avoidbringing her into any difficulty if she wereHELEN. 193questioned by Lady Cecilia, and besides, nonote of preparation would be heard or seen.She would take with her only sufficient for theday, and would leave Rose to pack up all thatbelonged to her, after her departure, and tofollow her. Thanks to her own late discretion,she had no money difficulties — no debtsbut such as Rose could settle, and she hadnow "only to write to Cecilia ; but she had notyet recovered from the tumult of mind whichthe writing to the General and to Beauclerchad caused.She lay down upon the sofa, and closing hertrembling eyelids, she tried to compose herselfsufficiently to think at least of what she was tosay. As she passed the table in going to thesofa, she, without perceiving it, threw downsome of the flowers ; they caught her eye, andshe said to herself, " Lie there ! lie there !Granville last gifts ! last gifts to me ! Allovernow ; lie there and wither ! Joys that arepassed, wither ! All happiness for me, gone !Lie there, and wither, and die ! — and so shallI soon, I hope — if that only hope is notwrong.VOL. 111. K194 HELEN.Some one knocked at the door ; she startedup, and said, " I cannot see you, Cecilia !"A voice not Cecilia*[8, a voice she did notrecollect, answered, " It is not Cecilia ; let mesee you. I come from Oeneral Clarendon''Helen opened the door, tod saw —-miss Clarendon., Her voice had sounded so muchlower and gentler than Usual, that Helen hadnot guessed it to be her's. She was cloaked, asif prepared to go away, and in the outer roomwas another lady seated, with her back towardsthem, and with her cloak on. also.** My aunt Pennant — who will wait for me.As she is a stranger, she would not intrudeupon you. Miss Stanley, but will you allow meone minute .?"Helen surprised, begged Miss Clarendon tocome in, moved a chair towards her, and stoodbreathless with anxiety. Miss Clarendon satdown, and resuming her abruptness of tone,said, ^^ I feel that I have no right to expect thatyou should have confidence in me, and yet I do.I believe in your sincerity, even from the littleI know of you, and I have a notion you believein mine. Do you ?*"IHELEN. 195I wish It had pleased Heaven'' continuedMiss Clarendon, ^^ that my brother had marrieda woman who could speak truth ! Butyou need not be afraid : I will not touch onyour secrets. On any matter you have in keeping,my honour as well as your's will commandmy silence — as will also my brother's happiness,which I have somewhat at heart ; not thatI think it can be preserved by the means youtake. But this is not what I came to say. Youmean to go away from this house tomorrowmorning ?"*' Yes," said Helen.** You are right. I would not stay where Idid not esteem, or where I had reason to believethat I was not esteemed. You are quiteright to go, and to go directly ; but not to yourold housekeeper."Why not ?'* said Helen.Because, though I dare say she is vastlyrespectable, — an excellent person in her way, Iam convinced, — yet my brother says she mightnot be thought just the sort of person to whomyou should go now— not just the thing for youk2C6196 HELEN.at present ; though, at another time, it wouldbe very well and condescending ; but now,when you are attacked, you must look to appearances— In short, my brother will not allowyou to go to this old lady's boarding-house, orcottage, or whatever it may be, at Seven Oaks ;be niust be able to say for you where you aregone. You must be with me ; you must be atLlansiUen. Llansillen is a place that can benamed. You must be with me — with GeneralClarendon's sister. You must — you will, Iam sure, my dear Miss Stanley. I never wasso happy in having a house of my own as atthis moment. You will not refuse to returnwith my aunt and me to Llansillen, and makeour home your's ? We will try and make it ahappy home to you. Try; you see the senseof it ; the world can say nothing when youare known to be with Miss Clarendon, and youwill, I hope, feel the comfort of it, out of thestir and din of this London world. I knowyou like the country, and Llansillen is a beautifulplace — romantic, too; a fine castle, anexcellent library, beautiful conservatory ; famousfor our conservatories we are in SouthHELEN. 197'Wales ; and no neighbours — singular blessing !And my aunt Pennant, you will love her so !Will you try ? Come ! say that you will."But Helen could not ; she could only pressthe hand that Miss Clarendon held out toher. There is nothing more touching, moreovercoming, than kindness at the moment theheart is sunk in despair. '' But did GeneralClarendon really wish you to ask me?" saidHelen when she could speak. " Did he thinkso much and so carefully for me to the last ?And with such a bad opinion as he must haveof me !"'* But there you know he is wrong''** It is like himself," continued Helen ;*^ consistent in protecting me to the last. Oh,to lose such a friend !"Not lost, only mislaid," said Miss Clarendon.'' You will find him again some fair dayor other; truth always comes to light. Meanwhile,all is settled. I must run and tell my aunt,and bless the Fates and Lady Emily Greville,that Lady Cecilia did not come up in the mid-^die of it. Luckily, she thinks I am gone, andknows nothing of my being with you, for my198 HELEN.brother explained all this to me in his study,after we had left the saloon, and he desires meto say that his carriage shall be ready for youat your hour, at eight o'clock. We shall expectyou ; and now, farewell till to-morrow''She was gone, and her motto might well be,though in a different acceptation from that ofour greatest modern politician — " Tout fairesans paraitreJ*^But before Helen could go to rest, shemust write to Lady Cecilia, and her thoughtswere in such perplexity and her feelings insuch conflict, that she knew not how to begin.At last she wrote' only a few hasty lines offarewell, and referred for her determination,and for all explanations, to her letter to theGeneral, It came to " Farewell, dear CeciliaDear ! yes, still dear she was to Helen, shemust be as Lady Davenant**s daughter — stilldear for her own sake was Cecilia, the companionof her childhood, who had shown hersuch generous affection early, such fondnessalways, who was so charming, with so manygood qualities, so much to win love — loved shemust be still.HELEN. 199** Farewell, Cecilia ; may you be happy !^But as Helen wrote these words, she thoughtit impossible, she could scarcely in the presentcircumstances wish it possible that Ceciliashould be happy. How could she, unless herconscience had become quite callous ?She gave her note to Rose with orders todeliver it herself to Lady Cecilia to-night, whenshe should demand admittance.And soon she came, the very instant LadyEmily Greville went away — before Helen wasin bed she heard Cecilia at her door; sheleft her to parley with Rose — heard her voicein the first instance eager, peremptory foradmittance. Then a sudden silence. Helencomprehended that she had opened her noteand in another instant she heard her retreatingstep. On seeing the first words referringfor explanation to Helenass letter to the General,panic-struck. Lady Cecilia hurried to herown room to read the rest privately.Helen now tried to recollect whether everythinghad been said, written, done, that oughtto be done, and at last went to bed and endeavouredto sleep for a few hours.200 HELEN.CHAPTER X.Helen was just dressed and had given herlast orders to her bewildered maid, when sheheard a knock at the door, and MademoiselleFelicities voice. She could not at this instantendure to hear her heartless exclamatoryspeeches : she would not admit her. MademoiselleFelicie gave Rose a note for heryoung lady — it was from Cecilia.DEADEST HELEN,The General will not allow me totake leave of you this morning, but I shallcertainly go to you in the course of to-day.I cannot understand or make you understandanything till I see you. I will see you to-day.Your affectionate,Cecilia."HELEN. sotI understand it too well !'' thought Helen.The carriage was announced, Helen wasready, she hurried into it, and she was gone !And thus she parted from the friend of herchildhood — the friend she had but a fewmonths before met with such joy, such trueaffection; and her own affection was true tothe last. ^As Helen drove from the door, she saw theGeneral — yes, it certainly was the Generalriding off — at this unusual hour! — Was itto avoid her ? But she was in too great anguishto dwell upon that or any other circumstance; her only thought now was to subdueher emotion before she was seen by Miss Clarendonand Mrs. Pennant. And by the time shearrived, she thought she had quite recoveredherself, and was not aware that any traces oftears remained ; but to Mrs. Pennant sympathisingeyes they were visible, and after thefirst introductions and salutations were over,that kind lady, as she seated her at the ,gently pressing her hand, said,** Poor thing ! no wonder — parting with oldfriends for new is a sad trial : but you knowk5S02 HELEN.we shall become old friends in time : we willmake what haste we can, my dear Miss Stanley,and Esther will help me to make you forgetthat you have not known us all your life's** There is very little to be known ; no mysteries,that is one comfort' said Miss Clarendon; *^ so now to breakfast. You are verypunctual, Miss Stanley, and that is a virtuewhich Aunt Pennant likes and can estimate toa fraction of a minute with that excellent watchofher^s.'^There was some history belonging to thatfamily watch, which then came out ; and thenthe conversation turned upon little family anecdotesand subjects which were naturally interestingto the aunt and niece, and not excitingto Helen, whose mind, they saw, needed quietand freedom from all observation.From the first awkwardness of her situation,from the sense of intrusion, and the suddennessof change, she was thus as far as possible graduallyand almost imperceptibly relieved. Bytheir perfect good breeding, as well as good*nature, from their making no effort to show herparticular attention, she felt received at onceHELEN. 303into their family as one of themselves; andyet, though there was no effort, she perceivedin the most minute circumstances the same sortof consideration t^hich would be shown to anintimate friend.They not only did not expect, but did notirish, that she should make any exertion toappear to be what she could not be ; they knewthe loneliness of heart she must feel, the weightthat must be upon her spirits. They lefther, then, quite at liberty to be with them oralone as she might like, and she was gladto be alone with her own thoughts : they soon'fixed upon Beauclerc. She considered howhe would feel, what he would think, when heshould receive her letter ; she pictured his looksi¥bi1e reading it ; considered whether he wouldwrite immediately, or attempt, notwithstandingher prohibition, to see her. He would knowfrom General Clarendon, that is, if the Generalthought proper to tell him, where she was, andthat she would remain all this day in town.Though her determination was fixed, whetherhe wrote or came, to abide by her refusal, andfor the unanswerable reasons which she had304 HELEN.given, or which she had laid down to herself;yet she could not, ' and who, loving as she did,could help wishing that Beauclerc should desireto see her again ; she hoped that he wouldmake every effort to change her resolution,even though it might cost them both pain.Yet in some pain there is pleasure; or, to bewithout it, is a worse kind of suffering.Helen was conscious of the inconsistency inher mind, and sighed, and tried to be as reasonableas she could be. And, to do her justice,there was not the slightest wavering as tothe iqain point. She thought that the Generalmight, perhaps, have some relenting towardsher. Hope would come into her mind, thoughshe tried to keep it out ; she had nothing toexpect, she repeatedly said to herself, exceptthat either Cecilia would send, or the Generalwould call this morning, and Rose must comeat all events.The morning passed on, however, and no onecame so soon as Helen had expected. She wassitting in a back room where no knocks at thedoor could be heard ; but she would have beencalled, surely, if General Clarendon had come.iHELEN. S05He had come, but be had not asked forher ; he had at first inquired only for his sister,but she was not at home, gone to the dentistThe General then desired to see Mrs. Pennant,and when she supposed that she had notheard rightly, and that Miss Stanley must betheperson he wished to see, he had answered,^^ By no means ; I particularly wish not to seeMiss Stanley. I beg to see Mrs. Pennantalone."It fell to the lot of this gentle tender-heartedlady to communicate to Helen the dreadful intelligencehe brought : a duel had taken place !When Helen had seen the General ridingoff, he was on his way to Chalk Farm. Justas the carriage was coming round for MissStanley, Mr. Beauclerk groom had requestedin great haste to see the General ; he said hewas sure something was going wrong about hismaster ; he had heard the words Chalk Farm.The General was off instantly, but before hereached the spot the duel had been fought.A duel between Beauclerc and Mr. Churchill.Beauclerc was safe, but Mr. Churchill wasdangerously wounded ; the medical people pre*206 HELEN;sent could not answer for his life. Al the timethe General saw him he was speechless, butwhen Beauclerc and his second, Lord Betrayers,had come up to him, he had extendedhis hand in token of forgiveness to one or theother, but to which he had addressed the onlywords he had uttered, could not be ascertained :the words were, " You are not to blame! —escape I ^- fly !"Both had fled to the Continent. GeneralClarendon said that he had no time for explanations,he had not been able to get any intelligibleaccount of the cause of the affair.Lord Beltravers had named Miss Stanley,but Beauclerc had stopped him, and had expressedthe greatest anxiety that Miss Stanley^s^sname should not be implicated, should not bementioned. He took the whole blame uponhimself — said he would write — there was notime for more.Mrs. Pennant listened ' with the dread oflosing a single word : but however brief hisexpressions, the Genere's manner of speaking,notwithstanding the intensity of his emotion,was so distinct that every word was audible,HELEN. S07except the name of Lord Betrayers which wasnot familiar to her. She asked again the nameof Mr. Beauclerk second ? " Lord Betrayers''the General repeated with a forcible accent, andloosening his neckcloth with his finger, headded, *^ Rascal I as I always told Beauclercthat he was, and so he will find him — toolate''Except this exacerbation, the General wascalmly reserved in speech, and Mrs. Pennantfelt that she could not ask him a single questionbeyond what he had communicated. Whenhe rose to go, which he did the moment he hadfinished what he had to say, she had, however,courage enough to hope that they should soonhear again, when the General should learn somethingmore of Mr, Churchill.Certainly he would let her know whateverhe could learn of Mr. Churchill's state.Her eyes followed him to the door withanxious eagerness to penetrate farther intowhat his own opinion of the danger might be.His rigidity of composure made her fear thathe had no hope, " otherwise certainly he wouldhave said something''^8 HELEN.He opened the door again, and returning,said,Depend upon it you shall hear how he is,my dear Mrs. Pennant, before you leave townto-sorrow's"We will not go to-morrow she replied.We will stay another day at least. PoorMiss Stanley will be so anxious ^"I advise you not to stay in town anotherday, my dear madam. You can do no good byit. If Mr. Churchill survive this day, he willlinger long, I am assured. Take Helen — takeMiss Stanley out of town, as soon as may be.Better go tomorrow, as you had determined*"But it will be so long, my dear General ! —one moment — if we go, it will be so long beforewe can hear any further news of your wards*'« I will write''To Miss Stanley— Oh, thank you."** To my sister'' he looked back to say, andrepeated distinctly, " To my sister."*< Very well — thank you, at all events."Mrs. Pennant saw that, in General Clarendon'spresent disposition towards Miss Stanley,the less she said of him the better, and she coniHELEN. 209fined herself strictly to 'what she had been commissionedto say, and all she could do was toprevent the added pain of suspense : it was toldto Helen in the simplest, shortest manner possible: — but the facts were dreadful.Beauclerc was safe ! — safe ! but under whatcircumstances ? an exile — perhaps a murderer !** And it was for me, I am sure," cried Helen,'^ I am sure it was for me ! I was the cause !I am the cause of that man's death — of Beau -clerc's agony'For some time Helen had not power orthought for any other idea. The promise thatthey should hear as soon as they could learnanything more of Mr. Churchill's state was allshe could rely upon or recur to.When her maid Rose arrived from GeneralClarendon's, she said, that when Lady Ceciliaheard of the duel she had been taken very ill,but had since recovered sufficiently to driveout with the General. Miss Clarendon assuredHelen there was no danger. *' It is too deepa misfortune for Lady Cecilia. Her feelingshave not depth enough for it, you will see.You need not be afraid for her, Helen."210 HELEN.The circumstances which led to the dud werenot clearly known till long afterwards, but maybenow related.The moment Beauclerc had parted fromHelen, when he turned away at the marriagedoor after the party at Lady Castlefort's, hewent in search of one, who, as he hoped, couldexplain the strange whispers he had heard.The person of whom he went in search was hisfriend, his friend as he deemed him, Lord Bel-travers.Churchill had suggested that if anybodyknew the bottom of the matter, exceptthat origin of all evil, Lady Katrine herself, —it must be Lord Beltravers, with whom LadyCastlefort was, it was said, /or^eme/i^ emprise andas Horace observed, " the secrets of scandal arecommon property between lovers, much modernlove being cemented by hate''Without taking in the full force of. this observationin its particular application to thehatred which Lord Beltravers might feel toMiss Stanley, as the successful rival of hissister Blanche, Beauclerc hastened to act uponhis suggestion. His lordship was not at home :his people thought he had been at Lady Castle-helen.211fort's ; did not know where he might be, if notthere. At some gambling-house Beauclerc atlast found him, and Lord Beltravers was suff*gently vexed in the first place at being therefound, for he had pretended to his friend Granvillethat he no longer played.His embarrassment was increased by thequestions which Beauclerc so suddenly put tohim ; but he had nonchalance impudence enoughto brave it through, and he depended withgood reason on Beauclerk's prepossession in hisfavour. He protested he knew nothing aboutIt; and he returned Churchill's charge, bythrowing the whole blame upon him ; said heknew he was in league with Lady Katrine ; —mentioned that one morning, some time ago, hehad dropped in unexpectedly early at LadyCastlefort's, and had been surprised to find thetwo sisters, contrary to their wont, together —their heads and Horace Churchill's over somemanuscript, which was shuffled away as heentered. /This was true, all but the shuffling away;and here it is necessary to form a clear notion,clearer than Lord Beltravers will give, of the212 HELEN.different shares of wrong ; of wrong knowinglyand unknowingly perpetrated by the severalscandal-mongers concerned in this affair.Lord Beltravers could be in no doubt as tohis own share, for he it was who had furnishedthe editor of Colonel D'Aubigny's memoirswith the famous letters. When Carlos, LadyDavenant's runaway page, escaped from ClarendonPark, having changed his name, he gotinto the service of Sir Thomas D'Aubigny, whowas just at this time arranging his brother'spapers. Now it had happened that Carlos hadbeen . concealed behind the skreen in LadyDavenant's room, the day of her first conversationwith Helen about Colonel D'Aubigny, andhe had understood enough of it to perceive thatthere was some mystery about the Colonel witheither Helen or Lady Cecilia ; and chancingone day, soon after he entered Sir Thomas'sservice, to find his escritoire open, he amusedhimself with looking over his papers, amongwhich he discovered the packet of Lady cecilia'sletters. Carlos was not perfectly sure ofthe handwriting ; he thought it was Lady Cecilia's; but when he found the miniature of MissHELEN. ^13Stanley along with them, he concluded thatthe letters must be heres. And having specialreasons for feeling vengeance against Helen,and certain at all events of doing mischief, hesent them to General Clarendon : not, however,forgetting his old trade, he copied them first.This was just at the time when Lord Beltraversreturned from abroad after his sisters divorce.He by some accident found out who Carlos was,and whence he came, and full of his own viewsfor his sister, he cross-examined him as toeverything he knew about Miss Stanley ; andpartly by bribes, partly by threats of betrayinghim to Lady Davenant, he contrived to getfrom him the copied letters. Carlos soon afterreturned with his master to Portugal, and wasnever more heard of.Lord Beltravers took these purloined copiesof the letters thus surreptitiously obtained,to the editor, into whose hands Sir Thomasb'Aubigny, (who knew nothing of booksor book-making,) had put«his brother's memoirs.This editor, as has been mentioned,had previously consulted Mr. Churchill, andin consequence of his pepper and salt hint.214 HELEN.Lord Beltravers himself made those interpose*tioDs which he hoped should ruin his sistersrival in the eyes of her lover.Mr. Churchill, however, except this hint,and except his vanity in furnishing a goodtitle, and his coxcombry of literary patronage,and his general hope that Helenass name beingimplicated in such a publication would avengeher rejection of himself, had had nothing to dowith the business. This Lord Beltravers wellknew, and yet when he found that the slandermade no impression upon Beauclerk, and thathe was only intent upon, discovering the slanderer,he, with dexterous treachery, contrivedto turn the tables upon Churchill, and to directall Beauclerk suspicion towards him. Hetook his friend home with him, and shewedhim all the newspaper paragraphs — paragraphswhich he himself had written ! Yes, this man'of romantic friendship, this blaze, this herooppressed with his own sensibility, could condescendto write anonymous scandal, to leaguewith newsmongers, and to bribe waiting-womeilto supply him with information, for MademoiselleFelicie had, through Lady Katrine^s maid,Helen. 215told all, and more than all she knew, of whatpassed at General Clarendon's ! and on thisfoundation did Beauclerk friend constructthose paragraphs, which he hoped would blastthe character of the woman to whom he wasengaged. And now he contrived to say all thatcould convince Beauclerc that Mr. Churchillwas the author of these very, paragraphs.And straight, and hot, and rash, Beauclercrushed on to that conclusion. He wrote achallenge to Churchill, and as soon as it waspossible in the morning, he sent it by LordBeltravers. .Mr. Churchill named Sir John Luttrell ashis friend : Lord Beltravers would enter intono terms of accommodation ; the challenge wasaccepted. Chalk Farm appointed as the placeof meeting, and the time fixed for eight o'clocknext morning.And thus, partly by his own warmth oftemper, and partly by the falsehood of others,was Beauclerc urged on to the action he detested,to be the thing he hated. Duellingand duellists had, from the time he could think,been his abhorrence, and now he was to end2^16 HELEN.his life, or to take the life of a fellow creatureperhaps, in a duel.There was a dread interval. And it wasduring the remainder of this day and nightthat Beauclerk felt most strongly, comparedwith all other earthly ties, his attachment, hispassionate love for Helen. At every pause, atevery close of other thoughts forced upon him,his mind recurred to Helen — what Helen wouldfeel — what Helen would think — what she wouldsuffer — and in the most and in the least importantthings his care was for her. He recalledthe last look that he had seen at the when they parted, recollected thatit expressed anxiety, was conscious that hehad turned away abruptly, that in the preoccupiedstate of his mind he had not spokenone word of kindness — and that this might bethelast impression of him left on her mind.He knew that her anxiety would increase, whenall that day must pass without his return, andit was then he thought of sending her thoseflowers, which would, he knew, reassure herbetter than any words he could venture ^ towrite.HELEN. 217Meanwhile, his false friend coldly calculatedwhat were the chances in his sister's favour,and when Churchill feU, and even inthe hurry of their immediate departure, LordBeltravers wrote t9 Madame de St. Cymon,over whom the present state of her affairsgave him command, to order her to set outimmediately, and to take Blanche with herto Paris, without asking the consent of thatfool and prude, her Aunt Lady Grace.It was well for poor Helen, even in thedreadful uncertainty in which she left london,i that she did not know all these circumstances.It may be doubted, indeed, whether we shouldbe altogether happier in this life if that worstof evils, as it is often called, suspense, wereabsolutely annihilated, and if human creaturescould clearly see their fate, or even know whatis most likely to happen.VOL. III.HELEN.CHAPTER XI.According to the Generals advice, Mrs.Pennant did not delay her journey, and Helenleft London the next day with her and MissClarendon.The last bulletin of Mr. Churchill had beenthat he was still in great danger, and a fewscarce legible lines Helen had received fromCecilia, saying that the General would notallow her to agitate herself by going td takeleave of her, that she was glad that Helen wasto be out of town till all blew over, and thatshe was so much distracted by this horribleevent, she scarcely knew what she wrote.As they drove out of town. Miss Clarendon,in hopes of turning Helenass thoughts, went ontalking.^' Unless,^^ said isle, ^^ we could, like Madamede Gentis, ^ promote the post-boys into agentsHELEN. 219of mystery and romances we have but littlechance, I am afraid, of any adventures onour journey to Llansillen, my dear MissStanley''She inveighed against the stupid safety,convenience, luxury and expedition of travellingnow-a-days all over England, even inWales, ** so that one might sleep the wholeway from Hyde Park corner to Llansillengate'' said she, *' and have no unconscionablylong nap either. No difficulties on the road,nothing to complain of at inns, no enjoyingone's dear delight in being angry, no opportunityeven of showing one's charming resignation.Dreadfully bad this for the nervous andbilious, for all the real use and benefit of trayveiling is done away ; all too easy for my taste,one might as well be a doll, or a dolt, or aparcel in the coach."Helen would have been glad to have beenconsidered merely as a parcel in the coach.During the whole journey, she took no noticeof anything till they came within a few milesof Llansillen: then, endeavouring to sympathisewith her companion, she looked outl2220 HELEN.of the carriage window at the prospect whichthey admired. But, however charming, Llangollenhad not for Helen the chief charmof early, fond, old associations with a happyhome. To her it was to be, she doubtednot, as happy as kindness could make it,but still it was new; /tnd in that thought,that feeling, there was something inexpressiblymelancholy ; and the contrast, at thismoment, between her sensations and those ofher companions, made the pain the more poignant: they perceived this, and were silent.Helen was grateful for this consideration forher, but she could not bear to be a constraintupon them, therefore side now exerted herself,sat forward— admired and talked when she wasscarcely able to speak. By the time they cameto Llansillen gate, she could say no more;she was obliged to acknowledge that she wasnot well ; and when the carriage at laststopped at the door, there was such a throbbingin her temples, and she was altogetherso ill, that it was with the greatest difficultyshe could, leaning on Miss Clarendon^s arm,mount time high steps to the hall-door. SheHELEN. 221could scarcely stand when she reached thetop, but, making an effort, she went on,crossed the slippery floor of that great hall,and came to the foot of the black oak staircase,of which the steps were so very low thatshe thought she could easily go up, but foundit impossible, and she was carried up straightto Miss Clarendon^s own room, no other havingbeen yet prepared. The rosy Welsh maidslooked with pity on the pale stranger. Theyhurried to and fro, talking Welsh to one anothervery fast ; and Helen felt as if she werein a foreign land, and in a dream.The end of the matter was, that she had alow fever which lasted long. It was more dispiritingthan dangerous — more tedious thanalarming. Her illness continued for manyweeks, during which time she was attendedmost Painfully by her two new friends — byMiss Clarendon with the utmost zeal and actioMrs. Pennant with the greatest solicitudeand tenderness.Her history for these weeks — indeed for somemonths afterwards — can be only the diaryof an invalid, and of a convalescent. Miss222 HELEN.Clarendon meanwhile received from her brother,punctually once a week, bulletins of churchillhealth ; the surgical details, the fears ofthe formation of internal abscess, reports ofcontinual exfoliations of bone, were judiciouslysuppressed, and the laconic General reportedonly " Much the same — not progressing— cannot be pronounced out of danger."These bulletins were duly repeated to Helen,whenever she was able to hear them ; and atlast she was considered well enough to readvarious letters, which had arrived for her duringher illness : several were from Lady Cecilia,but little in them. The first was full only ofexpressions of regret, and self-reproach ; in thelast, she said, she hoped soon to have a rightto claim Helen back again. This underlinedpassage Helen knew alluded to the promiseshe had once made, that at the birth of herchild all should be told ; but words of promisefrom Cecilia had lost all value — all power toexcite even hope, as she said to herself as sheread the words, and sighed.One of her letters mentioned what sh wouldhave seen in the first newspaper she had opened,HELEN. 223that Lady Blanche Forrester was gone withher sister, the Comtesse de St. Cymon, to Paris,to join her brother, Lord Beltravers. ButLady Cecilia observed, that Helen need not bealarmed by this paragraph, which she was surewas inserted on purpose to plague her. LadyCecilia seemed to take it for granted that herrejection of Beauclerc was only a ruse clamour,aid went on with her usual hopes, now vagueand more vague every letter — that things wouldend well sometime, somehow or other.Helen only sighed on reading these letters,and quick as she glanced her eye over them,threw them from her on the bed ; and MissClarendon said,Ay ! you know her now, I see !''Helen made no reply: she was carefulnot to make any comment which could betrayhow much, or what sort of reason shehad to complain of Lady Cecilia; but MissClarendon, confident that she had guessedpretty nearly the truth, was satisfied with herown penetration, and then, after seeming tQdoubt for a few moments, she put anotherletter into Helenass hand, and with one of thoseS24f HELEN.looks of tender interest which sometimes softenedher countenance, she left the room.The letter was from Beauclerc ; it appearedto have been written immediately after he hadreceived Helens letter, and was as follows : —((Not write to you, my dearest Helen !Renounce my claim to your hand f submit tobe rejected by you, my advanced bride ! No,never — never! Doubt ! suspicion ! — suspicionof you ! — you, angel as you are — you, whohave devoted, sacrificed yourself to others. No,Helen, my admiration, my love, my trust inyou, are greater than they ever were. And do/ dare to say these words to you ? /, who amperhaps a murderer ! I ought to imitate yourgenerosity, I ought not to offer you a handstained with blood :•— I ought at least to leaveyou free till I know when I may return frombanishment. I have written this at the firstinstant I have been able to command duringmy hurried journey, and as you know somethingof what led to this unhappy business,you shall in my next letter hear the whole; tillthen, adieu ! ^< Granville Bbauclbrc.^'HELEN. 225The next day, when she thought Helensufficiently recovered from the agitation of readingBeauclerc's letter, aunt Pennant producedone letter more, which she had kept for thelast, because she hoped it would give pleasureto her patient.Helen sat up in her bed eagerly, and stretchedout her hand. The letter was directed byGeneral Clarendon, but that was only the outercover, they knew, for he had mentioned in hislast despatch to his sister, that the letter enclosedfor Miss Stanley was from Lady Davenant.Helen tore off the cover, but the instantshe saw the inner direction, she sank back,turned, and hid her face on the pillow.It was directed —To Mrs. Granville BeauclerkLady Davenant had unfortunately taken itfor granted, that nothing could have preventedthe marriage.Aunt Pennant blamed herself for not havingforeseen, and prevented this accident, whichshe saw distressed poor Helen so much. ButMiss Clarendon wondered that she was soshocked, and supposed she would get over itl5226 HELEN.in a few minutes, or else she must be veryweak.There was nothing that tended to raise herspirits much in the letter itsdf, to make amendsfor the shock the direction had given. It containedbut a few lines in Lady Davenant'^s ownhandwriting, and a postscript from Lord Davenant.She wrote only to announce their safearrival at Petersburg, as she was obliged tosend off her letter before she had received anydespatches from England; and she concludedwith,I am sure the first will bring me the joyfulnews of Beauclerc'^s happiness and yours,my dear child."Lord Davenant'^s postscript added, that intruth Lady Davenant much needed such acordial, for that her health had suffered evenmore than he had feared it would. He repentedthat he had allowed her to accompanyhim to such a rigorous climate.All that could be said to allay the apprehensionsthis postscript might excite, was of coursesaid in the best way by aunt Pennant. But itwas plain that Helen did not recover duringHELEN* 227the whole of this day from the shock she hadfelt ^* from that foolish direction** as MissClarendon said.She could not be prevailed upon to rise thisday, though Miss Clarendon, after feeding herpulse, had declared that she was very well ableto get up. " It was very bad for her to remainin bed''This was true, no doubt. And Miss Clantendon remarked to her aunt that she was surprisedto find Miss Stanley so weak.Her aunt replied that it was not surprisingthat she should be rather weak at present, aftersuch a long illness.^' Weakness of body and mind need not gotogether'' said Miss Clarendon.Need not, perhaps," said her aunt, " butthey are apt to do so."l^ It is to be hoped the weakness of mindwill go with the weakness of body, and soon,"said Miss Clarendon.We must do what we can to strengthenand fatten her, poor thing !" said Mrs. Pennant.** Fatten the body, rather easier than tostrengthen the mind. Strength of mind cannot228 HELEN.be thrown in, as you would throw in the bark,or the chicken broth'"Only have patience with hers said Mrs.Pennant, " and you will find that she will havestrength of mind enough when she gets quitewell. Only have patiejice,'^During Helen's illness Miss Clarendon hadbeen patient, but now that she was pronouncedconvalescent, she became eager to see her quitewell. In time of need Miss Clarendon hadbeen not only the most active and zealous, butamost gentle and — doubt it who may — soft-stepping,soft-voiced nurse; but now, whenDoctor Tudor had assured them that all feverwas gone, and agreed with her that the patientwould soon be well, if she would only thinkso. Miss Clarendon deemed it high time touse something more than her milder influence,to become, if not a rugged, at least a stemnurse, and she brought out some of her rigidlore.*^ I intend that you should get up in reasonabletime to-day, Helens said she, as she enteredher room.Do you .^'^ said Helen in a languid voice.rHELEN. 229*^ I dos said Miss Clarendon ; '* and I hopeyou do not intend to do as you did yesterday,to lie in bed all daysHelen turned, sighed, and Mrs. Pennantsaid, " Yesterday is over, my dear Esther — nouse in talking of yesterday""^^ Only to secure our doing better to-day,Ma^am,^ replied Miss Clarendon with promptability.Helen was all submission, and she got up,and that was well. Miss Clarendon went inquestof arrow-root judiciously ; and aunt Pennantstayed and nourished her patient meanwhilewith " the fostering dew of praise ;^and let her dress as slowly and move as languidlyas she liked, though Miss Clarendonhad admonished her ** not to dawdle'"As soon as she was dressed, Helen went tothe window and. threw up the sash for the firsttime, to enjoy the fresh air, and to see theprospect which she was told was beautiful ; andshe saw that it was beautiful, and, though itwas still winter, she felt that the air was balmy;and the sun shone bright, and the grass beganto be green, for Spring approached. But how280 HELEN.different to her from the springtime of formeryears ! Nature the same, but all within herselfhow changed ! And all which used to please,and to seem to her most cheerful, now cameover her spirits with a sense of sadness ; — shefelt as if all the life of life was gone.Tears filled her eyes, large tears rolled slowlydown as she stood fixed, seeming to gaze fromthat window at she knew not what. Aunt Pennantunperceived stood beside her, and let thetears flow unnoticed. ^* They will do her good ;they are a great relief sometimesMiss Clarendon returned, and the tears weredried, but the glaze remained, and Miss Clarendonsaw it, and gave a reproachful look ather aunt,, as much as to say, 'why did you lether cry ?*' And her aunts look in reply was,I could not help it, my dear*"*' Eat your arrow-roots was all that transpiredto Helen.And she tried to eat, but could not; andMiss Clarendon was not well pleased, for thearrow-root was good, and she had made it ;she felt Miss Stanley^s^s pulse, and said that *^ Itwas as good a pulse as could be, only low anda little fluttered''HELEN. 281<(Do not flutter it any more, then, Esthermy dears said Mrs. Pennant.^* What am I doing or saying, Ma'am, thatshould flutter anybody that has common sense P*^** Some people don't like to have their pulsefelt,^ said aunt Pennant.^' Those people have not common senses repliedthe niece.I believe I have not common senses' saidHelen.Sense you have enough — resolution iswhat you want, Helen, I tell you."I know," said Helen : " too true "^True, but not too true — nothing can betoo true."True," said Helen, with languid submission.Helen was not in a condition to chop logic,or ever much inclined to it ; now less than ever,and least of all with Miss Clarendon, so ableas she was. There is something very provokingsometimes in perfect submission, becauseit is unanswerable. But the languor, not thesubmission, afforded some cause for furtherremark and remonstrance.SS2 HELEN.Helen, you are dreadfully languid to-day."^Sadly"" said Helen.If you could have eaten more arrow-rootbefore it grew cold, you would have beenbetter""*^ But if she could not, my dear Esther,"said aunt Pennant.*^ Could not, Madam ! As if people couldnot eat if they pleased""But if people have no appetite, my dear,Imam afraid eating will not do much good""*^ I am afraid, my dear aunt, you will notdo Miss Stanley much good"" said Miss Clarendon,shaking her head; '' you will only spother""^^ I am quite spoiled, I believe"" said Helen ;you must unspoil me, Esther""Not so very easy"" said Esther ; " but Ishall try, for I am a sincere friend."I am sure of it"" said Helen.Then what snore could be said ?Nothing at that time — Helens look was sosincerely grateful, and '* gentle as a lamb"" asaunt Pennant observed ; and Esther was notawolf quite — at heart not at all.HELEN. dismissClarendon presently remarked thatMiss Stanley really did not seem glad to bebetter — glad to get well.Helen acknowledged that instead of beingglad, she was rather sorry. ^^ If it had pleasedHeaven, I should have been glad to die.**^*^ Nonsense about dying, and worse thannonsense cried Miss Clarendon, *^ when yousee ths^t it did not please Heaven that youshould die''^* I am content to live'' said Helen.** Content ! to be sure you are," said MissClarendon. *' Is this your thankfulness toProvidence ?"I am resigned — I am thankful — I willtry to be more so— but I cannot be so glad."General Clarendon's bulletins continued withlittle variation for some time ; they were alwaysto his sister — he never mentioned Beauclerc,but confined himself to the few lines or wordsnecessary to give his promised regular accountsof Mr. Churchill's state, the sum of whichcontinued to be for a length of time : ^^ Muchthe same." — " Not in immediate danger*' —Cannot be pronounced out of danger."itS34 HELEN.Not very consolatory, Helen felt. ** Butwhile there is life, there is hopes as auntPennant observed. *^^ Yes, and fears said Helen ; and her hopesand fears on this subject alternated with fatiguingreiteration, and with a total incapacityof forming any judgment.Beauclerc's letter of explanation arrived, andother letters came from him from time totime, which as they were only repetitions ofhopes and fears as to Ghurchiirs recovery, andof uncertainty as to what might be his ownfuture fate, only increased Helen's misery ;and as even their expressions of devoted attachmentcould not alter her own determination,while she felt how crud her continuedsilence must appear, they only agitated withoutrelieving her mind. Mrs. Pennant sympathisedwith and soothed her, tmd knew howto soothe, and how to raise, and to sustain amind in sorrow, suffering under disappointedaffection, and sunk almost to despondency;for aunt Pennant, besides her softness ofmanner, and her quick intelligent sympathy,HELEN. Shadpower of consolation of a higher sort, beyondany which this world can give. She wasvery religious, of a cheerfully religious turnof mind — of that truly Christian spirit whichloveth all things.When she was a child, somebody asked herif she was bred up in the fear of the Lord.She said no, but in the love of Good. And soshe was, in that love which casteth out fear.And now the mildness of her piety, and thewhole tone and manner of her speaking andthinking, reminded Helen of that good dearuncle by whom she had been educated. Shelistened with affectionate reverence, and shetruly and simply said, " You do me good —I think you have done me a great deal of good— and you shall sese it.^And she did see it afterwards, and MissClarendon thought it was her doing, and soher aunt let it pass, and was only glad thegood was done.The first day Helen went down to the ,she found there a man who looked,as she thought at first glance, like a tradesman236 HELEN.some person, she supposed, come on business,standing waiting for Miss Clarendon, orMrs. Pennant. She scarcely looked at him,but passed on to the sofa, beside which was alittle table set for her, and on it a beautifulwork-box, which she began to examine andadmire.*' Not nigh so handsome as I could havewished it, then, for you. Miss Helen— -I askpardon. Miss StanleyHelen looked up, surprised at hearing herselfaddressed by one whom, she had thought astranger; but yet she knew the voice, and areminiscence came across her mind of havingseen him somewhere before.Old David Price, ma'am. Maybe youforget him, you being a child at that time.But since you grew up, you have been thesaving of me and many more "" Steppingquite close to her, he whispered that he hadbeen paid under her goodness order by Mr.James, along with the other creditors that hadbeen left.Helen by this time recollected who the poorWelshman was — an upholsterer and cabinet-helen.237maker, who had been years before employedat the Deanery. Never having been paid atthe time, a very considerable debt had accumulated,and having neither note nor bond,Price said that he had despaired of everobtaining the amount of his earnings. Hehad, however, since the Deans death, beenpaid in full, and had been able to retire tohis native village, which happened to be nearLlangollen, and most grateful he was ; and assoon as he perceived that he was recognised,his gratitude became better able to expressitself. Not well, however, could it make itsway out for some time ; between crying andlaughing, and between two languages, he wasat first scarcely intelligible. Whenever muchmoved, David Price had recourse to his nativeWelsh, in which he was eloquent ; and Mrs.Pennant, on whom, knowing that she understoodhim, his eyes turned, was good enough tointerpret for him.And when once fairly set going, there wasdanger that poor David's garrulous gratitudeshould flow for ever. But it was all honest ;not a word of flattery ; and his old face was238 HELEN.in a glow and radiant with feeling, and the joyof telling Miss Helen all, how, and about it ;particularly concerning the last day when Mr.James paid him, and them, and all of them :that was a day Miss Stanley ought to haveseen ; pity she could not have witnessed it ; itwould have done her good to the latest hour ofher life. Pity she should never see the facesof many, some poorer they might have beenthan himself; many richer, that would havebeen ruined for ever but for her. For his ownpart, he reckoned himself one of the happiest ofthem all, in being allowed to see her face toface. And he hoped as soon as she was able toget out so far — but it was not so far she wouldcome to see how comfortable he was in his ownhouse.It ended at last in his giving a shove to thework-box on the table, which, though nothingworth otherwise, he knew she could not mislike,on account it was made out of all thesamples' of wood the Dean, her uncle, had givento him in former times.Notwithstanding the immoderate length ofhis speeches, and the impossibility he seemedHELEN. 239to find of ending his visit, Helen was not muchtired. And when she was able to walk so far,Mrs. Pennant took her to see David Price,and in a most comfortable house she found him;and every one in that house down to theyoungest child, gathered round her by degrees,some more, some less shy, but all with gratitudebeaming and smiling in their faces.It was delightful to Helen ; for there is nohman heart so engrossed by sorrow, so overwhelmedby disappointment, so closed againsthope of happiness, that will not open to thetouch of gratitude.240 HELEN.CHAPTER XII.But there was still in Helenass inmost soulone deceitful hope. She thought she had pulledit up by the roots many times, and the last timecompletely ; but still a little fibre lurked, andstill it grew again. It was the hope that Ceciliawould keep that last promise, though at themoment Helen had flung from her the possibility;yet now she took it up again, and shethought it was possible that Cecilia might betrue to her word. If her child should be bornalive, and if it should be a boy !It became a heart-beating suspense as thetime approached, and every day the news mightbe expected. The post came in but three timesa week at Llansillen, and every post day MissClarendon repeated her prophecy to her aunt,You will see, ma'am, the child will be born ingood time and alive. You who have alwaysHELEN. 24flbeen so much afraid for Lady cecilia, willfind she has not feeling enough to do herany harm."In due time came a note from the General.^^ A boy ! child and mother doing well.Give me joy''The joy to Miss Clarendon was much increasedby the triumph, in her own perfectlyright opinion. Mrs. Pennant's was pure affectionatejoy for the father, and for Lady Cecilia,for whom, aU sinner as she was in her niece'seyes, this good soul had compassion. Helen'sanxiety to hear again and again every post wasvery natural, the aunt thought; quite superfluous,the niece deemed it : Lady Cecilia woulddo very well, no doubt, she prophesied again,and laughed at the tremor, the eagerness, withi^hich Helen every day asked if there wasany letter from Cecilia. At last one came, thefirst in her own hand-writing, and it Was toHelen herself, and it extinguished all hope.Helen could only articulate, " Oh ! Cecilia !"Her emotion, her disappointment, were visible,but unaccountable : she could give no reasonfor it to Miss Clarendon, whose wonderingVOL. III. MI242 HELEN.eye was upon her; nor even to sympathisingaunt Pennant could she breathe a word withoutbetraying Cecilia : she was silent, and therewas all that day, and many succeeding days, ahopelessness of languor in her whole appearance.There was, as Miss Clarendon termed ita"backsliding in her recovery which grievedaunt Pennant, and Helen had to bear imputationof caprice, and of indolence, from MissClarendon; but even that eye immediatelyupon her, that eye more severe than ever, hadnot power to rouse her. Her soul was sunkwithin, nothing farther to hope; there was adead calm, and the stillness and loneliness ofLlansillen made that calm almost awfuL Thelife of great excitation which she had led previousto her illness, rendered her more sensibleof the change, of the total want of stimulus.The walks to Price's cottage had been repeated,but, though it was ever a bright spot, the eyecould not always be fixed upon it.Bodily exertion being more easy to her nowthan mental, she took long walks, and came inboasting how far she had been, and lookingquite exhausted. And Miss Clarendon won*HELEN. 243tered at her wandering out alone; then she triedto walk with Miss Clarendon, and she was moretired, though the walks were shorter — and thatwas observed, and was not agreeable either tothe observer, or to the observed.Helen endeavoured to make up for it; shefollowed Miss Clarendon about in aU her variousoccupations, from flower-garden to conservatory,and from conservatory to pleasantry,and to all her pretty cottages, and her schools,and she saw and admired all the good thatesther did so judiciously, and with such extraordinary,such wonderful energy.Nothing wonderful in it'' Miss Clarendonsaid ; and, as she ungraciously rejected praise,however sincere and required not sympathy,Helen was reduced to be a mere silent, stupid,useless stander-by, and she could not but feelthis a little awkward. She tried to interestherself for the poor people in the neighbourhood,but their language was unintelligible toher, and her's to them, and it is hard work tryingto make objects for oneself in quite a newplace, and with a preoccupying sorrow in themind all the time. It was not only hard workM 2244 HELEN.to Helen, but it seemed labour in vain— bringingsoil by handfuls to a barren rock, whereafterall, no plant will take root. Miss Clarendonthought that labour could never be in vain.One morning, when it must be acknowledgedthat Helen had been sitting too long in thesame position, with her head leaning on herhand, Miss Clarendon in her abrupt voice,asked, " How much longer, Helen, do youintend to sit there, doing only what is theworst thing in the world for you — thinking*'Helen started, and said she feared she hadbeen sitting too long idle.If you wish to know how long, I can tellyou,^ said Miss Clarendon; "just one hourand thirteen minutes."By the stop watches said Helen, smiling.By my watch*' said grave Miss Clarendon ;.f*and in the mean time look at the quantity ofwork I have done''And done so nicely !" said Helen, lookingat it with admiration.Oh, do not think to bribe me with admiration;I would rather see you do somethingyourself than hear you praise my doings."\HELEN. 245If I had anybody to work for. I have sofew friends now in the world who would carefor anything I could do ! But I will try — youshall see, my dear Esther, by and by*By and by ! no, no— now. I cannot bearto see you any longer in this half-alive, half-deadstatesI know," said Helen, " that all you say isfor my good. I am sure your only object ismy happiness.*^Your happiness is not in my power or inyours, but it is in your power to deserve to behappy, by doing what is right — by exertingyourself :— that is my object, for I see you arein danger of being lost in indolence. Now youhave the truth and the whole truth""Many a truth would have come mended fromMiss Clarendon's tongue, if it had been utteredin a softer tone, and if she had paid a littlemore attention to times and seasons ; but sheheld it the sacred duty of sincerity to tell afriend her faults as soon as seen, and withoutcircumlocution.The next day Helen set about a drawing.She made it an object to herself, to try to346 HELEN,copy a view of the dear Deanery in the samestyle as several beautiful drawings of MissClarendon^s.While she looked over her portfolio, severalof her old sketches recalled remembranceswhich made her sigh frequently; Miss Clarendonheard her, and said — " I wish youwould cure yourself of that habit of sighing ;it is very bad for your'sI know it," said Helen.Despondency is not penitence," continuedEsther : " reverie is not reparation."In this sort of interminable warfare againstdespondency and indolence, Miss Clarendonwas always in the right, but wrong in too muchproving herself in the right, as half her knowledgeof the human heart, and a quarter of hergood sense would have shewn her, had notboth been obscured by little clouds of temper.She felt as desirous as ever to make Helenhappy at Llansillen, but she was provoked tofind it impossible to do so. Of a strong bodyherself, capable of great resistance, powerfulreaction under disappointment or grief, shecould ill make allowance for feebler health andHELEN. 247spirits — perhaps feebler character. For greatmisfortunes she had great sympathy, but shecould not enter into the details of lesser sorrows,especially any of the sentimental kind, whichshe was apt to class altogether under the head" Sorrows of my Lord ^lumcake !" an expressionwhich had sovereignly taken her fancy,and which her aunt did not relish, or quiteunderstand.Mrs. Pennant was, indeed, as complete acontrast to her niece in these points, as natureand habit joined could produce. She was naturallyof the most exquisitely sympathetic ,shrinking and expanding to thetouch of others joy or woe, and, instead of havingby long use worn this out, she had preservedit wonderfully fresh in advanced years. But,notwithstanding the contrast and seeminglyincompatible difference between this aunt andniece, the foundations of their characters bothbeing good, sound, and true, they lived ontogether well, and loved each other dearly.They had seldom differed so much on any point .a^ in the present case, as to their treatment oftheir patient and their guest. Scarcely a day248 ' HELEN.passed in which they did not come to somemutual remonstrance ; and sometimes when shewas by, which was not pleasant to her, as maybeimagined. Yet perhaps even these littlealtercations and annoyances, though they triedHelen's • temper or grieved her heart at themoment, were of use to her upon the whole,by drawing her out of herself. Besides, thesedaily vicissitudes — made by human temper,manner, and character — supplied in some sortthe total want of events, and broke the monotonyx)f these tedious months.The General's bulletins, however, became atlast more favourable: Mr. Churchill was decidedlybetter; his physician hoped he mightsoon be pronounced omit of danger. The Generalsaid nothing of Beauclerc, but that hewas, he believed, still at Paris. And from thistime forward no more letters came from Beauclercto Helen ; as his hopes of Churchill'srecovery increased, he expected every day tobe released from his banishment, and was resolvedto write no more till he could say thathe was free. But Helen, though she did notallow it to herself, felt this deeply ; she thoughtHELEN. 249that her determined silence had at last con-vineshim that all pursuit of her was vain ;and that he submitted to her rejection: shetold herself it was what should be, and yet shefelt it bitterly.Lady Cecilia's letters did not mention him,indeed they scarcely told any thing ; they hadbecome short and constrained : the General,she said, advised her to go out more, and herletters often concluded in haste, with " Carriageat the doors and all the usual excuses ofa London life.One day when Helen was sitting intentlydrawing, Miss Clarendon said, " Helen !*' sosuddenly that she started and looked round ;Miss Clarendon was seated on a low stool ather aunt's feet, with one arm thrown over hergreat dog's neck ; he had laid his head on herlap, and resting on him, she looked up with asteadiness, a fixity of repose, which broughtto Helen's mind Raphael's beautiful figure ofFortitude leaning on her lion ; she thought shehad never before seen Miss Clarendon look sohandsome, so graceful, so interesting ; she tookcare not to say so, however.M 5S50 HELEN.Helen T continued Miss Clarendon, ** doyou remember the time when I^was at Clarendon• park, and quitted it so abruptly ? Myreasons were good, whatever my manner was ;the opinion of the world I am not apt to fearfor myself, or even for my brother, but to thewhispers of 'insolence I do listen. Helen ! Iwas conscious that certain feelings in my mindwere too str^g, — in me, you would scarcelybelieve it — too tender. I had no reason tothink that Granville Beauderc liked me, it wastherefore utterly unfit that I should think ofhim ; I felt this, I left Clarendon Park, andfrom that moment I have refused myself thepleasure of his society, I have altogether ceasedto think of him. This is the only way to conquera hopeless attachment. But you, Helen,though you have commanded him never toattempt to see you again, have not beenable to command your own mind. Since Mr.Churchill is so much better, you expect thathe will soon be pronounced out of danger —you expect that Mr. Beauclerc will come overcomehereward be at your feet !"^' I expect nothings said Helen in a fallHELEN. 251tearing voice, and then added resolutely, " Icannot foresee what Mr. Beauclerc may do,but of this be assured, Miss Clarendon, thatuntil I stand as I once stood, and as I deserveto stand, in the opinion of your brother ; unless,above all, I can bring proofs to Granville'sconfiding heart, that I have ever beenunimpeachable of conduct and of mind, and,in all but one circumstance true — true asyourself, Esther — never, never, though yourbrother and all the world consented, nevertill I myself felt that I was proved to be asworthy to be his wife as I think I am, wouldI consent to marry him — no, not though myheart were to break''I believe it,'** said Mrs. Pennant ; " and Iwish — oh, how I wish "That Lady Cecilia were hanged, as shedeserves," said Miss Clarendon : ^^ so do I, Iam sure; but that is nothing to the presentpurpose''No, indeed," said Helen.Helen I" continued Esther, '* rememberthat Lady Blanche Forrester is at Paris."Helen shrank.252 HELEN. 'itLady Cecilia tells you there is no danger ;I say there is""Why should you say so, my dear Esther ?''said her aunt.Has not this friend of yours always deceived,misled you, Helen ?^She can have no motive for deceiving meinthis'' said Helen : " I believe her**Believe her, then 1" cried Miss Clarendon ;believe her, and do not believe me, and takethe consequences : I have done''Helen sighed, but though she might fed thewant of the charm of Lady Cecilia's suavity ofmanner, of her agreeable, and her agreeingtemper, yet she felt the safe solidity of principlein her present friend, and admired, esteemed,and loved, without fear of change, herunflinching truth. Pretty ornaments of goldcannot be worked out of the native ore; tomake the rude mass ductile, some alloy mustbe used, and when the slight filigree of captivatingmanner comes to be tested against thesterling worth of unalloyed sincerity, weighedin the just balance of adversity, we are gladto seize the solid gold and leave the ornamentsto those that they deceive./HELEN. 253The fear about Lady Blanche Forresterwas, however, soon set at rest, and this timeLady Cecilia was right. A letter from herto Helen announced that Lady Blanche wasmarried ! — actually married, and not to GranvilleBeauclerc, but to some other Englishgentleman at Paris no matter whom. LordBeltravers and Madame de St. Cymon, disappointed,had returned to London ; Lady Ceciliahad seen Lord Beltravers and heard thenews from him.There could be no doubt of the truth of theintelligence, and scarcely did Helen herselfrejoice in it with more sincerity than did MissClarendon, and Helen loved her for her candouras well as for her sympathy.Time passed on; week after week rolledaway.At last General Clarendon announced to hissister, but without one word to Helen, thatMr. Churchill was pronounced out of danger.The news had been sent to his ward, the Generalsaid, and he expected Granville wouldreturn from his banishment immediately.Quite taken up in the first tumult of herV254 , Helen.feelings at this intelligence, Helen scarcely observedthat she had no letter from Cecilia.But even aunt Pennant was obliged to confess,in reply to her niece's observation, thatthis was *^ certainly very odd ! but we shallsoon hear some explanation, I hopesMiss Clarendon shook her head ; she saidthat she had always thought how matterswould end ; she judged from her brother's lettersthat he began to find out that he was notthe happiest of men. Yet nothing to thateffect was ever said by him ; one phrase onlyexcepted in his letter to her on her last birthday,which began with, " In our happy days,,my dear Esther*"Miss Clarendon said nothing to Helen uponthis subject ; she refrained altogether frommentioning Lady Cecilia.Two, three post-days passed without bringingany letter to Helen. The fourth, veryearly in the morning, long before the usualtime for the arrival of the post, Rose cameinto her room with a letter in her hand, saying,From General Clarendon, ma'am. His ownman, Mr. Cockburn, has just this minutearrived, ma'am — from London."HELEN. . 255With a trembling hand, Helen tore the letteropen : not one word from General Clarendon !It was only a cover, containing two notes ; onefrom Lord Davenant to the General, the otherfrom Lady Davenant to Helen.Lord Davenant said that Lady Davenant'shealth had declined so alarmingly after theirarrival at Petersburg, that he had insistedupon her return to England, and that as soonas the object of his mission was completed, heshould immediately follow her. A vessel, hesaid, containing letters from England, had beenlost, so that they were in total ignorance ofwhat had occurred at home; and, indeed, itappeared from the direction of Lady Dave-nantesnote to Helen, written on her landingin England, that she had left Russia withoutknowing that the marriage had been brokenoff, or that Helen had quitted General Clarendon's.She wrote — " Let me see you andGranville once more before I die. Be in London,at my own house, to meet me. I shall bethere as soon as I can be moved."The initials only of her name were signed.Elliott added a postscript, saying that her lady256 HELEN.had suffered much from an unusually longpassage and that she was not sure what daythey could be in town.There was nothing from Lady Cecilia. ^Cockburn said that her ladyship had not beenat home when he set out ; that his master hadordered him to travel all night, to get to Llangollenas fast as possible, and to make no delayin delivering the letter to Miss Stanley.To set out instantly, to be in town at herhouse to meet Lady Davenant, was, of course,Helenass immediate determination. GeneralClarendon had sent his travelling-carriage forher ; and under the circumstances, her friendscould have no wish but to speed her departure.Miss Clarendon expressed surprise at therebeing no letter from Lady Cecilia, and wouldsee and question Cockburn herself; but nothingmore was to be learned than what he hadalready told, that the packet from Lady Davenanthad come by express to his master afterLady Cecilia had driven out, as it had been hercustom of late, almost every day, to Kensington,to see her child.Nothing could be more natural, Mrs. Pen-helen.257nant thought, and she only wondered at[Esther's unconvinced look of suspicion. ** Nothing,surely, can be more natural, my dearEsther""To which Esther replied, '* Very likely,ina'am.^^Helen was too much hurried and too muchengrossed by the one idea of Lady Davenant tothink of what they said.At parting she had scarcely time even tothank her two friends for all their kindness,but they understood her feelings, and, as MissClarendon said, words on that point were unnecessary.Aunt Pennant embraced her againand again, and then let her go, saying, ^^ Imust not detain you, my dear."*^But I must*' said Miss Clarendon, " forone moment. There is one point on which myparting words are necessary. Helen ! keepclear of Lady Cecilia's affairs, whatever theymay be. Hear none of her secrets."Helen wished she had never heard any ; didn5t believe there were any more to hear ; butshe promised herself and Miss Clarendon thatshe would observe this excellent counsel.258 HELEN.And now she was in the carriage, and onher road to town. And now she had leisureto breathe, and to think, and to feel. Herthoughts and feelings, however, could be onlyrepetitions of fears and hopes about LadyDavenant, and uncertainty and' dread of whatwould happen when she should require explanationof all that had occurred in her absence.And how would Lady Cecilia be able to meether mother's penetration ? — ill or well. LadyDavenant was so clear-sighted. ^^ And howshall I,'' thought Helen, " without plungingdeeper in deceit, avoid revealing the truth ?Shall I assist Cecilia to deceive her mother inher last moments ; or shall I break my promise,betray Cecilia^s^s secret, and at last be the deathof her mother by the shock P''It is astonishing how often the mind can goover the same thoughts and feelings withoutcoming to any conclusion, any ease from rackingsuspense. In the mean time, on rolled thecarriage, and Cockburn, according to his master'sdirections got her over the ground withallconceivable speed.HELEN. 259CHAPTER XIII.When they were within the last stage ofLondon, the carriage suddenly stopped, andHelen, who ^ was sitting far back, deep inher endless reverie, started forward — Cock-burnwas at the carriage-door.My Lady, coming to meet you. MissStanley''It was Cecilia herself. But Cecilia sochanged in her whole appearance, that Helenifvould scarcely have known her. She was somuch struck that she hardly knew what wassaid : but the carriage-doors were opened, andLady Cecilia was beside her, and Cockburnshut the door without permitting one moment'sdelay, and on they drove.Lady Cecilia was excessively agitated.Helen had not power to utter a word, and wasglad that Cecilia went on speaking very fast;260 HELEN.though she spoke without appearing to know-wellwhat she was saying : of Helen's goodnessin coming so quickly, of her fears that shewould never have been in time — ** but she wasin time, — her mother had not yet arrived.Clarendon had gone to meet her on the road,she believed — she was not quite certain""That seemed very extraordinary to Helen.Not quite certain ?^^ said she.No, I am not,^ replied Cecilia, and shecoloured ; her very pale cheek flushed ; but sheexplained not at all, she left that subject, andspoke of the friends Helen had left at Llangollen— then suddenly of her mother's return —her hopes — her fears — and then, without goingon to the natural idea of seeing her mother,and of how soon they should see her, beganto talk of Beauclerc — of Mr. Churchesbeing quite out of danger — of the Generalsexpectation of Beauclerk immediate return.And then, my dearest Helens said she, ** allwill be ^Oh ! I do not know how it will be I" criedshe, her tone changing suddenly ; and, fromthe breathless hurry in which she had beenHELEN. 261running on, sinking at once to a low brokentone, and speaking very slowly. " I cannottell what will become of any of us. We cannever be happy again— any one of us. Andit is all my doing -^ and I cannot die. Oh!Helen, when I tell you '^She stopped, and Miss Clarendon's warningcounsel, all her own past experience, were fullin Helenass mind, and after a moments silence,she stopped Cecilia just as she seemed to havegathered power to speak, and begged that shewould not tell her anything that was to bekept secret. She could not, would not hearany secrets ; she turned her head aside, and letdown the glass and looked out, as if determinednot to be compelled to receive this confidence.^* Have you, then lost all interest, all affectionfor me, Helen ? I deserve it ! — but youneed not fear me now, Helen : I have donewith deception, would to Heaven I had neverbegun with it TIt was the tone and look of truth — shesteadily fixed her eyes upon Helen — and insteadof the bright beams that used to play in362 HELEN.those eyes, there was now a dark deep-seatedsorrow, almost despair.Helen was deeply moved : it was indeed impossiblefor her, it would have been impossiblefor any one who had any feeling, to have lookedupon Lady Cecilia Clarendon at that moment,and to have recollected what she had solately been, without pity. The friend of herchildhood looked upon her with all the poignantanguish of compassion —Oh ! my dear Cecilia ! how changed !"Helen was not sensible that she uttered thewords " how changed !^Changed ! yes ! I believe I am'' said LadyCecilia, in a calm voice, " very much changedin appearance, but much more in reality ; mymind is more altered than my person."Oh! Helen! if you could see into mymind at this moment, and know how completelyit is changed ; — but it is all in vain now !You have suffered and suffered for me! butyour sufferings could not equal mine. Youlost love and happiness, but still consciousof deserving both: I had both at my com-HELEN. «68and, and I could enjoy neither under theconsciousness, the torture of remorseHelen threw her arms round her, and exclaimed,^* Do not think of me ! — all will bewell — since you have resolved on the truth, allwill yet be well."Cecilia sighed deeply and went on. — "Iam sure, Helen, you were surprised that mychild was born alive. At least I was. I believeits mother had not feeling enough toendanger its existence. Well, Clarendon hasthat comfort at all events, and, as a boy, it willnever put him in mind of his mother.Well, Helen, I had hopes of myself to thelast minute ; I really and truly hoped, as I toldyou, that I should have had courage to tell himall when I put the child into his arms. But hisjoy ! — I could not dash his joy — I could not !and then I thought I never could. I knewyou would give me up ; I gave up all hopeof myself. I was very unhappy, and Clarendonthought I was very ill ; and I acknowledgedthat I was anxious about you, and letall the blame fall on you, innocent, generousS64 HELEN.creature ! — I heard my husband perpetuallyupbraiding you when he saw me ill — all, hesaid, the consequences of your falsehood — andall the time I knew it was my own.*' My dear Helen, it is impossible to tell youall the daily, hourly necessities for dissimulationwhich occurred. Every day, you know,we were to send to inquire for Mr. Churchill;and every day, when Clarendon brought me thebulletin, he pitied me and blamed you; andthe double dealing in my countenance he neversuspected — always interpreted favourably. Oh,such confidence as he had in me — sand how it hasbeen wasted, abused ! Then, letters from Beauclerc— how I bore to hear them read I cannotconceive : and at each time that I escaped,I rejoiced and reproached myself — and re-preached myself and rejoiced. I succeeded inevery effort at deception, and was cursed by myown success. Encouraged to proceed, T soonwent on without shame and without fear. Myhusband heard me defending you against thevarious reports which my venomous cousin hadcirculated, and he only admired what he calledmy amiable zeal.' His love for me increased,HELEN. 265but it gave me no pleasure ; for, Helen, now Iam going to tell you an extraordinary turnwhich my mind took, for which I cannot accountscan hardly believe it — it seems outof human nature — My love for him decreased !not only because I felt that he would hate meif he discovered my deceit, but because he waslowered in my estimation I I had always had,as everybody has, even my mother, the highestopinion of his judgment. To that judgmentI had always looked up ; it had raised me inmy own opinion ; it was a motive to me to beequal to what he thought me : but now thatmotive was gone, I no longer looked up to him ;his credulous affection had blinded his judgment— he was my dupe! I could not reverencescould not love one who was my dupe.But I cannot tell you how shocked I was atmyself, when I felt my love for him decreaseevery time I saw him.^* I thought myself a monster ; I had grownused to everything but that — that I could notendure ; it was a darkness of the mind— -a coldness; it was as if the sun had gone out of theuniverse; it was more — it was worse— it was asVOL. in. N266 HELEN.if I was alone in the world. Home was a desertto me. I went out every evening ; sometimes,but rarely, Clarendon accompanied me: he hadbecome more retired ; his spirits had declinedwith mine ; and though he was glad I shouldgo out and amuse myself, yet he was alwaysexact as to the hours of my return. I wasoften late — later than I ought to have been,and I made a multitude of paltry excuses ; thisit was, I believe, which first shook his faith inmy truth ; but I was soon detected in a moredecided failure.You know I never had the least taste forplay of any kind : you may remember I usedto be scolded for never minding what I wasabout at ecarte : in short, I never had theleast love for it — it wearied me ; but now thatmy spirits were gone, it was a sort of intoxicationin which I cannot say I indulged — for itwas no indulgence, but to which I had recourse.Louisa Castlefort, you know, was alwaysfond of play — got into her first difficultiesby that means — she led me on. I lost a gooddeal of money to her, and did not care aboutit as long as I could pay; but presently itHELEN. 267came to a time when I could not pay withoutapplying to the General : I applied to him,but under false pretences — to pay this billor that, or to buy something, which I neverbought: this occurred so often and to suchextent, that he suspected — he discoveredhow it went ; he told me so. He spoke in thatlow, suppressed — that terrible voice which Ihad heard once before ; I said, I know notwhat, in deprecation of his anger. * I amnot angry, Cecilia,' said he. I caught hishand, and would have detained him ; he withdrewthat hand, and, looking at me, exclaimed,Beautiful creature ! half those charms wouldI give for truth P He left the room, andthere was contempt in his look.All my love — all my reverence, returnedfor bin in an instant ; but what could I say ?He never recurred to the subject ; and now,when I saw the struggle in his mind, my pas-^sion for him returned in all its force.** People who flattered me often, you know,said I was fascinating, and I determined touse my powers of fascination to regain myhusband's heart ; how little I knew that heart !n2268 HELEN.I dressed to please him — oh 1 I never dressedmyself with such care in my most coquettishdays ; — I gave a splendid ball ; I danced toplease him — he used to be delighted with mydancing : he had said, no matter what, but Iwanted to make him say it — feel it again ; heneither said nor felt it. I saw him standinglooking at me, and at the close of the dance Iheard from him one sigh. I was more in lovewith him than when first we were married, andhe saw it, but that did not restore me to hisconfidence •— his esteem ; nothing could havedone that, but — what I had not. One stepin dissimulation led to another.After Lord Beltravers returned (ram ParisonLady Branches marriage, I used to meethim continually at Louisa Castlefort^s. As forplay, that was over with me for ever, but Iwent to Louisa's continually, because it wasthe gayest house I could go to ; I used to meetLord Beltravers there, and he pretended topay me a vast deal of attention, to which Iwas utterly indifferent, but his object was topush his sister into society again by my means.He took advantage of that unfortunate noteHELEN. 269•which I had received from Madame de St.Cymon, when she was at Old Forest ; he wantedme to admit her among mj acquaintance ;he urged it in every possible way, and was excessivelyvexed that it would not do : not thatlie cared for her ; he often spoke of her in a waythat shocked me, but it hurt his pride that sheshould be excluded from the society to whichher rank entitled her.I had met her at Louisa once or twice,but when I found that for her brother's sakeshe was always to be invited, I resolved to gothere no more, and I made a merit of this withClarendon. He was pleased ; he said, * Thatis well, that is right, my dear Cecilia.'** And he went out more with me. One nightat the opera, the Comtesse de St. Cymon wasin the box opposite to us, no lady with her,only some gentlemen. She watched me ; I didall I could to avoid her eye, but at an unluckymoment she caught mine, bent forward,and had the assurance to bow. The Generalsnatched the opera-glass from my hand, madesure who it was, and then said to me,* How does that woman dare to claim your270 HELEN.notice, Lady Cecilia ? I am afraid there musthave been some encouragement on your parts** * None,' said I, * nor ever shall be ; yousee I take no notice.'*^ ^ But you must have taken notice, or thiscould never be ?'* No indeed,' persisted !•Helen ! I really forgot at the moment thatfirst unfortunate note. An instant afterwardsI recollected it, and the visit about the cameos,but that was not my fault. I had, to be sure,dropped a card in return at her door, and Iought to have mentioned that, but I really didnot recollect it till the words had passed mylips, and then it was too late, and I did not liketo go back and spoil my case by an exception.^^ The General did not look quite satisfied ;he did not receive my assertions as implicitlyas formerly. He left the box afterwards tospeak to some one, and while he was gone incame Lord Beltravers. After some preliminarynothings, he went directly to the point;and said in an assured manner, ^ I believe youdo not know my sister at this distance. She hasbeen endeavouring to catch your eye.'HELEN. 271^^ * The Comtesse de St. Cymon does me toomuch honours said I with a slight inclinationof the head, and elevation of the eyebrow,which spoke sufficiently plainly.^^ Unabashed, and with a most provoking,almost sneering look, he replied, ^ Madamede St. Cymon had wished to say a few wordsto your Ladyship on your own account, amI to understand this cannot be ?^* On my own account ?' said I, * I do notin the least understand your Lordships ^ Iam not sure,' said he, * that I perfectly comprehendit. But I know that you sometimesdrive to Kensington, and sometimes take aturn in the gardens there. My sister lives atKensington, and could not she, without infringingetiquette, meet you in your walk, andhave the honour of a few words with you ?Something she wants to say to you,^ and herehe lowered his voice, * about a locket, andColonel D'Aubigny.*Excessively frightened, and hearing someoneat the door, I answered, * I do not know,I believe I shall drive to Kensington tomorrow.'He bowed delighted, and relieved^2 HELEN.me from his presence that instant. The momentafterwards General Clarendon came in.He asked me, ^ Was not that Lord Beltraverswhom I met ?^** * Yes said I ; * he came to reproach mefor not noticing his sister, and I answered himin such a manner as to make him dear thatthere was no hope'< * You did right,' said he, * if you did so.'My mind was in such confusion that I couldnot quite command my countenance, and I putup my fan as if the lights hurt me.** * Cecilia,' said he, ^ take care what youare about. Remember, it is not my requestonly, but my command to my wife' (he laidsolemn stress on the words) * that she shouldhave no communication with this woman.'*^ ^ My dear Clarendon, I have not the leastwish'.^^ ^ I do not ask what your wishes may be ;I require only your obedience.'Never had I heard such austere wordsfrom him. I turned to the stage, and I wasglad to seize the first minute I could to getaway. But what was to be done ? If I did notHELEN. 273go to Kensington, there was this locket, and Iknew not what, standing out against me. Iknew that this wretched woman had hadColonel D'*Aubigny in her train abroad, andsupposed that he must — treacherous profligateas he was — have given the locket to her,and now I was so afraid of its coming to Clarendon'seyes or ears! — and yet why shouldI have feared his knowing about it ? ColonelD^Aubigny stole it, just as he stole the picture.I had got it for you, do you recollect ?*"Perfectly," said Helen, ** and your mothermissed it."Yes," continued Lady Cecilia. " O that# had had the sense to do nothing about it!But I was so afraid of its somehow bringingeverything to light: my cowardice — my conscience— my consciousness of that first fatalfalsehood before niy marriage, has haunted meatthe most critical moments: it has risenagainst me, and stood like an evil spirit threateningme from the right path.'^ I went to Kensington, trusting to my owngood fortune, which had so often stood me instead; but Madame de St. Cymon was too cun-V 5274 HELEN,king for me, and so interested, so mean, she actuallybargained for giving up the locket. She .hinted that she knew Colonel D'Aubigny hadnever been your lover, and ended by sayingshe had not the locket with her ; and though Imade her understand that the General wouldnever allow me to receive her at my own house,yet she ^ hoped I could manage an introductionfor her to' some of my friends, and thatshe would bring the locket on Monday, if Iwould in the mean time try, at least with LadyEmily Greville and Mrs. Holdemesse.' .^^ I felt her .meanness, and yet I was almostas mean myself, for I agreed to do what Icould. Monday came. Clarendon saw me as Mwas going out, and, as he handed me into thecarriage, he asked where I was going. ToKensington I said, and added — oh ! Helen, Iam ashamed to tell you, I added, — I am goingto see my child.And there I found Madame de St. Cymon,and I had to tell her of my failure with LadyEmily and Mrs. Holdemesse. I softened theirrefusal as much as I could, but I might havespared myself the trouble, for she only retortedHELEN. 275by something about English prudery. At thismoment a shower of rain came on and she insistedupon my taking her home ; * Come insaid she when the carriage stopped at herdoor : * if you will come in, I will give it to younow, and you need not have the trouble ofcalling again I had the folly to yield, thoughI saw that it was a trick to decoy me intoher house, and to make it pass for a visit. Itall flashed upon me, and yet I could not resist,for I thought I must obtain the locketat all hazards. I resolved to get it from herbefore I left the house, and then I thought allwould be finished.*' She looked triumphant as she followed meinto her saloon, and gave a malicious smile,which seemed to say, * You see you are visitingme after alle^^ After some nonsensical conversation, meantto detain me, I pressed for the locket, andshe produced it : it was indeed the very onethat had been made for you — But just at thatinstant, while she still held it in her hand, thedoor suddenly opened, and Clarendon stoodopposite to me !S76 HELEN.ccI heard Madame de St. Cymon's voice, butof what she said, I have no idea. I heardnothing but the single word *rain and withscarcely strength to articulate, I attempted tofollow up that excuse. Clarendon^s look ofcontempt !— But he commanded himself, advancedcalmly to me, and said, ^I came toKensington, with these letters ; they have justarrived by express. Lady Davenant is in England— she is ills He gave me the packet, andleft the room, and I heard the sound of hishorses feet the next instant as he rode off. Ibroke from Madame de St. Cymon, forgettingthe locket and everything. I asked my servantswhich way the General had gone ? ' ToTown.' I perceived that he must have beengoing to look for me at the nurse and had seenthe carriage at Madame de St. Cymon's door.^* I hastened after him, and then I recollectedthat I had left the locket on the table at Madamede St. Cymon's, that locket for which Ihad hazarded — lost — everything !^^ The moment I reached home, I ran to Clarendon'sroom ; he was uot there, and oh fHelen, I have not seen him since !HELEN. 277^^From some orders which he left about horses,I suppose he went to meet my mother. I darednot follow him. She had desired me to waitfor her arrival at her own house. All yesterday,all last might, Helen, what I have suffered! I could not bear it any longer, andthen I thought of coming to meet you. Ithought I must see you before my mother arrived— my mother! but Clarendon will nothave met her till to-day. Oh, Helen ! youfeel all that I fear — sall that I foreseesLady Cecilia sank back, and Helen, overwhelmedwith all she had heard, could forsome time only pity her in silence; and atlast could only suggest that the General wouldnot have time for. any private communicationwith Lady Davenant, as her woman would bein the carriage with her, and the General wason horseback.It was late in the day before they reachedtown. As they came near Grosvenor Square,Cockburn inquired whether they were to drivehome, or to Lady Davenant^s ?** To my mother's, certainly, and as fast asyou canes*'378 HELEN.Lady Davenant had not arrived, but therewere packages in the hall, her courier, and herservants, who said that General Clarendon waswith her, but not in the carriage ; he had sentthem on. No message for Lady Cecilia, butthat Lady Davenant would be in town this night.To-night — some hours still of suspense ! Aslong as there were arrangements to be made,anything to do or to think of but that meetingof which they dared not think, it was endurable,but too soon all was settled ; nothing tobe done, but to wait and watch, to hear thecarriages roll past, and listen, and start, andlook at each other, and sink back disappointed.Lady Cecilia walked from the sofa to the window,and looked out, and back again -— continually,continually, till at last Helen beggedher to sit down*She sat down before an old piano-forte ofher mother's, on which her eyes fixed ; it wasone on which she had often played with Helenwhen they were children. " Happy, innocentdays'' said she ; *^ never shall we be so happyagain, Helen I But I cannot think of it ;'' sherose hastily, and threw herself on the sofa.HELEN. 279A servant, who had been watching at thehall-door, came in — " The carriage, my lady !Lady Davenant is comingsLady Cecilia started up ; they ran downstairs; the carriage stopped, and in the imperfectlight they saw the figure of Lady Davenant,scarcely altered, leaning jupon GeneralClarendon^s arm. The first sound of her voicewas feebler, softer, than formerly — quite tender,when she said, as she embraced them bothby turns, " My dear children !^^* You have accomplished your journey.Lady Davenant, better than you expected'said the General.Something struck her in the tone of hisvoice. She turned quickly, saw her daughterlay her hand upon his arm, and saw that armwithdrawn !They all entered the saloon — it was a blazeof light; Lady Davenant, shading her eyeswith her hand, looked round at the countenances,which she had not yet seen. LadyCecilia shrank back. The penetrating eyesturned from her, glanced at Helen, and fixedupon the General.280 HELEN.'' What is all this ?" cried she.Helen threw her arms round Lady Dave-nant. ** Let us think of you first, and only —be calm''Lady Davenant broke from her, and pressingforwards exclaimed, ^^ I must see my daughterif I have still a daughter i Cecilia I"The General moved. Lady Cecilia, who hadsunk upon a chair behind him, attempted torise. Lady Davenant stood opposite to her ;the light was now full upon her face andfigure; and her mother saw how it waschanged ! and looking back at Helen, she saidin a low, awful tone, " I see it ; the blackspot has spread rScarcely had Lady Davenant pronouncedthese words, when she was seized with themost violent spasms. The General had butjust time to save her from falling; he couldnot leave hall was terror! Even herown woman, so long used to these attacks,said it was the worst she had ever seen, and forsome time evidently feared it would terminatefatally.AHELEN. StAt last slowly she came to herself, but perfectlyin possession of her intellects, she sat up,looked round, saw the agony in her daughter'scountenance, and holding out her hand to her,said, ^^ Cecilia, if there is any thing that Iought to know, it should be said now.^^Cecilia caught her mother's hand, and threwherself upon her knees. ^' Helen, Helen,stay r cried she ; " do not go. Clarendon rHe stood leaning against the chimney-piece,motionless, while Cecilia, in a faltering voice,began; her voice gaining strength, she wenton, and poured out all — even from the verybeginning, that first suppression of the truth,that first cowardice, then all that followedfrom that one falsehood — all— even to thelast degradation, when in the power, in thepresence of that bad woman, her husbandfound, and left her.She shuddered as she came to the thought ofthat look of his, and not daring, not havingonce dared while she spoke, to turn towardshim, her eyes fixed upon her mother's; butas she finished speaking, her head sank, she282 HELEN.laid her .face on the sofa beside her : she felther mother's arm thrown over her, and shesobbed convulsively.There was silence.*^ I have still a daughter V* were the firstwords that broke the silence. ^^ Not such as Imight have had, but that is my own faultsOh mother r^ I have still a daughters repeated LadyDavenant ^^ There is," continued she, turningto General Clarendon, ^^ there is a redeemingpower in truth. She may yet be moreworthy to be your wife than she has ever yetbeen''Never r exclaimed the General. His countenancewas rigid as iron ; then suddenly it relaxed,and going up to Helen, he said,I have done you injustice. Miss Stanley.I have been misled. I have done you injustice,and by Heaven ! I will do you public justice,cost me what it will. Beauclerc will be inEngland in a few days, at the altar I will giveyou to him publicly; in the face of all theworld, will I mark my approbation of hischoice ; publicly will I repair the wrong I haveHELEN. Stoneyou. I will see his happiness and yoiirsbefore I leave England for ever !''Lady Cecilia started up : " Clarendon r wasall she could say.Yes, Lady Cecilia Clarendon'' said he, allthe stern fixedness of his face returning at once" Yes, Lady Cecilia Clarendon, we separatenow and for ever."Then, turning from her, he addressed LadyDavenant. ** I shall be ordered on some foreignservice. Your daughter, Lady Davenant,will remain with you, while I am still in England,unless you wish otherwise "** Leave my daughter with me, my dearGeneral, till my death," said Lady Davenant.She spoke calmly, but the General, after arespectful — an affectionate pressure of thehand she held out to him, said, ^^ That maybefar distant, I trust in God, and we shallat all events meet again the day of Helenassmarriage."And, if that day is to be a happy day tome,"cried Helen, " to me or to your ownbeloved ward. General Clarendon, it must behappy to Cecilia !"384 HELEN.*^ As happy as she has left it in my power tomake her. When I am gone, my fortune***' Name it not as happiness for my laugh*ter' interrupted Lady Davenant, " or you doher injustice, General Clarendon !**I name it but to do her justice'* said he.It is all that she has left it in my power togive;*^ and then his long suppressed passionsuddenly bursting forth, he turned to Cecilia,'^ All I can give to one so false — false fromthe first moment to the last— false to me —to me ! who so devotedly, fondly, blindly lovedher r He rushed out of the room.Then Lady Davenant, taking her daughterin her arms, said, ^* My child, return to me !''She sank back exhausted. Mrs. Elliott wassummoned, she wished them all out of theroom, and said so ; but Lady Davenant wouldhave her daughter stay beside her, and withCeciUa*s hand in hers, she fell into a profoundslumber.HELEN. 085CHAPTER XIV.On awaking in the morning, after somelong-expected event has happened, we feelin doubt whether it has really occurred, orwhether it is all a dream. Then comes theawful sense of waking truth, and the fear thatwhat has been done, or said, is irremediable, andthen the astonishment that it really is done."It is over r Helen repeated to herself,repeated aloud, before she could well bringherself from that state of half belief, beforeshe could recover her stunned faculties.Characters which she thought she perfectlyunderstood, bad each appeared, in these newcircumstances, different from what she had expected.From Cecilia she had scarcely hoped,even at the last moment, for such perfect truthin her confession. From Lady Davenant notso much indulgence, not aU that tenderness for286 HELEN.her daughter. From the General, less violenceof expression, more feeling for Cecilia ; he hadnot allowed the merit of her candour, hercourage at the last. It was a perfectly voluntaryconfession, all that concerned ColonelD'Aubigny, and the letters could never havebeen known to the General by any other means.Disappointed love, confidence duped, and hispride of honour, had made him forget himselfin anger, even to cruelty. Helen thought hewould feel this hereafter, fancied he must fedit even now, but that, though he might relent,he would not recede ; though he might regretthat he had made the determination, he wouldcertainly abide by it ; that which he had resolvedto do, would certainly be done, — theseparation between him and Cecilia would takeplace. And though all was clear and bright inHelen's own prospects, the General's esteemrestored, his approbation to be publicly marked,Beauclerc to be convinced of her perfectinnocence ! Beauclerc, freed from all fear anddanger, returning all love and joy; yet she couldnot be happy — it was all mixed with bitterness,anguish for Cecilia.HELEN. 287She had so often so forcibly urged her tothis confession ! and now it was made, did Helenregret that it was made ? No, independently ofher own cleared character, she was satisfied,even for Cecilia'^s sake, for it was right, whateverwere the consequences ; it was right, andin the confusion and discordance of her thoughtsand feelings, this was the only fixed point.To this conclusion she had come, but hadnot been able farther to settle her mind, whensbe was told that Lady Davenant was nowawake, and wished to see her.Lady Davenant, renovated by sleep, appearedto Helen, even when she saw her bydaylight, scarcely altered in her looks. Therewas the same life, and energy, and elasticity,and strength, Helen hoped, not only of mind,but of body, and quick as that hope rose, asshe stood beside her bed, and looked upon her.Lady Davenant marked it, and said,You are mistaken, my dear Helen, I shallnot last long ; I am now to consider how I amto make the most of the little life that remains.How to repair a^ far as may be, as far as canbe, in my last days, the errors of my youth !288 HELEN.You know, Helen, what I mean, and it is nowno time to waste words, therefore I shall notbegin by wasting upon you, Helen, any reproaches.Foolish, generous, weak creaturethat you are, and as the best of human beingswill ever be — I roust be content with you asyou are; and sos continued she, in a playfultone, '^ we must love one another, perhaps allthe better, for not being too perfect. Andindeed, my poor child, you have been wellpunished already, and the worst of criminalsneed not be punished twice. Of the propensityto sacrifice your own happiness for othersyou will never be cured, but you will, I trust,in future, when I am gone never to return, betrue to yourself. Now as to my daughter r ''''Lady Davenant then went over with Helenevery circumstance in Cecilia's confession, andshewed how, in the midst of the shock she hadfelt at the disclosure of so much falsehood,hope for her daughter's future truth hadrisen in her mind even from the courage, andfulness, and exactness of her confession. '^ Andit is not,"*' continued she, ^' a sudden reformation; I have no belief in sudden reformations.HELEN. 289I think I see that this change in Cecilia^s^s mindhas been some time working out by her ownexperience of the misery, the folly, the degradationof deceitsHelen earnestly confirmed this from her ownobservations, and from the expressions whichhad burst forth in the fulness of Cecilia^s^s heartand strength of her conviction, when she toldher all that had passed in her mind.** That is well I'* pursued Lady Davenant ;**' but principles cannot be depended upon tillconfirmed by habit ; and Cecilia^s^s nature is sovariable — impressions on her are easily, evendeeply made, but all in sand ; they may shiftwith the next tide — may be blown away by thenext wind.'^Oh no'' exclaimed Helen, " there is nodanger of that. I see the impression deepeningevery hour, from your kindness and ^Helen hesitated, " And beside s ^^* Besides said Lady Davenant, " usuallycomes as the arrive-ban of weak reasons :you mean to say that the sight of my sufferingsmust strengthen, must confirm all herVOL. III. o290 HELEN.principles — her taste for truth. Yes,^' continuedshe, in her most firm tone, " Cecilia^s^sbeing with me during my remaining days willbe painful but salutary to her. She sees, asyou do, that all the falsehood meant to save mehas been in vain ; that at last the shock hasonly hastened my end : it must be so, Helen.Look at it steadily, in the best point of view —the evil you cannot avert : take the good, andbe thankful for it.^And Cecilia — how did she feel ? Wretchedshe was, but still in her wretchedness there waswithin her a relieved conscience and the sustainingpower of truth ; and she had now thesupport of her mother's affection, and theconsolation of feeling that she had at last doneHelen justice ! To her really generous, affectionatedisposition, there was in the return ofher feelings to their natural course, an inde-^scribble sense of relief. Broken, crushed, aswere all her own hopes, her sympathy, even inthe depths of her misery, now went pure, freefrom any windings of deceit, direct to Helen'shappy prospects, in which she shared with allthe eagerness of her warm heart.HELEN. 291Beauclerc arrived, found the General athome expecting him, and in his guardianscountenance and voice he saw and heard onlywhat was natural to the man. The Generalwas prepared, and Beauclerc was himself intoo great impatience to hear the facts, to attendmuch to the manner in which things were told.Lady Davenant has returned ill ; herdaughter is with her, and Helen ^'' And Helen "And you may be happy, Beauclerc, ifthere be truth in woman's' said the General.Go to her — you will find I can do justice.Go, and return when you can tell me that yourwedding-day is fixed. And, Beauclerk'' hecalled after him, *' let it be as soon as possible."The only unnecessary advice my dear guardianhas ever given me," Beauclerc, laughing,replied.The General's prepared composure had notcalculated upon this laugh, this slight jest ;his features gave way. Beauclerc, struck witha sudden change in the General's countenance,released his hand from the congratulatoryshake in which its power failed. The Generalo229S HELEN.turned away as if to shun inquiry, and Beauclerc,however astonished, respected his feelings,and said no more. He hastened to LadyDavenant with all a lover's speed — with all alover's joy saw the first expression in Helen'seyes ; and with all a friend's sorrow for LadyDavenant and for the General, heard all thatwas to be told of Lady Cecilia'^s affairs: hermother undertook the explanation, Cecilia herselfdid not appear.In the first rush of Beauclerc's joy in Helen'^scleared fame, he was ready to forgive all thedeceit ; yes, to forgive all ; but it was suchforgiveness as contempt can easily grant, whichcan hardly be received by any soul not lost tohonour. This Lady Davenant felt, and feltso keenly, that Helen trembled for her : sheremained silent, pressing her hand upon herheart, which told her sense of approachingdanger.It was averted by the calmness, the truth,the justice with which Helen spoke to Beauclercof Cecilia. As she went on, Lady colour returned, and Beauclerk readysympathy went with her as far as she pleased.HELEN. 293till she came to one point, from which beinstantly started back.Helen proposed, if Beauclerc would consent,to put off their marriage till the General shouldbe reconciled to Cecilia.** Attempt it not, Helen," cried Lady Da-tenant; ^^ delay not for any consideration.Your marriage must be as soon as possible,for my sake, for Cecilia's — mark me! — forCecilia^s^s sake, as soon as possible let it be ;it is but justice that her conscience should beso far relieved, let her no longer obstruct yourunion. Let me have the satisfaction of seeingit accomplished ; name the day, Helen, I maynot have many to livesThe day, the earliest possible, was namedby Helen ; and the moment it was settled.Lady Davenant hurried Beauclerc away,saying—Return to General Clarendon — spare himsuspense — it is all we can do for him.^'The General's wishes in this, and in all thatfollowed, were to be obeyed. He desired thatthe marriage should be public, that all shouldbe bidden of rank, fashion, and note — all their^4 HELEN.family connexions. Lady Katrine Hawksbyby,he especially named. To do justice to Helenseemed the only pleasurable object now remainingto him.In speaking to Beauclerc, he never oncenamed Lady Cecilia ; it seemed a tacit compactbetween him and Beauclerc, that her nameshould not be pronounced. They talked ofLady Davenant ; the General said he did notthink her in such danger as she seemed toconsider herself to be: his opinion was, hedeclared, confirmed by his own observation ;by the strength of mind and of body whichshe had shewn since her arrival in England.Beauclerc could only hope that he was right ;and the General went on to speak of the serviceupon which he was to be employed : said thatall arrangements laying an emphasis upon theword, would be transacted by his man of business.He spoke of what would happen afterhe quitted England, and left his ward a legacyof some favourite horse which he used to rideat Clarendon Park, and seemed to take it forgranted that Beauclerc and Helen would besometimes there when he was gone.HELEN. 295Then, having cleared his throat several times,the General desired that Lady Ceeilia^s portrait,which he designated only as " the picture overthe chimney-piece in my rooms' should besent after him. And taking leave of Beauclerc,he set off for Clarendon Park, where hewas to remain till the day before the wedding ;the day following he had fixed for hisdeparture from England.When Beauclerc was repeating this conversationto Helen, Lady Davenant came intothe room just as he was telling these last particulars.She marked the smile, the hope thatwas excited, but shook her head, and said,Raise no false hopes in ray daughter's mind,I conjure you ;" and she turned the conversetion to other subjects. Beauclerc had been tosee Mr. Churchill, and of that visit LadyDavenant wished to hear.As to health, Beauclerc said that Mr. Churchillhad recovered almost perfectly ; " but thereremains, and I fear will always remain, a littlelameness, not disabling, but disfiguring - anawkwardness in moving, which, to a man of hispersonal pretensions, is trying to the temper ;296 HELEN.but after noticing the impediment as he advancedto meet me, he shook my hand cordially,and smiling, said, * You see I am amarked man; I always wished to be so, youknow, so pray do not repent, my good friendHe saw I was too much moved for jesting, thenhe took it more seriously, but still kindly, assuringme that I had done him real service;it is always of service, he said, to be necessitatedto take time for quiet reflection, of whichhe had had sufficient in his hours of solitaryconfinement — this little adversity had left himleisure to be good.And then'' continued Beauclerc, " Churchilladverting to our foolish quarrel, to clearthat off my mind, threw the whole weight ofthe blame at once comfortably upon the absenton Beltravers. Churchill said we had indeedbeen a couple of bravely blind fools ; he ought,as he observed, to have recollected in time,thatAnger is likeA full hot horse, who being allowed his way,Self-mettle tires him** So that was good, and Horace, in perfectHELEN. 297good-humour with me and himself, and all theworld, played on with the past and the future,glad he had no more of his bones to exfoliate ;glad, after so many months of failure in ^ thefirst intention,' to find himself in a whole skin,and me safe returned from transportation —spoke of Helen seriously ; said that his conductto her was the only thing that weighedupon his mind, but he hoped that his sincerepenitence, and his months of suffering, wouldbe considered as sufficient atonement for hishaving brought her name before the public ;and he finished by inviting himself to our wedding,if it were only for the pleasure of seeingwhat sort of a face Lady Katrine Hawksbybywill have upon the occasion. — It was told of acelebrated statesman, jealous of his colleagues,Horace says, that every commonly good speechcost him a twinge of the gout; and everyuncommonly good one sent him to bed with aregular fit. Now Horace protests that everycommonly decent marriage of her acquaintancecosts Lady Katrine at least a sad headache ;but Miss Stanley's marriage, likely as it is tobe so happy after all, as he politely said, foresHELEN.dooms poor Lady Katrine to a month's heartacheat the least, and a face full ell longsWhether in his penitence he had forswornslander or not, it was plain that Churchill hadnot lost either his taste, talent, or power ofsarcasm, and of this Beauclerc could havegiven, and in time gave, further illustrations ;but it was in a case which came home to himrather too nearly, and on which his reports didnot flow quite so fluently — touching Lord Bel-travers,it was too tender a subject. Beauclercwas ashamed of himself for having beenso deceived when, after all his guardian haddone to save his fortune, after all that noblesacrifice had been made, he found that it wasto no good end, but for the worst purpose possible.Lord Believers, as it was now clear,never had the slightest intention of living inthat house of his ancestors on which Beauclerchad lavished his thousands, ay, and tens ofthousands; but while he was repairing, andembellishing, and furnishing Old Forest, fit foran English aristocrat of the first water, theLord Beltravers at the gaming-table, pledgedHELEN. 299it, and lost it, and sold it ; and it went to thehammer. This came out in the first fury ofLord Beltravers upon his sister's marriage atParis : and then and there Beauclerc first cameto the perception that his good friend hadpredestined him and his fortune for the LadyBlanche, whom, all the time, he considered asafool and a puppet, and for whom he had notthe slightest affection : it was all for his owninterested purposes.Beauclerc suddenly opened his eyes wide, andsaw it all at once : how it had happened thatthey had never seen it before, notwithstandingall that the General on one side, and LadyDavenant on the other, had done to force themopen, was incomprehensible; but, as LadyDavenant observed, " A sort of cataract comesover the best eyes for a time, and the patientwill not suffer himself to be couched ; and ifyou struggle to perform the operation that isto do him good against his will, it is odds butyou blind him for life."Helen could not, however, understand howGranville could have been so completely HELEN.civet, except that it had been impossible forhim to imagine the exquisite meanness of thatman^s mind.There'' cried Beauclerc, " you see myfault was having too little, instead of too muchimagination''Lady Davenant smiled, and said, ^^ It hasbeen admirably observed, that ^ it is amongmen as among certain tribes of animals, it issometimes only necessary that one of the herdshould step forward and lead the way, to makeall the others follow with alacrity and submission;'* and I solve the whole difficulty thus:I suppose that Lord Beltravers, just followingBeauclerc's lead, succeeded in persuading himthat he was a man of genius and a noble fellow,by allowing all Beauclerc's own paradoxes,adopting all his ultra-original opinions, and, inshort, sending him back the image of his ownmind, till Granville had been caught by it, andhad fairly fallen in love with it— a mentalmetaphysical Narcissus.After all," continued Lady Davenant, smiling," of all the follies of youth, the dangerousLord Mason.Helen, 301folly of trying to do good — that for which youstand convicted, may be the most easily pardoned,the most safely left to time and experienceto cure. You know, Granville, that ever sincethe time of Alexander the Great's great tutor,the characteristic faults of youth and age havebeen the * too much' and the * too little.' Inyouth, the too much confidence in others and inthemselves, the too much of enthusiasm — toomuch of benevolence ;-^-in age, alas ! too little.And with this youth, who has the too muchin every thing-r- what shall we do with him,Helen ? Take him, for better for worse, youmust ; and I must love him as I have done fromhis childhood, a little while longer — to the endof my life's*'A little longer, to the end of her life r saidBeauclerc to himself, as leaning on the backof Helen's chair he looked at Lady Davenant.^^ I cannot believe that she whom I see beforeme is passing away, to be with us but a littlelonger; so full of life as she appears; suchenergy divine ! No, no, she will live, livelong''And as his eyes looked that hope, Helen303 HELEN.caught it, and yet she doubted, and sighed, butstill she had hope. Cecilia bad none ; she wassitting behind her mother; she looked up atHelen, and shook her head; she had seenmore of her mother's danger, she had beenwith her in nights of fearful struggle. Shehad been with her just after she had written toLord Davenant what she must have felt to beafarewell letter-^ a letter; too, which containedthe whole history of Cecilia's deceptionand Helen's difficulties, subjects so agitatingthat the writing of them had left her mother insuch a state of exhaustion that Cecilia couldthink only with terror for her, yet she exertedall her power over herself to hide her anguish,not only for her mother's but for Helen's sake.The preparations for the wedding went on,pressed forward by Lady Davenant as urgentlyas the General could desire. The bridesmaidswere to be Lady Emily Greville's younger sister,Lady Susan, and, at Helen's particular request.Miss Clarendon.Full of joy, wonder, and sympathy, in weddinghaste Miss Clarendon and Mrs. Pennantarrived, both delighted that it was all happilyHELEN. 303settled for Helen : which most, it was scarcelypossible to say ; but which most curious as tothe means by which it had been settled, it wasvery possible to see. When Miss Clarendonhad secured a private moment with Helen, shebegan,Now tell me — tell me everything aboutyourselfHelen could only repeat what the Generalhad already written to his sister — that he wasnow convinced that the reports concerning MissStanley were false, his esteem restored, his publicapprobation to be given, Beauclerc satisfied,and her rejection honourably retracted.I will ask you no more, Helen, by wordor look," said Esther ; " I understand it all,my brother and Lady Cecilia are separated forlife. And now let us go to aunt Pennant : shewill not annoy you by her curiosity, but howshe will be able to manage her sympathyamongst you with these crossing demands, Iknow not; Lady Cecilia's wretchedness willalmost spoil my aunt's joy for you — it cannotbe pure joy'*Pure joy ! how far from it Helen's sigh304 HELEN.told ; and Miss Clarendon had scarcely patienceenough with Lady Cecilia to look at her again ;she scarcely seconded, at least with good grace,a suggestion of Mrs. Pennant's that they shouldprevail on Lady Cecilia to take a turn in thepark with them, she looked so much in want offresh air.We can go now, my dear Esther, you know,before it is time for that picture sale, at whichyou are to be before two o'clock." Lady Davenantdesired Cecilia to go. '^ Helen will bewith me, do, my dear Cecilia, go.**^She went, and before the awkwardness ofMiss Clarendon^s silence ceased, and beforeMrs. Pennant had settled which glass or whichblind was best up or down. Lady Cecilia burstinto tears, thanked aunt Pennant for her sympathy,and now, above the fear of Miss Clarendon— above all fear but that of doing furtherwrong by concealment, she at once told thewhole truth, that they might, as well as theGeneral, do full justice to Helen, and that theymight never, never blame Clarendon for the separationwhich was to be.That he should have mentioned nothing of6CHELEN. . S05her conduct even to his sister, was not surprising.^* I know his generous natures saidCecilia.^^ But I never knew yours till this moment,Cecilia cried Miss Clarendon, embracing her ;my sister, now, — separation or not''But there need be no separation'' saidkind aunt Pennant.Cecilia sighed, and Miss Clarendon repeated,^^ You will find in me a sister at all events."She now saw Cecilia as she really was — faultsand virtues. Perhaps indeed in this moment ofrevulsion of feeling, in the surprise of gratifiedconfidence, she overvalued Lady Cecilia's virtues,and was inclined to do her more thanjustice, in her eagerness to make generousreparation for unjust suspicion.306 HELEN.CHAPTER XV.After setting down Lady Cecilia at hermother's, the aunt and niece proceeded to thepicture sale which Miss Clarendon was eagerto attend as she was in search of a pendantto a famous Bergen she possessed ;and while she was considering the picture, shehad the advantage of hearing a story, whichseemed, indeed, to be told for the amusementof the whole room, by a party of fashionableswho were standing near her : — a wonderfulstory of a locket, which was going about ; itwas variously told, but all agreed in one pointthat a young married lady of high rank hadnever dared to appear in the world since herhusband had seen this locket in her hands — ithad brought out something — something whichhad occurred before marriage ; — and here mysteriousnods were interchanged.HELEN. 307Another version stated that the story hadnot yet been fully explained to the husband,that he had found the locket on the table inaroom that he had suddenly entered, where hediscovered her kneeling to the person in question,— " the person in question" being sometimesa woman and sometimes a man.Then leaned forward, stretching her scraggyneck, one who had good reason to believe thatthe husband would soon speak out — the publicwould soon hear of a separation ; and everybodymust be satisfied that there could not beaseparation without good grounds.Miss Clarendon enquired from a gentlemannear them, who the lady was with the outstretchedscraggy neck. — Lady Katrine Hawksbyby.Miss Clarendon knew her only by reputation.She did not know Miss Clarendon either byreputation or by sight; and she went on tosay, she would " venture any wager that theseparation would take place within a month.In short, there could be no doubt that beforemarriage," — and she ended with a look whichgave a death-blow to the reputation.Exceedingly shocked, Miss Clarendon, not308 HELEN.only from a sense of justice to Lady Cecilia,but from feeling for her brother's honour,longed to reply in defence ; but she constrainedherself for once, and having been assured byLady Cecilia that all had been confessed toher mother, she thought that Lady Davenantmust be the best person to decide what shouldbe done. She went to her house immediately,sent in word that she begged to see LadyDavenant for two or three minutes alone, wasadmitted; Cecilia immediately vacated the chairbeside her mother's bed, and left the room.Miss Clarendon felt some difficulty in beginning,but she forced herself to repeat all shehad heard. Then Lady Davenant started upin her bed and the colour of life spread overher face —^^ Thank you, thank you. Miss Clarendon !a second time I have to thank you for an inestimableservice. It is well for Cecilia that. shemade the whole truth known to us both —made you her friend ; now we can act for her.I will have that locket from Madame de St.Cymon before the sun goes down''Now Lady Davenant had Madame de St.HELEN. 309Cymon completely in her power, from heracquaintance with a disgraceful transactionwhich had come to her knowledge at Florence.The locket was surrendered, returned withhumble assurances that Madame de St. Cymonnow perfectly understood the thing in its truelight, and was quite convinced it had beenstolen, not given.Lady Davenant glanced over her note withscorn, was going to throw it from her intothe fire, but did not. When Miss Clarendoncalled upon her again that evening as she hadappointed, she shewed it to her, and desiredthat she would, when her brother arrived nextday, tell him what she had heard, what LadyDavenant had done, and how the locket wasnow in her possession.Some people who pretend to know, maintainthat the passion of love is of such an all-engrossingnature that it swallows up everyother feeling; but we who judge more justlyof our kind, hold differently, and rather believethat love in generous natures imparts astrengthening power, a magnetic touch, toevery good feeling. Helen was incapable of310 HELEN.being perfectly happy while her friend wasmiserable ; and even Beauclerc, in spite of allthe suffering she had caused, could not helppitying Lady Cecilia, and he heartily wishedthe General could be reconciled to her ; yet itwas a matter in which he could not properlyinterfere ; he did not attempt it.Lady Davenant determined to give a breakfastto all the bridal party after the marriage.In her state of health, Helen and Cecilia remonstrated,but Lady Davenant had resolvedupon it, and at last they agreed it would bebetter than parting at the church-door — betterthat she should at her own house take leaveof Helen and Beauclerc, who would set outimmediately after the breakfast for Thorndale.And now equipages were finished, and weddingparaphernalia sent home — the second timethat wedding-dresses had been furnished forMiss Stanley ; — and never once were theselooked at by the bride elect, nor even byCecilia, but to see that all was as it shouldbe — that seen, she sighed, and passed on.Felicie's ecstasies were no more to be heard :we forgot to mention that she had, beforeHELEN. 311Helenass return from Llangollen, departed, dismissedin disgrace ; and happy was it for LadyCecilia and Helen to be relieved from herjabbering, and not exposed to her spying andreporting.Nevertheless the gloom that hung over theworld above could not but be observed bythe world below; it was, however, naturallyaccounted for by Lady Davenant^s state ofhealth, and by the anxiety which Lady Ceciliamust feel for the General, who, as it had beenofficially announced by Mr. Cockburn, was toset out on foreign service the day after the■marriage.Lady Cecilia, notwithstanding the brighthopefulness of her temper, and her habits ofsanguine belief that all would end well in whichshe and her good fortune had any concern,seemed now, in this respect, to have changedher nature; and ever since her husband's denunciations,had continued quite resigned tomisery, and submissive to the fate which shethought she had deserved. She was muchemployed in attendance upon her mother, andthankful that she was so permitted to be. She312 HELEN.never mentioned her husbands name, and ifshe alluded to him, or to what had been decreedby him, it was with an emotion thatscarcely dared to touch the point. She spokemost of her child, and seemed to look to thecare of him as her only consolation. The boyhad been brought from Kensington for LadyDavenant to see, and was now at her house.Cecilia once said she thought he was very likehis father, and hoped that he would at leasttake leave of his boy at the last. To that lasthour — that hour when she was to see herhusband once more, when they were to meetbut to part, to meet first at the wedding ceremony,and at a breakfast in a public company,altogether painful as it must be, yet shelooked forward to it with a sort of longingardent impatience. " True, it will be dreadful,yet still — still shall I see him again, seehim once again, and he cannot part with hisonce so dear Cecilia without some word —some look, different from his last.'^The evening before the day on which thewedding was to be. Lady Cecilia was in LadyDavenant's room, sitting beside the bed whileHELEN. 313her mother slept. Suddenly she was startledfrom her still and ever the same recurring trainof melancholy thoughts, by a sound which hadoften made her heart beat with joy — her husband'sknock; she ran to the window, opened it,and was out on the balcony in an instant. Hishorse was at the door, he head alighted, and wasgoing up the steps ; she leaned over the rails ofths balcony, and as she leaned, a flower shewore broke off — it fell at the General^s feet :he looked up, and their eyes met. There hestood, waiting on those steps, some minutes,for an answer to his inquiry how Lady Davenantwas : and when the answer was broughtout by Elliott, whom, as it seemed, he had desiredto see, he remounted his horse, and rodeaway without ever again looking up to the balcony.Lady Davenant had awakened, and when Ceciliareturned on hearing her voice, her another,as the light from the half-open shutters shoneupon her face, saw that she was in tears ; shekneeled down by the side of the bed, and wept,bitterly ; she made her mother understand howit had been.VOL. 111. p314 HELEN.nNot that I hoped more, but Still — stillto feel it so ! Oh I mother, I am bitterly punishedThen Lady Davenant seizing those claspedhands and raising herself in her bed, fixed heireyes earnestly upon Cecilia, and asked,"Would you, Cecilia — tell me, would youif it were now, this moment, in your power — -would you retract your confession ?^Retract ! impossible r"Do you repent— regret having made it,Cecilia''Repent — regret having made it ! No,other, no !'' replied Cecilia, firmly. " I onlyregret that it was not sooner made. Retract ! —impossible I could wish to retract the onlyright thing I have done, the only, thing thatredeems me in my inmost soul from uttermostcontempt. . No ! rather would I be as I am,and lose that' noble heart, than hol^l it as Idid, unworthily. . There is mother, as yousaide as I feel, a sustaining • — a redeeming*power in truth." •Her mother threw her arms round h^.Come to my heart, my child, close -— doseHELEN. Sisto my heart. Heaven bless you ! You havemy blessing — my thanks, Cecilia. Yes, mythanks, — for now I know — I feel, my deardaughter, that my neglect of you in childhoodhas been repaired. You make me forgive myself,you make me happy, you have my thanksmy blessing — my warmest blessing !''A smile of delight was on her pale face, andtears ran down as Cecilia answeredOh, mother, mother ! blind that I havebeen. Why did not I sooner know this tendernessof your heart ?^'^ And why, my child, did I not sooner knowyou? The fault was mine, the suffering hasbeen yours, — not yours alone, though*"^^ Suffer no more for me, mother, for now,after this, come what may, I can bear it. Ican be happy, even if *" There she paused,arid then eagerly looking into her mother's eyesshe asked,What do you say, mother, about him ? doyou think I may hope ?'"I dare not bid you hopes'' replied hermother.** Do you bid me despair ?^316 .HELEN.No, despair in this world is only for thosewho have lost their own esteem, who have noconfidence in themselves, for those who cannotrepent, reform, and trust. My child, youmust not despair. Now leave me to myselfcontinued she. ^^ Open a little more of the shutter,and put that book within my reach.*^^As soon as Miss Clarendon heard that herbrother had arrived in town she hastened to him,and, as Lady Davenant had desired, told himof all the reports that were in circulation, andof all that Lady Cecilia had spontaneously confidedto her. Esther watched his countenanceas she spoke, and observed that he listenedwith eager attention to the proofs of exactnessin Cecilia ; but he said nothing, and whateverhis feelings were, his determination, she couldnot doubt, was still unshaken ; even she did notdare to press his confidence.Miss Clarendon reported to Lady Davenantthat she had obeyed her command, and shedescribed as nearly as she could all that shethought her brother's countenance expressed.Lady Davenant seemed satisfied, and this nightshe slept, as she told Cecilia in the morning.HELEN, 317better than she had done since she returnedto England. And this was the day of trialThe hour came, and Lady Davenant was inthe church with her daughter. This marriagewas to be, as described in olden times, ^^ celebratedwith all the lustre and pomp imaginable;^ and so it was, for Helen'^s sake, Helen,the pale bride^^ Beautiful !^ the whispers ran as she appeared,'^ but too pales Leaning on GeneralClarendon's arm she was led up the aisle tothe altar. He felt the tremor of her arm onhis, but she looked composed and almostfirm. She saw no one individual of the assemblednumbers, not even Cecilia or LadyDavenant.She knelt at the altar beside him to whomshe was to give her faith, and General Clarendon,in the face of all the world, proudly gaveher to his ward, and she, without fear, low anddistinctly pronounced the sacred vow.And as Helen rose from her knees, the sunshone out, and a ray of light was on her faceand it was lovely.Every heart said s op 3SI 8 HELEN.Every heart but Lady Katrine Hawksby\And why do we think of her at such a moment? and why does Lady Davenant think ofher at such a moment? Yet she did; shelooked to see if she were present, and she badeher to the breakfast.And now all the salutations were given and received,and all the murmur of congratulationsrising, the living tide poured out of the church ;and then the noise of carriages, and all droveoff to Lady Davenant^s ; and Lady Davenanthad gone through it all so far, well. And LadyCecilia knew that it had been ; and her eyes hadbeen upon her husband, and her heart had beenfull of another day when she had knelt besidehim at the altar. And did he, too, think of thatday ? She could not tell, his countenance discoveredno emotion, his eyes never once turnedto the place where she stood. And she was nowto see him for one hour, but one hour longer,and at a public breakfast ! but still she was tosee him.And now they are all at breakfast. Theattention of some was upon the bride and bridegroom; of others, on Lady Cecilia and on theHELEN. 319General; of others, on Lady Davenant; andof many* on themselves. Lady Davenant hadBeauclerc on one side, General Clarendon onthe other, and her daughter opposite to him.Lady Katrine was there, with her " tastefulvisage'' as Churchill justly called it, and moretasteful it presently became.When breakfast was over, seizing her momentwhen conversation flagged, and when(there was a pause, implying " What is to besaid or done next P^' Lady Davenant rose fromher seat with an air of preparation, and somewhatof solemnity — All eyes were instantlyupon her. She drew out a locket, which sheheld up to public view : then, turning toLady Katrine Hawksbyby, she said — " Thisbauble has been much talked of, I understand,by your ladyship, but I question whether youhave ever yet seen it, or know the truth concerningit. This locket was stolen by a worthlessman, given by him to a worthless woman,from whom I have obtained it ; and now I giveit to the person for whom it was originallydestined''She advanced towards Helen and put it roundher neck. This done, her colour flitted — herS90 HELEN,hand was suddenly pressed to her heart ; yet shecommanded — absolutely commanded, 4ihe paroxismof pain. The General was at her side ;her daughter, Helen, and Beauclerc, were closeto her instantly. She was just able to walk:she slowly left the room — and was no moreseen by the world !She suffered herself to be carried up theilteps into her own apartment by the General,who laid her on the sofa in her dressing-toon.She looked round on them, and sawthat all were there whom she loved ; but therewas an alteration in her appearance whichstruck them all, and most the General, whohad least expected it. She held out her handto him, and fixing her eyes upon him withhealthful expression, calmly smiled, and said -^You would not believe this could be; butnow you see it must be, and soon. We haveno time to loses' continued she, and movingvery cautiously and feebly, she half-raised herself— '* Yes'' said she, " a moment is grantedto me, thank Heaven !'' She rose with suddenpower and threw herself on her knees at theGeneral's feet : it was done before he couldstop her.HELEN. 321For God's sake I'' cried he, " Lady Davenant!-«J conjure you— — ^^She would not be raised. " No,^' said she,here I die, if I appeal to you in vain — toyour justice. General Clarendon, to which, asfar as I know, none ever appealed in vain — sandshall I be the first ? — a mother for her child —a dying mother for your wife — for my dearCecilia — once dear to you.^His face was instantly covered with his hands.Not to your love'' continued she — "ifthat be gone — to your justice I appeal, andMUST be heard, if you are what I think you:if you are not, why, go — go, instantly — go,and leave your wife, innocent as she is, to bedeemed guilty — Part from her, at the momentwhen the only fault she committed has beenrepaired — Throw her from you when, by thesacrifice of all that was dear to her, she hasproved her truth — Yes, you know that she hasspoken the whole, the perfect truth "^I know its exclaimed he.Give her up to the whole world of slanderers! — destroy her character! If now herhusband separate from her, her good name islost for ever ! If now her husband protect hernot "^e^3S2 HELEN.Her busband*tumed, and clasped her in hisarms. Lady Davenant rose and bless him—blessed them both ; and they knelt beside her,and she joined their hands.Now** said she, " I give my daughter toa husband worthy of her, and she more worthyof that noble heart than when first his. Heronly fault was mine — mine, my early neglect :it is repaired — I die in peace ! You make mylast moments the happiest 1 Helen, my dearestHelen, now, and not till now, happy— perfectlyhappy in Love and Truth !"THE END.LONDON :^ : > . PRINTED BY SAMUEL BENTLEY,^ i "^ Done Street, Fleet Street.