SPEECHES ON THEPASSAGE OF THE BILLREMOTAIi OF THE INDIANS,DELIVERED IN THE(ToitflteBS oi tete mmuti States,APRIL, AJVD MAY, 1830.Boston:PUBLISHED BY PERKINS AND MARVIN.NEW YORK : JONATHAN Leaving.1830.VS 30<INTRODUCTION.From the first settlement of North America by Englishmen, it hasbeen the practice to obtain Indian lands through the medium of treatiesor voluntary purchases. In a few cases, lands were wrestedfrom the original possessors in war ; but the colonists never avowedthe desire of conquest as a justifiable cause of war.Though nearly all the parts of the United States, which are nowinhabited by whites, were purchased from Indians, yet it does notfollow that undue measures were not frequently resorted to, in orderto induce a sale. Among these measures, unreasonable importunitydeserves to be reckoned. New lands were obtained more rapidlythan the necessities of the whites demanded ; and the eagerness, withwhich acquisitions of territory were made from the Indians, naturallycaused a good deal of apprehension in their minds.As the British power on this continent increased, the claims andrights of the Indians were generally admitted. No pretensions weremade to the right of taking their land from them without their consent.If they sold any part of their territory, they were required tosell it to the government, or the validity of the sale was not acknowledgedby the British tribunals. This was the state of things at thecommencement of the revolutionary war.As soon as the Continental Congress began to act as the organ ofthe United States, (that is, as the organ of a nation which had justsprung into existence,) measures were taken to conciliate the favorof the Indians. They were addressed as independent sovereignties.They were entreated to remain neutral. Their territorial rights wereguarantied to them ; and they were dealt with, in all respects, ascapable of making treaties, and of retaining forever their originalrights of territory and government.After the peace of 1783, the Confederated States entered into treatieswith the large south-western tribes, the Cherokees, Creeks, Choctawsand Chickasaws. In this manner boundaries were fixed, andan implicit guaranty of territory was given. At the adoption of theFederal Constitution, all these treaties were confirmed and ratifiednot by the nation merely, as a whole, but by each State, as it perform^d the solemn act of coming into the Union.KVr INTRODUCTION,President Washington, in the early part of his administration, applieddirectly to the Senate, and asked whether that body would adviseand consent to give a solemn guaranty to the Creelt and Cherokeenations of all their lands not ceded. To this question, proposedfirst in 1789, and again a year afterwards, the Senate gave, in eachinstance, an affirmative answer, without a dissenting voice. Treatieswere made on this basis, that at New York with the Creeks, then atHouston with the Cherokees, in both of which the guaranty was solemnlygiven, and afterwards solemnly ratified by the Senate.Treaties were made by the United States with Indian nations, asoccasion required ; the number of such treaties amounting to morethan three in a year, on an average. Several of these treaties werenegotiated with the tribes, whose residence was within the charteredlimits of Georgia. In 1802, a compact vas made between the UnitedStates and Georgia, by which along controversy was settled, and theUnited States bound themselves to extinguish the Indian title tolands within the chartered limits of that State. The obligation wasconditional, however ; and there was nothing in the compact, whichimplied that the United States did not acknowledge the perfect rightof the Indians to the peaceable and exclusive occupancy of theircountry forever.Since 1802, numerous treaties have been made with the Indians, inmostof which, portions of their territory were ceded to the UnitedStates. In this manner, Georgia has received about 20,000,000 ofacres under the compact ; and about 5,000,000 of acres now remainin the occupancy' of the Cherokees, within the chartered limits ofthat State. Since the year 1819, the Cherokees have peremptorilyand constantly refused to sell another foot of land. In the meantime,Georgia was constantly importuning the general governmentto extinguish the Cherokee title by treaty ; always admitting, thatthis was the only way, in which the Indian title could be extinguished.But suddenly', in December 1827, the legislature and executive ofGeorgia assumed an attitude entirely new, and totally unlike anyposition which had ever before been assumed by any State in theUnion, or by the United States. The new attitude was produced bythe annunciation of the following doctrines, and others of a similarcharacter ; viz. that Georgia has a perfect title, by tl)e right of discovery,to all the land within her chartered linnets ; that the Indianshave no title, but a mere occupancy, determinable at the pleasure ofGeorgia ; that she may take possession of their lands by force ; thatthe United States are bound to extinguish the Indian title, either bynegotiation or force ; and that, as the United States have failed in theirengagements, Georgia has a right to take the matter into her ownhands.As a consequence of these doctrines, Georgia declares, that, if otherINTRODUCTION. Vmeans fail, she will resort to violence in support of her claims; andthat, as she wants the Cherokee lands, she will have them.Following up these principles, in 1828 and 1829, Georgia extendsher laws over the Cherokees, and enacts several provisions of a mostoppressive and tyrannical character. The Cherokees immediatelyresort to the guaranty of the United States, and ask protection againstthese laws. The President of the United States informs them, thathe has no constitutional power to protect them. They next petitionCongress ; and, while their petition is pending and unanswered, a billis introduced for the purpose of enabling them to remove. Theysay, that they do not wish to remove, but to remain on the land oCtheir fathers.In this state of things, the bill, in opposition to which the followingspeeches were delivered, became the topic of debate. It has beensuggested, that the heads of arguments in favor of the bill shouldhere be given ; and, after some hesitation, the editor has concludedto give a brief abstract of them. The hesitation arose from the natureand character of these arguments. They are almost universallyfounded on false assumptions. But many readers would have noconception how utterly groundless the assumptions are ; and to sendthem forth to the public unexplained, seems to give them a standingto which they are by no means entitled. How many readers arethere, in every community, who look at an introduction of a book,with a few indiscriminate passages here and there, and read no more !If a plausible case is made out at tho ^^j;;,,;!;",^'^ thcV talc "it fergranted, that the facts, at least, are correctly stated. But nothingcould be more fallacious in reference to the case before us. It wasstated, by the advocates of the bill, that the United States had boundthemselves, by the compact of 1802, to extinguish the Indian title tolands within the limits of Georgia ; and many elaborate argumentsrested on this assumption. But the fact, that the engagement wasconditional, was omitted. The advocates of the bill asserted, also,that other States had legislated over the Indians in the same manner,and to the same extent, as Georgia has recently done. For this assertionthere is no support whatever. Let these two instances standas specimens.In the following statement of topics, the positions, if not the words,are taken from printed speeches of advocates of the bill, and from thereports of the committees on Indian affairs.On the question, whether the Indians had any right to their countryor not, it was alleged, by the advocates of the bill,That the king of England claimed the right of disposing of territory,on this continent, without any regard to the possession of theIndians ; that they were considered merely as an incumbrance ; andthat the proclamation of 1763 assumed the sovereignty of GreatBritain over the Indians :wVI INTRODUCTION.That, on the declaration of independence, the States, respectively,succeeded to the sovereignty of the mother country :That, from the first settlement of North America, the natives weresubjected to the arts and the arms of Europeans ; that civilizationand force prevailed ; and that, although the course 'of measures withthe Indians cannot be justified, it will always be imitated :That the Cherokees are a conquered people, having been the alliesof Great Britain in the revolutionary war : andThat, being a conquered people, they have no claim to territory orself-government.It is not unjust, or oppressive, therefore, in Georgia to assert herclaims to the land of the Cherokees.In answer to the plea for protection, which the Cherokees offer, itwas urged.That, although many compacts had been made between the UnitedStates and Indians, which had been called treaties, and which hadbeen sent to the Senate and ratified as treaties, yet, when made withtribes residing in any State, they were not in fact treaties, within themeaning of the Constitution :That these compacts, which are called treaties, were submitted tobythe several States, because the States acquired lands in this manner; but when the States were limited in their jurisdiction, and restrainedin their rights, by these compacts, it could not be expectedthat they would submit any longer :That compacts with Indians not within the Hmitg of States aretreaties, according to the Constitution; because, in these cases, thenational government alone can treat with them :That the guaranty given in the treaty of Houston was intended morefor the intimidation of the whites, than as a serious protection olthe Indians :That, when the guaranty was repeated, seven years afterwards,there was no necessity of repeating it : andThat it is very absurd to suppose, that independent States will suffertheir limits to be curtailed by tribes of savages.On the subject of the rights of Georgia, as an independent State,it was urged,That she would assert her right to a jurisdiction over all the territorywithin her own limits :That, although she has a very inconsiderable interest in the questionnow before Congress, she is determined to assert and maintain therights of sovereign and independent States :That neither the United States, nor any separate State, has a rightto demand of Georgia the reasons of her conduct in regard to herown population, or any class of persons residing within her limits :andThat nothing will prevent her executing her purposes in thismatter.INTRODUCTION. viiIt waa urged, also, that Georgia had been greatly vilified in thiscontroversy ; that she is " the evening chant and the matin song ofall trio calumniators in the Union, who have taken the Cherokees intotheir holy keeping;" and that " no epithet is too strong, no reproachtoo foul, to cast upon her, for having followed the example oftenStates, in the exercise of jurisdiction over the Indians withintheir territory."Other States were said to have enacted much severer laws, in regardto the Indians, than the present laws of Georgia, which are somuch complained of; and yet no sympathy has been called forth inbehalf of any Indian tribe but the Cherokees.As to the conflicting claims of Georgia and the Cherokees, whilesome advocates of the bill considered all existing treaties with Indiansas mere nullities, others held, that the treaties would be bindingon the United States, were it not for pre-existing obligations, incompatiblev/ith these treaties. They admitted, that general Washingtonand his cabinet, and the Senate of the First Congress, and allthe national authorities from 17d9 till quite recently, supposed thatwe were bound ; that the people of the United States had all alongsupposed themselves to be bound ; and that the Indians had alwayssupposed the United States to be bound by these treaties. It wasnot denied, that the stipulations are all plain ; that they were honestlyintended, and allow but of one interpretation, which is in favor ofthe Indians. But it was argued, that the United States had guarantiedthe integrity of all the separate States, and therefore could notguaranty the possession of the Indians residing upon any part of thechartered territory of States. The general government must thereforedo the best it can. When it cannot fulfil an obligation, it mustindemnify for the failure to fulfil.As to the expediency of the removal of the Indians, it was urged,That the acquisition of the lands, which the south-western tribesoccupy, would open a large tract for sale and settlement ; that theconvenience of the Southern States would be much promoted ; andthat the proceeds of the sales of those lands would more than reimburseall the expenses attending the contemplated removal.It was stated, also, that the removal of the Indians would be greatlyto their advantage, and, on this account, should receive the supportof all their real friends.The country to which they were invited to remove, was representedas very fertile, and abundantly large for a residence of all thetribes. The title to it may be permanently guarantied ; and the emigratingIndians will live under the sole protection of the UnitedStates. Here they will not be troubled by the conflicting claims ofStates exercising jurisdiction over them. They will feel themselvesfree from this constant apprehension. They can proceed, therefore,in their plans of civilization without interruption. The strongvia INTRODUCTION.arm of the general government will protest them from intruders.They will be out of the reach of the whites, and beyond the pressureof population. The benevolence of the government and of individualscan here display itself in the best plans for the meliorationof the Indian character.In carrying on the business of removal, all the advocates of thebill disclaimed a resort to force. The subject is to be fairly proposedto the Indians ; and, if they are willing to remove, the governmentwill kindly aid them in doing so. If they prefer to stay, they mustcome under State laws, and, of course, be subject to all the lawswhich the States shall see lit to enact hereafter. From the operationof these laws the United Stales cannot protect them.The present condition of the Indians was represented as being exceedinglywretched. They were said to be, generally, in a morehopeless state than at any previous period of their history. Thechiefs were charged with ruling the common people with severity.It was said, that the chiefs appropriate all the annuities to their ownbenefit.The sympathy professed, in different parts of the United States,for the Cherokees, was described as the work of fanatics, and pretendedphilanthropists, who had their own purposes to answer, andwho were well paid for their services from the Clierokee treasury.This allegation is so gross a slander, that it would be wrong to repeatit without saying, that it is totally destitute of foundation ; andthat there is not, and never was, a particle of evidence in supportof it.The foregoing summary embraces, it is believed, all the argumentsin favor of the bill. Some of its advocates expressed a strong beliefthat the removal of the Indians would be for their benefit; but othersboldly declared, that this was not their object, and that the Indianswould not be improved in their condition, whether they should removeor remain.The opposition to the bill was made with great earnestness, andwith every mark of entire sincerity. There was no indication, thatthe concern expressed for the national honor, and the dread of seeinga foul and indelible stain fixed upon the character of the country,were affected, or overstated. A deep solemnity pervaded the effortsof the honorable men, who exerted themselves to defeat a measure,which they declared to be, in their apprehension, inconceivably disastrous.On the other hand, the advocates of the bill most evidently placedno reliance upon argument. They never met the statements andreasonings of their opponents ; but showed very clearly, that theytrusted only to the power of self interest and party discipline.SPEECHOF THE ^HOJV. THEODORE FRELINGHUYSEN,SENATOR FROM NEW JERSEY,DELIVERED IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES,APRIL 7, 1830*The Bill to provide for an exchange of Lands with theIndians residing in any of the States or Territories, and fortheir removal West of the river Mississippi, being under consideration,Mr. Frelinghuysen spoke as follows : —Mr. President : I propose an amendment to this bill, by theaddition of two sections, in the form of proviso : — the first ofwhich brings up to our consideration the nature of our publicduties, in relation to the Indian Nations, and the second providesfor the continuance of our future negotiations, by the mode oftreaties, as in our past intercourse with them. The followingis the amendment :Provided always. That, until the said tribes or nations shall chooseto remove, as by this act is contemplated, they shall be protected intheir present possessions, and in the enjoyment of all their rights ofterritory and government, as heretofore exercised and enjoyed, fromall interruptions and encroachments.And provided also. That, before any removal shall take place ofany of the said tribes or nations, and before any exchange or exchangesof land be made as aforesaid, the rights of any such tribes or nationsin the premises shall be stipulated for, secured, and guarantied, bytreaty or treaties, as heretofore made."The first of these sections discloses the real object sought bythis bill, seemingly composed of harmless clauses. It supposesthat the design of the system of which the present bill formsbut a part, is really to remove all the Indian tribes beyond theMississippi, or, in case of their refusal, to subject them to statesovereignty and legislation. The Hon. Senator, (Mr. White,)who yesterday addressed the Senate, found it necessary so toconsider it ; and to anticipate and endeavor to meet all suchobjections to this course of policy, as he deemed worthy of arefutation.This speech was commenced on the 7lh, and concluded on the 9th, a partof each day's session being consumed by the ordinary routine of business.The whole speech occupied the attention of the Senate about six hours. It ishere much compressed.4 MR. FRELINGHUYSEN S SPEECH.Sir, I prefer that this latent object should be put fully beforeus, that we and the nation may look at it, and freely scrutinizeit. At an early stage of the present administration, its viewsand opinions on the interesting subject ol' our Indian relations,were developed in language not to be mistaken. It is greatlyto be regretted, Sir, that our present chief magistrate did notpursue the wise and prudent policy of his exalted predecessor,President Washington, who, at a time of collision and difficultywith these tribes, came belbre the Senate, and laid open to them,in propositions for their approbation, the various importantsubjects involved in our relations. The annexed extract fromthe Journals of the Senate illustrates the principles of Washington'sadministration. It follows :Saturday, August 22, 1789."The President of the United States came into the Senate, attendedby general Knox, and laid before the Senate the following state of facts,with the questions thereto annexed, /or their advice and consent "This was a most important document. It developed all thecollisions that existed between the Indian tribes and the States;and referred to the consideration of the Senate certain leadingprinciples of policy, which he thought it was wise to pursue.These pi-principles are embodied in seven distinct interrogatories;the fourth of which submits to the Senate "whether theUnited States shall solemnly guaranty to the Creeks their remainingterritory, and maintain the same, if necessary, 6^ a Sineof military posts "^^ This question " was wholly answered in theaffirmative" by that body, and the blaidi (for an appropriationof necessary funds) was ordered to be filled at the discretion ofthe President of the United States. Again, on the lllh of August,1790, President Washington sent a special message to theSenate by his Secretary, the subject matter of which he introducesby the following suggestion :Gentlemen of the Senate :Altlioiigh the treaty with the Creeks may be regarded as the mainfoundation of the future peace and prosperity of the Southwestern frontierof the United States, yet, in order fully to etTect so desirable anobject, the treaties which have been entered info with the other tribesin that quarter, must \te faithfully performed on our part."He then proceeds to remind the Senate, that, by the treatywith the Cherokees, in November, 1785, (the treaty of Hope-well,)'the said Cherokees placed themselves under the protectionof the United States, and had a boundary assigned them ;'that the white people settled on the li-others had openly violatedthe said boundary by intruding on the Indian lanius ; thatthe United States in Congress assembled, on the first day ofSeptember, 1788, had, by their proclamation, forbidden all suchunwarrantable intrusions, and enjoined the intruders to departwithout loss of time; but that there were still some refractoryintruders remaining. The President then distinctly announceshis determination to exert the powers intrusted to him by theMR. FRELINGHUYSEN S SPEECH. dconstitution, in order to carry into faithful execution the treatyof Hopewell, unless a new boundary should be arranged withthe Cherokees, embracing the intrusive settlement, and compensatingthe Cherokees for the cessions they shall make on theoccasion. And, in view of the whole case, he requests the adviceof the Senate, whether overtures shall be made to the Cherokeesto arrange such new boundary, and concludes his communicationwith the following emphatically question : " 3d. Shallthe United States stipulate solemnly to guaranty the new boundarywhich may be arranged ?"It produced as pointed a response — for the SenateResolved, In case a new or other boundary than that stipulated bythe treaty of Hopewell, shall be concluded v/ith the Cherokee Indians,that the Senate do advise and consent solemnly to guaranty the same."A new boundary was arranged by a second ti-easy ; the solemnguarantee was given to the Cherokees ; and cogent, indeed,should be the causes that now lead us to think lightly of suchsacred obligations.I lament. Sir, that so bright and illustrious a precedent wasnot regarded, and that the President had not yielded to the safeguidance of such high example ; and I deplore it the more, becauseit was concerning these very tribes, in the State of Georgia,that general Washington chose to confer with his constitutionaladvisers.Instead of this just proceeding, the present administration hasthought proper, without the slightest consultation with eitherHouse of Congress — without any opportunity for counsel orconcert, discussion or deliberation, on the part of these co-ordinatebranches of the government, to despatch the whole subjectin a tone and style of decisive construction of our obligations,and of Indian rights. It would really seem. Sir, as if opinionwas to be forestalled, and the door of inquiry shut forever uponthese grave questions, so deeply implicating our national faithand honor.We must firmly protest against this executive disposition ofthese high interests. The government cannot rescind, modifyor explain away our public treaties. They are the supreme lawof the land, so declared to be by the constitution. They bindthe President and all other departments, rulers and people.And when their provisions shall be controverted — when theirbreach or fulfilment become subjects of investigation — here,Sir, and in the other hall of our legislation, are such momentousconcerns to be debated and considered. That we may freelyexercise these essential powers, and review the proclaimed opinionsof the executive, I have submitted the finest branch of theamendment. We possess the constitutional right to inquirewherefore it was, that, when some of these tribes appealed tothe executive for protection, according to the terms of our treatieswith them, they received the answer that the governmentof the United States could not interpose to arrest or preventthe legislation of the States over them. Sir, this was a harsh4 MR. FUELINGHUYSEN S SPEECH.measure, indeed, to faithful allies, that had so long reposed mconfidence on a nation's faith). They had, in the darkest hourof trial, turned to the regis which the most solemn pledges hadprovided for them, and were comforted bj' the conviction thatit would continue to shed upon then a pure and untarnishedbeam of light and hope. Deep, indeed, must have been theirdespondency, wien their political father assured them that theirconfidence would be presumptuous, and dissuaded them fromall expectation of relief.Mr. President: The instructions that have proceeded fromthe war department to the agents of Indian affairs have excitedjust and strong jealousies of the measures that are now recommended.They have prompted this amendment, in the hopethat, by some public and decided expression of our disapprobation,the course of political management with these tribes maybechanged, and our country saved from the dishonor of buyingover the consent of corrupted chiefs to a traitorous surrender oftheir country.I will read a part of these instructions. They are from thewar department to generals Carroll and Coffee, of the date of30th May, 1829 :The past (remarks the Secretary, in respect to Indian councils)has demonstrated their utter aversion to this mode, whilst it has beenmade equally clear, that another mode promise* greater success. Inregard to the first, (that by councils,) the Indians have seen in thepast, that it has been by the result of councils that the extent of theircountry has been from time to time diminished. They all comprehendthis. Hence it is that those, who are interested in keeping them wherethey are, alarm their fears, and, by previous cautioning, induce them toreject all offers looking to this object. There is no doubt, however, butthe mass of the people would be glad to emigrate ; and there is as littledoubt that they are kept from this exercise of their choice by theirchiefs and other interested and influential men," &c. Again : " Nothingis more certain than that, if the chiefs and influential men could bebrought into the measure, the rest would implicitly follow. It becomes,therefore, a matter of necessity, if the genera! government would benefitthese people, that it move upon them in the line of their ownprejudices, and, by the adoption of any proper means, break the powerthat is warring with their best interests. The question is. How canthis be best done ? Not, it is believed, for the reasons suggested, bymeans of a general council. There, they would be awakened to all theintimations which those who arc opposed to their exchange of countrymight throw out; and the consequence would be— what it has been —a firm refusal to acquiesce. The best resort is believed to be thatwhich is embraced in an appeal to the chiefs and influential men, nottogether, but apart, at their own houses, and, by a proper exposition oftheir real condition, rouse them to think of that; whilst offers to them,of extensive reservations in fee simple, and other rcwai'ds, would, itis hoped, result in obtaining their acquiescence."Let us analyze this singular state paper. It does not relishthe congregation of Indian councils. In these assemblies, thej^deliberate and weigh the policy of measures — they calculate theresults of proposed improvements. These councils embody theMR. FRELINGIIUYSEN S SPEECH. 5collected wisdom of the tribes. Their influence is of the authorityof law. The people look to them lor protection. Theyknow that in the multitude of counsellors there is safety. Hencenations, far in advance of the Indians, always meet in council,when their great interests are to l)e promoted or defended. Butthese special agents are discouraged from lopping that the objectcan be obtained in this good okl-fashioned way. The Indiansare too vise to be caught when the net is spread so fully insight.They are directed to avoid all associations ; and, withthe public purse in hand, to take the chiefs alone — to approachthem individually, and at home — "io vieei thin in the ivy oj" theirprejudices." I admire the ingenious clothing of a most odiousproposal.A strong hint is suggested to try the effect of terror, and, bya proper exposition of their real condition, rotise tliein to thinkupon that, and to follow this up with " large offers to them ofextensive reservations in fee simple, and other rewards." Thereport made by one of these agents to the war department, datedSeptember 2d, 1821;*, still further discloses the nature of the ex-^agencies to which the Indians are to be subjected, to constraintheir removal. The agent observes,"The truth is, they (die Cherokees) rely with great confidence on Afavorable report on the petition they have before Congress. If thatis rejected, and the laws of the States are enforced, you will haveno difficulty in obtaining an exchange of lands with them."It may be true, that, if we withdraw our protection, give themover to the high-handed, heart-breaking legislation of the States,and drive them to despair, when mercenary inducements failto win them, force and terror may compel them. We shallhave no difficulty, the agent assures the war department. Sir,there will be one dilHculty, that should be deemed insurmountable.Such a process will disgrace us in the estimation of thwhole civilized world. It will degrade u^ m our o^vn eyes, andblot the page of our history with indelible dishonor.Now, Sir, I have brought this measure before the Senate, andwait with intense anxiety to see the final disposition of it.Where is the man who can, in view of such policy, open thedoor, or aflbrd the slightest facility to the operation of influences,that we should blush with honest shame to have employedwith our equals in the scale of civilization ? It is not intended.Sir, to ascribe this policy exclusively to the present;administration. Far from it. The truth is, we have long beengradually, and almost unconsciously, declining into these deviousways, and we shall inflict lasting injury upon our goodname, unless we speedily abandon them. ,I now proceed to the discussion of those principles which, inmy humble judgment, fully and clearly sustain the claims of theIndians to all their political and civil rights, as by them asserted.And here, Mr. President, I insist that, by immemorial possession,as the original tenants of the soil, they hold a title beyondand superior to that of the British crown and her colonies, and1*b MR. FRELINGHUVSEN S SPEECH.to all adverse pretensions of our Confederation and subsequentUnion. God, in his providence, planted these tribes on thiswestern continent, for aught that we know, before Great Britainherself had a political existence. I believe. Sir, it is notnow seriously denied that the Indians are men, endowed withkindred faculties and powers with ourselves ; that they have aplace in human sympathy, and are justly entitled to a share inthe common bounties of a benignant Providence. And, withthis conceded, I ask in what code of the law of nations, or bywhat process of abstract deduction, their rights have been extinguished.Where is the decree or ordinance, that has stripped of theirrights these early and first lords of the soil ? Sir, no record ofany such decree can l)e found. And 1 might triun)])liantly restthe hopes of these feeble fragments of once great nations uponthis impregnable foundation. However mere lucian policy, orthe law of power, or the tyrant's plea of expediency, may havefound it convenient at any time to transgress the unchangeableprinciples of eternal justice, no argument can shake the politicalmaxim — that where the Indian always has been., he enjoysan absolute right still to be, in the free exercise of his own modesof thought, government and conduct.Mr. President : In the light of natural law, can a reason foradistinction exist from the mode of enjoying that which is myown? If I use land for hunting, may another take it becausehe needs it for agriculture ? I am aware that some writershave, by a system of artificial reasoning, endeavored to justify',or rather excuse, the encroachments made upon Indian territory;and they denominate these abstractions the law of nations,and, in this ready way, the question is despatched. Sir,as we trace the sources of this law, wc find its authority to dependeither upon the conventions or common consent of nations.And when, permit me to inquire, were the Indian tribes everconsulted on the establishment of such a law ? Whoever representedthem or their interests in any congress of nations, toconfer upon the public rules of intercourse, and the properfoundations of dominion and property ? The ]plain matter offact is, that all these partial doctrines have resulted from theselfish plans and pursuits of more enlightened nations ; and itis not matter for any great wonder, that they should so largelypartake of a mercenary and encroaching spirit in regard to theclaims of the Indians.It is however admitted, Sir, that when the increase of populationand the wants of mankind, demand the cultivation of theearth, a duty rests upon the proprietors of large and uncultivatedregions, to ai)i)Iy them to these useful ]purposes. Butsuch appropriations are to be obtained by fair contract, and forreasonable compensation. It is, in such a case, the duty of theproprietor to sell — we may properly address his reason to inducehim; but we cannot rightfully compel the cession of hialands, or take them by violence, if his consent be withheld.MR. FRELINSHUYSEN's SPEECH. 7It is with great satisfaction, that I am enabled, upon the bestauthority, to affirm, that this tlmy has been largely and generouslymet and fulfilled on the pun of the aboriginal proprietorsof this continent. Several years ago, otHciai reports to Congressstated the amount of Indian grants to the United Statesto exceed 214 millions of acres. Yes, sir, we have acquired,and now own, more land, as the fruits of their bounty, than weshall dispose of, at the present rate, to actual settlers in twohundred years. For, very recently, it has been ascertained onthis floor, that our public sales average not more titian aboutone million of acres annually. It greatly aggravates the wrongthat is now meditated against these tribes, if we merely look atthe rich and ample districts of their territories that either forceor persuasion has incorporated into our public domains. Asthe tide of our population has rolled on, we have added purchaseto purchase. The confiding Indian listened to our professionsof friendship. We called him brother, and he believedus. millions after millions he lias yielded to our importunity,until we have acquired more than can be cultivated in centuries— and yet we crave more. We have crowded the tribesupon a few miserable acres on our southern frontier — it is allthat is left to their of their once boundless forests — and still, likethe horseleech, our insatiate cupidity cries. Give, Give.Before I proceed to deduce collateral confirmations of thisoriginal title, from all our political intercourse and conventionswith the Indian tribes, I beg leave to [pause a moment, and viewthe case, as it lies beyond the treaties made with them ; andaside also from all conflicting claims between the confederationand the colonies, and the Congress of the States.Our ancestors found these people, far removed from the commotionsof Europe, exercising all the rights, and enjoying theprivileges, of free and independent sovereigns of this new world.They were not a wild and lawless horde of banditti ; but livedunder the restraints of government, patriarchal in its character,and energetic in its influence. They had chiefs, head men,and councils. The white men approached them as friends.They extended the olive branch, and, being then a feeble colony,and at the mercy of the native tenants of the soil, by presentsand professions, propitiated their good will. The Indian yieldeda slow, but substantial confidence; granted to the colonies anabiding place : and suffered them to grow uj) to man's estatebeside him. He never raised the claim of elder title. As thewhite man's wants increased, he opened the hand of his bountywider and wider. By and by, conditions are changed. Hispeople melt away ; his lands are constantly coveted ; millionsafter millions are ceded. The Indian bears it all meekly ; hecomplains, indeed, as well he may ; but suffers on ; and now hefinds that this neighbor, whom his kindness had nourished, hasspread an adverse title over the last remains of his patrimony,barely adequate to his wants, and turns upon him, and says:"Away! we cannot endure you so near us. These forestsand rivers, these groves of your fathers, these firesides and8 MU. FUELINUHUVSEN S SPEECH.hunting grounds, are ours by the right of power, and the forceof numbers."Sir, let every treaty be blotted from our records, and in thejudgnieut of natural and unchangeable truth and justice, I ask.Who is the injured, and who is the aggressor ? Let conscienceanswer, and 1 tear not the result. Let those who please, denouncethe public feeling on this subject, as the morbid excitementof a false humanity ; but 1 return with the inquiry, whetherI have not presented the case truly, with no feature of it overchargedor distorted. And, in view of it, who can help feeling? Do the obligations of justice change with the color ofthe skiu.^ Is it one of the prerogatives of the white man, thathe may disregard the dictates of moral principle, vviien anIndian shall be concerned? No, Mr. President. In that severeand impartial scrutiny, which futurity will cast over this subject,the righteous award will be, that those very causes whichare now pleaded for the relaxation of the rules of equity, urgedupon us not only a rigid execution of the highest justice, tothe very letter, but claimed at our hands a generous and magnanimouspolicy.Standing here then, on this unshaken basis, how is it possiblethat even a shadow of claim to soil or jurisdiction can be derived,by foriniug a collateral issue between the State of Georgia andthe general government'' Her complaint is made against theUnited States, for encroachments on her sovereignty. Sir, theCherokees are no parties to this issue ; they hare no concernin this controversy. They hold by better title than eitherGeorgia or the Union. They have nothing to do with Statesovereignty, or United States sovereignty. They are aboveand beyond both. True, Sir, they have made treaties withboth, but not to acquire title or jurisdiction ; these they had beforeages before the evil hour, when their white brothers Hed tothem for an asylum. They treated to secure protection andguaranty' for subsisting showers and privileges ; and so far as thoseconventions raise obligations, they are willing to meet, and alwayshave met, and faithfully performed them ; and now expectfrom a great people the like fidelity to plighted covenants.I have thus endeavored to bring this question up to the controlof first principles. I forget all that we have [promised, andall that Georgia has repeatedly conceded, and by her conductconfirmed. Sir, in this abstract presentation of the case, strippedof all collateral circumstances, (and these only the morefirmly establish the Indian claims;) — if the contending partieswere to exchange positions ; place the white man where theIndian stands; load him with all these wrongs, — and what pathwould his outraged feelings strike out for his career ? Twentyshillings tax, I think it was, inclosed upon the innnortal Hampden,roused into activity the slumbering fires of liberty in the oldworld. Thence she dates a glorious epoch, whose healthfulinfluence still cherishes the spirit of freedom. A few pence ofduty on tea, that invaded no fireside, excited no personal fears,disturbed no immediate interest whatever, awakened in theMR. FRELINGHUYSEN S SPEECH. 9American colonies a spirit of firm resistance ; and how was thetea tax met, Sir ? Just as it should be. There was lurking, beneaththis tntiuig imposition of duty, a covert assumption of authority,that led directly to oppressive exactions. " No taxationwithout representation," became our motto. We would neitherpay the tax, nor drink the tea. Our lathers buckled on theirarmor, and, from the water's edge, repelled the encroachmentsof a misguided cabinet. We successfully and triumphantlycontended for the very rights and privileges, that our Indianneighbors now implore us to protect and preserve to them. Sir,this thought invests the subject under debate with most singularand momentous interest. /Fe, whom God has exalted to thevery summit of prosperity — whose brief career forms thebrightest page in history ; the wonder and praise of the world ;Freedom's hope, and her consolation: — IVe about to turn traitorsto our jjrmciples and our lame — about to become the oppressorsof the feeble, and to cast away our birth-right ! Mr.President, I hope for better things.It is a subject full of grateful satisfaction, that, in our publicintercourse with the Indians, ever since the first colonies ofwhite men found an abode on these western shores, we havedistinctly recognised their title ; treated with them as theowners ; and, in all our acquisitions of territory, applied ourselvesto these ancient proprietors, by purchase and cessionalone, to obtain the right of soil. Sir, I challenge the recordof any other or different pretension. When or where did theassembly or convention meet, which proclaimed, or even suggestedto these tribes, that the right of discovery contained asuperior efficacy to all prior titles ?And our recognition was not confined to the soil merely. Weregarded them as nations — far behind us, indeed, in civilization ;but still we respected their ibrms of government — we conformedour conduct to their notions of civil polity. We were awareof the potency of any edict that sprang from the deliberationsof the council fire ; and when we desired lands, or peace, oralliances, to this source of power and energy, to this great leverof Indian government, we addressed our proposals. To thisalone did we look, and from this alone did we expect aid orrelief.I now proceed, very briefly, to trace our public history inthese important relations. As early as 17G3, a proclamationwas issued by the king of Great Britain to his American coloniesand dependencies, which, in clear and decided terms, andwith an honorable regard for Indian privileges, declared theopinions of the crown and the duties of its subjects. The preambleto that part of this document which concerns Indian affairs,is couched in terms that cannot be misunderstood. I givea literal extract :And whereas it is just and reasonable, and essential to our interestand the security of our colonies, that the several nations ortribes of Indians loitli ichom ice are connected, and who live under10 MR. FRELINGHUYSEn's SPEECH.our protection, should not be molested or disturbed in the possessionof such parts of our dominions and territories, as, not having beenceded to or purchased by us, are reserved to them, or any of them, astheir hunting grounds ."Therefore the governors of colonies are prohibited, riponany pretence whatever, iron granting any warrants of surveyorpassing any patents for lands, " upon any lands whatever,which, not having been ceded or purchased, were reserved tothe said Indians;" and, by another injunction in the same proclamation,"all persons whatever, who have either wilfully orinadvertently seated themselves upoij any lands, which, nothaving been ceded to or purchased by the crown, were reservedto the Indians as aforesaid, are strictly enjoined and requiredto remove themselves li'om such settlements."This royal ordinance is an unqualified admission of everyprinciple that is now urged in favor of the liberties and rightsof these tribes. It refers to them as nations, that had put themselvesunder the protection of the crown ; and, adverting to thefact that their lands had not been ceded or purchased, it freelyand justly runs out the inevitable conclusion, that they are reservedto these nations as their property ; and forbids all surveysand patents, and warns oft" all intruders and trespassers.Sir, this contains the epitome of Indian history and title. Noking, colony, state or territory, ever made, or attempted tomake, a grant or title to the Indians, but universally and perpetuallyderived their titles from thei. This one fact, thatstands forth broadly on the page of Indian history — whichneither kings nor colonies — neither lords proprietors, nor diplomaticagents, have, on any single occasion, disputed — is alonesufficient to demolish the whole system of political pretensions,conjured up in modern times, to drive the poor Indian fromthe last refuge of his hopes.The next important era, in the order of time, relates to thedispute of the colonies with Great Britain. The attention ofthe Congress, on the eve of that convict, was called to thesituation of these tribes, and their dispositions on that interestingsubject. Then, Sir, we approached them as independentnations, with the acknowledged power to form alliances withor against us. For, in June, 1775, our Congress resolved,"That the Committee for Indian Affairs do ]prepare propertalks to the several tribes of Indians, for engaging the continuanceof their friendship to us, and neutrality in our pi-sent unhappydispute with Great Britain." Again, on the 12th July,1775, a report of the Committee was agreed to, with the followingclause at its head : "That the securing and preservingthe friendship of the Indian nations, appears to be a subject ofthe utmost moment to these colonies." And, Sir, the journalsof that eventful ]period of our history are full of resolutions, allof which indicate the same opinions of those illustrious statesmen,respecting the unquestioned sovereignty of the Indians.I forbear father details. After the revolution, and in theMK. FRELINGHUYSEn's SPEECH. 11eighth year of our Independence, in the month of September,A. D. 1783, the Congress again took up the subject of Indianaffairs, and resolved to hold a convention with the Indians residingin the middle and northern States, who had taken uparms against us, for the purposes of " receiving them into thefavor and protection of the United States, and of establishingboundary lines of properly, tor sepaidini'^ and dividing the settlementsof tilt citizens from the Indian villages and huntinggrounds, and thereby extinguishing, as far as possible, all occasionfor future animosities, disquiet and contention."If, at any point of our existence as a people, a disposition toencroach ujx>n the Indians, and to break dcnvn their separateand sovereign character, could have been looked for, or at allexcused, this was the time ; when we bad just come out of along, severe and bloody conflict, often prosecuted by our foeswith unnatural barbarity, and to aggravate which, these verytribes had employed their savage and ferocious customs. Andyet, Sir, what do we find ? Instead of the claims of conquest,the rights of war, now so convenient to set up, the AmericanCongress, greatly just, accord to these very Indians the characterof foreign nations, and invite them to take shelter underour favor and protection ; not only this, but adopt measures 'toascertain and establish boundary lines of property between ourcitizens and their villages and hunting grounds.'Under the confederation of the old thirteen States, andshortly before the adoption of the Constitution, on the 28th ofNovember, 1785, a treaty was made with the Cherokee nationat Hopewell. This treaty, according to its title, was concludedbetween " Commissioners Plenipotentiary of the United Statesof America, of the one part, and the Headmen and Warriorsof all the Cherokees, of the other." It gives "peace to all theCherokees," and receives them into the favor and protectionof the United States. And, by the first article, the Cherokeesagree to restore all the prisoners, citizens of the United States,or subjects of their allies, to their entire liberty." Here, again,we discover the same magnanimous policy of renouncing anypretended rights of a conqueror in om negotiations with theallies of our enemy. We invite them to peace ; we engage tobecome their protectors; and, in the stipulation for the liberationof prisoners, we trace again the broad line of distinctionbetween citizens of the United States and the Cherokee people.Who, after this. Sir, can retain a single doubt as to the unquestionedpolitical sovereignty of these tribes. It is very true,that they were not absolutely independent. As they had becomecomparatively feeble, and as they were, in the mass, anuncivilized race, they chose to depend upon us for protection ;but this did not destroy or affect their sovereignty. The ruleof public law is clearly stated by Vattel : — " One communitymay be bound to another by a very unequal alliance, and stillbe a sovereign State. Though a weak State, in order to providefor its safety, should place itself under the protection of amore powerful one, yet, if it reserves to itseK the right of governsMR. frelinghuysen's speech.ing its own body, it ought to be considered as an independentState." If the right of self-government is retained, the Statepreserves its poetical existence ; and, permit me to ask, whendid the southern Indians relinquish this right ? Sir, they havealways exercised it ; and were never disturbed in the enjoymentof it, until the late legislation of Georgia and the Statesof Alabama and Mississippi.The treaty next proceeds to establish territorial domains,and to forbid all intrusions upon the Cherokee country, by anyof our citizens, on the pains of outlawry. It provides, that ifany citizen of the United States shall remain on the lands ofthe Indians for six months "after the ratification ot the treaty,such person shall forfeit the protection of the United States, andthe Indians may punish him or. not, as they please." What strongerattribute of sovereignty could have been conceded to thistribe, than to have accorded to them the power of punishingour citizens according to their own laws and modes? and. Sir,what more satisfactory proof can be furnished to the Senate,of the sincere and inflexible purpose of our government tomaintain the rights of the Indian nations, than the annexationof such sanctions as the forfeiture of national protection, andthe infliction upon intruders of any punishment within therange of savage discretion. It is to be recollected, that thistreaty was made at a time when all admit the Clierokees tohave been, with very rare exceptions, in the rudest state ofpagan darkness.Mr. President, it is really a subject of wonder, that, afterthese repeated and solemn recognitions of right of soil, territoryand jurisdiction, in these aboriginal nations, it should be gravelyasserted, that they are mere occupants at our will ; and, whatis absolutely marvellous, that they are a part of the Georgiapopulation — a district of her territory, and amenable to herlaws, whenever she chooses to extend them !After the treaty of Ho|)ewell w aside and ratified, and inthe year 1787,. the States of North Carolina and Georgia transmittedtheir protests to Congress, in which they complained ofthe course of transactions adojUcd with respect to the Indians,and asserted a right in (he States to treat with these tribes, andto obtain grants of their lands. The Congress referred thewhole matter to a committee of five, who made an elaboratereport, that disclosed the principles upon which the intercourseof the confederacy with these people was founded. It is materialto a correct understanding of this branch of the subject,that wc shoidd advert to a limitation, subsisting at that time,upon the powers of the old Congress. The limitation is containedin the following clause of the articles of confederation:"Congress shall have the sole and exclusive right and powerof regulating the trade and managing all aflliirs with the Indians,not members of any of the States ; provided that thelegislative right of any State, within its own limits, be not infringedor violated."MR. FRELINGHUYSEN's SPEECH. 13Upon this clause and its proviso, the committee proceed toreport : " In framing this clause, the parties to the federalcompact must have had some definite objects in view. Theobjects that come into view principally in forming treaties, ormanaging affairs with the Indians, had been long understood,and pretty well ascertained, in this country. Tie committeeconceive that it has been long the opinion of the country, supportedby justice and humanity, that the Indians have just claimsto all lands occupied by, and trot fairly purchased from, them."The laws of the State can have no effect upon a tribe ofIndians, or their lands within a State, so lung as that tribe isindependent, and not a member of the State. It cannot besupposed that the State has the powers mentioned," (those ofmaking war and peace, purchasing lands from them, and fixingboundaries,) "without absurdity in theory and practice.For the Indian tribes are justly considered the common friendsor enemies of the United States, and no particular State can havean exclusive interest in- the management of affairs with any ofthe tribes, except in uncommon cases."The Senate perceive the estimate that was formed of theseState pretensions. The committee argue with conclusiveenergy, that to yield such powers to particular States, wouldnot only be absurd in theory, but would in fact destroy thewhole system of Indian relations — that this divided, alternatecognizance of the matter, by the States and by the Congress,could never be enforced, and would result in discordant andfruitless regulations. The grounds assumed in this able reportare unanswerable. The committee regarded the subject asnational, concerning the whole United States, of whom theIndians were the common friends or foes — that such a concernwas too general and public in all its bearings, to be subjectedto the legislation and management of any particular State.The Congress, therefore, assumed the entire jurisdiction andcontrol of it. And after this report, we hear no more of Stateprotests. They yielded their claims to a much safer depositaryof this interesting trust. Sir, I take leave to say, that thesound, sensible principles of this report have lost nothing oftheir authority by-time, and that every year of our history hasconfirmed their wisdom ; as well as illustrated the justice andhumanity of the Congress of '87.The Convention that formed and adopted the Constitution,in their deliberations upon the security of Indian rights, wiselydetermined to place our relations with the tribes under theabsolute superintendence of the general government, whichthey were about to establish. The proviso under the old compact,that had in ambiguous terms reserved to particular Statesan undefined management of Indian Affairs, was altogetherdiscarded; and the simple, unqualified control of this importantbranch of public policy, was delegated to Congress, in thefollowing clause of the Constitution : " Congress shall havepower to regulate commerce with foreign nations, among theseveral States, and ^cith the Indian tribes.'''' An incidental argusMR. FRELINGHUYSEn's SPEECH.ment, in favor of my views, cannot fail to strike the mind, onthe face of this clause. The plea that is now, for the first time,urged against the Indians, rests upon the allegation, that thetribes are not distinct nations — that they compose a portion ofthe people of the States ; and yet, in this great national charter,the work of as nnich collected wisdom, virtue and patriotism,as ever adorned the annals, or shed light upon the governmentof any age or country, the Indian tribes are associatedwith foreign nations and the several States, as one of the threedistinct departments of the human family, with which thegeneral government was to regulate commerce. Strangecompany, truly, in which to find those it now seems convenientto denominate a lew ]poor, miserable savages, that were alwaysthe peculiar subjects of State sovereignty, mere tenants at vvillof the soil, and with whom it is "idle" to speak of negotiatingtreaties !There was another subject, closely connected with this, thatengaged the anxious deliberations of the great statesmen whocomposed the memorable Convention ; — and this was the treatypower. To found this well, was a concern worthy of theirfirst and best thoughts. The good faith of a nation was not tobe pledged but on grave and great occasions : for when plighted,it brought the nation itself under obligations too sacred tobe argued away by the suggestions of policy or convenience,profit or loss. They, therefore, subjected the exercise of thishigh function to two great departments of the government — thePresident and Senate of the United States. They requiredformalities to attend the exercise of the power, that were intendedand calculated to guard the trust li'om rash and inconsiderateadministration. But, these requisites complied with,and a treaty made and concluded, no retreat from its claimswas provided or desired by the Convention. No, Sir. To shutup every avenue of escape — to compel us to be faithful, "Treaties"are declared, by the charter of our government, "to bethesupreme law of the land, any thing in the constitution or laisof any Slate to the contrary notwithstanding." How could theinviolate character of a treaty be more effectually preserved ?Let convulsions agitate the commonwealth — let the strife ofparty shake the pillars of the political edifice — around the nation'sfaith barriers are raised, that nay smile at the storm.And, Sir, if these guards fail ; if these defences can be assailedand broken down; then may we indeed despair. Truth andhonor have no citadel on earth — their sanctions are despisedand forgotten; and the law of the strongest prevails.Mr. President, I fear that I shall oppress the patience of dieSenate by these detail" — but the subject is deeply interesting,and each successive year of our political history brings mefresh and strong proofs of the sacred estimation, in which Indianrights were always held. Sir, in the very next year thatfollowed the formation of the Constitution, on the first of September,1788, the encroachments of the whites upon the Indianterritory, as guarantied to them by the Jroaty of Hopewell,MR. FRELINGIIUYSEn's SPEECH. 15made with the Cherokees, as 1 have ah-cady stated, in 1785,caused a j)rocIauiatioii to be issued by Congress, of the datefirst mentioned, affirming in all things the treaty of Hopewell,and distinctly announcing, (I give the literal clause,) "sae firmdetermination of Congress to protect the said Cherokees in theirrights, according to the true intent and meaning of the saidtreaty." And they further resolve, " that the Secretary of Warbe directed to have a sufficient number of the troops in theservice of the United States, in readiness to inarch from theOhio, to the protection of the Cherokees, whenever Congress shalldirect the same."The next important event, in connexion with the Cherokees,is the treaty of Houston, made with them on the 2d July, 1791.This was the first treaty that was negotiated with the Cherokeesafter the adoption of the Constitution. And it is only necessaryto consider the import of its preamble to become satisfiedof the constancy of our policy, in adhering to the first principlesof our Indian negotiations. Sir, let it be rememberedthat this was a crisis, when the true spirit of the Constitutionwould be best understood. Most of those who framed it cameinto the councils of the country in 1789. Let it be well pondered,that this treaty of Houston was the public compact, inwhich general Washington, as a preparative solemnity, askedthe advice of the Senate — and concerning which he inquiredof that venerable body, whether, in the treaty to be made, theUnited States should solemnly guaranty the new boundary, tobe ascertained and fixed between them and the Cherokees.The preamble to this treaty I will now recite :The parties being desirous of establishing permanent peace andfriendship between the United States and the said Cherokee nationand the citizens and members thereof, and to remove the causes ofwar, by ascertaining their limits, and making other necessary, justand friendly arrangements : the President of the United States, byWilliam Blount, Governor of the territory of the United States ofAmerica south of the river Ohio, and Superintendent of Indian Affairsfor the Southern District, u-ho is vested tcitli full powers forthese purposes, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate of theUnited Slates ; and the Cherokee nation, by the undersigned Chiefsand Warriors representing the said nation, have agreed to the followingarticles," &c.The first article stipulates, that there shall he perpetual peaceand friendship between the parties. A subsequent article provides,that the boundary between the United States and the Cherokees"shall be ascertained and marked plainly, by three personsappointed on the part of the United States, and three Cherokeeson the part of their nation."In pursuance of the advice of the Senate, by the 7th articleof this treaty, " The United States solemnly guaranty to theCherokee nation all their lands not hereby ceded."And after several material clauses, the concluding articlesuspends the effect and obligation of the treaty upon its ratify16 MR. frelinghuysen's speech.cation " by the President of tlse United States, with the adviceand consent oftlie Senate oftlie United States."Now, Sir, it is a most striking part of this history, that everypossible incident of form, deliberation, advisement and power,attended this compact. The Senate was consulted belbre ourplenipotentiary was commissioned — full powers were then givento our commissioner — the articles were agreed upon — thetreaty referred to the Executive and Senate for their ratification,and, with all its ]provisions, by them .solemnly confirmed.Mr. President, it requires a fulness of self-respect and self-confidence,the lot of a rare few, after time has added its sanctionsto this high pledge of national honor, to attempt to convictthe illustrious men of that Senate of gross ignorance ofconstitutional power ; to charge against them that they strangelymistook the charter under which they acted ; and violatedalmost the proprieties of language, as some gentlemen contend,by dignifying with the name and formalities of a treaty " merebargains to get Indian landseer'' Who so well understood thenature and extent of the pywcrs granted in the Constitution, asthe statesmen who aided by their personal counsels to establishit ?Every administration of this government has, with like solemnitiesand stipulations, held treaties with the Cherokees;treaties, too, by almost all of which we obtained further accessionsof territory. Yes, Sir, whenever we approached them inthe language of friendship) and kindness, we touched the chordthat won their confidence : and now, when they have nothingleft, with which to satisfy our cravings, we propose to annulevery treaty — to gainsay our word — and, by violence and perfidy,drive the Indian lice his home. In a subsequent treatybetween the United States and the Cherokee nation, concludedon the 8th July, A. D. 1817, express reference is made to pastnegotiations between the parties on the subject of removal tothe west of the Mississippi; the same question that now agitatesthe country, and engages our deliberations. And thisconvention!! is deserving of particular notice, inasmuch as weshall learn i'rom it, not only what sentiments were then entertainedby our govoriuiiont towards the Cherokees, hut also inwhat light the different dispositions of the Indians to emigrateto the west, and to icmain on their ancient patrimony, wereconsidered. This treaty recites, that application had beenmade to the United States, at a previous period, by a deputationof the Cherokees, [on the Jtth January, 18C9,] by whichthey apprized the government of the wish of a part of their nationto remove west of the Mississippi, and of the residue toabide in their old habitations ; that the President of theUnited States, after maturely considering the subject, answeredthe petition as follows: "The United Staxeif, my children, arethe friends of both )parties, and, as far as can be reasonablyasked, they are willing to satisfy the wishes of both. Thosewho remain may be assured of our patronage, our aid, find outMR. prelinghuysen's speech. l"?good neighborhood." " To those who remove, every aid shallbe administered, and Avhen established at their new settlements,we shall still consider iAe;« as our children, and alwayshold them firmly by the hand." The convention then establishesnCw boundaries, and pledges our I'aith to respect and defendthe Indian territories. Souse waiters, Mr. President, by universalconsent, are taken as granted, without any explicit recognition.Under the induce of tJiis rule of condition fairness,how can we ever dispute the sovereign right of the Cherokeesto remain east of the Mississippi when it v.'as in relationto that very location, that Vv'e promised our patronage, aid andgood neighborhood? Sir, is this high-handed encroachmentof Georgia to be the coinnsentary upon the national pledgehere given, and the obvious import of these terms .'' How werethese people to remain, if not as they then existed, and as wethen Acknowledged them to be, a distinct and separate comnudity, governed by their own )peculiar laws and customs?.Further', Sir, it appears from this treaty, that the Indians whopreferred to remain cast of the river, expressed '■ to the Presidentan anxious desire to engage in ike pursuits of agricultureand civilized life in the country icy then occupied" and weengaged to encourage those laudable pin-jH)8cs. Indeed, such]pursuits had been recommended to the tiles, and patronizedby the United States, for niauy years before this convention.Mr. Jefterson, in his message to Congress, as early as 1805, andwhen on the sidiject of our Indian relations, with !his usual enlargedviews of public policy, observes; 'the aboriginal inhabitantsof these countries, I have regarded with the commiserationtheir history inspires. Endowed with the facultiesand the rights of men, breathing an ardent lt)vc of liberty andindependence, vaud occupying a country' ^y^lich left tiicm 710 desirebut to be undisturbed, trio stream of overflowing imputation fromother regions directed itself on these shores. Without powerto divert, or habits to contend against it, they have been overwhelmedby the current or driven before it. Now reduced withinlimits too naiTow ibr the hunter state, humanity enjoins us toteach them agi:icidture and the domestic arts ? to encouragethem to that industry, which alone can enable them to maintaintheir place in existence ; and to prepare them in time for thatsociety, which, to bodily consorts, adds the improvement of theinind and morals. We have, therefore, liberally furnished themwith the implements husbandry and household use; we haveplaced among them instructors in the arts of first necessity;and they are covered loath the (Agis of the lalo against aggressorsfrom among ourselves." These, Sir, are sentiments worthy of anillustrious statesman. None can fail to perceive the spirit ofjustice and humanity which Mr. Jefferson cherished towardsour Indian allies. He was, through his whole life, the firm,shrinking advocate of their rights, a patron of all their plansfor moral improvement and elevation. 1Mr, President, it will not be necessary to pursue the detailsof our treaty negotiations further. I beg leave to state, before2*18 MR. FRELINGHUYSEN's SPEECH.I leave them, however, that with all the southwestern tribes ofIndians we have similar treaties. Not only the Cherokees, butthe Creeks, Choctaws and Chickasaws, in the neighborhood ofGeorgia, Tennessee, Alabama and mississippi, hold our faith,repeatedly pledged to them, that we would respect their boundaries,repel aggressions, and protect and nourish them as ourneighbors and friends: and to ail these public and sacred compacts,Georgia was a constant party. They were required, byan express article, to be submitted to the Senate of the UnitedStates for their advice and consent. They were so submitted ;and Georgia, by her able representatives in the Senate, imitedinthe ratification of these same treaties, without, in any singleinstance, raising an exception, or interposing a constitutionaldifficulty or scruple.Other branches of our political history shed abundant lightupon this momentous question. When the Congress of theUnited States directed its care to the future settlement andgovernment of the vast and noble domains to the northwest ofthe river Ohio, ceded by the State of Virginia, among othermatters, which were deemed to be vitally connected with thewelfare f)f that region, was the condition of the Indian nations.The third article of the celebrated ordinance for the governmentof the Northwestern Territory, is in the following words:Religion, morality and knowledge, being necessary to good governmentand the happiness of mankind, schools and (he means of educationshall forever be encouraged. The xitmo^t good faith shall always beobserved towards the Indians; their lands and property s\\vl\\ never betakenfrom them without their consent; and, in their jiroperti/. rightsand liberty, they never shall be invaded or disturbed, unless in justand lawful ivars, authorized by Congress ; but laws founded in justiceand humanity shall, from time to time, be made, lor preventingwrongs being done to them, and for preserving; peace and friendshipwith them."Sir, the more minutely we look into the proceedings of theCongress of 1787, the more deeply shall we venerate the wisdomand virtue, the largeness of views, and the political forecast, thatblessed and illustrated the councils of our country. This solitaryarticle woidd forever stand out, and alone sustain their reputation.We shall presently learn what concern was manifestedby the State of Georgia, to spread the whole influenceand control of this article over the cession, which she made tothe Union, of the territory now composing the States of Alabamaand Mississippi.How can Georgia, after all this, desire or attempt, and howcan we quietly ]permit her, "to invade and disturb the property",rights and liberty of the Indians?" And this, not only not "injust and lawful wars authorized by Congress," but in a time ofProfound peace, while the Cherokee lives in tranquil prosperityy her side ? I press the inquiry — How can we tamely sufferthese States to make laws, not only not "founded in justiceand humanity," " for preventing wrongs being done to theIndians," but ibr the avowed purpose of inflicting the grossMR. FRELINGHUYSEN's SPEECH. IS*and wanton injustice of breaking up their* governments — of abrogatingtheir loiig-clierishefl customs, and of annihilating theirexistence as a distinct people.The Congress of the United States, in 1790, in an act to regulatetrade and intercourse with the indian tribes ; and again, by asimilar act in 1802, still in force, distinctly recognised everymaterial stipulation contained in the innnerous treaties withthe Indians. In fact, Sir, these acts of legislation were passedexpressly to fulfil our treaty stipulations.These statutes relijr to 'Hke boundaries, an established by treatiesbetween the United States and the various Indian tribes;"they next direct such " lines to be clearly ascertained, and distinctlymarked" — prohibit any citizen of the United Slates fromcrossing these I'nie:?, to hunt or settle — and authorize the employmentof the ]public and tnllitanj force of the government toprevent intrusion, and to cx|)el trespassers upon Indian lands.The twelfth section of this important law most wisely guardsthe great object of Indian title from all public and private imposition,by enacting, "that no purchase, grant, lease or otherconveyance of lands, or of any title or claim thereto, from anyIndian or nation, or tribe of Indians, within the bounds of theUnited Slates, shall be of any validity in law or equity, messthe same be made bij treatise or convention, entered into pursuantto the ConstitutionsI trust. Sir, that this brief exposition of our policy, in relationto Indian aftiiirs, establishes, beyond all controversy, the obligationof the United States to protect these tribes in the exerciseand enjoyment of their civil and political rights. Sir, thequestion has ceased to be — fVhal are our duties') An inquirymuch more embarrassing is forced upon us: How shall wemost plausibly, and with the least possible violence, break ourfaith'? Sir, we repel the inquiry — we reject such an issue —and point the guardians of public honor to the broad, plainpath of faithful performance, to which they are equally urgedby duty and by interest.Here I might properly rest — as the United States are theonly party that the Indians are bound to regard. But if furtherproofs be wanting to convince us of the unwarrantable pretensionsof Georgia, in her late violent legislation, they are athand, cogent, clear and overwhelming. This State, Sir, wasnot only a party to all these conventions with the general government; she made as solemn treaties with the Creeks andCherokees for herself, both when a colony, and after she becamea State. These form a part of her title — and are boundup with Ber public laws. On the first of June, A. D. 1773, shenegotiated a treaty with these Indian nations, by the jointagency of the governor of the colony and the superintendentof Indian affairs ; in which treaty, boundaries are establishedand cessions of land agreed upon. Again, on the 31st May,A. D. 1783, after her independence as a State, another treatywas concluded between the governor of Georgia and five ofher most distinguished citizens, duly appointed by the legislateMR. frelinghuysen's speech.ture of the State, of the one part, and the chiefs, head men andwarriors of the hordes or tribes of the Cherokee Indians, "inbehah" of the said nation, on the other part." And in the firstarticle of this convention, the distinct, independent existenceof the Cherokees is acknowledged ; for it provides, " that alldifferences between the said parties, heretofore subsisting', shallcease Find be forgotten." Is it possible to contend, in the faceof this document, that the Cherokees are under the jurisdictionof Georgia, when that State finds it necessary to negotiate forpeace with them by all the forms of a regular treaty? ButiTiore than this — by the last article of this treaty, the Cherokeesagree to cede, grunt, release ami quitclaim to Georgia, all thelands up to a certain boundary line defined in the said document:And until since the extraordinary usurpation of this State, inextending her laws over this natl( n, these treaty lines were respected,and never disputed.In the year 1777, the States of Georgia and South Carolinamet the Creek and Cherokee nations at Dewitt's Corner, forthe avowed purpose of making a treaty of peace with them.Sir, if the greatest potentate of Europe had been a party, thepreliminaries could not have been more formal or solemn.First are produced what are denominated " the Georgia fullpowers" delegated to her commissioners, to meet "the IndianCongress" to he held at Dewitt's Corner. Next appear "theSouth Carolina fill )powers," lor the like purpose — and lastly,the Creek and Cherokee "full powers." These powers areopened and exchanged at this Congress, and a treaty is agreedupon by the plenipotentiaries, establishing peace, and futureboinulaiies between their respective territories.In many of the treaties made by the United States with theCherokees and Creeks, large tracts of land were relinquishedto us, which, by our compact with the State of Georgia, wereceived for her use. Side never questioned, at those times,our right to treat for those lands, nor the right of the Indiansto grant tiicm ; but gladly availed herself of such rich' accessionsto her domains, and ]proceeded very promptly to distributethem amongst her citizens. Now, it is a fundamental maximinall coles of law, which acknowledge the obligations of equityand good conscience, that if a party is silent when these old-fashionedrules of upright dealing require him to speak, he shallforever thereafter hold his peace. The application of this soundand wholesome rule will instantly strike the moral apprehensionsof every member of the Senate.I am indebted to the State of Georgia for a clear and verysatisfactory exposition of the native of Indian treaties, and theobligations that arise from them. It is an authority for positions,which I have had the honor to maintain, of the greaterweight, as it proceeds from the highest fimctioiKiry of her government.*In February, 1825, the Creeks, by a treaty made withthe United States, ceded all their lands to us within the geogM. Troup, now a member of the Senate of the U. S.MR. FRELINGHUYSEN's SPEECH. 21graphical limits of Georgia, for the use of that State. By anarticle in the treaty, it was provided that the United Statesshould protect the Indians against the encroachments and impositionsof the whites, until the removal of tie Imhans shouldhave been accomplished, according to the terms of the treaty.The governor of Georgia, on the 22d day of March, of the sameyear, issued his proclamation, in which, after stating the conclusionof the treaty already mentioned, and the article in itfor the protection of the Creeks, he proceeds :I have, therefore, thought proper to issue this, my proclamation,warning all persons, citizens of Georgia or others, against trespassingor intruding upon lands occupied by the Indians within the limitsof this State, either for the purpose of settlement or otherwise, asevery such act will be in direct violation of the provisions of the treatyaforesaid, and will expose the aggressors to the most certain andsummary punishment by the authorities of the State, and of theUnited States. All good citizens, therefore, pursuing the dictatesof good faith, will unite in enforcing the obligations of the treaty asthe supreme late," &c.The Senate perceive that this executive injunction founds itsrequirements, explicitly, upon the faith and authority of thetreaty, as the supreme law ; and this a treaty made with Indians.Yes, Sir, a treaty with a part of the very Indians now assertedby Georgia to be below the reach of treaties — poor abjects !with whom it is declared to be ridiculous and idle to speak oftreating !Sir, she cannot recall her proclamation. Give these sacreddoctrines their full operation here ; let their influence prevail inthe eventful issue now opened for our decision ; and the Indians,who are involved in it, will be satisfied. They have approachedus with no other plea ; they urge no other or higherconsiderations. They point us to the faith of treaties, and imploreus, by the constitutional obligation of these national compacts,to raise around our ancient allies the effectual defences,which we have so often promised. Carry out these rules ofpublic duty', and the Cherokee delegation, who have been waitingat your doors with anxious interest, will return to theirhome relieved from the burden that now sinks their spirits,and with the grateful conviction that the successors of Washingtonare still true to his memory.Mr. President : What could have wrought this entire revolutionin opinions ? and in three short years.' Our relationswith the Indians have not changed. Condition and circumstance,claim and obligation, remain precisely the same. Andyet, now, we hear that these Indians have been all the time,since Georgia had existence, a component part of her population; within the full scope of her jurisdiction and sovereignty,and subject to the control of her laws.The people of this country will never acquiesce in such violentconstructions. They will read for themselves ; and whenthey shall learn, the history of all our intercourse with thesenations ; when they shall perceive the guaranties so often re-22 MR. FRELINGHUYSEN's SPEECH.sewed to them, and under what solemn sanctions, the Americancommunity will not seek the aids of artificial speculationson the requisite Formalities to a technical treaty. No, Sir. Ireject it : Tlic}) ivill judge for themselves, and proclaim, in languagethat the remotest limit of this Republic will understand —*' Call these sacred piedf;os of a nation's faith hy what nameyou please — our tvord has been given, and ive should live and dieby our ivory."If the State of Georgia is Concluded, and morally bound tostay her hand li-join invading the lands or the government ofthe Indians, the States of Mississippi and Alabama are equallyand more strongly obliged. They came into the Union aftermostof the treaties had been made; the Brier in IblG, andthe latter in 1819. These obligations Avere liens upon the confederacy,and they must take the benefits With the burdens ofthe Union. They cannot complain of concealment or surprise.These conventions were all public and notorious ; and the Indiansunder their daily view, in actual separate possession, exercisingthe rights of sovereignty and [property.Moreover, we have heard much o{ constitutional powers anddisabilities in this debate. Sir, I proceed to demonstrate thatboth Mississippi and Alabama are, by a fundamental inhibitionin the constitution of their government, prevented from extendingtheir laws over the Indians.— Wlien Georgia, in 18C2,granted to the United States the territory that composes nearlythe whole of these two States, she made it an express conditionof the cession, that the States to be formed of it shouldconform to all the articles of " the ordinance for the governmentof the territory northwest of the Ohio," excepting onesingle article ]prohibiting involuntary servitude. When theseStates applied to the general government to be formed intoTerritories, this condition of the Georgia cession was rememberedby ail parties. Mississippi and Alabama, in the most deliberatemanner, agreed to the condition, and assumed the articlesof the ordinance as an ii:tcgral part of their ]political constitution.When they afterwards proposed to us to be receivedinto the Federal Union, acts of Congress were duly passed, authorizingthem respectively to form a constitution and Stategovernment for the people within their territories, with this proviso— " That the same, when formed, shall be republican, andnot repugnant to the principles of the ordinance of the 13thJuly, A. D. 1787 ;" and they were afterwards, upon duly certifyingto Congress that they had conformed to those principles,and engrafted them into their constitution, admitted into theRepublic. The third article of this ordinance I have alreadyread and considered, and Avill only add, that human wisdomand skill could not have devised a more effectual safeguard forthe Indian tribes, than is now incorporated into the laws andconstitution of the States of Mississippi and Alabama,It would have been well in these States to have reviewedtheir own origin ; to have examined the sources of their power,before they rashly, and in disregard of principles that arc .FRELIIVGHUYSEN's SPEECH. 23central to their political existence, usurped dominion over acommunity of men as perfectly independent of them as theyare of Mexico. And shall we, Sir, quietly submit to the breachof conditions, that we tendered as the indispensable terms oftheir admission ; that were fairly propounded, and freely andfully accepted 1 ^Vhy, Sir, it appears to me, that the fulfilmentof solemn contracts, the good faith of public treaties, the fundamentalprovisions of State constitutions, are to be regardedas matters of very trifling obligation, when they are all to bebroken through to reach a feeble and unoffending ally. Witha man of truth and honesty, such high considerations as addressus, would supersede the occasion for argument ; and howcan wt evade them Avithout deep dishonor ?I have complained of the legislation of Georgia. I will nowrefer the Senate to the law of that State passed on the 19thDecember, A. D. 1829, that the complaint may be justified.The title of the law would suffice for such purpose, withoutlooking further. After stating its object of adding the territoryin the occupants of the Cherokee nation of Indians to the adjacentcounties of Georgia, another distinct office of this oppressiveedict of arbitrary ]power is avowed to be, "to annul alllais and ordinances made by the Cherokee nation of Indians."And, Sir, the act does ailnul them effectually. For the seventhsection enacts, " that after the first day of June next, all laws,ordinances, orders and regulations, of any kind whatever, made,passed, or enacted by the Cherokee Indians, either in generalCouncil, or in any other v/ay whatever, or by any authoritywhatever, of said tribe, be, and the same are hereby declared tobe null and void, and of no effect, as if the same had never existed."Sir, here we find a whole people outlawed — laws, customs,rules, government, all, by one short clause, abrogated,and declared to be void, as if they never had been. Historyfurnishes no example of such high-handed usurpation. Thedismemberment and partition of Poland was a deed of humanelegislation, compared with this. The succeeding clauses areno less offensive. They provide, that "if any person shall prevent,by threats, menaces, or other means, or endeavor to preventany Indian of said nation, from emigrating, or enrolling as anemigrant, he shall be liable to indictment and confinement inthe common gaol, or at hard labor in the penitentiary, not exceedingfour years, at the discretion of the court ;" and "if anyperson shall deter, or offer to deter any Indian, head man, chiefor warrior of said nation, from selling or ceding to the UnitedStates,ybr the use of Georgia, the whole or any part of said territory,or prevent, or offer to prevent, any such persons frommeeting in council or treaty any commissioner or commissionerson the part of the United States,/or any purpose whatever,he shall be guilty of a high misdemeanor, and liable, on conviction,to confinement at hard labor in the penitentiary for notless than/oitr, nor longer than six years, at the discretion of thecourt." It is a crime in Georgia for a man to prevent the sale24 MR. frelinghuysen's speech.of his country — a crime to warn a chief or head man, that theagents of the United States are instructed "to move upon himin the line of his prejudices," that they are coming to bribe himto meet in treaty with the commissioner. By the way, Sir, itseems these treaties are very lawful, when made ybr the use ofGeorgia.It is not surprising that our agents advertised the War Department,that if the general government refused to interfere,and the Indians were left to the law of the States, they wouldsoon exchange their lands, and remove. To compel, by harshand cruel penalties, such exchange, is the broad purpose of thisact of Georgia, and nothing is wanting to till up the picture ofa disgraceful system, but to permit the bill before us to pass,without amendment or proviso. Then it will all seem fair onour statute books. It legislates for none but those who maychoose to remove — while we know that grinding, heart-breakingexactions are set in operation elsewhere to drive them tosuch a choice. By the modification I have submitted, I beg forthe Indian the jioor privilege of a free exercise of his own will.But the law of Georgia is not yet satisfied. The last sectiondeclares, " that no Indian, or descendant of any Indian, residingwithin the Creek or Cherokee nations of Indians, shall bedeemed a competent witness in any court of this State, to ivhichawhite person may be a party, excel)! such white person resideswithin the said nation." It did not suffice to rob these peopleof the last vestige of their own political rights and liberties.The work was not complete, until they were shut out of theprotection of Georgia laws. For, Sir, after the first day ofJune next, a gang of lawless white men nay break into theCherokee country, plunder their inhabitants, murder the motherwith the children, and all in siglitof the wretched Husband andfather — and no law of Georgia will reach the atrocity. It isvain to tell us, Sir, that min-der may be traced by circumstantialprobabilities. The charge against this State is — You haveby force and violence stripped these ]people of the protection oftheir government, and now refuse to cast over them the shieldof your own. The outrage of the deed is, that you leave thepoor Indian helpless and defenceless, and in this cruel wayhope to banish him from his home. Sir, if this law be enforced,I do religiously believe, that it will awaken tones of feelingthat will go up to God— and call down the thunders of his wrath.The end, however, is to justly the moans. " The removalof the Indian tribes to the west of the Mississippi is demandedby the dictates of humanity." This is a word of conciliatingimport. Bait it often makes its way to the heart under verydoubtful titles ; and its ]present claims deserve to be rigidlyquestioned. Who urges this plea ? They who covet the Indianlands — who wish to rid themselves of a neighbor that theydespise, and whose State pride is enlisted in rounding ofi' theirterritories. But another matter is worthy of a serious thought.Is there such a clause in our covenants with the Indian, that,when we shall deem it best for him, on the whole, we mayMR. FRELINGHUYSEN's SPEECH. 25break our engagements, and leave him to his persecutors ?Notwithstanding our adversaries are not entitled to the use ofsuch humane suggestions, yet we do not shrink from an investigationof this pretence. It will be found as void of support infact, as the other assumptions are of principle.It is alleged, that the Indians cannot flourish in the neighborhoodof a white population — that whole tribes have disappearedunder the influence of this propinquity. As an abstractproposition, it implies reproach somewhere. Our virtues certainlyhave not such deadly and depopulating power. It must,then, be our vices that possess these destructive energies — andshall we commit injustice, and put in, as our plea for it, thatour intercourse with the Indians has been so demoralizing thatwe must drive them from it, to save them ? True, Sir, manytribes have melted away — they have sunk lower and lower —and what people could rise from a condition to which policy,selfishness, and cupidity, conspired to depress them ?Sir, had we devoted the same care to elevate their moralcondition, that we have to degrade them, the removal of theIndians would not now seek for an apology in the suggestionsinhumanity. But I ask, as to the matter of fact, how standsthe account ? Wherever a fair experiment has been made, theIndians have readily yielded to the influences of moral cultivation.Yes, Sir, they flourish under this culture, and rise in thescale of being. They have shown themselves to be high' surreptile of improvement, and the ferocious feelings and habitsof the savage are soothed and reformed by the mild charitiesof religion. They can very soon be taught to under-stand andappreciate the blessings of civilization and regular government.And I have the opinions of some of our most enlightened statesmento sustain me. Mr. Jefferson, nearly thirty years ago,congratulates his fellow-citizens upon the hop^3fIll indicationsfurnished by the laudable efforts of the government to melioratethe condition of those, whom he was pleased to denominate"our Indian neighbors." In his message to Congress on the8th of December, 1801, he says; "Among our Indian neighbors,also, a spirit of peace and friendship generally prevails ; and Iam happy to inform you that the continued efforts to introduceamong them the implements and the practice of husbandry,and of the household arts, have not been without success.They are becoming more and more sensible of the superiorityof this dependence for clothing and subsistence over the precariousresources of hunting and Asking. And already are weable to announce that, instead of that constant diminution ofnumbers produced by their wars aiifl their wants, some of them,begin to experience an increase of population."Upon the authority of this great statesman, I can direct ourgovernment to a much more effectual, as well as more just andhonorable remedy for the evils that afflict these tribes, thantheir proposed removal into the wild, uncultivated regions ofthe western forests. In a message to Congress on the 17thOctober, 1803, Mr. Jefferson remarks; "With many of the26 MR. frelixghuysen's speech.other Indian tribe*, improvements in agriculture and householdmanufacture are advancing ; and with all, our peace and Friendshipare established, on grounds much firmer than heretofore."In his message of the 2d December, 18C6, there is a ]paragraphdevoted to this subject deserving of our most respectful consideration.The Friends of Indian rights could not desire the aidof better sentiments than Mr. Jefferson inculcated, in that partof the message where he says ;We continue to receive proofs of the growing attachment of ourIndian neighbors ; and of their disposition to place all their interestsunder the patronage of the United States. These dispositions areinspired by tlirir cnnfulcnre in our justice, and in the sincere concernwe feel for their welfare. And as long as we discharge these highand honorable functions with the iiitcirvity and good faith vehiclealone can entitle us to their continuance, we may expect to reap thejust reward in their peace and friendship."Again, in November, 18C8, he informs the Congress thatWith our Indian neighbors the public peace has been steadilymaintained; and generally, from a conviction that we consider themas a part of ourselves, and cherish with sincerity their rights and interests,tl'.e attachment of the Indian tribes is gaining strength daily,is extending from the nearer to the more remote, and will amply requiteus for the justice and friendship practised towards them. Husbandryand household manufacture are advancing among them-morerapidly with the southern than northern tribes, from circumstancesof soil and climate."Mr. madison, in his message of November, 18C9, likewisebears his public testimony to the gradual improvement of theIndians. " With our Indian neighbors," he remarks, " the justand benevolent system continued toward them, has also preservedpeace, and is more and more advancing habits favorableto their civilization and happiness.''''I will detain the Senate with but one more testimonial, fromanother venerable Chief Magistrate. Mi*. Monroe, as lately as1824, in his message, with great satisfaction informed the Congressthat the Indians were "making steady advances in civilizationand the injjirovcment of their condition.""Many of the tribes," he continues, "have already made greatprogress in the arts of civilized life. This desirable result has beenbrought about by the humane and persevering policy of the government,and particularly by means of the appropriation for the civilizationof the Indians. There have been established, under the provisionsof this act, thirty-two schools, containing nine hundred andsixteen scholars, who are well instructed in several branches of literature,and likewise in agriculture and the ordinary arts of life."Now, Sir, when we consider the large space which these illustriousmen have filled in our councils, and the perfect confidencethat is due to their official statements, is it not astonishingto hear it gravely maintained that the Intliaiis are retrogradingin their condition and character ; that all our publicianxieties and cares bestowed upon them have been utterly;MR. FRELINGHUYSEn's SPEECH. 27fruitless ; and that, for very pity's sake, we must get rid of them,or they will perish on our hands ? Sir, I believe that the confidenceof the Senate has been abused by some of the letter-writers,who give us such sad accounts of Indian wretchedness.I rejoice that we may safely repose upon the statements containedin the letters of Messrs. J. L. Allen, R. M. Livingston,Rev. Cyrus Kingsbury, and the Rev. Samuel A. Worcester.The character of these witnesses is without reproach ; andtheir satisfactory certificates of the improvement of the tribescontinue and confirm the history furnished to us in the severalmessages from which I have just read extracts.It is further maintained, " that one of the greatest evils towhich the Indians are exposed, is that incessant pressure ofpopulation, that forces them from seat to seat, without allowingtime for moral and intellectual improvement." Sir, this is thevery reason — the deep, cogent reason — which I present to theSenate, now to raise the barrier against the pressure of population,and, with all the authority of this nation, say to the urgingtide, " This far, and no farther." Let us save them now, or wenever shall. For is it not clear as the sunbeam. Sir, that a removalwill aggravate their woes? If the tide is nearly irresistibleat this time ; when a few more years shall fill the regionsbeyond the Arkansas with many more millions of enterprisingwhite men, will not an increased impulse be given, that shallsweep the red men away into the barren prairies, or the Pacificof the west ?If these constant removals are so afflictive, and allow no timefor moral improvement ; if this be the cause why the attemptsat Indian reformation are alleged to have been so unavailing ;I do not the dictates of experience, then, plead most powerfullywith us, to drive them no farther? — to grant them an abidingplace, where these moral causes may have a fair and uninter-1 rusted operation in moulding and refining the Indian charadeter ? And, Sir, weigh a moment the considerations that addressi us on behalf of the Cherokees especially. Prompted and enscourage by our counsels, they have in good earnest resolvedI to become men, rational, educated. Christian men ; and theyi have succeeded beyond our most sanguine hopes. They haveestablished a regular constitution of civil government, republicanin its principles. Wise and beneficent laws are enacted.The people acknowledge their authority, and feel their obligation.A printing press, conducted by one of the nation, circulatesa weekly newspaper, printed partly in English, and partly1 in the Cherokee language. Schools flemish in many of theirsettlements. Christian temples, to the God of the Bible, arefrequented by respectful, devout, and many sincere worship;pers. God, as we believe, has many people among them,whom he regards as the " apple of his eye." They have becomebetter neighbors to Georgia. She made no complaintsduring the lapse of fifty years, when the tribes were a horde ofruthless, licentious and drunken savages ; when no law conesMR. frelinghuysen's speech,trolled their ; when the only judge was their will, and their .avenger the tomahawk.Then Georgia could make treaties with them, and acknowledgethem as nations ; and in conventions trace boundary lines,and respect the land-marks of her neighbor : and now, whenthey begin to reap the fruits of all the paternal instructions, sorepeatedly and earnestly delivered to them by the Presidents ;when the Cherokee has learned to respect the right'* of thewhite man, and sacredly to regard the obligations of truth andconscience ; is this the time, Sir, to break up a peaceful community,to ]put out its council fires, to annul its laws and customs,to crush the rising hopes of its youth, and to drive thedesponding and discouraged Indian to despair .^ Although itbe called a sickly humanity to sympathize with Indians — everyfreeman in the land, that has one spark of the spirit of hisfathers, will denounce the proposed measure as an unparalleledstretch of cruel injustice — unparalleled certainly in our history.And if the deed be done. Sir, how it is regarded in heaven will,sooner or later, be known on earth ; for this is the judgmentplace of public sins. And all these ties are to be broken asunder,for a State that Alas silent, and acquiesced in the relationsof the Indians to our present government ; that pretended tono right of direct interference, whilst these tribes were reallydangerous ; when their ferocious incursions justly disturbedthe tranquillity of the fireside, and waked the " sleep of theCradle ;" — for a State that seeks it now against an unoffendingneighbor, which implores, by all that is dear in the graves ofher fathers, in the traditions of by-gone ages ; that beseechesby the ties of nature, of home, and of country', to let her live ^unmolested, and die near the dust of her kindred !Our fears have been addressed in behalf of those States,whose legislation we resist : and it is inquired with solicitude, ;Would you urge us to arms with Georgia ? No, Sir. This jtremendous alternative will not be necessary. Let the generalgovernment come out, as it should, with decided and temperate 1firmness, and officially announce to Georgia, and the otherStates, that if the Indian tribes choose to remain, they will beprotected against all interference and encroachment; and such jis my confidence in the sense of justice, in the respect for law,prevailing in the great body of this portion of our fellow-citizens,that I believe they would submit to Lie authority of thenation. I can expect no other issue. Iii if the general governmentbe urged to the crisis, never t<. be anticipated, of appealingto the last resort of her powers ; and, when reason, argumentand persuasion fail, to raise her strong ai-m to repressthe violations of the supreme law of the land, I ask, is it not inher bond. Sir? Is her guaranty a rope of sand .-' This effectiveweapon, the sword in the hands of onr national government,has often been employed to chastise the poor Indians ;sometimes with dreadful vengeance, I fear : and shall not theirprotection avail to draw it from the scabbard .-' Permit me toMR. FRELINGHUYSEN's SPEECH. 29refer the Senate to the views of Mr. Jefferson, directly connectedwith this delicate, yet sacred duty of protection. In1791, when he was Secretary of State, there were some symptomsof collision on the Indian subject. These produced theletter from him to general Knox, then our Secretary of War, apart of which I will read :I am of opinion, that government should firmly maintain thisground : that the Indians have a right to the occupation of their lands,independent of the States within whose chartered limits they happento be ; that, until they cede them his treaty, or other transaction equivalentto a treaty, no act of a State can give a right to such lands;that, neither under the present Constitution, nor the ancient confederation,had any State or persons a right to treat with the Indians,without the consent of the general government ; that that consenthas never been given by any treaty for the cession of the lands inquestion ; that the government is determined to exert all its energyfor the patronage and protection of the rights of the Indians, andthe preservation of peace between the United States and them ; andthat, if any settlements are made on lands not ceded by them, withoutthe previous consent of the United States, the government will thinkitself bound, not only to declare to the Indians that such settlementsare without the authority or protection of the United States, but toremote them also by public forcedMr. Jefferson seems to have been disturbed by no morbidsensibilities. He speaks out as became a determined statesman.We can trace in this document the same spirit Which shed itsinfluence on a ujore eventful paper — the Declaration of ourrights, and of our purpose to maintain and defend them. Helooked right onward, in the broad path of [public duty; and ifsin his way, he met the terrors of State collision and conflict, hewas in no degree intimidated. The faith of treaties was hisguide ; and he would not flinch in his purposes, nor surrenderthe Indians to State encroachments. Let such decided policygo forth in the majesty of our laws now, and Georgia will yield.She will never encounter the responsibilities or the horrors ofa civil war. But if she shoidd, no stains of blood will been ourskirts — on herself the guilt will abide forever.Mr. President: If we abandon these aboriginal proprietors ofour soil — these early allies and adopted children of our forefathers— how shall we justify it to our country ? to all the gloryof the past, and the promise of the future ? llcr good name isworth all else besides that contributes to her greatness. And,as I regard this crisis in her history, the time has come whenthis unsought treasure shall be plucked from dishonor, or abandonedto reproach.How shall we justify this trespass to ourselves? Sir, we mayderide it, and laugh it to scorn now ; but the occasion will meetevery man, when he must look inward, and make honest inquisitionthere. Let us beware how, by oppressive encroachmentsupon the sacred privileges of our Indian neighbors, we ministerto the agonies of future remorse.\ <■30 MR. frelinghuysen's speech.I have, in my humble measure, attempted to discharge apublic and most solemn duty towards an interesting portion ofmy fellow men. Should it prove to have been as fruitless as Iknow it to be below the weight of their claims, yet, even then,Sir, it will have its consolations. Defeat in such a cause is farabove the triumphs of unrighteous power. And, in the languageof an eloquent writer — "I had rather receive the blessingof one poor Cherokee, as he casts his last look back uponhis country, for having, though in vain, attempted to preventhis banishment, than to sleep beneath the marble of all theCaesar."SPEECHOF THEHO]V. PELEG SPRAGUE,SENATOR FROM MAINE,DELIVERED IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES,APRIL 16, 1830*The following amendment to the Bill for the removal ofthe Indians being under consideration —Provided always, That, until the said tribes or nations shall chooseto remove, as by this act is contemplated, they shall be protected intheir present possessions, and in the enjoyment ot all their rights ofterritory and government, as heretofore exercised and enjoyed, fromall interruptions and encroachments — "Mr. Sprague addressed the Senate as follows :Mr. President : The gentleman, who has just resumed hisseat, (Mr. Forsyth,) has Indulged in a wide range of remark indefence of his State against imputations which he supposed tohave been elsewhere cast upon her. This course may havebeen very proper in him ; I fully appreciate the motive whichinduced it. But I have no occasion to follow him ; I have nowish to derogate in the least from the character of Georgia ;but rather that it should be as elevated as her most devotedsons can desire. I shall speak of her so far only as may seemnecessary to the free discussion of the subject before us.This bill and amendment, and the discussion which theyhave produced, involve the question of the rights and duties ofthe United States with respect to the Indian tribes generally,but moi'e especially the Cherokees. With that people we havenot less than fifteen treaties. The first was made in the year1785, and the last in 1819.By several of these treaties, we have unequivocally guarantiedto the Cherokees that they shall forever enjoy —1st. Their separate existence, as a political community ;2d. Undisturbed possession and full enjoyment of their lands,within certain boundaries, which are duly defined and fullydescribed ;This speech was commenced on the 16th and closed on the 17th of April.On the 23a of the same month, Mr. Sprague made another vigorous attemptto arrest the bill, when he briefly and most powerfully urged again the greatconsiderations in the case.32 MR. sprague's speech.3d. The protection of the United States, against all interferencewith or encroachments upon their rights by any people,state, or nation.For these promises, on our part, we received ample consideration—By the restoration and establishing of peace ;By large cessions of territory;By the promise, on their part, to treat with no other state ornation ; and other important concessions.These treaties were made with all the forms and solemnitieswhich could give them force and efficacy, by commissionersduly appointed with full power. They were ratified by theSenate ; confirmed by the President ; and announced to theworld, by his proclamation, as the binding compact of thenation, and the supreirie law of the land.The Cherokees now come to us, and say, that their rightsare in danger of invasion, from the States of Georgia and Alabama; and they ask if we will extend to them the protectionwe have promised, and perform the engagements we havemade. This is the question which they distinctly propound,and which we must unequivocally answer ; and we are nowdiscussing what our response shall be.There is a broad line of distinction between the claims ofGeorgia and those of Alabama and Mississippi, which seemsheretofore to have been unobserved, but which I shall endeavorto keep in view.Let us first inquire what our duties are with respect to Georgia; for if her pretensions are unfounded, those of Alabamaand Mississippi fall of course.It is not necessary to determine whether the Indians havejust grounds for their apprehensions or not, because the questionis, whether if the rights secured to them by our treaties,should, at some future day, be invaded, we will perform our engagements.But have they not some cause for their present alarm? InDecember, 1827, a committee of the legislature of Georgiamade a report, accompanied by sundry resolutions which wereaccepted by both branches; and the resolutions also receivedthe approval of the Governor. In the report we find the followinglanguage, respecting the territory of the Cherokees: "Thelands in question belong to Georgia— she Jiivst and she ivillhave them :" — and in the resolutions, the following :Resolved, " That all the lands, appropriated and unappropriated,which lie within the conventional Hints of Georgia, belong to herabsolutely ; that the title is in her ; that the Indians are tenants ather will ; that she may, at any time she pleases, determine that tenancyby taking possession of the premises ; and Georgia has theright to extend her own authority and laws over the whole territory."Resolved, " That Georgia entertains for the general government80 high a regard, and is so solicitous to do no act that can disturb, ortend to disturb, the public tranquillity, that she will not attempt to enforceher rights by violence — until all other means of redress fail."MR. sprague's speech. 33Resolved, " That to avoid a catastrophe, which none would moresincerely deplore than ourselves, we make this solemn appeal to theUnited States," &c.It is thus asserted as the right, and avowed as the determination,of Georgia, to exercise absolute power over the Cherokees,and to take their land at all hazards — even by violence,if other means should fail.The gentleman from that State, (Mr. Forsyth,) observed, inthe commencement of his speech, that he felt himself bound inconscience to relieve his friend from New Jersey from all apprehensionsof a violation of the faith of the nation, by demonstratingthat the claims of Georgia were supported by treaties.And he proceeded to do so in language so strong, and tones sotriumphant, as to make an evident impression upon membersof the Senate. Let us deliberately examine his argument.The first treaty referred to, was that of Galpliinion, in 1785,by which certain concessions were made to Georgia. But thatwas by the Creeks, and by them only, and had no relation tothe Cherokees. —[Mr. Forsyth explained, he had remarked upon that treaty in answerto the gentleman from New Jersey, (Mr. Frelinghuysen,) annot as bearing upon the rights of the Cherokees.]Mr. Sprague resumed. He was glad to receive the gentleman'sexplanation ; it precluded the necessity of any furtherremark upon that topic.The treaty next cited was that of Dewitt's corner, A. D. 1777,between South Carolina, Georgia and the Cherokees, by whichthe latter acknowledge that a portion of their country, extendingas far as the Ocunna mountain, had been conquered ; andthey made a cession of the same by defined boundaries, toSouth Carolina, and to her only. The conquered and cededterritory lies wholly within that State ; and it is not now, andhas not been for at least one generation, either claimed or occupiedby the Indians. What right can that confer on Georgiato lands now owned and possessed by the Cherokees ?The next position was that the right of his State was derivedunder the 9th article of the treaty of Hopewell, made betweenthe United States and the Cherokees, in November,1785 ; by which they gave to the United States the right ofmanaging all their affairs. To this Georgia was no party.But the gentleman contends that the United States transferredall their power and claims, under the treaty, to that State, byvirtue of the compact of 1802 ; and that we now cannot interferewith her pretensions. The clause in the compact, whichis relied upon, is this — the United States "cede whateverclaim, right or title, they may have to the jurisdiction or soil otany lands lying" within the Units of Georgia.Does this relinquishment of the right of the United Statesto the soil and jurisdiction of the lands, purport to transfer apre-existing treaty with the Indians ? Was it so intended ?34 MR. SPRAGUE's speech.And if it had been, is the power which the treaty confers tolegislate lor their benefit in its nature transferable? The Articleis in these words, "For the benefit and comfort of the Indians,and lor the prevention of injuries and oppressions onthe part of the citizens or Indians, the United States in Congressassembled, shall have the sole and exclusive right ofregulating the trade with the Indians, and managing all theiraffairs in such manner as they think proper." The powergiven is strictly personal and liduciary ; to be exercised accordingto our judgment up'oii future events, and for their benefit.Can even a guardian transfer his rights and duties atpleasure .P By the Constitution — the fundamental compact —Georgia has given to the United States the right to legislate incertaincases over her citizens for their benefit ; for example,to organize, arm, discipline and call forth her militia. Canthe United States transfer this right to South Carolina, or anyother sovereign ?The express words of the Article require this right to be exercisedby the United States "i?i Congress assembled." Canwe, without the consent of the other ]laity, strike out thesewords, and insert — the Legislature of Georgia ?Again — in order to see that this power is property exercised,the 13th Article secures to the Cherokees "the right to send adeputy of their choice, whenever they think fit, to Co7-igress.''^Shall he come here to watch over the legislation at Mihedge-ville ? ^But, if this power was in its nature-transferable, it must besubject to the restrictions and limitations in the treaty contained;among which are the following: —1st. That the Cherokees shall continue to exist as a distinctpolitical community, under the protection of the United States:2d. That they shall enjoy the undisturbed j)of session of theirlands :3d. That the power to manage ^^ their affairs" shall be exercised" for the benefit and comfort of the Indians; and for theprevention of injuries and oppressions."Did this give to the United States the right to drive themfrom all their kids? — or to destroy the Cherokee nation, tostrike it out of exit fence; and, instead of managing for their"benefit," to annihilate "their affairs," as a body politic' Orcould we convey a greater right than we ourselves possessed ?But this is not all. The gentleman ]passed over in utter silencea most important event, Which intervened between thetreaty of Hoj)ewell and the compact of It'Ca. It is the treatyof Houston, made in 1791 ; by which the United States againpromised the Cherokees to protect them in their rights as anation; and the 7th Article holds the following language:"The United States solemnly guaranty to the CherokeeNATION ALL THEIR LANDS NOT HEREBY CEDED." If anyright was transferred to Georgia, it would be such only as existedat the time, and subject, of course, to the stipulations ofthat pre-existing treaty.MR. sprague's speech. 36There is still another view of this subject. Are we notbound to see that our treaties are fulfilled? The Indians saythat their very existence was threatened ; and inquire of uswhether we will perform our solemn promise of protection.What shall we answer? That we have conveyed that promiseto another! — that we have transferred our obligation to Georgia[ — have given her a license to violate our treaties! Maythey not reply, that the very purpose for which they purchasedour guaranty, and the protection of the strong arm of ourgovernment, was to secure them against the encroachments oftheir white neighbors in that State ?The compact of 1802, which has been so much insisted upon,was made between the United States and Georgia. The Cherokeeswere not parties, nor even assented to it. Of course itcould not impair their rights, or confer upon others any claimagainst them. If I, Mr. President, should promise the gentlemanthat I would obtain your farnj, and convey it to him —would that divest you" title, or authorize either of us to wrestit from you by force ? The compact itself expressly recognised" the Indian title," and the United States were to extinguishit only when it could be done "peaceably" and on "reasonableterms."The gentleman having, as he supposed, fully sustained thetreaty claims of Georgia, by the arguments upon which I haveremarked, triumphantly exclaimed, " I will have my bond, Iwill have my pound ofjltsh.^^ — A most unfortunate allusion. Sir ;and one which I should not have been unkind enough to make.He will have his pound of quivering flesh taken from nearestthe heart of the living man ! But he will take it without onedrop of blood. —■" Ay — there's the rub ;"For, in the cutting of that pound of flesh,What human blood shall flow — " must give us pause."The fiend-like Shylock himself could not take the penaltyof his bond, because " no jot of blood" was given. And noneis given here, but the express contrary — " peaceably" — " peaceably"— and " upon reasonable terms" too, is the emphatic language.But against whom does the gentleman make his claimthe Indians.' Does he hold their bond? No — they hold oursthey now [present it to us, and demand its performance — and,"till he can rail the seal from off that bond," he cannot absolveus from its obligations. He declares that he will have the termsof his compact fulfilled to "the twentieth part of one poor scruple,"and to the division of a hair. So be it ; and let the Indianstoo have their guarantied rights maintained with equalscrupulosity.The Hon. Chairman of the Committee on Indian Affairs(Mr. White) conceded that the United States had repeatedlypledged their faith to the Cherokees to interfere for their protection,but contended that we ought not to perform thesestipulations of our treaties, because the claims of Georgia cons" MR. sprague's speech.flint with them. He laid clown this pi-position, that, if theUnited States had come ito engagements inconsistent witheach other, so that it was impossible to keep both, the onewhich was prior, in point of time, should be specifically performed,and ample compensation be made for the breach of.the other.To this position I freely assent ; and upon this basis will restthe argument.It is incumbent, then, upon the Hon. Chairman to show, inthe first place, that our obligations to Georgia are incompatiblewith our treaties ; and, in the next place, that they are ol priordate. This, he and two gentlemen who hollowed him in thedebate (Messrs. M'Kinley and Forsyth) have attempted todo.Their argument is, that, before the revolution, GreatBritain had jurisdiction over the aborigines, and the sole rightof treating with them, and that this power was wrested fromher by conquest during the war, and forever abandoned by thetreaty of peace in 17S3.I would first observe that, if it was obtained by conquest, itbelonged to xhe conquerors. And who were the conquerors*'The United States ; who were also a ]party to the treaty ofpeace. Upon this ground it was, that New Jersey, Delaware,Maryland, and other States so strongly insisted that the crownlands, which had been acquired by the common arm and atthe onion expense, belonged of right to the common fund.Their demand to a great extent succeeded. The several Statesyielded to their pretensions by successive cessions ; Virginiamagnanimously taking the lead.But, Mr. President, 1 shall not dwell upon this ; for I mean,as far as possible, to avoid all debatable ground.Concede then, for the present, that, when Georgia becameindependent, in 1776, she at once succeeded to all the pre-existingrights of Great Britain over the unmeasured forests withinher chartered limits. What was that right ? Gentlemen sayit was the right of discoveries.Discovery, Sir, confers no claim or right against the nativesthe persons discovered — but only against future discoverers.It is said, that the rights derived fioni this source were establishedand defined in Europe, upon the first discovery of thiscountry. True; but it was by the mutual understanding andagreement of the nations of that continent only, in order toregulate their conduct among themselves. To prevent conflictand collision, it was tacitly agreed, that the sovereign, whoshould find a country, theretofore unknown, should have theexclusive right to the benefits of the discovery, and should bepermitted, without interference from other European sovereigns,to conduct toward the aboriginal inhabitants accordingto his conscience and his ability. He had therefore, as againstdiscovering nations who had assented to the arrangement, aconventional right to wage tvnr upon and conquer the natives, andsubject them to his sway. It is this right to which it is contendedthat Georgia succeeded upon the declaration of Inter.SPRAGUE's speech. S7sentence. Let it be so considered ; and that in the war, whichshe should wage to subjugate the Indians, no other state ornation could rightfully interfere. But the people attacked hada right to resist. They surely were under no obligation toacquiesce in the proposed subjugation. Suppose, then, thatthey should happen to be too strong for their assailants; thatthey should roll back the tide of war— the hunters should behunted — that those who came to conquer should be in dangerof being conquered ; and, in such emergency, the people ofGeorgia should call upon another State, Virginia lor example,for protection and defence. Georgia would thus have waivedher conventional right to exclude all others from her limits,and Virginia would, at her request, become a party to the war.Would not Virginia then have the right to make peace for thesecurity of her own citizens, and must she not be bound by itsterms ? Was not France bound by her treaty of alliance withus during the revolution ? Yet her interference was withoutthe consent of Great Britain, the discoverer. Are not the UnitedStates now bound by their treaties with the states of SouthAmerica .''But further, what if Georgia, in order to induce her neighborsto come in for her defence, had expressly agreed beforehand,that Virginia should have the sole power of conductingthe war, and concluding the peace. Would not both Statesbe bound by the treaty of peace thereupon made by Virginia .'To proceed one step farther, suppose that this arrangementbetween the two States, instead of being occasional, should beestablished by a permanent compact ; and that, in order to obtainthe aid and protection of Virginia, at all times, against theattacks of the Indians, Georgia should agree that she neverwould herself provoke such attacks by making war upon them,and that, if it should arise, her more powerful ally should havethe entire management of the war, and the exclusive right ofagreeing upon the terms of peace and making the treaty. —Would not such terms be obligatory ?Now, Sir, such a compact was actually made by Georgiawith Virginia and eleven other States, by the Articles of Confederation.By the third Article, the United States are bound to assistthe several States, "against all force offered to, or attacksmade upon them, or any of them." And by the ninth Article,the United States have "the sole and exclusive right and powerof determining on peace and war, except in the cases mentionedin the sixth article," and also of "entering into treaties."Here is the express grant. What answer can be given to it ?What reason can be assigned, why each State should not bebound by the stipulations of a treaty of peace .' Will it be saidwe could not have the relations of war and peace with the Indiantribes? Ask the relatives of Braddock and Butler, ofWayne, Harmar, and St. Clair, if Indians can wage var ?Consult the crimsoned pages of your history, and they will answeryou. Nay, to banish such a suggestion forever, that same38 MR. sprague's speech.9th Article of Confederation expressly declares, that by war itmeans lo include contests with Indians ; tor, by reference, it in-corporate into it the Cth Article, which is m these words :Art. G. No State shall engage in <tny tear without the consentof the United States, in Congress assembled, unless such State beactually invaded by enemies, or shall have received certain adviceof a resolution formed by some nation of Indians to invade suchState, and the danger is so imminent as not to admit of a delay tillthe United States, in Congress assembled, can be consulted."Here is also an unequivocal relinquishment by each State ofthe right to make war upon the natives.During the revolution, war actually existed between the UnitedStates and the Cherokees. It continued to rage after the acknowledgmentof our independence by Great Britain. Georgianeeded our aid, and received it. The Indians were then powerfuland terrific. The United States wore desirous of peace ; theysought it ; and it was established in 1785, by the treaty of Hope-well,which has been already referred to. It secured to the Cherokeestheir previous right to exist as a community, iqjon the territoryill their previous possession. Such a treaty would havebeen obligatory upon any State, if the Articles of Confederationhad never existed ; but by that compact a right was expresslygiven by Georgia herself to make it, and the United States werein duty bound to exercise that power.And now I ask, what prior incompatible obligations to Georgiaabsolve us from its stipulations, or render it impossible to fulfilthem ?Such was the shower. and such the practice of the Confederationii) to the time of the formation of our present Constitution, inSeptember, 1787. No longer previous than the preceding nionUt,we find a committee of Congress, in an able and elaborate report,declaring that the United States cannot interfere in behalf of aState against a tribe of Indians, "but on the principle that Congressshall have the sole direction of the war, and the settling of allthe terms of peace xoith such Indian tribe." And this language wasaddressed particularly to Georgia by name, and with respect tothe Indians within her limits. This was m August.The Constitution was fanned in die following September.The ()th Article declares, that " treaties inde, or wliicli shall bemade, under the authority of the United States, shall be the supremelaw of the land" — "any thing in the constitution or lawsof any State to the contrary notwithstanding." This was an expressconfirmation of the treaty of Hojiewell ; which had beenmade in November, 1785, less than two years before, and wasthen in fill force.The State of Georgia, with full knowledge that it had been somade, and that it was considered by the United States to be ^'alidand obligatory, voluntarily adopted the Constitution, thereby herselfmost solemnly affirming and establishing that treaty ; and, ,whatever may have been said before, never since that time, untilrecently, when the present controversy arose, has she in any mannerdenied its validity, or objected to its being carried into effect.MR. SPRAGUE S SPEECH. JRJSuch is die argument in support of the treats of Hopewell. 1shall leave it by adducing but one other proof of its validity, inthe opinion of general Washington and the Congress of 1788, andtheir determination to enforce it with scrupulous fidelity. It isthe proclamation of Sept. 1, 1788, which declares it to be " thefirm determination of Congress to protect the said Cherokees intheir rights, according to the true intent and meaning of the saidtreaty ;" and a resolution was adopted to hold in readiness a sufficientnumber of troops to enforce that declaration.Under our present Constitution, many treaties have been regularlymade with the Cherokees. The first was at Houston, m1791. The Reasons, which have been adduced m support of thepower to make the treaty of Hopewell are applicable to this withincreased force.The Constitution was foiled because the Confederation wastoo weak to answer the purposes of the Union. It substituted agovernment in place of a mere confederacy, conferring upon itadditional powers, and further limiting those of the individualStates. Uy the articles of Confederation, the power of Congressto regulate the trade, and manage affairs with the Indians wassubject to a proviso, that " the legislative right of any State withinits own limits should not be infringed." This restriction is theonly gi-ound upon which doubts could ever have been suggestedof the power of the Confederation to enter into treaty stipulations :it gave no countenance, however, to such suggestions, because itwas a limitation upon another gi-ant of power, distinct from thatof establishing peace and making treaties. But even this restrictionis omitted m the Constitution, and Congress are empoweredto regulate commerce with the Indian tribes in unqualified terms.The Constitution vests in the United States the sole and exclusivep.ov/cr of making year and concluding peace. It expresslyprovides, " that no State shall engage in war'" or " enter into anytreaty." Here is an unequivocal relinquishment of the right ofGeorgia to make war upon or treat with the Indians. And whatis the right which it is said devolved upon her, as successor tothe sovereignty of Great Britain ? The right of a discoverer ;that is, a right, as against others, and without their interposition,to attack, and by tbrce subdue the natives ; to make war for thepurpose of conquest. But Georgia covenants, by our fundamentalcompact, not to engage in war for that or any other purpose ;to attack no nation or political complicity.The United States have the sole power of making peace: thiscan be done only by treaty. At Hopewell, in 1785, we made atreaty of peace. Open war bad raged between the United Statesand the Cherokees up to that time. They had been the allies ofGreat Britain, but never had been ours, or m any manner contractedwith us. Was not that treaty rightfully made and obligatory?At Houston, in 1791, we made a treaty of peace aid friendship. —It is so denominated on the face of it. It was the termination ofan actually existing war ; of this there is no doubt. The Chairs40 MR. sprague's speech.mail of the Committee of Indian Affairs, in his written ophiiou of1824, states the fact, that war was raging. The gentleman fromGeorgia says, that his State applied to the United States for aidand protection in that war. The report of the Committee of IndianAffairs now before us declares, that the Cherokees wagedwar against the citizens of the United States. At Houston wethen undeniably made a treaty of peace to terminate an existingwar. The authority was express and exclusive. Are not theUnited States bound? Will they not abide by it.'The 1st Article is — "There shall he perpetual peace and friendshipbetween all the citizens of the United States of America, andall the individuals composing the whole Cherokee nation of Indians."Article 7tli — The United States solemnly guaranty to the Cherokeenation all their lands not hereby ceded'"Article 15th — All animosities tor past grievances shall henceforthcease, and the contracting parties will carry the foregoingtreaty into full execution ivith all good faith and sincerity.''''The question now is, Shall we carry these articles into effectwith any good faith or sincerity ?Will it be pretended, that the United States might make peace,but had no authority to insert such stipulations as those I havequoted ? Sir, the substance of these articles is of the essenceof a treaty of peace. In every contract, each party recognisesthe separate existence of the other ; and a treaty of peace — notatruce, not an armistice, not a temporary cessation of hostilities,but a treaty of peace, in its nature a permanent, enduringcontract — must bind each piety to respect the existence of theother, and never to assail or attempt its destruction — must obviateeach to permit the other to continue that existence, upon its owtt?!T!t'^!'^'; witling fitt.'ick or violence. To attempt to expel themby force, or subjugate or destroy their separate being, is a violationof the compact of peace, and a renewal of the war. In terminatinghostilities, therefore, by their undoubted constitutional ■powers the United States, not only rightfully, but of necessity,embraced such terms as these.But this is not all. The Constitution proceeds still further, andgives to the United States the general right to make treaties, notmerely of peace, but all others. This tower is not oily clearlyand positively conferred on the Union, but expressly inhibited toits several members. It has been repeatedly and continually exercisedin relation to the Indian tribes within the United States,and that by the acquiescence and assent of Georgia herself.I know it is said Georgia protested ; and this has been repeatedand insisted upon in every variety of form, as applicable to boththe treaties, and all the questions which have been presented.Let us examine :The first all(^g<Hl i)rot(^st Alas in Feb., 1786, prior to the treatyof Ilolston. It is the report of a committee, accepted by theHouse of Representatives only. The objections urged therein applyexclusively to the treaty of Hopewell, and must have rested3ni. sprague's speech. 41only on the ground of the resignation, before mentioned, m oneof the Articles of Confederation, and which was omitted in theConstitution.The next protest was in Feb., 1797. It makes no objectionwhatever to the treaty of Houston, and thereby impliedly approvesand assents to it. It protests against two treaties with the Creeksmade at New York and Coleraine, and the intercourse law of theUnited States. The grounds of objection insisted on are, that theintercourse law places theniilitaiy above the civil authority, andprohibits pursuit and retaliation for Indian outrages ; and that theCreeks, by the treaty of Galpliinton, in 1785, confirmed by a subsequenttreaty at Shouldering, had submitted themselves toGeorgia, and become members of the state, and ceded to her atract of land, luliich had been actually organized into a county by thename of Tallassec. And the State protests, " because the treatyof New York, in 1790, after the said cession being acted on constitutionallyerected and laid out in a county, and the lands appropriated,did sever, cut, and lop off the land so ceded before thepower of the federal Constitution existed, and ex post facto declaredthey were vested in, and belonging to, the Creek nation ofIndians ; and because the said intercourse law and treaty ofColeraine have confirmed the same."Their complaint is, substantially, that the United States hadtaken from Georgia lands which luu: " been duly ceded, fairlypaid for, and legally and constitutionally laid out into a county."in conclusion, they " most fervently' solicit a revision of the intercourselaw aud the New York and Coleraine treaties, and requiringa confirmation of the county of Tallassce to the State."And " they most earnestly solicit the assistance of the United Statesto attain the cession of land the treaty of Coleraine, they trust, wasintended to establish." These protestations insist that the treatiesof Galpliinton and Sliouklerbone were valid by reason of the beforehandreservation in the Articles of Confederation ; but nowheredeny, and by implication a<lmit, the general right of theUnited States to make treaties with the Indian tribes, and guarantyto them the possession of their lands.They do not breathe a whisper of election to the treaty ofHouston, of 1791,. or to any of the powers involved in making it,but acquiesce therein.In February, 179(3, by an act of her Legislature, to which 1shall hereafter recur, Georgia expressly declared, that the UnitedStates had the right to make treaties with the Indians — a rightwhich they have continually exercised, and which she has neverquestioned, until this recent controversy arose. Not less thanfourteen treaties have been entered into with this same Cherokeenation since the adoption, of the Constitution ; in 1791, 1792 and1794, by general Washington ; in 1798, by Mr. Adan)s ; one in1804^ two in 1805, one in 1806, and one in 1807, by Mr. Jefferson; three in 1816, by Mr. Madison ; one in 1817, by Mr. Monroe— general Jackson being the negotiator ; and one in 1819, bythe same President — Mr. Calhoun being the negotiator.4*42 MR. sprague's speech.By more that half these treaties, large cessions of land wereobtained, boundaries defined, and the remaining territory, and theprotection of the United States, again and again guarantied to theIndians.Shall Georgia now be permitted to den' their vahditj- ? If aman, seems another in the act of making a deed of his land to athird person, shall stand by in silence, until the conveyance iscompleted, and the grantee has parted with his money, paid theconsideration, Avould any Chancellor, that ever sat in a Court ofEquity, permit that man to reclaim his property, and thus consummatea fraud on the fair purchaser ? Jut suppose that heshall not only thus witness the conveyance perfected and themoney jjaid, but himself' receive the consideration : can he, withthe fruits of the contract in his pocket, lap' his hand upon theproperty, and wrest it from the innocent grantee ? Georgia notonly acquiesced, but actually received lands ceded by the Indians,and for which they obtained our promise of protection. I havein my hand some of her laws disposing of the acquisitions. —The title of one is, " An act to dispose of and distribute thecession of land obtained from the Creek and Cherokee nations ofIndians by the United States, in the several treaties of 10 August,1814; 8 July, 1817 ; and 22 January, 1818."And of another, " An act to dispose of the territory lately acquiredof the Cherokee Indians, by a treaty held by the HonorableJohn C. Calhoun, at the city of Washington, on the 27th day ofFebruary, 1819." There are others of similar tenor.And now, retaining these acquisitions, hoping the proceeds ofthese treaties in her hands, she declares that they are not valid ;thus, at the same moment, Finding the Indians by their stipulations,and denying them the benefit of om-s.She has not only thus declared the right of the United Statesto make treaties, and assented to them Avhen made, but has re-I^eatedly urged that they should be entered into for the purposeof obtaining further acquisitions for her benefit; and, even as lateas the year 1825, contended that the treaty of the Indian Springswith the Creeks was obligatory, and should be carried into effect.And it was not until the Indians had firmly refused to assent tofurther cessions, and it was perceived that no more lands could beacquired by negotiation, that the doctrine arose, Which denies tothe United States the right to make these compacts.Mr. President : What have the Senate heard to obviate the forceof the facts and arguments which I have adduced ? What answershave been given ? I \v\\\ advert to them all.And finest, as to the acts and acquiescence of Georgia, we have thereply in the report of the committee, that as she protested againstthe treaty of Hopewell, made m 1785, "no inference can be drawnto her disadvantage, from her si7e?Kc, or from any thing she mayhave sail in relation to any subsequent treaty, because, in each ofthem, a change was made, by which a ]portion of her tenitoiy andjurisdiction was restored to her, and thus her condition renderedbetter," &c. Who does not perceive that, loiter this form ofMR. sprague's speech. 43words of restoring — what she never possessed ; but which belongedto the Cherokees, before she had a being — the substantial, realcause of her assent is alleged to be the benefits ivh'ich she received!Yes, Sir; she did receive the fruits of these solemn contracts; bythe establishing of peace and additions to her territories, in 1791 ;by the cessions of 1798, 1804, 1805, 1806, 1807, 1810, 1817, and 1819.And shall we be told that, because it was lor her interest to besilent, because she was receiving the consideration of" the compacts,therefore she now, after 20 years' assent, is under no obligation toabide by them !The Hon. Chairman, iji his opening speech, assigned severalreasons why the United States could not constitutionally form suchtreaties. The first was, that " the creature could not possess powerto destroy its creator." This expression is calculated to misleadthe judgment, because it refers the mind at once to the relation inwhich we frail and feeble mortals stand to our Omnipotent Maker ;and it would seem to be just as true to say — the creature cannotdiminish the power of its creator. The gentleman applies it tothe general government, as the work of the several States. Is ittrue that it cannot — that it does not, take any power from itsseveral menibei-s .^ The argument is, that if the Union can secureto the Indians any portion of uieir territory by treaty, it may cedeaway a whole State. This would, indeed, as the gentleman mustadmit, be a gross and palpable abuse of authority. His reasoning,then, must be, that the United States cannot possess any powerwhich, by pei-version, may be exerted to the destruction of oneof its members. Can they, then, make any treaty with a foreignnation? If so, there is the same danger of wrongfully transfer-ringa State. Can they make war ? It would be the readiest meansof lopping oft' a member by leaving it defenceless. Can they organize,discipline, and call forth the militia, and control the wholephysical strength of the nation ? Sir, these are ])owei-s expresslyinserted in the Constitution, and they are not to be argued out ofit, by apprehensions of extravagant possible abuses.The general government was formed by the States — and thecreature, says the gentleman, cannot have power to destroy any oneof its creators. The state governments. Sir, were formed by individuals.If any of these should be guilty of a capital offence,night he not say, in the language of the Chairman, You cannottake my life ; it is impossible, in the nature of tiling, that thecreature can have power to destroy one of its creators.Again : It is argued that the existence of an Indian communitywithin the chartered limits of a State is consistent with " a republicanform of governments'' as guarantied, by the Constitution,to every State.This argument has been much relied on. It was advanced bythe Secretary of War, repeated by the Committee, and reiterated inthe speech of the Chairman. If this be so, Mr. President, a mostunexpected result follows ; it is — that Georgia has never yet had arepublican form of government — for there has never been a momentwhen such tribes did not exist within her borders. At thetime of the adoption of the Constitution, this same Cherokee MR. sprague's speech.tion was inucli more numerous, and held sway over a much widerregion, than at the present time. Nay, the Constitution itself confinethe pre-existing treaty of Hopewell, which recognised andguarantee the separate existence of the tribe ; and Which is nowcontended to be incompatible with that fundamental compact. Isthe existence of a body politic, which the Legislature cannot destroy,necessarily incompatible with a republican Inn of government? How is it with Dartmouth College, in New Hampsliii-e,or the chartered cities of other States ?Another proposition derived from the same elevated source, andurged with equal vehemence heine, is that these treaties cannot bevalid, because the Constitution declares that " no ntw State shallbe formed or erected within the jurisdiction of any other State,without the consent of the Legislature" thereof.Sir, no one proposes to create a ntw State, but to continue anold tribe, or State, if you so please to denominate it. It is to keepfaith with a political community more ancient than Georgia herself;it is to preserve, not to form anew. Here, again, I would observe,that this nation of Cherokees was as much a State at thetime of the adoption of the Constitution as now, and had muchgreater poAver, and more extensive dominion ; and that the treatyof Hopewell, which, this argument insists, Ibnned a new Statesince the Constitution, and in violation thereof, was made twoyears before its adoption, and was confirmed and sanctioned by itWe are next told, that the Constitution recognises the right ofthe respective State legislation-es to extend their laws over, andannihilate these communities, by that clause in the first article,which provides that an enumeration of inhabitants as a basis ofrepresentation shall be made, "excluding Indians not taxed."This provision undoubtedly implies, that there coidd be individualIndians subject to taxation, and therefore to be counted ; italso expressly declares that there might be those within a Statenot taxed."There may have been, nay, there were, in some of the States,individual natives voluntarily residing within the white settlements,.separate from any tribe, and freely subjecting themselves to thelocal laws. There were those, too, whose nation, <',s a body, haddisappeared ; and because these persons had, of their own accord,thus sought the State jurisdiction, does it follow that it could beextended over Indian nations, who had always resisted it, andwith whom, at the moment this clause was written, and the Constitutionformed, the United States had a treaty quarantine themagainst such taxation, and every oder exercise of Stale authorityover them? IJy what imaginable process would these words,,"Indians not taxed," produce the magical effect of milling thetreaty of Ho])ewell, then existing in full force.'Let us substitute the word aliens for Indians. The clausewould then exclude "aliens not taxed." Will it be contendedthat foreigners existing as a nation, with whom we had treaties,as such, would be subject to the laws of a State ? Would it notapply exclusively to the aliens who had separated themselvesfrom their nation, and mingled with our citizens .''MR. sprague's speech. 45As a last resort, and to me, Mr. President, it seems a desperateone, it has been earnestly contended Ijy the gentlemen fromTennessee, Alabama, and Georgia, (Messrs. White, McKinley, andForsyth,) that we cannot constitutionally make any treaty withany Indian nation within the United States — that the expresspower to make " treaties" does not embrace compacts or agi-elementswith such communities.Wherever, Sir, the relation of peace and war can exist, theUnited States must, of necessity, possess the right to make a treatyof peace. Tliat this relation may exist with these native tribeshas never yet been doubted, and will not at this day be questioned.No one will have the assurance, in the face of all history, in defianceof what is known by the whole world, to declare that ourcontests with the aboriginal nations are on their part insurrections,rebellions, subjecting them to be tried and executed as traitors.The Secretary of War will not say so, for he told the Cherokees,in Api-il last, "Your people were at enmity with the United States,and waged a war upon our frontier settlements ; a durable peacewas not entered into with you until 1791." The Committee andits Chairman (J\Ir. White) will not tell us so, for their report, accompanyingthis bill, declares that the Cherokees waged a waragainst the citizens of these States, prior to the treaty of Houston,in 1791. Rebellion! — by those who never owed allegiance, andwith whom, ever since our national existence, we have either hadopen war or subsisting treaties !But, independent of this power of peace and war, why does notthe general authority to make treaties embrace those with theIndians ? Gentlemen content themselves with a positive and earnestdenial.The word treaties say they, ui the Constitution, does not meancompacts or contracts with. Indian tribes. Why not ? Did notthose who formed and adopted the Constitution so understand it ?To answer this question, we must ascertain how that word wasused, and what were the ideas attached to it at the tune, and anteriorto its insertion in that instrument. This rule of constructionis the foundation of all science. When any term is used byan author, it is understood to carry with it the ideas which hehas previously affixed to it ; that he denotes by it what he alwayshas done. .Hence, in the science of law-when the student hasascertained what a writer means by the words fee simple, or larceny,if he subsequently finds those words used by the same author,he attaches to them the same meaning.These contracts with aboriginal communities have been denominatedtreaties from the first settlement of this country. It hasbeen their peculiar and appropriate name, without even an aliasdictus. Great Britain made treaties with the Indians ; the severalcolonies fornif^d many, and gave them the same appellation. TheContinental Congress, from the time it first assembled, until it wasmerged in the present national government, uniformly called themtreaties. They did so in 1775,1776, 1778, 1788, 1784, 1785, 1786,1787, 1788, and even to the day of the formation and adoption ofthe Constitution. We find them repeatedly and particularly MK. sprague's speech.toned in July, August and October, 1787 ; the Constitution beingformed in September of tlje same year.Nor is this all. In the articles of Confederation, power wasgiven to make treaties. It had been repeatedly exercised inestablishing our relations with Indian tribes ; particularly theDelawares, the Six Nations, the Cherokees, the Choctaws, theChickasaws, and the Siiawnees; and on the first of September,1788, was issued the proclamation of Congress and of generalWashington to enforce the treaty of Hopewell. "The word treaties, thus invariably known and used, andwhich had received a practical construction under the Confederation,was inserted by the same great men in the Constitutionof the United States. Could any one doubt its meaning?Did Georgia misunderstand it ? She had herself jade treaties,with all the forms of negotiation, through commissioners fitlyempowered, in 1773, 1/83, and 1785. They were so denominatedby her at the time and ever afterwards. On the 3d ofAugust, 1787, a motion was made by Mr. Few, delegate inCongress from Georgia, seconded by Mr. Blount from NorthCarolina, to take measures to "explain and confirm all formertreaties'' with the Creek Indians.There is as much evidence that this Avoid was intended toembrace conventions with such communities as the Creeks oi*Cherokees, as those with transatlantic nations, such as Franceand Sjwin.Contemporary exposition has always been deemed of greatforce in settling even the most difficult questions of constitutionallaw. Practice and precedent, too, have often been consideredas decisive authority. Mr. Garrison, who has, with so nmchjustice, been denominated the great constitutional lawyer ofrliis country, uri la;T;.I, in a message to Congress, that the questionof the constitutionally of the Bank of the United Stateshad been so settled by the sanction of the different departmentsof the government, that it was no longer to be agitated ;and yet orde one bank had then been chartered. If his argusment had, in that instance, any force, it is here irresistible. IFrom the organization of the government down to this very 'session of Congress, the practice has been unbroken and invariable.We find these treaties made in 1789, 1790, 1791, 1792,1794, 179.5, 179G, 1797, 1798, and almost, if not (piite, everyyear since. I have counted no less than one hundred andtwenty-four Indian treaties formed under the present Constitution,being more than three for each year. If authority andpractice can settle any question, this is at an end.In 1790, general Washington delivered a speech to the"Seneca Indians, some extracts from which I will now read:I, the President of the United States, by my own mouth, and by awritten speech signed ivith my own hand, and sealed with the seal of,the United States, speak to the Seneca nation.The general government only has the power to treat with the Indiannations, and any treaty formed and held without its authority willnot be binding.MR. sprague's speech. 47Here, then, is the security for the remainder of your lands. No Statenor person can purchase your lands, unless at some public treaty heldunder the authority of the United States. The general governmentwill never consent to your being defrauded ; but it will protect you inall your just rights.Hear well, and let it*fe heard by every person in your nation, thatthe President of the United States declares, that the general governmentconsiders itself bound to protect you in all the lands secured toyou by the treaty of Fort Stanwix, the 22d of October, 1784, exceptingsuch parts as you may since have fairly sold to persons properly authorizedto purchase of you.Again —But your great object seems to be the security of your remainingand I have therefore upon this point meant to be sufficientlystrong and clear.That in future you cannot be defrauded of your lands. That youpossess he right to sell, and the right of refusing to sell, your lands.That therefore the sale of your lands in future will depend entirelyupon yourselves.But that, when you may find it for your interest to sell any parts ofyour lands, the United States must be present by their agent, andwill be your security, that you shall not be defrauded in the bargainyou shall make.^ You now know that all the lands secured to you by the treaty ofFort Stanwix, excepting such parts as you may since have fairly sold,are yours, and that only your own acts can convey them away. Speaktherefore your wishes on the subject of tilling the ground. The UnitedStates will be happy to afford you every assistance in the onlybusiness which will add to you numbers and happiness.The United States will be true and faithful to their engagements.Given at Philadelphia, 29th December, 1790.GEORGE WASHINGTON.By the President :Thomas Jefferson.By command of the President of)the United States of America : 5H. Knox, Secretary for the Department of War."The United States will be true and faithful to their engagements."Such was the solemn declaration of the father of hiscountry, in the infancy of this republic. Heaven grant thathis sacred promises may be kept, and Iii confident predictionverified. The question is now before us. No sophistry canevade, no ingenuity can elude it. Will "the United States betrue and faithful to their engagements," or false and treacherous?The Cherokees present this solemn interrogatory, and wemust return a deliberate response. It seems almost as if theircase had been formed for the purpose of determining whetherit be possible to bind this nation by Its plighted faith.I have already referred to our repeated engagements by thesages of the revolution, in the Congress of 1785; by Washingtonand the constellation of brilliant names around him, in1791, 1792, and 1794; by the elder Adams and his cabinet in1798 ; by Mr. Jefferson, in four successive treaties, in 1804,48 MR, sprague's speech.1805, 1806, and 1807; by Mr. Madison, in several formed in181(J; by Mr. Moin-oe, in 1817, general Jackson himself subscribingit with his own hand as commissioner; and by anotherin 1819, to which Mr. Calhoun aiSxed his name, as negotiator.All these treaties were ratified by the Senate, and sanctionedby every department of the government.In 1794, that greatest and best of men, whose name we professso nuich to venerate, and which should be, of all others,the highest authority to this Senate and to the nation, delivereda speech to the Chiefs and Warriors of the Cherokee nation,in which, speaking of the lanius upon Cumberland, he says:"These have been confirmed by two treaties of Hofjewell, in1785, and Hoiston, in 1791." Again — "The treaties which havebeen made cannot be altered. The boundaries which havebeen mentioned must be marked and established, so that nodispute shall happen, nor any white people cix)ss over theme''In 1795, the governor of Tennessee, upon which State it isnow asserted these treaties are not obligatory, wrote a letter toPresident Washington, in order to "prevent infractions ofthem," by encroachments upon the lands of the Indians. Andas late as 1824, the gentleman from Tennessee, who reportedthis bill, (Mr. White,) gave an able and elaborate opinion inwriting, in which he strenuously asserts and maintains theirvalidity, and the rights of the Indians. He says,The Cherokees are to be considered as a nation, a communityhaving a country distinctly marked out, and set apart for their use ;that their interest is as permanent and fixed in it as the pledge andthe /a/'A of the United States can make it; inasmuch as they havesolemnly guarantied it to them as a nation, without any limitation oftime."With reference to the treaty of Hoiston, he says, they are"to be viewed as a nation ]possessing all the ]powers of otherindependent nations, which are not expressly, or by necessaryimplication, surrendered up by that treaty." And again, "theyhave not surrendered the [xiwer of making municipal recitationsfor their own internal government."But now that we, the United States, are called upon to "betrue and faithful to these engagements," it is contended thatthey are not obligatory ; and, in order to sustain that ]position,it is insisted that the Constitution gives no power to make treatieswith Indian nations, within the United States, althoughevery President of the United States, and the members of hiscabinet, every administration and all the great men by whomit was surrounded! and sustained, have formed and establishedsuch Indian treaties.Every Senate of the United States, and, I believe, everymember of every Senate, have ratified and confirmed such Indiantreaties. Every House of Representatives of the UnitedStates, and, I believe, every member thereof, have affirmed andsanctioned them, by passing laws for their due execution, payingfrom year to year the annuities secured by them, andmaking appropriations to amiable i*ie President to form otherMR. SPRAGUE S SPEECH. 49treaties. At this very session, the Senate has ratified newtreaties ; and, during the present month, we have made an appropriationto enable the President to form anutJier, with thetribes in Indiana. While that bill was under discussion, anamendment was proposed, prohibiting the use of any part ofthe money therein granted, in sent presents to the Chiefs ; andit was insisted by the gentlemen from Tennessee, Louisiana,and Illinois, (Messrs. Grundy, Livingston, and Kane,) that sucha proviso, merely restricting the use of money which Congresswas granting, would trench upon the high, independent, constitutionalpower of the President in negotiating treaties. Nay,the second section of the bill noir under consideration, providesfor the removal of " any tribe or nation of Indians, now residingwithin the hits of any of tJje States or territories, andwith which the United States have existing treaties," — and yetwe are told, by the chairman, that such treaties cannot exist —that they are no treaties.It is in effect asserted, that every President and every Senatehave been guilty of usurpation in extending the treaty-makingpower beyond its legitimate objects ; for if these contracts arenot treaties, within the true meaning of the Constitution, theycould be made only by the authority of Congress. But thePresident and Senate alone — the treaty-making powers havealways negotiated them, ratified them, and by proclamation announcedthem to the nation, as the supreme law of the land.Every State legislature, and the whole people, have heardthese annunciations, and looked on, during all these proceedings,ill silent acquiescence.Even in 1798, when all the acts of the general government,and particularly those of the executive, were scrutinized withthe utmost rigor, it was never suggested, even in Virginia,where the discussions were most animated, that there had, inthis respect, been any irregularity. But now, upon the pressureof an exigency, it is discovered, for the first time, that allhas been wrong. The present occasion has brought with itnew and peculiar lights, by which gentlemen now perceivewhat was in the minds and intentions of the framers of theConstitution, better than they did themselves. They were ignorantof their own work. The venerated fathers of the republic,and all the high and honored names, who have presidedover its destinies, have been involved in deep darkness, andwandered in gross error !I have thus, Mr. President, endeavored to present my viewswith respect to the claims of the State of Georgia. Whether[we regard original principles of international law as applicableto the right of discovery — or the express powers conferred byache Articles of Confederation — or the confirmation of pre-existingtreaties, by the adoption of the Constitution — or the authorityvested by that instrument in the general government,lind the renunciation of powers by particular States — the invariablepractice and usage of the Union, and the acts, acquiescence,and assent of Georgia herself— it is manifest that weI50 MR. sprague's speech.are bound to perform our crigageiiients to the Indians, and areunder no incompatible and paramount obligations to that State.But let us now, lor the sake of the argument, make the violentsupposition, that the pretensions ot Georgia are well founded,and that the United States cannot rightfully fulfil theirstipulations as against iicr. In that case, the States of Alabamaand Mississippi would stand en very different ground.Their claims have been mingled and blended with those of theelder sister, as if they were precisely the same ; and hers havebeen put Forward as the only subjects of discussion, when, intruth, there is a broad line of distinction, which ought to bemarked and remembered. For the sake of distinctness andbrevity, I shall speak of Alabama alone.Tt is conceded on all hands, as a fundamental proposition,that the United States arc bound to fulfil their engagements tothe Cherokees specifically, except when prevented by incompatibleobligations, prior in point of lime.Now, Sir, the State of Alabama did not exist until the year1819; when she voluntarily came into the Union alter the fifteentreaties with this nation had been previously establishedand proclaimed as the supreme law of the land.But it is said that Alabama was formed from territory' oncebelonging to Georgia, and succeeded to all her rights. Withoutstopping to examine the difficulties attending such a supposedtransmission of a right to resist treaties, it is sufficientto say, that, by thecomjjact of 18G2, Georgia ceded to the UnitedStates all her "right, title, and claim" "to the jurisdictionand soil" of ail the territory now constituting Alabama andMississippi. The whole right of Georgia, whatever it was,thus became vested in the general government, and so remaineduntil 1819 ; during which time not less than eight of thesetreaties were made. Who could then contest their validity ?Are our treaties valid with the nations in Florida, Arkansasand Michigan? Can we enter into engagements with anytribes within the boundaries of the United States, even beyondthe Rocky Mountains, or any where upon this continent?Can we make the solent guaranty proposed by this bill ? Ifso, we are legally constrained by our promises to the Indiansof Alabama, made before the existence of that State.But this is not all. Still another insuperable difficulty presentsitself to her claims to legislate over and destroy the Indiannations.The following Article is a part of the fundamental law tcwhich Alabama owes her being, and without which she cannotexist :The utmost good faith shall always be observed towards the Indians; their lands and property shall never be taken from them withouttheir consent ; and in (heir property, rights, and liberty, the]never shall be invaded or disturbed, unless in just and lawful war.authorized by Congress; hut laivsfoimded in justice and humaiiiti»hall,froni time to time, be made, for preventing wrongs being donto them, and for preserving peace andfricjidship with thei7i."iMR. sprague's speech. 51This was originally a part of the 4th Article of the Ordinancerespecting the Northwestern Territory, and was, by express reference,incorporated into the 1st Article of the Compact of 1802,and made a fundamental and perpetual condition in the Act ofCongress which provided for the admission of Alabama.What is the answer to all this ? We have it from the gentlemanfrom Alabama (Mr. M'Kinley). The compact of 1802, sayshe, was unconstitutional ; Georgia could not transfer to the UnitedStates either soil or jurisdiction.If this be so, the first consequence is, that the dispute betweenthat State and the general government, respecting the ownershipof the crown lands obtained by conquest, which that compactwas supposed to have happily put to rest forever, by mutual andreciprocal cessions, could never I)e settled !In the next place — that the combined powers of the State andof the Union cannot do that, under the Constitution, which themembers individually might have done without the Constitution.It is an attribute of complete sovereignty to be able to convey andreceive territory. It is insisted that this attribute, as between theStates, is annihilated — although all powers not granted are re-seized to the members. I will not say that such an effect couldnot be produced by the Constitution ; but it is at least so extremelyimprobable, that those who contend for it, in any particular instance,should be required to show it clearly, which has not beendone.It is insisted by the gentleman, that no State can be subject tothe restraining condition of the Ordinance refer-ed to, because itis inconsistent with her constitutional equality with the othermembers of the Union.That Ordinance was established in July, 1787. It declaresthat " The following articles shall be considered as articles ofcompact between the original States and the people and Statesof said territory, and forever remain unalterable, unless by commonconsent." Then succeeds an article embracing the clausebefore read, and which was incorporated into the compact of 1802.1 The Ordinance subsequently declares, that "The said memory,I and the States which may be formed therein, shall forever remaina part of this confederacy."This Ordinance and all its provisions were affirmed and establishedby the adoption of the Constitution, and thus that instrumentitself contemplated that all the States, to be thereafter fannednorthwest of the Ohio, should be forever subject to thoseconditions; by v.diicli it is now contended, no one could ever beconstitutionally restrained !It is insisted by the gentleman from Alabama, (Mr. M'Kinley,)'that Georgia could not transfer soil and jurisdiction to the UnitedStates ; that the compact of 1802, attempting to do so, was unconstitutionaland void ; and that the tract of country, which it wasintended to convey, remained a part of that State until the year;;i819.If the gentleman's doctrine is correct, this tract of country remainsa part of Georgia still, she having never conveyed it.52 MR. sprague's speech.Another consequence, Mr. President, would flow from thisdoctrine, which I shoukl exceedingly deplore ; it is. Sir, that Alabamais not a member of this Union ! By the Constitution, no newState can be formed or admitted into the Union within the limitsof an old one, witlioiit the consent of the latter. Now, Sir, Georgiahas never consented to the admission of Alabama, except bythe transfer of soil and jurisdiction by virtue of the compact of1802. If that conti dance was inoperative, no consent has beengiven. If that coini)act was absolutely void, as the gentlemancontends, it is a legal )nullity, and he can hold no rights under it.Congress, too, have never given their consent, except upon thebasis of the bindljig efficacy of that compact, and upon the expresscondition that its requisitions should be the fundamentallaw of the new State. But, says the gentleman, Congress had nopower to jiass such a law. If so, the Act respecting the admissionof Alabama was unconstitutional and void, and neither creatednor admitted any new State.The ingenious gentleman has reasoned so profoundly unionconstitutional law, that he has argued himself and his colleagueout of their seats in this Senate ! — Now, Sii-, against this I mostseriously protest — they cannot be spared— we need the aid oftheir talents and experience.How will the gentleman escape from the consequences whichI have deduced ? Will he contend that the compact and the lawwere valid and not valid at the same time ? That they conferredrights, but could not impose obligations upon his State ? Evenif such an extraordinary position were assumed, how would itaffect the present question ? If he can infuse any degree of vitalityinto that which Alas dead before its birth, if he can make thatcompact efficacious as the consent of Georgia to Alabama's becominga State, woidd it not also be effectual as her consent thatthe United States should exercise jurisdiction over the tenitoiy,so far as to make treaties with the Indian tribes ? If, then, thegentleman will admit that Georgia assented to any thing, by virtueof that compact, she consented tq the formation of these treaties,and thus they v/cre valid by her authority before Alabamawas brought into being.As a dernier resort, the gentleman insists that the tiaie constructionof the language of the Ordinance gives all the right over theIndians ibr which his State contends, because the latter clauserequires that " laws" — " shall from time to time be made for preventing;wrongs tins; done to them, and for preserving peace andfriendship ^itii them ;" that is, laws restraining the whites, ourown citizens, iron encroaching upon the natives, and thereby endangeringthe jirtMic tranquillity.If ]elaine or Ncav York should pass laws for "preventingwrongs being done to" the Canadians, " and for preserving peaceand friendship) with them" — would that give jurisdiction over theBritish provinces ? But let us read the whole clause, the trueconstruction of A^liich confers this unlimited power.The utmost good faiili shall always be obseiTcd toward theIndians ;" v/l.ich means that we nay violate all our engage*MR. sprague's speech. 53merits at pleasure ! — " their lands and property shall never betakenfrom them without their consent ;" that is, both may betakenby violence against their utmost resistance ! — " in theirproperty, rights, and liberty, they shall never be invaded or disturbed,unless in just and lawful wars authorized by Congress ;"there shall be laws for " preventing wrongs being done to themand for presei-vuig peace and friendship with them ;" the trueconstruction of all which is — that a State may make war uponthem at pleasure — deprive them of their lands — and annihilatetheir nation ! To such arguments are gentlemen of great abilitycompelled to resort ! I dismiss this topic, and proceed to another.The rights of the natives, both natal and conventional, havebeen strenuously denied. What right, it is asked, have the Indiansto the lands they occupy ? I ask, in reply, What right havethe English or the Finch, the Spaniards or the Russians, to thecountries they inhabit ?But it is insisted that the orig';nai claim of the natives has beendetested by the superior right of discovery.I have ah-lady slioAvn, that this gives no ground of claim asagainst the discovered ; that it is a mutual understanding or conventionalarrangement entered into by the nations of Europe,amongst themselves, to define and regulate their respective claims ,as discoverers, in ostler to prevent interference and contests witheach other ; all agreeing, that the sovereign who should first finda new country should l)e left without interference from them, todeal with it and its inhabitants, according to his ability and hisconscience.But we are told, that grants from the king are the highest title,,and have always been relied upon as such. True — as againstother grantees tom the crown, or against the government itself;but not as to the natives. If such a title gives any just claim asagainst them, then they are bound to yield to it ; for to everyright appertains a corresponding obligation.Were the aborigines bound to yield to such pretensions ? Supposethat, more than two centuries ago, when, in unbrokenstrength, they held resistless sway over this whole western world,a royal patentee, with his handful of followers, just landed on,these shores, should have foimd himself in the midst of a powerfulIndian nation. The council fire is lighted up, and sachemsand warriors are assembled around it. He presents himself, andsays to them —This country is no longer yours. You must leave the forestswhere you hunt, and the valleys where you live. All the landwhich you can see from the highest mountain is mine. It has.been given me by the king of the white men across the waters.Here is his grant — how can you resist so fair a title .'"If they deigned any other reply than the war-whoop, theiri^hief might say —i " The Great Spirit, who cause the trees to rise from thefroid toward the heavens, and maketh the rivers to descend,from the mountains to the valleys — who created the earth itselfind made both the red man and the white man to dwell thereof — ^5 *54 MR. sprague's speech.gave this land to us and to our ancestors. You say you have agrant from your king beyond the waters — v^^e have a grant fromthe King of kings, \v]io reigns in heaven — by this title our fathershave held it for uncounted generations, and by this title their sonswill defend it."It has been strenuously argued, that the over-flowing nations ofEurope had a just claim to the occupancy of some portion of thevacant lands of the aborigines for their own subsistence.The excessive population of China, and of Holland, have, atthis day, the same ground of claim against the United States*May they, ihcreibi-e, drive us even from our cities and villages,and take all our territory by force ? — We pennit them to comeand possess, if they submit to our laws, and pay us lor the soil.The Indians have been more liberal, having ceded both soil andsovereignty to huiivlreds of millions of acres. The Cherokeeshave no more to spare : ilicy need the residue for themselves.Shall they be permitted to retain it ?To avoid, as far as possible, all questionable ground, I at presentcontend only that the Indians have a right to exist as a com-dimity, and to possess some shot of earth upon which to sustainthat existence. That spot is their native land. If they have noclaim there, they have no right any where. Georgia asserts thatthe lands belong to her — she must, and she will have them — evenby violence, if other means fail. This is a declaration of a rightto drive the Cherokees from the face of the earth ; lor if she isnot bound to pt omit them to remain, no nation or people arebound to receive them. To that for which I now contend, theIndians possess not only a natural, but also a legal and conventionalright. These taro grounds of claim have been blended andconfounded.The rights which the United States have claimed With respectto the ten-story of the aborigines, have been twofold ; pre-empireand reversionary — a right to purchase, to the exclusion of allothers, and to succeed the natives, should tlicy voluntarily leavethe country or become extinct.It will at once be perceived, that this is a right to exclvidcthere from interference, biu not to coerce the Indians. It leavesto them the ]perpetual undisturbed occupancy. They cannot indeedtransfer their country to others — but this does not impairtheir title, although it may diminish its value in the market. Itstill belongs to them and their heirs forever. If a State should,by law, prohibit its citizens from making sale of their lands withoutthe assent of the executive, would it destroy every man'stitle ? Nay, the laws do now prevent conveyances to aliens.The right claimed is merely to exclude all others from purchasingof the aborigines. It will be divested of much of its appearanceof harshness towards them by recurring to its origin. Itwas the primitive agreement or mutual understanding betweenexploring nations, that whichever should first find a new country,should alone possess the privilege of dealing with the natives ;and upon this ground the discoverer exclude others from becomingpurchasers. He had the right of pre-emption. ThisMR. sprague's speech. 55agreement trenched not upon the title of the aborigines ; and asto its affecting the value of their lands, by preventing competitionin the purchase, there would have been no purchaser but for thediscovery.There is no mystery in the international law of discovery. Sofaras it relates to this subject, it is the same as if five or six persons,being about to go in search of sugjjf lands in South America,should mutually engage that they would not interfere with eachother in their purchases. Such agreement would do no wrongto the original owner.The reversionary claim, as it may be denominated — althoughin strictness that cannot Revert to another, which always belongedto the present possessor — is the necessary consequence of the exclusionof others idiom [pin-chasing. It is merely a right of successionto lands of the Indians, when they shall have become extinct,or have voluntarily abandoned th.-.-m by emigration ; as the propertyof individuals soiii-.-times escheats to the government for thewant of heirs.The right of the aborigines to the perpetual and exclusive occupancyof all their lands, has been always recognised and affirmedby the United States. It was respected by Great Britain before\he revolution; as appears by the royal proclamation of 1763, inwhich all persons are commanded " forth with to remove themselves"from lands, which, not having been ceded to or purchasedby us, are still received to the said Indians ; and, after reciting thatindividuals laid practised fraud upon the natives, forbids privatepei-sons from making pin-chases, to the end that the Indians maybeconvinced our justice; and provides, that if the said Indiansshould be inclined to dispose of the said lands, " the same shall bepurchased only for us, in our anie, at some public meeting orassembly of the said Indians, to be held for that purpose."That right was recognised by the Confederation ; as appears bythe whole tenor of their proceedings ; particularly their treaties,by which they purchased a part and guarantied the remainder ;by the report of a Committee in August, 1787, which declares thatthe Indians have just claims to all occupied by and not ]purchasedof them — and the proclamation of Congress in September, 1788)which has been already referred to.That, under omnipresent Constitution, the rights of the nativesand the relation in which they stand to the United States are suchas I have described, is clearly manifested — ^by the Speech ofPresident Washington to the Senecas in 1790, from which I havealready presented some extracts — and by the following explicitand deliberate letter of Mr. Jefferson, written to the Secretary ofWar in 1791—I am of opinion, that government should firmly maintain thisground : that the Indians have a right to the occupation of their lands,independent of the States within whose chartered lines they happento be ; that, until they cede them by treaty, or other transactionsequivalent to a treaty, no act of a State can give a right to suchlands; that neither under the present Constitution, nor the ancientConfederation, had any State or persons a right to treat with the56 MR. sprague's speech.Indians, without the consent of the general government ; that thatconsent has never been given to any treaty for the cession of thelands in question ; that the government is determined to exert all itsenergy fur the patronage and protection of the rights of the Indians, andthe preservation of peace between the United States and them; andthat, if any settlements are made on lands not ceded by them, withoutthe previous consent of the United States, the government will thinkitself bound, not only to declare to the Indians that such settlementsare without the authority or protection of the United States, but to removethem also Ins the public force."The same is also manifest ley the intercourse law of 1790, forbiddingall encroachments, by citizens of the United States, uponthe " territory belonging to any tribe or nation of Indians — by manyother statutes, jjai-ticulurly that of March, lbs — by all the treatiesof purchase and cession — all the laws to carry them into effectand pay the consideration — and rJl the acts tor enabling the executiveto extinguish Indian titles."The gentleman I'rom Georgia (Mr. Forsyth) has referred to thecorrespondence at Client to sustain his denial of rights to the Indiantribes. He relied upon the views of the American commissionersin schelling the claims of the British. As it is sometimesmore satisfactory to read lor om-selves, than to tale theconstruction of others, permit, me. Sir, to present to you an extractfrom that correspondence.Under this system the Indians residing within the United Statesare so far independent, that they live under their own customs, andnot under the laws of the United States ; that their rights upon thelands where they inhabit, or hunt, are secured to them by boundariesdefined in amicable treaties between the United States and themselves; and when these boundaries are varied, it is also by amicableand voluntary treaties, by which they receive from the United Statesample compensation for every right they have to the lands ceded.Such is the relation between them and the United States : that relationis not now created for the first time, nor did it originate withthe treaty of Grenville."And, subsequently, the treaty of Grenville was merely declamatoryof the public law — on principles previously and universallyrecognised. To this. Sir, was subscribed the luunes of all our commissionersat Fluent.The gentleman from Alabama, (Mr. M'Kinley,) to show that thenatives had no title to the soil, cited the case of Johnson andMcintosh, decided by the Supreme Court of the United States,and reported in the 8t!i of Wheaton.To see how precisely that case sustains my positions, let me.read a few very short extracts idiom the opinion of the court, asdelivered by Chief Justice 3Iai-shall. It declares that the rightof the United States, or the several States, is subject to the Indianright of occupancy ; that the original inhabitants are the rightfuloccupants of the soil, " ninth a legal as ivell as a just ctahn to retainpossession of it, and to vse it according to their own discretion Andagain, " it has 7i€vcr been contended that the Indian title amountedto nothing. Their right of possession has never been questioned.''^MR. sprague's speech 57Georgia herself has recognised those established rights of thenatives, and the relation they bear to the general government.By a law, passed in 179(3, respecting the vacant lands withinher chartered limits, she held the foUowhig language : " the territorytherein mentioned is hereby declared to be the sole propertyof the State, subject onlij to the right of treaty of the United States,to enable the Stiitc to purchase under its pre-emption right the Indiantitle to ti jc same." — A most pregnant act of legislation. Itexpressly admits the Indian title — that the claim of the State isonly to purchase under its pre-emption right — that even this shecould not do, unless enabled by the United States — that the UnitedStates had the right of treaty with the Indians ; and that the claimsof Georgia were subject to that right.In the compact of 1802, she stipulated, by reference to anArticle of the Ordinance before mentioned, for the inviolability ofthe lands, property, rights and liberty of the Indians, upon theterritory relinquished ; and recognised their just claim to lands, inthat which was retained, by the Article which binds the UnitedStates at the ov\ti expense, to extinguish the Indian title thereto,as early as it coidd be done peaceably and upon reasonableterms.The titles of the Acts which I have read, and several others,speak of the lauds therein disposed of as " acquired," " obtained,"from the " Creek and Cherokee nations," by the treaties heldby the United States.Even the act of December last contains a plenary admissionthat the lands in question were never before subject to her jurisdiction.A part of the title is " to extend the laws of this Stateover" — "the territory now occupied by the Cherokees." The6th section expressly extends the laws of the State over the sameand the inhabitants thereof. Sir, does not the legislation ofevery State, of itself, operate upon all the country within itsjurisdiction ? The laws of Georgia were not before limited toany parts of the State ; they were general — they covered thewhole ; and are now — extended over the residue !We have heard a great deal in this debate of the right ofCONQUEST ; and are told that it is always recognised as valid bythe judicial tribunals.True, Sir, by those of the conqueror. How can they do otherwise? Suppose that Congress should now declare a war forthe sole purpose of wresting Canada from Great Britain, andshould succeed ; could our own courts question this exercise ofpolitical ])ovver, and refuse to sustain our jurisdiction over thecountry, however iniquitous the acquisition ? And if in thisgovernment, where the political sovereign is under the restraintsof the Constitution, the courts cannot interfere, how could theyin Europe, where this doctrine had its origin ? There the legislativeand political powers are unlimited. Even in England,the parliament is legally omnipotent ; and who ever heard of ajudicial court undertaking to annul any of its enactments?Whatever may be the acquiescence of other nations in theexercise of power by a conqueror, it is no ground of just claim58 MR. sprague's speech.as against the conquered. — They surely are not bound to submit,if new means of resistance can be found.To give to conquest — to mere force— the name of right, is tosanction all the enormities of avarice and ambition. Alexanderand Bonaparte are justified ! — Britain has done no wrong, insweeping India with the hand of rapine, and holding fil'ty millionsof people in thraldom! All the cruelties of the Spaniardsin South America — tic crimes of Pizarro and Cortez — trackingthe fugitive natives, in terror and dismay, with blood-hounds, tothe caves of the mountains; and stretching their wretchedmonarch upon spurning coals, to extort from him the secret ofhis treasures — are sanctified by the name ol" right ! This rightof conquest gentlemen contend is the legitimate offspring of theright of discoverer. Sir, the ]pirates on the coast of Barbaryand at Barataria exercise both. They find a ship alone uponthe ocean — this is discovers. They capture her, and murder orenslave the crew — this is conquest. Both these rights are thuscombined and contaminated ; and their validity will not, I presume,be questioned either by the courts of Barataria, or otherbands of similar conquerors.But even this miserable argument of conquest is not applicableto the Cherokees. They Vere not subjugated. The southernIndians had sixteen thousand warriors, with arms in their hands.They were ]powerful ; their trade was war; they did not solicitpeace. We sought for it, as appears by the resolutions of Con-gross,of May, 1783 — and March, 1785. We obtained the treatyof Hopewell, in which gentlemen find the expressions, the "UnitedStates give )peace" to the Indians, and "allot boundaries:"and, by a verbal criticism upon the English terms which we used,they logically deduce the rights of conquest ! What did the unletteredIndian understand by those expressions, but that therewas to be an end of war ; and that his territory was to be sacred ?The treat" contains many reciprocal stipulations of the "contractingparties." Will it still be contended that we are not boundby them because the other party was conquered — in other words,because we Vvcre the strongest If the United States madeterms of peace, should they not abide by them? If a besiegedtown captivates, arc not the articles of capitulation obligatory?Wlien Bonaparte dictated treaties of peace in the capitals ofthe nations which he had overrun, was he not morally boundto observe them? They indeed might complain that the contractwas made by constraint, when they where not free agents ;but who ever heard of the stronger party claiming to be absolvedfrom his engagements, because the other was subject tohis coercion ?It has been repeatedly asked. Why not leave the Indians tothe legislation of the State ?I answer, Because they protest against it ; and they alone havethe right to judge. They demand of us the protection whichwe solenudy promised.Much has been said of their being untutored savages, as ifthat could dissolve our treaties ! No one pretends, that theyMR. sprague's speech. 59are less cultivated now than when those treaties were made.Indeed, it is certain, that they have greatly advanced in civilization; we sec it in the very proofs introduced by the gentlemani'rom Georgia to show their barbarism. He produced tothe Senate a printed code of Clierokee laws, and a newspaperissued from a Cherokee press! Is there another instance ofsuch productions Irom any Indian nation .^ I was surprised,that, with all his scrutiny, he could find no more remnants ofsavage customs. 1 shall not dwell long upon his selectionsfrown their laws. Tiie first was, that, if a horse should be stolen,and the owner, finding the thief in possession, should immediatelykill him, in the excess of passion, it should rest uponhis own conscience. It is to be observed that the person slainmust have been guilty ; and for such an offence, ife is nowtaken by the laves of England. But this provision, inserted inthe Cherokee code more tlsan twenty years ago, has yielded tofurther Light, and been since repealed. Time will not permitme to insist upon their advance in the arts of civilized life. Itis known to have been great. They till the ground, manufacturefor themselves, have work-shops, a printing press, schools,clnn-ehes, and a regularly organized government. Indeed, thegentleman from Tennessee himself told us, that some individualsof that nation were qualified for seats in this august assembly.What danger, it is asked, have the Indians to apprehend fi-omthe laws of the State .^What danger ? Is it not here avowed, that their presence isa nuisance, from which Georgia wishes to be relieved ? Hasnot her legislature declared, that she is determined to havetheir lands at all hazards, even by violence, in the last resort?And, if left to her unrestrained power, can it be doubted thatshe will find the means of carrying that determination intoeffect ? If the laws heretofore enacted are not sufficient, maynot others be resorted to ? Let us, lor a moment, look at themeasures already adopted, and see if they have not someadaptation to the accomplishment of her wishes.By the 9th section of the Actor Isis, no Indian in the Creekor Cherokee nations can be a party or a witness in any suit towhich a white man may be a party. It is said that this hasbeen repealed by the statute of 18"29. I think otherwise. Thelatter contains no repealing clause, nor any incompatible provisions.Both may well stand together, and both would be enforcedaccording to the usual construction of statutes in parimateria. It is true, that a part of the title of the act is, to repealthat 9th section of the former. This is easily accounted for.The act, as first reported by the committee, probably containeda repealing clause — which was stricken out by the more zealousmajority — the original title remaining unchanged.But suppose that only the law of 1829 is now in force. Whatis to be its effect ? All the laws, usages, and customs of theCherokees are abrogated, and severe punishments denouncedagainst those who shall presume to act under them. Their60 MR. sprague's speech.government is dissolved — their political existence is at an end —their nation is destroyed — it is resolved into its original elements!We know that their lands are not holden by individualownership ; the title is in the nation. To annihilate the tribe,therefore, as a political community, is to destroy the owner ; andthe State is then to take the whole by her claim of succession.By this statute, no Cherokee, or descendant of a Cherokee,can be a witness against any white man, who does not residewithin the " nation." This devotes their property to the cupidityof their neighbours ; it leaves them exposed to everyoutrage, wliicii lawless passions can inflict. Even robbery andmurder may be committed with impunity, at noonday, if not inthe presence of such whites as will become prosecutors or witnesses.This, the gentleman from Georgia asserts, creates no newdisability ; that Indians are not competent to testify, by thecannon law, either in England or in this country. That Ideny. They are good witnesses in both : and have been so,without question, ever since the case of the Gentoo, in the timeof Lord Mansfield. Several were recently admitted by thecourts of New York, in a very important question of title toreal estate near the falls of Niagara ; and I have myself seen aperson convicted of larceny to a large amount, in the SupremeCoui-t of Massachusetts, upon the testimony of an Indian.But the gentleman assigned, as a reason for his assertion,that a belief in a future state of rewards and punishments wasessential to their admissibility as witnesses. True, Sir; and soitis with respect to all others. The objection is as validagainst a white as a red man. If this act creates no new disability,why was it passed ? Why not leave them to the provisionsof the common law? But, Sir, we learn from an intelligentmissionary, that there are a thousand members of Christianchurches. — These, and all other true believers, are excluded.Even those who are so distinguished for their knowledge, integrityand ability, that the honorable chairman would be willinghimself to be represented by them, in the Congress of theUnited States, are not permitted to testify in a court of justice.Under these enactments, the Cherokees are aliens — in theirnative land; trespassers — upon their own soil ; outlaws — in thebosom of their own nation !But why should I dwell upon the laws already passed, whenthe same power can, at will, produce others to effectuate theavowed determination ? Who will pretend that the Indians canlive under the legislation of the State ? The head of the bureauof Indian Affairs, in a communication transmitted to Congressby the Secretary of War, declares that it will "seal their destruction,as admitted by their chiefs ;" and the Hon. chairmanhas frankly declared in this debate, that it will reduce them tothe last degree of wretchedness; — his words were — "you cannotmake a fill-blooded Indian more miserable" than liy suchsubjection; and, in his written opinion of 1824, he emphaticallysays, if " the protection of the United States is withdrawn,""the Cherokee nation cannot exist twelve months."MR. sprague's speech. 61The question now proposed by this amendment is, Shall thatprotection be withdrawn, and the Indians be compelled to leavetheirs country under the penalty of certain destruction, it" they remain?The interrogatory has been often repeated, Why should notGeorgia extend her laws over the natives as well as other States ?Again, Sir, I reply — Our treaties — our treaties. The Indiansobject, and the United States have solemnly promised to inter-poseat their request. In no other instances have they opposed Statelegislation, and demanded our interposition. This is a sufficientanswer.But this topic has been so much urged, and the effort has beenso great to find shelter under the precedents of other States, thatI will bestow upon them a moment's attention. That jn-uicipallyrelied upon, and the only one specified, is a law of New York,passed four or five years ago. The occasion was this. In oneof the little reduced tribes, within that State, a female had beenexecuted as a witch. The executioner was indicted in the Statecourt before one judge, and convicted. The question of jurisdictionwas carried to the superior court, who never came to a decision,but advised a pardoning act ; whereupon this law was passed,which punishes certain high crimes committed within thetribe. Its sole object was the protection of the Indians, and itseems to have l)een by their consent. They have never objected,much less claimed our interposition. Does this bear any analogyto the case of Georgia and the Cherokees ? When another tribe,the Oneidas, formed a Constitution of Government similar to thatof the Cherokees, did New York interfere to destroy it and dissolvethe nation ? Far otherwise ; they protected them in its enjoyment.And such has been the general character of the legislationof other States. I shall not go back to die early days ofcolonial vassalage, although it is surprising that so little color ofprecedent is to be found, even when the weakness of infancy wasstruggling for existence against the power of the savages. I speakof the States, since they became such, under the Confederation, orthe federal Constitution ; and say that then general legislation hasbeen — not over the Indians, and acting upon the individuals withinthe territory of their tribe, but protecting and preserving themas a distinct community — operating upon the whites, and restrainingthem from inflicting wrongs and injuries. The legislation ofGeorgia has thrown over them a net, which binds every limb infetters, but is no shield of defence against assaults ; whilst that ofother States has erected around them a wall of defence, guardingthem against encroachments.This bill, Mr. President, provides for the removal of the Indiansto distant regions, beyond the Mississippi ; and it is proposedto place no less than half a million of dollars in the handsjos the Secretary of War for that purpose. The amendment, nowunder consideration, declares that they shall be protected, in theenjoyment of their rights, until they shall choose to remove. Thenecessity for such a provision is apparent. Without it, they have62 MR. sprague's speech.no option. Without it, this bill will add to the pressure of thetorrent that is sweeping them away.Is it not knovsTi that Acts for holding Indian treaties have beenused as instruments of coercion ? When our commissioners have .met the chiefs in council to obtain further acquisitions of temtoiy,have thr>y not sometimes asked only, What will you reserves Andwhen the answer has been, We have no lands to spare— we willcede nothing; the question is repeated, What will you reserve'—Congress have classed a law for the purpose of obtaining a portionof your soil— the United States are strong— their arms now sleepin peace— beware how you arouse them from their slumbers !Not only has tenor been inspired, but other means have beenused to cause the women to influence their husbands ; the childrento beseech their parents ; the warriors to urge the chiefs ;until their firmness is overcome. It is related ot a venerablechief, that, yielding at last to this irresistible pressure, he signedthe fatal parchment in tears— declaring at the time that it wasthe death-warrant of his nation.Apprehending that our object is to obtain further cessions, theIndians have met us in council with fear and trembling. In oneinstance, five or six tribes being assembled, our commissionersannounced to them that our only desire was to establish and preservepeace among themselves ; that we asked for no lairds.— ■They instantly rent the air with acclamations of joy. No difficulties,no delays intervened— the treaties were accomplished atonce,Is it merchantable to suppose that agents, to be appointed underthe direction of those, who are now concerned m our Indian affairs,may resort to force or tciTor ? . , . /.Sir, the officer now at the head of the Indian bureau, m his officialreport of a treaty of cession, made by him with the Creeks,states the fact, that, in two successive councils, he met only a firmdenial ; and in the third, he says, one individual being most prominentin his opposition, it was not until he " broke hun upon thespot" that the treaty eras obtained ! Yes, Sir, that ofHcer avowsthat he "broke" one of the prominent chiefs in their own council,M the only means of accomplishing his purposes!And in 'an official communication, sent to us by the Secretaryof War, at the commencement of this session, the same officerrecommends that the government should send an " armed force"to the Cherokee country, to further the objects of this bill— theremoval of the natives.' He says, indeed, that he would make asolemn declaration that the military were not to be used to compelthem to leave their country, but only to give security to thosethat were willing to go. And would such a declaration, even ifmade, do away the effect of the presence of our bayonets ^ Whatifl the avowedV'iiT^'^e ? To protect, against their own governmentand people, the individuals who may choose to emigrate ;but not to aficn-d any aid or countenance to those that may chooseto remain, Tiie chiefs may inquin;- Will these soldiers give utprotection against the power of Georgia, if she shall attempt toforce her laws upon us ? The reply must be, OJi no— the .sprague's speech. 63Indent has decided that she has a right to govern you ; and if youshould resist, the United States are bound to assist her in the executionof her laws against all opposition. When the British ministerremonstrated against the emperor Alexander's annexing apart of Poland to his dominions, he replied — I have three hundredthousand soldiers m that country. The argument was conclusive.If the Cherokees should hesitate, they might, in significantsilence, be pointed to our glittering bayonets.It is recommended to send an armed force to enable the Cherokeesto deliberate freely !When the Roman orator appeared in defence of Milo, he foundthe forum surrounded by an anne force, accompanied, no doubt,by the declaration that it was only to preserve tranquillity. Buteven the tongue of Cicero was palsied by the formidable array,and his friend and client was abandoned to his fate. We know.Sir, how the deliberations of the Parliament of Great Britain, andthe National Convention of France, have been aided by the presenceof an armed force ; and history abounds with similar exampies.I confess. Sir, that I cannot but indulge fears of the use whichmay be made by the War Department, of the half million of dollars,to be appropriated by this bill. We do know, that, in makingIndian ti-bathes, there have been instances of valuable reservationsof lands, and large sums of money beuig secretly given toindividual chiefs, by confidential arrangements, to induce them toyield to our wishes, and betray the confidence reposed in them bytheir nation Is it uncharitable to apprehend that such thingsmay happen under the directions of the present Secretary ofWar?Toward that high officer I have no feeling of unkindness. Iseek no imputation upon his motives; but his official acts I ambound, ])y the duties of my station, to examine. Look at the in-stiiictions given by him, in May last, to general Carroll, who wassent as an agent of the government to induce the Cherokees to aremoval. They express throughout much solicitude for the welfareof the Indians, and profess to consult their best interests.But I am constrained to look at the acts to be done — the courseof conduct prescribed. He is directed not to meet the Cherokeesin " general council," for " the consequence would be, what it hasbeen, a firm refusal to acquiesce ;" but to " appeal to the chiefsand influential men — not together, but apart, at their own houses ;and to make offers to them of extensive reservations in fee simple,and other i-eivards," to obtain " their acquiescence." He is furthertold — the more careful "you are to secure from even the chiefs theofficial character you bear, the better ;" and again — " Go to themtwt as a negotiator, but friend'sto each a viev/ of his danger. Enlarge on their comparativedegradation as a people, and the total impossibility of their everattaining to higher privileges while they retain their present relationsto a people who seek to get rid of them" — that their laws " will besuperseded and trodden under foot." Again — " Enlarge upon theadvantage of their condition in-the west — there the general governedMR. sprague's speech.ment would protect them — improve them hy instruction." Theywould become our equals in privileges, civil and religious ; and that,by refusing" to remove, " they must, necessarily, entail destruction iupon their race."I cannot but remark the parallel between the course here prescribed,and that which expelled our first parents ti-om Paradise.When the Arch Tempter sought their removal, Lie assailedthem '■'■not together," lest their joint '■'■council'^ should have baffledhis arts ; but bund the feebler woman " apart from her husband,deprived of the aid of lei r Jiatiu-al adviser — and, carefully concealinghis " official charming — of Satanic Majesty ; assuming theguise of a 'befriend;" a kind instructed; he .said to her, Pursuethe course which I advise, and the evils which have been predictedshall not follow ! — " Ye shall not surely die" — but .ou shallhe enlightened and elevated — " Your eyes shall be opened, and yeshall be as gods, knowing good and evil." She listened andyielded —"Earth felt the wound, and nature, from her seat,Sighing through nil lier works, gave signs of woThat all was lost."She was then trade the instrument of seducing the man alsoand both were thriven from the garden of Eden, where their Creatorhad placed them, to the unsubdued wilderness of the world —and a flaming sword forever barred their return.The adoption of such measures is, in the language of the militarySecretary, to " move upon them in the line of their prejudices."And upon whom is it that we thus move ? Those whomwe have most solemnly promised to protect as faithful guardians ;whom we have called brothers ; whom we have taught to lookupto the President, as their great father ? Yes, we have endeavoredto obtain over them the influence of a parent ; but do weperform toward then the duties of that sacred relation ?It is said that we must resort to such mcasui-es ; they are unavoidable.The plea of state necessity is advanced. And is thisgreat comitis, with peace in all its borders, now controlled by anirresistible power, that laiows no rule and consults no law ? Doesthis measure wear the garb of state necessity ? That, Sir, is ahigh-handed tyrant — not a smooth-tongued seducer. It is a lion,seizing its prey with open and resistless strength — not a serpentwinding its sinuous way in secret to its victim.Without the adoption of this amencbiient, the Cherokees haveno choice, but between the miseries of emigration, and destructionwhere they are. It is contended, eliot it is for their best interestto remove. LcaAo that, Sir, to their own decision. Ourjudgment may be too much guided by om own convenience.We undertook to judge for the Senfmoles in Florida. We askedfor their fertile lands ; they objected, asserting that the residuewould not support existence. We ]persisted ; and bund moansat last to obtain a reluctant cession. They departed, in the deepestsorrow, from their homes of cenifort rend ]plenty, to encounterwant and misery upon a barren waste. Nineteen twentieths ofMR. sprague's speech. 6S)the ten-itoiy which we left to them consisted of sands where noverdure quickened, and of swamps upon which human life couldnot be sustained. The dreary description officially given by governorDual can hardly be exceeded. The consequence was,what the Seminoles foresaw — v/ant, suffering, and starvation.The government was forthwith compelled to give twenty thousanddollars for food to preserve life, and to retraced a portion oftheir territory'.Whither are the Cherokees to go ? What are the benefits ofthe change ? What system has been matured for their security ?What laws for their government ? These questions are answeredonly by gilded promises in general terms ; they are to becomeenlightened and civilized husbandmen.They now live by the cultivation of the soil, and the mechanicarts. It is proposed to send them from their cotton fields, their fai-msand their gardens, to a distant and an unsubdued wilderness — stomake them tillers of the earth !— to remove them from their looms,their work-shops, their printing press, their schools, and churches,near the white settlements, to frowning forests, surrounded v/ithnaked savages^that they may become enlightened and civilized !We have pledged to them our protection ; and, instead of shieldingthem where they now are, within our reach, under our ownarm, we send these natives of a southern clime to northern regions,amongst fierce and warlike barbarians. And what security dowe propose to them ? — a nev guaranty ! Who can look an Indianin the face, and say to him. We and our fathers, for morethan forty years, have made to you the most solemn promises :we now violate and trample upon them all ; but offer you in theirstead — another guaranty !Will they be in no danger of attack from the primitive inhabitantsof the regions to which they emigrate ? How can it beotherwise ? The official documents show us the fact, that someof the few, who have already gone, were involved in conflictswith the native tribes, and compelled to a second removal.How are they to subsist ? Has not that country now as greatan Indian population as it can sustain ? Wliat has become ofthe original occupants ? Have we not ah-lady caused accessionsto their numbers, and been compressing them more and more ?Is not the consequence inevitable, that some must be stinted inthe means of subsistence ? Here, too, we have the light of experience.By an official communication from governor Clark, thesuperintendent of Indian affairs, we lean, that die most powerfultribes, west of the Mississippi, are, every year, so distressed byfamine, that many die for want of food. The scenes of their sufferingare hardly exceeded by the sieges of Jerusalem and Samaria.There might be seen the miserable mother, in all the tortureswhich hunger can inflict, giving her last morsel for the sustenanceof her child, and then fainting, sinking, and actually dyingof starvation ! And the orphan-^no one can spare it is pint alive into the grave of the parent, which thus closes overthe quick and the dead ! And this not in a solitary instance only,6 *66 MR. sprague's speech.but repeatedly and frequently. " The living child is often buriedwith the dead mother"*Mr. President : I am aware that their white neighbors desirethe absence of the Indians ; and if they can find safety and subsistencebeyond the Mississippi, I should rejoice exceedingly at ^their removal, because it would relieve the States of their presence.I would do rntich to effect a consummation so devoutlyto be wished. But let it be by their own free choice, unawed byfear, unseduced by bribes. Let us not compel ths ni, by withdrawingthe protection which we have pledged. Theirs mustbe the pain of departure, and the hazard of the change. Theyare men, and have the feelings and attachments of men ; and ifall the ties which bind them to their country, and their homes,are to be rent asunder, let it be by their own free hand. If theyare to leave forever the streams at which they drank, and thetrees under which they reclined ; if the fires are never moreto be lighted up in the council house of their chiefs, and mustbe quenched forever upon the domestic hearth, by the tears ofthe hates, who have there joined the nuptial feast, and thefuneral wail ; if they are to look lor the last time upon the landof their birth — which drank up the blood of their fathers, shed inits defence — and is mingled with the sacred dust of children andfriends — to turn their aching vision to distant regions, envelopedin darkness and siuTOunded by dangers — let it be by their o\a71free choice, not as a consequence of ovum withdrawing the protectionof our slighted faith ; — an act, which would operate as themost oppressive and irresistible coercion. They can best appreciatethe dangers and difficulties which beset their path. It istheir fate which is intending ; and it is their right to judge ;while we have no Warrant to falsify our promise.It is said that their existence cannot be preserved ; that it is thedoom of Providence, that they must perish. So, indeed, must weall ; but let it be in the course of nature ; not by the hand of violence.If, in truth, they are now in the decrepitude of age, let uspennit them to live out all their days, and die in peace ; not bringdowntheir gray hairs in blood to a foreign grave.I know. Sir, to what I expose myself. To feel any solicitudefor the fate of the Indians, may be ridiculed as false philanthropyand morbid sensibility. Others may boldly saj^, " Their blood beupon us ;" and sneer at scruples as a weakness unbecoming thestem character of a politician.*Extract from an official Report of General Clark, Superintendent of IndianAffairs, dated March \,\Z'i.Q,."The condition of many tribes west of the Mississippi is the most pitiablethat can be imagined. During several seasons in every year, they are distressedby famine, ni which many die for want of food ; and during which theliving child is often buried with the dead mother, because no one can spareit as much food as would sustain it through its helpless infancy. This descriptionapplies to Sioux, Osages, and many others; bull mention those becausethey are powerful tribes and live near our borders, and my optional stationenables me to know the exact truth. It is in vain to talk to people in thiscondition about learning and religion."MR. sprague's speech. 67If, Sir, in order to become a politician, it be necessary to divestthe mind of the principles of good faith and moral obligation,md harden the heart against every touch of humanity, I confessthat I am not, and, by the blessing of Heaven, will never be — apolitician.Sir, we cannot wholly silence the monitor within. It may notbe heard amidst the clashing of the arena ; in die tempest andconvulsions of political contentions ; — but its " still small voice"will speak to us— when we meditate alone at even tide ; in thesilent watches of the night ; when we lie down and when we riseup from a solitary pillow ; and in that dread hour when — " notwhat we have done for ourselves, but what we have done forothers," will be our joy and our strength ; when — to have secured,even to the poor and despised Indian, a shot of earth uponwhich to C'est his aching head, — to have given him but a cup ofcold water in charity, — will be a greater treasure than to havebeen the conquerors of kingdoms, and lived in luxury upon theirspoils.Extracts from a Letter written by the Rev. Cyrus KingsburyTO the War Department ; dated Feb 8^1830Those who are better acquainted with them, and who are able tocompare their prest state with what it formerly was, must admitthat a great advance has been made. Comparing the present conditionof the Choctaws, in those parts of the nation which have enjoyedthe advantages of instruction, with what it was eight, or even fiveyears ago, it may be doubted whether any considerable portions ofthe civilized world present specimens of equal improvement accomplishedwithin the same space of time. In the statements whichfollow, I shall confine myself principally to facts, that the departmentmay be able to judge for themselves as to the correctness of theabove remark. Eight years ago, intemperance prevailed from oneend of the land to the other. In the space of two months, ten Indiansin this district alone lost their lives by whiskey. At this time,intemperance within the nation is hardly known.In July, 1828, I attended the distribution of the annuity to twodistricts, on which occasion there were present from 4000 to 5000 Indians— men, women and children. They were together four days,and not an intoxicated one was seen, until after the business wasclosed. Some whiskey had been secreted at a distance from the place,and, as the law prohibiting the introduction of it into that part ofthe nation was not to go into effect until fifteen days from that time,some, after leaving the place, obtained it, and became intoxicatedSince that time, I am not aware that whiskey has been used at anyCouncil or collection of Indians, held by order of the chiefs for thetransaction of business.Other evidences of improvement we have in the increase of industry,and a consequent advance in dress, furniture, and all the comfortsand conveniences of civilized life. It has been remarked by68 MR. sprague's speech.many, that the fields of the Indians have never been kept in so goodorder, and managed with so much industry, as for the two past years.At councils and other large meetings, the Indians, especially in thenorthern and western districts, appear comfortably and decently, andsome of them richly clad. A great desire is manifested to obtainfurniture for their houses ; and some are already supplied in a mannernot inferior to that of new settlers in our own country.The result of a census taken in 1828, in the northeast district, wasas follows, viz : population, u&27 ; neat cattle, ll,6(;i ; horses, 3874;oxen, 112 ; hogs, 22,047 ; sheep, 13G; spinning-wheels, 530 ; looms,124 ; ploughs, 3tJ0 ; wagons, o2 ; blacksmiths' slips, 7 ; coopers'shops, 2 ; carpenters' shops, 2 ; white men with Choctaw families,22 ; schools, 5 ; scholars in a course of instruction, about 150. Inone clan, with a population of 313, who, eight years ago, were almostentirely destitute of property, grossly intemperate, and roamingfrom place to place, there are now 188 horses, 511 cattle, 853 hogs, 7looms, G8 spinning-wheels, 35 ploughs, G oxen, 1 school, and 20 or25 scholars.The northeast district, in 1828, appropriated $1500 of their annuityfor the establishment and support of blacksmith's shops. In 1821),they appropriated their whole annuity to similar objects. As an evidenceof industry and public spirit, I would mention that in oneneighborhood the natives have built a smith's shop, chopped woodfor a large coal pit, and carried it on their backs to the place of setting; have built a house for their blacksmith, and cleared for him afield of twelve acres, all with their own hands ; they have purchasedwith their annuity a set of tools, and iron and steel to the amount of$200, and have engaged to pay their smith $300 more annually forthree years. Similar provision has been made for shops in otherplaces.Another evidence of the progress of improvement among the Choctawsis the organization of a civil government. In 182(j, a generalcouncil was convened, at which a constitution was adopted, andlegislative powers were delegated to a national committee and council,whoso acts, when approved by the chiefs, became the supremelaws of the land. I have now before me a manuscript code, containing22 laws, which have been enacted by the constituted authorities,and, so far as I know, carried into complete execution. Among thesubjects embraced by these laws are theft, murder, infanticide, marriage,polygamy, the making of wills, and settling of estates, trespass,false testimony, what shall be considered lawful enclosures aroundfields, &c. &,c.SPEECHOF THEHoi. ASHER BOBBINS,SENATOR FROM RHODE ISLAND,DELIVERED IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES,APRIL 21, 1830.The Bill to provide for an exchange of Lands with theIndians residing in any of the States or Territories, and foitheir removal West of the river Mississippi, being underconsideration, Mr. Robbins, of Rhode Island, addressed theSenate as follows : —Mr. President : The whole argument in favor of this bill tJirnsupon the question, whether the Indian nations, within our territorialboundaries, are competent to make treaties with theUnited States. For it makes no difference whether the Indiannation be within the chartered limits of a State, or out of thoselimits, if within the limits of the United States. If being withina State renders the Indian nation incompetent to make a treaty,the being within the United States makes them equally incompetent,the reason being the same in both cases ; namely,the being within the jurisdiction of another power, and therefore,as the argument is, subject to that jurisdiction.If these Indian nations are competent to make treaties, thenthe proposed law is unnecessary ; as its object may be effectedby treaty ; and this law is not necessary to aid the Executivein making this treaty. And if these Indian nations are competentto make treaties, then this proposed law is not only unnecessary,but it is unconstitutional ; for it is to make a treaty bythe legislature ; which can only be made by the Executive andSenate.The turning question, then, of this whole debate, I repeat, is,whether the Indian nations within our territorial boundariesare competent to make treaties.Before I proceed to discuss this question, I have to remarkthat it is matter of surprise that this question should be made,when it is now made for the first time. From the discoveryof this new world by the old, down to this day, now more thanthree hundred year's, the competency of an Indian nation, situatedwithin the jurisdiction of another power, has never beenmade a question before. No jurist, no writer upon public law,has ever made it a question. But, through all that long tractof time, treaties upon treaties, and almost without number,70 MR. ROBBINS'S SPEECH.have been made with Indians thus situated ; and not a doubt,in a single instance, has been expressed of their competency tobe parties to a treaty. Tiiis is not denied on the other .side;indeed, it is admitted, that the doctrine and the practice ol" allpast time, lor century upon century, iras been, to consider thesenations, thus situated, as competent to make treaties. But allthis is regarded as it the whole world, from the beginning downto this tiuie, had been benighted upon this sid)ject ; as it" the'had ignorantly supposed and believed that the Indian nationswere competent to make treaties, when, in truth, they were notcompetent ; that Great Britain had been in this deplorablestate of ignorance, with all lier statesmen ; that our governments,both state and national, had been in this deplorable stateof ignorance, with all their statesmen; that the jurists or writersupon public law, of all the world, had all been in this deplorablestate of ignorance ; — I say so regarded ; for I do notperceive that this new opinion is advanced with any less confidence,or with any more dithdence, on account of that massof authority and usage against it.I have tin-ther to remark, that if indeed it be so, that theseIndian nations, thus situated, are not, and have not been, competentto make treaties, then all the treaties made with themare nullities. If so, the consequences of that consequencewould be enough, I should think, to make gentlemen pause alittle, and even fear the success of their own argument; for theconsequences would l)e such, that the whole body of the rightsacquired by Indian treaties, or held under them, or derivedfrom them, would be torn from their foundations; and the resultingevils would be incalculably great. I have said that, inthat case, these treaties would be nullities, and who can doubtit'' The President and Senate have the power to niake treaties;but a treaty nuitle with a party not competent to nmke it,is not a treaty ; it is a contact, as distinguishable from a treaty-andthe President and Senate are not competent to make acompact which is not a treaty ; so that every such treaty isvoid, as a ti-easy, because the Indian nation wos not competentto make it ; and it is void as a compact, because the Presidentand Senate are not competent to make it. If this be so, honorablefriend from Tennessee need not disquiet himselfupon the subject of his contradictory obligations ; tor, upon hisdoctrine, these treaties have created no obligations tyson t!;cUnited States.Again : I have to remark that if these Indian nations, thussituated, arc not competent to make treaties, no more treatiescan be made with them ; that the treaties which have beenmade, and not ratified, if any such there be, must be rejected ;treaties which have been proposed for the jjiu'chase and extinguishmentof Indian titles, as that in Indiana for instance,must be abandoned : we are to get no more lands from themby treaty ; if you are to get them at all, you are to get them bycompact, and this compact to be made, not by the Executiveand Senate, but by the Legislature. And, pray, how is theMR. ROBBINS'S SPEECH. 71Legislature to make such a compact ? It would not be possible,I think, to overcome the difficulties to this mode of acquiringIndian lands.And then, in case of future wars with those Indian nations,how are they ever to be terminated ? and how are the relationsof peace ever to be restored, without the intervention of treaties ?Can any one, then, wish to see established a doctrine fraughtwith these, and, it may be, with other equally unhappy consequences? I should hope not.But if we must jn-ove, what has never before been denied —what has always been admitted — admitted in theory, and in practiceadmitted — namely, that the Indian nations within our territorialboundaries are competent to make treaties — how is thatcompetency to be made out ?I agree that an Indian nation, to be competent to make a treaty,must be a sovereignty ; for that treaties, properly so called, canonly be made by sovereigns with sovereigns : but for this purposeit is not material whether the sovereignty be dependent or independent.Sovereignty is all that is necessary to this competency.The honorable gentleman fi-om Alabama (Mr. M'Kinley) said thesovereigns must ba equal ; but lie will find no authority for thatopinion, if, by equal, he meant any thing more than that both mustbe sovereign. A dependent sovereignty is still a sovereignty, andcompetent to make a treaty. I understood this to be admitted bythe honorable gentleman ii'om Georgia, in the outset of his argument; though I could not reconcile the subsequent part of hisargument with this admission.Now, what is sovereignty It is to be srd juris ; that is, to besubject, within itself, to no law but the law of its own making :externally it may be subject to another jurisdiction, and then it isa dependent sovereignty — to what degree dependent, will belearned from the treaty or treaties, by which it is made dependent,if so made by treaty. Now, this is the condition of every Indiannation in our country, sui juris, and therefore sovereign ; but subjectexternally to another jurisdiction, and therefore a dependentsovereign. This has always been their condition since they ceasedto be independent sovereignties. When, or where, I wouldask, has any Indian nation been subject within itself to the law ofanother jurisdiction ? I know of none ; I have heard of none.If there be one, that one would be an exception from the rest, butwould not affect the right of the rest : that one may have relinquishedits right to be sui juris ; and then it would not be regardedas an exception.Now the fact of being sui juris, and always of having been so,constitutes the right to be so. I would be glad to know if anynation has, or ever had, a better title to be jure sui juris than the factof being so, and of always having been so ; than a present possession,fortified by a prescription that knows no beginning ; thatruns back as far as memory or tradition goes, and beyond whereit is lost in that oblivion in which unknown times and their memorialsare all buried. And such is the title of every Indiannation, now in fact sui juris, to be and remain sui juris. There72 MR. ROBBINS'S SPEECH.never was, there never can be, any better title to the right of being»u{ juris. To the validity of such a title, its acknowledgment byother sovereignties is not necessary' ; but if it were, there neverhas been a time in which it was not acknowledged by other sovereignties,or was denied by any other ; but it is not necessary ;for a right in present possession, fortified and sanctified by such aprescription as this is, stands on higher ground, much higher, thanany acknowledgment by other sovereignties cor.ld place it. Unquestionably,then, these nations are iii juris, of right sui juris ;therefore sovereign, therefore competent to male ti-bathes.A multitude of matters have been in-get upon our considerationon the other side, not to disprove the tact of the Indian nationsbeing at tins moment suijuris, nor the fact that they always havebeen suijuris ; for these can neither be disproved nor denied ; but toprove that, though they are suijuris de facto, they are not suijurisdejure ; not being aware, as it appears to me, that the tjict constitutesthe right.It is siiid, for instance, that the crows of Great Britain claimeda right to this country by the right of discovery ; that what wasthe right of the croAvn, is now our right, and therefore that theIndian nations are not sui juris de jwe.Now, what was the right as claimed by discovery ? (I maliceno question of that right, for the time has gone by for making thatquestion, except as a moralist or historian. Whatever-was the defect'of that right originally, time now has siij>i)lied that defect, as far asdefect of right can be sujijilied by lapse of time.) But what wasthat right as claimed by discovery .'' It was this: a right tothe domain of the country, subject to the right of occupancyby the Indian nations ; and that occupancy to be Vv'ithout restrictionas to mode, and without limitation as to time ; with the rightof alienation of their possessor title, restricted to the proprietor'of the domain. Tins was the clan of the British crown, as foundedon discovery : it was so defined and settled in the case refeiTcdto by the honorable gentleman from Alabama, (]\Ir. M'KinJey,) thecase of Johnson and jM'Intosh. It was so settled by the court, mthat case, because it had been'so settled by what had become thecustomary law of nations. But did the king of Great Britainclaim, (for that is the important question,) did he claim these Indiannations as his subjects, over wlioni or for whom he had aright to legislate for their internal regulation? No, never; neverAlas a claim of that kind advanced ; never heard of; never thoughtof: that claim left them, as it found them, subject, within themselves,only to their oaati jurisdiction.Besides this notorious fact, the right of pre-emotion, claimedby discovery, is decisive to prove that the right of jurisdiction wasnot claimed. If the crown claimed these Indian nations as hissubjects, why claim a presumptive right to their titles .' Did anyking claim a pre-eruptive right to the land titles of his own subjects? Never. If discover', then, is a good authority for what itclaims, it is good for what it disclaims. It disclaims the right ofjurisdiction over and for the Indian nations. It therefore affirmsand confirms this right in them, and guaranties it to them. Is itMR. Bobbins's SPEECH. 73possible that the honorable gentleman from Mississippi can supposethat the case of Grenada is a case in point ? That was thecase of a conquest, and the conquest ceded by the treaty of peaceto the conqueror, to be holden as a part of his dominions, and thepeople as a part of his subjects ; and both have been so holdenever smce.It is said, again, that a State has a right to exercise jurisdictionover persons within its territorial limits, and, of course, over theIndian nation Avithin its units ; and, therefore, that such Indiannation can have no right to exemption from that jurisdiction Ifthis State right was admitted, it would not dispj-ove the Indianright ; It would only prove that the two rights were incompatibleand that, if the State right is exerted and executed against theIndian right, the Indian right must be annihilated. That theIndian nation is placed within the limits of another jurisdictionproves nothing against the Indian right, for that must" be the situationof every Indian nation within our ten-trial limits It is soand was to be so, by the very claim originally made to the countmT '*^** " ^^^ originally settled, and by which it is nowheld. This country was in the possession of these Indian nations; die British claim to it, as founded in discovery, was a claimto the domain of their country, subject to their right of occupancy.1 hey, of course, must l)e situated in that domain. That domainwas parcelled out into colonies, now become States ; the Indiannations, of course, must fall within the limits of those Statesbo that, by our very claim to their country, they were to be andto remain, within our jurisdiction, and exempt ti-om that jurisdiction,and subject only to their own.To strengthen this State claim against the Indian right, it issaid that the State, within its territorial limits, has all the rightswhich the crown of Great Britain had within the same limitsBut, as has been stated, the crown of Great Britain made no suchclan against the Indian right. Happy will it be for these nations,if the claim of that crown is adopted by the States, as themeasure of their claim, and if they will content themselves with itStill It is said that a sovereign, independent State has a right tojurisdiction over all its own population ; and that these Stateswere sovereign and independent when they adopted this Constitution; and that they did not sun-ender this attribute of sovereigntyby that adoption. Admitting all this, it is still to be provedthat an Indian nation within a State is a part of the population ofthat State. How can this be seriously pretended ? . The populationof a State is the population which constitutes the communitywhich constitutes the State, which is protected by the laws andamenable to the laws, of the State as that community. But an Indiannation within a State is not a part of that community • isnot protected by the laws, and amenable to the laws of the Stateas a part of that community. 'The population of the United States is taken periodically bvregular census ; it is now about to be taken for the fifth timeWere the Indian nations within the United States ever includedm any census, as a part of the population of the United States ?74 MR. ROBBINS'S SPEECH.Never, as every one knows. And why not, if all persons withinthe limits of a sovereign jurisdiction are necessarily the subjectsof that jurisdiction, as a part of the population under that jurisdiction.''The States pay direct taxes to the United States, in proportionto their numbers ; that is, to their population. But are the Indiannations within the States included in that population ? Never; they are expressly excluded by the Constitution of the UnitedStates. ' Then the States themselves, by adopting the Constitution,have defined what constitutes their own population, andhave excluded from it these Indian nations.Still it is insisted, and as a branch of the same argument, thatthe Constitution gives the Executive no authority to go Avithin aState, and make a treaty with a part of its population. This istrue ; but an Indian nation within a State, as we have just seen,is not a part of its population. The power to make treaties, asgiven by the Constitution, is a general power, and may be exercised,at the Executive discretion, with any nation or people competentto make a treaty ; and it is not material where that nationis situated or placed. If competent to make a treaty, our Executiveis competent to ti-eat with it.Again, it has been said that, in several States in which is situatedsome tribe or tenant of some tribe of Indians, these Stateshave subjected those Indians to State legislation. Without stoppingto inquire how that fact is, and, if a fact, whether it has beenwith the will or against the will of tlicse Indians, — it is enough tosay, that if those States have undertaken that legislation over thoseIndians, against their will ; and while they were a tribe, and suijuris ; and when, up to that time, they had always been sui juris;that fact, instead of proving a right in that legislature, proves awi-long by that legislature ; and, instead of disproving the Indianright, it proves a violation of that right, I trust it is too late inthe day — a day so enlightened as this is — to contend that a factwhich is a wrong, Is a precedent to justify a similar wrong, andthat a violation of right in one case becomes a warrant for a violationof right in all similar cases.In the multitude of matters urged upon our consideration, toshow that the Indian nations are not sui juris de jure, these areall which appear to me to have the appearance of argument ; for,in the rest, I confess I cannot see even that appearance. It issaid, for instance, (and I notice it as a sample of the rest ; for itwould be endless to notice them all in detail,) that the Indian isan inveterate savage, and incapable of civilization. Admittingthis to be the fact — which I by no means do admit-what has it todowith the question, whether his nation is sui juris, and competentto make a treaty ? Is the Indian right less a right becausethe Indian is a savage ? or does our civilization give us a title tohis right ? — a right which he inherits equally with us, from thegift of name, and nature's God.The Indian is a man, and has all the rights of man. The sameGod who made us made him, and endowed him with the samerights; for "of one blood hath he made all the men who dwellMR. ROBBINS'S SPEECH. 75upon the earth." And if we trample upon these rights ; if weforce him to sun-ender them, or extinguish them in his blood ;the cry of injustice will rise to the throne of that God, and there,lilies the blood of Abel, will testify against us. If we should bearraigned for the deed before his awful bar, and should plead ourboasted civilization in its defence, it would, in his sight, but adddeeper damnation to the deed, and merit but the more signal retributionof his eternal justice.As to the civilization of the Indian, that is his own concern inthe pursuit of his own happiness; if the want of it is a misfortune,it is his misfortune ; it neither takes from his rights, nor adds toour own. As to his beg an inveterate savage, and incapable ofcivilization, I do not believe it ; in that respect, I believe he is likethe rest of mankind. The savage state is the natural state of man,and that state has charms to the savage, which none but the savageknows. Man no where, at no time, ever rose from the savageto the civilized man, but by the spur of an absolute necessity ; anecessity which controlled him, and could not itself be controlled:it was not until he could no longer hive as a savage, or go wherehe could hive as a savage, that he Avould submit himself to thatincessant labor and severe restraint, which hes at the foundationof all civilization, and to which nothing but education and habitreconciles the nature even of civilized man. The wild and freenature of the savage, unaccustomed to voluntary and constantlabor, and to the multiplied and severe restraints of civilized society,revolts at the idea of that labor and those restraints ; and hisstrong repugnance to them can only be overcome, as I have said,by the force of an overruling necessity. I have said this, not thatI disapprove or would discourage attempts at their civilization, butto account for the only partial success, if it-has been only partial,which has attended those attempts, and, at the same time, to vindicatethe Indian from the charge of incapacity for civilization,any further forth, than as it is applicable to all mankind, while ma savage state. That very necessity exists, and is beginning toexert its civilizing tendency where the ti-ives in question now are,but will no longer exist if they are removed, as is contemplated bvthis bill. • ^Again, it is alleged against one of these nations, situated not inone, but in several of these States, that they have been guilty' ofan act which forfeits their right to live independently of State jurisdiction,and which requires that the forfeiture should be immediatelyand rigorously enforced. It is the act of their havingchanged the form of their government for their own internal regulation.It seems that, to better their condition, and Avilh a viewto their own civilization, they have discarded that of the savage,and adopted the government of civilized man. And it is a governmentwell devised to improve that condition, and insure thatcivilization ; a government that is in itself a moiaiment of wisdom; that speaks volumes in favor of their capacity for civilization,and of their advances therein ; for it has every essentialfeature of a free and well-balanced government. It is evidently76 MR. ROBBINS'S SPEECH.not a work of blind imitation ; for, while it has followed the best -models, it has followed them only so far as they were adapted toits circumstances ; and it is original so far as these circumstancesrequii-ed it to be so ; and, where it is original, it is no less admirable'than where it is imitative. Attentive to those circumstances,so far from assigning any powers inconsistent with its externalrelations, either to the United States or to the States, that governmentrecognises and ratifies those relations exactly as they exist,and confines itself entirely to provisions for their own internalpolice. Sensible of the nide state of the people, and with a viewto their civilization, it makes it the primary duty of the nation toprovide the means of education, and to promote the acquisitionand diffusion of knowledge. Indeed, all its provisions show a wisesurvey of the present, and a provident forecast for the future.Now, this new government is not to be tolerated for a moment.State legislation must come and abate it as a nuisance ; and thenation are to be punished for this atrocious act, with the forfeiting,and forever, of every national right. They are not to be permittedeven to resume the government they had discarded, and tolive again as savages ; but they are, at once and forever, to be subjectedto the rule of another jurisdiction, never again to enjoy theright of self-government — a right which has come down to themfrom their fathers, through an unknown series of generations, andfor an unknown series of ages ; a right which they had used, butnot abused — certainly not in the act which is made a pretext forits destruction.Ill-fated Indians! barbarism, and attempts at civilization, arealike fatal to your rights, but attempts at civilization the more fatalof the two. The jealous of their own rights are the contemnerof yours ; proud and chivalrous States do not think it beneaththem to take advantage of yovn- weakness. You have lands whichthey want, or rather which they desire, for they do not want tiitni ;yoiu- rights stand in their way, and those proud and chivalrousStates do not think it beneath them to destroy your rights by theirlegislation. Proud and chivalrous States do not thuik it beneaththem to present to your feeble and helpless condition this alternative,either to abandon you* homes, the habitations you have built,the fields you have planted, and all the comforts you have gatheredaround you, the homes of your fathers, and the sepulchres ofthe dead, and go far into the depths of an unknown wilderness,there to abide the destiny which may await you, or to surrenderyour rights, and submit yourselves to their power, lit to expectno participation, in their lights.This is an alternative which has planted dismay and despair in .every heart that palpitate in that nation ; for they see their situation,and that nothing is left them but resignation to their late.Within themselves, they have no resource ; without, they haveno hope. The guaranties of treaties made with the United States,the faith of a mighty nation pledged for their protection, whichwas their hope, is now their hope no more. Like the morningcloud, and the early dew, it has passed away ; for the chief of thatMR. ROBBINS'S SPEECH. 77mighty nation has been appealed to to make good that guaranty,but has been appealed to in vain. He has told them that he wUinot make it gooil, and that they must submit to that alternative.But we are told they have deserved all this, because they havechanged the form of their government. But has this changedtheir external relations with the United States or with those States?Not in the least. Not in any one possible respect. The newgovernment, like the old, is made for their own internal regulation,and for that object merely. Suijwis as they are and alwayshave been, they had a right to make the law for their own internalregulation, according to their own will, and to change it fromtime to time, according to that will. They have done this, and,in doing this, they have done no mors than they had a right todo.If they now are a government within a government, at whichsuch an outcry is made as justifying their destruction, so theyalways have been, and not more so now than they always havebeen. They have always been what the gentleman calls an imperiumin imperio — dependent and without the external prerogativesof sovereignty, but still an imperium. But no matter — smatterhow justifiable, how proper that change of governmentwas, how strictly a mere exercise of right — they see and they feelthat their doom is sealed — that the decree is gone forth, and willbe executed.The cry of the miserable Indian will not an-est it ; the sympathyof this nation in that ciy will not arrest it. That sympathy isnot credited, or, if credited, is despised ; and we are told here, andin a tone of defiance, too, that no power shall arrest it. My fearsare, that no power ilHI arrest it ; none certainly will if this billpass, and without this amendment ; for then the executive willnot arrest it. But if executed, and when executed, for one, I willsay, that these Indians have been made the victims of power exertedagainst right; the victims of violated faith, the nation's faith ;the victims of violated justice ; yes, I call God to witness, of hisviolated justice.Extract from a Report of John L. Allen, Sub-Agent amongTHE ChICKASAWS, DATED FeB. 7, 1830.The country is well watered, and is well adapted to the culture ofcotton, corn, wheat, oats, peas, potatoes, beans, fcc.Cotton, beef and pork, are the principal articles for exportation.There will be cotton exported from the nation this year, probably tothe amount of 1000 bales ; beef and pork to no inconsiderable amount.The proceeds from the sales of cotton, horses, beef, cattle, hogs,&c., after retaining a sufficiency for their home consumption, is generallyapplied to the purchase of necessaries and luxuries of life ; towit, slaves, sugar and coffee, as well as dry goods of various describe*78 MH. ROBBINS'S SPEECH.tons, which are calculated to render them comfortable and ornamenttheir persons.The time has come when they no longer depend on the rifle forsupport, but it is used more for their recreation and amusement thanfor the means of sustenance.Every head of a family cultivates the earth more or less, as histhirst for gain, or his imaginary or real wants increase.Much to the honor of the Chickasaws, for the last eight years, thepractice of the men, requiring the women to perform all the labor inthe fields, is much changed ; the men now (with a few exceptions) cultivatethe earth themselves, while the female part of the family is engagedin their household affairs. They spin, weave, make their own-clothing,milk cows, make butter, cheese, &c. They keep themselvesdecent and clean, and, in many instances, particular attentionis paid to fashions that are in use by the whites.It is their constant practice to appear in their best apparel at theirpublic meetings ; also when they visit the country villages in thewhite settlements.Many of the Chickasaws profess Christianity. I attended a campmeeting, in November last, at the residence of the missionaries ; divineworship was performed alternately by white and red men, in theEnglish and Indian languages ; and, for the first time, I saw the saelement taken by the Indians. Every thing was conducted with theutmost good order and decorum.As a nation, the men are brave and honest. The women (the halfbreeds in particular) are beautiful and virtuous ; and I am of theopinion, that there has been greater advancements in civilization, inthe last eight years, than there was in tivcnty previous.I think the present state of education does not meet the wishes orexpectations of the chiefs and head men of the nation.Education is confined generally to the half breeds and youths generallyof the first promise. There are, at this time, several whitemen that have identified themselves with the Indians by marriage,and several half breeds that have sufficient education to enable themto transact a considerable portion of the business for the nation.The municipal laws of the Ciiickasaws consist in written laws orresolutions, commanding that which is right, and prohibiting thatwhich they conceive to be wrong. Their laws are few, easily understood,and rigidly enforced, and are highly calculated to promotepeace and good order among themselves.SPEECHOF THEHON. HENRY R. STORRS,REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK,DELIVERED IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, SITTINGAS A COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE, SATURDAY, MAY15, 1830, ON THE BILL FOR THE REMOVAL OF THE INDIANS.Mr. Chairman : If I believed that the real object and onlyeffect of the bill were to further the policy of providing a countrybeyond the Mississippi for such of the Indian tribes as mightbe inclined, of their own free choice, to remove there, I shouldhave cheerfully given my support to the measure ; for 1heartily respond to the opinion expressed by the honorablemember at the head of the committee on Indian affairs, whospoke yesterday, (Mr. Bell,) that no philanthropic man can lookat the condition to which these unfortunate people have becomereduced by a combination of circumstances, which now ju-essupon them in some quarters with intolerable severity, withoutfervently wishing that they were already removed far beyondthe reach of the oppression, and — I was about to say — the exampleof the white man. I hope that I am too well aware ofthe responsibility of the country to the opinion of the world,and too sensible of the duties we owe to these people, to befound resisting any measure here, which may really improvetheir condition, or encouraging them to reject any propositionsof the government, which may be offered to them for their freeacceptance or refusal. But, Sir, although the bill now beforeyou presents nothing on its face, which, on a superficial examination,appears to be objectionable, yet we cannot shut oureyes, if we would, to the circumstances which have broughtthis subject before us at the present session. The papers beforethe house have convinced me, that it is chiefly intendedand expected to come in aid of the measures recently taken bythe States along the southern line of the Union, for removingthe Indian nations within their limits from the country whichthey now occupies; and finding a purpose so unjust to thesepeople, and so mischievous to the reputation of the country,lurking uiwler it, I cannot give it my countenance or support.I shall leave it entirely to others to examine that policywhich affects to improve the moral condition of the ruffians byremoving them into the western forests ; and dismiss that partof the subject with the single remark, that the President hasfurnished us, in his message at the opening of the session, with80 MR. STORRS'S SPEECH.a fair commentary upon that scheme of Indian improvement.He says that,Professing a desire to civilize and settle them, we have, at thesame time, lost no opportunity to purchase their lands, and thrust themfurther into the wilderness"— that, " by this means, they have not onlybeen kept in a wandering state, but been led to loolc upon us as unjustand indifferent to their fate. Thus, though lavish in its expenditureupon the subject, government has constantly defeated its ownpolicy ; and the Indians in general, receding farther and farther to thewest, have retained their savage habits."He then recommends to us that we should set apart an ampleportion of our western territory, beyond the limits of Missouriand Arkansas, ibr the reception of all the tribes of Indiansnow witling the States — about sixty thousand — securethem the country, moliere he says they may enjoy governmentsof their own choice, auri where "time benevolent may endeavorto teach them the arts of civilization, and, by promoting unionand harmony among them, to raise up an interesting cannonwealth, destined to perpetuate the race and to attest the humanityand justice of tins government."We are fortunately able. Sir, to ascertain clearly the state ofthings which hat* induced the Executive to recommend thispolicy to us so earnestly at the present time. There can be nomistake in the history of our relations with certain Indian nations,which has brought this subject before us. It is fully-spreadupon the official documents of the House for some fewyears past ; and I shall proceed to call your attention to suchparts of them as, I trust, will lead us to the only safe and honorableconclusion, to which v/e ought to come upon this wholematter.By the 5th article of the treaty of New York, of the 7th ofAugust, 1790, the United Slates solemnly guarantied to theCreek nation all their lar\ds beyond the boundary then established.The treaty of Houston, of the 2d of July, 1791, with theCherokee nation, was also entered into under the administrationof general Washington, for the purpose of quieting foreverthe collisions which had taken place between that nation andthe adjoining States. After fixing a new and definite boundarybetween their lands and these States, and obtaining from thenation its express acknowledgment that they were under theprotection of the United States, and of no other sovereign whatever; that they should hold no treaty with any foreign power,individual Sure, or with individuals ; and stipulating'fur the restorationof prisoners, the treaty contains the following article:"Art. 7. The United States solemnly guaranty to the CherokeeOvation all their lands not hereby ceded."By the compact with Georgia of the 24th of April, 1802, onthe surrender of her claims to the country west of her presentlimits, the United States stipulated to extinguish, at their ownexpensc,ybr the use of Georgia, the Indian title to their landswithin that State, as early as it could be ^^ peaceably obtained,on reasonable terms." This article of the compact also recitedMR. STORRS'S SPEECH. 81that, for acquiring a part of these lands, the President (Mr.Jefferson) had directed that a treaty should be immediatelyheld with the Creeks. There seemed to be no doubt, therefore,originally, between the parties to this compact, as to the mannerin which it was to be executed on the part of the generalgovernment. This treaty was accordingly holden on the 16thof June, 1802, and the Kings, Chiefs, Head-men, and Warriorsof the Creek nation, assembled in Council, ceded to the UnitedStates an extensive tract of country. The Commissioners Plenipotentiarywho held this treaty were nominated to the Senateand their appointments confirmed. By another treaty with theCreeks, (Nov. 14th, 1805,) they ceded other lands to the UnitedStates, which also passed to Georgia. Other treaties have followedwith this nation, not essential to be now considered, untilthe administrations of Mr. Monroe and Mr. Adams, whenthey persisted in refusing to sell any more of their lands. Georgiahad, in the mean time, strenuously required of the generalgovernment the fulfilment of its pledge under the compact of1802. But all the efforts of the government to induce theCreek nation to part with their lands had failed, until the executionof the articles at the Indian Springs, in 1825, by Macintoshand some other chiefs, who assumed to represent the Creeknation on that occasion. We all know the melancholy catastrophe,which immediately followed, and which all of us mustwish could be forever forgotten. The calamities which befellthe Creeks filled them with terror. They were in some degreequieted, after great difficulty, and very painful measures on thepart of the general government towards Georgia, and found atlast that their only hope of peace and future security was inlistening to the benevolent counsels of the administration.They finally surrendered the remnant of their lands to Georgia.The last administration was then required by Georgia,in a tone at least decisive of her intention to persevere in herown views of the obligation of the compact of 1802, to extinguishthe Cherokee title to the lands held by them within thatState, and which were covered by the treaty of Houston. Theadministration repeated its efforts in good faith to induce theCherokees to treat. But they resisted all the temptations heldout to them, refused to enter into any negotiation, and claimed,on their own part, the protection of the plighted faith of thegovernment. It was time for the administration to pause atleast, and examine well the ground on which the governmentstood. The scenes of 1825 were still fresh in the recollectionof all. The blood of M'Intosh and his fellow chief was yetscarcely dry upon the earth, and the smoke of their habitationshad scarcely ceased to curl above the tops of the forest. Butthe government continued its efforts in the true spirit of its obligationsto Georgia, until it became evident that it was in vainto hope or look for success. The Cherokees remained inflexible,and the perseverance of Georgia placed the administrationin a situation, in which it was more probable that they mightBoon be called on to preserve the faith of the country plighted82 MR. STORRS'S SPEECH.to the Clierokees in the solomon pledge given to that nation,under the administration of general Washington, for the integrityof their country.in this condition of things, Georgia put forth her ultimatum,and passed lier resolutions of the 27th Deceiver, 1827. Inthese she declared her right to extend her authority over thewhole Indian country; to coerce obedience to it ; and openlyasserted that she could rightfully take possession of the Cherokeelands at her own will and pleasure. During the last year,she lias followed up these claims, and annexed their countryto the adjacent counties; she has extended her laws over theCherokees, and coupled with them a ]peculiar code, framed forthat purpose, and applicable to the Indians only. Of the operationand character of these laws, I shall say something beforeI sit down.There has been some complaint, on the part of Georgia, that,from the commencement of her collision on this sid)ject withthe former administration, she has been nuuh misunderstood,,and often greatly misrepresented. It is fair and candid, therefore,that, on this occasion and in this House, the principles onwhich she has relied to sir{)i)ort her measures should be statedherself ; that she should be heard in her own words; andthat, il" she fails to be convinced, the doctrines on which shehas rested her pretensions may be no longer mistaken, or herprinciples misrepresented. I shall not trust myself to statethem from recollection, and must ask the committee to indulgeme in reading some extracts from the proceedings of her Legislaturein 1827. A joint committee of that body, to whom theGovernor's message relating to "the acquisition of the Georgialands, at present in the occupancy of the Cherokee Indians,and the absolute and jurisdictional right of the state to thesame," had been referred, reported that they had given thatsubject the most mature and deliberate consideration, and accompaniedthe report with an elaborate exposition of the principleson which they founded certain resolutions submitted withit. The whole argument is finally recapitulated, with a comprehensivenessand clearness, which relieve me from readingthe whole report.Before Georgia," says tUis report, " hecaiiie n pnriy to the articlesof agreement and cession, (of 1802.) she could rightfully hare possessed'herself of those lairds, either by negotiation with (he Indians or byforce; and she had determined to do ?o ; hx\\ by tlii^ contract she madeit the duty of the United States to sustain the expense of obtaining forher t'.ie possession, provided it could lie done upon reasonable terms,and by negotiation. But in case it should become necessary to resortto force, this contract with the United States makes no provision; theconsequence is, that (ieorc,ia is left untrammelled, at full liberty toprosecute her rights in that point of view, according to ber own discretion,and as though no contract had been made. Your committee,therefore, arrive at this conclusion, that, anterior to the revolutionarywar, the lands in question belonged to Great Britain; that the right ofsovereignty, both as to dominion and empire, was complete and perfectin her; that the possession of the Indians was permissive ; thatMR. STORRS S SPEECH. 83they were mere tenants at will ; and that such tenancy might havebeen determined at any moment, either by negotiation or force, atthe pleasure of Great Britain ; that, upon the termination of the revolutionarywar, and by the treaty of peace, Georgia assumed all therights and powers in relation to the lands and Indians in questionwhich theretofore belonged to Great Britain ; that since that timeshe has not divested herself of any right or power in relation to thelapide now in question, further than she has in relation to all thebalance of her territory ; and that she is now at full liberty, and hasthe power and right to possess herself, by any means she maychoose to employ, of the lands in dispute, and to extend over themher authority and laws. Although your committee believe thatthe absolute title to the lands in controversy is in Georgia, and thatshe may rightfully possess herself of them, when and by^what meansshe pleases, yet they would not recommend an exercise of that righttill all other means fail. We are aware that tin Cherokee Indianstalk extravagantly of their devotion to the land of their fathers, andof their attachment to their homes ; and that they have gone veryfar towards convincing the general government, that negotiationwith them, with the view of procuring their relinquishment of titleto the Georgia lands, will be hopeless ; yet we do confidently believethat they have been induced to assume this lofty bearing, by the protectionand encouragement which have been afforded them by theUnited States, and that they will speak a totally different language,if the ffe7icral garerninFut trill change its policy towards them, and apprizethem of the nature and extent of the Georgia tit'c to their hinds,and what will be the probity 'c consequence of their remaining refractory.•'Your committee would recommend that one other, and the lastappeal , be made to the general government, with a view to open anegotiation with the Cherokee Indians upon the subject ; that the UnitedStates do instruct their commissioners to submit this report to thesaid Indians ; that if no such negotiation is opened, or if it is, andproves to be unsuccessful, that then the next Legislature is recommendedto take into consideration the propriety of using the mosteffectual measures for taking possession of and extending our authorityand laws over the whole of the lands in controversy. Your committee,in the true spirit of liberality, and for the purpose alone of avoidingany difficulty or misunderstanding, with either the generalgovernment or the Cherokee Indians, would recommend to the peopleof Georgia, to accept any treaty that may be made between theUnited States and those Indians, securing to this State so much ofthe lands in question as may remain, after making reserves for a termof years, for life, or forever, in fee simple, to the use of particular Indians,not to exceed, in the aggregate, one sixth part of the whole territory.But, if all this will not do; if the United States will not redeemher pledged honor ; and if the Indians continue to turn a deafear to the voice of reason and friendship ; we now solemnly warnthem of the consequences. The lands in question belong to Georgiashe must and she rci'l have them. Influenced by the foregoingconsiderations, your committee beg leave to offer the following resolutions:Resolved, That the United States, in failing to procure the landsin controversy as early as the same could be done upon peaceable andreasonable terms, have palpably violated their contract with Georgia,and are novo bound, at all hazards, and ivithoztt regard to terms, to procuresaid lands for the use of Georgia."Resolved, That the policy which has been pursued by the UnitedStates towards the Cherokee Indians, has not been in good faith tostMR. STORRS'S SPEECH.wards Georgia ; and as all the difficulties which now exist to an extinguishmentof the Indian title, have resulted from the acts of policyof the United States, it would be unjust and dishonorable in them totake shelter behind these difficulties.Resolved, That all the lands, appropriated and unappropriated,within the conventional limits of Georgia belong to her ubsuhitely ;that the title is in her ; that the Indians are tenants ut her ili ; thatshe may, ut uiuj time she pleases, determine that tenancy, by takingpossession of the premises ; and that Georgia has the right to extendher authority and laws over the whole territory, and to coerce obedienceto them from all descriptions of people, be they white, red orblack, within her limits."This report and these resolutions were agreed to by both branchesof the Legislature, approved by the Governor, transmitted tothe President under the late administration, and are among thepapers of this House. They were sent here by the President in1828, in answer to a resolution oftiired by a gentleman from Georgia,sui: \Vi\de.)I have not been able to ascertain whether or not the late administrationcomplied with the suggestion contained in this report,that these proceedings of the state of Georgia should be laid beforethe Cherokee nation ; but the iiaj)ers on .your table will enableus to judge how far the present administration has, in furtheranceof the ]policy and views of Georgia, changed the Juniper policy ofthe government, and apprized the Cherokees of the nature andextent of the Georgia title to their lands, and what the probableconsequences would be of their 'remaining refractory."Against all these pretensions of Georgia the Cherokee nationhave protested to the present administration as well as to the last.They have asserted the inviolability of their treaties, and invokedthe faith and demanded the protection of the government.They have received the answer of the ]present Secretary of thedepartment of War and the President. They have finally appealedto this House, and offered their memorials here as theirlast relieve from the calamities, which they believe await themafter we shall have turned them away. Speaking of their case,the President says in his message, " A ]portion, however, of thesouthern tribes, havuig mingled nuicli with the whites, and madesome progress in the arts of civilized life, have lately attempted toerect an independent government within the limits of Georgiaand Alabama. These States, claiming to be the 07ib/ sovereigns ,within their territories, extended their laws over the Indians, whichinduced the latter to call on the United States for protection.Under these circumstances, the question presented was, whetherthe general government had a right to sustain these people intheir pretensions."It is to be deeply regretted, that, before the President assumedthe power to decide against the Cherokee nation the interestingquestions, which were thus presented under the Constitution, lawsand public treaties of the country, he had not submitted the wholematter to Congress as his constitutional advisers, or, at least, to theSenate, with the view of disposing of these difficulties by amicablenegotiation. It seems that it was expected, at one time, that thisMR. STORRS'S SPEECH. 85would have been done. The superintendent of Indian affaire inthe war department, in a letter of the 11th of April, 1829, to theCherokee delegation, says : " The Secretary of war is not now preparedto decide the question involved hi the act of the Legislatureof Georgia, to which you refer, in which provision is made for extendingthe laws of Georgia over your people after the first ofJune, 1830. It is a question which will doubtless be the subject ofCongressional inquiry, and what is proper in regard to it will nodoubt be ordered by that body." I regret that this disposition ofthe subject had not been made. These questions might doubtlesshave been safely trusted to Congress. But if this was everthe uitenUon of the government, it appears to have been soonabandoned. On the 18th of April, and within a week after colonelMcKenney's letter, the Secretary of the department of warinformed the Cherokee delegation, that, since that communicationto them, he had conversed freely and fully with the President,and had been directed by him to submit to them his views on thewhole subject. He then explicitly tells them that their claims tothe protection of the government, under these ti-bathes and the lawsof the United States, against the operation of the laws of Georgia,could not be recognised. ^I shall not now call die attention of thecommittee to the doctrines assumed by this department, furtherthan to read one or two extracts from this letter to the Cherokeedelegation.To all this, " says the Secretary," there is a plain and obvious answer,deducible from the known history of the country. During thewar of the revolution, your nation was the friend and ally of GreatBritain ; a power which then claimed sovereignty within the limitsof what constituted the thirteen United States. By the declarationof independence, and sub-frequently the treaty of 1783, all the rightsof sovereignty pertaining to Great Britain became vested respectivelyin the original States of this Union, including North Carolinaand Georgia, within whose territorial limits, as defined and known,your nation was then situated. If, as is the case, you have beenpermitted to abide on your Fluids from that period to the present, enjoyingthe right of soil and privilege to hunt, it is not thence to beinferred that this was any thing more than a permission, growing outof compacts with your nation; nor is it a circumstance whence nowto deny to those States the exercise of their original sovereignty."After further explaining to the Cherokees the views of thePresident, the Secretary continues : " But suppose, and it is suggestedmerely for the \mr\yose o( awakening your better judgment,that Georgia cannot and ought slot to claim the exercise of sucha power, what alternative is presented ?" He then explicitly says'that, if any collision should arise, even on this admission thatGeorgia tuas thus in the throng, the claims set up by them undertheir treaties for protection cannot, even then, be recognised ;and, as to the interference of the Executive under the laws o*the Union or these treaties, he adds,The President cannot and will not beguile you with such an expectation;" and finally tells them, " No remedy can be perceived, exceptthat which frequently heretofore has been submitted for yourIt86 MR. STORRS's SPEECH.consideration — a removal beyond the Mississippi, where alone can be <assured to you protection and peace. It must be obvious to you,and the President has instructed mo again to bring it to your candidand serious consideration, that to continue where you are, withinthe territorial limits of an independent State, can promise you nothingbut interruption and disquietude."About the same time, I find that, in a talk delivered by thePresident to the Creek nation, through their agent, he told themthat where they now reside, their "■ white brothers" always claimedthe land, and these lands in Alabama happen to be the landsof the United rotates. He liu-ther inlornied them that his ivhitechildren in Ahiiiama had extended their laws over their country,and that, if they remained there, they must submit to these laws.I believe, Sir, that this bill owes its origin to this state of things,and that its chief poiiey is to co-operate with these States in theacquisition of the l)enetits which they expect to attain to themselvesby the removal of the Indians.By the course adopted by the Executive, and the principleson which he has thus assumed to act on his own responsibility,without consulting Congress, these Indian nations have beensubstantially placed without the protection of the United States.The treaties of this government, made with them from its firstorganization, and under every administration, to which they havesolenudy appealed for their security against these fatal encroachmentson their rights, have been treated as subordinate to thelaws of these States, and are thus virtually abrogated by the executivedepartment. The President has assumed the power todispose of the whole question; and the message proposes to lislittle more than to register this executive decree. This has seriouslyembarrassed the whole subject. It is to be feared that m-superable obstacles have been thus interposed to the fair and unbiasedaction of the house, and the full and free expression of itsopinion. We are called upon and constrained to act undera moral coercion extremely unfavorable to an impartial examinationof the questions before us. I well knovv the strengthof the moral influence of any opinion of the executive departmentof this government, and I feel the weight of it on this occasion.But hope that this House feels too deeply its own re-jsponsiVnIity to the country, to utter this influence to be felthere against the solemn "convictions of its judgment. Thesequestions nnist now be examined here. We must adopt themeasure before us, and in that way sanction all that has beendone, and all which shall follow ; or reject it, and leave the responsibilityto those who have assumed it. ,It is the more to be lamented that this decision of the Executivewas made so hastily, since there was no necessity of actingdefinitively upon it before Congress would have convened. Thtlaws of Georgia were not to have gone into operation immediately.If the first determination, which seems to have beertaken, had not been unfortunately abandoned, and the Statesconcerned had been frankly advised that this subject was to b<referred to Congress, we should have been left free to deviseMR. STORRS'S SPEECH. 87some prudent and just course, by negotiation or legislation,vvhicb might have quieted all parties, and preserved the publicfaith unblemished. It is unfortunately now too late to expectthat any such course could be proposed with the slightest hopeof success. There is no reason to believe that the executivedepartment is desirous to retrace its steps, and it is decisivelyavowed that these States have unalterably determined to proceedto the extremity of a strict execution of these laws in theface of the guaranties of our treaties. We must meet the case,then, here as we find it. The message has invited us to examineit freely ; and, if I am not greatly mistaken, the decision of thisHouse upon the measure now before it, will involve momentousconsequences, for good or evil, to the reputation of the country.While we have been sitting in these seats, deliberating on thismatter, or rather sleeping over it, the intercourse laws havebecome a dead letter in the Statute-book. While the Cherokeedelegation have been at our door, anxiously waiting toknow the fate of their nation, bands of profligate men have intrudedthemselves upon their people, and seated themselvesdown upon their lands. I know that this is not done under theauthority of Georgia, or by the countenance of the authoritiesof that State ; but our agent has informed us that these intrudershave taken courage m their aggressions from the laxity ofopinion prevailing in regard to Indian rights. A state of violence,disreputable to the country, exists there. Blood has been shed. One of the Cherokees has been slain in openday. The forces of the government have very lately been sentthere to piMiserve the public peace ; and there are now somethousands of lawless adventurers prowling through their country,digging for Cherokee gold, and quarrelling among themselvesfor the division of the spoil. I am not at all surprisedthat outrages of this sort have l)een renewed there. Theywere to have been expected, and are nothing more than theobvious consequences, which must have certainly followed theleast relaxation of the former policy of the government. Theprotection, which these unfortunate ]people have demanded ofi'll, has failed to secure them against these evils.By surrendering the question of sovereignty, the Executivehas, for all substantial purposes, virtually surrendered the treatiestoo. The intercourse laws of the United States are nullifiedwith them. For until this was done, the right of these Statesto extend their laws over the Cherokee nation and their country,was not sustainable. It has become necessary, therefore, forthose who justify what has been done, to go one step further,and deny the validity of the interior-se laws, and the treatiestoo. That ground has accordingly been taken, and gravely attemptedto be sustained. If it be well founded in any principlesof our political system, there is indeed no redress for those whohave trusted to us. We shall have ensnared them in our toils.'We have allured them on to their destruction. These unsuspectingvictims of their generous confidence in our faith, must,be left to bear the calamities which threaten them as they can,88 MR. STORRS'S SPEECH.or perish uiitler them. Tlicy have grievously complained of us,and the country has deeply felt the reproaches of our goodfaith, whioii these complaints could not have failed to inspire inan enlightened and Christian community. The obligations ofour treaties have never been so understood or acted upon before.The events which have followed have shocked the publicfeeling and agitated the country. It requires no skill in politicalscience to interpret these treaties. The plainest man can readyour solemn guaranties to these nations, ami understand them,ibr himself". I can tel! the gentleman from Tennessee (Mr. Bell)that he is greatly mistaken in £Supposing that the excitementwhich prevails is uothin;.;- more than jjuhng sensibility, or thatit is to be attributed to reii^'ous fanatics or aspiring politicians.The memorials on your tables will show you the names of thewarmest friends of this a Ministration. Able civilians andsound statesmen believe yu to be in the wrong. Pious menof all denominations have been afflicted by what has passed,and the consciences of the purest patriots in the country havebeen wounded.In my humble opinion, ir-ir. Georgia has had no reason tocomplain of us, or to accuse the general government of a disinclinationto promote her Interests, as far as it could have beetdone in the true spirit of our engagements to her, and withoutviolating our good faith to the Cherokees. To say nothingnow of'her original title to the country west of her presentlimits, (for we assumed that to be in her by the compact of1802,) we made her what was then considered and accepted asafair compensation for its surrender. We have since burthenedthe treasury with a heavy charge from the proceeds of whatwe acquired, for the extinguishment of private claims under titlesderived from her legislature. The amount paid to these claimants,and to Georgia, was seven millions and a quarter of dollars.In the execution of this compact, I am informed that wehave since extinguished the Indian title within her limits tomore than twelve millions of acres, and at an enormous ex]pense. 1 am ready now to vote any further amount that maybenecessary to carry it into effect honorably, in the spirit inwhich it has always been executed. This is to be done bytreaty. The very delay which has taken place in its completeexecution, from the second year of Mr. Jefferson's administrationto this time, (independently of its obvious meaning on theface of it,) conclusively shows the sense in which it has beenunderstood and acted upon under all administrations. Therecan be no administration, nor any one here, who does not feeland acknowledge our obligation to execute it faithfully.In the message of the Executive, informing us what has beendone, he has given us his reasons, too, for the course which hasbeen taken on his part. While the President has very justlysaid that it w ould be as cruel as unjust to compel the Indiannations to abandon their country, and seek a new home in ^distant land, he has explicitly stated, too, "that they should bdistindlij informed, that, if they remain within the limits of tblMR. STORRs's SPEECH. 89States, they must be subject to their laws" — and that, " in returnfor their obedience as individuals, they will, without doubt, beprotected in the efijoj'ment of those possessions ivhich they haveimproved by their industry. Cut," he adds, " it seems to n\e visionaryto suppose that, in tJiis state of tidings, claims can hallowedon tracts of country on which they have neither dwelt or made improvements,merely because they have seen them from the mountainor passed them in the chase." These are the doctrines ofthe Executive in the words of the message. They are little shortof a copy of their original, and I miirht almost as well have readthem from the report and resolutions of Georgia. These are doctrineSjtoo, which the United States set up in the face of the treatyof Houston ! Tie guaranty of that treaty. Sir, was to the Cherokeenation, and to the iaiuis of the nation, and not to individualsNow, what, on the oilier hand, is the palpable operation — indeed,I may say, the express enactments, of the laws of Georgia — but toannihilate conijiletely the political capacity, and abolish the governmentof the Cherokees, and reduce them all to individuals ?There is to be no longer any nation there. In the language ofthe message, they are to receive protection hereafter " like otJietcitizens" — of Georgia, I ]presume — and not from the United States.The other pearly to our treaty no longer exists. The bill beforeyou follows out these principles, and authorizes the President topurchase the improvements on the lands of the Cherokee nationfrom the individuals who happen to cultivate them for the timebeing, under their own recitations among themselves, and expresslyprohibits any Cherokee from re-occupying them afterwards.These lands then pass to Georgia under our compact.The Executive has expressly yielded to Georgia the power to accomplishthis object by the extinction of the national capacity ofthe Cherokees under her laws. It is an idle v,'ti.stc of words toenter upon any formal reasoning to show that he has thus assumedthe power to abrogate the treaty itself If he has the powerunder the Constitution to do what he has done, it is mere mockery,and an insult to the Cherokees and to common sense; to talkabout the ti-easy of Hoiston as a thing which has any existence.I do not know whom he may have consulted, or who has recommendedto him the course which he has seen fit to adopt Withthis ti-easy ; lint I trust, at least, that this illustrations our notionsof public fliith has received no countenance from that member ofhis cabinet, whom we have been accustomed to consider as standingin the nearest relation to his person, and whose duties havemade him the confidential adviser of the President in negotiationswith other powers.At the threshold of this inquiry, we shall find ourselves metwith a very gi-ave question, intimately connected with the treaty-makingpower, which I hope those who intend to sustain whathas been done, will be able to answer to the satisfaction of theHouse. I am the more anxious to know their dews of it, as wehave heard some specious appeals to the friends of State rights,;o come forward on this occasion, and sustain their principles,"she alarm has been sounded ; and they have rushed to the stand*90 MR. STORUS's SPEECH.dard With an alacrity which leaves us no reason to doubt thatthey have really believed their favorite doctrines to be in jeopardy.I fear that these appeals have had some influence upon the questionbefore us.If there was any point, on which, more than any other, the oppositionto the adoption of the Constitution originally turned, andthe influence of which has been fel by one of the great partieswhich divided the country, it was the apprehension that the newgovernment was either too monarchical in principle, or wouldturn out to be so in practice. This alarm, too, was chiefly foundedon the opinion that the Constitution had provided no adequatesecurity to the States, liy imposing definite and effectual imitationson the executive power and executive discretion. It hasbeen a fruitful source of crimination, whether just or unjust, uponone of the parties, and especially upon general Hamilton and hisfriends, that the tendency of their principles, and of the measureswhich they advised, was to invest the President With powerwhich must jove fatal to the wholesome influence of the Houseof Representatives and destroy the control of the States in theSenate. Under these banners," battles have been fought and won ;and laurels have either been, or thought to have been, gathered.They have certainly been claimed as the rewards of victory, andare even yet worn here as the hereditary honors of the field.The question before us does not involve the right of the President,in the recess of Congress, to decide, in the first instance, forthe regulation of his conduct until they can be convened, themere construction of the terms of a treaty — nor to determine theeffect of an infraction of any of its engagements by the other party.There is nothing ambiguous or of doubtful integration onthe face of the Cherokee and Crock treaties, and no pretence hasbeen set up that they have been disregarded by the executive becausedies nations have not observed them on their part, and kepttheir lilith v.ith us honestly. They were well imdei-stood, originally,on all sides, and arc framed in language that cannot lee perverted.There can be no quibbling as to the real intention ofboth parties. The terms are not susceptible of different significations,and the expressions used are definite and suitable to thesubject matter of them. It is enough, however, that the Executivehas not assumed to act on this ground, and the complaints ofbad faith arc unfortunately all on the other side. Nor are we examiningwhether the capitis fades has occurred under any treatywith a third party, by which any engagements on our part, notoperative before, have come into force. He claims the broad]power that it is lor the Executive to determine the abrogation ofour stipulations, because Georgia has enacted certain laws formore effectually exercising the jurisdiction which she claims overthe Cherokee nation and their lands. He maintains the right, inthat department of die government, to treat the obligations, bywhich the United States are bound on the face of the treaties, asmilled from that time — that they shall be reduced to meannothing any longer — in a word, that, from that time, they have noexistence as treaties with the Cherokee or Creek nations. ThisBIR. STORUS's SPEECH. 91is the doctrine which must be sustained, and it is this stretch ofexecutive power which must be vindicated by those who supportthe measures of the President. The doctrine will reach our treatieswith other powers, too, as well as those now before us ; forwe are examining the right of the Executive to determine such aquestion at all, in any case, and not whether he has decided itcon-eddy in this.But, Sir, the power asserted will be found to be much higherthan the Executive claims it to be. The assumption on which itostensibly rests m the message is, that, by the happening of thecontingency, that Georgia has ''extaiJed" her laws over the Cherokee?,the treaty has now come into collision wth the jurisdictionottliebtate, and must therefore \w. .yielded. But the principlewinch hurls under tins disguise really goes to die total annihilationot the treaties from the beginning, and assizes that they werenever binding on the United States at all. If they ever we sonoact of one of the States could discharge our obligations. Thejurisdiction of Georgia must have been as perfect when thesetreaties were first made as it was in 1827, and the general laws ofthe State must have always applied to the Cherokee country. Ifthe treaties are invalid now, they were always so. The right ofGeorgia to the improvements of the Cherokees, too, is as perfectas It is to their vacant kinds. There is no hiding-place half-way.There is no middle ground on which the Executive can stand. Idoubt if there was ever meant to be any, for less than the wholewould not reach the object to be attained. The principle set uj)cannot be arrested at any ]point short of the total ]prostrations thetreaties, and die unqualified power in the Executive to mould andliisliion them, and to annihilate these or any other treaties at hisown will and pleasure. He asks no advice from any other department,and consults no co-ordinate branch of the government.He acknowledges no obligation to submit such aquesdon to Con-gross,or even to the Senate. His march is onward to the directAccomplishment of the executive will, as if the whole action ofdie government on this subject was the exclusive attribute of executepower. It is this, Sir, which has led to all our embarrassments,and Jirouglit about the ]present disorderly eondidon ol'the government in diis matter. It is to support measures anddoctrines like these that appeals havelieen made, on this occasion,to the friends of State rights. I think that if they examine theirj)ruicii)I(is carefully, we have reason to believe that they will befound on the other side of the (question.It is well kriown that the disposition of the treaty-making powerwas one of the most difficult joints to lie settled in the Conventionof 1787. In Europe, it was in the hands of the sovereign,and was liable to the greatest abuse. It had been used there forpersonal objects, and perverted to die most mischievous designsof ambition. The whole policy of many of the European governmentshad linen seriously involved in the exercise of this power,and it had led to measures the most fatal to their prosperityand peace. Indeed, Sir, many of the calamities which they sufferedfor a century may be traced to the abuse of diis power in92 iWR. STORRs's SPEECH.the hands of the crown. It was in the \\ew of this evil, that, underour Constitution, it was considered unsafe to trust it to the Executive.In Europe it was prerogative ; but here it was to belimited by the Constitution, and subjected to the control of theStates in the Senate, where their sovereignty was equal. It wasa political power, which so seriously affected the general policy ofthe country in its relations with other nations, lus well as in itsoperation on the prosperity of the States at home, that it was evenconsidered unsafe to intrust it to a majority of the States, and theconcurrence of two thirds of the Senators was therefore required.For this purpose, the Senate is the council of the States, and thetreaties are the acts of the States. The Executive is little more, inthat respect, than the agent or organ of the States, in matters ofnegotiation. lie may refuse to act at all, and shut the door ofnegotiation, or decide to submit his preliminary arrangements tothe Senate. This was deemed to be quite as much power ascould be safely trusted to his discretion. His will or his opinion,however, was nothing without their sanction. The treaties,therefore, express the Avill of the States, and not the capriciousinclinations or the pleasure of the executive dejiartnient. Theywould have been the supreme law of the land under the law ofnations, without any express provision in the Constitution ; butthat sanction has been superadded, that there should be no questionof their supremacy. As they constitute the jniblic law ofthe country, the treaty-making power was withheld from the Executive,because, under our Constitution, this was to lie a governmentof law, and not of prerogative, and especially not of Executiveprerogative ; for if his will was to have the force of law, thatwas, to a certain degree, despotism. When the Executive andthe States have ent« i-cd into a treaty, the Constitution has attachedits sanction to it, and given it all its efficacy. Its validity restsupon that, and its force and operation are sustained liythat. Whenonce fixed and adopted as the law of the land, the Executive hasno dispensing power. His own duty is plainly jiresci-ibed inthe Constitution. The control of the States over his will has beenconstitutionally interposed to very little jitn-pose, if treaties are totake effect or not, or be suspended in their operation alec rewards,at his pleasure, Avithout any violation of them by the other party.They are clothed with a sanctity which entitles them to higherrespect than our mere municipal regulations. There are twoparties to them, and the public faith secures their inviolability.And yet it has been gravely asserted, .and attenuated to be maintained,that, after the States have entered into treaties, the Executivemay revise their solemn acts — that he may judge over theStates and above the States — that he may entertain an appealfront them to himself or his cabinet — that he may virtually arrogatetheir treaties by an order in council, and give the force oflaw to an executive proclamation.The treaties anti the law of nations constitute the publiclaw of the Union. They deeply concern private right, as wellas the political relations of the country. If a question should'arise between one of your citizens and the government or a*MR. STORRS'S SPEECH. 93foreign power, would the judiciary regard an interposition ofthe executive, which pi-blessed to exercise the right of impugningthe integrity of your treaties The power, Sir, toadjust and settle the conventional law of all countries, instexist somewhere in all governments. It is vested here in theStates themselves, and when they have established it, the politicalrights of others become irrevocable. You are denied thepower of unsettling it, or revoking your obligations at your ownpleasure. Above all things, we have never trusted the Executivewith that dangerous prerogative. The Semite was vestedwith the power to determine the conventional law of the Union,because they are the peculiar guardians and conservators, aswell as the representatives of the States, in the exercise of thatfunction of their sovereignty. In such matters as, in the exerciseof this high political attribute, might affect their citizensor their own jurisdictions, it could be safely trusted no whereelse. The individual States were denied this power, becausethat might defeat the conventional law of the whole. Thereis nothing new, or suggested now for the first time, in thatoperation of treaties, which, to some extent, affects and controlstheir domestic jurisdiction, and impairs, in some degree, whatgentlemen have so tenaciously held to, a? the reserved rightsof the States. Every treaty of limits ::ir:;l hove that operation.The treaty ui 1783 arrogated all the State laws which impededthe recovery of British debts, and prohibited the States drumpassing any in future. Yet the old Congress had no jurisdictionover that matter, except as a result of the treaty-makingpower. In the letter of Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Hammond, of the29th of May, 1792, he says that it was always perfectly understoodthat the treaties controlled the laws of the States — theConfederation having made them obligatory on the whole ;that Congress had so declared and demonstrated them ; thatthe legislatures and executives of most of the States had admittedit; and that the judiciai'ies, both of the separate andgeneral governments, had so decided. He stated further, thatthe formal repeal of the laws of the States was all supererogation,and showed that Georgia herself had so considered it, andher courts had so adjudged. It was every where consideredthat those laws of the States were annulled by the treaty. Itwould be quite easy to refer to numerous instances of the samesort, in various treaties since the adoption of the present Constitution.As it was foreseen that such must of necessity betheir effect by the law of nations, that feature of the old Confederation,which retains this poAver in the hands of the Statesby the federative representation of these sovereignties in theSenate, is continued under the present Constitution. It wasconfided to, or rather reserved to the States there, as a politicalConfederation of sovereignties, that they might determinefor themselves how far, and to what objects, the conventionallaw of the Union should be extended. It is not, in any sense,the dismemberment of the sovereignty of the States. Thatsuggestion is a mere abuse of words. It may as well be said94 MR. STORRS'S SPEECH.that the sovereignty of a particular State is dismembered bythe constitutional operation ol" the laws of Congress for regulatingthe commerce of the country. The thing of whichgentlemen sneak is the totality of sovereignty, which exists nowhereunder our institutions. I consider that the Slates have,in the strictest sense, retained to themselves in the Senate, theirown control of their reserved rights in the exercise oi' the treatpower. It is saliL'ly placed there under their ownconservation, and they are hounti, in good faith to the Union,to respect the treaties which are there entered into. They arerepresented and act there as in their original capacity. Theycould not act with convenience or usefulness iji any other way.Their rights are safe in their own council. What is constitutionallysettled there, becomes their public law, and they arebound to observe it. It is not perhaps strictly a legislativepower, though Mr. Madison has treated it, in a publication toWhich I shall presently refer, as partaking much of that character.The Constitution declares that " all legislative powers"therein granites shall be vested in Congress. It is not, however,essential to the views which I take of the question, toconsider that ]point.The course of the Executive has overturned these constitutioual securities of the States, and swept away theirpowers His doctrines fall nothing short of an assumption ofthe w^v/er of Congress to abrogate the public treaties in a caseof high and uncontrollable necessity, by exercising the powerof declaring war. If the friends of State rights jiroijose tosanction the violation of these Indian treaties, they must bearhim out to the full extent of this thoughtless usurpation. Thisquestion is not altogether new, though no stretch of executive[prerogative like this has ever before occurred or been claimedunder any administration. I presume that gentlemen are familiarwith the history of the Proclamation of Neutrality, issuedby general Washington in 1793. This declaration by the Presidentof the disposition of the government to remain at peace,and warning our citizens to abstain ii'om any' acts that mightinvolve them or t!.« government in the war, was looked uponwith jealousy. ]; was a topic of much remark, and was closelyscrutinized. Yet it violated no treaty. It assumed to suspendnone of our obligations, and settled no question arisingupon them. General Washington neither claimed nor exercisedsuch a power. The Proclamation was precisely what it professedto be, and no more. The administration assumed a postureof neutrality, and the Proclamation declared the intentionof the President not to change the relations of the government,until Congress should convene and settle that question. Inthe mean time, our citizens were forewarned, that if theymingled w with the parties to the war, and took part with eitherside, the government would not extend its power for their protection.It was unanimously sanctioned in the cabinet. Mr.Jefferson approved it, and has informed us that he " admittedthat the President, having received the nation at the close ofMR. STORRs's SPEECH. 95Congress, in a state of peace, was bound to preserve it inthat state, till Congress should meet again ; and might proclaimany thing which went no further." Whether the Proclamationwas to be treated as implying a pledge of future neutrality,was another matter, and a speculative question. But generalWashington and Ins administration were uncommitted to anysuch construction of it. It was an abstract question, and thePresident, at the opening of the next session of Congress, laidthe whole subject before them fbr their constitutional actionupon It. General Hamilton fitly declared, that no opinion ofthe President, on the point of neutrality, or the French o-uarany, could in the least affect the question; and the Messagesimply announced the issuing of the Proclamation and its realobject. Mr. Madison has furnished us with his opinions on thenature of the treaty-making power, in the letters of Helvidius.The friends of State rights may clearly see, in that commentary,in what direction the government is advancing, if the measuresof the Executive, since the adjournment of the last Congress,are sanctioned by this House. The power he has exercisedinvolves the assumption of the most transcendental sovereigntyof the States, and prostrates every other department ofthe government. The Executive may in other ways bring youinto collision with foreign nations, on his responsibility to thosewho may constitutionally call him to answer ; but in the casebefore us, I consider that he has acted by open usurpation. Itshould be quite enough that he may, in the exercise of his confessedpowers, force you into Avar against your own will, withoutyielding to him the power to enthrone himself above theConstitution. If, on any question which involves the constructionof a treaty — much more its validity — he may assume thepowers of the Senate, the Judiciary and Congress, there is nolonger any power in the government, which can be said tohave been linseed by the Constitution at all. It is a bold stepindeed of executive prerogative, and I have been surprised tofind that gentlemen in this house sit down so quietly underit. I was anxious, in the early part of the session, to knowhow it might be received by the Senate; but my doubts wereentirely removed when this bill appeared at your door. Theyhave capitulated. They are completely disarmed, and havebeen marched out of their entrenchments without the honorsof war. The duty of the Executive in this matter was exceedinglyplain. If he doubted as to the validity or operation ofthese treaties, the examples of his predecessors were beforehim. He should have at least paused before he moved sorashly — have kept all things in the condition in which theystood, and submitted the whole case to Congress. The firstsuggestion made to the Cherokee delegation was right ; and itis to be lamented that it was ever revoked or withdrawn.What is to be insecurity for our European treaties ? If theExecutive doubts as to the construction or validity of those, too,shall he cut the knot for himself, and dissolve their obligations.'Our commercial treaties have no greater sanctity than any96 MR. STORRS'S SPEECH.Others. Is your foreign trade and intercourse with other nationsto be at his mercy too ? I am not aware that the laws ofCongress have any greater sanctions than your treaties. Youhave many treaties with other nations for the advantage ofyour citizens. Shall the Executive so deal with these, too, asto prostrate your navigation, or subject it to retaliation? Hemay annul the stipulations of treaties made to favor your owntrade : for if he can overleap the law of nations and the Constitutionby revoking those which favor others, you have no than his will for yourselves. He can release themfrom their stipulations in your favor, as well as those whichoperate agai!:.-<t them. If he should think that all his predecessorsand former Senates have been wrong-headed on otherpoints, and that they have been too liberal to particular interests,or have favored commerce, or navigation or manufacturestoo much, it is only for the Executive to put tbrth hispi-prerogative, and your constitutional securities are in his hand.I am ready to admit that a case of high and uncontrollablenecessity may occur, so deeply involving the fate of the country,or so seriously affecting its safety, that the President, submittinghimself to a high responsibility, july feel it to be hisduty to decline the execution of a treaty until Congress can beconvened. But his duty in such a case is very clear. He maysuspend acting upon it altogether, bit he has no power to determinesuch a question finally for himself. He must submitit to Congress. If a treaty is to be declared void, it is fortJon-dress only to annul it.* The President and Senate cannot doitunless by negotiation. But, Sir, these are extreme cases,and that before us is not one of them. The President has not lacted, or professed to act, with any such views. He has givento the other party his own final determination of the question,and has acted upon it throughout. He declined to suspend thematter at all till the case could be sent here, and directed the )Secretary of the war department to inform the Cherokee delegationthat the course of the government was changed, and tocommunicate to them his final decision. He asks us now forno opinion upon it; but, considering it settled, we are called Iupon to appropriate some millions to relieve the other partyfrom the condition to which his decision has reduced them.I know that there is apathy here under these assumptions of jthe Executive; but we are bound to resist these encroachmentson the powers of Congress at the beginning. This is not adistant alarm. The invader is within this hall. His manifestois on your table ; and, at the next step, we, too, shall have sur-jrendered at discretion. I have often thought that, after all,jthose who usmp authority were not so nuich to blame as wecommonly consider their to be, when we find others so readyto yield up the powers of government into their hands. Romepreserved her liberties until her public councils prepared theThis would amount, in most cases, to a declaration of war; and Congresscould do it only under the power of declaring war. Ed.MR. STORRS'S SPEECH. 97way for one family to establish itself on their ruins ; and theTutors and Stuartss did not rule in England by proclamation,until servile parliaments looked upon the advances of prerogativeat least with indifference. If these encroachments of theexecutive department are not met and repelled in these halls,they will be resisted no where. The only power which standsbetween the Executive and the States is Congress. The Statesmay destroy the Union themselves by open force, but the concentrationof power in the hands of the Executive leads to despotism,which is worse. Of the two evils, I should prefer thenotifying power in the States. It is less dangerous, and admitsof surer remedy. A single State may occasionally sit unquietlyunder the measures of government, but the good sense ofthe people will set all things right in the end. But the executivedepartment never yields up power. The whole Unionwill sooner or later feel the shock, if this control of our treatiesshall be surrendered. The mischief will reach every where,and is irreparable. The judiciary may partially protect individualright, but there are two parties to the treaties, and oneof them will not always be under your control. We have alreadyreached a point in legislation, at this session, where weshould pause, and seriously consider in what path we are advancing.There are several bills now on your table, formallyprepared in the committee rooms of this House, and reportedhere, which confer powers of an extraordinary character onthe Executive. When you shall have passed the bill now underconsideration, which places your territory west of the Mississippiat his sole disposal, the two bills relating to the armyand navy, the reciprocity act reported a few days ago by oneof my colleagues, and yielded up the power claimed over yourtreaties, this government will scarcely be a masked monarchy.The Constitution will have become blank paper, and the firstdictator may come to your table and write his decrees ripon itat his pleasure. It may not become me to address an admonitionto this House, and it would profit nothing from me or anyman, if history has already done it so often in vain. But it isat least time for us, as prudent men, to open that book at almostany page, and read the fate of all republics that havegone before us and perished; or, if we are not admonished bythe past, to look around us, and see what is passing in the worldin our own day. What is now the condition of South America,in whose emancipation we felt so deep an interest, and wherewe hoped to find the cause of free government strengthenedagainst the alliances of its enemies ? Disunion has blastedour hopes. Slavish Congresses have there betrayed theircountry, and the power of that whole continent is swayed bybands of reckless despots. Yet, while their liberties have beencrushed, we find in Europe that, in spite of the power of kinglyalliances, the parliament of one government at least, and that,too, once the most despotic of them all, is successfully limitingthe power and influence of the crown. Shall we, then,strengthen the hands of the Executive here as one of the secusMR. STORRS'S SPEECH.cities of the rights of the States ? I know very well the answerwhich geiitlernen are ready to oftcr on this occasion. We areto be told that his decision Lias been in laver of the States. Itis this which leads us to look u])oii his measures with complacency; and this is the soothing opiate by which lie has quietedour fears. I should like to hear the answer to another question.What will be the decision of the Executive in the nextcase ? Will that be in favor of the States, or against thcni ? Iwill tell you, Sir. They will not be suffered to ask that question.When they have conceded the power to settle such amatter for hiniseif, the Executive will lake care to exercise hisnew ]prerogative without consulting them. We may see, outhis occasion, in the clearest lille, the teiiueucy of executivepower in those collisions which occasionally spring up in everyfederative government between the members of it and the head.This department is constantly on the watch, and seldom failsto secure to itself the arbitrament of every such matter. Thisthird jmrty is ever lying in wait tor ]power. Under some plausibledisguise, it attracts the confidence of the parties, and notunfrequently by appeals to the j)iiiie as well as the interests ofStates, it secures itself in its usurpations, and leads them willinglyto rivet their own chains. If the Executive had decidedthat all our former treaties with the Cherokees and Creekshad been void, as to the cessions of anil which some of theStates have received under them, should Ave not have witnesseda very discredit feeling here ? Should we not have heardsomething — and that, too, quite earnestly — of plighted faith —of solemn treaties — and the constitutional securities of theStates? By what process of infatuation, or by what operationof self-love or State pride, have we brought ourselves to yieldto the Executive the power to pronounce these treaties tobe worthless to the other parties ? There can be no tyrannyworse than that which refuses to be governed by its own rules.I find that we have entered into njore titian two hundred treatieswith the Indian nations since the declaration of independence.Fifteen are with the Cherokees alone, and all but oneof these have been made since the adoption of the ]present Constitution.Tliey have been made under every administration.Commissioners for treating have been nominated to the Senate,and regularly commissioned for this purpose. Every Senatesince 1789 has ratified them ; and they are proclaimed by theExecutive like all other treaties. The statesmen, whose nameshave sanctioned tl'.eni, are Washington, Adams, Jefferson,Madison, and Monroe. I see among them, too, the name of thepresent Chief Magistrate. It is in the face of such a case asthis, that we have heard the validity of Indian treaties denied,and the history of this government t()r half a century treatedas a deliberate system of jugglery and imposture.If there is any foundation for the doctrines which have beenput forth to justify ourselves in disregarding these treaties, wearebound to make out a case so clear that no plausible doubtcan be started against us. Our path must be free, open andMR. STORRS'S Sl'EECH. 99unobstructed ; and we must not only see that we can go there,but that we can do it with safety and honor. If there can beany doubt, it becomes us, if we regard our faith, to ask ourselves,as honest men, which party is entitled to the benefit ofit in morality ? — the ignorant or the enlightened ? — the weakor the strong ? — the defenceless or the powerful ? We shouldtake care that, on such a question, it shall not be said of us thatwe have tin-own our sword into the scale. The Cherokeetreaties and our guaranties to then) have been made for compensationsgranted to us on the face of them. Now, what saysnatural justice in such a case ? You have taken these compensations,and are in the enjoyment of them to this day. Can yourestore to the other party what you have taken from him, andwhat you tempted him to yield to you ? Can you give back therights which he has surrendered ? Can you place him in thesituation from which you have enticed him? Is this now inyour power, if you were even disposed to do it ? These arequestions. Sir, which will be asked, and they ought to be asked.It is better for us to ask them now. For they must be answeredtoo — and answered honorably for you ; or your countryis disgraced before the world. You are handling no lightor trifling matter. You are pressed on every side by circumstances,which should constrain prudent men to look well totheir steps. While these treaties are lying open before you,and you are compelled to look such an array of names as thesein the face, he must be a bold man, and one having a very goodopinion of himself, who can step forward and efface the mosthonorable portion of your history, and hold up the illustriousmen who founded this government as ignorant of the first]principles of the Constitution. I have too much confidence inthe honor and justice of this House to believe that we are preparedso soon to blemish the reputation of those names, whichwe have been taught to venerate from our childhood.I have carefully examined the report of the committee onIndian affairs, to And on what ground this bill is to be supported; and, great as my persona! respect is for the gentlemen whoare on that committee, I am constrained to say, that I havefound in that diaper subtle principles thrown out, but not established— ingenious doctrines started, but not proved — and refinedtheories projected, which I think the history of the countrywill not sustain. The positions relied on to support the argumentof the committee against the right of the Indian nations tosoil or sovereignty are, "that possession, actual or constructive,of the entire habitable portion of this continent was taken by thenations of Europe, divided out and held originally by the rightof discovery as between themselves, and by the right of discoveryand conquest as against the aboriginal inhabitants;"that, "although the practice of the crown of England was notmarked with an equal disregard" (as that of Spain) "of therights o? personal libertie in the Indians, yet their pretensions tobe the owners of any portion of the soil were whole disregarded;" that " in all the acts, first of the Colonies, and afterwards of100 MR, STORRS's SPEECH.the States, the fundamental principle that the Indians had norights, by virtue of their ancient possession, either of soil or sovereignty,has never been abandoned, either expressly or by implication,"and that the recognition of these principles may beseen in the history of the federal government.Before I proceed to a more particular examination of thesepositions, which have been advanced with so much confidence,I feel it to "be a duty to the State which I have the honor inpart to represent here, to say something of her policy towardsthe Indians within her limits. I have been somewhat surprisedto hear, on several occasions during this session, that NewYork had some interest ili this question, and that her policy,since the revolution, would be found to sanction the principleswhich have been advanced in relation to the Cherokees. 1feel bound not to let this opportunity pass without setting thatmatter right. I deny. Sir, that there is any just ground forthese assertions ;"■ and more especially I deny, that she hasmaintained any doctrines, which go to impeach the sanctity, orimpair the obligations of any treaties made by the generalgovernment with the Indian nations in that State. By thetreaties of Fort Schuyler of September 12tli, 1788, September22d, 1788, and of Albany of February 25th, 1789, the Onondagas,Oneidas and Cayugas expressly cestui and granted alltheir lands to that State, and the occupation of certain portionsof the lands thus ceded was allowed them by the State in thesame treaties. The Stourbridge and Brotherhood Indians cameinto that State from some of the New England States. Noneof these tribes, therefore, hold any lands there under their nativeor original title. Whether they are to be treated as athens ornot, or whatever their relation to the State may be, thej^ aresubject, like all aliens as well as citizens, to the criminal jurisdictionof the State. But as these tribes, as well as others, havebeen placed under her protection, she has recognised her obligationto secure them against the frauds and encroachmentsof white men. She Alas bound, in the treaties I have referredto, to do this as to their lands, and she has ever respected themhonorably. Accordingly, it has been made unlawful for hercitizens, or any other than Indians, to settle among them ; or to])iu-cliase their lands; or to prosecute against them any actionupon any contract, in her courts. Surely New York mayregulate the conduct of her own citizens in these matters asshe pleases. But she has not stopped there. Agents and attorneysfor them have been appointed, and paid, too, by the State,to advise them in controversies among themselves, or withothers, to defend them in A\ actions brought against them, andto prosecute for them. Yet I find these laws, passed for theirprotection, among those gravely reported from the committeeon Indian affairs under a resolution of this House, and laid uponour tables to show, I presume, that New York claims the samepower over the Indian tribes and their lands that Georgia, Alabamaand Mississippi have done over the Indians within theirlimits. Why, Sir, if these laws are carefully examined, theyMR. STORRS'S SPEECH. 101would show nothing to that effect, did the Inditing still holdtheir lands and sovereignty under their native claim and right.So careful has New York been on the point of Indian title,that, although the Mohawks were driven into Canada, at theclose of the revolution, and their country was wrested fromthem by actual conquest, we find that, as late as llje 29tli ofMarch, 1797, she purchased their title at a treaty held at Albany,under the authority of the federal government. It purportsto have been made with "the Mohawk nation of ruffians residingin the Province of Upper Canada, within the dominions ofthe king of Great Britain," in the presence of Isaac Smith, acommissioner appointed by the United States. By anothertreaty, held at New York, on the 31st of May, 1705, the Statepurchased of" the seven nations of Indians of Canada," all theirclaims to lands within her limits, reserving a small tract at St.Regis.The Seneca nation still claim to hold their lands under theiroriginal title. But New York has no interest in them. Thepre-empire right was conveyed to Massachusetts many yearsago, and is now held by individuals under purchases from thatState. I have noticed, in the Executive Journal, that, on the24th of February, 1827, a conveyance by ti-easy Irom the Senecanation of part of their lands to some of these individuals,made in the presence of a commissioner of the United States,was laid before the Senate by mr. Adams. On the 29th ofFebruary, 1828, a resolution to ratify it was negatived, the Senatebeing equally divided on the question. On the 26th ofMarch, the Blowing resolution was submitted by one of thesenators from Georgia, (Tvlr. Berries:)resolved, That, by the refusal of the Senate to ratify thetreaty with the Seneca Indians, it is not intended to expressany disapprobation of the terms of the contract entered into bythe individuals who were parties to that contract, but merelyto disclaim aiuj paidtr over the subject matter."This resolution was modified, on the 4th of April, by omittingthe latter words, and inserting so as to read, "to disclaim thenecessity of an interference hj the Senate with the subject matter,"and passed in that form. These proceedings struck me assomewhat novel ; and I find that the Senate departed, in thisinstance, from its former practice, on the same subject, underMr. Jefferson's administration. Tire treaties between the Senecasand Oliver Phelps, as well as the Holland Land Company,for perfecting the same pre-empire right, were laid before theSenate by Mr. Jefferson, and formally ratified, like other treaties.There was but one dissenting vote, (Mr. Wright of Maryland.)Neither Mr. Jefferson nor the Senate appear to havethen thought that this was an interference in any matter beyondtheir power. How soon afterwards it was discoveredto be so, I cannot say. It may, perhaps, be inferred thatthis treaty was considered more in the nature of a private contractthan a political treaty in the sense of the Constitution ; andthe conclusion to which the Senate came may admit of that9*102 MR. STORRS'S SPEECH.explanation. But I think that the proceedings followed tooclose upon the Georgia resolutions, to authorize us to considerit as a grave precedent, in its bearing on the question of Statesovereignty.The conuiiittee have referred us to an expression found inan opinion delivered in the Supreme Court of New York, bythe Chief Justice, in which they came to the conclusion thatthe Indians were to be considered as citizens of the State, andcapable of taking by descent. They have copied into theirreport an extract of half a dozen words, in which the ChiefJustice said that he " knew of no half-way doctrine on thissubject." It would be quite enough for New York to say, inanswer to this case, that this opinion was afterwards reversedin the Court of Errors, with great unanimity; and this verypoint Alas then fully examined by the Chancellor. But itwould have been mole fair to have furnished us here with asomewhat larger extract from the opinion of the Chief Justice.The context would have shown us more clearly the views,which led the Court to the conclusion to which they came.He says that the Court " do not viean to sais that the conditionof the Indian tribes, at former and remote periods, has beenthat of subjects or citizens of the State. Their condition hasbeen gradually changing, until they have lost every attnlnite ofsovereignties, and become entirely dependent upon and subjectto our government. I know of no half-way doctrine on thissubject." Now, Sir, I thiidv that the fair import of this is ratheragainst the position taken by the committee. We ail admitthat there is no half-way doctrine on this point. Every candidman will admit, too, that a tripe of Indians, within any of theStates, may so far dwindle away, or abandon their right toself-government, and so far dissolve their original institutions,that they may be considered, on the soundest principles, tohave become pierced in our society, and extinct, for all politicalpurposes, as separate communities. It wofild be very easy torefer you to cases of that sort in New England. The ChiefJustice said that the time had come when the Cours, on thoseprinciples only, might so consider the Indians in New York.It was not a question involving strict ]principles of municipallaw merely. The Court considered that such was, in fact, theircondition." But the case is reversed, and the law of the State issettled, to this day, as the Coin-t of Errors left it. The ChiefJustice, however, no where denied the original native right ofthe Indians to sovereignty. He expressly disclaimed any suchdenial. He asserted no rights of conquest over them or theirlands. He said nothing of disregarding Indian pretensions totheir lands, or that any of the Colonies or States had ever maintainedthat they bad no rights of sovereignty or soil. There isnothing of this or any thing that countenances if, in the opinionof the! Court. Such doctrines as these would have startledthe moral sense of the State, and contradicted her whole history.And how far, Sir, after all, coidd the committee havepressed this opinion into their service, if it had never beenMR. STORRS'S SPEECH, 103overruled ? It referred only to the condition of the Indians inNew York. It neither speaks nor treats of any others ; nordoes it profess to suggest any principles which reach the casebefore us here. Upon these it is silent.It is very obvious how the Court were led to the conclusionto which they came. No one can read this opinion, and failto see that they relied chiefly on the effect of the Act of April12th, 1822. The history of this Act is well known to everylawyer in that state. Soonongize, a Seneca Indian, had beenindicted for killing an Indian woman within the Seneca lands.She had been put to death under the authority of the Senecachiefs and sachems. He pleaded to the jurisdiction of theState tribunal, and the question came before the SupremeCourt, for their opinion, in 1821. It was fully discussed by theattorney-general, and the counsel for Soonongize, (Mr. Oakley,)and the learning, research and ability displayed in that argument,will be long remembered at the bar, and in the courts ofNew York. I recollect well the general impression at the barat that time on the point. Tbe Court held the case under advisementuntil the next winter They found no )principles onwhich they could safely aliirm, in a judicial opinion, the jurisdictionof the State Court. Tliey reported the case to theGovernor, and recommended that the question should be submittedto the legislature. The Act of 1822 was passed. Therewas, however, no Indian land to acquire. No code of Indiancrimes was enacted, nor were Indians disqualified to testify inany case. The object and spirit of it are very nmnifcst in therecital which recedes it. It states that the Senecas had exercisedthe power of [finishing, even capitally, individuals of theirtribe ; that the sole and exclusive cognizance of comes belongsto the State; and that, to protect the Indians, this jurisdictionought to be asserted to that extent. Now, Sir, what was thecase before the legislature, and on what motives did they act''They saw that death was inflicted upon the Senecas, undertheir bloody code and summary Indian forms, with no regardto proof, or any secvn-ity for the fair investigation of truth.Crimes, too, were of the most fanciful character. Sorcery andwitchcraft were among them. The system was, in itself, littleless than murder. There was some form or mockery of inquirybefore the chiefs, but nothing like trial. The foundation ofwhat we call punishment had no reference among them to theprotection of their society, but was rather the infliction of personalretaliation or ]private revenge. I believe that the caseof Soonongize partook somewhat of that character ; but I donot recollect the circumstances well enough to say that I maynot be mistaken on that point. The intention of the legislaturewas to rescue them from this condition — to extend to them, ifit could possibly be done, some security against the inhumanproceedings of this Indian code — to afford them a fair and impartialtrial — a trial by testimony — the aid of council, and thesecurity of a jury. It was felt that the State owed it to humanity— to the unfortunate people cast upon her protection — to her104 MR. STORRS'S SPEECH.own character, and lier responsibility to the opinion of mankind,to make that effort to arrest this course of violence and wasteof liinnan life. If the act can be sustained, it is undoubtedlydesirable that it should be. But this is not the first occasionon which I have expressed my own opinion, that it left thewhole matter exactly where it found it. It has once been myprofessional duty to examine that question in its bearingupon another case. The sovereignty of the Senecas is yeunimpeached, if it should be found that they were not subjectto the jurisdiction of the State, when this act was passed'.That question yet remains to be tried. However benevolentthe intentions of the legislature may have been, yet, if it shouldbe found that the consent of the Seneca nation to the exerciseof this power was necessary, the Courts will pause before theyassume jurisdiction under it. J am not aware that the Act hasever been executed. It was shortly after its passage, and inthe first case which brought U|) the question, as to the conditionof the Indians in another form, that the Suj)renie Courtsrelying on the inferences to be drawn from that law, decidedthat they were citizens, and subject, like all others, to the lawsof the State. But, since the reversal of this case, the opinionof chancellor Kent is considered to be the law of the StateHow much aid, then, to the doctrines of the report of the committeeon Indian affairs, can be drawn from the course of judicialdecisions in New York, even since the passage of the Actof 1822, I leave to you to determine, and will dismiss this partof the subject with the remark that, if, by the public or conventnational law of that State, or the Union, whether arising fromtreaties, or founded on any ]political principles of our system,the Seneca nation held their sovereignty in 1822, that Actcould not rightfully take it away.I shall cheerfully concede that we are to look to the acts of)the Colonies, and especially of the States and the federal gov-lernest, to determine the rights of soil and sovereignty claim-jed by the Indian nations ; but I shall be compelled to detain!you longer than I should have done, had the committee on In-jtian affairs claimed with less confidence, and given us betterproof, that the fundamental principle that the Indians had noright to either, had never been abandoned, either expressly orby implication. Whatever may have been the public law beforethe revolution, it would be quite sufficient to settle thisquestion conclusively in favor of the Indian nations, by showingwhat the acts of the old Congress, the States, and the federalgovernment, have been from the declaration of independenceto the present time. But, as we find upon our tables acollection of colonial laws, some of which were passed nearlytwo centuries ago, I will trouble you with some reflections thathave occurred to me on this mode of disposing of the difficultiesthrown in the way of gentlemen by the "history of latertimes.I cannot agree, that we are to go back quite so far, to ascertainthe public or conventional law of the federal government,MR. STORRS'S SPEECH. 105or to look beyond the revolution, for the political law of theStates. This collection of laws certainly contains some, chieflyof an early date, which may now appear to be somewhatwhimsical ; and there is no doubt that many could be found,which would show less regard to Indian rights, and perhaps tothe onion claims of humanity, than some of these. Theremay be much to disapprove and much to lament in our earlyhistory. I cannot say that I have found much instruction fromthe extracts laid before us of these early laws of the colonists;and I certainly feel no gratification that they have been rescuedfrom oblivion, and placed among the documents of thisHouse. I am sorry to see them here. It would not, however,be difficult to account for the origin of them, without attributingthem to a spirit so unfavorable to the claims of the native inhabitantsof this continent, as the committee on Indian affairsseem to have assumed.It would be rather remarkable, if we could show that Indianrights were always held in high respect, or that treaties withIndians were always strictly observed. We must make greatallowances for the early colonists. They were settled here, ata great distance from Europe. They were little regarded, andaltogether unprotected by the mother country. Their vicinityto these fierce and warlike nations often produced dangerouscollisions with them. A state of exasperation sprung up, whichled to merciless wars and bitter and implacable resentments.The French were on the other side of the Indians, and sometimesexcited them even to the extirpation of the English colonists.If we consider what the state of society was, and howstrongly the principle of self-preservation is implanted m the1 human heart, we should rather wonder that the committee onIndian affairs had not been able to find much more m our earlyi history to sustain their positions. Was it to be expected thatI our fathers were to be more than men, m the critical andI afflicting situations in which we know from history they were- often placed ? Would you look for calm philosophy in menwhose families were awakened from their pillows at midnightby the yell of the war-whoop ?— when they fled, naked, in thedepth of winter, to the nearest thicket for refuge from the tomahawk?— when they looked back upon the conflagrationwhich lighted up the pathless forest around them ?— when theyreturned to the burning ruins, and saw the gate-posts of theiri dwellings sprinkled with the blood of their children, and theremnant of their-families swept into captivity ?— or when they■ gathered from the scorching ashes the calmed relics of all theyhad held dear on earth? If we cannot justify that extremityof retaliation to which human nature, in such circumstances,could be tempted, let us be just enough to their memory to forbearto reproach the errors of their social affections. Why,Sir do we not go back, and bring up, for our example at thisday other laws, of our own or other countries, more gravelyenacted, and quite as rigorously enforced ? We might, perhaps,be able to justify the practice of making slaves of the Indians ;106 MR. STORRS'S SPEECH. :or, if we should be inclined to go back still farther, we couldjustify the putting of prisoners of war to death. It is riot halfa century since the African slave-trade was generally sustainedby the ia-ivs of Christian nations. 1 should be very.sorry" to believe that the government was driven to justify the!passage of this bill under any examples like these; or that we;should be forced to confess that we and all the world havemade no advance, for two centuries, in political science, or;the morality of the code of public law, by which enlightened;nations are willing to be governed. I hope that, during thattime, our society has gone forwards, and not backwards. Weboast much of our improvement in other things; and whyshould we not be willing to admit it in this ? I protest, at leastagainst going back to the thine when the fires of Smithfieldwere lighted up ; and I cannot consent to take the expulsionof the French from Acadia as a lit model to illustrate our dutiesto the Cherokees.We had better come down to later times — after Christianityhad shed its piu'e light more clearly upon the world — after thecolonial governments had become better established — the codeof public Ian' better considered, and the duties of nations betterunderstood and defined. It will be quite as well for us to seewhat our own governments have done in the last fifty years,,and ask ourselves if we can honorably repudiate this portion ofour history. We may, perhaps, find ourselves so hemmed inon all sides, that this question is not to be debated at this day.If it should turn out to be so, it will profit us very little to knowthat, in a winter's search among the archives of'one of our historicalsocieties, we have been able to find a single treatise,written a century ago, to prove that the Indians never had anyrights at all on this continent. I have looked into that workof the Rev. John Buckley, from which the gentleman from Tennesseeread us an extract ; and it is very true that it makes outthe whole case. The learned author zealously niaintahis thatthe Indians were in a state of nature ; that they had no homes-andno governments, and, consequently, no more right to the-soilor sovereignty than the animals which they followed in the'chase.This is the substance of his argument, and he undoubtedlyconvinced himself of the truth of his hypothesis. But to provethat against our treaties, is to prove nothing, unless it be shownthat we are in a stale of nature too, and that men in a state ofnature are released from the moral law of nature. It wouldbe much easier to get rid of our treaty obligations, by assuringonce that Christian nations were not bound to keep theirfaith with infidels; and plentiful casuistry' can be found for thattoo. This matter is not to be disposed of in that way, nor willit be hereafter. It is too late for us to deny our claims to be-considereda civilized people; that we are willing to acknowledgethe public and social law of the human family, and to be-boundby that code of universal morality, which is confessedby every government, which feels it to be honorable to stand j|MR. STORRS S SPEECH. 107within the pale of Christian nations. It is not a trifling thingfor us to start any principles at this day, on which we may claimto absolve ourselves from the obligation of that faith, which wehave pledged in all our Indian treaties. The question is toosolemnly settled. If it was now an original question, and amere speculative inquiry, we might treat it as a theme for the3xercitatiou of ingenuity with a better grace, and shelter ourselvesfrom the imputations which may follow, under somemore plausible apology. But we cannot approach our Indiantreaties on any side, without finding them secured by sanctionsjvvhich cannot safely be despised.I fully admit, that, shortly after the discovery of America,;he principle became established by European nations, that■;hey held their dominions here, as among themselves, by thesight of discovery, and that this doctrine must be considered assettled at this day, let its origin have been what it may. Weshould hold a maxim of so long standing in the greatest respect.Some inconveniences may have followed Irom uncertainties in;he history of the early discoverers, and the difficulty ol' its applicationto the claims of nations, as the j)Oj)uhition advancedinto the interior. But, from the very nature of the subject, anyrule would probably have led to some collisions. This maylave been considered the best; and almost any rule was preferableto none. It was clearly better for England, and probablyhr France too, to establish this rule, than to submit the questionof title to the decision of the pope, who claimed all undiscoveredlands as his spiritual ]patrimony, and ]parcelled out hisunknown dominions on maps, which furnished him nothing butdegrees of longitude to define the extent of his earthly donations.We must considers therefore, that the question of priorityin right is to be settled by priority of discovery. Occupationdoes not seem to have been at first considered as strictlyessential, though it was generally' taken symbolically. It isprobable, too, that this rule had no reference, originally, to anyquestion growing out of the title of the natives. The moralityof such an application of it would have more seriously meritedthe sarcasm of one of our poets, who has said,The time once was here, to the world be it known,'•■ When all a man sailed L>3' or saw was his own."As the spirit of discovery advanced, the claims of the nativeoccupants who might be found here presented another question.The voyages of Columbus had shown it to be probable,That every part of the new world was peopled. It was necessaryto find some semblance of principle to dispose of theirtitle. In an age which was overshadowed with superstition, andwhen the human mind was darkened by bigotry, it was notfound difficult to silence conscience, and even eidist the religiousfeeling of" mankind in favor of the schemes of avarice andambition. They were, therefore, cloaked under the garb ofreligion. Ojeda's proclamation will show us the nature of theclaims of Spain to the soil and sovereignty of South Americaagainst the natives : —i108 MR. STORRS S SPEECH.I, Alonzo de Ojeda, servant of the most high and powerful kingsof Castile and Leon, the conquerors of barbarous nations, their messengerand captain, notify to you, and declare, in as ample form as 1am capable, that God our Lord, who is one and eternal, created theheaven and the earth, and one man and one woman, of whom youand we, and all the men who have been or shall be in the world, aredescended. But, as it has come to pass, through the number of generationsduring more than four thousand years, that they have beendispersed into'ditferent parts of the world, and are divided into variouskingdoms and provinces, because one country was not able tocontain°thein, nor could they have found in one the means of subsistenceand preservation ; therefore God our Lord gave the chargeof all those people to one man, named St. Peter, whom he constitutedLord and head of all the human race, that all men, in whatever placethey are born, or in whatever faith or place they are educated, mightheld obedience unto him. He hath subjected the whole world tois jurisdiction, and commanded him to establish his residence a1Rome as the most proper place for the government of the world. Helikewise promised, and gave him power to establish his authority inevery other part of the world, and to judge and govern all Christians,Moors, Jews, Gentiles, and all other people, of whatever seelor faith they may be. To him is given the name of pope, which signifiesadmirable, great father and guardian, because he is the fatherand governor of all men, &c.One of these pontiffs, as lord of the world, hath made a grant ofthese islands, and of the terra firma of the ocean sea, to the Catholickinops of Castile, Don Ferdinand and Donna Isabella, of gloriousmemory, and their successors, our sovereigns, with all they containas is more fully expressed in certain deeds passed upon that occasion,which you may see, if you desire it," &c. He then requiresthem to acknowledge the pope and the king as the lord of •' theseislands"' to embrace their religion, and submit to his government,and concludes thus : " But if you will not comply, or maliciouslyrefuse to obey my injunctions, then, with the help of God. 1 willenter your country by force. I will carry (yn war against you withthe utmost violence. I will subject you to the yoke of obedience tothe church and the king. I will take your wives and children, andwill make them slaves, and sell and dispose of tlieui according to hismajesty's pleasure. I will seize your goods, and do you all the mischiefin my power as rebellious subjects, who will not acknowledgeor submit to their lawful sovereign. And 1 protest that all thbloodshed and calamities which shall follow are to be imputed toyou, and not to his majesty, nor to me, nor to the gentlemen whoserve under me ; and, as 1 have now made this declaration andrequisition unto you, I require the notary hero present to grant meacertificate of this, subscribed in proper form." So much for theSpanish title.The state of feeling in England, too, was favorable to thesame code of public law for America. Ryiner has given us atlarge the commission of Henry VIL to the Cabots, from whichI have taken an extract. This king was a near family connexionof Ferdinand of Spain. The tenor of this commission is tosail with the king's vessels, '■'■ adinveniendum, discooperiendum.et investigation quicunque insults, patriae, regions sive provincialGentium et vifidelium, in quicunque parte mundi postsquiz Christians omnibus ante hoc tempore faerunt incognita."MR. STORRS S SPEECH. 109They are then commanded to take possession of their discoveries.The Latin is, as barbarous as the doctrine. No translation coulddo it full justice. It is not improbable that this papier was thework of Eni])son and Dudley, who were the confidential advisersof Henry VII. Their characters are v/ell known to all whohave looked into any history of that period. The kine-dom issaid to have never been in a more disreputable condition than itwas at that time. No man was safe ; and this reign is said tohave been chiefly distinguished by its rapacity and meanness.The successor of this king rewarded the crimes of Empson andDudley by a bill of attainder.James I. made some improvements upon these examples ofhis predecessors. A king who held his notions of prerogative athome was not apt to respect the rights of those abroad very highly.He commissioned Richard Penkevel to sail on a voyage ofdiscovery, and took care to make " assurance doubly sm-e" to thelands of the natives of America. He ]prescribed in Penkevel'scommission the tenure by which the lands were to be held, beforethe voyage was even commenced, declaring that they shouldbe held " of Us, as parcel of our manor of East Greenwich inKent, in soccage, and not in capite." It was on a notion derivedfrom some commission or charter of that sort, that the right ofparliament to tax America was maintained about the time of ourrevolution, on the gi-ound that we were represented in the houseof commons as parcel of the county of Kent. Now, Sir, it isuseless for gentlemen to puzzle themselves with learned thesesand ingenious disquisitions, to show that the European nationswould have been justified in expelling the natives from theirlands, on the ground that they were in a state of nature, and thatman in a state of nature has no right to any thing which heholds — not even to his life. King Hey, Janies, Ferdinand andthe pope, set up no such doctrines themselves. They doubtlessasserted the best which they could find, and ought to have theprivilege of being heard for themselves, and justifying themselvesupon their own principles. We may search as closely as we caninto the history of the claims they set up, and shall find, at last,that they were defended solely on the ground that these were hereticand infidel countries, and that the claims of heretics and infidelsto the earth wei-e entitled to no regard in preference toCatholic dominion. But as the age of superstition and bigotrypassed away — as prerogative became weakened, and popish supremacyfell into disrepute — as the minds of men became enlarged,and the public law improved^jetter principles were established.Before the beginning of the last century', moral and politicalscience had become too far emancipated from the superstition andintolerance of the times of Alexander VI., as well as the Tutorsand Stuartss, to sanctify any longer the violences which had beencommitted in the name of religion and prerogative. Grotius hadlong before given the true foundation of all original title. " Primusacquired modus est occupation forum queen radius sunt."We have the right to take that which others have not already appropriatedto themselves, but we have no right to take away our110 MR. STORRS'S SPEECH.neighbor's property. This was the nile laid dowii by that greatcivilian and Christian moralist. Then it came to be held hy some,that Indian occupation was no occupation for any purpose ; thatit was the state of nature without the security of natural law.Some were so very liberal as to admit that the Indians were men,but held that they roved over the earth as vagrants and outcastsof the lilian family, with no more title, even to what they actuallycultivated, than the brutes that fled before them, or the windswhich passed over the forest, and that they were fair subjects forforce or fraud lor all who might find it to be their interest to ensnareor hunt them down. Titre were John Bullets before1734, who held to this doctrine as stoudyas John Buckley of Colchester.But I doubt if any other tr(*Jitise like this can be foundin the whole history of New England. Why these [people were,above all others, to be excluded from the social law of mankind,was not as closely inquired into as it might have been. It vastrue that their kings and sachems had few or no prerogatives.They were generally goveiTied by councils assemble d from thewhole nation. But if the head men and warriors proved to besometimes refractory, the kings had no power to send them toTower-hill or Tybm-n. Tliey lighted up no tires for heretics, andnever sent their fawn prophets to the stake. They roasted theirenemies only. The' were ferocious and merciless in war, butthey had no St. Bartholomew days. They held large tracts ofuncultivated country, but they had no laws of the forest. It was'neither death nor transportation for a starving man to take a deer ;and it is probable they never heard a discussion on the moralityof spring-guns. They believed in witchcraft as well as someothers of their fellow-men ; and in that they came somewhatnearer to a certain king, who sat in his closet v/ith his treatise on Idemonologj' open before him, and conveyed away their country,by parchment and green wax, before he knew ^^■here it was to befound. We cannot deny that the European governments originallyheld the rights of the Indian nations in very little regard.There were great temptations to tivat them lightly, and they were]not looked upon Avitli that deference to the sounder principles of]justice, and that humanity which has since so highly improvedthe moral law of nations. The spirit of avarice was excited, antithe thirst of dominion was reunited, by the developments of theyresources of the new world. Grants and charters followed, and!were often dispensed as rewards to favorites. But, Sir, whatevermay have been the theories on ^A'liich the government at homeasserted its supremacy, I deny that our English ancestors, whofirst colonized these States, ever countenanced that disregard ofIndian rights, or carried into practice that system of injustice to'the native inhabitants, which has been asserted in the report of;the committee on Indian afl^iiirs. On the settlement of the country,one of two courses was to be pursued — to deny altogetherthe claims of the Indian occupants tor any pui-jiose, and to dispossessthem by \'iol(^nee, under any ]plausible or convenient pretext,or to treat them as holding a qualified right in the soil, and]extinguish their title honestly by purchase. We have ahcadjiiMR. STORRS'S SPEECH. Illsee, in the proclamation of Ojeda, the system pursued by Spain.The natives were treated as fit for spoil only. The history ofSpanish America is the most disgraceful tissue of injustice, crueltyand perfidious villany, which stains the annals of Christendom ;and Spain has suffered for her crime the retributive justice ofProvidence. But, to the honor of our ancestors, history has givenus no North American annals like these. They held the doctrineof discovery so fair as to protect the chartered rights of the coloniesagainst the encroachments of others ; but they never sanctionedany system which left the Indian nations unprotected againstthemselves, and fit subjects for lawless ]plunder. They Avere menwho acted up to their professions before the world. The honorablegentleman from Tennessee, in asking where we should lookfor the monuments of William Penn, directed us to the noble institutionsand enviable prosperity of Pennsylvania. This is allvery' just to the name of Penn, but it falls short of full justice tohis memory. I can tell him where he can find another monumentto the fame of that excellent man. Vattel has perpetuatedhis name to all ages, and in all nations, in that work in which hehas commended to all mankind the invariable respect, m whichWilliam Penn and the Puritans of New England held the rightof the native inhabitants of America to their country.It is verj^ true, that, in the colonies, the crown was consideredas the only legitimate source of tide for its own subjects ; and inmostof them the lands were generally held under patents fromthe crown, or the colonial governments. This was early established,and continues to be maintained to this day. The discoverieshad been made under commissions from the crown, and possessionwas taken in its name. As between the king and his subjects,the lands were treated as the domain of the crowai, and Indianpurchases were not admitted against the gi-ants of the kingor his title. He was considered, in theory, m the light of an originalfeudal proprietor of the country'. It was therefore said, thatAvliat otherwise might have been called, at the bar of the courts,the seisin of the Indian nations, was nothing more against thecrown than a naked occupancy. By the original title of the colonists,under their charters, they held, in fact, under the king, asthe lord paramount of the realm. We hold this doctrine ourselves,so far as it applies to our governments. But we claim nosupremacy over the Indian right, even in tlieoiy,^ because theyare to be treated as in a state of nature, and without governmentsof their own, which we have never acknowledged, or as hereticsand infidels. Instances may doubtless be found in ministry(and the committee have been able to collect a few,) in whichthere was occasionally collision between some of the colonists andthe Indian nations on the point of title. It is probable that insome few cases, injustice was done. But the practice of the coloniessettled down at last in favor of the sanctity of the Indian titleto their lands.The committee have suggested that we slioidd not give muchweight to " the stately forms which Indian treaties have assumed,nor to the terms ofl;en employed in them," but that we should112 MR. STORRS's SPEECH.rather consider them as "mere names" and "forms of intercourse."If treating these Indian nations as proprietors of a qualifiedinterest in the soil — as competent to enter into treaties — tocontract alliances — to make war and peace — to stipulate on pointsevolving, and often qualifying, the sovereignty of both parties, andpossessed generally of political attributes lUlkno^\^l to individuals,and altogether absurd in their application to subjects, is nothingmore iJian "mcrcnames,^^ and "5/«if/j/ /on/is," then tliJs long practiceof the crown, the colonies, the States and the federal government,indeed ]proves nothing. Words no longer mean what wordsimport, and things are not what they are. But these treaties havebeen looked ilion :!s something quite substantial in the time ofthem. Things as firmly settled as these are not to be easily moved.This most hono)'at)le portion of our history is not to be obliteratedby a dash of the jjcn. From a period not long anteriorto the revolution in England, there are numerous Indian treatiesmade by agents of the cro%vii as well as the colonies. Thesewere doubtless made with the ftdl approbation, and, in many instances,under instructions or advice from the croAvn officers.They have been acted u]wu and acknowledged in a way that]puts aU question as to their obligation at rest. The croA\ii andthe colonies found it to l)c their interest to take that course. Themotives ^^hich led to it were various, and are quite obvious evento a careless reader of oiu- history.As long ago as 1(184, we find a '■^ definitive trccdi/" made at Albany,between lord Bellingham, tin n governor of Virginia, and colonelDongan of New York, with the Five Nations. One of thechiefs said to them on that occasion, that "this treaty had spi-eatso far in the earth that its roots woidd reach through the wholeland, and, if the French should tread upon the soil any where, theIndian nations would immediately feel it." They kept this treatyfaithfully, and the colonies owed their security, tor many years, toiit. Short before our revolution, the principle may be consideredto have been so far settled,, that these nations might well claimto be invested with the capacity to contract in that way, as qualifiedsovereignties. The doctrines held in the time of Henry Nati.nd the Stuartss were completely changed before the declarationof independence. On the 8th of April, 1779, general Gage issuedat New York, "% or-Jer of the king" a proclamation fully recognisingthe obligations of the crown, under its treaties viith theIndian nations.I do riot mean. Sir, to be understood to say, that this acknowledgmentof qualified sovereignty would have linen admitted bythe British government to the full extent that we have carried itslice. We Bund it so far settled at the period of our independence,that we openly adopted it as the jniblic law for ourselves.We have ever since placed our relations with the Indians on thatfooting, and they are not to be disturbed now on any Ituieiliil hypothesis.As to their right to the soil, however, that ^^•as long be-ifore solemnity settled in practice, and has remained so lor a ]perishod too long to be now questioned. New England is held underfair and honest purchase from the natives. A very small part oflMR. STORRS'S SPEECH. 113-it was ever claimed by actual conquest. Pennsylvania and NewYork were acquired in the same way. Mr. Jefterson says, in hisNotes, speaking of Virginia, " Tliat the lands of this country weretaken from them by conquest, is not so general a truth as is supposed.I find, in our histories and recoils, repeated proofs ofpurchase, wliieh cover a considerable part of the lower country ;and many mon; would doubtless be found on further search.The upper country, we laiow, has been acquired altogether bypurchases made in the most unexceptionable form." There isnot a foot of land now held by Georgia, for which Ave cannot produce,from authentic history, her title by purchase from the Indiannations. This system, Sir, was conscientious in itself, andfounded in good morals. We may here stand up boldly, likehonest men, before all mankind. 1 am not willing to blot outthese fairest [pages of our history. I will not consent that theseproud monuments of our country's honor shall be defaced. Iwould not darken the living light of thatgloiy, which these illustrationsof the justice of our successors have spread over everypage of their history, for all the Indian lands that avarice everdreamt of, and all the empire which ambition ever coveted.The administration appears to have conceded to Georgia thenight of sovereignty and toil which she claims, in the report of1827, over the Cherokees and their lands, under the impressionthat such was the operation of the treaty of 1783. The Secretaryof War has placed it on that ground, and assumed, in that respect,the principles of the Georgia report. V/e have never consideredthe treaty as any thing more than the acknowledgment of our in-dependence, and we took the rights of the croAvn by accession.The king admitted that he treated with us as a power already in-dependent. lie granted us nothing of our sovereignty. Hemerely relinquished, i<)r himself and his successors, his chain tothe government, propriety and territorial rights over the country.We do not claim these from his gift. The treaty took no sucJiform. We became independent, in fact, in 177(3, and our nationalcapacity came into existence at that time. We were then atliberty, as an independent power, to adopt any policy, or assumeany principles, we believed to be just in regard to the Indian nations.It is too late to inquire whether we might not have begundifferently. We nnist be pound now by the system which we infact adopted ; and our inquiry should be to know, by what principlesof public law we are pledged before the world to abide,in our conduct towards the Indian nations.What doctrines, then, have been assumed, acknowledged, affirmed,established, and acted upon for almost half a century on ourpart, and trusted to by those we have dealt with ? Before youmade the treaty of 1783, you had acknowledged the qualifiedsovereignty of some of these nations. In 177G, we guarantied tothe Delaware nation " all their territorial rights, in the fullest andmost ample manner, as it had been bounded hy former treaties''The treaty states that the article Alas inserted to obviate the falsesuggestion, which our enemies had, by every artifice in their power,inculcated upon aU the Indians, that the United States intends*114 MR. STORRs's SPEECH.ed to extii-pate them, and take possession of their country. Inthe treaty of 1804, they were acknowledged to be the ^^ originalproprietors ;" and you then admitted them to be the " rightful owners"of the lands there referred to. An an-argument was provided,in some of your treaties, for allowing the Delawares and Cherokeesdeputies to the Old Congress. 1 eoidd refer you to numeroustreaties, before and since the treaty of 1783, which conclusivelyrepel the notion that the Indians were transferred to us asweirs of the crowii. It would be an unpardonable waste of timeto examine them, or a fiftieth ]part of them. They include almostevery Indian nation within the States. The Old Congress actedthroughout on the principe's which I have stated.The Constitution lias put to rest a question which arose out ofthe power of Congress under the Confederation, and shows howlargely it was intended to vest the management of Indian affairsin the new government. The articles of confederation had narrowedthe power of ^'' rcgulnthig trade, and managing all affairswith the Indians," by confining it to such as were not membersof any' of the States, and providing that the legislative right of anyState v.'ithin its own limits shoidd not l)e infringed or violated.The Constitution omitted these restrictions. Mr. Madison, in theFederalist, speaking on this point, says :'the regulation of conunerce with the Indian tribes is veryproperly untired from two limitations in the articles of confederation,which render the provision obscure and contradictory.The power is there restrained to Indians, not members of any ofthe States, and is not to violate the legislative right of any Statewithin its own limits. What description of Iiuliaus are to bedeemed members of a State is not yet settled, and has been aquestion of frequent perplexity mid contention in the federal councils.And how the trade with Indians not members of a State, yetresiding within its legislative jurisdiction, can be regulated by anexternal authority', without so far intruding on the internal rightsof legislation, is absolutely incomprehensible. This is not the onlycase in which the articles of confederation have inconsiderately endeavoredto accomplish impossibilities ; to reconcile a partial sovereigntyin the Union, with a complete sovereignty in the States ;to subvert a mathematical axiom, by taking away a part, and lettingthe whole remain."All which can be said in any sense to have passed to the UnitedStates or to the States from the crown, was a naked right ofpre-emption to what were called the crown lands. I speak advisedlywhen I say that the United States have solemnly and deliberatelyadniitied it. This (question was fitly examined by thegovermneiit almost forty years ago, and we stand pledged in suchexpress terms to the Indian nations on this point, that our lijisaresealed. They can show you a case on their jiart, that defies allcavil and all criticism. I know that this is strong language, but Ihave men sur cii my words. I know well the extent of what I say,and what I p!<>(!ge myself to show in saying what I do. It is notathoughtless jilcdge, and it shall be redeemed by proof from thearchives of your own government, which all the subtleties of in-MR. STORRS'S SPEECH. 115tenuity cannot evade, and which will annihilate that learned andlabored hypothesis, on which the rights of the Indians have beendenied by this administration and in these halls. I invite the attentionof gentlemen to the papers, which can be produced onthis subject, and should be gratified to hear what answer is tobe made to them.Before general Wayne moved with the army in 1793, generalWashington determined to make one more effort for peacewith the Indian nations then confederated against us. Thecabinet was convened, and the whole subject of a negotiationwas laid before them. The question as to the rights of the Indiannations was there deliberately examined, and the opinionsof the cabinet were required by the President. In the firstplace, Mr. Jefferson has furnished us fully with his own opinionin the late publication of his' papers.February 2tj, l/U's."First Question. We were all of opinion that the treatyshould proceed, merely to gratify public opinion, and not frontan expectation of success."Second Question. I considered our right of ]pre-emptionof the Indian lands, not as amounting to any tloniiiiiou or jurisdiction,or i)arainoinjtsliip whatever, but merely in the natureof a remainder after the extinguishment of a present right,which gave us no present right whatever but of preventingother nations from taking possession, and defeating our expectancy; that the Indians had the full and undivided sovereigntyas long as they chose to keep it, and that this might be forever; that as last as we extend our rights by ]purchase fromthem, so fast we extend the limits of our society; and as soonas a new portion became encircled within our line, it becamea fixed limit of our societe."Another question seems to have arisen in the cabinet, which,as far as I can gather from the book before me, (for I have notbeen able to lay my hand on the original papers,) involved are-cession to the Indians of certain lands purchased before.Mr. Jefferson was of opinion that the government could "nomore cede to the Indians than to the English or Spaniards, asit might, on acknowledged principles, remain as irrevocably andeternally with tlje one as the other."The negotiation proceeded. Beverly Randolph, BenjaminLincoln and Timothy Pickering, were nominated to the Senate,on the 1st of March, as commissioners, and their appointmentconfirmed. Their instructions are expressed on the face ofthem to have been given by general Knox, " bathe special directionof the President of the United, States." A part of theiraddress to the Indian council is as follows :^^ Brothers — Now listen to another claim, which probablyhas more disturbed your minds than any other whatever." Brothers — The commissioners of the United States formerlyset up a claim to your hole country southward of thegreat lakes, as the property of the United States, grounding this116 MR. STORRS'S SPEECH.claivi on the treaty of peace with your father, the king of GreatBritain, who declared, as we have before mentioned, the middleof those likes, and the waters which unite tlieni, to be theboundaries of the United States.Brothers — We are determined that our conduct shall bemarked with openness and sincerity. We therefore frankly tellyou, that we think those commissioners put an erroneous constructionon that part of our treaty ivilh the king. As he had notpurchased the country of }'ou, he could not give it away. Heonly relinquished to the United States his claim to it. Thatclaim was founded on a right, acquired by treaty with otherwhite nations, to exclude them from purchasing or settling inany ]part of your country ; and it is this night which the kinggranted to the United States.* * * if * *Brothers — TVe now concede this great point. We, by the expressauthority of the President of the United States, acknowledgethe property or right of soil of the great country above described Ito be in the Indian nations, so long as they choose to occupythe same. We oily claim ]particular tracts in it, as beforementioned, and the general right granted by the king, a^ abovestated." ******These papers are to be found in the manuscript volumes ofthe Senate. They were communicated to that body by generalWashington. The originals were doubtless in the wardepartment when the present Secretary wrote his letter of the18th of April, to the Cherokee delegation. In an address ofMr. Jefferson to the Cherokees, during his administration, hesays :I sincerely wish you may succeed in your laudable endeavorsto save the remnant of your nation by adopting industriousoccupations, and a government of regular law. In this, j'oumay always rely on the counsel and assistance of the UnitedStates."Those, Sir, are " the lights that flow from the 7ni7}d thatfounded and the mind that reformed our system," speaking ofwhich, one has said to his country, that a diffidence, perhapstoo just, in his own qualifications, would teach him to lookwith reverence to the examples of public virtue left by his illus 'tribus predecessors.Mr. Jefferson's opinion to general Knox in 1791, speaks alanguage tluit cannot be misunderstood. He there says, " Governmentshould firmly maintain this ground; that the Indians ihave a right to the occupation of their lands, independent of the ;States tvilhin whose chartered lines they happen to be ; that, mitilthey cede them by treaty, or other transaction equivalent to treaty,no act of a Slate can give a right to such lands ; that neither underthe present Constitution, nor the ancient Confederation,had any State, or persons, a right to treat with the Indians,without the consent of the general government." What is theanswer, Sir, which the Cherokees and Creeks have received toall this? The modern records of the department of war, andMR. STORRS'S SPEECH. 117the papers on our table, willsliow us no very enviable contrastto that just and humane policy, which the administration ofWashington solemnly pledged us to follow in our intercoursewith these unfortunate people. If any thing can bind a government,we have not a pretext for denying the qualified sovereigntyof the Indians. We have dealt with them by commissionersappointed under all the forms of the Constitution. Wehave asserted our compacts to be definitive treaties with themas nations. We have ratified them like other treaties. Theyare ]propagated in the statute-book as the law of the land.We have not only recognised them as possessed of attributesof sovereignty, but in some of these treaties we have definedwhat these attributes are. We have taken their lauds as cessions— a term totally senseless if they are citizens or individuals.We have stipulated for the right of passage through their country,and for the use of their rivers — lor the restoration of prisoners— for the surrender of fugitives Irom justice, servants andslaves. We have hinted our own criminal jurisdiction andour own sovereignty, and have disfranchised our citizens bysubjecting them to other punishments than our own. With,the Cherokees you have, in oiie treat', stipulated the mannerof proceeding for injuries, by a formal declaration of hostilitiesbefore war. These are some of the most prominent and remarkableof your acts. You cannot open a chapter of Vattel,or any writer on the law of nations, wliicli does not define yourduties, and explain your obligations. No municipal codereaches them. If these acts of the federal government do notshow these nations to be sovereign to some extent, you cannotshow that you have ever acknowledged any nation to be so.The condition of these Indian nations is not treated of by authorson ]public law in Europe, because no such condition ofthings exists thei'e. You may find some analogies in formertimes, but they will turn out to be against you. If you look tothe moral law, you can find no escape there.I might ask, Where was your authority to make the compactwith Georgia .'' The lands to be acquired were not to be of thedomain of the general government. V/hat is the bill now beforeus? Who are the *^ 77 at ions" with whom we have "existingtreaties ?" Who are to receive new guaranties frown theUnited States, if, after this, they will accept another fi-om us .^Who are those that the President is to exercise a " superintendence"over ? Are they citizens"? The framers of this bill havenot been able to make its provisions intelligible, without admittingmuch which they deny in sustaining it. The guaranties nowproposed are as much a dismemberment of the sovereignty ofthe United States as former ones were of Georgia. The onlydifference is, that the President alone is to act in this matter,while your treaties were made by the States in the Senate,where the sovereignty of Georgia was represented. If thereis any thing in this part of the argument against the Cherokees,gentlemen are bound to protect the sovereignty of theUnited States, by voting against this bill. The President in-118 MR. STORRS's SPEECH.forms us, that they are to have " governments of their ownchoice" located on oin- domain.There is noticing,' planning to our own security or our pridein admitting this sovereignty in the Indian nations. We tookcare, in the first instance, to obtain all necessary imitations ofit. They continued themselves to be under our protection ;that their lands twould be sold to us only ; that we should regulatetheir trade ; and wc stipulated Ibr various other restrictionson their part. Great foresight and wisdom in this respect wereshown, by those who fn-st admitted them to their present condition.The treaties numitest how carefully this matter wasguarded, and we have suffered no inconveniences from it, ofwhich reasonable men should couiplaiu. We have made tlienisubordinate to us, in all essential joints, by express treaties.Our intercourse laws are founded on the system we haveadopted; and, though their constitutionally has been questionedtoo, it is not probable that Mr. Jefterson approved any lawthat palpably violated the reserved rights of the States. If thequestion before us is not settled at this days there is nothingsettled in the government. Every thing is to be kept floating.We shall never know what our institutions are, nor will othersknow when, or whether to trust us at all.The mischiefs which are to follow to the Cherokees are incalculable.They were told forty years ago what we then admittedtheir rights to be. Tliey are now in a great measurereclaimed, under our counsels, front their former condition, andhave begun to realize the blessings of civilization. When theyhave just reached that point, which is successfully calling forththeir talent, and developing their capacity for moral improvement,we are about to break up their society, dissolve their institutions,and drive them into the wilderness. They have livedfor a short time under a government of their own, which veryable counsel {Mr. White of the Senate) has vindicated in oneof the most learned and conclusive opinions I have ever metwith. Their right to adopt for themselves the institutionswhich they have established, and to assert the qualified sovereigntywhich they claim, is demonstrated in that paper, andsettled upon ground that no argument or ingenuity can shake.This opinion, too, was given upon great deliberation, and showsthat the whole (question was cautiously as well as thoroughlyexamined. It is not to be viewed in the light of a mere professionalopinion. It exhibits the deductions and convictionsof the mind of a civilian and statesman, drawn from a comprehensiveand masterly view of the subject, in all its bearingsand relations. If there could be doubt on any point consideredin it, we niii;ht question the right of the Cherokee governmentto tax the Ignited States traders. Their treaties had concededthat the recitation of their trade should be managed by thegeneral government ; and such an exercise of power, on thepart of the Cherokees, might essentially defeat the objects andstipulations of the treaties.MR. STORRS'S SPEECH. 11&What, Sir, is the character of this government of the Cherokees,which appears to have offended the pride of Georgia sohighly.' They claim no jurisdiction over the concerns of anybodyhut themselves. Tliey have always had this, and alwaysexercised it. Their government has lately assumed a moreconvenient form, and one better adapted to their improvedcondition. Their domestic institutions show more of civilizationand good order than we have seen among them before ;and I hope we do not reproach them for that. Their regulationsfor the allotment of their lands, and the better governmentof their own people, interfere with nobody. I have never yetbeen able to see the force of that suggestion, which treats themas a State within the sense of that part of the Constitutionwhich forbids the erection of any new State within the jurisdictionof any other without its consent. I think it has no applicationto the case. The Cherokee government has neitherbeen formed or erected as one of the States of this Union, orto be admitted into it. It is zio more calculated to alarm thejurisdiction of any State than a certain kingdom lately projectedon Grand Island, the institutions at New Lebanon, or thefamily government at New Harmony.But it has been said, in answer to the claims of the Indians,that we hold our sovereignty over them and their lands by conquest,as well as discovery. I shall say but little as to that pretension.They may have been defeated in battle. Their countryjuly have been overrun by our armies. We may have invadedthem, and sometimes burnt their towns, and driven theminto places of concealment. But it is essential to title by conquest,that we should have exercised the right which the laws ofwar allow to the conqueror. Have we taken away their lands,abolished their governments, and put them in subjection to ourlaws.' If this has not been done, (and history shows that ithas not,) it is too late now to say that there has been a timewhen we might have done it. So far from claiming to exercisethis right, we have closed our hostilities by treaties eversince we became an independent government ; and both partieswere restored to their original condition, except on pointswhich the treaties provided for. It must be considered, too,that when we set up the title of conquest, we seem to feel thatdiscovery alone would not have reached the rights of soilagainst the native inhabitants ; and I thought the gentlemanfrom Tennessee felt pressed in making out his case, when heassumed that discovery gave us the right to follow it up byconquest. The war must at least be lawful to justify that title,in any case, on the score of morality. I do not think that theposition can be sustained, that, because we have discoveredany new country, we have the right to conquer it. If wechoose to put it on the ground of mere force, I will not saythat title by conquest may be denied, though the war mayhave been unlawful. But I do not agree that this was doneon the discovery of America. Our history does not show it.120 MR. STORRS's SPEECH.I forbear to take up more of your time on this jiart of thequestion, for I fear that I have ahead wearied your patience.But before I leave it, I beg leave to call your attention to oneof the many luminous [papers which have issued upon this sub ;sect from the department of war. We have found a pamphlet !on our tables containing a letter, of the 25ih of August last, to ithe Rev. Eli Baldwin, Secretary of a Board formed in the cityof New York, tor the "salvation of the Indians." This Board jis pledged, in its constitution, to co-cijierate with the federal jgovernment in its "operations on Indian affairs." But thisarticle has fortunately restricted that hasty pledge by an expresscondition "at no time to violate the laws" of the Union. <Of these laws, the intercourse acts and treaties are certainly /the most sacred in right and morals. In replying to a letter 'communicating to the President a copy of the constitution of]this benevolent association, the Secretary of War availed himselfof the occasion to take it upon himself to instruct theBoard in that casuistry, by which the I'aith of our treatiesmight be imjjaii-ed successfully. The argument is very brief,and the j)i-ocess quite summary, by which he accomplished thispolitical absolution in our behalf I do not feel at liberty tohazard the omission of a single word, that might impair itsmerit or obscure its clearness, by undertaking to repeat it frommemory.How can the United States' government contest with Georgiathe authority to regulate her own internal affairs? If the doctrineevery where maintained be true, that a State is sovereign, so far as,by the Constitution adopted, it has not been parted with to the generalgovernment, then it must follow, as matter of certainty, that,within the limits of a State, there can be none other than her ownsovereign power that can claim to exercise the functions of government.It is certainly contrary to every idea of an independent governmentfor any other to assert adverse dominion and authority withinher jurisdictional limits; they are things that cannot exist together.Between the State of Georgia and the Indian tribes within herlimits, no compact or agreement was ever entered into ; who thenis to yield ? for it is certain, in the ordinary course of exercised authority,that one or the other must. The answer heretofore presentedfrom the government, and which you, by your adoption, havesanctioned as correct, is the only one that can be offered. Georgia,by her acknowledged confederation authority, may legally and rightfullygovern and control throughout lier own limits, ar else ourknowledge of the science and principle of government, as they relateto our forms, are wrong, and have been wholly misunderstood."Now, Sir, all this may seem to be very clear demonstrationto its author. I do not doubt that he honestly thought it mustprove quite convincing to all who should have the good fortuneto meet with it. With your leave. Sir,I'll talk a word to this same learned Thcban."I should like to know whether it ever occurred to him, mthe course of his profound investigations, that the question toMR. STORRS'S SPEECH. 121be examined was, whether this was really the internal affair ofGeorgia only or not ? It would have been better to have provedthis conclusion than to have assumed it. He began to reason atthe wrong end of the matter, and that is the misfortune of hiswhole argument. It must strike the mind of others, too, if theSecretary himself failed to discover it, that the powers whichGeorgia has in fact parted with to the general government, mustbe exercised within the States, or they cannot be exercised anywhere.Yet Georgia remains an independent government, as toall the sovereignty she has reserved. What more is there in thatpaper but a jargon of words ? Adverse authority — exercised authority— confederate authority ! I wish to hold the governmentof tny country in some respect if I can, but I was ashamed to findthe justification of one of its measures put forti in such a paperas this froui one of the Executive departments. I trust that heanswers for himself only, when he speaks of our knowledge ofthe principles of our o\\ni government, and then I will agree,that, if we are to judge from this paper, he liiiows very little aboutthem.We are less justifiable in applying the principles which havebeen asserted to the Indian nations in Alabama and Mississippi.Before these States were erected, they were the territory of theUnited States. The jurisdiction was in the general government.There were no State rights in existence there. We had solemnlyguarantied to the Creek nation all their lands, and recognised theirsovereignty under various treaties. These States have but recentlybeen admitted into the Union. Yet the President has saidin his message, " It is too late to inquire whether it was just in theUnited States to include them (the Indian nations) and their territorywithin the bounds of new States, whose limits they couldcontrol. That step cannot be I'etniced. A State cannot be dismemberedby Congress, or restricted in the exercise of her constitutionalpower." It is not denied here, nor could it have been,that while this was the territory of the United States, it was competentfor the government to admit the sovereignty' of the Creeknation. But it is assumed, that the erection of this territory intoStates under the same Constitution which sustained the treaties,has abrogated our obligations. This casuistry will hardly misleadany very plain man. We are to ba released from the effect ofour treaties by our own act, against the will of the other party,Iwlio has faithfully kept them. Is it indeed too late to inquire ifthis be just ? I know of no such maxhii among nations, if it isto be found any where. The Constitution secures the inviolabilityof these treaties as effectually as it has the federal sovereigntyof these new States. In acceding to the Union, they becomebound with the other States in all their political and conventionalobligations. If the older States remain bound by these treaties,(and no one, I presume, denies that,) the new States, as constituentparts of the federal sovereignty, are bound to respect and fulfil'I them too."Ii The history of our guaranties to the Cherokee and Creek 122 MR. STORUS's SPEECH.tons is stated at large in the executive journal of the Senate.General Washington came with general Knox to the Senate-chamber,and land before the Senate the state of the difficultiesexisting between North Carolina and Georgia and these Indian,nations. These States had protested against the treaties of theOld Congress as infringements of their legislative rights. GeneralWashington stated that the Cherokees had complained thattheir treaty had been violated by the disorderly whites on thefrontiers, but that, as North Carolina had not acceded to theUnion, it was doubtful whether any efficient measures could betakenby the general government. In relation to the difficultiesbetween Georgia and the Creeks, it was stated to be of great importanceto Georgia, as well as the United States, to settle thosedifferences, and that it would be highly embarrassing to Georgiato relinquish certain lands, which she alleged the Creeks had alreadyceded to her, and which her citizens had settled u}X)n. Tofix cei-tain principles as instructions to the commissioners, generalWashington stated several questions to the Senate for their advice.Among these was the subject of a cession from the Creeksof the lands in controversy, and one of the conditions to be offeredthem on that ]point was as follows :4th. A solemn guaranty by the United States, to the Creeksof their remaining territory, and to maintain the same, if necessary,by a line of military posts."The Senate advised and consented to this, and the treaty wasnegotiated and ratified. The differences with Georgia appearedthen to be finally settled.On the 11th of August, 1790, general Washington stated to theSenate in a message,"that as the obstacles to closing the difficultieswith the Cherokees had been removed by tie accession ofNorth Carolina to the Union, he should now execute the powervested hi him by the Constitution, to carry' into faithful executionthe fonder treaty of Hopewell, unless a new bomidaiy was agreeupon ; and proposed to the Senate several questions, as to thcondensation to the Cherokees for that puqjuse, and the followingcondition :3. Shall the United States stipulate solemnly to guaranty thsnew boimdai-y which ny be arranged r"The Senate consented that this guaranty should be given, anthe treaty of Houston was made in conformity to it. It was negotiatedby governor Blount. Tiie manuscript volumes of the Senate;show certain instructions from the government to governorsof the 27th of August, 1790, which are so highly charac-|theistic of the administration of general Washington, that I hav((taken a brief ext-act from them, \\liicli I beg leave to read : (In order to effect so desirable a purpose upon proper princepies, it is highly necessary that the United States should set tinexanii)le of performing all those engagements, which by treatieshave b(;en entered into under their authority. It will be in vailto expect a consistent conduct from the Indians, or the approval 44pn of the impartial part of mankind, while we violate, or suffer) |MR. STORRS'S SPEECH. 123a violation of, our engagements. We must set out with doingjustice, and then we shall have a right to exact the same conductfrom the Indians."This is the history of your guaranties, and these the professionswhich sou made when you offered them. They were given onmature deliberation, with the full knowledge of the claims of allparties, and were entered into with a solemnity which admonishesus that they cannot be safely trifled with. Against whom werethey to operate ? Not against foreign powers, for they had noclaims, nor against the general government. It was the claims ofthe States to their country, which we stand pledged to resist untilthey consent to part with it peaceably. It is claimed again, now,by some of the States, that our power to contract with these nations,as qualified sovereignties, violates their jurisdiction. Butwe have seen that this question was fully before the Senate whenwe gave these guaranties, and general Washington then said, thatsince JVorth Carolina had acceded to the Union, he should put forththe power entrusted to him by the Constitution, to execute the treatyof the Old Congress with the Cherokees. These guarantiescannot be 'executed at all unless the treaties and the intercourselaws are paramount to the laws of the States. The operation ofthe laws of Georgia, as well as Mississippi and Alabama, showsthis.I know that there is nothing on the face of these laws, whichproposes to exert any direct force for the removal of the Indians.But, under the existing condition of things there, the moral effectof these measures will as effectually accomplish this end as yourarmy could do it. The Indians themselves believe it, and theSecretary of War well understands that to be the inevitable consequenceof them I infer from a document on your table, thathe has instructed your own agents to make use of them lor thatpurpose. A letter from the Choctaw interpreter to the War Department,of the 27th of November last, says : "I was ]put in possessionof the contents of your letter of the 31st ult. to colonelWart], United States' agent to the Choctaws, and was ordered byhim to interpret and fully explain the nature of the laws of Mississippithat were about to be extended over them, and the badconsequences that woidd attend, as they were not prepared tolive under said laws. I have advised them on all occasions tomake the best arrangement with the government they possibly can,and emigrate to the west of the Mississippi." The Secretarywrote to the agent of the Cherokees, since this measure has beenpending : " The object of the government is to persuade, not coerce,their Indian .hen's to a removal from the land of their fathers.Beyond all doubt, they cannot be peaceable and happywhere they are ; yet still will they be protected to the extent thatright and justice, and the powers possessed, require. Beyond this'he President has neither the inclination nor the authority to go.lit is idle to talk of rights which do not belong to them, and of protectionwhich cannot be extended. The most correct plan is to disposethe fads as they exist, that all in interest may be warned,rod, by timely precaution, escape those evils of which experience124 MR. Stones's SPEECH.has already afforded abundant indication there is no avoiding, situatedwhere they are."We can all understand language of this sort without the aid ofan interpreter. But the Cherokees and Creeks have declaredthat they will not leave their country. They ]peremptorily refuseto go over the Mississij)pi. Why, then, have these laws of theStates been extended to them at tJjis ]particular time ? We aretold that this bill is only to come in aid of their voluntary emigration.But you have had their answer to that for years. Yourtable is covered by their inemonals and protests against it. Youhave made large appropriations before now to effect that object,and have failed. Why, then, are you repeating these appropriationsat this particular time ? They arc at your door, and tell youthey will not accept them. Is there not reason, then, to believethat they are to be removed against their real consent and inclinations,though no actual force is meditated in any quarter ?Individuals may doubtless be found to surrender the lands of thenation which they happen to occupy. These lands then pass toGeorgia. The nations are to be put at variance among themselves.Their social institutions are to be destroyed. •T^'lie lawsof the States have done that effectually. The lands sun-enteredare to be covered with white men. Can the Cherokees then livethere ? Is that the ]protection which you have promised ? Isthat the execution of your solemn guaranties ? Is that your dealingwith your plighted faith and national honor ? S\r, the confidenceof these nations in the securities of their treaties and yourgood faith is shaken. They feel that they are abandoned — thatyour laws have ceased to protect them— that their institutions aredestroyed — that the ]pressure to be inflicted on them is such thatthey cannot bear it, and that they must abandon their countrywhen this House shall have sanctioned the mesne before you.The government is undoubtedly right in saying, that the Indianscannot live where they no\'C^ are under these laws. Andwhy, then, were they passed ? We are told in one breath thatthey are mostly mere savages, and that all the efforts to reclaimthem have failed ; and in the next we hear, that, to carry into effecta very benevolent plan for their improvement, they are to beplaced under the strict regulations of our state of society. Arewe to understand by this that they are to i)e civilized by a legislativeact ? It is useless, Sir, to consider this matter gravely in thatway. We do not deceive ourselves by it, and shall mislead nobodyelse. There is sagacity enough in the people whom misrepresentto understand it. Think you that, with the Georgia reportbefore them, they will believe that the object of these laws is ito reclaim the Indians, and improve their condition, so as to attachthem more strongly to their country? The government hasput this in its true light. The consequence Avill be, that, in theirstate of society, they can enjoy none of the ]practical benefits ofthe general laws of these States, and will be sul)jected,at the same itime, to the whole range of their ordinary criminal jurisdiction, ashwell as another code applicable to themselves only. We hear itSometimes said, that they are to be admitted to the privileges ofMR. STORRS'S SPEECH. 125citizens, as if some substantial privileges, Which they do not nowenjoy, were to be conferred on them. Why, then, do we findthis bill here exactly at the time when they are to receive thesefavors ? If they are really to receive any new privileges, willthey not be more contented where they are, and less inclined togo beyond the Mississippi .' It will be asked, too, by many whocannot under-stand this sort of reasoning, what particular benefitsthese States expect to obtain by extending their laws over somethousands of people who are said to be wild Indians, and bringingthem within the pale of their society ? There is certainly no Statepride to be gratified by that. I shall not take up your time toanswer questions of this sort. If these laws do not sneak a languagethat can be imdei-stood here, they will lee very Avell understoodelsewhere. There is no reason to baUeve that Indian communitiesdisturb the peace of these States, if their own citizenswill let them alone. The only sufferers in that respect are theIndians. There are laws enough to meet that case, if governmentwill do its duty, and execute them faithfully. The Indians are apeaceable and inoffensive people, advancing rapidly in moral improvement,cultivating their lands, establishing schools and churches,and disturbing nobody. They have already patiently bornewhat we should not submit to ourselves, aud they will bearmuch more, if we choose to inflict it upon them. But they arcnot prepared to live under our laws, if we had the right to extendour jurisdiction over them without their consent. The courtsof justice in these States will doubtless see that right is done sofaras they are to administer the law in particular cases. Butthey will afford a slender protection against the operation ofmoral causes, which will reduce the Indians to the condition ofoutlaws in society.I am not satisfied that the funds to be provided by this bill areto be used in such a manner as we shall be willing hereafter toapprove. The Secretary of War said last year to our commissioners,"Nothing is more certain than that, if the chiefs midinflu-enthral men could be brought into the measure, the i-est wouldimplicitly follow. It becomes, therefore, a matter of necessity,if the general government would benefit these people, that itmove upon them in the line of their own prejudices, and, by theadoption of any [proper means, bi-weak the power that is warringwith their best interests. The question is. How can this be bestdone ? Not, it is believed, for the reasons suggested, by meansof a general council. There they would be awakened to all theintimations which those who are opposed to their exchange ofcountry might throw out ; and the consequence would be —what it has been — a firm refusal to acquiesce. The best resort isbelieved to be, that which is embraced in an appeal to the chiefsand influential men, not together, but apart, at their own houses;and, by a proper exposition of their real condition, rouse them tothink of that ; whilst offers to them of extensive reservations in feesimple, AND OTHER REWARDS, would, it is hoped, result in obtainingtheir acquiescence."11*126 MR. STORRS'S SPEECH.Noah, Sir, disguise these suggestions as we may, there can oe jno successful dissiinuhitioii in language of this sort. It is sheer, !open bribery — a disreputable ]proposition to buy up the chiefs,and reward them for treason to their people. It is the firsttime, so far as my knowledge extends, that such a practice hasbeen unblushingly avowed.There is more, too, before us, which should attract the attentionof this House. I see by a jiampljlet before me, that our superintendentof Indian affairs iii the war department was sentto New York last sinner to aid the benevolent institution, towhich I have already alluded, with such information as he mightpossess in regard to these Indian nations, lie delivered an address,on that occasion, in one of the churches of that cit3\ Inthis he said, that, if the Indians were present, he would addressthem thus :Brothers — Whether is it wise in you thus to linger out a chafed,and impoverished, and disheartening existence, anil die asyour lingers have died, and leave the same destiny to jour children; or to leave your country, and the hones of your fathers, whichcannot benefit you, stay irhcre they are as long as you may?"I was shocked. Sir, when I met with the shameless avowalof such a sentiment, and addressed to such an audience too, byan agent of this government. I have no language that canexpress my detestation of it. No man, who cherished a sparkof virtuous feeling in his heart, could have given it utterance. Itdeserves the marked reprobation of this House, as the guardiansof the honor of the country, and the government ought notto retain him in his place a single hour.I am aduioiiislied. Sir, by the duty which I owe to the Housefor their indulgence, to occupy your time no longer. But I askgentlemen to review the history of this government faithfidl}-,and decide, if, on looking to the afflicting condition of tJitse people,and the certain consequences which are to follow, they canlay their hand ujjon their hearts as hono)al)]e men, and say thatthey feel clear in conscience in going any further with this measure.We are not dealing fir ourselves in this matter. Our ownreputation is not alone concerned. The character of the countryis deeply involved in it. We shall not be able at last to disguiseour co-operation, ti removing these nations from theircountry. . We may now flatter and deceive ourselves as we may,but the time will come when our responsibility can neither beevaded nor denied. It must be met, and it is better for us to considernow what we must meet. Our relations With the Indiannations aie of our own seeking. We assumed our guardianshipover them voluntarily, and we justified it, too, in the name of religionand humanity. We claimed it to be due from us, as a civilized,enlightened and Christian people, to them, to our owncharacter, and the opinion of the world. They never asked itof us. We stretched out our arm towards them, and they tookour hand in the confidence that we shoid<l act up to our professions.It was we who solicited their friendship, and not theyMR. STORRS'S SPEECH. 127ours. It was done for our convenience too, and not theirs. Weoffered them our faith, and they trusted to us. To attest oursincerity and win their confidence, wc invoked the sanctions ofour holy religion. They have confided in us liii children, andbelieve solemnly pledged ourfaith, before God and all mankind,to fulfd our promises to them righteously. We came here andsat ourselves down in their country, and not they in ours. Theywere then strong, and we were weak and helpless. They couldhave crushed us in the hollow of their hand. But we had fledfrom oppression and persecution in our own native land, and theyreceived us here in theirs as friends and brothers. We haveperpetuated their hospitality to our fathers on the gorgeous panelswhich surround us. If we cherish in our hearts the slightestsentiment of honor or the least spark of gratitude yet lingersthere, we shall not be able to lift up our eyes and look aroundus when we enter these halls, without feeling the smart of thatrebuke, which we deserve and must suffer for our perfidy.These memorials of their hospitality cannot be effaced until weshall have dilapidated these walls, or another enemy shall kindlyinflict upon us a lesser disgrace.We came to these people with peace-offerings, and they gaveus lands. As we increased in numbers, we increased our demands,and began to press upon them. They saw us hemmingthem in on every side, and furrowing down the graves of theirfathers. As their subsistence was wasting away, they remonstratedagainst us. We were deaf to their reproaches. They imploredus to remember their kindness to us, but we turned away fromthem. They resisted at last, and flew to their arms. Fici'ce andbloody waits followed. We felt their power, and if they had beenunited, or had foreseen what we are now doing, we should notnow be in these seats. We met again in friendship, and establishedour treaties with them. We pledged our faith, and gave themour solemn guaranties that we would come no farther. I hopethat we shall feel it to be our duty to observe them like honestmen.But are we asked. Will you leave things in their present condition? Will you refuse to treat with them ? No. But if I amasked when we shall treat, I am ready to answer. Never, Sir,never, till they are at perfect liberty, and free from all restraint.I should not consider a treaty made with them, in their presentwretched and forsaken condition, as morally binding on them. Iwill not consent to take advantage of men in their situation. Iam sick — heart sick — of seeing them at our door as I enter thishall, where they have been standing during the whole of this session,supplicating us to stay our hand. There is one plain pathof honor, and it is the path of safety, because it istlie path of duty.Retrace your steps. Acknowledge your treaties. Confess yourobligations. Redeem your faith. Execute your laws. Let thePresident revise his opinions. It is never too late to be just. Lethim extend his hand to them as a brother — as their great fatherindeed. The power of the government is at his command. Lethim set them free. Above all things, win back their confidence.128 MR. STORRS'S SPEECH.Convince them that they may trust you again as friends. If yowill do this, and they are free to act without any coercion, I amready to execute any treaty which they will make with you. Butit must be done "■ peaceable'' — in the true spirit of our obligationsto Georgia, and in no other way. I wish they were in a conditionto treat with us fairly. I wish it for the sake of Georgiafor them, and for ourselves. But I will not consent that governmentshall operate on their fears. It is unmanly and dishonorable.I will not agree to inculcate on their minds the slightestsuggestion that they are not to be protected fully, fearlessly, andfaithfully. They are now shrinking under the tenor of the calamities,which they believe await them when this bill shall havepassed. They believe that the laws of the States are not to beextended over them for good. It is immaterial whether they areright or not in this belief. They cleve it to be for evil, and anarchyis now there in its Avoid-st finns. I have too much confidencein Georgia to believe that she will suffer any violence tobe committed under her authority. But the effect produced byher laws litis not left these [people tree agents. These States haveno right to ask us to act under such circumstances, or, if they do,we ought to judge of that for ourselves, and refuse to act, if wethink the honor of the government forbids it. Heal the woundswhich you have inflicted, and convene their councils. If theywill then treat with you, bring your treaty here instead of thislaw. We shall then know what we are doing. I will then sustainthe Executive, by my humble vote, in all that he shall promisein oiu' name. He shall have countless millions to fulfil ourfaith. The treasures of the nation shall flow like water, and thepeople of this country will bear any burden, rather than suffer thehonor of their government to be stained with perfidy. But forcoercion, or any thing like coercion, moral or ]physical, direct orindirect, I will vote nothing — not one poor scruple. I will takeno responsibility that may involve the country' in that taint uponour reputation, nor be accessory to it. No pride of opinion shouldinfluence us. There are no laurels to be won in this field. There iis no victory to achieve over a ]people in their situation. There iis no reward before us but disgrace and the detestation of our fel 1low men.If this bill passes, they will submit to all the injuries which maybeinflicted upon them, for it is no longer in their power to resist.They will bear it as long as men can bear oppression, but theywill sink under it at last. If we were in their situation, we shouldnot leave our own country willingly. We, who are strong andproud, and restive of restraint, should fly to arms for half what)they have suffered already. We have done it, but we had friendsto sustain us. The Indian must submit. When we have turnedhim away from our door, he has no friends any where. Shallwe, who boast so much of our institutions, and talk so loftily of (patriotism, reproach him because he loves his country too well .'jbecause his heart is not as flinty as we would make it ? becausehe lingers too long among the graves of his fathers ? But, Sir, ifthe fiat is pronounced here, he will go. He must go, for he canMR. STORRS'S SPEECH. 129not stay there and live. They will leave the fields which theyhave reclaimed fi-join the forest, and laid open to the sun — theircomfortable dwellings — their flocks — their schools — their churches— ay, Sir, their Christian churches, which we have built there,and which now stand where the stile of the victim was onceplanted. But they will not leave the graves of their fathers. Awhole nation, in despair, will piously gather uj) their bones, andretire to your western forests. When they shall have reached itsnether skirts, they will look back for the last time from the mountainover this beautiful land of their fathers, and then, retiring tothe deeper shades within, will curse your pei-tidy, and teach theirchildren to execrate yoiu- name. We could bear reproach fromthe proud and the solent, but there is eloquence in the liumihtywith which these people plead their wrongs. We feel our guiltin the very submissiveness with which they approach us.I have viewed this question in ail the lights which have offeredthemselves to my mind, and I can see no way to dispose of itsafely but to stop where we are — to go no hither — but to retractopenly, honorably, and immediately. Every step we advance iuthis injustice will sink us deeper in disgrace. But, Sir, to rejectthis measure is not enough. We cannot regain what we havealready lost, unless our laws are executed. We cannot leave ourseats here, and do this ourselves. Without the co-operation of theExecutive, we are powerless ; and if he will not pause — if he willnot execute the treaties — if the laws are suffered to sleep— if reasonand justice are slighted, and expostulation is in vain— if hisoath will not awaken him to stretch forth his ann fearlessly andhonorably to sustain the Constitution and laws of the countryand the rights of these oppressed people — he shall go on upon Insown responsibility, and that of those who may be about to placethis measure in his hand. Be the consequences what they may,the stain of whatever may happen shall be upon his hands.My poor opinion in this matter may be worth very little here,and I may be mistaken in my apprehensions. I will leave this to'tune and "those who come alter us. But, holding the opinions Ii do, I will take no share of the responsibility of carrying this measurethrough the House. Ou a subject as momentous as this, it isbetter for" us, and more just to our constituents, that we shouldpostpone this measure, and let the question be fairly and fullyI presented to them before we act upon it finally They have aright to demand it of us. Let the feeling and judgment of thecountry be consulted. When this bill has passed, the whole matteris beyond our reach and theirs. The memorials on yom* tablei ought not to be lightly trifled with, and will not be safely despised.l(This thing is not to be done here in a corner, without responsibility.It will be stripped of all the mysteries and vain disguise inwhich we may hope to conceal its real character, and be put toI the severest scrutiny. Surely, Sir, we must wish that we feltconfident of that enlightened support in public opinion, without'which we cannot be, and shall not find ourselves sustained beforethe country.130 MR. STORRS'S SPEECH.We may differ on ]points which affect our internal policy only,without responsibility to others. But our conduct in this affectsthe security of the social law of all mankind, and which all nationsare interested to sustain. They have the right to sit in judgmentupon us. That part of the law of nations which commands,the observance of treaties, is the law of the whole human family.Though the present measure may not immediately affect othercivilized nations, and they may have no right to interfere, yet theyhave the right, lor their own security, to put in action the mofeeling of the world against the effect of our example. Whatever-ouropinions may be of the invasion of France, as a question of"original interference, the power of Europe were fully justified inthe measures which they took in 1815, on the return of Buonapartefrom Elba. As the violator of treaties, he had placed himselfout of all civil and social relations. There was no securityfor any government, if so dangerous an example, by siich a formidablepower, should have been able to sustain itself. I have:nothing to say of the subsequent disposition of Its person. Itdoes not concern the question before us. But the opinion ofmankind sustained his expulsion from France, if not from Europe,.and history will sanction it. The eye of other nations is now fixedu}X)n us. Our islands are looking with fearful anxiety to ourconduct in this matter. Our enemies, too, are wtttchiag our steps.They have lain in wait for us for half a century", and the passageof this bill will light up joy and hope in the palace of every despot.It will do more to destroy the confidence of the world iafree government, than all their armies could accomplish. Ourfriends cveiy where will be compelled to hang their heads, andsubmit to this reproach of their principles. It will weaken ourinstitutions at home, and infect the heart of our social system Itwill teach our jjeojde to hold the honor of their governmentlightly, and loosen the moral feeling of the country'. Republicshave been charged, too, with insolence and oppression in the dayof their power. History has unfortunately given us much proofof its truth, and we are about to confirm it by our own example.But, Sir, wc must stanch at last at the bar of postciit j', and answerthere for ourselves and our country. If we look for party influenceto sustain us now, it will fail us there. The little bickering,in which we now bustle and show off our importance, will havethen ceased and been forgotten, or little understood. There willbe no time-serving purposes to warp the judgment — no temptationsto entice into error — no adulation to offer unto power, or towin the favor of the great — no ambition to be exalted, and novenal press to shelter wrong, to misrepresent the truth, or calumniatethe motives of those who now forewarn you of your responsibility.The weight of a name will not sustain you there, and notide of popularity will carry you along triumphantly. Our couui itry will be brought by the historian — c^istodiaji delis renivi — to that Istandard of univei-sal morality, which will guide the judgment and Ifix the sentence of posterity. It will be pronounced by the imopartial judgment of mankind, and stand forever irreversible, ThQJMR. STORRS'S SPEECH. 131character of this measure will then be known as it is. The fulland clear Light of truth will break in upon it, and it will stand outin history in bold relief The witnesses who will then speak willbe those illustrious men who have not lived to see this day. Yourhistory, your treaties, and your statutes, will confront you. Thehuman heart will be consulted — the moral sense of all mankindwill speak out fearlessly, and you will stand condemned by thelaw of God, as well us the sentence of your fellow men. Youmay not live to hear it, but there will be'no refuge for you in thegrave. You will yet live in history ; and, if your children do notdisown their fathers, they must bear the humiliating reproachesof their name. Nor will this ti-transaction be i)ut down in historyas a party measure. Our country, too, must bear the crime andthe shame. I have been a party man, Sir — perhaps too much so—and I have contributed nothing to place the present Chief Magistratein the station which he now holds — as yet unlcr the Constitution,and not above it. But I should deem it a lesser evil and a moresupportable calamity — and I declare to you, that I had rather seehim, or any other man, created dictator at once, and let him swayour destinies for one life at least, than suffer for a single hour theshame of feeling that my country must submit, before the Christianworld, to the disgrace of being set down in history as the violatorof her treaties, and the oppressor of this helpless people, whohave trusted so confidingly to her faith.But I will not despond, or give up all for lost. When it is consideredhow little, after ail, these States really have at stake onthis question, and how trifling the acquisition of this paltry territorymust be, I cannot believe that they will refuse to make somesacrifice, or concession of feeling, to the reputation of the country.Are not our honor and our reputation, our interests and our glory,theirs ? Are they not bound up with us in one onion lot, forgood or evil, as long as this Constitution and our Union shall endure,and until the blessings, which, under the goodness of Providence,it may long cUspenseto our common country, shall be foreverwithdrawn ? — until that appalling night of despotism shalldescend upon the world, and lower upon the whole family ofman, when this bright constellation shall have set, and the lasthope of human freedom shall have been forever extinguished .''What are these miserable remnants of Indian land worth to themor to us, if, in settling an abstract question of jurisdiction, we areabout to expose join-selves and them to the imputation of bad faith?New York, Pennsylvania, Virginia and Ohio, have all yielded tothe constitutional authority of the Union, on points quite as essential,in their opinion, to their sovereignty as this. There is nothingto be won in this controversy that is worth a moment's thought,in comparison with the condemnation that lies beyond it. Toavert such a calamity, I will yield much — very much. I willpve up almost any thing here. I will claim nothing of theseStates that shall offend their pride. The point of honor shall Beconceded to them, and our good faith shall be vindicated by aconcession from their patriotism. I will not yet give up even thishope. Nor will I believe that the Chief Magistrate will suffer the132 MR. STORRS'S SPEECH.reputation of his administration and the country to be famished.1 will look there, too, for better counsels, and a more deliberateexamination of the ground on which he has placed himself.)Whether we favored his elevation to his present station or not,we may all unite in wishing that he may leave it with a solid reputation,and that he may advance the honor of his country beyondeven the hopes of his friends. We are all interested in his fame,for it is now identified with his country. There are oliver examplesfor his emulation than Spain or Carthage. Let him vindicatethe i)ui)lic faith of his country, and he shall be hailed indeedas her Saviour, for he will have preserved her honor. Lethim instruct the world that the sanctity of treaties is no longer thescorn of republics, and he shall then have truly filled the measureof his country's g!oi-y and his own. Her history beams with fightupon the j)atii of honor and honest fame. There are bright examplesbefore him which any man may be proud to follow andto emulate ; hut the enduring glory of his predecessors has beenwon by their inflexible justice and public virtue. " £r omnibuspremiss virtutis, amplissimuin esse premium, gloria ; esse handuna, qitcE brevitatcm vita: posteritatis memoria consolcretur ; qucBefficient ut assented adessemus, moHui vive remus ; hand denique esse,cujus gracious diam homines in cmlum viderentur ascended"NOTES.P. 80. Mr. Storrs speaks of the Indians within the States as beingC0,000 in number. He doubtless meant the Southern States. TheSecretary of War estimates the number in these States to be 7.5,000There are probably more than 100,000 east of the Mississippi, andtwice as many west of that river, whose condition may be directly oisindirectly affected by the Indian bill.P. 88. Mr. Storrs states, that 12.000,000 of acres have been purchasedby the U. S. for the use of Georgia, since the compact oil1802, and in compliance with that compact. The quantity is muchlarger than his estimate.By a report of Mr. Calhoun, when Secretary of War, in 1S24, thgovernment of the U. S. had then obtained for the use of Georgia]From the Creeks, 14.748.()9fliFrom the Cherokees, 1.095,310'15,844,()0qFrom the Creeks, since 1824, all their remaining landsin Georgia, 4,083,20Acres, 19,927,20qGreat tracts of country have been ceded to the United States byjthe Cherokees, upon which are now established the most populousand flourishing communities of Tennessee and Alabama. Georgiaclaims about 5,000,000 acres of Cherokee land, as now remaining inthe possession of the Cherokees.SPEECHOF THEHON. WILLIAM W. ELLSWORTH,REPRESENTATIVE FROM CONNECTICUT,DELIVERED IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, SITTING- AS IN COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE, ON THE BILL FOR THEREMOVAL OF THE INDIANS, MONDAY, MAY 17, 1830.Mr. Chairman : I would most cheerfully acquiesce in theproposed appropriation to assist the Indians in their removal,could I believe that this object would be effected in i^ood faithand according to the unbiased wishes of the Indians. But Ido not believe such will be the fact. Whatever gentlemenmay say and feel in this house, in the honest expression oftheir views I have no doubt that mercenary motives, in someoi the southern and south-western portions of the country havehad, and still have, an important influence upon this measure.Jt is advocated upon principles at war with our policy towardsthe Indians ; upon principles which no State in this Union canexpect tins goveriuiient to recognise or sanction. By the compactof 1802 with the State of Georgia, we agreed to extinguishthe Indian title to her lands as soon as it could be doneon reasonable terms, and peaceably." I should be glad tounite m any proper measures, as being an amicable and honorablemode ot settling questions of grave consideration nowi urged upon us and as meeting the wishes of several of thestates, who feel their rights, dignity, and welfare, to be involvedim the issue. Certainly I shall strive to be faithful to everyjust expectation of a State ; but we must not be faithless to ourengagements. Sir, 1 have no belief that the bill will briuff alomrwith it the proposed and desirable effect ; and, while I am readyto go as far as any gentleman to assist in an honorable removalot the Indians, I cannot do it under circumstances whichadmonish me that this bill is but a part of a united effort virtuallyto expel the Indians from their ancient possessions Someof these circumstances I will lay before the committee Nooption IS left with the Indians as to their removal, if you passthis bill, consistent with their heretofore acknowledged rightsand such as the faith and honor of this country ought to secureto them.Before I mention these circumstances, permit me to call theattention of the committee to the true question in debateThis bill proposes a scheme for the removal of all the Indiantubes on the east of the Mississippi to the western wilderness.X4f134 MR. Ellsworth's speech.The sum now to be appropriated, it is admitted, is for a beginningonly. None suppose the whole expense will lull short ofthree millions, and many think it will be more than quadruplethat sum. What is the character of this grand scheme ? Uponwhat principles is it urged upon us ? It becomes us to examineit narrowly, if it is to operate coercively upon the Indians ;if bribery,"corruption and menace are about to make it etiectu-u], as 1 verily believe will be the fact, we cannot give the fundsof this nation to assist in its accomplishment. 'I've question isnot so exactly what is the relation between the States and theIndian tribes, as what is the relation of this government tothem. It is not so material what notions Georgia entertainsabout the original rights of the Indians. She may deny themall, if she pleases, and her advocates may contend that it isnow too late to inquire into their rights, as distinct and independent; but since we are called upon to accomplish their removal,it is our duty to see that the principles which havehitherto regulated our relations with the Indians are not deniedor abandoned. This nation has settled the character of theIndian tribes— it is too late fur her to speculate, if she would,on this subject. The whole history of our Indian departmentsthe scores of treaties we have made, and the intercourse lawof 1790, and now existing as passed in 1802, establish the greatfact, that this government has held these tribes to be distinctfrom the States for all national purposes; nor can we nowdeny it, without the most manifest injustice to the Indians, andthe most glaring disregard of our solemn engagements. Letothers have such systems as they please— we have one establishedby the practice of every successive year, resting on the;eternal principles of justice, and wrought into all our laws bonithis subject. And, Sir, even if we could not properly havetaken the ground which we did at fires, and have since maintained,we cannot now deny it, and appropriate our lands, and lendour liiUional arm, to subvert it. We are committed. W e haveinvited the Indians to treat with us— to trust us— to put themselvesinto our hands— and now, can we betray them ? Coin weadvance money to carry into effect a system at war with entreatiesand our solemn sledges? This is the ground. And,though I shall investigate first principles a little, I do contendthe friends of the Indians need not go beyond the statutes andrecords of our own government to learn the line of duty.The advocates of removal tell us we cannot interfere withthe internal concerns of a sovereign State. The gentlemen;from Georgia admonish us, that that State has taken h«course, and nothing will divert her; that she is sovereign, answill do as she pleases ; and they advise us to let her aloii<(Sir, the difficulty is, she will not let us alone. She says, Giveua your money ; pledge the national treasury to remove mIndians without borders: and all this she demands of us, bjtrampling under foot the charters of our plighted faith, amchanging completely the principles of our relations with mIndians. She asks too much. She asks what honesty requireMR. ELLSWORTH S SPEECH, Jesusto withhold. I will never give her a farthing upon the principlesshe assumes — nor can this government, without excitingthe just indignation of this nation and of mankind.I will now mention some of the circumstances which showthe character and object of this bill.First, then, the executive, whose opinion and future courseof conduct on this subject, it seems, were well known beforehis election, applauds Georgia ibr her great forbearance towardsthe Indians, and denies their right of self-governmentand of soil, except to such a portion as they may happen to bein the actual occupation and enjoyment of.Next, the secretary of war, in his official communications,labors to prove that they have no rights at ail, not even to anyportion of the soil; for he asserts they have lost all, and theStates have acquired all, by conquest and discovery ; and suchhas of late become the language of Georgia. She openly declared,by her legislature, in 1827, " that the State might properlytake possession of the Cherokee country by force, andthat it was owing to her moderation and forbearance that shedid not thus take possession." Previous to this declaration, ajoint committee of the legislature had made a report, in whichthey say, that the European nations asserted successfully theright of occupying such parts of America as each discovered ;and thereby they established their supreme command over it.Again — " It (nay be contended, smith much plausibility, thatthere is in these claims more of force than of justice ; but theyare claims which have been recognised and admitted by thewhole civilized world ; and it is unquestionably true, that, undersuch circumstances, force becomes right. Before Georgiabecame a party to the articles of agreement and cession, (thecompact of 1802,) she could rightfully have possessed herselfof those lands, either by negotiation with the Indians,• or by force; and she had determined, in one of the two ways,i to do so ; but by this contract she made it the duty of the UnitedStates to sustain the expense of obtaining for her the poshsession, provided it could be done upon reasonable terms, andiby negotiation ; but in case it should be necessary to resort to1 force, this contract with the United States makes no provision:the consequence is, that Georgia is left untrammelled, and atI full liberty to prosecute her rights, in that point of view, accordingto her discretion, and as though no such contract had beenI made." Truly this is logic with a vengeance. And we are[called upon to" sanction these abominable doctrines. They lie,avowedly, at the basis of this fearful measure. May the nationalcouncil pause upon the brink of this precipice, before everyI thing is lost in the chasm below.Another circumstance of admonition is, that an honorablecommittee of this house have openly declared, in their reportmade to sustain this bill, that the Indians are mere tenants at'! will, strictly having no rights to territory or self-government ;.and that the red men lie at the mere of the whites, by reasonof discovery, conquest, civilization, greater knowledge and MR. Ellsworth's speech.er, or Christianity. This is their language on page 5tli : " Butinall the acts, first of the colonies, and afterwards of the States,the fundamental principle, that the Indians lead no rights byvirtue of their ancient possession, either of soil or sovereignty,has never been abandoned either expressly or by implication."So again: "No respectable jurist has ever gravely contendedthat the right of the Indians to hold their reserved lands couldbe supported in the courts of the country upon any other groundthan the grant or permission of the sovereignty or State in whichsocii lands lie." This report goes farther than I had supposedintelligent men C(.u!d go. It really leaves nothing to the Indian.The very soil on vvliich he lives, and vv^here his ancestors livedbefore hin), is none of his, but belongs to the white man.Nor am 1 less alai-med to see it so seriously asserted by thecommittee, that all our Indian treaties are a mere legislative proceeding,and, as such, terrible at our pleasure. And I am byno means certain that the committee do not mean to say, that ourtreaties and legislative enactments, as far as lliey rest on anyrights of the Indians, are unconstitutional and void. Page 8th,I read: "These treaties were Int a modeof government, and asubstitute for ordinary legislation, Which were from time to timedispensed with, in regard to those tribes which continued in anyof the colonies or States until they became enclosed by the whitepopulation." If these treaties are not binding to their full extent,then the great men who established the government, andfor years administered it — all the Presidents of this Union, andtheir associates, including, too, our present chief magistrate —have been in error, and made treaties and laws without right andagainst right.I have a further reason for fearing the Indians are to be expelled.While such sentiments are entertained in the cabinet,,certain States, for the first time, and just at this crisis, jut thefinishing stroke to this grand scheme of removal. They deliberatelypass laves annihilating the independent existence of thetribes — abrogating all their customs, decrees, rules and obligations— excluding the superintendence of Congress — opening theAvhole country of the Indians to the whites, and, in short, takingfrom them their own government, and excluding them from aparticipation in any other; and ail this upon a claim of right,while the single object is to coerce their removal.Now, sir, when 1 find such sentiments prevailing in certainStates, and in illic cabinet, and that the same are urged upon usby the committee, to induce the house to ]pass this bill, I amalarmed ibr the ])()or and helpless Indian. I feel that power iaarrayed against right ; and that the voluntary, ,inbiascd expressionof the Indians, as to their removal, is not likely to be had.Besides, sir, we have the protest of the Indians reiterated uponus. They do not wish to remove. Foi years have we beenlaboring to induce them to remove — have made them liberaloffers — urged them to go and see the promised land tendered tothem ; but it is all in vain. Like others, they prefer to live anddie where their lathers lived and died, and refuse absolutely to ,MR. Ellsworth's speech. 137remove. And, to make the last and final attempt, this great andmighty government has Insidiously sent in its agents, generalsCk>liee and Carroll) secretly as their friends, to advise them —to try the chiefs alone" — " to move upon them in the line of theirprejudices, and to give them rewards." The letters of instructionto these agents of government we have on our tables. Theyare a stain upon our national character. These fruitless attemptsto induce the Indians to go, prove, beyond all question,that they never will remove, if left to act their own pleasure.I cannot help believing that nnich is meant by this bUl of appropriations.The Indians will feel that tlwy nest go, or beabandoned to their fate ; and the world will justify that feeling.They must and they will go.While the Indians are thus abandoned by the U. States, pressedby the States in which they live, and denied all right of territoryand self-government, let us not dehido ourselves with talkingabout their voluntary and cheerful removal, but rather let usmeet the matter fairly, and make out the position, that this nation,or the individual States of it, have a right, before God andman, to send trie Indians even to the Pacific ocean, if they be inthe way of our growth and expansion.Let me now ask the attention of the committee to the greatquestions— What are the rights of the Indians, and what is ourduty to them ?It is not at all improbable that we shall answer these questionsdifferently fi^om what the Indians would. We may adoptacourse of reasoning which they would deny, and one which wemight perhaps see differently if the Indians were the strongerparty. But I trust that we shall not forget that truth and justiceare always the same, and that towards the Indians we ought toact upon the most noble, generous, and humane principles.The Indians declare to us, they are to be sacrificed to themercenary views of the whites. They come in a body of somethousands, imploring oiu' interposition. They recite our treaties,in which they have given themselves into our arms for protection,and in which we have most solemnly received them, andpledged ourselves to protect them from every power whatever'Sir, it is becoming in us to look at this matter fairly and fully,and see where duty lies.What, then, I ask, are the rights of the Indians ? I maintainthat the complainants have the right of territory and self-government,and that these have ever been accorded to them by theUnited States.Suppose, sir, we were now, for the first time, to learn thatthere was a tribe of Indians in Georgia, the Cherokees, and that,discovering them, we should learn they had lived upon theirpresent territory, and their ancestors before them, from a periodbeyond all memory or history. Suppose we should find themto be owners of a tract of land containing 8,000,000 of acres —possessing a government of laws, a public treasury, schools andreligious institutions, and made up, to a great extent, of farmersand mechanics, advancing in knowledge, wealth, virtue, and12*138 MR. Ellsworth's speech.power. Siipj)ose all this, (and I do not speak of au imaginarypeople,) what should we say of their rights as a nation.' Wecould not possibly differ. Writers on the law of nature and ofnations, politicians and moralists of every school and every age,would agree that they had the most perfect and absolute right toterritory and government. And let me stop here to remark thatthe Indian right to territory is no better than his right to government.Every consideration can be urged in favor of oneright that can be urged in lUvor of the other. They must standor fall together. I do not deny that the right of soil and jurisdictionmay be divided. But they are not in this case. If theIndian tribes have a right to live upon their possessions, theyhave a right to live there as they please, provided they do notannoy us.Now, I ask gentlemen if the rights supposed are not reallythe present rights of the Indians .' Here they are ; here theyever have been ; and here they are in the condition in which Ihave supposed. In 182tj, the Cherokees were the owners of9,94.3 ploughs, 172 wagons, 2,.500 sheep, 7,G00 horses, 22,000cattle, 4(>,000 swine. Have they done any thing to forfeit theirrights? H" so, when? how? by what act? by what event.'True we have gathered round them, while they have been recedingto their present narrow limits, and advancing to theirpresent condition of knowledge andiujjjrovement; (and had theynot a right so to advance?) When v/e have taken their lands,we have purchased them, and marked distinctly the boundariesof what we let. Now, I again ask gentlemen when the Indianslost their rights? The whites may have made maps andcharts, and drawn lines; but what have the Indians done? — ■They are the creatures of the same God with ourselves. lie hasmade them, and ]placed tlicm where they are. He it was whogave them their land to dwell in. Sir, I declare there is noright in us to take it or their government from them. Powermay do it, but the God of heaven will not sanction it. Self-defencedoes not require it; nor does discovery, conquest, civilizationor Christianity warrant it.Let us look for a moment at these several grounds of title.What, sir, is the right of discovery ? This right is often S|>okeuof by those who are adverse to the claims of the Indians.Among the nations of Europe, it seems to be a principle of thelaw of nations, that, if the subjects of any king discover and enterupon new and unknown lands, they become a ]part of thedominions of that king. There is much that is arbitrary andfanciful abourthis right, lint, be it reasonable or unreasonable,it is a mere political arrangement among nations, established toregulate their own conduct among themselves, and has nothingto do with the ]prior possessors of the land. I can hardly conceivehow sailing along our coast for a few miles, should, in thefirst instance, have given a right to North America. But be itthat it (Docs; how are the Indians affected by that consideration? Suppose even the rights of the Indians ought, upon gen-iera principles, to be limited and restricted by the settlements of IMR. Ellsworth's speech. 139civilized and Christian people ; will any contend that the Cherokees,for instance, oiiglit to be driven into narrower limits thaitheir present possessions If, because we are enlightened andcivilized, by discovering this country wc have acquired a rightto drive off the Indians, or wrest fioin them their government,(which I consider the same thing,) then we may, if it becomesnecessary, in order to secure our further advancement in knowledgeand virtue, drive them into the western ocean, or even putthem to death. Certainty noticing of this kind is necessary.Indeed, I believe the Indians, by being established on the west.side of the Mississippi, will become a greater obstacle to our nationalgrowth and prosperity, than if left as they now are. Not25 years will pass before the Indian, on those rich lands, will bein some white man's way.It may be true that the European nations, the English, French,Spanish and Portuguese, have partitioned this continent upon the.principle of title by first discovery and possession. But in doingthis, they had infinite difficulty and wars; nor did they then doitwith reference to the Indians, but only to govern their own-conduct, and to avoid further collision and war. Has it notbeen the established principle of this government to recognisethe Indian title ? lias it ever taken their land, upon this title bydiscovery, without their consent, for an agreed consideration?sir, do we not every year acknowledge their title, by makingtreaties with there, and paying annuities? We pay, I thinksmore than $200,000 annually to the Indians in annuities. IIow-can we, the United States, deny a right which we have recognised,aye, guarantee, thousands of times? We are estoiij)e-d. Weere convicted by our own conduct from the very beginning. TheHistory of misgovernment wil) j-ise up in judgment against ws.Sir, the Indians should find by experience, that wc are honestand faithful to our engagements, and that we are not a!)o«t tochange our whole course of intercourse with them. They knownothing about this European notion of title by first discovery.They have always occupied their ]present possessions. The Indianfinds that the great Being who made him has given him aplace on the earth, and be argues that some reasonable portionof it, on which he was born, and has ever lived, must be his, andthat that portion of it cannot be wrested from him by another'sfeasting his eye or placing his foot upon it.Thus much for the right of discovery.As to the right of conquest, I imagine even less can be said.Victory and captivity subject the vanquished and his property tothe pleasure of the victor. But then the right of claiming thecountry of another nation, and of exercising government overit, depends upon the fact of a victorious conflict — taking possessionas conquerors, instituting a government as such, and drivingout the enemy or receiving him as a dependent subject.But none of all this, surely, is true of these southern tribes. Allthe wars between them and us have terminated in formal treaties,leaving them in possession of their territory, distinctly acknowledgingtheir independent existence, and quarantine to140 MR. Ellsworth's speech.them their' possessions Treaties to this effect are numerous, and .I trust, too familiar to this house to need to be read. Besides, sofaras the Indians have lost their country by conquest, the UnitedStates have acquired it, aid not the States. The States have neverconquered their country, or taken ]possession omit, or abolishedtheir laws, and instituted a government of their own. The vv^arshave been conducted by the nation ; but she has acknowledgedtheir independence in the numerous treaties of peace alreadymentioned. Nor has she ever taken any thing from them, noteven a right of i>aseage through their territory, without their consentand an equivalent. It is forever too late to talk of conquest.Great Britain has not more fully acknowledged our independencethan have we that of the Indians. ^Vith the Cherokees we havemade sixteen treaties. They all begin and end with this sentiment.And even if these treaties were made without authority,(which I by no means admit,) they ncgateall right or claim by conquest.Betbre the union of these States, Georgia herself, by morethan one treaty, most fully acknowledged the rights of the Indians.It is enough that she never did take the attitude of a conqueror.[See the treaty made at DcAvitt's Comer, in 1777.]If, then, Georgia and the other States have no right, directly Ofindirectly, to expel these Indians — no right to their government ortheir territory by discovery, or conquest, or civilization, or Christianity,when and where have they this right at all ? True, theymay not wish to have the Indians within their limits ; but whoput them there .^ God. How long have they been there? Always.Nor is it their fault that the whites have gather-ed aroundthem, or that it so luqijiens that they full within the chartered limbsof a State. This is no act of theirs, whereby they forfeit theirrights ; nor do they admit, nor have they at any time, that they arenot independent and sovereign. They have granted no charters,and drawn no lines, except as they have sold to the whites.I have thus far coi-ordered what are the rights of these Indians,independent of treaties and legislation, on om* part ; but I willnow call the attention of the committee to the political conditionin which this government has considered them to stand, and I affirmwe shall tint every thing to confirm the opinion already advanced.No position is susceptible of better proof.From the first union among the States, our relations with theIndian tribes have been conducted by the national government.As our defence in case of war with them required the generalarm and common funds, the nation was interested to superintendall intercourse with tJiem — in order to avoid the causes of weir, aswell as to save the Indians from the intrigues of individuals, andfrom alliances with foreign powers. These Indians were likewisevery formidable and dangerous. Under the Old Congress and theConfederation, all our intercourse with the Indians was in our nationalcharacter. As such, we made treaties with them, offensiveand defensive, induced them to forego all connexion with osiernations, and to conceit themselves and their concerns into ourhands. As a nation, too, from the fii-st, this government has admittedtheir independent existence, and their full right to the soil.MR. Ellsworth's speech. 141We have never usurped their rights, but have maintained a friendlyconnexion with them, and purchased their lauds when wewanted them and they would sell.In 1785, we made our fii-st treaty with the Cherokees. In thetreaty we agreed that they should have a delegate hi Congress.The treaty begins thus : " The Commissioners Plenipotentiary ofthe United States of America, in Congress assembled, give peaceto all the Cherokees, and receive them into the favor and protectionof the United States of America, on the following conditions:"Art. 3. The said Indians, for themselves and their respective tribesand towns, do acknowledge all the Cherokees to be under the protectionof the United States of America, and of no other sovereign whatever.Art. 9. For the benefit and comfort of the Indians, and for the preventionof injuries or oppressions on the part of the citizens or Indians,the United States, in Congress assembled, shall have the soleand exclusive right of regulating the trade with the Indians, andmanaging all their affairs in such manner as they think proper.Art. 12. That the Indians may have full confidence in the justiceof the United States respecting their interests, they shall have a rightto send a deputy of their choice, whenever they think fit, to Congress.Art. 13. The hatchet shall be forever buried ; and the peace givenby the United States, and friendship re-established between the saidStates, on the one part, and all the Cherokees on the other, shall beuniversal : and the contracting parties shall use their utmost endeavorsto maintain the peace given as aforesaid and friendship reestablished.;hThe same provisions and mutual stipulations are to be found inthe treaty of Houston, tide in the year 1791, and so m the subsequenttreaties down to the present day.Can we need other evidence that our relation to the Indianshas been national, exclusively, from the hast ? The States andindividuals have been prohibited the purchase of Indian land.All our dealing with the Indian tribes beai-s but one interpretation— that of two distinct parties treating in their national character.Sir, at the time when these States established the present government,how did they find these Indian tribes, and our relationswith them ?They found —1st. Treaties of friendship and alliance existing between themand us, containing reiijn-ocal obligations and guaranties.2d. They found their national domain marked out and defined.3d. They found them nations in claim, in enjoyment, and right,acknowledging no dependence except such as was defined by treaty,and such as was perfectly compatible with retaining the right of territoryand government.4th. They found that, loiter existing treaties, the United Stateshad excluded the whites from the Indian territory, and had regulatedall trade and intercoui-se with them, as it is now done. TheOhio river was made to divide them ito two departments, the142 MR. Ellsworth's speech.noilh and the south. Before 1787, there Jiad been three departments.The Old Congress, in 1787, appropriated $34,000 for thepurpose of niakhig treaties with the Indians.In this state of tidings, the j)rt\sent' government was formed;and to it is given the power of regulating comnitrce with foreignnations, between the States, and with the Indian tribes ; the restrictionin the eighth article of the confederation being omitted.In 1790, the second session of the iiret Congress, this powerwas carried into effect, by first appropriating $20,000 to maketreaties. And in the same session they passed the act to regulatetrade and intercourse with the Indian tribes, which expired iu1793, and has been renewed from time to time, until, in 1802, itwas permanently enacted, substantially as it now is. The treatieswith the Cherokees, and the provisions of the intercoui-se law of1802, all now in force, are substantially the same. I ask the attentionof theconnnitteetothem very particularly, for I hold themto be indubitable evidence of the national character in which weacted, utterly consistent Vvith the assumed jurisdiction of Georgia,and such as imperiously demand of us to resist the claim ofGeorgia, or alwindon our treaties and our laws.1st. The boundaries of the Indian country are expressly, bytreaty and legislative enactment, recognised and established, andthe President is directed to ascertain them.~a. By treaty and legislative enactment, the Indians cannot sellany of their lands to thins persons or foreign States.3d. By act of Congress, no person can enter the Indian territoryto trade, without license, and giving bond of SIOOO, with surety ;nor can a foreigner ever obtain license at all.4th. No person shall settle in the Indian territory, nor shall surveyor mark out the same ; and if any one does, the Presidentmay remove him by military force.5th. No person shall purchase of the Indians clothing, guns, orimplements of husbandry.6th. Every white man found over the line, may be seized bymilitary force, and carried into any one of tln-ee adjoining States,and tried.7th. So he may be seized and tried wherever he may befoimd.8th. All crimes committed by Indians against whites shall betried in the United States courts.9th. The tribes fii-st, and government finally, are liable for alldepredations by the Indians, demand being first made on the superintendent.lOth. Indian agents arc located among the tribes, and they onlycan designate ]places of trade.11th. The President may regulate and forbid the sale of spirit ,nous liquor among the Indians.12th. The President may cause them to be furnished with domesticanimals and implements of husbandry, and with goods andmoney.13th. To prevent their further decline, the President may appointpersons to instruct them in agriculture and knowledge, and'the sum of $10,000 is appropriated annually therefor.MR. Ellsworth's speech. 143Now, Georgia has assumed the entire civil aud criminal jurisdictionover all this Indian territory within her limits, as have Alabamaand Mississippi ; and they claim that, let their laws be whatthey may, the United States cannot interpose ; no, not if they passalaw to put every man of them to death. These States havedriven the United States out of their State limits, and now denytheir right, by treaty or legislation, to interfere in the internal anddomestic concerns of the Indians. At one blow our treaties andlaws fail to the ground. And we are to sanction and sustain thesemeasures by appropriating the funds of the government ! I asktills house to consider the character of the laws of Georgia, andsay if they are willing to aid in the execution of her designs.But, sir, aside from the injustice, upon general principles, of removingthe Indians, I ask if this government is not bound by treatiesto protect them against every body.Congress, under the ]power of the Constitution, has repeatedlyentered into compact with the Indians.1st. It has made appropriations beforehand, to enable the Presidentto make treaties. It did this at the first session, appropriating$20,C00. It has done it every year since ; and most of thetreaties we expressly enumerated and approved in the act of 1826.The treaty for the removal of the Creeks was made by the President,but is, I trust, binding on the country.But, sir, if Congress had not expressly directed the Presidentto make treaties, and had not ratified his acts after they were done,he has the power given him in the Constitution. We have beenmaking treaties with the Indians from the first. We know thatWashington, Adams, and every President since, have acted uponthe idea that this government possessed the power. By virtue ofthese treaties, we have obtained the country of the Indians — thatwhich we never claimed as ours — and for it we have stipulatedto pay annuities. Are all these things mere waste paper ? Canthis government say we have no power to treat, while we are constantlydoing it, and now hold much of their land under treatiesBut, sir, let us not forget, that, by treating with the Indians, wehave induced them to throw themselves into our arms, and tocommit themselves to us. Take, as a just illustration of this sentiment,the fii-st treaty of the Indians under the Constitution.They abjure every other power, State, and individuals ; committheir country and their affairs to the United States, exclusively,and with us enter into treaties of alliance, offensive and defensive.So, too, we receive them ; guaranty their country ; define andbound it ; receive a jmrt of it ourselves ; and, by legislative enactments,regulate their trade, and exclude all pei-sons from theirterritory, and send them implements for the pui-poses of husbandry.Can we now say we have no power, and cannot redeemour pledge. I hope this government will not stoop to such infamyand perfidy.In 1819, Congress passed a law to appropriate $10,000 annually,to co-operate with benevolent societies in civilizing and reclaimingthe Indians — ay, to co-operate with the " fanatics of the|Borth," as the gentleman from Georgia calls them. The MR. ELLSWORTH S SPEECH.taws have appropriated $12,000 for trinity years, annually, and theChickasaws $30,100— and now, since some of them are beginningto be what we have long labored to make them, we are aboutto abandon them forever.If, sir, our treaties or laws are of any force, how can the actsof Georgia, Mississippi!, and Alabama stand ? One or the other ofthese powers, only, can extend its jurisdiction over the Indians.It has been said that the Indians in the Southern States willsoon become extinct — that humanity dictates their removal. Sir,why not leave the Indians to judge for themselves in this matter .'They have the deepest interest in it, and they are sufficiently intelligentto discover what is best for themselves. Sir, I confess Ido not like this ]parade of humanity. Nor, if there be a willingnesson the part of the Indians, Avould Georgia need to pass herextraordinary laws. But, sir, who constituted u.s judges overthem ? We may as well set ourselves up as judges for any otherpeople — lor Spain or France, for instance, and force uj)cn them arepublican government, if we thought it would be better lor them.How comes it to pass that some of the tribes, the Cherokees especially,are increasing in population and wealth ? Does this looklike their extinction ? When did Georgia, permit me to ask, firstfeel this impulse of humanity lor the Cherokees ? Not until theybegan to be a growing tribe. If she wishes to save the Indian,why does she deny him the benefit and ]protection of htr laws ?Why does she leave him to the merciless rapacity of his whiteneighbors ?But it is said the Cherokees and other tribes are willing to remove.What, then, mean these memorials of touching entreatyon our tables, signed by some thousands of them, begging thatthey may not be" forced to leave their country ? Why has governmentscut in among them secret agents to advise them to go ?Why have these States passed their unequal and luiprotectinglaws ? Does this look like a wish on the part of the Cherokees toremove ? And why, let me ask, have they so long refused theoffers made them by the government ? But it is said. The chiefs !the chiefs ! they are the mischief-makers — they advise the Indiansto stay. And has it come to this, that we are to find faultwith die poor Indian, because he regards the advice of his chiefsand guardian ? Do not we and other nations the same ? Shallwe take the ground that the Indians are willing to remove becausewe, in our inanity, think they ought to be ? They, as anation and as individuals, declare they are not willing to remove ;and, among other things, they give, as a reason for their unwillingness,that they have examined and do not like the country beyondthe Mississippi — that they cannot be happy and secm-e there.And may they not judge for themselves ?Sir, there are many considerations pertaining to this great subject,which I must leave to other and abler hands. I Avill close myremarks with noticing one objection to the Indians remaining andestablishing a government where they are. It is said, and it is sodeclared in the President's message, "that it is against the theoryand Constitution of our government, that the Indians should haveMR. Ellsworth SPEECH. 145a distinct existence in the bosom of a State. My answer is, thatthese southern tribes have always had a government — they areexercising no new power — it is not a new nation, an " imperiumin imperio'' springing up. They have, it is tie, within a fewyeai-s, new modelled their government, in imitation of ours, andinfused into it something of our spirit and principles ; but they assumeno new authority. The whites have established themselvesaround the Indians, and it is not a new povyer springing up andplanting itself in a sovereign State. The objection takes for gi-wantedthe whole matter in dispute. If my views are right, the Indianscan urge this objection with moi-e" force than we can. Inmostof the States, the Indians have melted away, and therebylost the power of self-government and distinct existence ; but thisis not true of the Cherokees and other southern tribes, who haveclaimed and exercised the power of self-government ; and, foraught I see, may do it with as much propriety as ourselves. Sir,I will close with saying, that this emigration of 60,000 Indians, ofdifferent tribes, to a new country, now occupied more or less withhostile tribes, is an experiment of such serious magnitude, thatwe ought not to force it upon them, but leave it really to their freechoice. Andwho, Sir, can tell us of the expense of this removal7 We are first to purchase the country they leave ; then to removethem ; to conquer or purchase the country to be assignedthem, and, after this, to sustain and defend them for all future time.How many millions will this cost ?Mr. Chairman, we must be just and faithful to our treaties.We shall not stand justified before die world in taking any stepwhich shall lead to oppression. The eyes of the world, as wellas of this nation, are upon us. I conjure this house not to stain thepage of om history with national shame, cruelty, and perfidy.Extracts from an Act of Georgia, passed Dec. 19, 1829, toEXTEND THE Laws of that State over the Territory of theCherokee Indians.Sec. 6. Jlnd he it further enacted That all the laws, both civil andcriminal, of this State, be, and the same are hereby, extended oversaid portions of territory, respectively ; and all persons whatever, residingwithin the same, shall, after the first day of June next, be subjectand liable to the operation of said laws, in the same manner asother citizens of this State or the citizens of said counties, respectively; and all writs and processes whatever, issued by the courts, or offersof said courts, shall extend over, and operate on, the portionof territory hereby added to the same, respectively.Sec. 7. And he it further enacted, That, after the first day of Junenext, all laws, ordinances, orders and regulations, of any kind whatever,made, passed or enacted, by the Cherokee Indians, either ini|;eneral council or in any other way whatever, or by any authorityJ 46 MR. Ellsworth's speech.whatever, of said tribe, be, and the same are hereby declared to be,null and void, and of no effect, as if the same had never existed; and,in all cases of indictment, or civil suits, it shall not be lawful for thedefendant to justify under any of said laws, ordinances, orders, orregulations ; nor shall the courts of this State permit the same to begiven in evidence on the trial of any suit whatever.Sec. 8. And be it further enacted. That it shall not be lawful for anyperson or body of persons, by arbitrary power, or by virtue of any pretendedrule, ordinance, law or custom, of said Cherokee nation, toprevent, by threats, menaces, or other means to endeavor to prevent,any Indian of said nation, residing within the chartered limits of this'State, from enrolling as an emigrant, or actually emigrating, or removingfrom said nation ; nor shall it be lawful for any person orbody of persons, by arbitrary power, or by virtue of any pretendedrule, ordinance, law or custom, of said nation, to punish in any manner,or to molest either the person or property, or to abridge the rightsor privileges of any Indian for enrolling his or her name as an emigrant,or for emigrating, or intending to emigrate, from said nation.Sec. 9. And be it further enacted, That any person or body of persons,offending against the provisions of the foregoing section, shallbe guilty of a liigii misdemeanor, subject to indictment, and, on conviction,shall be punished by confinement in the common gaol of anycounty of this State, or by confinement at hard labor in the penitentiary,for a term not exceeding four years, at the discretion of thecourt.Sec. 10. And be it further enacted. That it shall not be lawful forany person or body of persons, by arbitrary power, or under color of .any pretended ride, ordinance, law, or custom, of said notion, to prevent,or ojf'er to prevent, or deter any Indian, head man, chief, or warrior,of said nation, residing within the chartered limits of this State,from selling or ceding to the United States, for the use of the Slate ofGeorgia, the whole or any part of said territory, or to y;r«rc«<, or offer toprevent, any Indian, head man, chief, or warrior, of said nation, residingas aforesaid, Jrowi meeting in council, or treaty, any commissioneror commissioners on the part of the United States, for any purposewhatever.Sec. 11. And be it further enacted, That any person or body of persons,offending against the provisions of the foregoing section, shallbe guilty of a high misdemeanor, subject to indictment, and, on conviction,shall be confined at hard labor in the penitentiary, for notless than four, nor longer than eix years, at the discretion of thecourtSPEECHOF THEHON. GEORGE EVANS,REPRESENTATIVE FROM MAINE,DELIVERED IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, SITTING ASIN COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE, ON THE BILL FOR REMOVINGTHE INDIANS, TUESDAY, MAY 18, 1830.Mr. Chairman : The object of the bill under considerationhas been fully stated by the chairman of the committee on Indianaffairs, (Mr. Bell,) and by the gentlemen from Georgia,(Messrs. Lumpkin and Foster,) who have preceded me in thisdebate. It proposes, as they have correctly said, an appropriationof money's to be expended by the President, in effecting theremoval of the Indians now residing within the limits of theStates and Territories, to a new residence west of the Mississippi.We have been told, that this has long been the settledpolicy of the government ; and gentlemen express much surprisethat any opposition should now exist, to the accomplishmentof an object so often sought, and represented as highlydesirable. Sir, if this has been the settled policy of the government,which I shall not now stop to consider, there has beenalso another policy, another jn-actice, pursued towards theIndian tribes, which Providence has cast upon join* care, thatseems, at the present juncture, to be wholly forgotten. It is thisin ail our relations with them, to respect their rights of soiland of jurisdiction — to treat with them as free and sovereigncommunities. We have uniformly acknowledged the bindingforce of our engagements with them, and we have promisedthat we would be faithful and true in the performance of allour stipulations. We have never attempted to drive themfrom their ancient possessions, nor to permit others to do so,by withholding oiu* promised protection. We have never endeavoredto deceive them as to the nature and extent of theirrights, nor to intimidate them into an acquiescence with ourwishes. Is such the language now addressed to them ? Issuch the course now about to be pursued ?Sir, when gentlemen refer us to the past policy of the government,and ask us still to adhere to it, I tell them to take thewhole policy together. Hold out as many inducements as youplease, to persuade the Indian tribes to exchange their countryfor another beyond the Mississippi, but, at the same time, assurethem, that, until they freely and voluntarily consent to remove,they shall be protected in the possession and enjoyment of all148 MR. Evans's speech,the rights which they have immemorially possessed, and whichwe have recognised and solemnly guarantied to them in existingtreaties. But the gentlemen have said, and reiterated, thatthe bill contemplates only the voluntary removal of the Indians; and they are astonished that the [proposal should meetwith any opposition. Sir, have tlioy yet to learn that there isno opposition to their free, unconstrained, voluntary removal ?Has any man upon this floor, or in this Congress, opposed it.^Do the numerous memorials, which weigh down your table,oppose it ? The honorable member from Tennessee, (Mr. Bell,)to sustain his assertion, that the public mind had been perverted,deceived and misled upon this subject, said, that the uniformlanguage of all the petitions was, that the Indians mightnot be coerced and compelled to remove ; that the public faithmight be kept and redeemed. Now, Sir, is there any remonstranceagainst the voluntary removal of these tribes ? Is therean objection to it from any quarter, unless it is to be accomplishedby coercion, or force, or withholding from them thatprotection, which we are bound to afford ? I know of none,and I tell the gentlemen, once for all, that the only oppositionis, to a forced, constrained, compulsory removal.The gentleman from Georgia, who first spoke upon this subject,(Mr. Lumjikin,) has gone farther, and discovered thesources of the opposition, and the motives from which itsprings. lie has told us, that it has its origin among enthusiastsin the northern States, Who, under the pretence of philanthropyand benevolence, have acquired a control over the Indiancouncils — have sent missionaries among them, who "arewell paid for their labors of love," and who are actuated by asordid desire for " liidiar. annuities." The gentlcir.a:! has reproachedthe memorialists who have addressed us, as "intermeddlers,"and " zealots," and expresses his strong disapprobationof appealing to religious associations, or interminglingreligious considerations in aid of political and jniblic objects.Sir, I am not about to vindicate the policy which the gentlemanhas reprobated. The occasion does Riot call for it. Butdoes he know upon whom his reproaches fall .-' Does he rememberthe first pamphlet which was laid upon our table, inreference to this subject.' It is entitled "Proceedings of theIndian Board in the City of New York ;" and I call the attentionof the gentleman to it, if he wishes to ascertain who areendeavouring to enlist religious societies and associations in theconcerns of government. What was the origin of this "IndianBoard," and of wiioni is it composed It originated with thegovernment. I've superintendent of Indian affairs, acting underthe auspices and by the direction of the department of war,opened a correspondence with divines in that city. He invitedthe formation of the society for the j)iupose of aiding the objectsof government — he was sent on to deliver an address explanatoryof the purposes of the administration, and to assistin the establishment of the association. It was formed, and iscomposed, chiefly, of religious men, who have solely in view,MR. Evans's speech. 1491 doubt not, the benefit and preservation of the Indians, andhave been made to believe that humanity requires their removal.Among these proceedings, I liii also a letter written bythe superintendent, under the direction of the department olwear, to a gentleman in Boston, (J. Evarts, Esq.) upon the samesubject — disclosing the views of the government, and solicitinghis attention to the condition of the Indians, and inviting hisco-operation in measures calculated to improve their situation.The gentleman from Georgia has alluded to a series of letterswith the signature of William Penn, and has denounced theauthor as an " intermeddler" in matters which does not concernhim, and a "zealot," intruding his opinions upon this house,and upon the country. Now, Sir, in attributing these lettersto the gentleman I have already adverted to, (Mr. Evarts,) Idisclaim all knowledge of the fact that is not common to everymember of the house. I know him only as possessing a repu "nation for intelligence, philanthropy, benevolence and untiringzeal in the promotion of human happiness, which any one uponthis floor might be proud to possess. Is he an intermeddler?Has he obtruded his opinions upon this subject? Sir, was henot invited and solicited to its consideration ? He was ; andhe did consider and investigate, and has given the result of hisresearches and reflections. What was he to do ? Hold hisopinions in subserviency to the will of the government? Dogentlemen forget in what age and in what country we live ?Are we retrograding, while the spirit of free inquiry and unrestrainedopinion is pushing its onward progress, even undermonarchies and despotisms ? Is it in this country only to bemet wit]) checks and rebukes ? Sir, have the free citizens ofthis nation no right to investigate subjects so highly interestingto our national prosperity and character, and to Ibrm opinions,except in accordance with the views of government ? Thegentleman regards it perfectly proper and correct to form religiousassociations, and issue pamphlets even in the northernStates, when the object is in aid of his designs. But when a;sense of right, and justice, and humanity, leads to a differentconclusion, then the gentleman can hardly find terms strongenough to express his abhorrence of intermingling religiousconsiderations with political movements. Sir, I wish gentlemenwould fairly meet and answer the arguments which havebeen addressed to us, and not content themselves with the useof harsh epithets, and the imputation of base motives.When was this com-plaint about enthusiasm, and mixing religionwith politics, first heard of? Missionary establishmentshad long existed among the Indians, w with the approbation andby the aid of government. Their object was to melior-ate thecondition, and elevate the character of these tribes, therebyrendering them better neighbors to Georgia, and essentiallypromoting her interests. Not a syllable of complaint washeard; Georgia was perfectly satisfied, and the other Stateswere left at full liberty to send their missionaries, and expendtheir funds in improving the Indians within her border. But13*150 MR. Evans's speech.when a new crisis lias arisen, and the claim of these Indians t*their own lands has come in question, then, if they are foundnot to coincide in the schemes of Georgia and of the administration,it is all "enthusiasm," fanaticism, "sordid interest,""selfishness, delusion, hypocrisy."I do not know, Sir, that it is necessary for me, or for any one,to stand here in vindication of the motives of those intelligentand estimable men, who have devoted time and treasure in thebenevolent purpose of converting the Indians to civilizationand Christianity — who have established schools and churches,and have been the means of their improvement and advancementin the arts of social ife. The country will do justice totheir motives and their actions. It is one thing to make animpeachment, but quite another thing to sustain it. The gentlemanhas been liberal in accusations of the most odious complexion— and by what are they sustained ? IJy that gentleman'sopinion, and by nothing else — he brings no facts to corroborateit ; and he must ]pardon me if I decline to adopt hisconjectures, or to regulate my action in any degree upon assumptions,i(ir which I discover no foundation.But the gentleman inquires why any opposition should bemade to the bill, which contemplates only the voluntary removalof the Indians ; and he complains of great misrepresentation,on the part of those who oppose it, because they hold outthe idea that force is to be used ; while he strenuously deniesthat such a ])iui)ose is cherished in any quarter. Now, Sir, ifthe gentleman lead confined his denial to the intentions of thegovernment of the United States, it is very possible he may becorrect. I do not know that the administration means to employany force ; but if that gentleman meant to assert that theIndians within the limits of Georgia are not to be operatedupon in a compulsory manner, from some other quarter, I donot assent to his position. I believe they are. It may not, tobe sure, be by an army in the field, advai.ciiig to the sound ofdrum, with banners displayed, to drive tum from their homes,at the point of the bayonet. lout, Sir, is there no compulsionexcept military comjiJiLsion ? Can men be coerced by nothingbut guns and bayonets'' I say that those Indians are not to beleft in circumstances, where they can act in an unconstrainedand voluntary manner. x'\nd when the gentleman inquireswhy we oppose the bill, 1 tell him, because it does not providefor the exigency of the case. It does not provide for the securityand protection of the Indians in their possessions andrights. It does not answer their demands upon us. Thoughthis bill professes in itself nothing hostile, yet, if its effect willbe to leave the Indians in circumstances where they can makebut one choice, then it is clear that they ai-e compelled. Forwhat is compulsion but placing men in circumstances wherethey have no alternative left them ? The gentleman affects tobe greatly amazed that we do not at once assent to his bill.But supposing that the bill shall pass, and the Indians shall notchoose to leave their homes, I ask the gentleman, Will they beMR. EVANS S SPEECH. 151left in the same situation in which they have hitherto beenplaced.' Will they be permitted to enjoy the undisturbed possessionof their soil and jurisdiction? If so, and no externalbias or oppression is to be brought to bear upon them, and theyshall be lett perfectly free and independent, as they were leftwhen previous laws have been passed, relating to the removal,to which the gentleman has referred, then 1 am content. Wehave not a word to say. But it is not so; and the gentlemanknows it is not so. He says no force is to be applied. Oh no.No force. Only the laws of Georgia are to be extended overthem! Their ancient customs, laws, usages, are to be abolished—their council tires arc to be extinguished— their existenceas a political community to be annihilates.Sir, in what mulier has this subject been brought beforeus.' The President, to be sure, has called our attention to itin his message, and recommends the measure proposed in thisbill. But, beside this, we have urgent memorials from theCreeks and Cherokees, reminding us of our treaties and ourengagements to t!iem, and demanding the lulfihnont of thosestipulations. What answer do we propose to give ? They ask,Will you pers )rm your engagements ? We reply. We will helpyou to remove latimer into the wilderness. Is this such a reply,as we are bound to give .' Tliey tell us they wish to remain,and to be protected, where they now are; and I object to thebill, because it docs not furnish this protection. For what purposedoes Georgia extend her laws over those Indians, but forcompelling them to remove ? to enable her to get possessionof the land ? What does Georgia gain by legislating ovei- theseIndians, unless it be their lands? ' We all know the nature ofthe claim vehicle Georgia sets up — that the soil of the Indiancountry belongs to her— that its jurisdiction is in her — that theIndians are tenants at her will, whom she may at any rune remove— that, before the compact of 1802, she had a right at anytimeto take the land by force, and that she has hitherto forborneonly because the United States had crriraged to extinguishthe Indian titles for her. She says, expressly, " that theland is hers, and lie will have it," but that she will not resortto violence "until other means have failed." Other meansthen, it seems, are first to be tried : and, if they fail, the obviousconsequence is,, that she will resort to violence. Now, Avliatare these other means ? The gentleman from Georgia has toldus, that, after having long exercised great forbearance, Georgiahas at length caught a gleam of hope ft-om the elevation of ourpresent chief magistrate, and the recognition by him of herlong delayed rights. Give me leave to tell the gentleman, thatthe President has never recognised the rights which Georgiaclaims, unless the right of jurisdiction, which the Presidentadmits to be in Georgia, is equivalent to the right of soil, whichGeorgia claims — unless it gives, also, a title to the land ; for thisshe is to get by violence, if other means fail.[Here Mr. Lumpkin interposed, and denied that he had eversaid that Georgia meant to resort to violence in any case.]152 MR. EVANs's SPEECH.iSir, I did not charge this language upon that gentleman ; heis not authorized to speak as to what Georgia will or will notdo. The language 1 have cited, and the principles avowed,are to be found in a report and resolutions adopted by theLegislature of that State in 1827 ; they are the solemn declarationsby the State of the policy which she means to pursue.The gentleman said, to be sure, that perhaps the language ofthat report was too strong ; and probably the State of Georgiawilmot say the same thing now. Why? Because she feels sureof getting the land without violence. Other means are in progresswhich must be successful. Is it not apparent that theobject of extending her laws over the Indians is to drive themacross the Mississippi ; and now they tell us that no compulsionis contemplated. Sir, if compulsion is not contemplatedto be practised, it is contemplated to be permitted. The Indians,tell us that they cannot remain under the laws of Georgia; and the President himself, and the secretary of war, say,in so many words, to the Indians, that their only means ofescaping this dreadful calamity is to emigrate to the west.'The tenor of all the language employed proceeds upon theidea that it is a calamity which they cannot endure. And thisis no new idea. A gentleman, not now a member of this house,in a report made upon this subject to a Brier Congress, hastruly said, " that such a measure must prove destructive to theIndians."I have said, that the President had not recognised the rightsof Georgia, as Georgia lays them down. What is his language? He says, thu-ough the secretary of war, to a delegationof Cherokees, "An interference to the extent of affording!you protection, and the occupancy of your soil, is what is demandedof the justice of this country, and will not be withheld"'It seems, then, that they are to remain in the occupancy of theirsoil. But this is not compatible with the claims of Georgia.'Where does the gentleman discover his ray of hope, but in theassurance that the open tion of the laws of Georgia will compelthe Indians in phnitdoii their country.The chairman of the committee takes the same ground, andsays, that it is no great hardship for the Indians to be broughtunder the laws of the State, inasmuch as they will still "enjoytheir own lands," and, "as it is understood" that the States donot contemplate to take the land away from the Indians byforce, thei-e can be no harm in passing this bill. I do not knowwhence the gentleman deriv-es this " understanding." I, forione, understand no such thing. I understand that the Statesdo mean to have the land. It is the land they want. Georgiaclaims, by the compact of 1802, that the Indian title shall be'extinguished, in order that the land may come into her possession.Has she ever claimed the mere sovereignty, as such.'Never — but always the land. When, therefore, the honorable'chairman says, " It is understood," I say that it is not understood,and that it cannot be understood from the public actsof the State. Is there any man on this floor entitled to speak'MR. EVANS's SPEECH. 153in the name of a sovereign, independent State, as to what shewill, or Avhat she will not do ? and this when she tells us thatthe land is hers, and that she " will have it," though she willnot resort to violence until other means tail ? These othermeans are her laws. If she extends them over the Indians,and the Indians still remain where they are, then, clearly, theother means will have failed; and then, if we may believe herown words, she does mean to resort to violence. When thegentleman therefore says, that it is with great satisfaction heobserves that the President recognises the rights of Georgia, Itell him the President does no such thing, and that Georgiawill be as little satisfied with this executive as she was withthe last, if he protects the Indians on any terms in the occupancyof their lands. Sir, I have been endeavoring to showthat the object and intention of Georgia, in extending her jurisdictionover the Indian tribes, is to compel them to remove.Such will be its effect. Upon this subject, hear the commissionerswho were sent last year to negotiate vv'ith the Indiansfor their removal :General Carroll, to the secretary of war, describing the difficultieshe met with in inducing the Indians to emigrate, says,"The truth is, they rely with great confidence on a favorablereport on the petition they have before Congress. If that isrejected, atul ths lawson the States are enforce, you will haveno difficulty of (procuring an exchange of lands with them."General Coffee, upon the same subject says, " They expressa confident hope that Congress will interpose its power, andprevent the States from extending their laws over them.Should they be disappointed in this, I hazard little in sayingthat the government will have little difficulty in removing themwest, of the Mississippi''Mr. Chairman, I think it can require no further roof tosatisfy us that the legislation of Georgia is designed, and willhave the certain effect, to coerce the Indian tribes, and tocom-joel them to seek a new home, beyond the reach of the avidityand oppression of the white man, if such a spot remains to themof all their once vast domains. Yet we are told that this removalis to be purely voluntary ; and gentlemen point us to thebill, and say, there is no compulsion there. No, Sir ; and thereis no protection there.I shall proceed, now. Sir, to consider the general subject ofour relations to some of the Indian tribes who are to be affectedby this bill, and who have invoked our protection ; the obligationswe have entered into with them ; the claims they haveupon us ; and the duties which we are bound, by the mostsolemn stipulations, to perform towards them. In this questionare involved the rights of Georgia, as a member of the Union,and the powers of the general government over Indian tribesresident within the borders of a State. These topics have alreadybeen so fully and ably discussed elsewhere, and so eloquentlyand elaborately debated here, by the honorable memberfrom New York, (Mr. Storrs,) that I am sensible very little154 MR. Evans's speech.remains to be said. I shall endeavor, as far as possible, toavoid the repetition of arguments and authorities, which havebeen used by others much more ably than I could hope to do.Our relations with the Indian tribes, upon which this bill is designedto operate, grow out of treaties entered into between themand the government of the United States. With the Cherokees,who are more directly concerned in this question than eitherof the other tribes, we have negotiated not less than sixteen.The first was that of Hopewell, in 1785,entered into by Congress,under the Articles of Confederation. This was a treaty of peace,and terminated a war, which had existed between them and theUnited States. The Cherokees place themselves under theprotection of the United States, "and of no other sovereignwhatever." After the adoption of the federal Constitution, in1791, the treaty of Houston was formed ; which was, also, " atreaty of peace and friendship." The tribe again placed itselfunder the protection of the United States, and "of no othersovereign whatever," and stipulated that they would "not treatwith any foreign power, individual State, or with individuals ofany State." A lil)cral cession of territory was made to the UnitedStates, and the United States, by the 7th Article, "solemnlyguarantied to the Cherokee nation all their lands not hereby ceded" Various other treaties have been made since that time, bywhich a large territory has been acquired, and renewed guarantiesgiven. These treaties have been negotiated by every administrationexcept the last — have been confirmed by every ."ijjjm-ovchI and sanctioned by every House of Representativesin the appropriations they have made to carry them intoeffect.By these treaties we have recognised the Cherokees as a"nation" — a political community, capable to contract and to becontracted v.ith. We have received them under our protectionand sovereignty, and prohibited them from treating with any"individual State," or placing themselves " under any othersovereign whatever." We have admitted their title to the landsin their occupancy, have paid them for the cessions they havemade, and solenudy guarantied to them " their lands." Yes, Sir,"their lands," which had not been ceded. All these rights theyclaim of the United States by virtue of treaties still subsisting.But we arc told that they are not a nation, or community, andthe laws of Georgia have abrogated and dissolved their politicalcharacter, and incorporated them as citizens of the State, subjectto its laws. The party with whom we contracted is annihilated.This is the first infraction of which they complain.They are now claimed as loiter the sovereignty of Georgiaalone, though we had received them under our sovereignty, andguarantied to them our protection. Of this they also complain,as a violation of our treaties. The lands which they occupyare denied to be theirs ; and Georgia says, " she will have them."How does this claim comport with the obligations we have enteredinto? Our stipulation with the Indians is, that they areadistinct community, and have the power of holding their ownMR. EVANS's SPEECH. 155"land. This guaranty is about to be violated, and we are calledupon to sit still, and see it violated. Sir, I could go farther.The guaranty in the treaty of Houston is a guaranty to the Indiansas a nation. No individual o\vnerslu|) is therein recognised; and when individuals leave the tracts on which they haveresided, those tracts revert, not to the United States, nor to thegovernment, nor to any body else, but to the nation, as a nation.But this bill contemplates a separate negotiation with individuals,and it declares, that all the land abandoned by individuals,who become emigrants, reverts not to their tribe, but to the Stateof Georgia. We are called to pass a law exchanging land withprivate individuals, widen we have guarantied the possession ofthat land to the Cherokee nation, as condition property; so thatwe are not only to stand by and see Georgia violate our faith,but to pass a bill, which very bill expressly violates it. ThePresident tells us, Georgia had a right at any time to extend herlaws over the Indians within her limits, and says that her doingso will be no violation of our guaranty. But I ask whetherthe laws of Georgia do not annihilate the party we contractedwith? Georgia comes in, and says, that ail laws, customs andusages of the Indians, as a nation, shall be utterly obliterated.When this has been done, where, I ask, is the party with whomwecoiuracteil.^ I ask Georgia to show us the community, withwhich we have entered into engagements. They will tell methere is no such jiarty. The nation, as such, ceases to exist.Jut what h^s caused it to cease .? The laws of Georgia. It isthose laws that have violated our stipulation, aid utterly annihilatedthe very party with whom we stipulated.It seems to me, the gentlemen get into a dilemma. Theground they take is, that Georgia has a right to abolish the tribe,and to resolve it into its elements, .as individual citizens of theState. Well, Sir, grant this, and what then ? Then they bringin a bill to enable the President to hold treaties — but with whom ?With the tribe of Indians? With the Cherokee nation ? Why,Sir, that tribe is abolished — there is no Cherokee nation. Withwhom, then, is the President to make a treaty ? With the Indiansconvened in council ? Sir, they cannot convene — the lawsof Georgia forbid it, and subject them to imprisonment andpunishment if they do. They dare not assemble to treat, andyet the President is to hold a treaty with them ! If the gentleman'spositions are true, he will have nobody to treat with. Notwith individuals — that is in the very face of our contract. Irefer gentlemen to the treaty of Houston, where the guarantyis to the nation.But we learn, as I have already had occasion to remark, thatthe construction which the President places upon these treatystipulations, is not "adverse to the sovereignty of Georgia."While he admits the Indians to have a just right to the occupancyof the lands, he denies to them the right of jurisdictionand government over their territory. Sir, have we not receivedthose tribes under our protection, and refused to permit them tobecome subject " to any other sovereign whatever ?" Is this not156 MR. Evans's speech.adverse to the sovereignty of Georgia .'" The idea of separatingthe jurisdiction of a nation fiorn the territory, which itowns as a nation, is a modern discovery. And 1 yield so far to ■the argument of gentlemen on the other side, as to admit that ithe discoverer, whoever lie may be, is entitled to the full credit iand benefit of the discovery. Such was not the doctrine of IGeorgia in 1825. In the discussions which then took place betweenher chief magistrate (governor Troup) and the secretaryof war, in relation to the treaty of the Indian Springs, the formersaid, " Soil and jurisdiction go together ; and if we have not theright of both at this moment, we can never have either by bettertitle. If the absolute [property and the absolute jurisdiction ihave not passed to us, when are they to come .'' Will you makea formal concession of the latter? When, and how .-' If the jurisdictionbe separated from the property, show the reservation iwhich separates it: 'tis impossible."The argument then was, that jurisdiction was acquired bytreaty, as well as soil. The argument now is, that jurisdictionalways belonged to the State, and that compact is not necessaryto confer it. The governor inquired when and how you could!obtain jurisdiction, if separated from the property, and declared!that it was impossible. Sir, the doctrines then relied upon forthe promotion of the interests of Georgia are in direct collisionwith the doctrines now advocated for her benefit. Will she]preserve consistency, or must new principles of law and rightbe discovered at every new emergency The honorable chairman,(stir. Bell.) in his report upon this subject, says, "The fundamentalprinciple, that the Indians had no rights, by virtue oftheir ancient possessions, either of soil or sovereignty, has neverbeen abandoned, either expressly or by implication."Sir, it might be answer enough to say, that this principle hasnever been asserted, and to call upon gentlemen to prove itsexistence by other means than the absence of an abandonmentof it. But as the gentleman has chosen to state the propositionin this form, I will endeavor to show that it has been expresslyabandoned, and by some of the States which are most interestedin the passage of this bill. By the treaty of the IndianSprings, in 182.5, with the Ci-week nation, all their land in Georgia,and a considerable portion of that in Alabama, was ceded to theUnited States. This treaty was annulled in 1820, for gross fraudand corruption, and a new treaty formed, ceding the lands inGeorgia, but not those in Alabama. These States protestedagainst rescinding the first treaty, because, as was contended,Georgia had acquired vested rights inherit; the property inthe soil, by virtue of the compact of 1802. The lands in Alabama,upon the extinguishment of the Indian title, belonged tothe United States, while those in Georgia, agreeably to our en *garments in the compact, belonged to that State. These treatiesbecame the subject of discussion in the Senate; and I willread a short passage from the debate : — Mr. Benton, of Missouri,said, "he thought that Georgia had no further cause of dissatisfactionwith the treaty; it was Alabama that was injured, byMR. Evans's speech. 157the loss of some millions of acres, which tie had acquired underthe treaty of 1825, and lost under that of 1826." " She hadlost the right of jurisdiction over a considerable extent of territory"— lost the right of jurisdiction. So, Sir, the doctrine thenwas, that right of jurisdiction was acquired by treaty, and, whenthe treaty was rescinded, the right of jurisdiction fell with it.Mr. King, of Alabama, said, "The constitutional question, asregards Georgia, yet remains in force ; and, though it may notseem to apply to Alabama, I still think our rights were violatedin annulling that treaty, and adopting another."Now, the rights which Alabama acquired under that treatywere merely rights of jurisdiction — the soil passed to the UnitedStates. If, therefore, the complaint of the Senator was wellfounded, it was the right of jurisdiction which was taken awayby the last treaty. 11^ Alabama lost any rights by the abrogationof the first compact, it was that of jurisdiction. Yet the argumentnow is, that the State always had jurisdiction, anterior toall treaties; and, by virtue of it, her laws have been extendedover the whole Indian country. But, Sir, there is a more directrenunciation of this doctrine still.In the session of 1826, a Senator from Mississippi (Mr. Reid)moved a resolution of inquiry into the expediency of authorizingprocess, both civil and criminal, to be served iq)on persons,citizens of the States, Who had fled to the Indian territory foi*protection. The resolution proposed no other action than uponcitizens of the United States, In explanation of his views, Mr.Reid said : —" He presumed it was already known, that more than half of the Stateof Mississippi is still in the occupations the Indian tribes, the Choctawand Chickasaw nations. In regard to the action of the State laws uponthese people, there never had been any difficulty, nor was it ever soughton the part of the State of Mississippi, to extend its jurisdiction overthem." " Hi object was to call the serious? consideration of the Senateto the condition of our own citizens, who, after having committed crimesor contracted debts, locate themselves among those Indians, and considerthemselves as beyond the jurisdiction of our laws." * * * "Herepeated, it was not sought on the part of the State of Mississippi, or byher Senators in this house, to enforce the action of the laws on the Indiansthemselves ; they did not claim to con-iter them as subject toI their operation. The Indian tribes have laws and traditionary usagesof their own, and are entitled to the patronage and protection of thegeneral government."At present, as far as he had been able to investigate the subject, itwas the opinion of some able jurists on this point, that process does notextend to persons residing on the Indian territory ; and he would wishto bring to the consideration of the legislative authority of the Union,the question, whether it is competent for us to extend our civil andcriminal process, or whether it As one of the appendages, one of thesepeople's rights as sovereigns, to afford a sanctuary to vagabonds fromEvery part of the Union." * * * * » «"At the last session of the Legislature of Mississippi, a propositionwas made to extend the civil power of their courts to their own citizensirho had contracted debts within the State, and had fled to this savage158 MK. Evans's speech.sanctuary. The matter was debated for many days, and it was at lastdecided, that there existed no power in the State to extend its laws inthe manner sought by the proposition." * * * .i Therefore, ifthere was any remedy on this subject to be obtained, it was to be atthe hands of" the general government, and not by force of any competentauthority in the State government."I think, Mr. Chairman, it sufficiently appears from the extractsI have read, that the State of Mississippi, so deeply interestedill this question, and so anxious to niauiiain all its rights,has wholly repudiated, both hy its Senators in Congress andby its Legislature, the doctrine which the chairman asserts " hasnever been abandoned." Jurisdiction, in its most ample extent,is hereby conceded to the Indians ; and if that State hasmore recently, under the auspices of the present executive,adopted a different course, and obtained new views of its rights,it remains for it to justify its course to an enlightened ]publicopinion, and to the scrutiny of the world. But, Sir, by the 11tharticle of the treaty of houston, we have expressly recognisedthe Cherokee country not to be within the jurisdiction of anyState. That article provides, that if any crime be committedwithin their territory, by a citizen of the United States, which,"if committed within the jurisdiction of any State," would bepunishable by the laws of such State, it shall be proceeded againstin the same manner as if the offence had been committed"within the jurisdiction of the State, &c." Can any thing bemore manifest, than that the Indian territory was not to be deemedwithin the jurisdiction of the State? This is, in truth, aguaranty, on our )part, that we will not invade their jurisdiction.And are wo jiow to be told, that wc have given no guaranty "adverseto the sovereignty of Georgia ?"Sir, is it becoming a great and magnanimous nation to fritteraway its obligations, to search for nice distinctions and refinedcasuistry, to justify its violations of faith ? I have beenattempting to show, Sir, tattle idea of se[)?)ratn!g the right ofjurisdiction from the right of soil is iio\cl and unfounded; andthat, by our stipulations, the right of jurisdiction, is fully concededto the Indian tribes within their own territories. If I havsucceeded in this, it will hardly be contended that tlse soil is nottheirs also. Indeed, 1 do not understand, that the executive oisthe committee assume the position that they Leave not a right tcthe occupancy of their lands, however Georgia may assert thcontrary, and claim them as exclusively her own. It will nottherefore, be necessary for me to discuss the question, whatrights have the Indians to their lands, more especially, as tht!gentleman from New York (Mr. Storrs) bus done it with scmuch ability.I shall, however, notice hereafter some of the arguments whichhave been adduced to sustain the right which Georgia sets up t<these lands.The gentleman who last addressed the committee (Mr. Fosterseems to lie aware that the obligations and guaranties containsin our treaties do, in truth, conflict with the pretensions of GeorlMR. Evans's speech. 159gia ; and he assumes the position that they are, therefore, unconstitutionaland void. The same sentiment is advanced by thePresident, and by the committee on Indian affairs, if the meaningand construction of the treaties are such as we have endeavored tomaintain. The ground taken is, that the United States had noright to enter into stipulations inconsistent with the sovereignty ofGeorgia ; that we are under obligations to her, which we mustfirst discharge. Now, Sir, it comes with an exceeding ill gracefi-om us, when we are called upon to perform our promises, to returnfor answer that we had no authority to make them. Havewe not received ample compensation for > the promises made''Whether we had the authority or not, is a question between usand Georgia, and not between us and the Cherokees. They holdour warranty of authority ; and shall we refuse to be bound by it.'But if we had no right to make the contract, what is to be done.'I presume, Sir, it is to be rescinded.If the treaty is not binding on us, can it be binding on the Cherokees? If we refuse to be bound by the guaranty, may they notrefuse to be bound by the cession ? The one was the considerationfor the other. Shall we restore them to their original condition? Shall we cede back the territory ? Gentlemen have foreseenthe difficulty, and they say, its we cannot give back the land,we will make compensation ; and what is the compensation Whichthey propose ? It is, that we should say to these Indians, Movefarther off — leave us — cross the Mississippi — go to the RockyMountains. This is our will and you must obey. Sir, it requirestwo parties to make a contract, and the Indians do not agree tothis mode of compensation. They tell us it is inflicting a deeperinjury still. And now, Sir, when we are about to compensatethem for a violation of our faith, we propose to do it not as theywill, but as we will — by withholding " our aid and our good neighborhood"— by permitting them to be driven into the recesses ofthe forests, to become the prey of more barbarous nations. Andthis we call compensation.But why had we no right to enter into the stipulations ? Gentlementell us that we are thereby erecting a State within the limitsof another State, against the consent of the latter, which is expresslyinterdicted in the Constitution. Sir, I deny • the fact. Ideny that by any thing in the treaties we do erect or form anotherState. If these Indian tribes are a State now, they were a Statebefore. They obtain no additional authority from the treaty.They derive from it no political existence. The treaty merely recognisedthat which had existence at the time it vas made. Itgave the Indians nothing. They were as much a State before asthey are now. But I ask, What is the true meaning of that termin the Constitution ? The " State" there mentioned means a memberof this confederacy — a State having all the prerogatives, andbound by all the obligations which that instrument contained — thatshall have representatives on this floor and in the Senate, andshould have a voice in the election of President. The clause isiiBimply a limitation of the power of Congress in the admission ofmew States into the Union. Sir, do we admit a new State into160 MR. EVANS's SPEECH.the Union, when we acknowledge the Cherokees as an independenttribe ? Do we restrict them as the Constitution restricts theStates of this Union ? Do we confer powers and privileges whichthat instrument confers ? We do not. When I heard gentlemenurge this objection, and talk about erecting a State within the hm-itsof another State, I was astonished. It may be proper enoughto call the Cherokees a " State," if we affix to that word someother meaning than it beare in the Constitution ; but " Slate," atthere used, means neither more nor less than a member of theUnion.It is said, however, that these Cherokees are fondling a government,and are taking rapid strii'.cs to po^^•er, Tljis position isequally untrue. They have not formed a govemmeiit. Theyalways had a government. They were riiljd by councils, and bytraditionary laws ; and all they have done is to put that which v.'asformerly oral only, into a written form. This may be improvingtheir government, but it is not creating it, nor assuming any newpower. They disclaim such an idea. But it is said that this recognitionis inconsistent with the sovereignty and jurisdiction oti.Georgia. Do not gentlemen perceive that this argument assumes;the whole question ? The very question is, whether the jurisdictionof Georgia does or does not extend over the Cherokees.They assume the very question we are debating. They say thatthese lands lie within her chartered limits, and that therefore shehas jurisdiction over them as a matter of course. "Charteredlimits !" " Chartered limits !" Sir, one would think there was'some magic, some charm in these words, which conceited im-lmense powers, so great as to subvert all Indian rights whatever.!But what are chartered limits ? Certain lines described in chartersderived from Great Britain. Gentlemen argue that thesovereignty of Georgia is derived from her chartered limitsSovereignty follows them as a thing of course. This brings usto a further question. What ii.;ht had the crown of Great Britainto gi-ant these chartered limits, and to extend them round the Littian possessions ? Did the Indians consent ? No, Sir. I shallbe told that it was an net of sovereignty ; and this brings us backagain to the former question. Whence comes your sovereignty rAnd thus we are reasoning in a circle.The State lias jurisdiction and sovereignty because it has receivedchartered limits, and it has chartered limits from its right of sovereignty.Each of these is the cause, and each the effect of the other.To such reasoning as this I have a short answer. I tell gentlemen,that chartered limits arc one thing, and jurisdictional limits areanother. I deny that the two an; co-extensive. Chartered limitsconvey no other right than as against those who giant the charter — ;no other power than to obtain sovereignty and jurisdiction from)those who ]possess it, and could confer it. If the gentlemen mean tofix any other idea to the term chartered limes, then I deny that theIndians are ■vitliin the chartered limits of Georgia, and I ask, Howcame they there ? And here we come to an argument which haabeen much pressed.We are told of the right of discovery ; that the discoverers hadMR. EVANs's SPEECH. 161a right to plant colonies, and to protect tlieni, and to drive off thehostile tribes ; and we are further told, that civilization has a superiorclaim over the savage life ; that the earth was intended byProvidence to be cultivated. The gentleman from Georgia (Mr.Foster) has read the opinions of cmiucut men to sustain these positions.Sir, these are very fine theories, and I shall not stop to questionthem ; but they have nothing to do with the matter in hand.The question is, not what rights the first discoveries and settlersbad, nor whether civilization might or might not lawfully usurpthe possessions of the savage. AH these might be very good considerations,and very interesting questions, before we entered intocontracts with the Indians. But the simple question now is, Whatare their rights under these contracts? IIow have the natural,original rights of the Indians been modified, confirmed, and guarantiedby compacts .'' IIow have our rights as discoverers, or ascivilized nations, been waived, defined, and limited by treaties ?Surely it will not be contended that the rights of discovery, or conquest,or civilization, are so sacred and immutable as to be incapableof change or modification ))y voluntary compact.The rights of discovery have been so clearly defined by the honorablemember from New York, (Mr. Stones,) and so ably expoundedin the other branch of Congress, in debates now before the world,that I shall say nothing in relation to them, but to repeat ina singleword, that they are conventional rights between discoverers.As to the right derived from cultivation and civilization, whendoes it commence ? Only when that part of the world inhabitedby civilized man is full and overflowing, and a portion of its inhabitantsare compelled, from the necessity of the case, to seek a newhome. Civilization may not till then say to the savages — Giveground, yield us more space. Now, I ask whether Georgia, Alabamaor Mississippi, are so densely peopled, that more land is wantingfor their citizens ? Are there not 2C0 millions of acres belongingto the United States still unsold ? Is not the population of theseStates sparse and' thin ? Let them Avait till their o^vn territory shallbe filled up ; then they may assert this right with a better grace.But then another question may arise on this very doctrine. TheIndian territory may then be as dense in populations Georgia, andits inhabitants as civilized also. If that period should ever arrive,may not the Indians turn round on Georgia, and saj- — ewe are a civilizedpeople, our country is full to over-flowing, and we want someof your land to accommodate our suffering population ? WillGeorgia be willing to yield to such a claim ?Sir,, the period is distant,. very distant, when we can make gooda right to usurp the Indian )possessions on the gi-ound of the superiortitle of civilization. The gentleman from Georgia (Mr.Foster) read the opinion of Mr. Adams,, the late chief magistrateof the Union, of Dr. Morse, and of some other ]person, said to beaneminent lawyer, upon this point ; and how far did it meet thepresent juncture ? The subject under consideration was the originalright of the natives to the whole continent. Does this lawyerassert that the rights of civilization were so imperious and inexorableas to leave the Indian no spot of earth to rest upon .' Does14 *162 Mn. Evans's speech,he deny that the right, Avliatever it was originally, may be modifiedby compact ? Does he assert the monstrous position, thatAvhen civilized covenants with savage man, the compact is notbinding? No, Sir; he went into the question only as consider-edaside from all compacts and conventions ; and the strongest languageused was, " that the original right of the Indians had beendoubted." None, surely, will contend, that out of the rights of civilizationgroans a right to obliterate at will all your own agreementsand promises. We sto]) here. We base our argument on thefoundation of contract.But to return, Sir, to the question, what authority the UnitedStates had to enter into these stipulations. It seems to me thatthose who so strenuously deny it, should account for its undisturbedexercise for so many years past. It was first exercised under:the Confederation, by virtue of which the treaty of Hopewell wasformed. The gentleman read an article in that instrument toshow that each State retained its own sovereignty ; and hence heargues that the United States were divested of all power Avithinthe range of that sovereignty. But, Sir, the rights retained Averethose not delegated. The States did delegate to the United Statesthe right of peace and war, and they expressly interdicted thatpower to the States. " No State shall engage in any war, withoutthe consent of the United States in Congress assembled, unlesssuch State be actually invaded by enemies, or shall have receivedcertain advice of a resolution being formed by some nation of Indiansto invade such State, and the danger is so imminent as notto admit of delay," &e. Georgia could not therefore engage inwar, except in the imminent danger provided tor. As to peace ;The United States shall have the sole and exclusive right and}iOV»'er of determining on peace and war, except in the cases"mentioned before. The States had therefore no right to makev.'ar, except when under actual invasion, or imminent danger ofevasion ; but thej^ had not the coiTeF]:!onding right of makingpeace, under any circumstances. The right of war was derivedfrom the imminence of the danger ; but the United States mustcome, in, in order to conclude a peace. The tn aty of Kopcweliwas a treaty of peace formed liy virtue of this pe.A^-er.It was made to i>ut an end to war. Had the State of Georgiaa right to conclude the peace .'' No, Sir. The United Statesalone could do it I>y treaty. Is there a}iy other mode ? None.The gentleman complained, in respect to the treaty of Hoj)ewcl],that the Cherokees lead acknowledged their dependence on thegovernment of thei United States, had ]placed themselves under itsprotection, and under no other sovereign whatever. lie said thegovernment had no right to make such a stipulation. But if thegovernment nnist conclude a peace, (and ail yiekl that,) surelythey had the right to fix the terms. Why was this objection notmade at the time ' I am told that Georgia protested against thetreaty. I am wll aware of it. Tiie ground of that protest was,that the United States were assuming the right of regulating matterswith the Indians wiiicii belonged to Georgia; and that thelegislative rig) it of Georgia had been expressly resented in the .Evans's speech. 163tides of Coi)ff deration. The article reads thus: The UnitedStates shall have the power of "regulating the trade, andmanaging all affairs with the Indians*, not inemhers of anyState, provided that the legislative right of any State Avithin itsown limits be not infringed or violated." Georgia protested,because she thought her legislative rights were infringed. Herprotest was submitted to Congress in 1787, at a time whenmany of those who bad formed the instrument of Confederationwere administering the government, and must be supposedto know the extent of the powers which it conferred.A long report was made in Congress upon the subject of theprotest, denying the ground tr.keu bj' Georgia and North Carolina,which State had also protested, and affirming that the provisohad no such meaning as vas contended. I will read apart of that report :But there is another circumstance, far more embarrassing, and.thatis — the clause in the Confederation relative to managing all affairs withthe Indians, &.c. is differently construed by Congress and the twoStates within whose limits the said tribes and disputed lamps are. Theconstruction contended for by those States, if right, appears to thecommittee to leave the federal powers, in this case, a mere nullity;and to make it totally uncertain on what principle Congress is to interferebetween them and the said tribes. The States not only contendfor this con-traction, but have actually pursued measures in conformityto it. Noi-th Carolina has undertaken to assign land to the Cherokees,and Georgia has proceeded (o treat with the Cheeks concerningpeace, lands, and the objects usually the principal ones in aJnio.t everytreaty with the Indians. This construction appears to the committee,not only to be productive of confusion, disputes, anil embarrassments inmanaging affairs with the independent tribes within the limits of theStates, but by no mean? the true one. The clause referred to is —Congress shall have the sole and exclusive right and pov;er of regulating<:he trade, and managing all affairs with the Indians, not membersof any of the States ; provided that the legislative right of anyState, within its own limits, bo not infringed or violated.' — In formingthis clause, the parties to the federal compact must have had somedefinite objects in view ; the objects that come into view, principally,in forming treaties or managing affairs with the Indians, had been longunderstood, and pretty well ascertained, in this country. The committeeconceive that it has been long the opinion of the country, supportedby justice and humanity, that the Indians have just claims to alllands occupied by, and not fairly purchased from them; and that, inmanaging affairs with them, the principal objects have been those ofmaking var and peace; purchasing certain tracts of their lands; fixingthe boundaries between them and our people, and preventing thelatter settling on lands left in possession of the former. The powersnecessary to these objects appear to the committee to he indivisible,and that the parties to the Confederation must have intended to givethem entire tO' the Union, or to have given them cn'iro to the State. —These powers, before the revolution, were (assessed by the king, andexercised by him ; nor did they interfere with the legislative right ofThe colony within its limits : this distinction, which was then, and maybenow taken, may perhaps serve to explain the proviso part of therecited clause. The laws of the State can have no effect upon a tribeof Indian;, or their lands, within the limits of the State, so long as that164 MR. Evans's speech.tribe is independent, and not a member of the State ; yet the laws ofthe State m;iy be executed upon debtors, criminals, and other properobjects of those laws, in all parts of it; and therefore the Union maymake stipulations with any such tribe, secure it in the enjoyment ofall or part of its lands, without infringing; upon the legislative right inquestion. It cannot be supposed the State has the powers mentioned,without making the recited clause useless, and without absurdity mtheory as well as in practice ; for the Indian tribes are justly consideredthe common friends or enemies of the United States; and no particularState can have an exclusive interest in the management ofaffairs with any of the tribes,, except in some uaconunon cases. Thecommittee find it difficult to reconcile the said construction of the recitedclause made by the two Slates, and their proceedings beforementioned, especially those of Georgia, with what they conceive to betheintentions of those who made the said motion; for the committeepresume that the delegates of Georgia do not mean that Congress isbound to send their forces (o. punish such nations as the State shallname, to act in aid of the State authority ; to send her forces and recalltlieni as she shall see fit to make war or peace. Such an idea cannotbe consistent with the dignity of the Union, and the principles of the-federalcompact. But the committee conceive that it is the opinion ofthe honorable movers, and also the general opinion, that all wars andhostile measures against the Creeks, or any other independent tribe ofIndians, ought to be conducted under the authority of the Union, atleast where the forces of the Union are employed ; that the power taconduct a war clearly implies the power to examine into the justiceof the war, to make peace, and adjust the terms of it; and that, therefore,the terms or words of the said motion, if it be adopted by Congressat all, must be varied accordingly."Such, Sir, was the opinion of Congress of its powers underthe Confederation ; and it practised upon that opinion. Notlong after tlii.^, the present Constitution of the United Stateswas formed and ratified, Georgia assenting. One article ofthat instrument is — "All treaties made, and which shall bemade, under the authority of the United States, shall be thesupreme law of the land." The treaty of Hopewell was atreaty then "made." Its validity as a treaty had been alreadyasserted by Congress. Georgia assented to this article of theConstitution, therein sanctioning the treaty of Ilo]>ewell, andgiving it validity, if it had none before. Georgia yielded thepoint in controversy: by virtue, as she supposed, of her reservedlegislative rights, she had made a treaty, and acquired landsby it. But of what use was that treat' and those lands to her.'None at all. And by the compact of 1809, she expressly stipulatedthat the United States should extinguish the Indian titleto the county of Tallahassee — the lands which the Indians hadbefore yielded. Sir, was not this an admission that the treatywhich the State had previously made was of no validity .'* thatthe Indian title still remained to be extinguished ? The Confederationdid not recognise the right of Georgia to make atreaty, and Georgia, therefore, did not acquire the lands ; buthad to call in aid the power of the United States to do it for her.Such was the authority possessed by the United States underthe articles of Confederation, and such was the exercise ofMR. Evans's speech. 165it. Not long after the treaty of Hopewell was made, and thepowers of the general government asserted in the report Ihave read, the present Constitution was adopted, conferringupon the United States the same powers of peace and war —of i-egulatii)g the affairs with the Indians, without the limitationas to the legislative rights of the States, which was thefoundation of the Georgia protest. The restriction under theConfederation was found to be embarrassing and obscure, andtherefore was omitted ; and, as Mr. Madison, in a number ofthe Federalist, referred to by the gentleman from New York,(Mr. Storrs,) says, was designedly omitted. The United States,therefore, derives its authority uiider the Constitution ; and inthe very same year in which it was ratified, commenced negotiationsand concluded treaties with Indians living within thelimits of a State. Did they do this incautiously, ignorantly ?No, Sir ; they proceeded in the uiost cool and cautious manner.The government was circumspect and deliberate. Thethen President did not take a single step without the previousconsent of the Senate. He went to that body in person, andinquired whether he would be authorized to offer the guarantyand to pledge our faith ? The response was, that he should beso authorized. The States interested heard the stipulationswhich were proposed, and they set up no objection. It wasproposed to them that the President should treat with the Indianswithin the limits of the State, and Georgia assented to it.And now, are we to be told that the general government had noauthority, and that Georgia is not boun;l by the treaty ? Thetreaty was made in conformity with their advice and consent,and was subsequently ratified "by the Senate also, with the consentof Georgia ; and are we now asked, where was our authorityto make it? Those who deny the right must account forso extraordinary a procedure.Gentlemen say they can well account for it ; and the solutionis, that the treaty was for their benefit ; and, therefore,though the United States had no authority to make it, yet thatthey submitted to it because it was for their interest, knowing,fell the time, that the government had no right to do it.Sir, it is a well known rule in morals and in common sense,that every one making a promise is bound by it in the sense inwhich he knows the other party to understand it. WhenGeorgia, therefore, knew the promises which this governmentwas making to the Indians, and yielded Iter assent, she shallbe precluded from asserting that either she or we are notbound, according to the sense we then knew the Indians putupon those promises ? By this rule our guaranty is to bemeasured ; and I, for one, will never move an inch to relieve aState which thus permits us to enter into engagements, andreceives the benefit of our contracts, and at last comes forwardwith the complaint that we had no right to make them. I sayto Georgia, If we had no right Avithout your consent, your consenthas been obtained. It is too late. You are estopped.166 MR. Evans's speech.Sir, we have heard another doctrine, at which I was, I comfess, both astonished and alarmed. We are told that thesenational treaties are " expedients," resorted to merely to accomplishour own ends, made lor our interest, and to be construedfor our benefit. We have a very extraordinary historyoftliem in the IGth page of the committee's report. It is theresaid, we were in a critical situation. Dilhcuities existed withrespect to the forts on our western frontier, and about the Mississippi,with Great Britain and Spain. We had just come outof a long « ar, and were poor. That we were in no condition toincur Indian hostilities; and in this particular juncture, generalWashington was called upon to settle the mode of conductingour relations with the Indian tribes, and to secure our peacewith them. That he adopted the ]practice of regulating our!affairs with them by treaties. Sir, are they any the less obli igatory because they were made when we were in difficulty ?Had we told these Indians, We are now in a critical condition;we want you to treat with us ; but by and by, when we get out Iof trouble, and grow powerful and strong, we shall considerour compacts as expedients — mere matters of legislation overyou — do you think they would have ceded their lands? If theIndians, in the day of our calamity, received our plighted faith,and yielded u|) their territories, so much the more reason isthere that we should now observe them as sacredly bindingupon us. There is a moral obligation, beyond all treaties, tokeep our promises in good faith, in the day of our strength andpower, to which, in the day of our weakness, we were indebtedfor security and peace. Yet the gentleman at the head of one iof the committees of this house has told us, that these engagementswere mere "expedients" to obtain j)cace and get theIndian lands. Sir, if such is that gentleman's opinion, I amsorry he expressed it to the world ; for I am not willing to affixsuch a stigma on our national fame ; I am not willing to committhe honor of this nation to the gentleman's keeping; antihaving, as one of the humblest citizens of the republic, some 'share in her faith and her character, I ]protest for myself, and!for those I represent, against any such interpretation of ourengagements.The 7th article of the treaty of Houston contains the guaranty Iof which so much has been said in this debate; and the follow 1ing is the explanation which the committee jut upon that Iarticle :It was therefore thought necessary, in order to ensure peace,that some strong and decisive evidence should be given of thedetermination of the government to prevent, by force, anyfurther intrusions upon the lands reserved for the Indians, anda guaranty of their boundary was thought of, as the meansbest calculated to effect that object. It was probably a deviceadopted more for the intimidation of the whites, than for anyeffect it was likely to have upon the Indians themselves."The guaranty was necessary to secure peace — in otherwords, the Indians would not make peace without the guaranty.Evans's speech. 167ty. But, instead of being for their benefit, and obligatory uponus, it was probably a device for the intimidation of the whites !Sir, I deny this assertion, and I call upon the gentleman toproduce his authority for it. How absurd an idea! how utterlypreposterous ; Will the gentleman tell me that a solemnpromise in a treaty with another party was not intended tohave any effect upon those to whom it was made — but was adevice to intimidate the party making it .'' Could we not intimidateand restrain ourselves b}' laws!* I repudiate the idea:I cannot consent thus to fix an indelible stigma on the fairfame of my country. Sir, the language of the treaty was sincere,intended to be obligatory upon us, and should be observedmost sacredly.The great object of the gentleman is to procure the removalof the Indians; and to obtain their consent, he proposes, in thebill, that the President shall " solemnly guaranty" — the verywords of the treaty of houston — solemnly guaranty to them thecountry to which we propose to send them. The gentlemansays, that the guaranty in that treaty was " probably a devicefor the intimidation of the whites." Well, Sir, let the projectbe executed — and within a period that the gentleman nay liveto see, the whites will again press upon them, and say. Youmust go — move farther west. When the Indians inquire forwhat cause, the same reasons will be given then that are givennow. All history shows, that if you remain near us, you will bedestroyed. Tiie red man cannot live in contact with the white.Humanity and your owt interests require your removal. Besides,we have a right to the land. Our ancestors discoveredit. Are we not civilized ? And has not civilization a right toprevail over savage life? Siip|)ose it be so, reilly the Indians,but we were sent here not by our consent, but by your powerand did you not " solemnly guaranty" to us these limits ?Very true — but were you so ignorant as not to know that ourguaranty was only an expedient? only a device? Had younot sagacity enough to perceive that it was only a |)Ian to getrid of you ? to send you off out of the way ? Were you nottold by us at the time, that " Indian treaties were only aspecies of legislation?" Were you not told by a connniltee ofCongress, that these things were only a device ? that in ourconduct towards you, " one of those expedients was, to appearto do nothing which concerned" you, " either in the appropriationof your hunting grounds, or in controlling your conductwithout your consent." Nothing but appearance — really andtruly, we did as we [pleased.Sir, I have i\o doubt the gentleman is sincere in the guarantieshe proposes to give ; and intends to bind the nation in allfuture time. If he should live to see his assurances thus explainedand chaffered away, he will feel something of the emotionwhich Washington, and the fathers of the country, wouldhave experienced, could they have anticipated that their solemnassurances were to be thus lightly regarded.168 MR. EVANS's SPEECH.[Mr. Bell interposed, and said the report had not been correctlyunderstood — that lie did not contend that the guarantywas not binding.]Sir, I regret very much, if I have misrepresented any sentimentof the report. Jf the gentleman will joint out any part ofit which he wishes to be read, I will cheerly read it, and abidebv his correction.'[Mr. Bell declined.]- Sir, I have connected upon it as I understand it, and I quotethe language which I find in it. The report gives another reasonwhy the guaranty should not be understood in the sense weaffix to it —The victory of the 20th of August, 1794, over the northern Tnrlians,with whom the Creeks and Cherokees had kept up a regular correspondence; the expedition, which was secretly planned, for carryingthe war into the Cherokee country, and which was successfully conductedhy the suffering frontier inhabitants ; and the pacific dispositions"of the Spanish authorities of Florida, which preceded the treaty of 1796iwith Spain, were the actual restorers of peace."After this time, the government was under no obligation to renewthe guaranty contained inthe treaties 17fc0 and 1791, with the Creeksand Cherokees, but, as it has done so, it only shows that that stipulationwas not believed to affect the nature of the title by which thosetribes held their lands, or to introduce any new principle, in relationto their rights gene ally."Thus, Sir, it seems that our pacific relations with the southerntribes were the result of a victory obtained by general Wayneover the northern Indians, with whom the Cherokees and Creekshad some alliance — that they were therefore vanquished — thatafter this we were under no obligation to renew the guaranty,and, having renewed it, it is not therefore to be construed asaffecting the nature of their title, or the extent of their rights.Sir, is this the rule by which treaties and compacts are to beconstrue.' 1 had siijiposed that the tine mode of arriving atthe meaning of any clause, was to examine and weigh the termsin which it is couched — to compare it with the general spirit ofthe instrument, and not to inquire into the inducements and obligationsresting upon the parties at its formation. Suppose thisguaranty to 1>e the merest gratuity in the world, on our part —that we were, in truth, under no obligations to make it — does itthence follow, that it is to have no meaning, or a restricted meanings'Have we thence a right to construe it away ? Surely not.If we have made the guaranty, we must be bound by the guaranty,in its true, full sense, as understood at the time of makingit. This idea of abrogating the force of treaties is of modernorigin. The parties who now favor it were formerly amongthe most zealous defenders of the faith and obligation of treaties.In 1827, Georgia contended most manfully, that treatieswere sacred, binding, immutable. She demanded the full performanceof the stipulations with the Creeks, at the IndianSprings, and wholly denied the power, even of the parties tothe compact, to rescind it, though it was founded in gross fraud •MR. EVANS's SPEECH. 169and corruption. In every line of her remonstrance, we perceivethe tenacity and force with which she clung to the validity oftreaties. Sir, in a communication, to wliicli I have ah-lady referred,from the President to the Creek Indians, in which he endeavorsto convince them that the treaties are not binding uponus, if construed as impairing the sovereignty of Georgia, heclaims from them the most exact performance of their obligations:"Our peaceful mother, earth, has been stained by theblood of the white man, and calls for the punishment of his murderers,whose surrender is now demanded, under the solemnobligation of the treaty which your chiefs and warriors, in council,have agreed to. To preserve peace, you must comply withyour own treaty." With what face can we require of them thefull, faithful performance of their promises, vvlien, in the samebreath, we tell them that we had no authority to give the assuranceon our part .-' Let us construe, and so perform our engagements,as to preserve the national faith and honor — as will in noevent expose us to the censures of the world.Sir, I have before me many documents which I had intended touse, illustrative of the policy of the government towards the Indians— as well of the crown before the revolution, as of theCongress under the Confederation, and since, under the presentConstitution. In all these, I find abundant vindication of Indianrights, to the full extent as I have endeavored to maintain them ;but I forbear to trespass upon the kind indulgence of the committee.I will now proceed, Mr. Chairman, to a brief consideration ofsome other topics involved in the bill before us, and which havebeen discussed at much length by the member from Tennessee,(Mr. Bell.) The gentleman computes the expense, which willbe incurred in the prosecution of this measure, at the most, as notexceeding five millions of dollars. The very nature of the subjectforbids accurate and minute calculations. As a generalprinciple, we all know that public expenditures vastly exceedprevious estimates. Nothing is more common. I am not possessedof sufficient data to form an estimate with any pretensionsto accuracy ; but. Sir, when you consider that 60,000people are to be removed a distance of several hundred miles —that they are to be subsisted for one year after they have reachedthe destined "land — that customary presents and rewards are tobe given to them — that all their iini«-ovements, possessions, andproperty which they leave behind, are to be paid for — that agents,commissioners, and contractors, are to Ite employed and compensated— and moreover that you will be obliged to purchaseof the tribes beyond the Mississippi a right to plant others there,I think the most orthodox believer in the dangers of a redundanttreasury will have no occasion to be alarmed for the libertiesof the country. Gentlemen, who have resisted the prosecutionof internal improvements as tending to corrupt theStates, will have the satisfaction to see this source of their disquietuderemoved. But, Sir, I shall make no objection on thescore of expense. Protect the Indians in their rights and MR. EVANS S SPEECH.sessions where they now are, and you may have almost anysum to effect their removal, when it can be done with tien-free,voluntary, unbiased consent. The gentleman seemed to anticipatean objection on the ground of a want ot constitutionalpower in Congress to make the appropriation. I shall say butaword on that subject. If these tribes are to be regarded asdistinct communities, independent .jf the States where they reside,possessed of lands which will belong to us when their titleis extinguished, I can see no valid objection of the kind the gentlemananticipated. But if they are to be regarded as individualcitizens of a State, subject to its laws, possessing propertyas individuals, and protected in its enjoyment, then 1 do noteasily perceive the authority which we possess to make the appropriation.Sni-,)ose, Sir,* that some fifty thousand of the citizensof New York or New Englaiul wish to emigrate to thewest, and ask the aid of government to enable them to accomplish'that object. Would such an application be listened to foramoment? Should we not be reminded that the powers of thegeneral government were all " enumerated," and among themthere was none authorising it to appropriate the ]ud)lic moneyto enable individuals to change their location ? Sir, this hallwould echo with the perpetual reiteration of "constitutionalscruples."The gentleman (Mr. Bell) has urged the passage ot this billonthe ground of humanity to the Indians, and the promotionof their own interests and happiness. He informs the committee,that the tribes proposed to be removed are a degraded, decliningrace, who are rapidly wasting away, and wdl ere long bede'itro'ved, if tliev remain in "their present situation. The lessonsof history are adduced to show that the red man cannot live incontii,niil;y with the white— that it is the inevitable fate ol thesavage to ]perish whenever civilization has planted its foot withinhis confines. However just this may be in the general it hasno application to the southern tribes, particularly to the Cherokees,who are chiefly interested in the subject before us. Theyare not hordes of wandering savages— they are not hunters—;They till the earth— they have mechanics' shops and trades-schoolsand churches — cultivated fields and flocks — have madegreat advances in civilization— formed a written code of gov-iernmeiit— established a press. Is it for the benefit and happinessof such a people to be expelled from their country, andplanted a^aiii in the depths of the forest, to resume the wiWstate from which they had emerged? Sir, I do not find anywhere in the records of history, that the condition of such a \yeo-pie can be promoted by such a measure. Least of all do I fino'ithat the interest or honor of any nation can be promoted by iviolation of its public treaties— an infraction of its slighted fiiithWhether it be for the benefit of the Indians to remove or notis a question for them to decide; and so long as they shall determinethat it is not for their advantage and happiness, atMijrefuse to comic, so long are they entitled to protection insecurityin all their rights. In several of our treaties with themMR. Evans's speech. 171W6 have had in view their permanent residence, in the territorieswhich they possess. We have held out inducements forthem to become cultivators, and have stipulated to fin-nisi them"with useful implements of husbandly," for the purpose of reclaimingthem from the savage state. The treaty of 1817 is tooexplicit on this point to be omitted. The preamble recites, that,in 1808, a delegation of the Cherokee nation signified to thePresident the anxious desire of one part of the nation " to engagein the pursuit of agriculture and civilized life, in the countrythey then occupied," and that this portion wished for a divisionof the country, and an assignment of lands for that purpose;that, "by thus contracting their society within narrow limits,they proposed to begin the establishment of fixetl laws and aregular government."Another portion of the tribe wished to pursue the hunter Use,and, for that end, were desirous to remove beyond the Mississippi.The President (Mr. Jefferson) answered, " The United States, mychildren, are the friends of both parties, and, so far as can reasonablybe asked, are willing to satisfy the wishes of both. Those whoremain may be assured of our patronage, our aid and good neighborhood."Such was the preamble ; and it concludes, "Now knowye, that, to carry into effect the before recited promises with goodfaith," &c, the parties concluded the treaty. I ask, Mr. Chairman,if v.'e have not " ass-ed" them of a permanent residence — if wehave not promised them "our good neighborhood ;" and now, thatthe experiment has so far been successful, and they have maderapid advances in civilization, are we to be told that humanity andtheir own interests require them to be thrust again into the wilderness?Sir, what will be their condition in the country towliicb it is pixjposed they shall remove ? The gentleman has describedthe region, about six hundred miles in length, and twohundred and fifty in width, Between the western boundaries ofArkansas and Missouri and the base of the Rocky Mountains,somewhere within the limits of which is to be their ultimate destination.The gentleman's plan is to locate the southern tribesamong the Cherokees, Creeks, Choetav/S, and C'hickasaws, whohave already moved. Besides these parts of tribes, the Osages arethere ; and the warlike bands of the Camanches, Sioux and Pawnees,roam over the vast prairies in search of game, or on theirpredatory excursions. It is now designed to plant a civilized colonyamid a people of these savage habits. They are not hunters,whom we are about to send there. Agriculture is their employment.They arJ not manors. We have induced them to layaside the war club and the tomahawk, and to substitute the peacefulimplements of husbandry They have flocks and property ofvarious descriptions. How long can they retain it in the neighborhoodof the warlike tribes I have enumerated ? How long cantheir schools and their churches be maintained in the bosom of thewilderness ?" Sir, they will be only objects of plunder to the strongerand more savage bands around then. They will be overrun ;and, if they resist, it will only provoke extermination. Can theytin the ground when its fruits will ripen only to be gathered andMR. EVANS S SPEECH,consumed by hordes of savages, who know no law but force, noright but power ? Sir, I firmly believe they cannot exist in thecountry to which you arc about to send them ; and I can give nocountenance to a project which contemplates their removal againsttheir wishes and their remonstrances. We have among the papersbefore us a very attesting account of the distress and privationswhich the tribes west of the Mississippi already endure. I willread an extract which has been often quoted, but which cannothe too often called to our recollection, from the letter of generalClai-k :The condition of many tribes west of the Mississippi is the mostpitiable that can be imagined. During several seasons in every year,they are distressed by famine, in which many die for want of food, Iand during which the living child is often buried witlithe dead moth jer, because no one could spare it as much food as would sustain it ,through its helpless infancy. This description applies to Sioux,Osages, and many others, but I mention (liosc because they are powerfultribes, and live near our borders, and my official station enablesme to know the exact truth. It is in vain to talk to people in thiscondition about learning and religion."The honorable gentleman answered this objection in anticipation: and what was his answer ? Why, that mistress and sufferingof this description was common among Indians — that it isincident to their character, and habits and modes of life — that it isnot more frequent now than it always has been. And is this asufficient answer ? Arc we to send a whole people from theirapostles of comfort, to scenes of distress like these, with the coldanswer that it is no hardships because such sufferings are common? Because the tribes west of the Mississippi are compelledto endure these distressing privations, therefore it is no hardshipto send other tribes there to endure them also ! Will such an answersatisfy benevolence, philanthropy, humanity ? Will it alleviatethe pangs of the civilized Cherokee, when he consigns hisdead wife and his hviug child to the earth, to be told that suchscenes are of frequent occurrence ?And, Sir, how will these sufferings be aggravated by such anaccumulation of nnmbei-s ? The country does not now affordsubsistence enough for its population. low much greater will bethedeficiency, when sixty thousand more are addctl to its starvinginhabitants ? The gentleman has said that the country is welladapted to their waits, abounding in timber and water, and capableof a high degree of cultivation. If it were so, from thcauses I have mentioned, they can never possess raid cultivate itin security. We have been called upon, at the present session, tomake a military road, of several hundred miles in extent, upon thewestern borders of Arkansas and Missouri, and to mount ten companiesof infantry for the protection of the white inhabitantsagainst the predatory incursions of the Indiiuis. The delegatefrom Arkansas assures us that the security of that frontier dependsupon these mejisr.res, low much nitre will the feeble tribes youpropose to send still farther into the forests, need yoin- protection ? '■The gentleman has not taken into his account of expenses those ■■MR. Evans's speech. 173which Avill be incited in keeping up a military establishment inthat vicinity, which will be absolutely necessary to prestige peaceamong the different tribes, who will hind jjerpetiial sources ofdiscord when crowded together in the small limits assigned them.But, Sir, is the country suited to their v/aiits ? The gentlemanmust allow me to say, that I repose little confidence in the informationhe has received upon this subject Descriptions from othersources give a different account. I Avill only refer, however,to the opinion of a delegation of die Chickasaw nation, aaIio weresent last year west of the Mississippi, " in search of a home." It isamong the (documents upon our ttiblcs. They could find nocountry to which they would consent to remove, except pne smalltract which \\'cis already occupied. The vacant lands, they said,were not adapted to their convenience. " If we had found a.country to please us, it was our intention to exchange. It is yetour wish to do so. Kit wc cannot consent to remove 1o a countrydestitute of a single corresponding tincture to the one in whichwe at present reside." Such, Sir, is the information we have receivedfrom the Indians themselves. If they wish to remove, Iwould furnish them assistance to do it. But I would first securethem in their rights where they now reside. I would then furnishtlicui the most ample information possible of the country inwhich it is proposed to locate them — give them every means offorming a correct judgment as to their situation and condition intheir now abodes, and then leave the decision to them.When, Sir, under these circumstances, they shall decide to remove,I apprehend no o!)j( lion will be made to it. It has L>eenurged, however, very zealously by the gentlemen, (Messrs. Belland Lumpkin,) that the great mass of the Southern Indians arenow willing and anxious to remove ; but are restrained and keptin awe i)y the chiefs, <md wiiifc men who reside among thetribes. V/herc is the evidence of this? Upon v/hat facts do thsgentlemen make the assertion ? Is it to l)c found in the circumstancethat they have uniformity and firmly resisted all your offerand solicitations ? Coniiiiissioners were scsit kist j\^ar to negotiateupon this subject, with instructions so ]>ecu]iiir, that I cannotforbear to advert to them. What w'cre these instructions ? Why,Sir, not to jjcrmit their official character to be known, but to appearamong the Indians as their friends and advisers, solicitousonly for their benefit and happiness. In this mode their confidencewas to be won. They were not to convene the Indians incouncil, agreeably to uniform custom whenever negotiations wereto be conducted with them, but to see " the chiefs and other influentialmen, not together, but apart, at their own houses ;" and, whenother arguments and advice should fail, " offers to them of extensivereservations in fee simple, and outer rewards, would, it is hoped,result in obtaining' their acquiescence." So it seems the Indianterritory, the property of the whole nation, was to be obtained byoffers of " rewards" to the chiefs and influential men, to procuretheir assent. Is this the mode in which Indian rights are to betreated ? Bribery to the chiefs ! Wliat is the reason given fornot convening the Indians in council ? A most remarkable one15 *174 MR. Evans's speech.truly ! It is in these words i " The ]past has demonstrated theirutter aversion to this mode, whilst it has been made equallyclear, that another mode promises greater success. In regardto the first, the Indians have seen, in the past, that it has beenby the results of councils that the extent of their country hasbeen from time to time diminished. They all comprehendthis." Now, Sir, it is represented that the Indians are willing'to exchange their country, and to remove. If so, why not convenethem in council, as it is by means of councils that the extentof their country has been diminished .'' Would they Jivesuch an "utter aversion to this mode," if they were really willingto adopt the nieasiu'cs to which such a mode leads ? No,Sir. They see it has been ])y councils that their country hasbeen diminished, and they are opposed to councils because theyare opposed to any further diminution.Upon this svdiject we have the testimony of a gentleman residentamong the Cherokees, whom the member from Georgia(Mr. Bumpkin) represents as worthy of all confidence, andwhose word surely he will not deny. 1 will read an extractof a letter from Mr. Worcester, published among the documentsof the Senate :There is one other subject on which I think it is due to justice togive my testimony, whatever it may be worth. Whether the Cherokeesare wise in blushing to. remain here or not, I express no opinion.But it is certainly just, that it should be known whether or not theydo, as a body, wish to remain. It is not possible for a person to dwellamong them without hearing much on the subject. I have heardmuch. It is said abroad, that the common people would gladly remove,but are deterred by the chiefs, and a few other influential men.It is not so. I say with the utmost assurance — it is not so. Nothingsplainer than that it is the earnest wish of the whole hotly of thepeople to remain where they arc. They are not overawed by thechiefs. Individuals may be overawed by popular opinion, but not bythe chiefs. On the other hand, if there were a chief' in favor of removal,he would be overawed by the people. He would know that hecould not open his mouth in favor of such a proposition, but on painnot only of the failure of his re-election, but of popular odium andscorn. The whole tide of national feeling sets, in one strong and unbrokencurrent, against a removal to the West."'' With this evidence before me, I must be pardoned wien Itell the honorable chairman, (Mr. IjcII,) that I do not reposeconfidence in the information with which he has been furnished,and has presented to the house. It seems to be assigned,without evidence, and against evidence, that the Indians arewilling to remove, bib are restrained by some overpoweringcause. In 1827, the complaint of Georgia was, that the governmenthad neglected its duty, and, instead of adopting a coursewhich woiihl terminate in the removal of the Indians, had pursueda policy calculated to render their residence permanent.There was no complaint then against the chiefs. It was allthe fault of government. Well, Sir, we have now a governmentco-operating with Georgia. This ground of complaint isMR. EVANs's SPEECH. 175removed. Still the Indians refuse to go. Some new reasonmust be found for their refusal. Sir, would it not be better toinquire into the fact, than to be searching for the causes of thatwhich is only assumed to exist ? Is it not natural and reasonablethat they should be unwilling to abandon their homes ? Arethey not men? Are they not capable of attachments? Havethey no ties to bind them to the land of their birth — to the soilwhich covers the ashes of their fathers ? Is not their countrydear to them? Sir, in their vie^v, tltat earth wears a deeperverdure, and the heavens pour a more unclouded radiance,than in ail the world besides. It is unnatural, it is unreasonable,to suppose that they are "anxious" to quit the scenes oftheir childhood, to seek a new home, far off, in the hails of thesetting sui.And, Sir, how are they to be removed? The only project Ihave seen is that contained in the " Report from the bureauof Indian affairs" to the secretary of war, and by him transmittedto Congress. The proposition is, that they shall be removed'^by contract" — and the recommendation of this plan is, thatit can be done much cheaper titian in any other mode. Bycontract. Sir ! What, are sixty thousand human beings — thesick, the aged, the infirm, children and infants — to be transportedhundreds of miles, over mountains, and rivers, andforests, by contract! by those who will engage to perform theservice for the smallest sum! Are ymi to hold out such inducementsto long and fatiguing marches — to scanty and cheapprovisions ? Will you place these hapless, deceived and abusedpeople at the mercy of contractors, whose only object is gain?in whose bosoms Indian wrongs and Indian suffering will findbut little sympathy? Sir, if this is the mode in which themeasure is to be executed, I will never yield my sanction to it,though the Indians should be willing to remove. No, Sir! ifthey must go, let their path be made smooth. irthe treatyis to be opened, let it be opened wide enough to relieve all theirwants — to render their situation, bad at the best, as tolerable asthe exigency vnW admit.Sir, the question before sis, in all its aspects, is one of greatand momentous magnitude. It becomes us to pause and considerwell the step we are about to take. If it be at all doubtful,let us so decide as shall preserve, and not impair, our nationalcharacter. If we err, let it be on the side of humanity.In the inaugural address of the present chief magistrate, heassures the country — "It will be my sincere and constant desireto observe, towards the Indian tribes within our limits, ajust and liberal policy; and to give that innate and considerateattention to their rights and their wants which are consistentwith the habits of our government, and the feelings ofour people." Sir, are we about to observe towards their " ajust and liberal policy?" Are we giving a " innate and considerateattention to their rights and their wants ?" Thispledge remains to be redeemed. If we now turn a deaf ear tothe Cherokees, who have appealed to our justice, and claimed176 MR. Evans's speech.our protection ; if this bill shall pass, in its present shape, providingno security for their rights, their destiny will be irrevocablyfixed. x\nd how Avill our conduct toward them bear thescrutiny of an enlightened world.' — and the just judgment ofimpartial history ? Sir, if we permit these feeble remnants ofonce powerful nations to be driven from their homes, thoughit may not reach the same celebrity which history has assignedto that transaction, in the close of the last century, which blottedPoland from the map of nations, yet will it stand ujjon thesame page of injustice and oppression, and receive the samesentence from posterity. It will stand, too, in the annals ofthe work, by the side of those enormities which our mothercountry has practised in another hemisphere ; and though thepoor Cherokee may find no Bin-ke or Sheridan to tell the storyof his griefs, and to hold up the ]picture of his wrongs to theexecration of mankind, it will go up to a higher tribunal, wheresophistry cannot thule, and where the hunii)lest Indian willbe equal to his proudest oppressor. Sir, it was said by oneoften quoted upon this floor, (Mr. JefFei-son,) and in referenceto a subject not dissimilar to the fu-sent, " I tremble for mycountry when I remember that God is just, and that his justicewill not sleep forever." And although the particular mode ofretribution which was in his mind on that occasion may notnow be anticipated, yet let us recollect "that the Almighty hasno attribute which can take side with us" in a conflict betweenpower and right — between oppression and justice.The honorable gentleman from Georgia (Mr. Lumpkin) hasanticipated a i)erio(!, when it will be odious to be known as anadvocate of the Indian rights. I know not what pretensionsthe gentleman possesses to the power of augury — but, in myestimation, he has consulted the stars to very little jnu'pose, ifsuch be the lessons they read him. Before that period shallarrive, you must burn all the records of the government — destroythe history of the country — pervert the moral sense ofthe community — make injustice and oppression virtues — andbreach of nation.-'.l faith honorable ; and then, but not till then,will the visions of the gentleman assume the form of realities.Sir, if I coidd hope, as I surely cannot, that any feeble effortsof mine would outlive the brief hour which gave them existence,— if I could give ]perpetuity to any thing I can say or do, —there is no occasion I should covet more than that which Inow possess. If I could look forward, as I certainly do not, to along life of public service — to honors and distinctions, — I wouldforego all for the power to roll back the tide of desolation,which is about to overwhelm these hapless sons of the forest.If I could stand up between the weak, the friendless, the deserted,and the strong arm of oppression, and successfullyvindicate their rights, and shield them in their hour of adversity,I should have achieved honor enough to satisfy even anexorbitant ambition ; and I should leave it as a legacy to mychildren, more valuable than uncounted gold — more honorablethan imperial power.MR. EVANS's SPEECH. 177Sir, the crisis in the fate of these people has arrived. Theresponsibility is upon us — upon us as a House, and upon eachof us as individuals. The Indians make their last appeal here.All other sources of protection have failed. It remains withus to decide whether they return in joy and hope, or in sorrowand despair. Shall we listen to their cry ? If we do not, thenis their sun about to set, it may be in blood and in tears. Then,indeed, will all human means have failed, and, deserted andabandoned by our government, which had solemnly sworn toprotect them, they are commended, O God, to thy sovereignmercy.Extracts from a Letter written by the Rev, S. A.Worcester to Mr. William S. Coodey, one of the CherokeeDeputation at Washington, dated March 15,1830, AT New Echota, in the Cherokee Nation.Whatever deficiencies there may be in my statements, I shall usemy utmost endeavor that nothing colored — nothing which will not bearthe strictest scrutiny — may find a place.It may not be amiss to state, briefly, what opportunities I have enjoyedof forming a judgment respecting the state of the Cherokee people.It was four years last October since I came to the nation, duringwhich time I have made it my home, having resided two years atBrained, and the remainder of the time at this place. Though I havenot spent very much of the time in travelling, yet I have visited almostevery part of the nation, except a section on the northeast. Twoannual sessions of the General Council have passed while I have beenresiding at the seat of government, at which tones a great number ofthe people of all classes, and iron all parts, are to be seen.The statistical information which has been pubH5hed respecting thisnation I hope you have on hand, or will receive from some othersource ; it goes far towards giving a correct view of the state of thepeople. 1 have only to say, that, judging from what I see around me, Ibelieve that a similar enumeration, made the present year, would show,by the comparison, a rapid improvement since the census was taken.The printed constitution and laws of your nation, also, you doubtlesshave. They show your progress in civil polity. As far as my knowledgeextends, they are executed with a good degree of efficiency, andtheir execution meets with not the least hinderance from any thing likea spirit of insubordination among the people. Oaths are constantly administeredin the courts of justice, and I believe J have never heardof an instance of perjury. iIt has been well observed by others, that the progress of a people incivilization is to be determined by comparing the present with the past.I can only compare what I see with what I am told has been.The present principal chief is about forty years of age. When hewas a boy, his father procured him a good suit of clothes, in the fashionof the sons of civilized people ; but he was so ridiculed by his mates asawhite boy, that he took off his new suit, and refused to wear it. The178 MR. Evans's speech.editor of the Cherokee Phoenix is twenty-seven years old. He wellremembers that he felt awkward and ashamed of his singularity, whenhe began to v/ear the dress of a white boy. Avow, every boy is proudof a civilized suit, and those feel awkward and ashamed of their singularity,who are destitute of it. At the last session of the General Council,I scarcely recollect having seen any members who were notclothed in the same manner as the white inhabitants of the neighboringStates; and those very few (I am informed that the precise numberwas four) who were partially clothed in Indian style were, nevertheless,very decently attired. The dress of civilized people is generalthroughout the nation. I have seen, I believe, only one Cherokeewoman, and she an aged woman, away from her home, who was notclothed in at least a decent long gown ; at home, only one, a very agedwoman, who appeared willing to be seen in original native dress; threeor four, only, who had at their own houses dressed themselves in Indianstyle, but hid themselves with shame at the approach of a stranger.I am thus particular, because particularity gives more accurateideas than general statements. Among the elderly men, there is yet aconsiderable portion, I dare not say whether a majority or a minoritywho retain the Indian dress in part. The younger men almost, i{dress like the whites around them, except that the greater nyaibereswear a turban instead of a hat, and in cold weather a blanket frequentlyserves for a cloak. Cloaks, however, are becoming comm',^^ Thereyet remains room for improvement in dress, but that iijmjoveoieixt missmaking with surprising rapidity.The arts of spinning and weaving, the Cherokee Voraen> generallyput in practice. Most of their garments are of thf^',,- own spinning andweaving, from cotton, the produce of their owni^elds; though considerablenorthern domestic, and much calico is worn, nor is silk un.^common. Numbers of the men wear in\por ted cloths, broadcloth, &c.».and many wear mixed cotton and woo',^ the manufacture of theirWives; but the greater part arc cloUie'], principally in cotton.Except in the arts of spinning vrai weaving, but little progresshas been made in jaanafactuves. A few Cherokees, however, are.mechanics.Agi-culture is the principal employment and support of the people."It is the dependence o( aln .ost every family. As to the wanderingpart of the people. who live by the chase, if they are to be found inthe nation, I certainly h;\\re not found them, nor even heard of themexcept from the floor of Congress, and other. distant sources of information.I do not know of a single family who depend, in any considerabledegree", on-same for a support. It is true that deer and turkeysare frequently Lilies, but not in sufficient numbers to form any dependenceas the means of subsistence. The land is cultivated with verydifferent degrees of skill.SPEECHOF THEHON. JABEZ W. HUNTINGTON,REPRESENTATIVE FROM CONNECTICUTDELIVERED IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, SITTINGAS IN COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE, ON THE BILL FOR THEREMOVAL OF THE INDIANS, TUESDAY, MAY 18, 1830.Mr. Chairman : If the bill for which this has been substituted,though nearly identical with it, had been accompaniedby a report from the committee, confined to the statement offacts and principles connected with what are said to be the objectsof the bill itself, I should not have troubled the Housewith any remarks upon it. I would not have mingled in a debatewhich would then have been limited to the expediency ofadopting the legislative provisions proposed to be enacted. Butas the committee have reported the spill " in conformity withthe suggestions contained in the report, and to effect the objectrecommended in the message of the President;" as that report,and that message, contain sentiments with which I do not accord; as they advance principles, which, in my judgment, arenot tenable — principles which, if I understand them correctly,deprive the Indian tribes, to whom they are applied, of rightswell defined, long enjoyed, and secured and guarantied by themost solemn compacts, and the plighted faith of a nation, whichhitherto has been, an! always, I trust, will be, jealous of itsown honor, and which will not set the example of a Christiannation disregarding its own engagements because they havebeen entered into with a weak, defenceless, unprotected people,I have not been willing to give a silent vote upon the propositionnow before us. My own sense of duty, and the sentimentsof a great portion of my constituents, who take a deep interestin this subject, demand of me, that I should express their opinionsand mine, on a topic which is connected with the honorof our common country, and the welfare of a race once powerful,but now weak, and looking to us with anxiety, but notwithout hope, for that protection which the faith of the governmentis pledged to afford.Before I enter into the examination of what are called, in thereport, "the pretensions of the Indians, and of the obstacleswhich are considered as being in the way of their indulgenceby the government," I solicit the attention of the committeeto the language of the executive, in his message at the openingof the session, and to the construction or commentary which180 MR. Huntington's speech.has been put upon it, in another place. I shall examine it withallthe respect which is due to the chief magistrate of thisnation, and to the elevated and honorable station which he occupies; but, at the same time, and holding his advisers responsiblefor it, I shall make this examination with all the freedomof a representative of the people, sworn to support the constitutionof the United States. 1 noticed with much ]pleasure, inthe inaugural address of the present executive, the followingexpressive sentence: — " It will be my sincere and constant desireto observe towards the indian tribes within our limits ajust and liberal policy ; and to give that humane and considerateattention to their rights, and their wants, which is consistentwith the habits of our government and t|je liieliiigs of ourpeople." How far this pledge has been observed, will be seenin the progress ol'this discussion.In the message. Congress are informed, that the Presidenthas been called on by a portion of the southern tribes for ]protection,in conscience of the extension, by the States of Georgiaand Alabama, of their laws over these tribes ; that, in answerto this application, he stated to them, that their attemptto establish an independent government would not be countenancedby the executive of the United States ; that it was toolate to inquire whether it was just Ibr the United States to includethese Indians and their territory within the bounds ofnew States, whose limits they coidd control ; and that theyshould be distinctly informed, that, if they remained within thelimits of the States, they must be subject to their laws. Thesame opinions are advanced, in the hotter of the secretary ofthe war department to the Cherokee delegation, dated April18, 1829, in which they are told, by order of the President, thatthe State of Georgia has extended over their country her legislativeenactments, in virtue of her authority as a sovereign, independentState, which she and every State embraced in theconfederacy, from 1783 to the present time, when their independencewas acknowledged and admitted, possessed the powerto do, apart from any authority or opposing interference bythe general government. — In these documents, then, we findthe legislation of Georgia and Alabama over the Indian tribes,within their chartered limits, sustained, as of right, and an explicitavowal made, that the President will not interfere to preventit. And what is the construction put upon this language ?Not merely, that the operation of the State laws is not to beopposed, because the guaranties contained in treaties with theIndians do not require it ; not that, if they did require it, theexisting laws are insufficient for that purpose; but "because,"as stated in the report of the Senate by the committee on Indianaffairs of that body, "in the opinion of the executive, constitutionalobjections exist, which it is not in the power ofCongress to remove by any law which they could enact." Ifthis be the right imer|iretatu)n of the views entertained by theexecutive, the doctrine is advanced, that treaties made with allthe forms and solemnities known to the constitution, ratifiedMR. Huntington's speech. 181by the President, with the consent of his constitutional advisers,and thus made, so far as the executive branch of the governmentcan make them, the supreme law of the land, and declaredso to be by the constitution, are not to be regarded and enforced,if, in the opinion of the President, such treaties contain provisionsinconsistent with what he considers the legitimate rightsof the states; or, expressed in other words, if the executivedeems a law of Congress, or a treaty duly ratified, to be an encroachmentupon state rights, or for any other reason an excessof delegated power, he is at liberty to refuse his aid in causingthem to be "faithfully executed." Is this a sound interpretationof the duties which the constitution has devolved upon thePresident? Is he made the judge of the extent of the powersof Congress, or the treaty-making power, after that power hasbeen exercised in the manner prescribed by the constitution?Has he been constituted, in such cases, a judge to determinewhether treaties are constitutionally binding? whether lawswhich have been enacted are void, for want of power to enactthem? If so, there seems to be no necessity for the clause inthe constitution, which provides, that " the judicial power shallextend to all cases in law and equity arising under the constitution,the laws of the United States, and treaties made, orwhich shall be made, under their authority." If so, there is nodivision of the department of this government into executiveand judicial ; the latter, for all practical purposes, is annihilated,and the provision, that a bill which has been returned by thePresident with objections, reconsidered, and then approved bytwo thirds of both houses of Congress, shall become "a law,"is a dead letter. The President, if he can lawfully refuse to executea law, or enforce the provisions of a treaty, because he hasconstitutional objections or scruples, constitutes himself the executiveand judicial departments of this government. Such, inmy judgment, is not his prerogative ; and I believe it is the firsttime in the history of this nation, since the adoption of theconstitution, that opinions like these have been advanced.Bure I am, that they were not the opinions of any of his predecessors,or of those wise men who flamed the constitution, orof the people of this country; and I have deemed it indispensableto advert to them, lest it might be thought, from silence,that they met with universal approbation. The executive hasno constitutional right to say he will not execute a law, becausehe considers it void for want of authority to enact it. No suchdiscretion has been confided to him; I trust it never will be;and if his scruples are such as to deter him from enforcing it,let him resign the trust which has been confided to him. Thisis the only course he can adopt, under such circumstances.The legislative and judicial departments are powerless, and thegovernment is a rope of sand, if such opinions are entertainedand acted on. Every law may depend for its execution uponthe will of the executive ; and, in these days of strict construction,it may be feared that few legislative enactments will passunhurt through this ordeal of presidential discretion182 MR. Huntington's speech.Having thus, very briefly, adverted to the opinions entertainedand avowed by the executive in regard to '■'■pretensions'^ ofthe Indian tribes, on the supposition that the construction of thetreaties made with them, and the laws enacted to regulate theintercourse with them, is correct, 1 proceed to consider thegreat questions involved in this discussion.The report denies to the Indian tribes any tide whatever tothe lands which they occupy within the chartered limits of anystate ; and asserts a right in the states, in which they are located,to extend their legislative enactments over the Indians, and,consequently, a power to annihilate their political existence, ascommunities to be governed by their own laws, usages, andcustoms. Nor does the executive, in his message, acknowledgeany title to the lands, as subsisting in the tribes.In the letter from the war department, before referred to, thesecretary says, " an interference to the extent of affording youprotection, and the occupancy of your soil, is what is demandedof the justice of this country, and will not be withheld ;" thoughhe adds what would seem to make this interference of little, ifany use ; looking very much like "keeping the word of promiseto the ear, and breaking it to the hope." It is in these words :"yet, in doing this, the right of permitting to you the enjoymentof a separate government within the limits of a state, and ofdenying the exercise of sovereignty to that state within her ownlimits, cannot be admitted. It is not within the range of powergranted by the states to the general government, and thereforenot within its competency to be exercised. No remedy can beperceived but a removal beyond the Mississij)pi, where alonecan be assured to you protection and peace. To continuewhere you are, within the territorial limits of an independentstate, can promise you nothing but interruption and disquietude."And the President, in his message, speaking in reference to thesame tribes, says, though their "emigration should be voluntary,yet it seems visionary to suppose that olaimscanbe allowedon tracts of country on which they have never dwelt normade improvements, merely because they have seen them fromthe mountain, or passed them in the rliase." It will be observed,that this language is spoken of the Cherokees, who havedwelt on and improved their lands, and seems, at least, to implythat they have no title to the lands within their boundaries.:But it is unnecessary to make further reference to the message.;I shall content myself with referring to the report, and, so far as'I am aiije to comprehend it, there is not only no acknowledgmentof any title, in the Indian tribes, but the spirit of every;part of it is utterly at war with any such acknowledgment.The committees, (p. 4,) " Ascertain that possession, actualor constructive, of the entire habitable portion of this continent,was taken by the nations of Europe, divided out, and held originally,by the right of discovery as between themselves, and bythe rights of discovery and conquest as against the aboriginal inhabitants.The pretensions of the Indians to be the owners ofMR. Huntington's speech. 183any portion of the soil, were wholly disregarded by the crownof England."Here the opinion is advanced, that the crown, by discoveryand conquest, obtained either the possession, or right prepossession,of the whole of the soil then and now occupied by Indiantribes, and admitted no right in these tribes to any portion of it.The title and the possession being thus in the crown, it permittedthe Indians, in all of them, to be governed or otherwise disposedof by the colonial authorities, without any interference onits part, until within a short period before the revolution. Andin all the acts, first of the colonies, and afterwards of the states,the fundamental principle that the Indians had no right, byvirtue of their ancient possession, either of soil or sovereignty,has never been abandoned, either expressly, or by implication.The principle was adopted (p. 8,) that the Indians had no permanentinterest in their hunting grounds; their right to holdtheir reserved lands can be supported on no other ground thanthe grant or permission of the sovereignty or state in whichsuch lands lie. This was in the crown before the revolution,and in the states after that event, succeeding, as they did, to thesovereignty over all the lands within the limits of their respectivecharters. The Indian boundaries were considered temporary.The treaties made with them were but a mode of government,and a substitute for ordinary legislation, which were from timeto time dispensed with, (p. 12.) Territory and jurisdiction, consideredin reference to a state or nation, are inseparable ; theone is a necessary incident to the other; and, as a state cannotexist without territory, the limits of that territory are, at thesame time, the limits of its jurisdiction. The policy of Georgia(p. 13,) has always been, to contract the Indian reservations,gradually, within such reasonable limits, that no part of thecountry should remain uncultivated. Her policy in this respectwas a part of her rights; any thing which tends to defeat itsoperation, is a deprivation of right. It is understood that neitherGeorgia, nor any other state, will attempt to appropriate thelands within the Indian reservations without their consent.Can it be doubted, after these quotations, that the report deniesto the Indians the right both of sovereignty and soil ? Itwould seem not: and, supposing this to be its meaning, and asexpressive of the opinions of the committee, which we are calledupon to adopt or reject, I proceed to an examination of the natureand extent of the Indian title to the lands within theirboundaries.In my judgment, neither of the positions assumed by the committeein their report is tenable. I think it capable of demonstration,that the right of the Indian tribes to the lands whichthey occupy is paramount to, and exclusive of all others, whethernations, states, or individuals; it is a right to occupy, enjoy, passes,and use, according to their own discretion, indefinitely andfor ever; and, for all practical purposes, is absolute. Theonly restriction is that of alienation at pleasure. This powerof alienation is not, and cannot be claimed by these tribes; for184 MR. Huntington's speech.the right of discoveries, in the first instance, and the voluntarycompact of the tribes afterwards, gave to the government of theUnited States the ultimate title, charged with the Indian rightof possession, or occupancy, and the exclusive power of acquiringthat right. In other words, the Indians have the sole rightof occupancy. To that they have a just and legal right, and it ■includes the use, in such manner as tliev please, and is indefinitein duration, and of which they cannot be dispossessed, exceptby cession or conquest. Tiie government have the exclusiveright of purchase, and the ultimate right, whenever the possessionbecomes vacant, by voluntary dereliction, or bj' the extinctionof the tribes.I think, also, it can be shown, that these tribes are separate,distinct communities, wholly independent of the states ; notsubject to their legislation, and possessing the right of self-government— the riglu to be governed by their own laws, customs,and usages; and under no restraints, except such as they haveimposed upon themselves, in their treaties with the UnitedStates.The foundation of their title is occupancy. They have beenin possession, claiming the rights to the soil, from our firstlaiowiedgeof them. They were found here, when this countrywas discovered. They, and they only, have possessed it ; andthis occupancy has been from time immemorial. Writers onjurisprudence agree in the proposition, " that the original rightto all kinds of property arose from pre-occupancy, and that, in astate of nature, every one might possess himself of and retainany vacant sidyect. Tbe first occupant had a right to grant,cede, or transfer, the subject he had possessed himself of, tosuch persons, and upon such terms, as he thought proper; andif, before such grant, cession, or transfer, the occupant died, hisproperty descended to his children. The right of transmittingproperty always resided in the owner, and civil institutionsonly prescribe the mode of carrying that right into effect. Inthat period of society, when countries were formed, and theirboundaries fixed, we find that different districts were appropriatedto the native owners, the first occupants, or, in case of vacantor derelict lands, to the first discoverers."What rights over the lands inhabited and possessed by theIndian tribes did the government making the first discovery ofthem acquire.' Were they such as to annihilate the previousexisting title of the aborigines to them ? Not at all. The discoveryconferred the right of making settlements, of forming establishments,whenever the junior right of occupancy was lawfullyextinguished ; connected with the right of pre-emption,and the ultimate right in fee, whenever the Indian tribes shouldbecome extinct. The power to exclude other nations from occupying,or making ])inThases of the natives, was an incident tothe discovery, and was afterwards conferred by the Indians intheir treaties.It will be obvious that this view of the subject is correct, byreferring to the uniform course adopted by the crown of Eng,Mu. Huntington's speech. 185land, by the colonies, by the states after the revolution, and bythe states and general government since that period, up to thepresent time ; confirmed by repeated adjudications of the highestjudicial tribunal of this nation.The first attempt to dispose of a whole continent, without referenceto the rights of the aboriginal inhabitants, was made in1493, the year after the discovery of America, by pope AlexanderVI. who gave it to the crown of Spain, on the assumedprinciple that infidels were unjust possessors of the lands onwhich their Creator had placed them. This grant was accepted,contrary to the advice of the civilians and crown lawyers ofSpain; and one of the bishops, in a treatise dedicated to Charlesthe v., holies this strong language: "The natives of America,having their own lawful kings and princes, and a right to makelaws ibr the good government of their respective dominions,could n^tbe expelled out of them, or deprived of what they possess,without doing violence to the laws of God, as well as thelaws of nations."The English princes, though they did not acquiesce in theright of the pope to make these grants, made out their commissionson the same principle, the distinction between infidel andchristian nations. It is true, that grants w«M-e made, charterspassed under the great seal, and the British crown asserted theright of conveying the soil, though in possession of the natives;or, as it has been sometimes said, of appropriating the lands occupiedby the Indians. But it was only the ultimate right ofproperty, the reversionary interest, which they claimed, andwhich they professed to have the power to convey. It vasthe right to extinguish the Indian title of occupancy, and nothingmore, which they either possessed or claimed to possess. ThIndians were always "acquitted by the crown to be the rightfuloccupants of the soil, with a legal, as well as just claim toretain possession of it, and to use it according to their o\yii discretion,"and of which they could not be dispossessed by legislation,but by conquest or cession only.I have said, that the Indian title, thus explained, vas alwaysand uniformly admitted by the crois, the colonies, the states,the old confederation, and the government of the United Statessince the adoption of the constitution ; and that it has receivedthe sanction of the highest judicial tribunal of this country. Iwill ask the attention of the committee to the proof in supportof this position.In 1750, the superintendent of Indian affairs informed theIndians assembled at Mobile, in the name of the king, that noencroachments should be permitted on their lands; and thatall treaties made with them would be faithfully kept on thepart of the crown.In September, 175.% by order of the king, instructions weresent to the governor of the province of New York, to. appointcommissioners, who, in conjunction with commissioners fromother neighboring governments in alliance with them, shouldmake a treaty, in his majesty's name, with the Six Nations. In16*186 MR. Huntington's speech.these instructions, it is stated, "that nothing may be wanting toconvince the Indians oftlie sincerity of our intentions, you willdo well to examine into the complaints they have made of beingdefrauded oi' their lands ; to take all proper and legal methods toredress their complaints, and to gratify them by reasonable purchases,or in such other matters as you shall find most proper andagreeable to them lor such lands as have been unwarrantablytaken from them, and for such other as they may have a desire todispose of." In June, 1754, pursuant to these instructions, com-missionaries met at Albany, from the provinces of New York, NewHampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, Maryland,Pennsylvania, and Virginia. Ilendrick, in behalf of the Six Nations,told the commissioners, "that the governors of Virginia andCanada were both quarrelling about lands which belonged tothem'" The commissioners replied to them, and said, " We gladlyunderstand that you gave no countenance to the French, whowent to the Ohio, and have entered on your habits. You did putthis land under the king our father, and be is now taking care topreserve il for you. For this end, among others, he has directedus to meet you here ; for, although the land is under the king'sgovernment, yet the property or ]power of selling it to any of hismajesty's subjects, having authority from him, we always consideredas vested in you. We ever did and still do acknowledge ifto belong to you, although within your father, the king of GreatBritain's dominion, and under his protection !" A treaty of allianceand defence was, at that time, made with the Six Nations.In allusion to this treaty, the governor of Pennsylvania, in hisaddress to the assembly of that state, says, " From the proceedingsat the late treaty of Albany, you will clearly perceive, thatthe lands on the river Ohio do yet belong to the Indians of theSix Nations, and have long since been put under the protectionof the crown of England."In April, 1755, general Braddock sent instructions to the superintendentof Indian affairs of the king, in which!, alter mentioningthat the Five Nations, in 1701, had ]put their lands also under thesame protection, to be protected and defended by the said king,his heirs and successors, to the use of the tribes and their successorsfor ever, he adds, " Yon are in my name to assize the saidnations, that I am come by his majesty's order to build such fortsas shall protect and secure the said lands to them, their heire andsuccessors for ever."In the memorial delivered by the British minister to the Frenchnegotiator in 1755, (Jamie,) he says, " Whatever pretext might bealleged by France, in considering these countries as the appurtenancesof Canada, it is a certain truth, that they have belonged,and, as tii< y heave not been given up or made over to the English,belong still to the same Indian nations. What the court of GreatBritain maintains, what it insists upon, is, that the Five Nations ofthe Iroquois are, by origin or by right of conquest, the lawful proprietorsof the river Ohio, and the temtoiy in question."Li May, 1755, sir William Johnston said to the Six Nations,Agreeably to the distinctions I have received fi-om the greatMR. Huntington's speech. 187king, your father, I will reinstate you in the possession of yourlands." And again, in February, 1756, " The king will protectyour country, and the lands which your fathers conquered, andare of right your territories, against all violence."In August, 1760, lord Ainlierst assured the Six Nations, " thattheir lands should remain their absolute property."In 1762, the commanding officer at fort Pitt prohibited, byproclamation, any of the subjects of the king from settling westof the Allegheny mountains, that country having, by the treaty atEaton, in 1758, been allowed to the Indians for their huntinggrounds.In 1763, a royal proclamation was issued, restraining the governorof Virginia from making grants west of the Alleghenymountains, because that country, not having been ceded to orpurchased by the crown, was reserved to the tribes of Indians,who lived under the protection of the king, as their hunting ground.I will not detain the committee by quoting from the proceedingsat what was called the Congress of Fort Stanwix, in 1768 ;from the opinions of the learned in the profession in England, ofDr. Franklin, Patrick Henry, judge Pendleton, and Mr. fiercer,on the operation and effect of the gi-ant from the Six Nations toWilliam Trent, and of the ratification of that grant by the cro^^Ti,by the treaty at fort Stanv/ix. It may be remarked, however,that all these distinguished men agreed in opinion, that the titleof the Indians was one which could not be disturbed withouttheir consent ; and some of them supposed their power to conveywas ahsolutty l)0th as to the manner and the grantees, as an incidentto their right of property in the soil.The treaties made between Great Britain and the Chickasawand Choctaw Indians, at Mobile, in 1765, and the Upper and LowerCreeks, at Pensacola, in May and November, 1765, all recognisethe same right in these tribes, which has heretofore beenstated : boundaries are established, and all the lands not embracedwithin the limits which include what the Indians reserve tothemselves, and which are declared, in these treaties, to belong tothem, and in which they have full right and pro pert yare grantedand confirmed to the crown.It may safely be affirmed, that in no instance did the cro^vn ofEngland ever claim, in practice, a right by discovery, but only bypurchase, to interfere with the Indian title of occupancj^,^ as beforeexplained. It admitted, in the fullest extent, the necessity ofextinguishing it, before the Indians could be deprived of theirlands ; and, Jn all their acts, whether in the form of instructions,proclamations, laws, or treaties, acknowledged the title of the aborigines,and claimed only the exclusive right of purchase, andthe ultimate reversionary right in fee.Such being the relative situation of the crown and the Indiantribes, as to the lands occupied by them, let me now cal the attentionof the committee to the acts and declarations of the coloniesand states, particularly Georgia, and it will be seen that thesame principles were adopted, the same rights conceded to theMR. HUNTINGTON S SPEECH.Indians, and the same interest asserted to exist in the coloniesand states.In June, 1779, the assembly of Virginia resolved, that the commonwealthlead the exclusive right of pre-emption from the Indianswithin the limits of its own chartered territory, and that suchexclusive right of pre-emption would and ought to be maintainedby the commonwealth to the utmost of its power. This is all theright which they asserted and claimed.In 1783, Oglethorpe, the founder of Georgia, made a treaty withthe Lower Creeks, in which he obtained cessions of lands fromthem, and in wiiicli it is declared, that, though the lands belong tothem, (the Indians,) they will permit the English to use and possessa part of them, and that the rest should remain to the Creeks ■for ever.In 1738, he made another treaty .with the assembled estates of"'all the Lower Creek nations, in which substantially the same provisionswere inserted.In 1783, another treaty wins made with the Catawba, Cherokee,Choctaw, Chickasaw, and Creek nations, in which cessions ofland were made ; and, in May, 1773, another treaty was madewith the Cherokee and Creek nations, by which boundaries wereestablished, and cessions made by the Indians.In 1777, a treaty of peace was made between South Carolinaand the Cherokees, to which Georgia was a ]party, in which thecommissioners of loth states and the Cherokees exchanged theirrespective full powers, in which a cession is made by the Cherokeesof all the l?u](is east of the Unaware mountain, to the state ofSouth Carolina, as having been acquired and possessed by that :state by conquest ; and, in the 8th article, it is declared, that the -hatchet shall be forever buried, and there shall be a universal ipeace and friendship re-established between South Carolina, includingthe Catawba, and Georgia on the one part, and the Cherokeenation on the other; there shall be a general oblivion of injuries;the contracting parties shall use their utmost endeavors tomaintain the peace and friendship now re-cstal)Iished ; and theCherokees shall, at all times, apprehend and deliver to the commandingofficer at fort Rutledge, every person, white or red, who,in their nation or si elements, shall, by any means, endeavor to instigatea war by the Cherokee nation, or hostility or robbery byany of their ]people, against or upon any of the American statesor subjects tln^reof. Can Georgia enter into a treaty With her otvncitizens ? give peace to those who are not enemies, but traitors .-'In 178J3, another treaty was made, between the state of Georgiaand the Cherokee nation, by which peace was established,and a permanent Boundary fixed.It is unnecessary to go farther. The acts of Georgia furnishunequivocal evidence of her acquiescence in the doctrine, that theIndian tribes within her territorial limits, of right, might maintainthe unmolested occupation of their lands. I will now advert tothe acts and declarations of the confederated states ; and it will beseen that they entirely coincided, on the subject of the Indian title.MR. Huntington's speech. 189with the principles assumed and acted on by the croAvn and thecolonies.In January, 1776, Congress resolved, that no person shall bepermitted to ti-ate with the Indians, without license from one ormore of the commissioners of each respective department.In September, 1783, a proclamation was issiie<l by the UnitedStates in Congress assembled, prohibiting all persons from makingany settlements on, or purchasing any lands inhabited or claimedby the Indians without the limits or jurisdiction of any particularstate ; and declaring all such purchases, without the express .authorityof Congress, void.In October, 1783, Congress resolved, that a convention be heldwith the Indians in the northern and middle departments, for thepurposes of receiving them into the favor and protection of theUnited States, and for establishing boundary lines of property.In Mai'cli, 1785, Congress resolved, that a commission be openedfor treating with the Cherokees and all other Indians southwardof them ; and, in June, 1786, Congress directed the com-inissioners, who were to hold this treaty for the purpose of obtainingfrom them a cession of lands, to make such cession asextensive and liberal as possible.In August, 1786, Congress passed an ordinance for the regulationof Indian affairs, the preamble of which states, that the safetyand tranquillity of the frontiers of the United States depend, insome measure, on maintaining a good correspondence betweentheir citizens and the several nations of Indians. This ordinanceregulates the intercourse with the tribes.In November, 1785, the treaty of Hopewell was made. Itsprovisions need not be referred to.It will be seen, that all the acts of the Continental Congresswere predicated on the assumed basis, that the Indian tribes hada just and legal right to the occupancy of their lands, indefinitely,and that the only subsisting right of the government to them, waswhat has been heretofore stated — the exclusive right of purchase,and the ultimate, contingent right in fee.But the ]proceedings of the government, after the adoption ofthe constitution, if valid, put an end to every question regardingthe title of the Indians. In the treaty of Houston, made with theCherokees in 1791, the seventh article provides, that the UnitedStates solemnly guaranty to the Cherokees all their lands notthereby ceded. When this treaty was transmitted to the Senate,it was referred to a committee, consisting of Mr. Hawkins of NorthCarolina, Mr. Cabot of Massachusetts, and Mr. Sherman of Connecticut,who reported, among other things, that they had examinedthe treaty, and found it strictly conformable to the instructions 'given by the President of the United States, and that those instructionswere founded on the advice and consent of the Senate, andthat the Senate advise and consent to the ratification of the treaty.Various other treaties with the same, and with other tribes, containa similar provision ; and if these treaties have any bindingforce, it is needless to inquire, what were the rights of the Indiansbefore the conclusion and ratification of these treaties, or what190 MR. Huntington's speech.were the rights of the government. These solemn compactscontain a promise of security in ]possession of their lands, andgive them a title, if they had not one before, low far it wascompetent for the United States to enter into these stipulations, Ishall not, in this stage of the discussion, inquire. That I shallconsider, when 1 refer to them, as proving that the states are excludedfrom making any legislative enactments to effect them.I have now considered the nature and extent of the Indian title,as recognised by the crown, the colonies, the states, the ContinentalCongress, and the United States, since the adoption of theconstitution. On the subject of this title, it oily remains for meto show, as I promised to do, that the title, as thus acknowledged,has received the sanction of the judicial department of this government.In Fletcher vs. Peck, (G Branch, pp. 142, 3,) it is said, " Themajority of the court is of opinion that the nature of the Indian title,which is certainly to be respected by all courts, until it be legitimatelyextinguished, is not such as to be absolutely repugnantto seisin in fee on the part of the state." Here is a complete recognitionof a title ; it is not absolutely repugnant to the idea thatthe state may be seised in fee ; because the state has the ultimatedominion, the right expectant upon the determination of the statein the Indians : so long as the Indians occupy, the right of thestate is dormant ; it cannot be exercised. It is only in" the eventthat the occupancy ceases, or the right to occupy becomes extinct,that the ultimate right of the state can be enforced. Judge Johnson,in the same case, (pp. 146, 7,) says the Indians have the absoluteproprietorship of the soil. "The uniform practice of acknowledgingtheir I'ight of soil, by purchasing from them, andrestraining all persons from encroaching upon their territory,makes it unnecessary to insist upon their right of soil."But it was received to the court, at a later period, to give thissubject a great degree of attention, and to investigate, ascertainand declare the nature and extent of the Indian title. This wasdone in 1823 ; and the case of Johnson vs. M'Intosh (8 Wheat.)furnishes us with the result. In that case, the chief justice, titteringthe opinion of the court, says, " The original inhabitantswere admitted to be the rightful occupants of the soil, with a legalas well as just claim to retain possession of it, and to use itaccording to their own discretion. While the different nations ofEurope respected the right of the natives as occupants, they assertedthe ultimate dominion to be in themselves, and claimed andexercised, as a consequence of this ultimate dominion, a ]power togrant the soil, while yet in the possession of the natives. Thesegrants have been understood by all to convey a title to the grantees,subject oily to the Indian right of occupancy. It has neverbeen doubted that either the United States, or the several states,had a clear title to all the lands within the boundary line describedin the treaty, subject only to the Indian right of occupancy,and that the exclusive power to extinguish That right was vestedin that government, which might constitutionally exercise it."It has never been contended, that the Indian title amounted toMR. Huntington's speech. 191nothing. Their right of possession has never been questioned.The claim of governinetit extends to the complete ultimatetitle, charged with this right of possession, and to the exclusivepower of acquiring that height."After these adjudications, confirmatory of all previous practice,legislation, and treaties, and giving to that practice thesolemn sanction of the united opinion of the bench of thesupreme court, can it be doubted, that the title of the Indiantribes to the lands they oceujjy is practically as complete, perfect,and absolute, as that of any citizen of this country to thefarm on which lie lives, and vviiich has descended to him, afterhaving been in the occupation of father and son, from generationto generation? Can the opinions and statements advancedin the report be sustained ? " That the pretensions of theIndians to be owners of any portion of the soil were whollydisregarded by the crown of England ;" " that, where there wasreservation of any part of the soil to the natives, they were leftto be disposed of as the ]proprietors thought proper;" "thatone of the expedients of the colony was" merely " to appear todonothing which concerned the Indians, cither in the appropriationof their hunting grounds, or controlling their conductwithout their consent ; that this was the general principle ofaction ; and that, in all the acts, first of the colonies, and afterwardsby the states, the fundamental principle, that the Indianshad no rights by virtue of their ancient possession, eitherof soil or sovereignty, has never l)cen abandoned, either expresslyor by implication ;" " that the Indian boundaries, definedby treaties, were merely temporary ; that the practice ofbuying Indian titles is but the substitute which humanity andexpediency have imposed, in place of the sword, in arriving atthe actual enjoyment of property, claimed by the right of discovery,and sanctioned by the natural superiority allowed tothe claims of civilized communities over those of savage tribes;"that the principle was adopted, that they had no permanentinterest in their hunting grounds;" " that treaties were but amode of government, and a substitute for ordinary legislation,which were from time to time dispensed with ;" " that thetribes were indulged in the 'partial' enjoyment of their ancientusages ;" " that the essential point in the policy of Georgiawas, that the Indian reservations should be gradually contractedwithin such reasonable limits, that no ]part of the countryshould continue uncultivated ; that her policy, in this respect,was a part of her rights, and that any thing which tended todefeat its operation was a deprivation of right." I will pursuethese quotations no farther. Tliey are negatived by history,by authenticated records, by universal usage, by legislativeacts, and by judicial determinations.Having thus disposed of the question, what is the nature andextent of the title of Indians to the lands which they occupy;and having shown, I hope, that it is one which, for all practicalpurposes, is absolute, and limited only by the right of the generalgovernment, of exclusive purchase, and of the reversionary192 MR. Huntington's speech.interest in fee ; I proceed to inquire into and answer the question,Have the states, in which these tribes reside, the ]powerto extend their legislative enactments over them, and thus toabolish, among these tribes, the power of self-government, andthe laws, usages and customs, by which their affairs, iron timeimmemorial, have been regulated? If I do not very much mistake,an examination of this subject will result in an entireconviction, that no such power has ever existed, nor does anysuch power now exist.The advocates of this power insist upon the right claimedand possessed by the crown to exercise it while the UnitedStates were colonies ; that, by the declaration of Independenceand the treaty of peace, this power, this right of sovereigntyand legislation, was transferred to the states, as sovereign, independentconunimities; that it has never been surrendered bythe states to the federal government, but is rather guarantiedand secured to them by the constitution under which thatgovernment is founded.I take the liberty to saj% that, in my opinion, but one of thesepropositions can be sustained, and even that is by no meansfree from doubt. I refer to that which assumes that tlje rightsof sovereignty and legislation (whatever they were) becamevested in the states individually, upon their becoming independentof the crown. To say the least, it might be contendedwith sonne [plausibility, that these rights became vested in theconfederated union first, and afterwards, in the governmentformed under the constitution, rather than in the individual'states. Hence the cautious remark of chief justice Marshall,,(8 Wheaton, 585,) "It has never been doubted that either the'United States, or the several states, had a clear title to all thelands within the boundary lines described in the treaty, subjectonly to the Indian right of occupancy, and that the exclusivepower to extinguish that right was vested hi that government,ivhich might constitutionally exercise it." Hence the conflictingclaims of the United States, and the individual states, tounappropriated lands, which were finally adjusted by cessionsfrom the latter to the former. But I do not propose to agitateor discuss that point. My attention will be directed to theother ]propositions necessary to be sustained by the advocates'of the rights of the states.If the crown had a lawful right to exercise jurisdiction overthe Indian tribes without their consent, it must have been derivedeither from discovert or conquest.As to the latter, (the right by conquest,) it is very obvious thatit has no application to these tribes. There are two reasonswhich would seem to be conclusive on the subject. One is,that no conquest was ever made of them ; but if there ever was;a right by conquest, it is very clear, that it was surrenderedby the crown, in the treaties which were made with them. In •these compacts, the Indians were regarded as possessing thepower to make them ; they were treated as lawful and necessaryparties to them ; their claim to territory was acknowledge.Huntington's speech. 193ed ; boundaries were fixed ; and pledges given that no interruption,no interference with their respective territorial limits,as settled by these treaties, should be allowed. To assert anunlimited right of sovereignty and legislation in the crown, bythe force of conquest, is utterly inconsistent with the admittednecessity that the Indian tribes should conclude treaties withthe crown, with the circumstances under which they weremade, and with their explicit provisions : hence the SupremeCourt say, after speaking of the wars between the whites andthe Indians, that the law which regulates, and ought to regulatein general, the relations between the conqueror and conquered,was inapplicable to these Indian tribes. The resort tosome new and different rule, better adapted to the actual stateof things, was unavoidable. The one adopted was, as the Indiansreceded, the lands which they thus left unoccupied wereparcelled out and granted by the crown ; and as to those ofwhich they retained possession, the Indians residing on themwere to be considered as occupants, to be protected while inpeace, but to be deemed incapable of transferring the absolutetitle to others.As to the existence of this right, as emanating from discovery,it is contradicted by the best writers on international law, bythe opinions of the most distinguished lawyers and statesmenof Great Britain and this country, and has been repudiated bythe Supreme Court of the United States.The rights acquired by discovery, on the part of the nationmaking it, are, simply, the exclusive right to make purchasesof the native tribes ; to make settlements, and to occupy inpursuance of purchases when made ; and an ultimate right infee, whenever the title of the Indians shall become extinct :and even these rights may be considered as peculiarly andsolely confined to the relations subsisting between this countryand the aboriginal inhabitants, and do not exist, and are notapplicable to the case of any other community of native tribes.What is called the sovereign power of the nation discoveringthe country, consists in the particulars above mentioned.This attribute of sovereignty, the sole right of purchase, and theultimate ownership in fee, grows out of the fact of discovery;and, so far as it exists, it takes so much from the sovereigntyand independence of the Indian tribes. But the power tolegislate, to extend its laws over the territory discovered, isconfined to its subjects when they make purchases and settlements,and grows out of the obvious principle, that these subjects,purchasing, as they must, with the consent of their ownsovereign, when they remove and occupy the lands purchased,carry with them the laws under which they previously lived,and in return for the protection which they receive, as continuingsubjects of their sovereign, become amenable and subjectto such legislative enactments as it may be deemed usefuland expedient to make. The right to purchase is derived fromthe crown ; the right to occupy from the purchase ; and thesubjection to the legislation of the crown, from the union ofMR. HUNTINGTON S SPEECH.these rights, connected with their national character, and theprotection which the nation is bound to afturd iceni. Thispower to legislate is a branch of the same power which canlawfully make any municipal regulation, a power over its omnsubjects, settled on territory purchased with its consent, and iuregard to which it had the exclusive right of purchase.Let me solicit the attention of the committee to the supportwhich these positions derive from judges, lawyers, andstatesmen.In 1757, lord Camden, and mr. Yorke, the king's attorneyand solicitor general, officially advised the crovi/n, that thegrants to the East India Company were subject only to theking's right of sovereignty over the settlements as Englishsettlements, and over the inhabitants as English subjects, whocarry with them the king's laws wherever they form colonies,and receive his protection by virtue of his royal charters.Here the true principia of the riglu to legislate is clearly stated.It is derived from the fact, that the purchasers are Englishpurchasers ; that the settlements consequent on the purchaseare English settlements, which form colonies, carry with themEnglish laws, and receive protection by virtue of the patentfrom the crown ; and this part of the opinion seems to havemet with the approbation of the Supreme Court of the UnitedStates.In 1755, counsellor Dagger, sergeant Glen, Dr. Franklin,and Patrick Henry, gave written opinions in support of thesame principles. The lands conveyed by the Indian tribeswere taken by the grantees, and held, subject only to the king'ssovereignty over the settlements to be established thereon, andoverthe inhabitants as English subjects. The tra)isi(3r of the.sovereignty to the crown of England was jade by the sameinstrument whereby the land was conveyed, and was effectualto pass it ; and the title is under the protection of the laws ofEngland.Hut it is not necessary to refer to English lawyers, or totimes as remote as those just mentioned. The Supreme Courtof the United States, whose decisions we ought to regard assound expositions of the law, have told us, in language not tobe misunderstood, what rights were acquired to this countryby the discovery of it.In the case of Johnson vs. M'lntosh, the court say, the principleadopted by the great nations of Europe, on the discoveryof this continent, by which they should be mutually regulated,was, that discovery gave title to the government by whose subjectsor by whose authority it was made, against all otherEuropean governments, which title might be consummated bypossession. As a consequence, the nation acquiring the discoveryobtained the right of acquiring the soil from the natives,and establishing settlements upon it.The rights of the original inhabitants to complete sovereignty,as independent nations, were necessarily diminished. Andwhy ? Because they interfered with the fundamental principle,MR. Huntington's speech. 195that discovery gave exclusive title, ultimate dominion, subject tothe Indian right of occupancy, to those vv^ho made the discovery.The court say, the United States maintain, as all others havemaintained, that discovery gave an exclusive right to extinguishthe Indian title of occupancy, either by purchase or by conquest,and gave also a right to such a degree of sovereignty as the circumstancesof the people would allow them to exercise ; or, as itis called, a limited sovereignty over them. This sovereignty isnot called absolute — unlimited — but a kind or degree of sovereigntylimited and confined, and, when taken, as it should be,according to the subject matter, means nothing more than that itexisted so far, and to such an extent, as was necessary to preserveinviolate the exclusive right of purchase ; or, perhaps, as was saidby judge Johnson, (6 Branch, p. 147,) the only limitation of thesovereignty of the Indians was the right in the states of governingevery person within their limits, except themselves. It mayfurther be observed, that in no instance did the crown ever claimthe right to legislate for the Indian tribes, except with their consent,and for their protection against the encroachments of thewhites.I have thus endeavored to slow that the crown of Englandneither possessed nor claimed the right, as derived from discovery,conrjucst, or otherwise, to extend its laws over the Indiantribes. They were considered as distinct nations or communities,sovereign and independent, excepting that the right to alienatetheir lands at pleasure was denied to them ; possessing and actuallyexercising the powers of government, through the mediumof their own laws, usages, and customs. If this he so, then, by thedeclaration of independence and the treaty of peace, Georgia acquiredno right to legislate over them, for the crown did not possessit ; and, as was well observed by the Supreme Court, " Neitherthe declaration of independence, nor the treaty confirming it, couldgive the United States more than that which they before possessed,or to which Great Britain was before entitled."Should it, however, be admitted, that the view thus far takenof this subject is incorrect ; that the crown, while the states werecolonies, possessed and exercised the unlimited right of sovereigntyand legislation, and that the states succeeded to this right afterthe declaration of independence ; I will ask the committee to followme in an examination of this subject, under the constitution,and will endeavor to show, that, if the states had the power oflegislation at any time, it was sun-entered at the adoption of thatconstitution, and that that instrument contains a virtual prohibitionto the states to extend their legislative enactments over theIndian tribes within their limits.It shoidd be premised, that the right to legislate over thesetribes, if it exist, is in its nature indefinite and unlimited ; for, as ithas its foundation in the sovereign power of the state, that sovereignpower extends to the enactment of all laws to effect the Indiantribes, which could lawfully be made to operate upon itswhite citizens. And this seems to be the doctrine assumed in196 MR. Huntington's speech.the report. The right to legislate is spoken of as growing out of-theabsolute sovereignty of the states within their territorial Ihn-its, and can of course have no limitation in respect to Indians,which it has not in regard to its ivhite population. It must, therefore,be admitted, that, if a state can legislate, so as to affect theIndians at all, it can do so to the same extent, as over its own citizens.This unlimited power of legislation cannot exist, without annihilatingthe Indian title to their lands. I have heretofore attemptedto show what was the nature and extent of that title ; a rightto use and occupy forever ; not to Ije defeated by legislation, butby cession or conquest only ; and that this title was not acquiredby permission, by treaty, by reservations ; but by the original rightoi occupancy. What becomes of the enjoyment of this right, if astate can lawfully do as Georgia, Mississippi, and Alabama havedone — pass laws, abolishing and declaring null and void all laws,ordinances, orders, regulations, usages and customs of the Indiantribes within their limits .^ Cannot these states alter the mode ofdescent, the regulations of alienation, the rights of possession, asknown and practised by the Indians .' Cannot they impose taxes,and subject their lands to the payment of them ? Cannot theymake legislative enactments, the necessary and inevitable effect oiwhich will be to drive the Indians from the occupation of thememory .^ Did not the secretary of war foresee this consequence,when he stated to the Cherokee delegation, that, in consequenceof the power of Georgia to extend her legislative enactments overthis nation, the only remedy for the nauoa was a removal beyondthe Mississippi, where alone could be assured to it protection andpeace ; that, while the tribes continue whin the territorial limitsof an independent state, they could promise themselves nothing-butinterruption and disquietude ; that beyond the Mississippithere would be no conflicting interests ; there the United Statescould say to them, The soil shall be yours while the trees grow orthe streams run ; but, situated Adhere you now are, no such languagecan be held to you ? What is the meaning of all this,but that, being subjected to the legislation of Georgia, the occupancyof their territory would be disturbed ; !quid that the consequenceof their residing within the limits of a sovereign statewould eventually be extermination ? Let me read to the committeean extract from the speech of a distinguished senator fromMississippi, lately deceased, [Mv, Reiil.) which I shall have occasionto use lor another pinjiose hereafter, delivered in the Senateof the United States, in IbSl!: "He was entirely persuaded thatso long as the tribes of Indians within any state of the Unionwere exempted from the operations of state laws, they neverwould consent to remove i'rom the territory they occupy : untilour legislation can, in some Ibrm or other, be brought to act onthese people, or those resident among them, they wl'Jl never consentto abandon their lands. So soon as our laws can reach thoseabandoned citizens, who settle among them, and become as savageas the Indians themselves, a powerful motive for then con.join. Huntington's speech. 197finance will be removed. It is a first step iii a system of removal; it is the first step in anj» system tending to a change of residence."If one of the principles advanced in the report be correct, andthe Indian title to their lands be what I have stated it to be, itwholly excludes state legislation. The committee say, speakingof the law of the state of New York, " It was not understood asintroducing any new principle. It recognised the genera! principle,that territory and jurisdiction, considered in reference to astate or nation, are inseparable ; that one is a necessary incidentto the other ; and that, as a stiite cannot exist without memory,the limits of that territory are, at the same time, the Emits of itsjurisdiction." Here the fundamental principle is asserted, thatsoil and jurisdiction arc inseparable from each other ; that theright to the soil in a state, ex vi termini, includes a right of sovereigntyor jurisdiction over it. Let an application be made of thisdoctrine to the Indian title. It has been shown, that the title tothe teiTitori^ which they occupy, as against the state of Georgia,is practically an absolute title, and by the United States it has beensolemnly guarantied to them. If so, then the attribute of sovereignty,said to be necessarily incident to the right of soil, attachesto it ; for it can hardly be chained, that what is a correct rule, asapplied to civilized nations, ought not to be applied to the Indiantribes. It would seem, therefore, to be a necessary consequence,from the positions taken in the report, that the Indians possessthe right of sovereignty over their lands, if they are the owners ofthe lands ; and I have endeavored to show, in a former past ofthis discussion, that they are the owners cf the soil, for every practicalpurpose of aL-solute ownership).Another objection to the right of legislation, by the states, isderived fi-om its sion user, (if the expression may be allowed,) byGeorgia, at all times. It is !row more than fifty years since thedeclaration of independence, and more than forty since the adoptionof the constitution ; and, until within a little more than ayear, no such right was ever claimed. Whence this silence?Whence this acquiescence in the legislation of the federal government? Whence the repeated and reiterated demands upon thegovernment to extinguish the Indian title ? Does the doctrine solately advanced, of state sovereignty, comport with the languageof the report, that " it is understood Georgia will not attempt toappropriate the lands within the Indian reservations without theirconsent ?" Does it not look to the operation of state laves as asure and speedy mode of extinguishing actual occupancy, if notof title ? Has it not this for its object ? For what other purposecan the state desire to legislate over them ? Not to draw revenuefrom them ; not to subject them to the peribniiance of civil ormilitary duties ; not to make them citizens, and amalgamate themwith their white population. The state can have no such objectsin view. Can any other motive be assigned, than indirectlyto force them to remove, by bringing the action of legislation tobear upon them ? If such be the object, if the power existed,why was it never before claimed or exercised ? Why was the17 *MR. HUNTINGTON S SPEECH.federal goA-eninient to extinguish the title, to purchase the rightof occupancy 1 Can this long acquiescence, on the part of Georgia,\\\ the exercise of self-government by the Cherokees, be accountedfor in any other way than by a full admission that thetight so to exercise it belonged to that tribe ?If the power of legislation exists, how are these Indians to beregarded .'' as citizens, aliens, or denizens ? Not as citizens, itwould seem ; for the law already passed nearly oiitlaics them. Itdoes not, indeed, declare them incompetent to sue as plaintiffs inthe courts of Georgia, but it has all the practical consequences ofoutlaiv)-y ; for they are deprived of the benelitof theory testimonywhich woidd generally exist, to sustain their legal rights. Notonly no Indian can testify for another, where a white man, not residingin the nation, is the adverse party, but no descendant ofone, however remote, is a competent witness. The rights of personalsecurity, personal liberty and private ]property, to far as itregards the Indians, are, by this law', practically) annihilated. It isclear they are not aliens, residing within the jurisdiction of thestates ; for if so, whose subjects are they ? They are not denizens; for a state cannot make them such. They have not beenmade citizens by naturalization ; for a state cannot make themsuch, in that manner. If, then, they are subject to the municipalregulations of the state, it is because they are, and from the periodof the declaration of independence have been, citizens of thestate. If citizens, they may be prosecuted for all offences forwhich the whites may be prosecuted — bigamy, treason, &c. &c.If citizens, they are to be enumf reed in the census, and to form apart of the basis of representation, if taxed. Now, did the framersof the constitution ever suppose, that, by exercising the power oftaxation, the whole of the Italian tribes within the limits of thestates, coidd be represented on the floor of Congress ? WouldGeorgia have a right to send one of the chiefs, or head men ofthese tribes, as a representative or senator to the national legislative.'' The Old Congress did not think so, vrhen it vas j\'0\ iced,in the treaty of Hopewell, that the Indians should have the rightto send a deputy of their choice, whenever they should think fit,to Congress. They never: were, at any time, considered subjectsof Georgia ; but if they are now, they always have been, suiteJuly 4, 177(j ; and a new basis of representation is to lee made af-^ter the year 1831, for the states within whose limits Indian tribesreside. The law of Mississippi, if a valid one, has completely effectedthis object ; for, while it abolishes the laws and usages ofthe Indians, it confers on them the rights of citizens, and subjectsthem to the operation of all the laws, statutes, and ordinances ofthe state ; and the 23d Congress will, perhaps, have one additionalrepresentative from Mississippi, by force of this legislative enactment.The power to extend the municipal regulations of the state ofGeorgia over the Indians, if it ever existed, is taken away by theconstitution, and cannot now, consistently with the provisions ofthat instrument, be exercised.I suppose that it will be admitted, that the state, by adoptingMR. Huntington's speech. 199the constitution, is bound in good faith, by its provisions, and cannotclaim to exercise any rights which, by that instrument, areconferred exclusively on the general government, or prohibited tothe state. A denial of this principle would, of course, be a denialof any paramount authority of the constitution, and reduce thegovernment to what it was under the articles of confederation.By the constitution, Congress have power to "regulate commercewith foreign nations, and among the several states, andwith the Indian tribes." Whatever the extent of this power maybe,so far as it exists, and may be lawiidly exercised, it is exclusive.It must necessarily be so ; for, if it exist both in the statesand in the federal government, it becomes nugatory in the handsof either. The regulations of the state and of Congress mightconflict with each other ; and which is to yield ? Neither, if thepower may be exercised by both. This point has, however, beenseeded by the Supreme Court. That tribunal has decided, that thepower given to Cougi-ess, under this clause of the constitution, isexclusive, and ajr.ounts to a prohibition to the states to exerciseit.I shall not stop to comment upon the suggestion, that it is notsaid Congress shall have povicr to regulate commerce with theIndian tribes within the states, for the expression is general : it ismade to extend to all Indian tribes, and must include those within,as well as those without, the territorial limits of a state. Butthere were no Indians in the United States who were not, at thetime of the adoption of the constitution, within the territoriallimits of some state. Such has uniformly been the constructionof this clause of the constitution, and it has received the sanctionof the Supreme Court.This power,ln my opinion, forbids all control over the Indiantribes within the limits of Georgia, through the medium of herlaws. It was, I think, so intended, and n\U:iX of necessity be so.By the articles of confederation, it is provided, that "the UnitedStates, in Congress assembled, shall have the sole and exclusiveright of regulating the trade, and managing all affairs with the Indians,not members ofany of the states, proCTi/erf that the legislativeright of any state within its omn limits he not infringed or violated :"and, in the ordinance of 178U, this legislative right was expresslyadverted to and recognised. When the constitution was framed,this ]proviso was purposely omitted. It does not appear in thatinstrument ; and it is to be recollected, that some of the distinguishedmen, who signed the articles of confederation, also attiredtheir signatures to the constitution, and were members of thatCongress which enacted the first intercourse law after its adoption,July 22d, 1790 ; continued by acts of March I, 179.'] ; May19, 179G ; March 3, 1799 ; and made perpetual by act of March 30,180'2. In the fifth section of the act of 1790, a provision is made,which evinces most clearly that the Indians wei-e not consideredas within the jurisdiction of any state ; for it provides for the punishmentof citizens, or inhabitants of the United States, who commitcrimes in the Indian territories, in the same manner as if theoffence had been committed within the jurisdiction of the state200 MR. Huntington's speech.of which they were inhabitants or citizens. Tic same provisionis to be found in the 4th section of the act of March, 17113. Andin the first act, sales to states are declared void, tliougli they havethe pre-empire right, unless at a public treaty held under the authorityof the United States.It would seem, from these fticts, no other inference could bedrawn, than that the framers of the constitution supposed theyhad effectually excluded state legislation over the IiidijUi tribes:else why omit in the constitution what v.'us inserted in the articlesof confederation less than ten yeai-s preceding, vera whichmust have been knovrn, understood, and well considered, by theconvention in 1787, — the reservation of the legislation of the states.And why, in the first law that was made, in execution of the poorergiven to Congress, was it necessary to ]provide lor the punishmentof crimes, committed on lands ]belonging to the Indians, declaredto be out of the jurisdiction of thee states, if they possessedjurisdiction? Contemporaneous exposition is generally a saferule, both in the construction of constitutional and statute law,and, if it be applied here, establishes the principle, that the stateshad no power of legislation over the Indian tribes within their*limits.But let it be examined in another point of view. The provisobefore referred to, in the articles of confederation, may have beeninserted, out of abundant caution, to prevent any inference, thatthe right of the states to legislate, on other subjects than the intercoursewith and affairs of the Indians, was abridged or takenaway ; for it would Have been absurd to have granted to Congressthe sole and exclusive jsov/er of regulating the trade, and managingail affairs with rhu indians, not members of a state, ont thento have added a proviso which would have effectually preventedthem from the exercise of that pov/cr. In this view, the treaty of ^Houston, of 178.5, is binding under the clause of the constitution,"which provides that ali debts, contracts, and engagements, enteredunto before the adoption of this constitution, shall be as validagainst the United States, under this constitution, as under theconfederation. But the power to regulate commerce with the Indiantribes not only was intended and believed to hav.' excludedstate jurisdiction over them, but such is the necessary consequenceof the gent of the power. It has been before stated to beexclusive, and,t)f consequence, it denies to the states the exerciseof jurisdiction in the regulation of connnerce with the tribes.But a want of ]iOvv(^r to regulate commerce or intercourse withthem, is a want of ]power to affect them, in any manner, by legislativeenactment. The very circumstance, that intercourse may,and must be had with them in some form, is conclusive, that theyare considered and lo l)e treated as a community distinct from ourown citizens. Now, how can a state legislate over a body ofmen, with whom they are prohibited from having any intercourse,except under recitations )prescribed by Congress ? There is nosubject ; there is neither territory nor person, on which legislationcan act. If Georgia can of right pass a law which operates uponthe tribes, she can enforce it ; for it is idle to talk of die right toMR. Huntington's speech. 201extend its laws to them, if there is no constitutional power tocarry them into effect. A right to make and a right to enforce alaw must co-exist in the same body. They cannot be separated.Can a law be executed in a territory where an entry on it cannotbe made without the assent of a power distinct fioin that whichenacts the law ? Let this question be answered, by a referenceto the law of Georgia, approved by the governor, DecemberThe 6th section extends the civil and criminal laws of thatstate over the Cherokees, and subjects them to the legal processof its courts. The 7th section abolishes all their laws, ordinances,orders and regulations. Suppose the Cherokees refusea compliance with these statute provisions ; how is the state toenforce them ? If process is issued, can the ministerial officer gointo their territory to serve it ? What says the intercourse lawof March, 1802, sec. 3 ? " If any citizen of a state or territory, orother person, shall go into any country which is allotted or securedby ti-easy to any of the Indian tribes south of the riverOhio, without a passport," obtained in the manner specified inthe act, " he shall forfeit a sum not exceeding fifty dollars, or beimprisoned not exceeding three months." Would the processof the state of Georgia alone be a protection to an officer whoshould go among the Cherokees to execute it? Would it savehim from the penalties of this section of the intercourse law?Would it be " a good plea in bar," to an action of debt to recoverthe penalty, or to an indictment fir the offence? Suppose thelaws of Georgia to authorize the assessment of a tax upon theCherokees ; could the tax-gatherer go into their nation and taketheir property, to satisfy it? Look at the fourth section of thetzi of }^Q2: "If a"V citizens, iniciithorized by law, and with ahostile intention, shall be found on any Indian land, such offendershall" be subject to a pecuniary forfeiture, and imprisonment,and, "where property is taUtrti, simia ])ny for it twice itsjust value." Would the law of Georgia save him from thesepenalties and forfeitures? Would it be an available defence, insuits brought to recover and enforce them ? The 12th sectionof the law of Georgia makes it murder to take the life of anyIndian residing within the chartered limits of Georgia, for enlistingas an emigrant, &c. contrary to the laws and customs ofthe Cherokee nation. Should there be a violation of this section,and its penalty exacted, which is death by hanging, what wouldbe the consequence ? Turn again to the intercourse act, sec. 6:If any citizen or other person shall go into any town, settlement,&.C. belonging to any nation or tribe of Indians, and shallthere commit murder, by killing any Indian, &c. he shall sufferdeath." Would the warrant of execution, issued under the lawof Georgia, be a justification ? Woxdd this be an available "pleain bar ?"Is this intercourse law one made in pursuance of the constitution? If it is, it is the supreme law of the land. Let me theninquire, what is the meaning of the expression, "commercewith the Indian tribes?" The Supreme Court have given an202 MU. Huntington's speech.explanation of the please. They say, " Commerce undoubtedlyis trafHc, but it is something more ; it is watercourses As usedin the constitution, "it is a unit, every part ol" which is indicatedby the term. It cannot stop) at the exterior boundary lineof each state, but may be introduced into the interior. In theregulation of trade with the Indian tribes, the action of the law,especially when the constitution was made, was chiefly within astate. The power of Congress, then, whatever it may be, mustbe exercised within the territorial jurisdiction of the severalstates." What is this power? "It is the power to regulate,that is, to prescribe the rule by which commerce is to be governed.It is complete in itseiti may be exercised to its utmostextent, and acknov, ledges no limitations other than are prescribedin the constitution. It is vested in Congress, as absolutelyas it would be in a single government, having in its constitutionthe same restrictions on the exercise of the power, as are foundin the constitution of the United States. As it implies, in its nature,fur power over the thing to be regulated, it excludes, necessarily,the action of all others that wouhl perform the sameoperation on the same thing." The power, then, given to Congress,is to prescribe the rule by which intercourse with the Indiantribes shall be governed, and excludes the action of allothers. Now, can a state legislate over a territory, or a people,where both these subjects of legislation are within the exclusivecontrol of Congress, so far as the constitution and treaties havegiven this control? What kind of legislation is that, which ismade to operate upon a community, with whom the law makersare not even permitted to have any intercoin-se? It seems as.though it were impossible successfully to contend, that tribesof Indians could bo brought unilcr state laws, when they arewithout the reach even of ordinary commerce with the states.But another view may be taken of this part of the subject.The right to regulate intercourse '.vitji t!;e Indian tribes includesa right to prohibit it altogether, or to place it under certain modifications,as the intercourse law of Ici does. Now, Congresshave exercised the shower to ]prohibit commerce or intercoursewith foreign nations: they did this when the embargo and non-intercourselaws were passed. These laws have been adjudgedvalid by the highest judicial tribunal in the country. Now,if, under the clause which gives to Congress the right to regulatecommerce with foreign nations, all intercourse may be prohibited,surely the same thing may be done, as it relates to thecommerce with the Indian tribes. And a power to prohibit allintercourse is a power which excludes state legislation ; for astate law cannot be executed where there is no lawful right toenter into the Indian territory to enforce it.But let us examine this clause a little further. It is very obvious,that the framers of the constitution supposed that theIndian tribes were a community distinct from the ordinary citizensof a state. They provided for the regulation of commercewith foreign states, between the states, and with the Indiantribes, that is, with a people not foreigners, not members ofMR. Huntington's speech. 203the Union, but distinct from them, called tribes. They did notprofess to regulate intercourse between citizens of the samestale. If, however, the states, by virtue of their sovereignty, canlegislate over the Indians, it is because they are members oftheir community, citizens, persons living within their jurisdiction;and thus the power given to Congress to regulate tradewith them is annihilated. They are no longer tribes ; they losethat distinctive character and appellation, when they are claimedto be members of the state ; and thus this clause in the constitutionis a dead letter; it means nothing.One observation further on this part of the subject. The consentgiven by the states, in the constitution, that Congress shallhave the exclusive power of regulating the trade with the Indians,is a virtual admission, that they are not citizens or inhabitantsof the states. They are not only called tribes, but aretreated as distinct communities, not incorporated with the states;not a part of their population. Can the United States regulatetrade and intercourse with the citizens of a county or a townin any state ? Can they make laws to govern a portion of theinhabitants of a state.' They certainly can do it, if the Indiantribes are citizens of the states within whose limits they reside.It cannot, however, be seriously contended that the constitutionhas vested in Congress any such power, as that which would ofnecessity result, if the Indians are citizens of the states.By the constitution, "power" is given to the President, "byand with the advice and consent of the Senate, to make treaties."This power is also exclusive, and, whenever lawliiily exercised,supersedes all state legislation inconsistent with it ; for by thesame constitution it is provided, "that all treaties made, orwhich shall be made under the authority of the United States,shall be the supreme law of the land, and the judges in everystate shall be bound thereby, any thing in the constitution orlaws of any state to the contrary notwithstanding."In pursuance of the power thus given, what at least are calledtreaties, have been inde with the southern Indians. I shallendeavor to show that these treaties, or by whatever namethey may be called, contain provisions which exclude all legislationover them by the states within whose chartered limitsthey are located ; and that these treaties are " the supreme lawlos the land."The treaties with the Cherokees are those to which I shallrefer; for it is from them we have had memorials soliciting protectionfrom the legislation of Georgia ; and those made withother tribes contain similar provisions.That these treaties in terms, and in the fullest and most solemnmanner, guaranty to them, forever, all their lands not ceded, isadmitted. Any legislation, either of the United States or thestates, which would deprive them of their possessions, would, of'Course, be an infraction of these compacts. No such legislation,(if the treaties are valid,) which would produce this effect,Directly or indirectly, can be admitted. These propositionsneed no illustration nor argument to support them.204 MR. HUNTINGTON S SPEECH.But not only is this species of legislation prohibited, but legislationin every form, and for any purpose, by the states, is equallyprohibited.The treaty of Houston, July 2, 1791, was the first one madewith the Cherokees, after the adoption of the constitution ; andthe subsequent treaties are considered and declared to be additionalto, and forming a part of, this treaty. Let me now askthe attention of the committee to several clauses in this treaty.The Cherokees are placed under the protection of the UnitedStates, and of no other sovereign whatever: they stipulate notto hold any treaty with any individual state. The United Statesare vested with the sole and exclusive right of regulating theirtrade; they may punish at their pleasure any citizen of theUnited States who settles on their lands; all persons are prohibitedfrom going upon their lands without a passport ; theyshall deliver u|) offenders guilty of certain specified crimesagainst the citizens of the United States, to l)e punished accordingto the laws of the latter ; and offenders against them shallbe punished as though the crimes had been committed withinthe territory and jurisdiction of the United States. And by the5th article of the treaty of llo])ewell, which in 1790 generalWashington declared was in lull force, and the provisions ofwhich he felt bound to carry into faithful execution, the Indiansare admitted to have the power to punish, at their discretion,and in such manner as they please, those settlers upon theirlands, who will not remove within six months after the ratificationof the treaty.In the face of these treaty provisions and recognitions, canthe states legislate over them ? Can they exercise an authorityover them, even for protection, when, that power is confided tothe United States? And what does protection imply? merelysecurity in the enjoyment of their lands? This term is g-cnera/,and applies to all their then existing usages and customs. It isto be a protection against all who attempt to intermeddle withthem. They have abjured the protection of all sovereigntiesbut the United States. To them is confided the right to regulatetrade. To them offenders are to be given up; by themoffenders are to be punished. And the United States bincl themselvesto observe all these stipulations. How is it possible that \a state can enact a law wliicli shall operate, in a territory guarantiedexclusively to the Indians, and over a community whoserelations are declared to exist only with the United States, andwhose local jurisdiction is admitted by these provisions to beexclusive of the federal government ? And, now, in what lightare these treaties to be considered with reference to the characterof one of the contracting parties ? Do they, or do they notimply and admit, the Indian tribes to be independent of, andnot subject to, the control of the states ; and do they possess anybinding force ?Let us attend to the language of general Washington on thissubject. On the 22d of August, 1789, he came into the Senatechamber, and asked the advice of the Senate, among otherMR, Huntington's speech. 205things, on these two points ; " Shall a solemn guaranty" be given"by the United States to the Creeks of their remaining territory,and to maintain the same, if necessary, by a line of niihtaryposts?" "If all offers should fail to induce the Creeks to makethe desired cession to Georgia, shall the commissioners make itan ultimatum?" To the first question, the Senate answered inthe affirmative ; to the second, in the negative. On the 17thSeptember, 1789, general Washington sent a message to theSenate, in which he states, that "it is important that all treatiesand compacts, formed by the United Slates with other nations,whether civilized or not, should be made v/ith caution and executedwith fidelity." After speaking of trio practice of theUnited States with European nations, not to consider any treatyas conclusive until ratified, and suggesting that the same coursewould be advisable in relation to treaties made with the Indians,he asks of the Senate their opinion and advice, whethercertain Indian treaties were to be considered as perfected, andconsequently as obligatory without being ratified; and if not,whether these treaties ought to be ratified? The Senateanswer by adopting the following resolution: "Resolved, thatthe Senate do advise and consent that the President of theUnited States ratify the treaty." Can any language be moreexpressive of the opinion of the President and of the Senate,that these treaties were of the character coiitetiiplated by theconstitution, requiring ratification, as made with a nation havingthe power to enter into them, and therefore as independent,having the power of self-government ? And it is to be observed,that the practice, in regard to these Indian treaties, has beenuniformly the same from that time to the present.On the 11th of August, 1790, general Washington sent a messageto the Senate, in which he asks the advice of the Senate,whether " overtures shall be made to the Cherokees to arrangea new boundary, so as to embrace the settlements made by thewhite people since the treaty of Hopewell ;" and whether theUnited States should "stipulate solemnly to guaranty the newboundary, which may be arranged ?" The Senate gave theiradvice by answering both these questions in the affirmative.It is to be observed also, that in this message general Washingtonexplicitly states, that he shall consider himself bound toexert the powers intrusted to him by the constitution, in orderto carry into faithful execution the treaty of Hopewell.Let me now turn the attention of the committee to the opinionsentertained by the distinguished men who negotiated theI treaty of Ghent, speaking in the name of the government, andwhose attention was particularly called to the subject by the1 British negotiators ; and let it be remembered, that some of1 them, at least, were advocates of the rights of the states, andI of what has been called, in modern times, a strict construction1 of the powei'sof the general government. These opinions uneequivocal support the Indian tribes in their right to be governedt by their own laws and usages. In their not to the BritishCommissioners, dated September 9th, 1814, they use the MR. Huntington's speech.lowing language : " A celebrated writer on the laws of nations,to whose authority British jurists have taken particular satisfactionin appealing, alter stating in the most explicit manner thelegitimacy of colonial settlements in America, to the exclusionof all rights of uncivilized Indians, has taken occasion to praisethe first settlers of New England, and the founder of Pennsylvania,in having purchased of the Indians the lands they resolvedto cultivate, notwithstanding their being Furnished with acharter lion their sovereign. It is this example which theUnited States, since they became, by their independence, thesovereigns of the territory, have adopted and organized into apolitical system. Under that system, the Indians residing withinthe United States are so far independent, that they live undertheir own customs, and not under the laws of the United States;that their rights to the lands where they inherit or hunt, aresecured to them by boundaries defined in amicable treaties betweenthe United States and themselves ; and that wheneverthese boundaries are varied, it is also by amicable and voluntarytreaties. They are so far dependent as not to have the right todispose of their lands to any private persons, nor to any powerother than the United States, and to be under their protectionalone, and not under that of any other power. Whether calledsubjects, or by whatever name designated, such is the relationbetween them and the United States. These principles havebeen uniformly recognised by the Indians themselves, in all thetreaties between them and the United States."I now invite the attention of the committee to the Cherokeetreaty of July 8th, 1817, which was negotiated by the presentchief magistrate of this nation, as one of the commissioners.And it is worthy of particular notice, that it was under the faithof this treaty, and one of the objects for which it was made, toenable the Cherokees to establish a government of their ow-n,and adopt laws more in unison with republican principles thantheir former usages, and which laws and government the stateof Georgia claims a right to abolish.The ]preamble recites, that the upper Cherokee towns are desirousof contracting their society within narrow limits, thatthey may begin the establishment of fixed laws and a regulargovernment ; and for this [purpose request a divisional line to beestablished between them and the lower towns ; and, to carry ;into effect the before recited promises with good faith, the Cherokeesmake a cession of part of their lands to the United States,It is very obvious, that the otdy object of this treaty, and the cession made under it, was to enable the Cherokees who remainedeast of the Mississippi to institute a government and enact lawssuited to their then condition. This object was well understoodbathe commissioners who negotiated, and by the President anSenate who ratified this treaty. As an inducement to effectthis object, to them so desirable, they made large grants of theirterritory. They proceeded to establish their government andlaws, to "engage in the pursuits of agriculture and civilizedlife," upon the faith of this treaty ; and, eleven years after wurdffiMR. Huntington's speech. 207they are informed by the President, who negotiated the treaty,and speaking in behalf of the government vviiich ratified it, thatthey cannot be ]protected in the enjoyment of that governmentand those laws, but that the state of Georgia may lawfully abrogateboth. Was this the view taken of their rights by the com-missionaries, and by the President and Senate, in 1817 ? Was itriot conceded by them all, that the Cherokees had the right to institutea form of government and make laws for themselves, andthat they should not be molested, but protected in the exercise ofthat right ?In July, 1787, Congress passed an ordinance for the governmentof the ten-story north-west of the river Ohio, the fourth articleof which provides, that the " utmost good faith shall alwaysbe observed towards the Indians ; their lands and property shallnever be taken from them without their consent ; and in theirproperty, rights and liberty, they never shall be invaded or disturbed,unless in just and laved wars authorized by Congress ;but laws founded in justice and humanity shall, from time totime, be made for preventing wrongs being done to them, and forpreserving peace and friendship with them."In the cession by Georgia, in 18C2, it is provided, that whenthe territory ceded by her shall be foi-med into a state, it shall beadmitted as such into the Union, on the conditions and with therestrictions contained in the foregoing ordinance, except the articlewhich forbids slavery.In 1817, Congress authorized the inhabitants of the western,part of the territory of Mississippi to form a state government,preparatory to her admission into the Union, with a proviso, thatthe constitution and government by them formed should not berepugnant to the before mentioned ordinance, and the provisionsof the deed of cession by Georgia.In the same yeai-, Mississippi, having formed a constitution andstate government, declared by Congress to be in. conformity tothe principles of the foregoing ordinance, was admitted into theUnion.In 1819, Alabama was admitted on the same principles.From these acts, two very obvious inferences are to be drawn.The one is, that, in 1802, Georgia considered the ordinance of1787, which secured the property, the rights, and the liberty ofthe Indians, as not only just and ]proper, but as one which theContinental Congress might lawfully make. The other is, thatthe states of Alabama and Mississij)pi are precluded by the actsauthorizing them to form a government, and admitting them intothe Union, from enacting laws which shall infringe upon therights of the Indians.In the Senate of the United States, in 1896, in the discussion ofa bill making an appropriation for the repair of a post-road in thestate of Mississippi, in answer to an objection, that the stateought to construct and repair its own roads, Mr. King of Alabamasaid, " The road runs through the Indian country, over which'the state of Mississippi had no control."208 MR. Huntington's speech. >Mr. Johnson of Kentucky said, this " was a road opened by theUnited States, according to a treaty stipulation with the UnitedStates."Mr. Ellis of Mississippi said, " the road did not pass throughone seventh part of that state, and it was inijjossible I'or the stategovernment of Mississippi to have any authority over those lands,till the title to thin was extinguished."Mr. Eaton of Tennessee, the present secretary of war, said atreaty had been entered into between the United States and theChoctaw Indians. Tiie question of state rights had not thenarisen, and the government of this country was in the hands ofMr. Jefferson. Under such an administration, no attempt wouldhave been made to enter into a treaty Vt^ith a distinct sovereignty,that went to invade the principles of the constitution. " Eversince this government had existed," Mr. Eaton said, " they hadproceeded on the principle that the Indians are a distinct sovereignty; it was an anomaly that one sovereignty should existwithin the orbit of another ; but they always had proceeded onthis principle, and if they had any right to interfere with them,why did they proceed with them in the character of sovereignties?" Mr. Eaton contended that, " in the provisions of this treaty,there was no cession of iHoperiy on the pail of these Indians ;there was not even a cession of sovereignty. They, in their sovereigncapacity as Indians, yielded their consent to the UnitedStates to open a road. The United States could not give thestate of Mississippi any sovereignty over it."Mr. Ben-hen of Georgia, now attorney-general of the UnitedStates, said, " the moderate reflection he lead been able to bestowupon this subject had reconciled his mind to the admission of theprinciple, that the effect of this treaty was certainly of limited extentThis treaty was concluded before the admission of the stateof Mississippi into the Union, and the parties to that treaty, beingconsidered as distinct sovereignties, might have imposed on theUnited States certain obligations ; from which obligations theycould not disengage themselves by any new compacts, enteredinto with the people of Mississippi, on their admission into theUnion."Mr. White, at present a senator from Tennessee, and chairmanaf the committee on Indian affairs, in a written opinion given in1824, says, "these ]people (the Cherokees) are now to be viewed.IS a nation possessing all the powers of other independent nations,which are not expressly, or by necessary implication, surrenderedup by this treaty, "the treaty of Houston.) I have believed,and still do, that under the treaties the Cherokees must beconsidered a nation possessing like powers with other nations, exceptso far as they have surrendered their independence to theUnited States."Are these treaties, thus explained, hinting ? If they recogniseand declare the Indian tribes, with which they are made, so far independentas to possess the right of governing themselves, bytheir own municipal regulations, as not to be subject to the legis.Huntington's speech. 209nation of the states, and to have the sole right of occupancy foreverto the lands described in the boundaries specified, are thetreaties the supreme law of the land ? Had the government of theUnited States the power to enter into and to ratify them ?It Avould seem to be somewhat novel, that a necessity is supposedto exist to prove that the treaties made with the Indiantribes are valid ; but this necessity is imposed, from the repeateddeclarations, made hypothetically indeed, upon the suppositionthat they conflict with the supposed and asserted rights of statesovereignty ; that they were not lawfully entered into ; that nopower is given by the constitution to make these treaties ; and,therefore, that they are void. Let me ask the attention of thecommittee to the proofs that they are compacts, which, if not fulfilledby us, will subject us to the imputation of violating our nationalfaith ; that they were, what they profess to be, made withfull authority, and are now the supreme law.These treaties have received the sanction of every departmentof the government, and by each been considered as binding onthe contracting parties.By the Executive. This is necessarily implied in making andratifying them. For it is not to be presumed that the Presidentwould make, and that the Senate woukl advise and consent to, atreaty which they did not believe was binding on either of theparties to it. But we are not left to mere deductions or inferencesfrom the exercise of the treaty-making power. The records ofour government furnish us with ample evidence of the opinionsentertained of their validity by all the illustrious men, who havesuccessively held the high office of President of the UnitedStates.General Washington, in a communication to the Senate, in1790, says, " The treaties which have been entered into with theother tribes in that quarter, must be faithfully performed on ourparts : I shall conceive myself bound to exert the powers intrustedto me by the constitution, in order to carry into faithful executionthe treaty of Hopewell. The letters of the chiefs to theCreeks are also laid before you, to evince that the requisite stepshave been taken to produce a full compliance with the treatymade with that nation on the 7th of August, 1790, The Senateadvised and consented that the President should cause the treatyconcluded at Hopewell to be cried into execution according to theterms thereof. It is of some importance that the chiefs shoidd bewell satisfied of the entire good faith and liberality of the UnitedStates."Similar opinions were expressed by all the persons holding theoffice of President. I will detain the committee by referring tothose of Mr. Jefferson only.The government is determined to exert all its energy for thepatronage and protection of the rights of the Indians. Until theycede their lands by treaty, or other transaction equivalent to atreaty, no act of a state can give a right to such lands."The validity of these treaties has been fully recognised by therelative department of the government It has passed, from18 *210 MR. Huntington's speech.time to time, laws regulating the intercourse with them ; lawsmaking appropriations of large sums of money to carry these treatiesinto effect ; and the bill now under consideration proceedsupon the admitted principle, that the Indian tribes have, by treaties,rights to lands which arc to be extinguished, improvementswhich'are to be purchased and ]paid for ; and appropriates moneyfor these objects.The judicial department, in the cases before refer-ed to, hasmale a full recognition of the validity of these treaties. It speaksof them as subsisting ; as containing provisions binding on theparties to them, and which, like al! other similar compacts withindependent powers, are to be faithfully obsen'cd.I have, for another purpose, adverted to the opinions advancedby distinguished senators and representatives in Congress, fromthe states within whose chartered limits the Indians reside, allsustaining the doctrine that these treaties are the supreme law ofthe land. I solicit the committee to examine them, in connexionwith the topic of argument which I am now discussing.As these treaties were made under the authority of the UnitedStates, they aic, of course, valid. The committee will notice themarked distinction, which is made in the constitution, betweentreaties and laws. Treaties made, or which shall be made, underthe authority of the United States, and laws which shall be madeill pursuance of the constitution, shall be the supreme law of theland. To make a treaty binding, it is necessary that it should bemade by tlje authority of the United States, and this is all whichis necessary. This authority is delegated to the President andSenate, and, when exercised' by them, the states have agreed thatit is duly made. Whereas, as to a law, it must be made in pursuanceof the constitution: and of this, the judicial department isconstituted the judge. Now, these treaties have been made bythe President, and ratified by two thirds of the Senate. Theyhave, therefore, been made under the authority of the UnitedStates ; and thus the states, by becoming parties to the constitution,have declared them to be the supreme law of the land. laitin the power of any state to declare, that, in making these treaties,the limits prescribed by the constitution were passed.? thatthere was an exercise of ]power not delegated ? . jIt is, in most cases, a safe rule by which to ascertain the correctnessof an assumed principle, by following it out in its consequences.What would they be, in the case we are now considering,if these treaties are invalid ? If they are void as to theUnited States, or as to any of the states, they are so as to the Indians.If they cannot be canned into effect, in good faith, becausethey infringe "upon the rights of the states, they are operativefor all purposes. The Indian tribes may say with great proprietyto this government. If you have not the power to fulfil the stipulationscontained in the treaties made with us, we are under noobligation, on our part, to comply with them. If you exceededyour powers, the treaties are at an end. And what would then b^the reside ? Why, every cession of land made by virtue of themisa' void giant. The boundaries which now circumscribe themMR. Huntington's speech. 2Hare no longer fixed and permanent. Every thing conceded bythem in these treaties is set afloat. Are the states more especiallybenefited by them prepared for this result ? Are they willingto acknowledge the principle, that no permanent rights were acquiredfor them by the ratification of these treaties .^If the Indian tribes possess the rights of soil and sovereignty tothe extent, to which I have attempted to showtliey do possess them;if the treaties and laws entered into and enacted by the UnitedStates in relation to these tribes are valid — the power to pass thislaw does not exist, and its inexpediency is obvious. It takesaway from those tribes, or impairs, the rights which belong tothem. It substitutes a legislative enactment, requiring only a majorityof both houses of Congress for a treaty, Which rebukes theassent of two thirds of the Senate.If my physical strength were competent to the task, I wouldsubmit to the committee some considerations evincing the impolicyof the passage of this bill, growing out of the enormous expensewhich will attend its execution, quid the utter annihilationwhich it will cause, of the tribes who may remove to their contemplatedresidence west of the Mississippi. But I have alreadyexhausted my strength in the discussion of the other interestingquestions connected with the iii. I shall leave these topics tomy friends who may follow me in this debate.I would not, if I had the power, excite any improper sympathyin favor of these remnants of a once powerful race. I will notask the committee to consider the manner, in which the whiteman was received by them, when he first set his foot ujjon theshores of the western v/orkl ; to the cessions of lands which, fi-omtime to time, they have made to the colonies and to this nation ;to their present condition as improved in civilization, in morals,and religion ; to their attachment to their present homes, the landswhich they occupy, the graves of their fathers. No, sir ; our obligationsto sustain and ]protect them where they now are, are derivedfrom sources, which need not the aid of sympathy to givethem efficacy.My friend from New York (Mr. Storrs) pointed out the viewwhich would hereafter be taken of our decision on this bill, shouldit become a law. He took us froi.i this hall, and arraigned us beforethe tribunal of our own countrymen, who would pronouncethe sentence of "condemnation ; before the tribunal of assembled■• nations, who would pass a like sentence ; before the tribunal ofposterity, where would be opened the volume of histoire', in whichwould be found written, in letters of fire — This republic violatedi its solemn treats obligations unto the Indian tribes, because it hctd\ the poiver, and was actuated by motives of interest, to do it. Sir,I our future historian Avill not have the power of the recording anigel, as he writes this sentence, and drops upon it a tear, to blot itI out. It will remain there as long as time endures. It is the ulmcer of infamy : no balsam can heal it. It is the wi-eck of a ruined reputation : no artist can rebuild it. I might pursue the trainof thought suggested by my friend from New York. I might semble this nation before the most august tribunal ever to be212 MR. Huntington's speech.erected — the tribunal of the last day. Divine inspiration hathwritten for our admonition, and I pray that it may not be repeatedin the retribution of the final judgment, Cursed be he that possessedhimself of the field of the fatherless, and of him that hath nohelper, and the congregated universe pronounce the sentencejust.Extract from a Letter written by the Rkv. S. A. Worcester,Missionary among the Cherokees, dated March 15,1830.As to education, the number who can read and write English isconsiderable, though it bears but a moderate proportion to the wholepopulation. Among such, the degree of improvement and intelligenceis various. The Cherokee language, as far as I can judge, isread and written by a large majority of those between childhood andmiddle age. Only a few who are much beyond middle age havelearned.In regard to the progress of religion, I cannot, I suppose, do betterthan to state, as nearly as I am able, the number of members in thechurches of the several denominations. The whole number of nativemembers of the Presbyterian churches is not far from 180. Inthe churches of the United Brethren are about 54. In the Baptistchurches 1 do not know the number ; probably as many as 50. TheMethodists, I believe, reckon in society more than 8C0 ; of whom Isuppose the greater part are natives. Many of the heathenish customsof the people have gone entirely, or almost entirely, into disuse,and others are last following their steps. I believe the greater partof the people acknowledge the Christian religion to be the true religion,although man' who make this acknowledgment know very littleof that religion ; and many others do not feel its power. Throughthe blessing of our God, however, religion is steadily gaining ground.SPEECHOF THEHOJV. KENSEY JOHNS, JUN.,REPRESENTATIVE FROM DELAWARE,DELIVERED IX THE HOUSE OF Representatives, SITTINGAS liV COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE, ON THE BILL FOR THEREMOVAL OF THE INDIANS, TUESDAY EVENING, MAY 18, 1830.Mr. Chairman: If on this occasion I could discharge theduty I owe the State I have the honor to represent, hy givinga silent vote, I should forbear trespassing upon the time or thepatience of the committee. I had indulged a hoi>e that, in decidingon questions involving consequences of so nuich importance,there would exist a disposition to aftbrd a favorable opportunityfor the exercise of calm and deliberate investigation.But, sir, in this I am disappointed. The anxious impatienceof those who advocate this bill constrains me, at this late hour,and under circumstances thus unfavorable, to engage in thisdebate ; and should I accomplish nothing more by my feebleeffort than to arrest this hasty action, I shall, in part, have attainedmy object. It may be, that, time being gained for deliberation,the principles of justice will be recognised, and allowedtheir appropriate influence.Sir, I have examined, I believe without prejudice, the provisionsof this bill. I have viewed the subject in every light, andfeel anxious to act in a manner calculated to fulfil all our obligations,as well to the several States as the Indian nations,who, in their dependent condition, have appealed to us forprotection, and rest their claim upon the faith of treaties. Iam not insensible to the difficulties and embarrassments withwhich we are surrounded. Georgia holds our bond, and demandsthat the condition be performed ; the Indian nationspoint to our guaranty, and have confidence in the plightedfaith of the republic. Can we, by adopting the course prescribedby the bill as reported, avoid violating admitted rights?Shall we not thereby fail to decide upon that which the Presidenthas presented to our consideration ? Has he not invitedour attention to more than this hill provides for ? Does he not,in express terms, inform us of the difficulties existing betweenthe Indian nations and the southern States, within whosechartered limits they reside ? Has he not fully and decidedlydeclared his opinion in reference to the right of the States toextend their laws over the. Indian tribes? Sir, I am not disposedto imitate the example of the executive ; nor do I feel214 MR. JOHNs's Speech.inclined to pass beyond the limits of our legislative power, andexpress a gratuitous judgment on the acts of particular States-theyhave proceeded upon their own responsibility. It becomesus to guard the national faith, and to be cautious howwe impair the obligations of the most solemn compacts. Wearecalled upon as members of the United States, i ji our hands .is deposited the honor, the faith, and the character, of theAmerican republic. Shall we not be faithful to our trust, andsanction only such measures as will accord with national responsibility? We have hitherto boasted of our scrupulousregard to the principles of humanity and justice. Are we willingto discard their influence, and, in the enjoyment of power,forget right ? Sir, 1 feel conscious the State 1 have the honorto represent would not sustain me in any course which has theappearance of oppression. Her sons have never failed, in thehour of danger, to support the honor of their country, and resistthe oppressor — they cannot ]practise towards others thatto which they have themselves refused submission.Sir, I find it impossible, from the best consideration I havebeen able to give this subject, to yield my support to the bill ;and, with a view to obviate the difficulties which must necessarilyattend this enlarged plan of removal, I have offered theamendment which restrains the operation of the bill, and confinesit to the terms of the contract with Georgia. This, I apprehend,will fully discharge our obligations to that State, preserveinviolate the national faith, and afford ample protectionand security to the Indians.In presenting to the committee the reasons which have inducedme to propose the amendment, I shall endeavor to observeas much brevity as is consistent with a proper regard tothe importance of the subject. It is not my intention to rentersate arguments which have been, in the course of this debate,enforced with much ability. I have no desire either to exciteparty feeling, or strengthen any sectional prejudice, but, as faras in my power, to l>rinf; to bear upon this question, that calm,dispassionate, and unprejudiced deliberation, which becomes"the representatives of freemen ; that our decision may harmonizewith the spirit of our free constitution, and manifest to theworld that we arc worthy of the civil and religions privilegeswe enjoy.Before entering upon a particular explanation of the amendmentI have offered, I would call the attention of the committeeto a few important principles, which have an essential influenceon the question, and come to us recommended by the weightand authority of the highest judicial tribunal of our country.From the decision of the Supreme Court of the United Statesin the case of the Society for propagating the Gospel in foreignParts, we find it is settled that discovery is the original foundationof titles to land in America, as between the differentEuropean nations by whom conquests and settlements weremade. It gave to the nation making the discovery the soleright of acquiring the soil from the natives, and establishing'MR. JOHNs's SPEECH. 215settlements. It was a right with which no Europeans couldinterfere. It was a right which all asserted for themselves,and to the assertion of which by others all assented. The relationswhich were to exist between the discoverer and thenatives were to be regulated by themselves. In the case ofJohnson against M'Intosh, it was decided that, while the differentnations of Europe respected the rights of the natives asoccupants, they asserted the ultimate dominion to be in themselves,and claimed and exercised, as a consequence of thisultimate dominion, a power to grant the soil while yet in thepossession of the natives. These grants have been understoodby all to convey a title to the grantees, subject only to the Indiantitle of occupancy.From these principles, relative to the rights acquired by discovery,we have clearly defined and explained the origin andextent of the pre-empire right. This right of pre-emption,vested in the sovereign, was by the sovereign power alwaysregulated. Hence we observe, in the history of the early settlementof this country, the right to purchase the land from thenatives was derived from the crown, by express and specialgrant; and, after the colonies were established, the extinguishmentof the Indian title was generally effected by treaties,through the agency of the respective governors. These negotiationswere subject to the control of the crown, and conductedin that mode which the sovereign thought proper to prescribe.Thus we find, vvlien, in the year I7(>3, the colonistsviolated this settled policy, the king issued his proclamation,declaring that the crown reserved, under its own dominion andprotection, for the use of the Indians, "all the lands and territorieslying to the westward of the sources of the rivers whichfall into the sea from the west and northwest," and fordable allBritish subjects from making any purchases or settlementswhatever, or taking possession of the reserved lands.I have called the attention of the committee to these mattersas they were understood in time past, that we may correctlycomprehend the nature and extent of the title, as it existedprior to the revolution, and which we claim as derived byvirtue of the treaty of peace of 1783. It appears, antecedentto that event, uniformly to have been considered a sovereignright ; and since that period, the only question has been whetherit was transferred to the United States or passed to the respectiveStates. The Supreme Court has declared that it has neverbeen doubted that either the United States or the several Stateshad a clear title to all the lands within the boundary lines describedin the treaty of peace of 1783, subject only to the Indianright of occupancy, and that the exclusive power to extinguishthat right was vested in that government which mightconstitutionally exercise it. The several States have generallyceded those lands to the United States. They were occupiedby numerous tribes of warlike Indians ; but the exclusive rightof the United States to extinguish their title, and to grant thesoil, has never been doubted.216 MR. JOHNS's SPEECH.I would here remark, that, immediately on the declarationof independence, each colony claimed and exercised all thepowers ol' a sovereign and independent State, and, prior tothe adoption of the articles of confederation, became entitledto the pre-empire right, as it had existed in the crown, in relationto the Indian lands within its chartered limits. If werecur to the history of this period, it appears that the respectiveStates claimed and exercised the treaty-making power in theextinguishment of the Indian title. Thus we observe, fromthe treaty at Dewitt's Corner, on the 20th of May, 1777, theStates of South Carolina and Georgia respectively appointedcommissioners to treat with the Cherokee nation of Indians.In all the circumstances which attended this treaty, we discoverthe same formality which usually attends such transactions.The commissioners on behalf of the States are vestedwith full powers — the deputhes appointed by the Cherokeenation are also vested with the same power, in full council.By this punctilious observance of all the forms essentially connectedwith the exercise of the treaty-making power, the Stateof Georgia, at a time when she was in full possession of allher sovereign powers, recognised the Cherokee nation ; andhas, by the terms of that treaty, acknowledged their sovereignand independent national character. Alter Georgia accededto the articles of confederation, it was considered that thetreaty-making power was necessarily transferred to the UnitedStates, as inseparably connected with, and an essential incidentto, the right of declaring war or making peace. It is truethat, prior to the adoption of the present constitution, doubtswere entertained in relation to its exercise as to Indian tribeswithin the chartered limits of the States ; and Georgia protestedagainst it ; but her protest was disregarded, and treaties weremade and ratified under the articles of confederation with theCherokee and other Indian nations. I am aware of the particularclause in the articles of confederation which gave riseto the doubts, and induced Georgia to protest against the exerciseof the treaty-making power by the United States, in relationto the Indians within her clattered limits. The clause towhich I allude grants " to the United States, in Congress assembled,the sole and exclusive right and power of regulatingthe trade and managing all affairs with the Indians not membersof any of the States; provided that the legislative right ofany State within its own limits be not infringed or violated."Admitting the objections of Georgia to have been well foundedunder the particles of confederation, we cannot avoid theconclusion to which we must come, when, on adverting to theclause in the present constitution granting to Congress thepower to regulate trade with the Indian tribes, wc find it unrestrainedby any qualification, and unconnected with any proviso.This unlimited delegation of power, together with thatpart of the sixth article which declares, that "this constitution,and the laws of the United States which shall be made in pursuancethereof, and all treaties made or which shall be made underMR. JOHNS's SPEECH. 217the authority of the United States, shall be the supreme lawof the land, and the judges in every State shall l)e hound thereby,any thing in the constitution or laws of any State to thecontrary notwithstanding," appears to me to remove all doubt,and establishes beyond all controversy the right of the UnitedSlates. And may I not ask. How can Georgia, after having becomea party to this constitution, object to treaties made andratified according to the express terms of that compact? Is itcompetent for one State to anrud, by her interpretation of theconstitution, a power hitherto exercised, and without disputesGeorgia, sensible of the dithculty, endeavors to evade the obligationof our Indian treaties, by assuming ground which, I apprehend,is not tenable. In support of the new doctrine now advanced,we are told the treaty-making power is confined in itsaction to foreign powers; and, as it is denied that the Indiannations stand in that relation, the advocates of the bill contend,that the Indian treaties are not what they purport to be. Sir, Ishould like to hear from those, who have made this suggestion,an explanation of what constitutes a foreign power. The Indianswould probably answer an argument founded on sostrange a proposition by appealing to the transactions of the past,and ask to be informed how and when their right of self-governmenthad been surrendered ? But, sir, we are not left indoubt or uncertainty as to the relation the Indian nations sustainto the Union, or the States within whose limits they are.I admit, under existing treaties, the Indian nations are dependentsovereignties with regard to the United States ; but I apprehendnone can deny that they now are, and always have been,independent of the States. So far as the general governmentexercises any power over the Indians, the right is derived fromtreaties, and by the same instruments their sovereignty is recognisedand guarantied. Is it because their intercourse with foreignpowers is prohibited, that we refuse to concede their nationsal character.' Reasoning from similar premises, we shouldI conclude that the several States of this Union were not independent in relation to each other, ff we advert to the restrictionupon the powers of the several States, we must admit theyare confined within narrower limits than the Indian tribes.The latter have always enjoyed and exercised, in its idlest extent,the right of self-government; none has questioned theirpower to declare war and make peace; to regulate their owninternal trade ; to enact and administer their own laws, bothcriminal and civil ; and, in every respect, to maintain their nationalrights within the Hmitsof thrown territory. This rightto manage, according to their own will and pleasure, their ownmunicipal concerns, we have always admitted, not in consequenceof any concession on our part, but as derived from theirancestors, and guarantied to them by the faith of treaties. Havingrecognised the right, it does not belong to us to prescribethe peculiar form or mode in which it shall be exercised. It isaot our province to decide whether they shall live under chiefs,or enjoy the advantages of a representative government. The218 MR. JOHNS's SPEECH.particular form cannot effect the existence of the right. Thisis a matter, which is exclusively and appropriately under theirown control. If, then, I am correct in the view I have taken ofthis part of the subject, how can the claim of Georgia to extendher laws over the Cherokee nation be sustained .^ It has beenvery gravely contended, in the course of this debate, that it is aviolation of the sovereignty of Georgia for the Clierokee nationto establish an independent government. Sir, I confess I arn ata loss to appreciate fitly the propriety or justice of the pretensionsnow for the first time advanced by Georgia. Why is theattempt now made to bring under the operation of her laws theIndian nations, when, for so long a period, she has continued toderive benefit from the numerous treaties made with those tribes,and by her conduct sanctioned their validity ?But it has been alleged, against the riglu of the Cherokee nationto continue within the territory they now [possess, that theyhave attenuated to improve their form of government, andthereby indicate a disposition to meliorate their condition.This has been considered, by very high authority, a violationof that clause ol' the constitution which declares, that newStates may be admitted by the Congress into this Union; butno new state shall be formed or erected within the jurisdictionof any other State, nor any State be formed by the junction oftwo or more States, or parts of States, without tale consent of theLegislatures of the States concerned, as well as of the Congress.Now, sir, the Cherokee nation, which has always existedindependent of the State of Georgia, having in some respectsimproved their form of government, in the exercise of a clearand undoubted right, neither derived iron nor in any uninfluencedby the United States, it is said their acting in this manner,if sanctioned, will be a violation of the constitution. Sir,the source from which this opinion emanates, being no less thanthe chief magistrate of these United States, and reiterated by-thesecretary of war, demands for it the most respectful consideration.VVe are often induced to consider certain pro})Osi- jtons sound, because they are advanced by individuals occupy jing situations which add weight and influence to their o])inions.jHad this constitutional question been of less distinguished origin,I should scarcely have considered that it merited refutation.If I do not greatly misapprehend the import of this clause of our Iconstitution, it refers exclusively to the action of Congress, andI am yet to learn when or how we have had any agency orinstrumentality in erecting the Cherokee nation into a State, orby what train of argument an Indian nation, which never haabeen under the jurisdiction of Georgia, by exercising its legitimatepower of self-government, can be charged with violatingthe rights of Georgia. Sir, 1 cation concur in this constructionof the constitution, uidess I concede to those who maintain itthat the Cherokees are within tui jurisdiction of Georgia, nndjnever have been, and are not now, i\i the full enjoyment of sovereigntyand entitled to all the rights and privileges of self-gothernest. But, that I may stand rectus in curia on this impoA)MR. JOHNs's SPEECH. 219tant point — the question of sovereignty — I will refer to an argumentmade by the present secretary of war, when a memberof the Senate, which is not of very ancient date. That I maydo justice to the secretary of war, I will ask the special attentionof the committee, while I read from his speech, deliveredon the thirteenth of February, 1826, in the Senate. The subjectthen under consideration was an appropriation for therepair of post-roads, and particularly of one through the Indianterritory : — ■Mr. Eaton of Tennessee said, a treaty had been entered into, in1801, between the United States and the Choctaw Indians. The questionof State rights had not then arisen, and the government of thiscountry was in the hands of Mr. Jefferson. Under such an administrationsno attempt' would have been made to enter into a treaty with a distinctsovereignty, that went to invade the principles of the constitution.By the second article of that treaty, the Indians gave their consent that awagon road should be con instructed through their lands ; and if the ideawas a correct one, that to make such a road was unconstitutional, was itnot strange that the Senate should not have conceived this idea in 1801,or, if they did conceive it, that they should have acted as they did ? MrEaton said, a road had been made from the State of Georgia to the Stateof Tennessee, which was at present the main highway between these 'two States. Ever since this government had existed, Mr. E. said, theyhad proceeded oo the principle that the Indians are a distinct sovereignty.It was an anomaly that one sovereignty should exist withinthe orbit of another; but they always had proceeded on this principle;and if they had any right to interfere with them, why did they proceedwith them in- the character of sovereignties ? If there was any forcein the objection urged by the gentleman from Georgia, at least so farback as 1801, something would have been thought about it in the Senatewhen they entered into this treaty with the Indians, by the secondarticle of which, privilege is granted to the United States to open a roadthrough their country. Mr. Eaton contended, there was no cessionof property, ors the part of these Indians, by the provisions of this treatythere was not even a cession of sovereignty. They, in their sovereigncapacity as Indians, yielded their consent to the United States to open aroad. The United States could not give the State of Mississippi anysovereignty over it."Such were the sentiments of the present secretary of war,in the year 1826. What new light has been shed upon the subject,which could operate so great a change in his views sincethat period, it is not for me to explain.I would ask the indulgence of the committee, while I directtheir attention to a few extracts from a speech delivered by Mr.Reid, a senator from Mississippi, on the subject of our Indianrelations, the 20th of March, 1826. I refer to it as expressingthe sentiments of an individual, in reference to the State he represented,and who had every opportunity of being well acquaintedwith the true state of public opinion on this subject : —Mr Reid said, the resolution which he was about to offer to theSenate involved some principles in which several of the States of thisUnion had a joint and something like an equal concern. It related tothe Indians, and to the light in which they were to be viewed by thisgovernment. It was well known, Mr. R. said, that there were sev-320 MR. JOHNs's SPEECH.era States of the Union, a great portion of whose territory is in the occupancyof the aboriginal inhabitants ; and he presumed it was aheadknown to the Senate, that more than half the States Mississippi, whichhe had the honor in part to represent, is still in the occupation of theIndian tribes — the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations. In regard to theaction of the State laws on these people, there never had been any difficulty; nor was it ever sought, on the part of the State of Mississippi,to extend its jurisdiction over them ; but there were evils, growing outof their situation in this territory, which required the consideration ofgovernment. Mr. R. said, he did not mean to call the attention of theSenate to the actual condition of these people, who inhabit the territorywithin the limits of a State ; his object was to call the serious considerationof the Senate to the condition of our own citizens, who, afterhaving committed crimes or contracted debts, locate themselves amongstthese Indians, and consider themselves as beyond the jurisdiction of ourlaws. This was a state of things, which, Mr. R. said, the Senatewould easily perceive, was not to be endured ; and if there was anythingwithin the competency of the Senate to remedy the evil, it wastime it should be done. These persons are exempted from the jurisdictionof the laws of the Union, and cannot be reached by the laws of theState of Mississippi. It had occurred to him, therefore, that it was aduty incumbent upon him to call this matter to the consideration of thecompetent authority of the United States. He repeated, it was notsought, on the part of the State of Mississippi, or by her senators inthis House, to enforce the action of the laws on the Indians themselves; they did not claim to consider them as subject to their operation.The Indian tribes have laws and traditionary usages of their own, andare entitled to the patronage and protection of the general government.And Mr. R. observed, the Indian rights are sufficiently secured, andthey themselves are protected, in the enjoyment of the lands on whichthey are located."There was, Mr. R. said, another question involved in this matter,which he was very anxious to bring before the consideration of theproper authority of the Union. How far it is within the competencyof the State to extend the action of its own laws, without the aid of theUnited States, to persons thus circumstanced, is a question somewhatnovel, and has never been decided. At the last session of the legislatureof Mississippi, a proposition was made to extend the civil powerof their courts to their own citizens who had contracted debts withinthe State, and had fled to this savage sanctuary. The matter was debatedfor many days, and it was at last decided that tht re existed no powerin the State to extend the action of its laws in the manner which wassought by the proposition before the legislature. Mr. R. said his ownopinion on this point was, that it Is in the power of the State to actwithin its own territorial limits, so far as to serve its own civil process,and the action of its laws, on citizens who may have contracted obligations.The State decided otherwise, and said it was a matter for thegeneral government; therefore, if there was any remedy on this subjectto be obtained, it was to be at the hands of the general government,and not by force of any competent authority in the State government."I have adverted to what has heretofore been said, because Iapprehend nothing lias since occurred to vary the rights of therespective parties. The sovereignty of the Indians was not onlyadmitted, but considered unquestionable by the present secretaryof war; and from what was stated by the former senatorfrom Mississippi, that State, after many days' debate, decidedMR. Joins's SPEECH. 221against the right of State jurisdiction. The committee willtherefore perceive, that, in objecting to the constructions Presidenthas given that clause of the constitution, vvliich refers fothe admission of new States, I am supported by respectableauthority. If, then, I am warranted in saying, that the Indiantribes are entitled to be considered and treated as sovereign nations,and that it is not within the competency of the States toextend their laws over them, may I not ask upon what principleswe can sustain the bill as reported Surely we are notwilling to rely on force, at the expense of right and justice. 1cannot permit myself to believe that the representatives oftwelve millions of freemen will sanction a measure fraught withoppression, and which must inevitably bring disgrace uj)ou, ourcountry. I admit the bill does not indicate that force is to beapplied. But if we withhold protection, disregard our treatystipulations, and leave the Indian nations to the operation of the'laws of Georgia, Mississippi, and Alabama, this appropriationwill come in aid of oppression ; and, although we profess to leavethe Indians free to act, none caa doubt they must yield, and,however unwilling, be constrained to leave their homes, andtheir country, and escape to the wilderness.Thechairmai] of the committee on Indian affairs has endeavoredto sustain, the principles of this bill, as according with thepolicy of all former administrations, and particularly recommendedby Mr. Jefferson ; as further sanctioned by every feelingof humanity, and calculated to improve the condition, and promotethe future prosperity of the Indian tribes. In support ofhis argument, he has referred to what Mr. Jefferson alleged as anargument in favor of the purchase of Louisiana. It occurred toJim, as a reason why we should possess the valley of the Mississippi,and the range of country west, that, in addition to otheradvantages, it would afford a retreat for the Indian tribes, atsome future period. But none can believe he ever would haveadvocated a removal of the Indians of the character of.tliat nowcontemplated, especially when we regard the sentiments containedin his letter to general Moultrie. He thei-e declares hisdetermination to execute our treaties with the Indian tribes in.good faith, and, if necessary, he would use the force of the nationfor their protection. 11^ Sir, we ten-Ti our attention to thpolicy of former administrations, we shall discover nothing tosanction this bill. General Washington adopted the principlesand practice of the early settlers and colonial governors and, ashas been stated by an able writer on this subject,"Mr. Jefferson was a member of his Cabinet, and doubtless intimatelyconversant with these fundamental measures. The live firstPresidents of the United States made treaties with the Cherokees, allresting on the same acknowledged principles. Mr. Jefferson, the thirdPresident, having pursued the policy of general Washington on thissubject with more undeviating zeal than on any other subject whatever— being about to retire from the chief magistracy — and standingmidway between the era of 1789 and the present year, wrote a fatherlyletter to the Cherokees, giving them his last political advice. This19*222 MR. JOHNs's SPEECH.letter is preserved by them in their archives. A negotiation is heldwith then* on their own soil, or, as the title has it, ' within the Cherokeenation,' under the direction of the fifth President of the UnitedStates. The letter of Mr. Jefferson is produced and incorporated intoa treaty. It is therefore adopted by the people of our land, and approvedas among our national muniments erected for the defence of ourweak neighbors. What adds to the singularity of the transaction is,that this letter, reaching backward and forward through five administrations,is adopted in the fifth by a negotiator, who is now the seventhPresident of the United States; thus bringing all the weight of personalcharacter and political consistency to support as plain stipulationsas can be found in the English language or any other"*Sir, toils letter of Mr. Jefferson, thus adopted and sanctioned,speaks a language not to be misunderstood. It declares theUnited States will always regard both brandies of the Cherokeenation as their children. It says that all " the individualsof the Cherokee nation have a right to their country ; and, there ,fore, if a part of the nation surrenders to the United States itsright to lands east of the Mississippi, it must receive from theUnited States a right to lands west of that river. It says thatthose Cherokees who choose to remove, may emigrate withthe good wishes and assistance of the United States, and thatthose who remain may be assured — (yes, in the words of Mr.Jefferson, adopted by general Jackson) may be assured of ourpatronage, our aid, and our good neighborhood." Sir, I apprehend,after reading this letter, no doubt can exist in relation tothe sentiments of Mr. Jefterson, or the policy of former administrations.During that period, it may truly be said, those Indiannations enjoyed ail their rights and privileges unmolested ;they then sat under their own vine and their own fig-tree, Findthere was none to make them afraid. They relied with confidenceon our national faith, " because no President of the UnitedStates had broken faith with Indians."Sir, I feel confident lio preceding administration has evercountenanced or sanctioned the right of legislation now assumedby the States; or ever dreamed of robbing the Indians of theirrights. That was reserved to mark the era of this administration; and, in the eloquent language of Pitt, avIio, in the day ofour adversity, boldly and fearlessly asserted our rights in theBritish Parliament, when the advocates of power claimed theright to oppress our forefathers in their weak and dependentcondition, I may with propriety add, "With the enemy at theirback, with our bayonets at their breasts, in the day of their distress,]perhaps the Indians will submit to the imposition, but itwill be taking an unjust and ungenerous advantage"'Such was the sentiment expressed by a British statesman inour behalf, when the government was appealed to, as authorizingthe oppressive exercise of power against right ; and am Inot warranted in applying it to the present condition of the Indiantribes, especially those over whom the States assume theSee Letters of William Penn, No. XII.MU. JOHNs's SPEECH. 223right to extend their laws ? And, Sir, is not the parallel morestriking, when we call to mind the measure proposed by the individual,who holds the station of superintendent of Indian afFau-s?Has he not recommended, in his communication to the President,which has been laid before us, to ]place near those Indian tribesan imposing military force, which would overawe the chiefs, andenable the inferior class to enrol as emigrants, by protecting themagainst the influence of those who exercise authority over them ?From the information communicated by the executive, extraordinarymeans have been adopted, and no effort left untried, to inducethe Indians to emigrate. Secret agents have been speciallyinstructed, and attempts have been made to operate on the redman in the line of his prejudices. Has not every attempt provedunsuccessful ; and, notwithstanding the means which have beenresorted to, have we not, in the inetriorials on our tables, enough tosatisfy us that no impression has been made ?I would now briefly examine the humanity of this project.The extensive operation of this bill, embracing the number andinvolving the fate of not less than seventy thousand Indians, is ofitself enough to create doubt and excite anxiety as to the consequenceslikely to result from its adoption. It may be that the absenceof all information, as to the manner in which the removalof so great a multitude is to be conducted, and an entire ignoranceof the nature or peculiar adaptation of the country designed fortheir occupation to afford the necessary means of subsistence,preclude my forming a satisfactory opinion. But, when calledupon to sanction so important a measure, supposing Ave have theright, we certainly should have, from the best source, accurate information,that we might be able to exercise intelligent legislation.Sir, I apprehend the execution of the measure contemplated bythe bill, will afford, by sad and meltuiclioly experience, an amountof suffering and distress, which, could we now realize it, wouldmake us shudder, and recoil from this ruinous and disgracefulproject. Truly, it may be said, we are about to take a step in thedark — and who can assign any good reason why, at present, weshoidd thus eagerly embrace this visionary system ? The advocatesof the bill have attempted to sustain it, as I have alreadystated, on principles of himianitj'^, and endeavored to enforce theirarguments by portraying the present condition of the Indiantribes as degraded, and exhibiting the extreme of wretchedness.I regret that it should have been considered necessary to connectwith tijis description remarks tending to impugn the motives ofthose, who have been instrumental in advancing the cause of civilization,and extending the influence of moral and religious principles.thir, I did suppose, if any unkind feeling existed towardsthese great and good men, whose names and characters would dohonor to any age and country, their ])ectd!ar respectability, andunquestioned and disinterested philanthropy, would have shieldedthem from an attack such as we have heard in this debate, denouncingthen* as hypocrites, fanatics, and zealots. Surely, when suchepithets are thus applied, we, who entertain far different opinionsof those benevolent individuals, who have hitherto acted in union224 MR. JOHNs's SPEECH.with former administrations, and as the faithful almoners of thepublic charity and bounty of the government, cannot avoid repellingthe charge, and entering our solemn protest against the unfoundedasper-sion. Sir, I should have thought it enough, afterall their toil and labor, when they were about to realize the accomplishmentof that object so desirable to every friend, of humanity,and rejoice in the melioration of the savage, that theyshould have to witness the destruction of their best hopes, andsubmit to the inexorable mandate which consigns the Indian backagain to the habits of the hunter, and the wild and uncultivatedregion of the wilderness. And is this the condition favorable toIndian civilization and reform ? Surely we are determined to reject,not only the practice of tanner times, but all past experience.Civilization is the result of restriction and necessity ; and, if Imistake not, man more readily casts off than yields to its influence.Sir, if I could control the measure now under discussion,I should be unwilling to disturb those tenants of former times,or countenance, in the slightest degree, diis novel mode of Indiancivilization.But, sir, from the peculiar relation in which the United Statesis placed in regard to Georgia, I feel willing to comply with theterms of that contract, and for this purpose have submitted anamendment which provides the means, but at the same time prohibitstheir application, unless the object can be obtained peaceablyand on reasonable terms.I shall, after having thus detained the committee much longerthan I intended, endeavor to confine the few additional remarksI have to submit within as concise a statement as practicable.And, ui the first ]place, I would ask the attention of the committee,for a few moments, to the unjust and unequal operation of thebill, in ref hence to the obligations and relation of thee UnitedStates to the respective States, within whose limits the Indiantribes are situated. The bill, without making any distinction as tothe mode or manner in which the expense of extinguishing theIndian title is to be defrayed, embraces all the Indians Tvith whomwe have treaties, and requires the title to be extinguished, and theconsideration to be paid out of the treasury of the United States.Now, sir, we stand in a very different relation in respect to ourobligations to Gt borgia, and to Alabama, Mississippi, and Tennessee.In the former, we are bound to extinguish the Indian title,and to defray the expense thereof, when it can be done peaceablyand on reasonable tents : jn the latter, we are under no obligationwhatever. In Alabama and Mississippi,, the reversionary interest,when the Iiidimi title is extinguished, belongs to the UnitedStates ; aud I cannot understand either the propriety or necessityof increasing the qutuitity of vacant land in those States, when ■there is already more surveyed, and in the market, than can besold for many years, probably in half a century. I cannot bemistaken ; because, on refining to the official statements, I observe,in mississippi, the amount of sales, after deducting landsreverted and relinquished, is 1,155,562 acres, when the quantitysurveyed amounts to 8,733,928 acres ; the quantity purchased byMR. JOHNs's SPEECH. 225the United States being 14,188,454 acres, the quantity of land unsoldthe first of January, 1826, was 11,643,275 acres. In Alabama,the quantity purchased by the United States is 24,482,159 ;the amount sold, deducting lands reverted and relinquished, is3,496,369 acres ; the quantity of land surveyed is 22,602,754 -acres, and the quantity of land unsold is 20,268,863 acres.But, sir, if we advert to the aggregate amount of land, to whichthe Indian title has been extinguished, and which is now in ourpower to bring into the market, the inexpediency of expending thepublic treasure to enlarge the quantity, must be apparent to everyone.Sir, the quantity of land in the several States and territories,to which the Indian title has been extinguished, amounts to261,695,427 acres; the amount sold, from the 4th of July, 1776,to 31st December, 1825, deducting lands reverted and relinquished,was 19,239,412; the quantity surveyed, 138,988,224; and thebalance remaining unsold being 213,591,960 acres, on the 1st ofJanuary, 1826. Sir, I cannot comprehend why we are now urgedto remove the Indians from land they occupy in the new States,when it is manifest we have already more vacant land than wecan find people to settle and cultivate ; and more than we candispose of, by sale, for a century to come. Sir, if we adopt thebill, and remove the Indians, we gain no advantage by the result,but rather impair the value of the public domain, and increasethe difficulty and expense of their protection and support, in theremote country where it is proposed to send them. With respectto the Indian tide to land in Tennessee, as the United States hasrelinquished the reversionary interest to that State, I cannot consentthat the expense of extinguishing it should be defrayed outof the treasury of the Union. Such has not been the practice inrelation to the old States, and I can see no good reason why itshould be adopted in favor of Tennessee.From the best consideration I have been able to give this subject,it appears to me there is no claim upon the United States exceptthat which arises from the contract with Georgia in 1802.And, in reference to that, our undertaking is conditional : it is notabsolute. The amendment I have proposed does all we can dotowards its execution, and, if adopted, will relieve us from muchdifficulty. Sir, I fear the consequences that must result frompassing the Iiill. The magnitude of the undertaking, and the enormousexpenditure it must occasion, present it as a doubtful, andthere certainty do exist strong reasons to apprehend it mustprove a dangerous and ruinous experiment. The chairman ofthe committee on Indian affairs has formed his estimate of theexpense on premises which must prove illusory. He has presenteda calculation based on the present low ]price of provisionsin that country ; but when seventy or eighty thousand Indiansare removed there, I should anticipate a very different result. Wemay, if we are not Wind to the occurrences of the last war, deriveimportant information from the difficulty then experienced in affordingsubsistence to but a small force on our frontiers. I cannotconcur in the accuracy of the estimate, which has been madeby the gentleman from Tennessee, when he uniforms us the averseMR. JOHNs's SPEECH.age cost per head will not exceed eight dollars. If we advert tothe expense incurred in the removals which have been made, theamount expended considerably exceeds that sum. I would directthe attention of the committee to the inebriation communicatedin answer to a resolution of the House, which passed some timesince. We there have it stated, that Nearly's party of Indians,in 1827 and 1828, cost the government for their removal upwardsof $40 per head ; that the expense of supporting them one yearwas $24 22 per head. Now, sir, we must add to this the sumrequired to extinguish the Indian title, and $30 to each amortor presents ; as also the funds necessary to ]pay Indian agentsand those who conduct the emigrants. Should the terms of thebill be complied with, and all the Indians v/ith whom we havetreaties be removed, the number cannot be less than eighty thousand.All circumstances considered, if we jay a fair compensationfor the Indian improvements, the sum which must necessarilybe expended cannot be reduced below eighteen millions, andprobably will amount to twenty. Now, sir, how aj-e we to receivean equivalent for this extravagant expenditure of the publictreasure ? The chairman of the committee on Indian aftliii-s hastold us the United States will be remunerated by acquiring atleast thirty-eight millions acres of land, a large portion of whichhe has represented as valuable. Sir, I admit that, in Alabama,Mississippi, and Indiana, on the extinguishment of the Indian title,the United States will be entitled to the possession ; but inGeorgia and Tennessee, it will be otherwise ; and those Statesalone will derive all the benefit, the latter contrary to aLl forraei-practice, without incurring any expense. Sir, front the quantityof land now in the market and remaining unsold, I am inclinedto believe, by increasing the amount we shall depreciate thevalue.Now, sir, the amendment I have proposed will obviate manyobjections, which, in reference to the bill, appear to be well founded.If adopted, it will satisfy Georgia. We are not only willing,but prepared, to comply with the terms of the contract of 1802.It will place under the control of the executive, as a specific appropriation,the necei^saiT funds, to be applied, when practicable,in discharge of our obligations to Georgia, and in accordance withthe letter and spirit of her own agreement — when the same canbe executed peaceably and on reasonable terms. By restrictingthe bill, as I apprehend it should be, we shall avoid violating thefaith of treaties, and ]present the subject in a manner calculated toobtain for it a favorable consideration. We shall, further, holdout stronger inducements to the Indians to repose confidence, asthe prospect of success will be greater, and there will exist lessdoubt as to our ability to afford subsistence and protection.Sir, the advocates of this extensive and general system of removingthe Indians, appear to me to hazlitt all, by attempting toaccomplish more than is now either expedient or necessary. TheITiagultude and expense of the plan contemplated by the bill mustarrest and ultimately defeat its execution, The people whom werepresent will not sustain the measure ; it cannot, when fully uu-MR. JOHNs's SPEECH. 227understood, meet with their approbation or receive their sanction.The immense drain upon the treasury of the nation will attractattention, and induce all to examine and consider the subject ;and, if I have formed a just estimate of the moral feeling of theAmerican people, when the sufferings and distress of the Indiansshall have filled the measure of their wrongs, and, front the inhospitableand sterile wilderness to which we are about to consignthem, shall cry aloud for vengeance, and proclaim to the civilizedworld the ingratitude and disgrace of the nation thus acting in violationof the most solemn treaty stipulations, and regardless ofevery principle of humanity — then, if not till then, will awake theindignant feeling of freemen, jealous of their country's honor.But we cannot then repair the injury, nor blot from our escutcheonthe indelible stain.Sir, it becomes us to pause and deliberate in the most solemnmanner, before we adopt this bill. Why this impatient, hasty action,in a matter involving the fate of thousands of our fellow beings,and the character and recitation of our highly favored andrespected republic ? May I not say more ? — will not our decisionhave an important influence ou the cause of liberty throughoutthe world ? To us much has been given, and of us much will berequired : our station is as conspicuous as it is elevated. Thefriends of liberty regard us with an anxious,, and the opponentswith a jealous eye. To us our ancestors have confided a sacreddeposit, an inheritance wordy of their name, and endeared to usby the recollection that it was the purchase, of their blood and sufferings,when they struggled against oppression. Are we elmssoon prepared to forfeit our birthright, and sacrifice all thatshould be dear to freemen ? Has our prosperity corrupted ourfeelings, and inclined us, in the enjoyment of power, to forget theprinciples of justice, and trample upon the rights of the weak anddependent? I)o3S the doctrine of force now prevail, and, becausewe are strong, shall we embrace principles that would disgraceeven despotism ?Sir, I have endeavored, on this important question, to suggestthat which to me appears calculated to discharge fully and fairlyour obligations to all parties, and avoids even the appearance ofintention to violate the national faith. This violated, how canwe answer for our disregard of obligations, which have such peculiarstrength and influence ; equally binding upon nations aa individuals,and in their preservation affording the surest and bestfoundation for the support of our free and republican institutions.All nations acknowledge, without exception, the respect due tothe law of good faith ; and, as was justly remarked by one of ourablest statesmen, on a former occasion, " It is observed by barbarians; a whiff of tobacco smoke, or a string of beads, gives notmerely a binding force, but a sanctity to treaties. Even in Algiers,a truce may be bought for money ; but, when ratified, evenAlgiers is too wise or too just to disown and annul its obligation.Thus we see, neither the ignorance of savages, nor the principlesof an association for piracy and rapine, permit a nation to despiseits engagements. If, sir, there could be a resurrection from the228 MR. JOHNs's SPEECH.foot of the gallows — if the victims of justice could live again, collecttogether, and form a society, they would, however loath, soonfind themselves obliged to make justice, that justice under whichthey fell, the fundamental law of their state. They would perceiveit was their interest to make others respect, and they wouldsoon pay some respect themselves, to the obligations of good faith.It is {)ainfid, I hope it is superfluous, to make even the supposition,that America should furnish the occasion of this opprobrium.No ! Let me not even imagine that a republican government,sprung, as our own is, from a people enlightened and uncorrupted— a government whose origin is right, and whose daily disciplineis duty — can, upon a solemn debate, make its option to befaithless ; can dare to act what despots dare not avow ; what ourown example evinces that the States of Barbary are unsuspectedof." Sir, I cannot believe the American ]people have degenerated,since the time when Ames thus, in the strong and eloquent languageI have quoted, enforced the obligation of national faith.Enjoying, as we do, in a peculiar manner, the rich blessings of diepurest republican government, and boasting of our civil and religiousprivileges, we cannot etoo}) so love, nor consent to sacrificethat wiiicli alone, by its universal influence, guaranties to us securityas individuals and as a nation. It" we should in an evil hoursully tliB lustre of the American name, and destroy the last hopeof liberty, I woidd rather share with the Cherokee the fate thatawaits him, than encounter the infamy and disgrace which mustbe our portion. Sir, I cannot yield my assent, nor can I believethe American people are so lost to all moral feeling, as to sanctiona policy tints dangerous in its consequences, and tending to violatethe rights of others. Sir, I yet indite the hope that He,whose kingdom ruleth over all, will, as in time past, dispel thedark cloud which hangs in lowering aspect over our political horizon.He alone can restrain the wrath of man, and bring orderout of confusion. To his hand would I confide the issue, and,having discharged my duty to my country and the State I havethe honor to represent, await that decision which I trust will proclaimto the world, in strong and emphatic language — " that westill hold these truths to be self-evident ; that all men are createdequal ; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienablerights ; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuitof happiness: that to secure these rights, governments are institutedamong men, deriving their just showers from the consent ofthe governed." If we are true to the sentiments expressed in thismemorable declaration, which we justly prize as the charter ofour liberties, the Indian nations are safe, and they may continueto repose confidence in the plighted faith of the republic.SPEECHOF THEHON. ISAAC C. BATES,REPRESENTATIVE FROM MASSACHUSETTS,DELIVERED IN THE House OF REPRESENTATIVES, ON THEBILL FOR THE REMOVAL OF THE INDIANS, WEDNESDAY,MAT 19, 1830.Mr. Speaker : I shall take it for granted that the States vv^hichhave passed laws subjecting the Indian tribes to their jurisdiction,mean what, by their legislative acts, they say they mean ; and thatthe laws, which they have passed, are to be enforced. I rejecteven the supposition, that these laws are made not to be executed,but in mockery — to be used as an expedient, a contrivance —the means of driving a bargain. Upon such an attempt, comefrom what quarter it may — States or individuals — the House wouldfrown indignantly. This granted, I affirm, that the bill before usdoes not meet the exigency of the case, nor present fairly and fullythe question upon which we are to decide.There are, at the south, several tribes of Indians — the Cherokees,Creeks, Chickasaws, and Choctaws — with whom the UnitedStates stand in diis relation, viz. They are unfler the protectionof the United States. The boundary is defined between themand the people of the United States, which no white man is atliberty to pass without a license under the authority of the UnitedStates. In short, they hold the guaranty of the United States, inall the solemn forms of a treaty stipulation, by which the faith ofa nation can be pledged, to protect and defend them. The Statesof Georgia, Mississippi, and Alabama, have passed laws, as thesetribes say, direct violating their territorial and national rights.take the law of Georgia as an exemplification of the laws of theThree States. The eighth section makes it penal for a Cherokeeto " endeavor" to prevent one of his tribe from emigrating. Afather, therefore, may not influence his child, nor a guardian hisward. No, Sir ; he thus exposes himself to four years confinementto hai-d labor. What will men, who are fathers, or not fathers ;what will men who are free, say to this ?The fifteenth section enacts, " that no Indian, oi descendant otan Indian, within the Cherokee nation of Indians, shall be a competentwitness in any court of Georgia, in a suit in which a whiteman is a daily, unless such white man resides within said nation."While Georgia makes the Indians citizens, or subjects, she doesnot leave them to the common law to be excluded for infamy,interest, or incompetency of any kind ; but she proscribes the naw230 MR. BATEs's SPEECH.tion — and that wtliout reference to-the character, talent, or capacityof individuals, whether Christian or heathen, civilized orsavage. They are all turned ois the stand by one general sweepinginterdict of law. Now, Sir, whatever ny be the form of theconstitution of Georgia, if it sanctions this act, it is a despotism.Tiberius never dictated an act in its essence more tyrannical, orinits character more unjust And to take away the only apologythat any man could offer — the incapacity of die people to testify —this very law admits their capacity, Ijy admitting them to bewitnesses if the party to the suit be resident within the Cherokeenation. But this is not the worst feature of the law, if worsecan be.By the seventh section, "all laws, ci-finances, orders, and regulationsof any kind whatever, made by the Cherokee Indians, inany way whatever, are declared to be null and void as if the samehad never existed ;" thus resolving the nation into its originalelements ; making as if it had never been all that combines andforms then into states, nations or tribes ; dissolving all ties butthose of nature. i^Ir. Speaker, I beg the House to realize themeasure, the extent and scope of this unrivalled, outrageous actof usurped dominion. Bring it home. Let it be said to you — tothe United States of America — that "all your laws, ordinances,orders and regulations, shall be null, as if they bad never existed !"Let it be said by a nation that was weak when you were strong ,that had grown up by your side ; that had increased while youhad decreased ! I^et a nation say it tJiat had lived by your permission; that had pledged itself for your protection and dti'ence !Does it change the ctise to change the name ? Has the Cherokeeno attachment to the simple forms of government lie has maturedand improved ? to the customs and regulations of his fathers? Does he not feel ? Is he not a man ?In this condition of things, the Indians applied to the Presidenttold them, as he tells us in his message, " That if they remainwithin the limits of the United States, they must be subject to dielaws ; that they will be protected in their possessions which theyhave improved, but that it seemed to him absurd and visionary tosuppose their claims can be allowed to tracts of country merelybecause they have seen them from the mountain, or passed themin the chase." And thus the subject is presents d to Congress,both by the President and the Indians, for consideration. Thesympathies of the public having become interested, — for, Sir, natureis the ally of the weak against the eti-ong — numerous memorialscame in from every part of the United States, and the wholesubject is referred to your committee upon Indian affairs. Thatcommittee report a spill malting an appropriation of five hundred tthousand dollars, to begin xoith, for the removal of the Indians tothe west of the Mississippi. The chiefs say, that is no answer totheir inquiry. They desire to know whether they must submitto the laws of Georgia ? and to such laws ? whether she has aright to abrogate their government and dissolve their nation ?The President has told them they must, but has refined the sub* !jeeit to us. They tell us they cannot decide the question of re^'iMR. BATES's SPEECH. 231moral, until they know their rights where they are. And notonly the Indian chiefs, but the American people, expect us to answer.Here is money for your rer)ioval, we say. This is the onlyanswer we deign to give them. Well, say they, if you will nottell us directly what our rights are, will you allow us to remindyou of your duties ? Will you defend our boundai-y,and protectus where we arc, as you agreed to do ? The President has saidhe will not. They urge upon the consideration of Congress theimpossibility of deciding what they will do, until they know whattheir condition is to be where they are — whether they must submitto such a law or not — whether they will be protected or not —whether they are to retain tht^r lands, or whether Georgia, whohas not even " seen them from the mountain, nor passed them inthe chase," is to have them. Sir, they produce to yoii your treatywith them. Is this your signature and seal ? Is this yom promise ?Will you keep it ? If you will not, will you give us back thelands we let you have for it ? The President answers. No ; andthe Confi;i'es5 of the United States answers, Here is money for yourremoval. V/e dare not, in the face of the American people, directlyaffirm the answer of the President ; and, therefore, we evadethe question, and hope to hide oui-selves in the folds of this bill,when the scrutiny shall he made for us. Sir, who so blind as notto see that, by Implication, direct and inevitable, you affirm thedecision of the President, by giving him the means to carry thatdecision into effect .'' You decide that the Indians are the citizensof Georgia, subject to her jurisdiction, and that you will not defendtheir boundary, nor protect them. This you decide obliquely,at a time when the crisis in the affairs of the Indian nations,and in the affairs of your own honor, too, requires that you shouldspeak out. You co-operate with Georgia — you give effect to herlaws — you put the Indians aside, and trample your treaties withthem in the dust. And it will be in vain you tell the world youdid not set fire to the city, when you saw it burning, and wouldnot put it out, though you were its hired patrol and watch.In passing this bill, therefore, the House decide that the Indiansare the citizens of Georgia, subject to the jurisdiction of Georgia;and that we cannot interfere to protect them. Now, Sir, I denyit all. I affirm the contrary'. I maintain that the Indians are notthe citizens of Georgia, nor subject to the jurisdiction of Georgia;but that they are sovereign ; that we are pledged to [protect themin the enjoyment of their sovereignty ; and that Georgia has noright that stands in the way of it. Sir, the great mien, who havegone before us in this business, were not so uninstructed in theirduties as to be thus put in the v.'rong by those who now have theadministration of affairs.I shall not go with the gentleman from Tennessee (Mi. Bell) tothe other side of the Mississippi, either for the purpose of ascertainingwhether the trees can be made to grow tor the use of theemigrant Indians, where none ever grew before, or whether theemigrants themselves will form a convenient barrier between ourown settlements and the tribes of Indians west of them ; or, if convenient,whether they may not have an objection to becoming :.\MR. BATES S SPEECH.breast-work to be eliot at, or shot through, for our accoiiinioda-tion ; or, in a region Adhere there are now frequent victims tofamine, whether an addition of such a promiscuous and wild populationwill not be likely to augment the evil. No, Sir ; for if tJiisbill pass, your faith is gone, your honor violated, and there isnothing left worth a wise man's thought.I take the liberty to enter my protest against the appeal that hasbeen made to party feeling in this discussion. If that is to be invokedand enlisted, the destiny of these nations is feed. It is aspirit that has no heart, no sympathy, no relenting. Truth maypour her radiance upon its vision, and it sees not. Distress mayutter her cry, and it hears not. Often has it stained the scaffoldwith the blood of the innocent. Nor is the sectarian influencethat has been called-in aid of this measure by the honorable gentlemanfrom Georgia (Mr. Lumpkin) less to be deprecated. For,although, at this age of the work, it is not seen actually plantingthe stake and lighting the fires, yet it is akin to the persecutionsof a former age. And it would be as much in place, in the highcourt of law at the other end of the capitol, to appeal to the sectarianand ]early feelings of the judges as a correct rule of decision,as to make the appeal to honorable gentlemen here. Sir,this is not a (question upon the life or Puberty of an individual, butupon the fate of nations. How then can any man, in such a case,and in such an assembly, dare to make the appeal, and hope to beforgiven ! What a reflection upon the integrity and the honor ofthis House ! Sir, it is not a party question. No man can makeit such, until he can quench the last spark of honor in the breast,and stop the current of feeling in the heart, and put out the lightof truth in the mind, and stifle the voice of conscience in the soul.Sir, it is our right to decide this question, it is our duty to decideit, upon principle — a right in trust for our constituents and countiesand a duty imposed union us by relations which we cannotchange, and from Vi which vet; cannot escape, coming down uponus Irom above, and springing up before us from beneath, andflowing in from all around us. Let this question, therefore, bodecided upon a full and broad survey of its merits, and its meritsonly.My positions are, that the Cherokees are not the tenants ofGeorgia, nor subject to her jurisdiction ; but that they are thesole proprietors of the territory they occupy, whether as huntinggrounds or otherwise, and are sovereign ; and that the UnitedStates are pledged to defend their boundary, and to protectthem in all their rights and privileges as a nation.I sujiposc it will be admitted, that the Cherokees are a distinctclass of Ujcn from the Georgians, that they were once.sovereign, and that the presumption is they are sovereign still.The onus probandi, as the profession say, is therefore uponGeorgia. If she claims the right of dictating law to this nation,once sovereign, it is for her to show whence she derived it.With this view of the subject, I propose to go back to thorigin of the State of Georgia, and briefly to trace her historyto the revolution, to see what her rights then were in relationMR. bates' S SPEECH. 233to the Indians, as admitted and established by compact. Thiswill preclude the necessity of inquiring as to natural rights.In 1732, Georgia was a ]cart of South Carolina. And in orderto erect a barrier against the Jndiaiis and Spaniards in Florida,upon the frontier of South Carolina, George II., by patent,created a corporation, styled the "Trustees for establishingthe Colony of Georgia in America," to hold for his use all theland between the Atlantic and the South Sea, as it was thentermed, within the degrees of latitude and the boundariestherein given. No individual was to hold more than fiftyacres. The command of the militia was given to the governorof South Carolina. In this ]patent, nothing is said of the Indians.In 1752, it was surrendered. Oglethorpe, who was the activeagent of the corporation, in 1733 arrived hi Georgia with a hundredand fourteen emigrants, men, women and children, andselected the site of Savannah, as the most eligible place for alodgment, where he erected a fort. The Upper and LowerCreeks were then twenty-five thousand strong. In order to geta title to some land, he employed a female of the half blood, thewife of a traveler, to whom he made liberal presents, and gave asalary of a hundred pounds a year. She assembled fifty Indian-chiefs,and prepared them to accede to Oglethorpe's propositionsa treats They ceded, with some reservations, ail the land tothe head of tide-water, within the limits of the patent. Thattreaty admits that the Indians owned the land, and were sovereign.They were treated with as "the headmen of the Creeknation ;" and the land, in express terms, is said to be theirs."Although this land belongs to us," the Creeks say, yet, inconsiderationthe Georgians have come for the good of outwives and children, and " to teach us what is straight," we makethe cession. At Coweta, in 17.39, another treaty, preceded bylarge presents, was made, in which the boundaries of the firstcession were more particularly defined ; and the trustees declare,"that the English shall not enlarge or take any otherlands except those granted by the Creek nation." In 1762, atMobile, at a convention of Indian nations, captain Stuart, theIndian agent, told them, " that the boundaries of their hunting-groundsshould 1k3 accurately fixed, and no settlement permittedupon them," assuring them "that all ti-bathes would be faithfullykept." And at a meeting at Augusta, in 1763, to which captainStewart's " talk" was preliminary, a further cession of land wasmade by the Creeks and Cherokees iji payment of the debts theyhad contracted. The govemoi-s of the four southern States werepresent. As showing clearly how this subject was viewed by themin 1767, we find the Indians complaining to the governor of Georgiaof encroachments upon their lands ; and they ask him " howit could be expected of them to govern their young warrioi*s,if hecould not restrain the white people ?" In 1773, they cede anothertract of land ; and it was then agreed, " that the bounds fixed bythat treaty should be the mark of division between his majesty'ssubjects and the said Indian nations."20*234 MR. BATEs's SPEECH.This Indian boundary limited the territory of the colonistson the west. Within this they had a right to dictate l,avv ; beyondthis they had no right to do it. If they, or the king, theirmaster, had such right, then the Indians were bound to submit.A I'ight implies a duty. Now, who will pretend, that if theking had passed a law abrogating their customs, and makingthem amenable to the courts of Georgia, the Indians would nothave had a right to resist ? If the Cherokees were subject tothe jurisdiction of Georgia, then, prior to the treaty of 1763, theIndians beyond the Rocky Mountains were, (for the charterextended to the Pacific Ocean,) some of whom had never heardof the English nation or king. Vv'ho will pretend that he hada right to subject them to his laws ? He might have had thepower to conquer them, but he had no right to do it. Thiswould have been a right to rob and murder.The Indian boundary is sometimes called the "line of ordinaryjurisdiction," implying an extraordinary jurisdiction beyondit. What was that ? By the right of discovery, settled by compactamong the discovering nations, and since confirmed entreatieswith most of the Indians themselves, the king of GreatBritain had the sole and exclusive right of purchasing of theIndian nations their title to the land lying in that part ofAmerica, wliichhad been assigned to hint. Vv'e call it the rightof pre-emption. Tic whole of his extraordinary jurisdictionconsisted of the right to defend and protect that right of preemption.The king never attempted or claimed any thingmore. I affirm, therefore, that, with this exception, the Indianboundary was the boundary of the jurisdiction of both kingand colony. I affirm, further, that the Indian nations werethe sole and absolute owners of the land which they had notceded, and which lay west of the Indian boundary, subjectonly to this restriction upon their right of alienation. Accordinglythe king, in his proclamation of 1763, disclaims an' otherright to it. He says, "it is but just and reasonable, and essentialto our interest, &:c., that the tribes of Indians who liveunder oiu- ]protection" (as they now live under the protectionof the United States) "should not be disturbed in their possessions,which, not having been purchased by us or ceded to us,are reserved to them : we do, therefore, declare that no governoror commander shall survey or grant them, and that theyare reserved to the Indians." The king does not rest the rightof the Indian nations to these lands upon concessions, gift,grant, indulgence, or expediency, but upon the broad and solidbasis of the "justice and reasonableness" of their unalienatedtitle ; a due regard tor which principles will be found alwaysto comport with a wise policy.Before I pass from this period, as the whites commonly speakfor the Indians, it is but right, when we can, to let them speakfor themselves. I refer to the negotiation at Lancaster, in1744. The governor of Maryland claimed some of their landby possession. Canasateego replied — " When you intentionedthe affair of the land yesterday, you went back to old times,MR. BATES's SPEECH. 235and told us you lead had the province of ]\Iar3'land above onehundred years. But what are a hundred years in comparisonof the length of time since our claim began — since we cameout of the ground .^ For we must tell you that, long before onehundred years, our ancestors came out of this ground, and theirchildren have remained here ever since. You came out of theground beyond the seas ; but here you must allow us to be yourelder brothers, and the lands to belong to us long before youknew any thing of them."To Virginia, who claimed some of their lands by conquest,another chief answered — " Though great things are well rememberedby us, we do not remember that we were ever conqueredby the great king, or that we have been employed byhim to conquer others, if it was so, it is beyond our memory'.We do remember we were employed by Maryland to conquerthe Conostogas; and the second time we were at war withthem, we carried them all wolf."The House will perceive what the views of these people wereof their right to their land, and what their notions were of possessionand conquest. I think it clear, therefore, that beforethe revolution, the Cherokees were not the citizens of Georgia,nor subject to the jurisdiction of Georgia, nor tenants at thewill of Georgia.When the troubles with Great britain came on, Congressimmediately assumed the direction of the Indian relations, asof nations distinct from the States, and independent of them.After a short session for other purposes, in tlse autumn of 1774,Congress met in May, 1775, and in June a coujujittee was appointedto make an appeal to the Indian nations. Tj^ey wereaddressed thus, by order of Congress :"Brothers and friends ; this is a family quarrel between usand Old England. Indians are not concerned in it."In the same month, the Indian tribes were arranged intothree departments ; and commissioners were appointed to treatwith them " in behalf of the United States, to preserve peacewith them, and prevent their taking part in the commotions ofthe titncs."In January, 177G, rules for Indian intercourse were established,interdicting all " trade with the!vi without a licence."In 1777, another "talk-seas ndch-essed to them, affirmingthat they omit to take no ]part in the war between the UnitedStates and Great Britain, and stating also, that, although theCherokees lead been prevailed upon to strike us, they had seentheir error, had i-cpented, and we had forgiven them, and renewedour ancient covenant chain with them."In 1778, a treaty with the Delaware nation was couched atFort Pitt. The parties to it were " The United States of NorthAmerica and the Delaware nation." It stipulates : That thereshall be peace ; and that the troops of the United States maypass " through the counties of the Delaware nation," upon payingthe full value of the supplies they may have. It further236 MR. BATEs's SPEECH.provides, that, " Whereas the enemies of the United States haveendeavored, by every artifice, to possess the Indians with anopinion that it is our design to extirpate them, and take possessionof their country — to obviate such false suggestions, theUnited States guaranty to said nation of Delawares, and theirheirs, ail their territorial rights, in the fullest and most amplemanner, as bounded by former treaties ;" and they further providefor a confederacy of tribes, of which the Delaware nationwas to be the head, and to have a representative in Congress.Here is recognition enough of the rights of Indians. And,to put an end to the false suggestion, which none but an enemycould make, assurance is given, by treaty, binding upon thewhole country, that their territorial rights shall be defended, inthe fullest and most amj)Ie manner, as antecedently defined.Now, Sir, let it be recollected, that, during this period, all theStales, by their agents, acting under their authority and withtheir sanction and approbation, adopted these measures. Theymay, therefore, be considered a fair and decisive indication ofwhat was then thought to be our Indian relations. In no respectwere the Indians treated as citizens or subjects, but assovereign tribes or nations, with the power of making peaceor war at pleasure ; much less as tenants at the will of theStates — one, any, or all of them.When the articles of confederation were adopted, in 1778,or finally by all the States, in 1781, " the sole and exclusiveright and power of regulating the trade and maiui!:ing all theaffairs of the Indians, riot members of nn?/ of the States," wasgiven to the United States. In connexion with this clause is aproviso, "that the legislative right of any State within its oivnlimits be not infringed or violated." The argument is, that theCherokees were the citizens of Georgia, and subject to herjurisdiction. From this article it is clear there were Indianswith whom the United States had trade to regulate, and affairsto manage, who were not members of any State. Il' not theCherokees, who were they? The land from the Atlantic to theMississippi!, within, time limits of the United States, was withinthe geographical boundary of some one of the States. Accordingto the position of Georgia, therefore, thei-e were no suchtribes. Rehancc is placed upon the proviso, as controlling theexpress grant ; and if no effect could be given to the proviso,consistent v/ith the grant, there might be something in thesuggestion. IJiit while the "power of entering into treaties andalliances" is given, in the same section there is a proviso,"that the legislative power of the States shall Jiotbe restrainedfrom imposing duties and prohibiting the exportation and importationof goods." These articles were permanent ; and itwas not to be foreseen what these tribes might become. Withthe same viev/, the proviso in relation to them might have beenadopted. Or it might have been (the term Indians being used,and not Indian nations) in order to restrain Congress frominterfering with such of them as were dispersed among theMR. BATES S SPEECH. 5^7inhabitants of the States. Or, again, it might have been to restrainCongress from controlling the laws of the States in relationto the people of these Indian nations, when within the acknowledgediiniits and jurisdiction of the States. Or, finally, it mighthave been out of abundant caution, without any distinctly contemplatedobject. Effect enough can be given to sustain the proviso,without annulling the' power granted. And this grant plainlyproves that there were Indian nations or tribes, wijo were 'notmembers of any of the States ;' and if so, the Clierokct-s do norbelong to Georgia. What Congress understood by this article isclear; for, immediately after the confederation in 1781, it passeda resolve approving of the appointment of commissioners bygeneral Greene to negotiate a treaty with the Cherokee Indians ;and the whole course of its legislation, down to the adoption ofthe Constitution in 1788, shows the same thing.In 1783, the Secretary of War was directed to notify the Indiannations, ' that the United States were disposed to enter into friendlytreaties with the different tribes.' Tiiis was in May, after thepeace. In September, Congress issued a proclamation, prohibitingsettlements 'on lands inhabited and claimed by Indians,without the limits and jurisdiction of any particular State,' andprohibiting the purchase of such lands, without an express ' authorityfrom tlje United States in Congress assembled.' Whatlands were these, ivitkoid the limits, and without the jurisdictiontoo, of any State ? In October, Congress resolved that a conventionshould be holden of the different tribes, for the purposeof receiving them ' into the favor and protection oi" the UnitedStates,' and of establishing ' boundary lines of ]property to dividethe settlements of the citizens from the Indian villages and huntinggrounds.' In 1784, another resolve was passed, to expeditethe holding of treaties; and in 1785, particularly with the Cherokeesand the Indians to the southward of them. This is the resolveunder which the treaties of Hoi)ewell were held. Thecommissioners were appointed for the purpose of making peace ;they went under the pi-election of an armed force ; they wentwith presents. It was a peace we sought, not the Indian nations.After the treaties of Hopewell were concluded with the differenttribes, the Indian departments were reorganized, and another resolvewas passed in 1786, regulating Indian intercourse. No citizenwas to reside among or trade with the Indians, without alicense. And in 1788, upon application of Georgia herself, theCreeks were informed, that if they persisted in refusing to treat"with the United States, an armed force would be called out toprotect the frontier.I do not find a remonstrance, or an objection even, by any ofthe States, to the powers assumed anti exercised by Congress inrelation to the Indian nations, except as to the treaty of Hopewellwith the Cherokees ; and that Congress enforced, notwithstanding,by a proclamation in September, 1788, deeming it a treaty bindingupon the United States, and upon Georgia as one of the UnitedStates.MR. BATES S SPEECH.In this condition of things, the Constitution was adopted ; and,instead of the clause in the articles of confederation, with thelimitation and the proviso, a general, unlimited, unqualified poweris given to Congress, ' to regulate commerce with the Indiantribes,' and as fully and unconditionally as with ' foreign nations,'or ' among the several States.'This article in the Constitution establishes my position, that theIndians were not members of the States, nor subject to their jurisdiction; but were sovereign nations, with whoni the UnitedStates hall a commerce to regulate. If, as affirmed, they weremembers of the State of Georgia — citizens or subjects — dien thegrant of power was to regulate commerce among the severalStates and the members thereof; which is a power never claimednor admitted. Congress deals only with States ; the States withtheir citizens or subjects. Congress, therefore, has the power, inexpress terms, to prescribe all the terms of intercourse betweenthe United States and the Indian tribes, or to interdict it altogether,as the exigency may require, \\} the ssune sense, and to the sameextent, as It has with foreign nations.In 1790, the first Indian intercourse /aii', under the Constitution,was passed, forbidding all trade between the citizens of the UnitedStates and the Indians, except by ]persons duly licensed. Thefifth section provides, that if any citizen of the United States gointo any town belonging to a nation of Indians, and there commita crime, he shall be punished as ii" siiid crime had been committedwithin the jurisdiction of a State. Is not this decisive, that theCherokees are not citizens of Georgia? nor within the jurisdictionof Georgia rThe act of 1796 defines the boundary of the Indian tribes, andmakes it penal ibr any citizen of the United States to pass itwithout a license.Another act was passed in 1799, substantially of the same import.These acts were temporary, and the provisions of them wereembodied in the act of 18C2, which was made permanent. It isnow in fill force, and has been, e\ er since its enactment. Theonly provisions, in either this or the antecedent acts, objected to,were a part of the fifth section of the act of 1790, relating to theforfeiture of lands, and the sixth section, punishing with deaththe murder of an Indian. These ]provisions were, among otherthings, the foundation of a remonstrance to Congress, by Georgia.The objectionable feature of the fifth section was omitted, and thesixth section was retained, in the act of 1802. This act has beenin force, and has been enforced by all die States, as a wise andconstitutional law. Well, Sir, this re-affirms the Indian boundaryas then established and defined by the Indian treaties. It providesthat no person shall pass it, not even the governor of Georgia,much less his bailiffs, without authority from the United States.It forbids all settlements by the whites on the Indian lands, andinvests the army with jwwer to arrest and bring offenders to punishment.It makes void all grants by Indian nations, or individuals,unless sanctioned by Congress ; and it commissions theMR. BATES's SPEECH. 239President to see it faithfully executed. It will be perceived at aglance, that if the ludiajis were the citizens of Georgia, or subjectto her jurisdiction, the whole range of this act is unconstitutional.Congress can make no such internal regulations amongthe inhabitants of a Suite as it contemplates.The act of Georgia itself, " to extend her laws over the territoryin the occuinuicy of the Cherokee Indians," is the most decisiveproof that they were not within her jurisdiction before.The general laws of the State were without limitation. Of theirown force, as soon as passed, they pervaded and covered thewhole extent and circumference of her jurisdiction. And yet aspecial act is now necessary to give them extinct among the Cherokees!Wiry this? Because they were not within her jurisdictionbefore. They were honest laws, and knew that their commissionand power ceased at the Indian boundary, beyond which theyhad no right to go, and beyond which no citizen of Georgia couldgo to execute them. If Congress lias power, under the Constitution,to regulate commerce with foreign nations, to say by whom,and under what restrictions, it may be carried on; to interdict italtogether, even ; it has the right as to the Indian tribes. Andhaving done it, Georgia is bound by it, unless she be above law,and so not subject to law.She is bound also bey treaties, which the United States havemade with the Cherokees. The power to make treaties is inthese words :The President shall have power, by and with the advice andconsent of the Senate, to make treaties, provided tv/o thirds ofthe Senate concur."The effect of treaties is declared in these words :All treaties made, or which shall I)e made under the authorityof the United States, shall be the supreme law of the land, anythingin the constitution or laws of any State to the contrarynotwithstanding."It has been intimated, to get rid of the effect of our Indiantreaties, that they are not treaties. What then is a treaty ? Hamiltonsays, "Treaties are contracts v/ith nations, which have theforce of law, but derive it from the obligations of good fiiith" —"Agreements between a sovereign and sovereign" — another namefor a bargain, but a bargain between those wiio are sovereign.The treaties between the United States and the Cherokees werenegotiated as treaties, and treaties between nations competent tomike treaties. They were ratified as treaties. They were calledtreaties, not only by us, but by the French. Spanish and English,before minime They were admitted to be ti-bathes by Georgia-butwhether treaties or not, is of no importance, because indisputablythey are what was meant and intended by the term asused in the Constitution ; they are the thing that wis to have thepower and force given to it in the Constitution, to controlState laws and State constitutions. How, then, can we say to theIndian nations, that what we called treaties, and ratified as treaties,were not in fact treaties ?240 MR. BATEs's SPEECH.I will call the attention of the House to the treaty of Hopewell,in 1785. This was a treaty in force when the Constitution wasadopted. It was a treaty then " made ;" and " all treaties made, orwhich should he made" &e., were to be the supreme law of thyland. These are the words of the Constitution. Georgia, byadopting the Constitution, agreed, at least, to this treaty. Nor isthere the slightest foundation for the suggestion that she did notintend to athrui this treaty. Let it be recollected that this treatywas not only uniformly called a treaty, known as such, hut of allother treaties, this was most likely to be distinctly in view ; 1st,Because it was a subject of her remonstrance to Congress in1780 ; 2d, Because the boundary to which it related had been amatter of ]perpetual dispute between her and the United States ;and, 3d, Because, when she adopted the Constitution, the proclamationof Congress was then before the people, requiring submissionto this very treaty, and calling upon the army to enforce itagainst the citizens of Georgia. Of all subjects, therefore, whichGeorgia had openly and I'ully in view, this was the most prominent,made so by the important extemporaneous events whichaffected that State individually. But, independent of all this, it isenough that it was then deemed a treaty, and, as such, was madethe supreme law of the land. Now, what is it ?1. It is negotiated by plenipotentiaries's on both sides.2. The United States give peace to the Cherokees, and receivethem into f ivory ami ]protection.3. A uiuuial r storatiou of ]u:soners, &c. is agreed upon.4. The boundary between the Cherokees and the citizens ofthe United States (widim "the United States of America" — thetechnical corporate name of the confederation, excluding the ideathat the hunting grounds lay in Georgia) is stated in these terms,"the boundary allotted, &c. is and shall hv the folk wing," goingon to state it. Now, Sir, what form of wools can auld any thingto the strength of the covenant or guaranty involved in the phrase"is and shall be," and that without limitation as to time ? Theguaranty in the treaty of Ilolston is nothing more thin this. Itbinds the United States, and Georgia with them, and will bindforever, unless the Cherokees choose to remit the obligation.5. The citizens of the United States who had settled, or shouldattempt to settle, westward of the boundary established by thattreaty, are outlawed, and left to the Indians to punish as theyplease. What, then, becomes of the right claimed by Georgia totake possession of this whole country, and annex it to the contiguouscounties of that State ?6. Congress "shall have the sole and exclusive right of regulatingthe trade with the Indians, and managing all their at?aii-s insuch maimer as they shall think proper." This article, which hasbeen the subject of some criticism elsewhere, is in the very wordsof the power given to Congress upon this particular subject, inthe articles of confederation, with this difference, that, instead ofsaying " regulating trade and managing affairs with the Indians,"it makes a wrong collocation of the words, and says, "regulatingtrade with the Indians, and managing all their affairs," the intentMR. BATES's SPEECH. 241obviously being to make the Indians agree that Congress shouldhave the power to regulate the trade of the United States, andmanage the aftairsofihe States, individually, or collectively, orboth, with them. Congress had no power to go luther. Thetreaties at Hopewell with the Clioctaws and Cliickasaws areexpressed in the same terms. They were probably written bygovernor Blount, who attests them, and hence the similarity.The object lor which this power is given to the United Statesis set forth in the same article, viz: "For the benefit and' comfortof the Indians, and for the prevention of injuries and oppressionson the part of the citizens." By what authority then doesGeorgia, in the face of this treaty, abrogate all their laws, usagesand customs, subject them to her laws, and throw their countryopen to the inroads, injuries and oppressions of her owncitizens? And what becomes of the guaranty of boundary, andof the protection the United States promised them ?7. Retaliation is not to be practised on either side, "exceptfor a manifest violation of this treaty ; and then it shall be precededby a demand of justice ; and, if refused, by a declarationof hostilities." This, Sir, looks very uuich like sovereignty.I have said that this treaty was formed, by the adoption ofthe Constitution), as a " treaty made," and it is still iij Ibrce. Toremove all doubt upon this subject:, 1 have only to remark, that,by the treaty of Philadelphia in 1794, at Telhco in 1/98, andagain in IdO.j, and at the Cherokee agency ti 1817, by generalJackson, this treaty of Hopewell is recognised as a treaty in force,and perpetuated. But this is not all. In August, 1790, after theConstitution vt^as adopted, Washington addressed the followingnote to the Senate:"I shall conceive myself bound to execute the powers intrustedto me by the Constitution, to carry into effect and faithfulexecution the treaty of Hopewell, unless it shall be thoughtproper to attempt to arrange a new boundary with the Cherokees,embracing the settlements, and compensating the Cherokeesfor the cessions they shall make on the occasion." Thewhite people had encroached upon the Cherokees contrary tothe treaty ot" liopewell, and the question was whether to expelthem by force, or purchase the laixl they occupied, and so byagreement change the boundary tired by the treaty of Hope-well.He goes on — "Is it the judgment of the Senate, that overturesshall be made to the Cherokees to arrange a new boundary,so as to embrace the settlements made by the white peoplesince the treaty of Hopewell ?" The Senate answer — "Thatthey do advise and consent that the President cause the treatyof Hopewell to be carried into effect according to its terms; orenter into arrangements for a further cession of territory fromthe Cherokees, at his discretion."Hence the House see that this treaty was not only affirmed bythe Constitution, but, during the first Congress under the Constitution,it was recognised as a treaty in force ; and without anychange, except as to the boundary, which has varied with thesubsequent cessions of territory, it still remains a treaty in force242 MR. BATES's SPEECH.It had in it no limitation as to time ; and if it be not now inforce,let the advocates of this bill tell us when, where, and howit was abrogated.The treaty of Houston with the Cherokee nation, of 1791, wasaccordingly negotiated, by which a further cession of land wasobtained, and thereby the necessity of removing the intrudersobviated. A new boundary was established, of course, " and, iuorder to preclude forever all disputes relative to said boundary,the baiae shall be ascertained, sajsthe treaty, and marked plainly."And by the seventh article, "The United States solemnlyguaranty to the Cherokee nation all their lands not hereby ceded."Here the guaranty in the treaty of Hopewell is reiteratedin a more distinct and solemn form ; ibr it will be Ibiind thatWashington, when he asked the advice of the Senate, to whichI have alluded, and in prospect of this identical treaty of Houston,put this question, "Shall the United States stipulate solemnlyto guaranty the new boundary which may be arranged"'And the Senate answer, "That in case a new boundary,other than that in the treaty of Hopewell, be made, the Senatedo advise and consent solemnly to guaranty the same." Sir,treaties cannot be annulled at pleasure. Tit re nay not be goodfaith enough in the ]parties to keep them, Lut their obligationslive. What answer can you give the Cherokee nation whennow called upon to redeem this |)!ef!ge.'* to make good yourguaranty ol"t!iis boundary, and to prevent the partition of theirnation, and the annexation of its parts to Georgia? The Presidenthas told us, " they must submit." This bill tells us «o, andtells the world so. Submit, or remove, is the language. Thistreaty of Houston, the ninth article, further stipulated, "that nocitizen of the United States should go into the Cherokee countrywithout a passport," the barriers of which are all prostrate, andany man may now go at pleasure into it, or over it, unless thisgovernment interpose.Another treaty was concluded at Philadelphia in 1794, andanother at Telling in 1798,' by which the Cherokees cede moreland,and by which the United States, "in consideration of thecession thereby made, say to the Cherokee nation, that theywill continue the guaranty of the remainder of their countryforever, as made and contained in former treaties" — Ho])evvell,Houston, and Philadelphia. This is found in the sixth article ofthe treaty of Telling. In the face of these admissions on ourpart, who will venture to say that the Cherokees are the citizens,the tenants at will, of Georgians or subject to the jurisdictionof Georgia? Who does not see that they were sovereign? the .sole, the admitted proprietors of the "country weguarantied to them forever" — we,the United States of America!The same stipulations as to boundary, settlement, trade, andgenerally as to intercourse, are contained in these treaties, as arecomprised in the law of 180y, and show conclusively, not onlythat the Cherokees are not subject to the jurisdiction of Georgia,lent they interpose the most insurmountable obstacles to anassumption of it by Georgia. And I feel justified in affirming',MR. BATES S SPEECH.that, unless the laws of the United States, and treaties underwhich we hold millions of acres of land — laws and treaties neverquestioned until it became necessary to deny their authorityto sustain this claim — are a dead letter, the sovereignty of theCherokees recognised, and the protection of them guarantied.At this stage in the progress of my remarks, allow me to advertto the origin of the claim on the part of Georgia, with aview to a consideration of the settlement of it in 1802.I have already remarked, that, at the commencement of theRevolution, the Indian boundary in the different States was theboundary of their ordinary jurisdiction, and included the landswhich had been purchased of the Indians, as the aboriginalproprietors of them. In the progress of the war, a questionarose as to the wild lands west of the boundary, and cast of theMississippi. Some of the States, having no particular title tothese lands, being severed from them by other interjacent States,had, nevertheless, a deep interest in this question. An extractfrom the Journal of Congress, in 1783, will show how this matterwas viewed by one side, at least, at that time. It is by wayof recital. "Whereas the territory (of the United States) comprehendsa large extent of country lying without the lines, limits,or acknowledged boundaries of any of the United States, overvifhjch, or any part of which, no State can, or ought to exerciseany sovereign, legislative, or jurisdictional (acuity, the same havingbeen acquired under the confederation, and by the joint andunited efforts of all : And whereas several of the States accededto the confederation under the idea that a country unsettled atthe commencement of this war, claimed by the British crown,if wrested from the common enemy, by the blood and treasureof the thirteen States, should be considered as a common property,"therefore. Resolved, &c. Nothing was done by Congressupon this proposition. Tiie other States, however, ceded theirright to these lands, under certain limitations and reservationsnot material to be stated, to become a common find for the benefitof the United States*' Georgia held on, and claimed as herown, the immense and valuable tract of land lying between theAtlantic and the Mississippi, a part of which now constitutesthe States of Alabama and Mississippi. This was gained by thewar of the revolution, the expense of which was apportionedamong the States according to " the white, black, and mulattopopulation," excluding Indians ; and during the confederation,according to the " value of the land in each State granted orsurveyed for any person," excluding the wild lands. WhileVirginia paid eight hundred thousand dollars, and Massachusettseight hundred and twenty thousand, Georgia paid sixtythousand only.New York ceded in 1781.Virginia, 1784.Massachusetts, 1785.Connecticut, 1786.South Carolina ceded in 1787.North Carolina, 1789.Georgia, 1802.244 MR. BATES's SPEECH.Immediately after the preliminaries of peace, Georgia undertookto fortify her cliiini, and ]passed an act declaring that theboundary of Georgia " toes, and did, and of a right ought to extendto the Mississippi," resting the right to such an extent ofboundary upon her charter, and the articles of confederation.The charter had been given up long before, and therefore no claimcould be sustained under that ; and it is clear the confederationsettled nothing in relation to the title to these lands. Georgia,in her constitution of 1798, after setting forth her boundaryas in the act of 1783, declares that " all the territory without thepresent temporary line, and within the limits aforesaid, (that is,between the Indian boundary and the Mississippi,) is now, andof right, the property of ths tree citizens oi'this State." By thesearticle authority is given to sell to the United States theland lying west of the Chatahooche, and to procure an extinguishmentof Indian claims to the land east of that river. Theboundary of the ordinary jurisdiction of Georgia — "the temporaryline" — is here recognised in her constitution, and the Cherokeecountry as lying without that boundary, as also the right ofthe Cherokees thereto. The purpose of Georgia was to establishin herself the right of pre-emption, as adverse to the rightclaimed by the United States.After twenty years dispute upon this subject, in 1802, commissionersmutually appointed by the United States of the onepart, and Georgia of the other, settled this much agitated andlong disputed subject. Georgia ceded to ;lie United States theland west of the Chatahooche, now Alabama and Mississippi,the United States paying her one million two hundred and fiftythousand dollars, and taking it subject to certain other claims,and among them the Yahoo claim, ibr which we have paidabout live millions. The United States ceded to Georgia theland lying east of said river, or the line of cession, whatever itwas, and west of the Indian boundary, or the boundary of herordinary jurisdiction, and engaged to extinguish the Indiantitle to it "as early as the same could be peaceably obtained onreasonable terms." 'i've words of cession were, " the UnitedStates cede to the State of Georgia whatever c/«m, right ortitle they may have to the jurisdiction or soil of any lands,"describing them. It i.-i an assignment, or release of the rightwhich the United States had to the jurisdiction and the soil.Now, Sir, what was that? Not a right to dictate laws to theCherokees ; not a right to cancel their laws and customs; not aright to invade, cut up, and distribute their country at pleasure.No, Sir; the United States never claimed, nor had, nor exercisedthat right. All publications to the Cherokees by treaties,laws, and long established intercourse, were incompatible withit. Not the federative obligation we were under to protect theCherokees. That was, in no sense, a jurisdiction I'ight, but anobligation, growing out of treaty stipulations — a trust, ]personaland confidential, to lie exercised by the United States, and notassignable nor removable, but by the consent of time Cherokees.Nor was it intended to be " ceded;" for it has been recognisedMR. BATES's SPEECH. 245in ten successive treaties, since the cession, as still existing inthe United States. It was a trust, for assuming which the UnitedStates received an equivalent — for which they were paid.It conferred no favor, but supposed an obligation — one, therefore,that Georgia would not have been willing to receive if the UnitedStates could have transferred it. What was it, then ? Simplyand solely the right of pre-emption. This was all the"claim, right, or title," the United States lead to the ^' soil."And the right to protect that right of pre-emption — to defend it,if need be, in any way in which it might be assailed — was allthe claim, right or title the United States had to "jurisdiction,"And these were ail the United States could, or did assign, or attemptto assign, to (georgia. But this whole country was thensubject to the Indian title, possessed by the Indian nations, wnrferthe government of the Indian laws, such as they were, and fullyand absolutely, with the limitations I have named, and those notat all effecting their sovereignty. In this condition of things theUnited States stipulated with Georgia to extinguish the Indiantitle. When ? When it could be done peaceably — by treaty, notforce — by cession, not usurpation— with the tree consent, notagainst the will of the Cherokees. Here was no stipulation onthe part of the United States, express or implied, to adopt any expedientto hasten the extinguishment of tluiir title, which wouldnot be open, fair and honorable ; not even when it could be donepeaceably," unless on " reasonable terms" — for a fair equivalent— not at all events and hazards ; — not an obligation absolute,hut conditional. And if the Cherokees refuse to sell and toleave their country, the United States are under no obligationsto Georgia, other than to keep up a standing offer of reasonableterms to the Cherokees. This certainly is the case, if we subjectthe compact to any rule of right reason, by v.'hich contractswith individuals are governed. The land was not hers before.The compact is an admission of it. Jt is not to become hersuntil the event hapjjeus that is to make it hers ; and that is theextinguishment of the Indian title. Conformably to this viewboth parties acted, for the twenty-six years next succeeding thecompact. If Georgia be now right, the intercourse law of 1802,which was in force when her compact was made, was a directinvasion of her sovereignty. Did she ask for its repeal ? No,Sir. Her courts enforced it, and have done so ever since. Thetreaties then existing were, also, iq)on her present assumption,an invasion of her sovereignty, interdicting the governor frompassing a line within her own jurisdiction — from entering orleaving the city of Savannah, for example. Did she requirethat they should be modified or annulled ? Not only no stipulationwas made on this subject, when it was under examinationby the commissioners, but no request even. And until verylately, she has acquiesced in them, and in ten other successivetreaties of the same character, made since, taking the fruits ofthem without an intimation to the Indian nations that theywere void, or that they were parting with their land for nothing.Now, Sir, I say this question — this long disputed, and, if you21*2-10 MI!. BATEs's SPEECH.please, vexed question — is settled ; is not open to re-examinationby Georgia. If there be Ibrce in law, or force in treaties,or force in contract, this question is settled, and Georgia isbound and estopped on this sidjject.But, admitting the right of pre-emption to those lands to be inGeorgia, vvitiiout restriction or limitation, by virtue of the compactof 1802, and tliKt she may extinguish the Indian title, let ussee hoc lie may do it under the compact, by which lie claimsthe right to do it. This is supposing hier not bound by the lawsor treaties of the United States, but by the act side alarms andunder which she ( lais.One article ol"that contact was. that the ordinance of 1787,"in all its parts, should extend to the territory contained in theact of cession," except in one particular, not material here to beconsidered. One part of that ordinance of 1787 was, that " the'atmosl good faith should always be observed towards the Indians; their /a?ic/o and properly should never be taken frtiin themvifithout their consent; and iii their properties, rights and liheHi/,they never should be invaded or disturbed, unless in just andLaiifid scars, authorized by Congress; but laws founded in justiceand humanilij shove] ii'om time to time be made, for preventingwrongs being done to them, and for preserving peace andfriendship with them." Another part of the compact vias, that,whenever any new States, that might lie formed out of theaterso ceded, should be admitted into the Union, " it shouldbe Oil an equal footing with the original States, in all respectswhatever." "^This article in the ordinance of 1787, in relation) to the Indians,is declaratory of the rule of justice and [)ohcy to whichall the States are subject, and by which they are to be governed; as the new State's are to come into tUe Union "on e{|ua]terms with the oil States in all respects whatever," entitled tothe same privileges, and subject to the same duties. V/hen,therefore, the old States require of the new "to make laws toprevent wrongs being done to the Indians,— that good i'aith shallalways be observed, that their property, rights and liberty shallnot be invaded," it is an admission that they are under the sameobligations. Indeed, these are such principles of natural justiceas bind all men, whether declared or not. They, at least,are not unconstitutional ]principles. Now, Sir, can any thing bemore clear than that Georgia here admits that the Indians haveland — huw property — have rights — have liberty? that, in theenjoyment of then), they are never' to be invaded nor disturbed ?or, if at all, only in just and lawful wars authorized by Congress? This is what Georgia concedes to, and affirms of the Indianswest of the line of cession — a line that runs through theCherokee nation. This is what she imposes upon the new Statesas a fundamental law of their being, subject to which they comeinto the Union. If true of the natives of Alabama and Mississippi,is it not true also of the natives belonging to the same ?!«-fion on the cast as well as on the «'fs/ side of the line of cession ?of Georgia as well as of Alabama and Mississippi ? Does thisMR. BATES's SPEECH. 247compact make a distinction among the people of the same tribesor between the lands they have seen from the inouii pains oi-passedin the chase, and those they have cultivate*! ? TheCherokees have not only this land, propria, and liberty, andthese lights here spoken of", 'but in these they are never to beinvaded nor disturbed by any State ; never, except in a war declaredhji Congress. How then can Georgia extinguish the Indiantitle, take possession of the Indian lands without theirconsent, uidess she violates her own compact, as well as thelaws and treaties of the United States But has she not disturbedthe Cherokee nation, and invaded their ]property, rightsand liberty ? h^ by an act to make " all the laws, ordinances,orders and regulations of a nation," as if they had never been;if to subject the people of it to alien laws, and, at the sametime, to exclude in any suit the evidence of the laws, usagesand customs upon which their property, rights and liberty allrest as upon their basis, and without which there can be noproperty', or distinction of property, or rights, or liberty, — be notdisturbing and invading their property, rights and liberty, willyou tell me, Sir, what is? If this is not something more thanmaking laws, founded in justice and humanity, to preventwrongs being done to them, what would be ?Mr. Speaker, there is not an act of Georgia, since Oglethorpefirst planted his foot upon trieste of Savannah, when tidy considered; liicre is not a resolve, ordinance or law of Congress ;there is not a treaty of the United States with the Indian tribes,that does not tend to establish the fact, that the Indians are theproprietors of the lands and hunting-grounds they claim, subjectonly to the restriction upon their right of alienation. Youmight have unit the (question to every man in this nation, orchild on the frontier, and he would have told you so, until thelegislation of the States, aided by interest, instructed him otherwise.What then becomes of the tenancy at will — at sufferance,as asserted by Georgia ? Not one act, law or treaty thatdoes not establish the fact that the Cherokees are sovereign.Sir, when were they otherwise In what field were theyconquered ? Produce the proof. But wei-e there something inthe shape of evidence, it would be controlled by a single, undisputed,admitted fact — here is the nation, until tins invasionof it, still sovereign. There is no tradition that has not beenlost in its descent, that it was ever otherwise than sovereign.The pyramids of Egypt, upon their own broad and solid foundations,are not better proof of themselves, than the Cherokee nationis of its sovereignty. Sir, the emblems* of it were sparklingin the sun, lieu the white men, who ;how inhabit Georgia, andail v/ho ever did, were in the loins of their European ancestry;and the bird that bore these emblems aloft in the upper skiesthe region that clouds never darkened — was not more theking of birds, than the Cherokees were the lords of the countryin which they dwelt, acknowledging no supremacy but that ofThe feathers of the eagle.248 MR. BATES's SPEECH.the Great Spirit, and awed by no power but his — absolute,erect and indomitable, as any creatures upon earth the Deityever formed.But it is said the Constitution forbids the " erection of a newState within the jurisdiction of another State," and thereforethe Cherokee government cannot be tolerated. Before I examinedthe subject, 1 was embarrassed by this consideration.But it will be found that this article was drawn with greatcaution and forecast, and for th(; very purpose of saving theselittle sovereignties of the aboriginal inhabitants. In the firstplace, as Jias'been clearly shown in this debate, they are not a"Stowe," within the meaning of the Constitution. In the nextplace, they are not a " new State." They were sovereigntieswhen the Constitution was adopted. Therefore the existenceand toleration of them was then as much a violation of theConstitution as it is now. According to the Georgia doctrine,the government of the United States was then Sound to dowhat it is now fining ; that is, to put an end to the Cherokeenation. In the third place, if a " new Slate," it is not a Stateformed " within the jurisdiction" of Georgia. The Constitutiondoes not say, in the often repeated phrase, within the"chartered limits," or "geographical limits," or "limits" ofGeorgia. No such thing. The Indian boundary is the limitof the jurisdiction of Georgia. The other lines indicate the extentof country to which she claims the right of ]pre-emption,and, by every new purchase, of adding to her territory, andthus extending the limits ol" her jurisdiction.These equivocal terms were rejected, and the word "jurisdiction"was substituted by the framers of the Constitution,extending to the Indian boundary only, and being so consideredby Georgia herself, down to the time of this dispute. Now,I take it upon myself to say, that, after the adoption of theConstitution, there was no ]pretence for alarming that the Cherokeeswere within the jurisdiction of Georgia.What the views of the framers of that instrument were inrelation to these remnants of once mighty nations, I cannotsay. Proliablv they looked forward to the time when theywould melt away or mingle with the current of white trepidation,or pass off in some other form. Certain I am it was nottheir intention that "in their property, rights or liberty theyshould ever be invaded or disturbed." This our ancestors saidin 1787, and placed it on record ; and Georgia said the same in1809. The Cherokee nation is not, therefore, a new State, formedwithin the "jurisdiction" of Georgia.I do not remark upon the improvement made in the Cherokeeform of government; for any man of sense must see thatthat can make no difference. The more perfect the system, thebetter; and the less the trouble from it.It has been said also, that the United States have not extinguishedthe Indian title to the lands in question, as agreed atthe cession. I have already remarked upon the conditions ofMR. BATES's SPEECH. 249the obligation then entered into ; and it is a full answer to thiscomplaint to say, that the United States have extinguished thetitle until the Indians have refused' to cede another acre, andthat they have been always ready and willing, and are nowready to do it, if the Indians will consent to it.Then, again, it is said that the indisposition to sell is the resultof the civilization of the Cherokees, and that that has beenbrought about by the agency of the government. The answerto this is, that the United States were under obligation to dowhat they have done, prior to the compact of 180'2 ; and thiswas known to Georgia, and she tools the stipulation subject tothis obligation, which is distinctly recognised iii her owncompact.Again, it has been urged against some of the treaties quarantinethis country to the Cherokees, that the "just claimsof the State of Georgia were prejudiced" thereby, contrary tothe Constitution. This is jjeaging the question ; for Georgiahas no "just claim" to the Clierokee country, and thereforenone is ]prejudiced. Georgia has no right, constitutional or anyother, that is incompatible with the engagements you havemade to the Indian nations, or that is invaded by any law youhave passed "to prevent wrongs being done to them, or topreserve peace and friendship with them."Sir, you cannot take a step in the argument towards the resultcontended for by the friends of this bill, without blottingout a treaty, or tearing a seal from your bond. I give to thebill the connexion which it has in fact, whatever may be saidto the contrary, with the laws of the States to which it is subsidiary,and with the decision of the President, that the Indiansmust submit or remove. Now, Sir, I say you are bound toprotect them where they are, if they claim it nt your hands;that you violate no right of the States in doing it, anil will violatethe rights of the Indian nations by not doing it; thatwhen the United States, in consideration of the cession of land,made by the Cherokees to this government, guarantied to themthe " remainder of their country forever," you meant somethingby it. Sir, it is in vain to talk Upon this question ; impossiblepatiently to discuss it. If you have honor, it is pledged ; if youhave truth, it is i)le(lged ; if you have faith, it is pledged ; — anation's faith, and truth, and honor! And to whom pledged?To the weak, the defenceless, the dependent. Fidem Jlnglo-rum infadcrc elcgimus, they say to you. Selecting your faithand no other, — you would not have it otherwise, — we reposedour trust an I confidence in you, and you alone. And for whatpledged ? Wherever you often your eyes, you see it, andwherever you i)!ant your foot upon the earth, you stand uponit. And by whom pledged ? By a nation in its youth — a republic,boastful of its liberty ; may it never be added, unmindfulof its honor. Sir, your decision upon this subject is not tobe rolled up in the scroll of your journal, and forgotten. Thetransaction of this day, with the events it will give rise to, willstand out upon the canvass in all future delineations of tU'"250 MR. BATES's SPEECH.quarter of the globe, putting your deeds of glory in the shade.You will see it every where — on the page of history, in theessay of the niorahst, in the tract of the jurist. You will see itill the vision of the poet ; you will feel it in the sting of thesatirist ; you will encounter it hi the indignant frown of thefriend of liberty and the rights of man, wherever despotismhas not subdued to its dominion the very look. You will meetit upon the stage; you will read it in the novel, and the eyesof your children's children, throughout all generations, willgush with tears as they run over the story, unless the oblivionof another age of darkness should come over the world, andblot out the record and the memory of it. And, Sir, you willmeet it at the bar above. The Clierokees, if they are men,cannot submit to such laws and such degradation. The' mustgo. Urged by such persuasion, they must consent to go. Ifyou will not interfere in their behalf the result is inevitable —the object will be accomplished. Widen the Cherokee takeshis last look of the cabin he has reared — of the field he hascultivated— of the mound that covers the ashes of his fathersfor unknown generations, and of his family and fi lends, andleaves all to be desecrated by the greedy and obtrusive borderer— Sir, I will not venture upon a description of this sceneof a nation's exit and exile. I will only say — I would notencounter the secret, silent prater that should be breathed fromthe heart of one of these sufferers, armed with the energy thatfaith and hope would give it, if there be a God that avengesthe vvror.gs of the injured, for all the land the sun has lookedupon. These children of nature will go to the stake, and bidyou strike without the motion of a muscle ; but if they can bearthis ; if they have reduced whatever there is of earth aboutthem, to such a subjection to the spirit within, as to bear this,we are the men to go into the wilderness, and leave them hereas our betters.Mr. Speaker, there are many collateral arguments, bearingupon the main point of this discussion, that I intended to haveurged, and many directly in my way, that I have passed over,and most of them I have but touched. But, full of interest asthis question is, I dare not venture longer upon the patienceof the IJouse. At this age of the world, and in view of whatthe original possessors of this continent have been, and whatwe were, and of what they have become, and we are ; anythingbut the deep) and lasting infamy — to say nothing of theappalling guilt — of a breach of faith with the Indian tribes. Ifthe great men who have gone before us were so improvident,as to involve the United States in contradictory and incompatibleobligations, a breach of faith with all the world besides,rather than with these our confiding neighbors. If we mustbe made to blush, let it be before our equals. Let there be atleast dignity in our humiliation, and — something besides unmixedselfishness, and domineering cowardice, in the act thatproduces it.A SKETCH OF THEREMARKSOF THEHoe DAVID CROCKETT,representative FROM TENNESSEE,ON THE BILL FOR THE REMOVAL OF THE INDIANS, MADE IN THEHOUSE OF Representatives, WEDNESDAY, MAY 19, 1830.Mr. Crockett said], that, considering his very humble abilities,it might be expected tJKit he should content himself with a silentvote ; but, situated as lie was, in relation to his colleagues, he feltit to be a duty to himself to e,xj)iain the motives which governedhim in the vote ho should give on this bii!. Gentlemen hadalready discussed the treaty-making [power ; and had done itmuch more ably than he coidd pretend to do. He should nottherefore enter on that subject, but would merely make an explanationas to the reasons of his vote. He did not know whether aman* within 500 miles of his residence would give a similarvote ; but he kn<!W, at the same tim ;, that he should give that votewith a clear conscience. He had his constituents to sstde with,he was aware ; and should like to ]please them as well as othergentlemen ; but he had also a settlement to make at the bar of hisGod ; and what his conscience dictated to be just and right hewould do, be the co sequences what they might. Hj believedthat the people who had been kind enough to give liii their suffrages,supposed him to be an honest man, or they would nothave chosen him. If so, they could not but expect that he shouldact in the way he thought honest and right. He had alwaysviewed the native In iran tribes of this country as a sovereignpeople. He believed they had been recognised as such from thevery foundation of this government, and the Un'tad States werebound by treaty to protect them ; it was their duty to do so. Andas to giving the money of the American people for the purposeof removing them in the manner proposed, he would not do it.He would do that only for which he could answer to his God.Whether he could answer it before the people was comparativelyNothing, though it was a great satisfaction to hint to have the approbationof his constituents.Thai is, a member of Congress.252 MR. Crockett's speech.Mr. C. said he had sei-vet for seven years in a legislative body.But troiii the first hour lie had entered a legislative hall, he hadnever known what party was in legislation ; and God horrid heever should. He went lor-the good of the country, and lor thatonly. What he did as a legislator, he did conscientiously. He shouldlove to go with his colleagues, and with the West and the Southgenerally, if he could ; but he never wouki let party govern himin a (question of this great consequence.He lead many objections to the bill — some of them of a Aeryserious character. Oni3 was, that lie did not like to jmt half amillion of nioujy into the bauds of the Executive, to be used in amanner which nobody could foresee, and which Congress was notto control. Another objection was, he did not wish to departfrom the rule which hail been observed towards the Indian nationsfrom the foundation of the government. He considered thepresent application as the last alternative for these jioor remnantsof a once powerful people. Their only chance of aid was at thehands of Congress. Should his ineiiibers turn a deaf ear to then-cries,misery must he their fate. That was his candid opinion.Mr. C. said be Wits often forcibly reminded oi the remark madeby the i'lnuons Ra Jacket, in die rotunda of this buikhng, whenhe was shown die channel which represented hi sculpture die firstlanding of the Pilgrims, with an Indian chief presenting to theman eai- of corn, in token of friendly welcome. The aged Indiansaid " that was good." The Indian said, he knew that they camefrom the Great Spirit, and he was willing to share the soil withhis brothers from over the great water. But vvhCn he turnedround to another channel representing Ff nn's tn aiy, he said "Ahall's gone now." There was a great deal of truth in this shortsaying ; and tlie-^u-esent bill was a strong commentary upon it.Mr. C. said that lour counties of his district bordered on theChickasaw country. He knew many of their tribe ; and nothingshould ever induce him to vote to drive them west of the Mississippi.He ibid not know Avhat sort of a country it was in whichthey were to be seitl. d. He Avould willingly appropriate moneyin order to send proper ]persons to examine the country. Andwhen this had been done, and a fair ami free treaty had beenmade with the tribes, if they were desirous of removing, he wouldvote an appropriation of any sum necessary ; but till this had beendone, he v,<)uld not vote one cent. He could not clearly understandthe extent of this bill. It seemed to go to the removal ofall the Indians, iu any State cast of the Mississippi river, in whichthe United Spates owned any land. Now, there was a considerablenumber of them still negK card ; there was a considerable numberof thei iu Tennessee, and the United States' government ownedno laud in that State, north laid east of the congressional reservationline. No man could be more willing to see them removethan he was, if it could be done in a manner agreeable to themselves; but not otherwise. He knew personally that a part of thetribe of the Cherokees were unwilling to go. When the proposalwas made to them, they said, " No : we will take death here atourhomes. Let them come and tomahawk tis here at home : weMR. Crockett's speech. 253are willing to die, but never to remove." He had heard them usethis language. Many different constructions might be put uponthis bill. One of the first things which had set him against thebill, was the letter from the secretary of war to colonel Montgomery— from which it appeared that the Indians had been intrudedupon. Orders had been issued to turn them all off cxcejit theheads of the Indian families, or such as possessed improvements.Government had taken measures to purchase land fi-om the Indianswho had gone to Ai-kansas. If this bill should pass, thesame plan would be earned further ; they would send and buythem out, and put white men upon their land. It had never beenknown that white men and Indians could live together ; and inthis case, the Indians were to have no privileges allowed them,while the white men were to have all. Now, if this was not oppressionwith a vengeance, he did not know what was. It wasthe language of the bill, and of its friends, that the Indians werenot to be driven off against their will. He knew the Indianswere unwilling to go : and therefore he could not consent to placethem in a situation where they would be obliged to go. He couldnot stand that. He knew that he stood alone, having, perhaps,none of his colleagues from his state agreeing in sentiment. , Hecould not help that. He knew that he should return to his homeglad and light in heart, if he voted against the bill. He felt thatit was his wish and purpose to serve his constituents honestly,according to the light of his conscience. The moment he shouldexchange his conscience for mere party views, he hoped his Makerwotdd no longer suffer him to exist. He spoke the truth in sayingso. If he should be the only member of that House who votedagainst the bill, and the only man in the United States who disapprovedit, he would still vote against it ; and it would be matterof rejoicing to him till the day he died, that he had given thevote. He had been told that he should be prostrated ; but if so,he would have the consolation of conscience. He would obeythat power, and gloried in the deed. He cared not for popularity,unless it could be obtained by upright means. He had seen muchto disgust him here ', and he did not wish to represent his fellow-citizens,unless he could be permitted to act conscientiously. Hehad been told that he did not understand English grammar. Thatwas very true. He had never been six months at school in hislife: he had raised himself by the labor of his hands. But he didnot, on that account, yield up his privilege as the representative offreemen on this floor.* Humble as he was, he meant to exercisehis privilege. He had been charged with not representing hisconstituents. If the fact was so, the error (said Mr. C.) is here,(touching his head) not here (laying his hand upon his heart). Henever had possessed wealth or education, but he had ever beenanimated by an independent spirit ; and he trusted to prove it onthe present occasion.Colonel Crockett represents more voters than any member of Congress,except Mr. Duncan of Illinois. The reason is, the great influx of populationsince the State was formed into districts. There were 20,000 voters incolonel Crockett's district more than a year ago. There are probably morethan 22,000 now.Proclamation of the Old Congress.In Congress, Sept. 1, 1788. — " Whereas the United States, in Congressassembled, by their commissioners, duly appointed and authorized,did, on the twenty-eighth day of November, one thousand seven hundredand eighty-five, at Hopewell, on the Keowee, conclude articlesof a treaty with all the Cherokees, and, among other things, stipulatedand engaged, by article fourth, ' that the boundary allotted to the Cherokeestor their hunting grounds, between the said Indians and the citizensof the United States, within the limits of the United States ofAmerica, is and shall be the following, viz :' [The boundaries arehere inserted.] And whereas it has been represented to Congress,that several disorderly persons, settled on the frontiers of North Carolina,in the vicinity of Chota, have, in open violation of the said treaty, madeintrusions upon the said Indian hunting grounds, and committed manyunprovoked outrages upon the said Cherokees, who, by the said treaty,have put themselves under the protection of the United States; whichproceedings are highly injurious and disrespectful to the authority ofthe Union, and it being the firm determination of Congress to protectthe said Cherokees in their rights, according to the true intent andmeaning of the said treaty ; — the United States, in Congress assembled,have therefore thought fit to issue, and they do hereby issue, this theirproclamation, strictly forbidding all such unwarrantable intrusions, andhostile proceedings against the said Cherokees ; and enjoining all thosewho have settled upon the said hunting grounds of the said Cherokees,to depart, with their families and elects, without loss of time, as theyshall answer their disobedience to the injunctions and prohibitions expressedin this resolution at their peril :"Resolved, That the secretary of war be, and he is hereby directed,to have a sufficient number of the troops in the service of the UnitedStates in readiness to march from the Ohio, to the protection of theCherokees, whenever Congress shall direct the same ; and that he takemeasures for obtaining information of the best routes for troops to marchfrom the Ohio to Chota ; and for dispersing among all the white inhabitantssettled upon, or in the vicinity of, the hunting grounds securedto the Cherokees, by the treaty concluded between them and the UnitedStates Nov. 28, 1785, the proclamation of Congress of this date."THE SUBSTANCE OF THESPEECHOF THEHOW. EDWARD EVERETT,REPRESENTATIVE FROM MASSACHUSETTS,DELIVERED IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, ON THEBIIiL FOR THE REMOVAL OF THE INDIANS, WEDNESDAY,MAY 19, 1830.Mr. Speaker : I sensibly feel the disadvantages under whichI rise to address the House. Submissive as I woukl ever be tothe will of a majority of this body, I must express the opinion,that this discussion has been urged forward somewhat tooseverely. It is now Wednesday. The bill was first taken upin committee of the whole on Thursday last. That and thefollowing days were occupied by the worthy cliairiuan of thecommittee on Indian affairs, in his opening exposition of thecase. The hours appropriated to debate, on Saturday, weretaken np by the gentleman from New York, (Mr. Storrs,) onthe other side of the question. Monday wa* consumed by twogentlemen from Georgia, (Messrs Lumpkin and Foster,) insupporting the bill; and the gentleman fioin Connecticut (Mr;Ellsworth) in opposition to it. Yesterday was occupied byseveral gentlemen opposed to the bill ; hurt the able argumentof the gentleman from Delaware (Mr. Johns) was made whenit might as well not have been made; at that hour of the day,or rather of the night, when it is impossible to bring the attention,worn down by a protracted session, to the considerationeven of a subject as important as this. Aflcr a session of morethan twelve hours, last night, the committee of the whole refusedto rise, at the request of more than one gentleman, whoexpressed a wish to address them against the policy now proposed; and when the committee did rise, the bill was reportedto the House. Thus, Sir, of five days given to the discussionof a bill of this vast importance, a little more than two is allthat has been allowed to those, who think that it ought not topass. The bill is now out of committee, and it is not in orderto reply to any thing that has been urged in its favor. Youhave given us less time to discuss this all-important measure,than you devoted to the subject of a draftsman for the House.I cannot think an urgency and a precipitation like this, to b©justifiable on such a subject.MR. EVERETT S SPEECH.It was my original ])iii'()ose to attempt a formal reply to theable argument of the chairman of the committee on Indianaffairs. It is not now in order to do this ; nor at this hour ofthe day, after five hours' attendance in the House, would it bephysically possible for me to make the effort. I shall continuemyself to a more limited vieAV of the subject.But, before I proceed, I will say a word or two on the imputationof mercenary motives against some of those individuals,who, out of this House, have been conspicuous for their endeavorsto enlighten the [public mind on this subject. That imputationhas obtained no small currency elsewhere ; and has, tosay the least, lost no strength, by the terms in which it hasbeen repeated on this floor. It has been more than insinuated,that their pretended zeal in the cause of the Indians, on thescore of humanity and religion, his prompted by the basest mo jlives of selfishness ; and that the annuities of the Cherokeenation have been looked to, and have been disbursed, as thereward of these ]pretended efforts of philanthropy.I will not undertake a general vindication of men, v/hom Ido not know, against a vague charge of this kind, made withoutthe least specification of facts. If there are some, who,from unworthy motives, have affected an interest in this goodcause, it is no more than happens in every other good cause.I know none such ; I defend none such, if they are known toothers. But with respect to the individual most meritoriouslyconspicuous for his efforts in this cause, (Mr. Evarts.) the authorof the essays of William Penn, (so often alluded to on this floor,but which stood in no need of such mention, to give them reputationin the country,) I will say of this gentleman, that he isquite above the reach of that imputation, come it whence itmay. He needs no defence against it. It cannot attach itselfto him, not even as possible to be conceive of. Sir, I will gofurther, and say, that not a shadow of proof has been adduced,that one dollar has been expended by the Indians to procureor to compensate any exertion that has been made on theirbehalf I have no belief that a dollar has been so expendedby them.I say this, because I think it due to truth and fact, and notbecause there would have been any impropriety in such anexpenditure, applied in a ]proper way ; and as is constantlydone, by men who have large interests at stake. So far fromits being improper, had I, when these troubles began, three orfour years ago, been called upon by the Cherokees for my humbleadvice, T would, in lieu of every thing else, have advisedthem to retain the services, at any cost, of the ablest counselin the United States. How can it be expected, that this friendless,unrepresented people, with no voice in our councils, noaccess to our tribunals, no place in our community, should,without aid, plead their own cause effectively, against theStates that surround them, and the general government itself?I am only astonished that they have been able to sustain theircause as they have : and had their whole annuity been appliedMR. Everett's speech. 25Tfor the purpose I have named, it would have been the best usethat they could have made of it. Had this been done, theirfate Would not now be trembling on our decision, coerced underthe previous question, in a midnight session.As I have already .stated, 1 shall not go into the constitutionalargument. It has been most ably treated; and an arrayof authorities set forth, which has not been, and, in my judgment,cannot be shaken. I will, in passing, but add one totheir number, which has not yet been cited in this House, andwhich shows that the principle on which this government hashitherto acted towards the Indians, and which it is now proposedto repudiate, has been incorporated, as far as it was inour power to incorporate it, into the law of nations.In the negotiations at Ghent, the British envoys charged thegovernment of the United States with having reduced the Indiansto the state of subjects, living on sufferance within theirlimits, and threatened thereby with final extinction. Our commissioners(John Quincy Adams, James Bayard, Henry Clay,and Albert Gelatin) repelled this charge, and declared that theUnited States had followed the system practised by the settlersof New England, and William Penn, and commended by thebest writers on natural law ; adding that,Under that system, the Indians residing within the United Statesare so far independent, that (lie live under their own customs, andnot under the laws of the United States; that their rights upon thelands where they inhabit or hunt are secured to them by boundaries,defined in amicable treaties between the United States and themselves;and that whenever those boundaries are varied, it is also byamicable and voluntary treaties, by which they receive from the UnitedStates ample compensation, for every right they have to the landsceded by them."But I pass to a narrower view of the subject. I shall treatthis matter plainly and practically. I shall go into no abstractions;no refinements. I go to the substance. What is thequestion? It is whether, liy passing this bill, we will furnishthe means to carry into effect the policy " prescribed" by theexecutive for the removal of the Indians. Yes, Sir, proscribed;I use the word, but it is not my own. At an early stageof the session, the course iii which this bill furnishes an appropriation,was, by a mrmher of this House friendly to thebill, said to be prescribed by the President. This language, Ibelieve, is novel on this floor. I never heard it, nor heard of itbefore, in any connexion with this House. I was not aware,that there existed an authority on earth, that could prescribeany thing to this House. It struck my ear; but it seemed toexcite no surprise ; it passed as matter of course ; no one protestedagainst it, as an infringement of the privileges of thisHouse. I did, indeed, then almost give up the cause in despairWhat hope could be left, when — organized as parties are, inand out of this House — a measure like this could be said to be"prescribed" by the Executive.'22*\mjMR. EVERETT S SPEECH,What, then, is this prescribed policy ? It is to co-operate withthe States, and particularly with Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi,in removing the Indians. I name these States, for areason that I shall presently state. I omit North Carolina andTennessee, because the provisions of the bill do not apply tothem. In the State of Tennessee, there is a large and valuabletract of land occupied by the Cherokee Indians. Those landslie north and east of the congressional reservation line of theState of Tennessee. The United States have long since cededtheir interest in them to the State of Tennessee; and wheneverthe Indian title to them is extinguished, it will of coursebe, as in similar cases it always has been, at the expense ofthat StatCv For this reason, and to prevent the provisions ofthe bill, as originally drafted, from applying to the States ofNorth Carolina and Tennessee, an amendment was moved bya senator, and adopted as a feature of the bill. The amendmentreferred to is in these words : "within the bounds of anyope or more of the States or territories, where the land claimedand occupied by Indians is owned by the United States, or theUnited States are bound to the State, within which it lies, toextinguish the Indian title thereto." The States of NorthCarolina and Tennessee have, therefore, no interest in the bill.The bill then provides the means for co-operating with theStates of Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi, in removing theIndians within their limits. It is not a substantive measure,ending where it begins, in the legislation of Congress and theaction of the general government. It is a joint policy. Weareto do part, and the States to do part. We are to furnishthe money, and a portion of the machinery. The great principleof motion proceeds from the States. They are to move theIndians. We are to pay the expense of the operation.What is my warrant for such a statement ? I admit, asamply as gentlemen please, that it has long been the policy ofthe general government to remove the Indians from their lands,if their consent could be obtained, in treaties, negotiated withthem, as thus far independent societies. It is a policy we havelong ]pursued, and with a success which, one would think, wouldsatisfy the warmest friend of Indian cessions. We have acquired,east and west of the Mississippi, by treaties, about hvohundred and thirty millions of acres of land. I do not wish tobe understood as condemning this policy. The considerationpaid to the Indians has, I believe, generally been to them a fairequivalent for the value which the land ceded possessed intheir hands. But with the four southern tribes, the policy hadbeen pushed so for, and so rapidly, that they had come to theresolution, that they would cede no more. We tried it witheach tribe; through the agency of the most respectable andskilful commissioners ; by the offer of the largest bribes ; by theforce of the most unwearied importunity. The answer cameat last, in terms from one of them, and in substance from all,"that they would not cede another foot of land."MR. Everett's speech. 259Such, no doubt, was their determination. Whether they couldhave adhered to it or not, is not for me to decide. At any rate, theStates have not been willing to exercise patience, nor leave the eventto the operation of ordinary causes. The United States, havingabandoned for the present the hofje of obtaining by treaty anymoreland from the southern tribes, and it having been determined,in die words of President Monroe, that force was not to bethoughtof; the matter must, under the Constitution and laws ofthe States, for the present, have rested where it stood three yearsago. There is no way known to the Constitution and laws of theUnited States, by which Indian land can be acquired, but conquestin open war, and amicable agreement by treaty.Here then the States step in, with the novel, and, as I regard it,and deem it fully proved in this debate, the unconstitutional andillegal extension of their ordinary civil and criminal jurisdictionover these tribes, accompanied with enactments peculiarly operativeand oppressively binding on them. The Indians (with whomwe have nt-satiated treaties, promising them protection) come andask to be protected against this unheard-of assumption. Theyask us to ward otF the blow aimed at them ; to arrest the strongarm stretched out against them. Tiie President tells them hecannot do it. The executive government reiterates that we cannot,shall not, will not give them this protection ; and the Presidentadvises them to remove wesfv\'arJ.Now, what are these laws ? I will not noW specify their provisions.It is sufficient to say, in the general, that they are such,by all admission, that the Indians cannot live under them. TheIndians say they cannot live under them. The Executive tellsthem they cannot live under them. The States evidently do notexpect that they can or will live under them. The laws were,beyond all (question, not passed with any such design : they arenot so regarded by the Indians, nor i)y ourselves. For the proofof my assertion relative to the character of these laws, I refer tothe message of the President, at the opening of the session ; tothe instructions of the secretary at war to generals Carroll andCoffee ; and to the letters of these two gentlemen to the secretaryIn a letter dated Winchester (Tennessee), '2d September, 1829,governor Carroll writes as follows : " The truth is, they (the Indians)rely, with great confidence, on a favorable report on thepetition they have before Congress. If that is n jccted, and thelaws of the States are enforced, ipu drill have no difficidti/ in procuringan exchange of lands with them."I have seen an authentic account of the proceedings of theChoctaw council, lately convened to consider this subject of emigration.It was a scene, as we are told by the Mississippi papers,that could not be witnessed without tears. After the new chiefhad been installed in office, "he introduced to the council thesubject of a removal in this way : he first stated some of the lawsof Mississippi, and then inquired of them, whether they wouldremain where they were, and submit to these laws, or removeover the Mississippi. He also stated the substance of the last talkto them of the President of the United States. The captains and260 MR. Everett's speech.others i*ose and spoke : the general sentiment was — " We are distressed— we cannot endure the laws of Mississippi — we do notthink our great father loves us — we must go, as he will not helpus while we remain here."If another authority is needed, I will add that of general Coffee,in a letter to the secretary of war, dated Creek Agency, October14, 1829 : " They express a confident hope that Congresswill interpose its power, and prevent the States from extended*their laws over them. Should they be dis-appointed in this, Ihazard little in saying, that the government will haVe little difficultyin removing them west of the Mississippi."If the States enforce the laws, they will be glad enough to go !The States declare they Avill enforce them. The Indians cryto us for protection. We tell them we will not protect them ;and the consequence is, they go.This bill is to appropriate the fluids for. their removal.Such is the bill, of which we are told that there is nothing in itobjectionable, that it contemplates nothing compulsory. Thisis the removal which is said to be voluntary. These are the lawwhich are said to have no connexion with the subject ; into whichwe have been told it is irrelevant and idle to inquire !Nothing to do with the subject ! Take the bill as it is ! Notto presume that Georgia, Alabama, or Mississippi, has passed, orcan pass, any law that affects this question ! Why, it is the verypoint on which the rightfulness of the measure turns. Here hes thegreat objection to the removal, thitt it is compulsory ; an objectionwhich we publish ten thousand copies of the report of the IndianCommittee to obviate ; and which is not touched, I believe, inthat report. The State laws nothing to do with our legislation !Why, they are the very means on which our agents rely to movethe Indians. It is the argument first and last on their tongues.The President uses it ; the Secretary uses it ; the Commissionersuse it. ' The States have passed the laws. You cannot live underthem We cannot, and shall not protect you from them. Weadvise youyasyou would save your dear lives from destruction,to go.'I appeal to the House if I over-state this point.*The question then is, Shall we nerve the arm of this State legislation,which is put forth forcibly to remove the Indians? Thatis the question for us to decide. It is the only question, and wearethe only authority. Tiiis Congress is the only tribunal clothedwith power to decide it. It depends on our vote ; and it dependson nothing else. It is the business of the President to enforce ourlaws, not the laws of the States. He is solemnly sworn, to thebest of his ability, to "preserve, protect, and defend the Constitutionof the United States ;" take care that the laws ice pass areIt was at the close of the debate, slated by Mr. M'Duffie, in moving theprevious question, that Georgia had taken a stand, from which she would notrecede, and that if blood should jioio, it would be on the heads of those whcvopposed the bill.MR. Everett's speech. 261faithfully executed ; and " this Constitution, and the laws of theUnited States made in pursuance thereof, and all treaties, made,,or which shall be made, under the authority of the United States,shall be the supreme lav of the land, and the judges m everyState shall be bound thereby, any thing in the constitution or lawsof any State to the contrary notiuithstanding.''^The President, then, has no power in this matter, but to executethe laws and treaties of the United States. The great question isto be settled by us. We are to protect the Indians from this legislation,or abandon them to it. No other power on earth can do it.Sii", it is force. The President himself authorizes us to calLit force. In his message at. the opening of the session, he says :By persuasion and force, they have been made to retire fromriver to river, and from mountain to mountain." But when wereany means employed to detrude the Indians, better entitled thanthese laws to the name of force ? He does not, probably, refer toopen wars against hostile nations, in which he has been himselfso beneficially for his country, and so much to his own fame, distinguished.No ; I take the message to intend legislative force,moral force, duress, the untiring power of civilized man pushinghis uncivilized neighbor farther ami farther into the woods. Tliis-I take to be the force to which the President alludes. And if thiskind of action, unavoidably incident to the contiguity of the tworaces, be justly called force, how much more so the legislation ofwhich the Indians complain, avowedly instituted to effect theirremoval, and confessedly insupportable in its nature \Sir, it is force. It is because it is force that Our Interference forprotection is invoked. I know it comes in the form of law ; butis not the law force ? Suppose the Indians disobey the laws,(and they are no more bound to obey them than the Mexicansare,) is there no force then ? Are not the sheriff, the constable,the jailer, the executioner, ministers of foi'ce .^ No force ! A lawpassed over my head by a power which I cannot resist, a law intendedto make me fly the country, because I cannot hive under it,and I not forced to go ! There was no force, then, applied againstthe Huguenots, by the revocation of the edict of Nantes. 'I'hey hadonly to adoj^t the Catholic faith ; and dragoons were scut amongthem to assist in their conversion. There was no force < employedby the British government toward the Puritans. They neededonly to conform to the established church, and they would thenbe safe from the visitations of the star chamber. But it was Avellknown that these victims of power could not and would not submit; and history has recorded that they were driven by force fromtheir native land. I do not say that the State laws are as oppressiveas these odious measures of a dark and bigoted age in Europe.I do but take their admitted character, which is such thatthe Indians cannot live under them. The peculiar kind and degreeof the disability imposed by the laws are immaterial, if, inthe general result, they are, as they are admitted to be, intolerable.I say again, then, that legal force is the most efficient and formidablethat can be applied. It is systematic, it is calculated andmeasured to effect its end. The sovereign power sits calmly in'•Z62 MR. Everett's speech.its council chamber, and shapes its measures most effectively tothe desired object. Actual physical force is either tumultuary,as that of the mob, and, of consequence, transitory ; or it is that ofthe military arm of the government, which, from the nature oftidings, is i)ut forth only at a crisis, and to n)eet the exigency ofan occasion. But force embodied in the form of law, a compulsorylegislation, a code beneath which I cannot live, a duresswhich sun-pounds me, and [lui-sues me, whithersoever I travel,wherever I abide ; ever acting by day, ever watchful ley night, coextensivewith the land in which I live ; Sir, I submit to this Congressof reasonable men,tliat it is the most effectual, and the mostappalling form in Which force can be^appUed; the most disheartening.Ail other force awakens a manly courage of resistance.But this deadly influence of an unfriendly legislation; this cold,averted eye of a government which has checks and restraints foryou, but no encouragements nor hopes, which is intended to depress,harass, and prostrate }'ou, beneath which you tell youcannot live, and which drives you as an outcast from your nativeland ; this is the force which every freeman would most deprecate.Sir, I acknowledge my mind has been strangely confounded bythe propositions laid down by the executive government, andthose who support its policy towards the Indians, I am readyto think that they or 1 have lost sight of the ordinary significancyof terms. I had supposed the general idea of the altare ofIv was settled in the common agreement of mankind. Sageswhen they attenijjtcd to describe it in its highest conception, hadtold us, that its seat was the bosom of God, and its voice the harmonyof the world. I had been taught to reverence the law asasort of earthly Providence ; as th great popular sovereign ;the mild dictator, whose province it was to see that not a singlesubject of its sway received harm. With these conceptions, howcan I understand it, when I hear that te Indians claim to be protectedagainst the laws of the States ? Protected against the laws II thought it was the object of the law to protect every good man'from all harm whatever, and even to visit on the bad man onlythe specific ]penalty of his]>rovcn offence. But jirotcetion againstthe law ; protection against the protector ! Sir, 1 cannot understandit ; it is incongruous. It confounds my faculties. Theremust be fatal mischief concealed in so strange a contradiction oflanguage.It has been asked, in a highly respectable quarter, "What has aCherokee to tear from the laws of Georgia ?" Is it necessary formeto answer that (question, and tell what a man has to fear fromlaws under which it is admitted he cannot live ? But I will answerthe question specifically ; and, in the answer I give, I imploregentlemen whose duty it is to vindicate the honor of Georgia,not to imderstaiul me as casting any imputation upon it. Iwill say nothing which the most tender sensibility cat constanceinto an aspersion of her honor, because I mean nothing whichcan be so construed. I will state, then, what a Cherokee has tofear from the laws of Georgia.MR. Everett's speech. 263By the fifteenth section of lier law of 19th December, 1829, itis provided " that no Indian, or descendant of any Indian, residingwithin the Creek or Cherokee nations of Indians, shall bedeemed a competent witness in any court in this State to whicha white person may be a party, except such white person resideswithin the said nation."It would be going out of my way to dwell on the point, yet Icannot but remark, m passing, that this law makes a s angular discrimination,bo.ii as respects the credibility of Indian testimonyand the rights of Georgian citizens, whom it is the presumable intentionof the law to protect against evidence, which cannot, in itsalleged nature, be sufficiently responsible. Georgia has attachedthe different portions of the Cherokee country to her several adjacentcounties, and made them parts of those counties. It is wellknown also, that, in proportion as the Cherokees have been drawnoff by emigration, citizens of Georgia have advanced into thecountry, and numbers of them are now resident there. Againstthese latter, the Cherokee is a competent witness in a court of law.Here, then, we have the singular incongruity that Indian testimonyis good against a Georgian citizen in one part of a county,and not good against him in the other. It is an obvious consequenceof this state of things, that the same Indian, in the samecourt, and on the same day, is and is not a competent witness.This hour, he is, by the law of Georgia, an uncivilized pagan, possessingno i-eligiou nor superstition by which the court can bindhis conscience ; the next hour, he may swear away the life of anyGeorgian resident in the Indian country. Does not this show thatthe law has no foundation in any political or social necessity ?But I return to the question, What h? ; the Cherokee to fearfrom this law of Georgia ? He has this to fear. The citizens of Georgia,I admit, freely and cheer-fully, to be as orderly, virtuous andhumane a people as the citizens of any other State in the Union. Ipresume, however, that in Georgia, as in every other State, thereare individuals, in considerable numbers, who regard the law onlyfor its terrors ; whom justice and honesty do not control, exceptas they are enforced by the law. Such men exist in all theStates ; they keep our courts of criminal jurisdiction constantlyemployed. In my own State, and in perhaps the most orderlycommunity in it, the country has lately seen, with horror and astonishment,that there are men capable of atrocities which wouldshock the brigands of Calabria. Well, then, sir, suppose the Stateof Georgia to contain some such ; they have but to cross the Cherokeeline ; they have but to choose the time and the place, wherethe eye of no white man can rest upon them, and they may bumthe dwelling, waste the farm, plunder the property, assault theperson, murder the children of the Cherokee subject of Georgia,and, though hundreds of the tribe may be looking on, there is notone of them that can be permitted to bear witness against thespoiler. When I am asked, then, what the Cherokee has to fearfrom the law of Georgia, I answer, that,' by that law, he is left atthe mercy of the firebrand and dagger of every unprincipledwretch in the community. Am I told the laws of Georgia are264 MR. Everett's speech.kindly administered towards this people that they have oftenobtained justice in the courts of Georgia.' I do not doubt it; Iknov^^ it, on the best authority. But the law of which 1 speak,is a new law; it has not yet gone into operation, and when ithas gone into operation, let it be administered as mildly as youplease, it cannot admit an Indian's testimony against a white mannot resident in the nation.What has a Choctaw to fear from the laws of Mississippi ? Hehas this to car : The fifth section of one of those laws provides,"that any person or persons who shall assume on him or themselves,and exercise, in any manner whatever, the office ofchief, mango, headman, or other post of power established bythe tribal statures, ordinances, or customs of the said Indians,and not particularly recognised by the laws of this State, shall,on conviction, upon indictment or presentment before a courtof competent jurisdiction, be fined in any sum not exceeding onethousand dollars, and be imprisoned any time not exceedingtwelve months, at the discretion of the court before whom convictionmay bo had."Now, Sir, there is a treaty between the United States and theChoctaw nation, negotiated at Oak's Staid, not ten years ago,-and signed on bt-half of the United States by the present chief'magistrate, and the respectable member (mr. Hinds) from Mississippi.The thirteenth article of that treaty is as follows:"To enable the mangoes, chiefs and headmen of the Choctawnation to raise and oi-organize a corps of light horse, consistingoften in each district, so that good order may be maintained,and that all men, both white and red, may be compelled to paytheir just debts ; it is stipulated and agreed, that the sum of twobundled dollars shall be appropriated by the United States, loreach district amiably, and placed in the hands of the agent, topay the expenses incurred in raising and establishing the saidcorps; which is to act as executive officers, in maintaining goodorder, and compelling bad men to remove from the nation, whoare not authorised to live in it bj' a regular permit of the agent."Now, as I understand the law of Mississippi, any person whoshould presume to act as a chief among the Choctaws, and toexercise the authority given him by this treaty, and i)ut in actionthe force which the United States not only recognise andsanction, but support and pay, would be subject to fine and imprisonment.If they come to the President, and say. Here is thetreaty, and here is your own signature and seal ; the Presidenthas been induced, by his official advisers, to tell then he cannotprotect them, and to prison they must go, and their fine theymust pay, whenever it shall be the interest of any one to dragthem before the courts of Mississippi. Sir, it has been statedto me — I do not vouch for the fact, but so I have been informed —that, since the passage of this law, the whiskey traders havemade their inroads into the Choctaw country ; the chiefs darenot exercise their own strict laws against them, for fear of incurringthe severe penalties above recited : and thus the firstfruit of this State legislation has been to arrest the progress ofMR. Everett's speech. 265the reform which had commenced and made the most extraordinaryprogress among the nation, in that vice to which theyare supposed to have the strongest natural disposition.I have shown, Sir, what an Indian lias to hear lion the lawsof the Slates. I now feel warranted in repeating, that it is theobject of this bill to appropriate a sum of money to co-operate tviththe States in the compulsory removal of the Indians.Notwithstanding all that Lias been said to the contrary, I pronouncethis to be a new policy. We have been told that it isthe established policy of the government; that many successivePresidents have recommended it ; and many successiveCongresses have appropriated funds to can-y it into effect ; andiiiucli surprise is expressed, that low, for the first time, it shouldmeet with opposition. 1 maintain, on the contrary, that it is anew policy; and I challenge the proof that it is not.Sir, 1 do not know that even the voluntary removal of the Indianswas ever regularly considered and adopted by Congress,the only power competent to adopt it. I know that, from timeto time, steps have been taken to effect such a voluntary removalby treaties, and that appropriations have been made tocarry the treaties into effect. This is the most that has beendone by Congress. I am aware that, at the second session ofthe eighteenth Congress, a bill passed the Senate, but was not,I believe, acted on in the House, which made an approachtowards a systematic removal of the Indians ; carefully guarded,however, to be purely voluntary ; and this bill passed at a timebefore the' coercion of State laws was thought of. The provisionsof that bill are widely different from the provisions of thebill before us, and coincide with the judicious amendment tothe latter, which the gentleman from Pennsylvania (mr. Hemp-hill)has already announced the intention of offering, and forwhich I tender him my hearty thanks. The third section ofthe bill which passed the Senate in 1825 providesthe President be, and he is hereby, authorized, by and withthe advice and consent of the Senate, to appoint five commissioners, toreceive a reasonable compensation, who shall, under his instructions,hold treaties with the Osages, the Kanzas, or any other tribe havingjust claims to the country, for a cession of territory westward of theState and territory aforesaid, for the purpose above specified ; and tovisit the Cherokees, Creeks, Choctaws, and Chickasaws, residing inNorth Carolina, Georgia, Tennessee, Alabama, and Mississippi ; theDelawares, Kickapoos, Shawnees, Was, noways, Piankeshaws, Cherokees,and Osages, residing in Missouri and Arkansas; and the Wyan-dots, Shawnees, Senecas, Delawares, Kaskaskias, and the Miami and EelRiver Indians, residing in Ohio, Illinois and Indiana, in order to makeknown to them the views of the government ; and, under the directionsof the President, and with the consent of the Indians, to adopt suchmeasures, and form such arrangements, or to enter into such treaties,as may be deemed proper to effect the same ; and to pledge, in suchmanner as he may direct, the faith of the nation, as he is above authorisedto do ; the said commissioners to act either jointly or separately, ashemay direct."266 MR. Everett's speech.This is the nearest approach that I am aware was ever madeto the enactment, by Congress, of a systematic plan for thevoluntary removal of the Indians; and this, as I have said, waslong before the attempt had ever been made, by the States olGeorgia, Alabama, or Mississippi, to extend their laws over theIndians within their limits. That this pretension is of the mostrecent character, the passages cited by the gentleman fromMaine, (Mr. Evans,) from the speech of the senator from Mississippi,in 1827, abundantly prove — if, indeed, the fact be not toonotorious to require proof.I therefore pronounce, again, the policy of this bill to be whollynovel. Its great distinctive element, the part to be performedby State legislation, is entirely new. It is not three years oldWhen gentlemen tell me this is the ancient policy of the government,let them point out the laws, passed by the States, underwhich it was impossible for the Indians to live, and whichrequired them to remove, in order to escape destruction. Theselaws cannot be pointed out. It is a new policy. The Statelaws are not two years old; and the refusal of the Executive ofthe United States to protect the Indians against them, is but ayear old. On the 11th of last April, the officer at the head ofthe bureau of Indian affairs informs the Cherokee delegation,by direction of the secretary of war, " That the secretary is notnow prepared to decide the question, involved in the act of thelegislature of Georgia, to which you refer, in which ]provision ismade for extending the laws of Georgia over your people afterthe first of June, 1830. It is a question which will doubtless bethesubject of congressional inquiry, and what is proper in regardto it will, no doubt, be ordered by that body."So late, then, as the eleventh of April of the last year, theessential feature of this " ancient policy" had not received thesanction of the present Executive. On the 30th of the May following,(not yet a year,) we learn from the instructions of thedepartment to generals Carroll and Coffee, that " in the right toexercise such jurisdiction," — that of the States over the Indians,"the Executive hilly concurs."It is, in my judgment, much to be regretted, that the Presidentshould have felt himself authorized to decide this question,which, about six weeks before, had been pronounced, by thesecretary of war, to be a matter, in regard to which "no remedyexists, short of one, which Congress alone can supply."On the strength of these documents, I may venture to pronouncethis policy (which has been recommended to us as theancient and established policy of the government) to be thegrowth of the last twelve months.And now. Sir, let us proceed to contemplate it in some of itsdetails. The notion which seems to accompany this plan ofremoval, in both the voluntary and compulsory forms, the notion,I mean, of an Indian State, to be elevated to an equalitywith the political members of this Union, appears to have presenteditself vaguely to the old Congress. In the treaty withMR. EVERETT S SPEECH. X67the Delawares, negotiated in 1778, it is provided as follows, inthe 6th article : —It is further agreed on, between the contracting parties, (should itfor the future be found conducive for the mutual interest of both parties,)to invite any other tribes, who have been friends to the interestsof the United States, to join the present confederation, and to form aState, whereof the Delaware nation shall be the head, and have a representationin Congress." It was also provided, in the treaty ofHopewell, with the Cherokees, in order " that the Indians may have fullconfidence in the justice of the United States respecting their interests,they shall have the right to send a deputy of their choice, wheneverthey see fit, to Congress."It is unnecessary to say that there stipulations were nevercarried into effect. They are properly quoted, as illustratingthe opinions held at that period on the subject of Indian relations.Each of these treaties existed prior to the Constitution,and was recognised by that instrument, and, consequently,by every State which adopted it, as a portion of the law ofthe land, "any thing in the constitution or laws of any State tothe contrary notwithstanding."Wlien Mr. Jefferson acquired Louisiana, he conceived theidea of providing, in the upper part of it, an abode for the Indiantribes. His idea was to remove the Indians by treaty fromthe eastern to the western bank. "The inhabited part of Louisiana,"says he, "from Poiiu Couple to the sea, will, of course,be immediately a territorial government, and soon a State.But above that, the best use we can make of the country, forsome time, will be, to give establishments in it tot-ielndifiBsonthe east side of the Mississippi, in exchange for their presentcountry, and open land offices in the last, and thus make thisacquisition the means of filling up the eastern side, instead ofdrawing off its population. When we shall be full on this side,we may lay off a range of States on the western bank, from thehead to the mouth, and so range after range, advancing compactlyas we multiply."In another letter, written 1st November, 1803, lie uses stillmore-emphatic language: "Spain is afraid of her enemies inMexico ; but not more than we are. Our policy will be to formNew Orleans and the country on both sides of it into a State, and,as to all above that, to transplant our Indians into its constitutingthem a Marechaussie, (a mounted patrol,) to prevent emigrantsfrom crossing the river, until we shall have filled up allthe vacant country on this side. This will secure both Spainand us, as to the mines of Mexico, for half a century."I have more than one object in these citations. An attempthas been made lately, on the strength of a few garbled passagesfrom the Journals of the old Congress, to fix on New Englandthe odious and improbable charge of having refused to protectthe west from the Indians, in order to cripple the growthof that part of the country. We here find that this policy, ifever systematically formed, is to be traced to a quarter remotefrom New England. Mr. Jefferson proposed, in 1803, to colesMR. Everett's speech.let the Indians on the right bank of the Mississippi, for the expressj)iirpose of morning them into an armed guard, to preventthe emigrants from crossing over.It must be admitted that Mr. Jefferson's ]project was crudeenough, although it was free from most of the objectionablefeatures of the measure now proposed, and possessed some positiveadvantages. It contemplated no interference of State legislation,but amicable agreement by treaty, as appears by theact creating the territory of Orleans and the (strict of Louisiana,of the 26tii March, 1804. In that act, we find the followingsection : —The President of die UiHtcd States is hereby authorized to stipulatev/ith any Indian tribes oivni.ig lands on the astride of the Mississippi,and residing thereon, for an exchange of lands, the property of the UnitedStates, on the west side of the Mississippi, in case the said tribesshall remove and settle thereon ; but in such stipulation, the said tribesshall acknowledge themselves to be under the protection of the UnitedStates, and shall agree that they vvill not hold any treaty with anyforeign Power, individual State, or with the individuals of any State orPower; and that they will not sell or dispose of said lands, or any partthereof, to any sovereign Power, except the United States, nor to thesubjects nor citizens of any other sovereign Power, nor to the citizensof the United States." ^We here see that the Congress of 1804 recognised the ownershipof the Indians in the lands they occupy ; and we find notrace of that coercive State legislation, which forms the greatobjection to the present measure. In proving, also, that the3Iisgfs!feippi itself, and not an imaginary line four hundred mileswest of it, should be the boundary of the Indians, and that thereforhalf a century, they should be securely entrenched behindthis mighty barrier, BIr. Jefferson certainly made a vastly betterprovision for their security, than we can now make. Still,however, in tjjc idea of a successive removal of the Indians, asthey should be crowded on by each new range oi States, andin thus associating a place of refuge for the lijdinns, with thegradual extension of our own ]population over the same region,Mr. Jefferson evidently aimed at objects at war with each other,and attempted to promote, at the samelinic, two measureswhich were essentially at variance.Could Mr. Jefferson have executed the first ]part of his plan,it might have been v.ell for the Indians. Unfortunately for itssuccess, the other ]fortiori of the project began instantaneouslyto execute itself. A principle of our political ^v?iem was immediatelydeveloped far moj-e active in its progress, far moretenacious in its hold, than any principle that could;! be appliedto the preservation of the Indians. Our own ])opuiauon rushedover the river; they looked roimd on the broad new regionas their own ; their own they made it ; and, before mr. Jefferson'sIndian Marcchmisste could be organized, to keep off theemigrants, the emigrants were sufficiently numerous to embarrassthe settlement of the Indians. So that, instead of proculing them an asylum for fifty years, those that were sent overMR. EVERETT S SPEECH.were subject to the same pressure of a rapidly increasing whitepopulation, which had borne upon them in the old States.Sir, could it be otherwise? will it be otherwise ? What! areyou indeed going to abandon this region to the Indians? Mr.Jefferson's second range of States ? this fine tract, as you describeit, six hundred and fifty miles long, and two hundredbroad ; the garden of the United States ; a fine soil, wellwatered, rich in coal mines, and capable of being covered withforests; are you going to lock it up, in mortmain, for the Indians? Can we stop the wave of population, that flows towardit? Shall we do it ? We cannot ; we shall not. Preciselythe same process which has gone on in the east, will goonin the west. Tliat onward march, which neither theAllegheny Mountains, nor the Ohio, nor the Mississippi, couldarrest, will not be checked by your meridian lines, nor parchmentpatents. If the land, a.3 you say, is good, it will never bethepolicy of this government to hold the keys of the territory,.and turn off the emigrants, that will claim to enter. A cordonof troops could not do it. Withhold your leave, and they willgo without leave. They will boast themselves your citizens ;they will soon demand a territorial government ; they will nextswell into a sovereign State; will extend their jurisdictionover the Indians, and drive them into Texas.Nor was this the only difficulty in the way. The first stepin this great policy of removal was met by the obvious embarrassment,that the territory west of the Mississippi, towardwhich the removal was to be made, was itself occupied bynumerous, warlike, and powerful tribes of Indians, of a racealien from those whom it was proposed to remove. Previous,then, to removing the Indians from the left bank of the river,it became necessary to remove others from the right bank, tomake way for them. What was to become, what did becomeof those, thus to be* removed from the right bank ?' It wouldrequire time and sources of information not at my commandto trace them into their narrowed limits, and point out particularlytheir fate. But tete nature of things teaches us what itmust have been. Driven into closer bounds, and forced uponneighboring tribes, their removal from the hunting grounds, towhich they had been accustomed, on the right bank of the Mississippi,must have been the source of wars, destructive to allparties in their immediate effect, anil doubly fatal in the interferenceof our arms, VAhich follows ass a necessary consequence.I must pass over the various steps, taken in pursuit of thispolicy of removing the Indian tribes to the west of the Mississippi.*It need only be remarked here, that, as far as the Cherokeeswere concerned, there were two parties in that tribe, asearly as 1808, when this policy began to be put in practice,with respect to them : the party which wished to emigrate, inThey are slated at some length, in the fuH report of this speech.23*270 MR. Everett's speech.order to keep up the pursuit of the hunter's life, and the partythat wished to remain, to cultivate the arts of civilization, andto have " fixed laws and a regular government ;" and theprotection of the United States was equally pledged to bothparties. — In the month of July, 1817, a treaty was negotiatedat the Cherokee Agency, between "major general AndrewJackson, Joseph M'Minn, governor of the State of Tennessee,and general David Meriwether, Commissioners Plenipotentiaryof the United States of Amenca, on the one part, and the chiefs,headmen and warriors of the Cherokee nation east of theMississippi, and the chiefs, headmen and warriors of theCherokees of the Arkansas river, and their deputies, John D.Chisholm and James Rodgers, duly authorized by the chiefsof the Clierokees on the Arkansas river, in open council, bywritten power of attorney, duly signed and executed, in presenceof Joseph Sever and AVilliani Ware." This treaty providedfor a considerable cession of the lands of the Cherokeeseast of the Mississippi. It stipulated that, during the month ojJune, 1818, a census should be taken of those who emigrated,and those who staid behind: it guarantied the protection ofthe United States to both parties, reciting in the preamble thewords of Mr. Jefferson, who declared, in 1808, "the UnitedStates to be the friends of both parties, and willing, as far ascan be reasonably asked, to satisfy the wishes of both," andwho promised, " to those who should remain, the patronage, aid,and good neighborhood" of the United States; and it providedfor running the line between the portion of the territory whichthe Cherokees ceded, and that Which they did not cede.Such was the treaty ; and it was unanimously ratified by theSenate. Among the names recorded in favor of this treaty,which was negotiated in furtherance of the pin-jose of theCherokees "to begin the establishment of fixed laws and aregular government," I find the names of George M. Troup,and Charles Tail, the senators from Georgia. This purposehaving been formally avowed by the Cherokee deputation in1808, did not, of course, have its origin, as has been stated, in1817; and the fact I have just mentioned shows, that it received,at that time, the sanction of the representatives of Georgiain the Senate of the United States.Although it was the avowed purpose of the Cherokees toprovide, by this treaty, for a separation of their community, andto leave to those wiio wished to stay a permanent home",'• fixed laws and a regular government," yet the agents of theUnited States, under the instructions of the department, endeavored,with the severest urgency and pressure, to compel thewhole nation to emigrate. For this reason, the taking of thecensus was delayed, contrary to the treaty which fixed thetime when it should be taken, and the remonstrances of theCherokees; and high pecuniary offers were held out to them,to consent to go en masse, or accept reservations, and becomesubjects of the States. It is painful to read the documentsTvhich contain the history of these transactions. After all ater.Everett's speech. 271tempts to persuade and overbear them had failed, the projectfor the time was abandoned, the idea of taking a census givenUp, and a new treaty entered into on the 27th of February,1819, by which a further cession of land was made. In thepreamble to this treaty it is set forth, that " the greater part ofthe Cherokee nation have expressed an earnest desire to remainon this side of the Mississippi, and being desirous, in orderto continence those measures which they deem necessaryto the civilization and preservation of their nation, that thetreaty between the United States and them, signed 8th of July,1817, night, without further delay, or the trouble and expenseof taking the census, as stipulated in said treaty, be finally adjusted,have offered to cede to the United States a tract of landat least as extensive as that which they probably are entitledto under its provisions."This treaty was also unanimously ratified by the Senate, receivingin its favor the vote of Mr. Tait, the only senator frontGeorgia recorded as voting on the question.The whole number of Cherokees, who emigrated to Arkansas,before the treaty of 1817, or pursuant to its ]provisions, issupposed to have been five or six thousand. They are believedto have suffered severely, for several years after their emigration.They immediately became involved in war v/ith theOsages and other tribes of Indians west of the river; andwhen a proposal was again made in 1823, to the Clierokees,under a new commission, to cede their remaining lands, andcross, the river, they refused, alleging that " the importunatepart of our nation, who have emigrated west of the Mississippi,have suffered severely since their separation fiotn this nation,and settlement in their new country. Sickness, wars andother fatality have visited them, and lessoned their numbers ;and many of them, no doubt, would willingly return to theland of their nativity, if it was practicable for them to do so,without undergoing various difficulties, which would be almostinsurmountable, in so long a journey, by men, women andchildren, without friends and without money."The Cherokees, having refused to cede their lands and emigrate,for the reasons in part already given, drawn from thesuffering condition of their brethren in Arkansas, despatcheda delegation to Washington, in 1824, to make known tlicir determinationto the government to cede no more land. Thispurpose they communicated to the President and secretary ofwar. They also addressed a memorial to the House of Representatives.In this paper they say, — "The Cherokees are informedon the situation of the country west of the Mississippiriver. And there is not a spot out of the limits of any of theStates, that they would ever consent to inhabit, because theyhave unequivocally' determined never again to pursue thechase as heretofore, or to engage in wars, unless by the specialcall of the government, to defend the common rights of theUnited States. As a removal to the barren waste borderingon the Rocky Mountains, where water and timber are scarcely272 MR. Everett's speech.to be seen, could be for no other object or inducement than t&pursue the buffalo, and to wage war with the uncultivated indians,in that hemisphere, imposing facets speak from the experiencewhich has been so repeatedly realized, that such astate of things would he the result, were they to emigrate. Butsuch an event will never take place. The Cherokees haveturned their attention to the pursuits of the civilized man.Agriculture, manufactures, the mechanic arts, and education,are all in successful operation, in the nation, at this time ; andwhilst the Cherokees are peacefully endeavoring to enjoy theblessings of civilization and Christianity, on the soil of theirrightful inheritance; and whilst the exertions and labors ofvarious religious societies of these United States are successfullyengaged in jironndgaling to them the word of truth andlife, from the sacred volume of holy writ, and under the patronageof the general government, they arc threatened with removalor extinction. This subject is now before your honorablebody for a decision. We appeal to the magnanimity of theAmerican Congress for justice, and the protection of the rights,liberties and lives of the Cherokee people. We claim it fromthe United States, by the strongest obligations, imposed onthem by treaties; and we expect it from them under thatmemorable declaration, that all men are created equal ; thatthey are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienablerights; that among them are life, liberty, and the pursuit ofhappiness."After this positive and solemn refusal, no further direct attemptwas made to carry into execution upon the Cherokeesthe policy of removal.Let us now contemplate, for a moment, the situation of theCherokees removed to the territory of Arkansas. I have alreadystated, in general terms, that they were immediately involvedin wars with the neighboring tribes; and the statementabove cited as to their unhappy condition, when made, in 18Q3,by the Cherokees east of the Mississippi, as a reason for refusingto emigrate, was not controverted liy the commissioners ofthe United States. But the active benevolence of the friendsof humanity, and the bounty of the government, had followedthem to their new abode. The missionary establishments andschools were flourishing; and though the object for whichthey emigrated — that of resuming the hunters life — seemed tobe abandoned, the object of advancing in civilization was in acourse of fulfilment. Meantime, however, the population of Arkansasbegan to press upon them, and at length it was thoughtnecessary that they should again remove. In a letter of Rev.Mr. Washburn, frt)m Dwight, a missionary station in Arkansas,it is stated as follows: "From the facts above detailed, itwill appear, that the efforts, which have been made for theimprovement of this portion of the American aborigines havenot been without important results ; and that among these results,it is not the least important, that the natives are led toplace a high value upon education, to desire its general difTu-MR. Everett's speech. 273sion among them, and to exert themselves for the maintenanceof schools. These resuks, connected with the belief", that thispart of the Clierokees were settled where the cupidity of ourown people would not be likely to disturb them, presented toour minds the cheering prospect, that they would soon exhibitto the view of the philanthropist a most interesting spectacle —that of a people reclaimed from ignorance, barbarity, and vice,and elevated to intelligence, retirement and virtue, and surroundedwith the comforts and elegancies of the useful liberalarts. We expected soon to see their country, which was latelya wilderness, covered with fruitful fields, surrounding comfortableand convenient habitations, and store-houses, andhere and there decorated with edifices for literary and scientificimprovement, and temples for the worship of the greatand beneficent Father of all the kindred of the earth. Such,Sir, were our expectations, when we received intelligence, that,by a new convention, entered into by a delegation of the chiefsand the late secretary of war, these poor people must againrelinquish their homes, their improvement, and for a time theirprivileges, and seek a new residence in the wilderness."It is true that the author of this letter expresses the opinion,that this second removal will be ultimately beneficial to theCherokees of Arkansas. He rests this opinion on the supposedsecurity of their last retreat froui further invasion, on the liberalindemnity given for their property, and on the advantageouscharacter of the new country. But the former circumstance,as I have already stated, will infallibly lead to furtherencroachments. To suppose that they Avill be permitted longto remain unmolested, is the merest dream of fancy.Such has been the result of the experiment of finding apermanent home" for the Cherokees, west of the Mississippi.I pass over the history of the removal of the Quapaws, and ofthe attempts to remove the Choctaws, as also the memorableincidents of the Creek treaty of the Indian Springs.* It wasthe well known policy of the last administration to remove theIndians to the west of the Mississippi, provided their could berouged hy voluntary agreement, expressed in the usual authenticform, to go. — in pursuit of this object, in the year 1827, a tourwas made to the southern tribes by the ofKcer at the head of thebureau of Indian affairs, under the direction of the secretary ofwar, and further attempts were maun by him to induce the Choctawsand Chickasaws to consent to remove. Ki« efforts were limitedto persuading them to send a party to visit the country westof Arkansas ; and a provisional consent was obtained cf theChickasaws, that, if the country pleased them, and could be deliveredto them unencumbered by any population* and guarantiedto them forever, they would remove to it. Other conditionsalso were attached to this provisional consent, such asA more detailed reference to these topics is contained in the full reportof this speech. '274 MR. Everett's speech.that, all their houses, mills, fences, workshops, and orchardsshould be replaced by others, as good, in the new country.Of the sort of argument by which their slow consent to theseterms was obtained, the following specimen will enable theHouse to form an opinion : —Brothers : It is said, since j'ou did not agree to the proposals of th*commissioners, that you are a self-willed and obstinate people. I donot believe it; but many people, who do not know you as well as I do,may incline to think this is true. This, as far as it may be believed,will lessen the number of your friends ; and these are few — you havenone to spare I"After repeating, in the most urgent terms, the request thatthey would agree to fetid a party of exploration, this officeradds : " If you do not, I shall still i'eav^Jor the storm about Indianlands is ten-ibis indeed J I wish to screen you from it'"In pursuance of the arrangements made by colonel McKen-ney, a party of Chickasaws and Choctaws visited the country westof Arkansas, in company with Mr. McCoy. Of the result of this-visit,I shall ask permission, before I sit down, to say a few words.In a word, it is a proposition susceptible of hoof the mostclear, that the policy of removing the southern Indians has;'proved utterly abortive, so long as it was conducted on theonly rightful and equitable principle — that of the free aon-^sent of the Indians. It is because their free consent couldnot be obtained, it is because it is well kriowtf That vol atari Ij',they would never go, that the States have extended over thpiji,a coercive legislation, under which it if, avow eft that they cannotand will not live; and now we o re asked to furnish themeans to effect their voluntary removal.As for the idea that this retreat Avert of the Mississippi is:to be a safe and undisturbed abode, the facts to which I Ijave alludedshow that it is a mere mockery. We see one unfortunateremnant the Quapaws) driven from a reservation, which, sixyears before, had been spared them out of a vast territory, andon the condition that their reservation should not be intrudedon. We see the Choctaws assailed by a demand for morelands at the same time on both sides of the river. They are togive up on the east sids, and give back on the west side, afterboth sides had been guarantied to them,l)v all the sanctions ofthe government. The Cherokees are enticed into Arkansas,with the assurance tV.ai the protection of the United Statesshould follow iiiem there'. Here they are to have a permanent"one. Here the arm of the white man shall not be longenough to reach them. In a few years, the advanced guard ofyour population is upon them ; their flank is turned, their rearis cut off. The territory of Arkansas, in which there is an estimatedpopulation of one to a square mile, is sadly crowded ; thereis no room for the Indians ; they must leave their settlements,,just beginning to thrive, their houses, their farms, their schooland churches, and remove beyond the frontier, to a new permanenthome. Two parties of Creeks have followed the .Everett's speech. 275ample, and gone to their permanent home, on lands just allottedto the Choctaws and Cherokees. It will probably be amongthen* first occupations to fight for their title to this land ofrefuge; particularly when seventy-five thousand recruits comepouring in, (driven forward by "a few troops," who, we aretold, will be needed to aid in this voluntary removal,) and whoare to find their permanent home in the wilderness alreadygranted away.Sir, if you really do carry out this policy, its wretched objectswill indeed come to a permanent home, in its execution, of anature different from that you profess to contemplate. Youwill soon drive them up to that bourne from which neitheremigrant nor traveller returns.This is the effect, whatever be the provisions of the bill. Butlet us, Mr. Speaker, contemplate it more closely. What is, inthe general, the necessary character of a measure like this, aforced removal of whole tribes of Indians from their nativedistricts to a distant wilderness ? I will give it, Sir, not in myown language, but in that of the President of the United States,at the commencement of the session:The condition and ulterior destiny of the Indian tribes within thelimits of some of our States, have become objects of much interest andimportance. It has long been the policy of government to introduceamong them the arts of civilization, in the hope of gradually reclaimingthem from a wandering life. This policy has, however, beencoupled with another wholly incompatible with its success. Professinga desire to civilize and settle them, we have, at the same time,lost no opportunity to purchase their lands, and thrust them furtherinto the wilderness. By this means, they have not only been kept inawandering state, but been led to look on us as unjust and indifferentto their fate. Thus, though lavish in its expenditures upon the subject,government has constantly defeated its own policy ; and the Indians,in general, receding further and further to the west, have retainedtheir savage habits."Such is the President's view of the effect of removing Indianswestward. Those who have been removed, have beenkept wandering and savage. Some, who have staid, havemade great progress in civilization ; but, having undertaken"the establishment of fixed laws and a permanent government,"agreeably to the provisions of a treaty negotiated withthem by the President himself, and approved by the Georgiasenators, that State has extended laws over them which willhave the effect of driving them into the wilderness; and againstthese laws the President cannot protect them ! One scarcebelieves, that it is in this way that a project for a generalsweeping removal of all the Indians against their will, to thedistant wilderness, is to be introduced to our favorable notice.Let us view this subject. Sir, in a practical light. Let us nottalk of it by a name, but consider it as. a thing. What sort ofa process is it when actually gone through, this removal to thedistant wilderness ? The people whom we are to remove areIndians, it is true ; but let us not be deluded by names. We276 MR. Everett's speech.are legislating on the fate of men dependent on us for theirsalvation or their ruin. They are Indians ; but they are not allsavages ; they are not any of them savages. They are not wildhunters. They are, at least some of the southern Indians areacivilized people. They have not, in all their tribes, purgedfevers relic of barbarism ; but they are essentially a civilizedpeople. They are civilized, not in the same degree that weare,but in the same way that we are. 1 am well informed,that there is probably not a single Cherokee family that subsistsexclusively in the ancient savage mode. Each family hasits little farm, and derives a part, at least, of its support, fromagriculture or some other branch of civilized industry. Aresuch men savages? Are such men ])i-oper persons to be drivenfrom home, and sent to hunt buffalo in the distant wilderness.'They are planters and farmers, trades-people and mechanics.They have cornfields and orchards, looms and workshops,schools and churches, and orderly institutions. Sir, the poeticalcommunities of a large portion of civilized and ChristianEurope might well be proud to exhibit such a table of statisticsas I will read you.Here Mr. Everett read " a Statistical Table, exhibiting; the populationof the Cherokee nation, as enumerated in 1824, agreeably to a resolutionof the Legislative Council ; also, of property, &c. as stated ;" fromwhich it appeared that the population was 15,560, including 1277negroes ; and that there were "18 schools in the nation, and 314 scholarsof bosh sexes, .36 grist-mills, 13 saw-mills, 762 looms, 2486 spinning-wheels,172 wagons 2923 ploughs, 7683 horses, 22,531 black cattle,46,732 swine, 2566 sheep, 430 goats, 62 blacksmiths' shops, 9 stores,2 tan-yards, and 1 powder-mill, besides many other items not enumerated; and there are several public roads, and ferries, and turnpikes, iithe nation."These, Sir, are your barbarians; these are your savages;these your hunters, whom you are going to expel from theirhomes, and .send out to the pathless prairies of the west, theretopmsue the buffalo as he ranges periodically from south tonorth, and from north to south ; and you will do it for theirgood !But I shall be told, ]perhaps, that the Cherokees are moreadvanced than their red brethren in civilization. They maybeso ; but to a less extent, I imagine, than is generally thought.What is the condition of the Choctaws ? I quote a letter fromone of the missionaries to that tribe, communicated to theSenate by the department of war, during the present session.After stating that a very great and general reformation of thevice of intemperance had, within a few years, taken place, MrKingsbury proceeds : —"The result of a census taken in 1828 in the north-east district, wasas follows, viz: population, 5627 ; neat cattle, 11,661; horses, 3974;oxen, 112; hogs, 22,047; sheep, 136; spinning-wheels, 530 ; looms,124 ; ploughs, 360 ; wagons, 32 ; blacksmiths' shops, 7 ; coopers'shops, 2; carpenters' shops, 2; white men with Choctaw families, 22;schools, 5 ; scholars in the course of instruction, about 150. In oneMR. EVERETT'S SPEECH. 277clan, with a population of 313, who, eight years ago, were almost entirelydestitute of property, grossly intcinpeiate, and roaming from placeto place, there are now 188 horses, 511 cattle, 853 hogs, 7 looms, 68spinning-wheels, 35 ploughs, 6 oxen, 1 school, and 20 or 24 scholars.*Another evidence of the progress of improvement among theChoctaws is the organization of a civil government. In 1826, a generalcouncil was convened, at which a constitution was adopted, andlegislative powers were delegated to a national committee and council,whose acts, when approved by the chiefs, became the supreme lawsof the land. I have now before me a manuscript code, containing 22laws, which have been enacted by the constituted authorities, and, sofaras I know, carried into complete execution. Among tho subjectsembraced by these laws are theft, murder, infanticide, marriage, polygamy,the making of wills and settling of estates, trespass, false testimony,what shall be considered lawful enclosures around fields, &c."A great desire for the education of their children furnishes anotherproof of the advancement of the Choctaws. Petitions are frequentlymade requesting the establishment of new schools. Numbers morehave applied for admission to the boarding-schools than could be received.Nothing is now wanting but suitable persons and adequatemeans, to extend the advantages of education to all parts of the Choctawnation."The preaching of the Gospel has, within the two past years, beenattended with very happy effects. To its influence must be ascribedmuch of that impulse, which has recently been given to the progressof civilization, in the more favored parts of the nation. The light whichthe Gospel hasditfused, and the moral principles it has imparted to theadult Choctaws, have laid a foundation for stability and permanencyin their improvements. In this district, eighty-two natives, principallyheads of families, are members of the church. All these, with oneexception, have maintained a consistent Christian character, and woulddo honor to any Christian community'. "Nor is the condition of the Chickasavs's less advanced and improving.Frown the official return of colonel M'Kennej'^, it appearsthat their numbers are about four thousand. Tliey are estimatedby him to possess eight hundred houses, of an average valueof one hundred and fifty dollars, with some that must havecost one or two thousand. He supposes them to have 10 mills,50 workshops, enclosures of fields to the value of fifty thousanddollars, and an average of stock to each of 2 horses, 2 cows, 5hogs, and a dozen of poultry.I know, Sir, that there is, in the same document on the civilizationof the Indians, communicated to the Senate, (meagre at thebest, compared w'llh the ample materials for such a document, inpossession of the department,) a letter which tells you that theChoctaws, except where the schools are, and where the half breedslive, are, in every sense of the word, genuine Indians. No generalimprovement in any thing appears to pervade the country, Iwill rely more on this expression of opinion", when I am betterinformed of the disinterestedness of its source.Such are some of the people we are going to remove from theirhomes ; people living, as we do, by husbandry, and the mechanicThis is but the return of one district, doubtless less than a third of the1 nation.kMR. EVERETT S SPEECH.arts, and the industrious trades ; and so much the more interesting,as they present the experiment of a people rising from barbarityinto civilization. We are going to remove them from these theirhomes to a distant wilderness. Who ever heard of such a thingbefore .' Whoever read of such a project .'' Ten or fifteen thousandfamilies, to be rooted up, and carried hundreds, ay, a thousandof miles into the wilderness ! There is not such a thing inthe annals of mankind. It was the practice — the barbarous andtruly savage ]practice — of the polished nations of antiquity, to bringIiome a part of the population of conquered countries as slaves.It was a cruel exercise of the rights of the conqueror, as then understood,and, in turn, practised by all nations. But in time ofpeace, towaixl unoffending communities, subject to our sovereigntyindeed, but possessing rights guarantied to them by more thanone hundred treaties, to remove them against their will, by thousands,to a distant and a different country, where they must leada new life, and form other habits, and encounter the jjcrils andhardships of the Wilderness ; Sir, I never heard of such a thing ; it isan experiment on human life and pierian happiness of perilousnovelty ! Gentlemen who favor the project cannot have viewedit as it is. They think of a march of Indian warriors, penetrating,with their accustomed vigor, the forest or the cane-brake — theythink of the youthful Indian hunter, going forth exultingly to thechase. Sir, it is no such thing. This is all jiast ; it is matter ofdistant tradition, and poetical fancy. They have nothing nowleft of the Indian but his social and political inferiority. Theyare to go in families, the old and the young, wives and children,the feeble, the sick. And how arc they to go ? Not in luxuriouscarriages ; they are poor. Not in stage coaches ; they go to a regionwhere there are none. Not even in wagons, nor on horseback,for they are to go in the least expensive manner possible.They are to go on foot ; nay, they are to he driven by contract.The price has been reduced, and is still further to be reduced.It is to be reduced by sending them by contract. It isto be screwed down to the least farthing, to eight dollars per head.A community of civilized people, of all ages, sexes and conditionsof bodily health, is to be dragged hundreds of miles, over mountains,rivers, and deserts, where there are no roads, no bridges, nohabitations; and this is to be done for eight dollars a head; anddone by contract. The question is to be, What is the least forwhich j'ou will take so many hundred families, averaging somany infirm old men, so many little children, so many lame, feebleand sick '' What will you contract for ? The imaginationsickens at the thought of what will happen to a company of theseemigi-ants, which may prove less strong, less able to ]pursue thejourney, than was anticipated. Will the contractor stop for theold men to rest, for the sick to get well, for the fainting womenand children to revive ? He will not ; he cannot affix to. Andthis process is to be extended to every family, in a population ofseventy-five thousand souls. This is what we call the removal ofthe Indians !It is very easy to talk of this subject, reposing on these luxuries.Everett's speech. 279vous chairs, and protected by these massy walls, and this gorgeouscanopy, from the power of the elements. Removal is a soft word,and words are delusive. But let gentlemen take the matter hometo themselves and their neighbors. There are 75,000 Indians tobe removed. This is not less than the population of two congressionaldistricts. We are going, then, to take a population of Indians,of families, who live as we do in housework as we do in the field orthe workshop, at the plough and the loom, who are governed as we areby laws, who send their children to school, and who attend themselveson the ministry of the Christian faith, to march them fromtheir homes, and put them down in a remote, unexplored desert. fearegoing to do it — this Congress is going to do it — this is a bill todoit. Now, let any gentleman think how he would stand, werehe to go home and tell his constituents, that tJiey were to be removed,whole counties of them — they must fly before the wrathof insupportable laws — they must go to the distant desert, beyondArkansas — go for eight dollars a head, by contract — that this wasthe policy of the government — 'that the bill had passed — the moneywas voted — you had voted for it — and go they must.Is the case any the less strong because it applies to these poor,unrepresented tribes — " wiio have no friends to spare ?" If theyhave rights, are not those rights sacred — as sacred as ours — as sacredas the rights of any congressional district ? Are there twokinds of rights, rights of the strong, which you respect becauseyou must, and rights of the weak, on which you trample, becauseyou dare ? I ask gentlemen again to think what this measure is,not what it is called : to reflect on the reception it would meetwith, if proposed to those who are .able to make their wishes respected,and especially if proposed to them /or their good. Wlij"",Sir, if you were to go to the least favored district in the Union —the poorest soil — the seven-est climate — the most unhealthy region,and ask them thus to remove, were it but to the next State, theywould not listen to you : they would not stir an inch. But totake up hundreds and thousands of families, to carry them off unmeasureddistances, and scatter them over a wilderness unknownto civilized man — they would think you insane to name it !What sort of a region these unhappy tribes are to be removedto I will presently inquire. Let us see what sort of a region theyare to leave.And now. Sir, I am going to qtiote an account, which I candidlyadmit to be in all likelihood over slated. It proceeds from apatriotic native pen ; and who can rest within the limits of exactreality, in describing the merits of a beloved native land ? I believeit a little colored, but the elements of truth are there. It isplain, from the circumstance and detail, that it is substantially correct.At any rate, since I have been a member of Congress, ithas been twice, and I believe three times, communicated from thewar department, as official information. It is from a letterwritten by David Brown, a native Cherokee, of mixed blood, datedWillstown, Cherokee Nation, September 2, 1825 : —The Cherokee nation, you know, is in about 35 decrees northlatitude ; bounded on the north and west by the State of Tennessee ;280 MR. Everett's speech.on the south by Alabama, and on the cast by Georgia and North Carolina.This country is wcl! watered ; abundant springs of pure waterare found in every part. A range of majestic and lofty mountains stretchthemselves across the nation, The northern part of the nation is hillyand mountainous. In the southern and western parts, there are extent'sive and fertile plains, covered partly with tail trees, through whichbeautiful streams of water glide. These plains furnish immense pasturage,and numberless herds of cattle are dispersed over them. Horsesare plenty, and are used for servile purposes. Numerous flocks olsheep, goats, and swine, cover the valleys and hills. On Tennessee,Ustanala, and Canasagi rivers, Cherokee commerce floats. The climateis delicious and healthy; the winters are mild ; the spring clothes theground with its richest scenery. Cherokee flower s, of exquisite beautyand variegated hues, meet and fascinate the eye in every direction. Inthe plains and valleys, lliesail is generally ricci, producing Indian corn,,cotton, tobacco, wheat, oats, indigo, sv.cet and iii.>h potatoes. The nativescarry on considerable trade with the adjoining States; and someof them export cotton in boats down the Tennessee, to the Mississippi,and down that river to New Orleans. Apple and peach orchards arequite common, and gardens are cultivated, and much attention paid tothem. Butter and cheese are seen on Cherokee tables. There aremany public roads in the nation, and houses of entertainment kept bynatives. Nuncio-is and flourishing; villages are seen in every sectionof the country. Cotton and woollen cloths are manufactured here.Blankets of various dimensions, manufactured by Cherokee hands, arevery common. Almost every family in the nation grows cotton for itf«own consumption. Industry and commercial enterprise arc extendingthemselves in every part. Nearly all the merchants in the nation arenative Cherokees. Agricultural pursuits (the most solid foundation ofour national prosperity) engage the chief attention of the people. Differentbranches in mechanics are pursued. The population is rapidlyincreasing,"Such is the land, which at least one large comnuii.'ity of theseIndians are to leave. Is it not too much for human nature tobear, that uiioflendinif tribes, for no alleged crime, in profoundpeace, should be rooted up from their hereditary settlement, insuch a land, and hurried off to such an one as 1 shall presentlyshow to the Kou.-e ?Sir, they are attached toit; it is their own ; and though, by yoursubtilties of state logic, you make it out that it i.i^ not their own,they think it is ; they love it as their own. It is the seat of theircouncil fires, not always illegal, as your State laws now callthem. Tiie time has been, and that not very distant, when, hadthe king of France, or of Stain, or of England, talked of its beingillegal for the Ciioctaws or Cherokees to meet at their councilfire, they would have answered, "Coin and prevent us." Itis the soil in which are gathered the bones of llieir fathers. Thisidea, and the importance attached to it by the Indians, have beenheld up to derision by one of the officers of the government.He has told the Indians that "the bones of their fathers cannotbenefit them, stay where they are as long as they may"* IProceedings of the Indian Board, in the City of New York, with ColonelM'Kenney's Address, page 42.MR. Everett's speech. 281touch with regret on that, upon which the gentleman from NewYork has laid his heavy Iiuud. I have no unkind feeling towardsthe gentleman, who has unadvisedly made this suggestion.But the truth is, this is the very point on which the Indian racesensitive on ail points — is most peculiarly alive. It proverbial.Governors Case and Clark, in their official report thelast winter, tell you, that " We will not sell the spot which containsthe bones of our lathers," is almost always the first answerto a proposition for a sale. The mysterious pounds whichare seen in different parts of the country, the places of sepulturefor tribes that have disappeared, are objects of reverence to theremnants of such tribes as long as any such remain.Mr. Jefferson, in his Notes on Virginia, tells you of such a case.Unknown Indians came through the country, by a path knownto themselves, through the woods, to visit a mound in his neighborhood.Who they were no one knew, nor whence they came,nor what was the tribe to whose ashes they had made theirpilgrimage. It is well known that there are tribes who celebratethe great feast of the dead — an awful but affecting commemoration.They gather up the bones of all who have dicitsince the last return of the festival, cleanse them from their impurities,collect them in a new deposit, and cover them againwith the sod. Shall we, in the complacency of our superior light,look without indulgence on the pious weakness of these childrenof nature? Shall we tell them that the bones of their fathers,which they visit after the lapse of ages, which they cherish,though clothed in corruption, can do them tho good ? It is asfalse in philosophy as in taste. The Tian who reverences theashes of his fathers — who hopes that posterity will reverencehis — is pound by one more tie to the discharge of social duty.Now, Sir, whither are these Indians, when they arc removed,to go ? I confess I am less informed than I could v/ish. I thankthe gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. Hemphill) for his amendment.It does credit to his sagacity. It is just what is wanted.I say, we all want information. We arc going, in a very high-landedway, to throw these Indians into the western wilderness.I call upon every gentleman, ^vho intends to vote for the bill, toask himself, if he has any satisfactory information as to the characterof that region. I say it is a terra incognita. It has beencrossed, but not explored. I have made some notes of thiscountry, and it is the conclusion to which I have come, from:consulting the best authorities within my reach, and ]particularlycolonel Long and Mr. Niittall, that it is an uninhabitable desert.The gentleman froiii Ohio, (Mr. Linton,) the other day, moveda resolution asking for information on this subject. The Housefelt that it wanted the information : his resolution was adopted.And what did we get in reply ? Twenty-two lines, from a letterwritten by governor Clark, five years ago? and he had neverseen the country, to which the title of the Osages and Kanzashad, when he wrote the letter, just been extinguished. This isthe official information which is to guide us in deciding the fateof thousands and tens of thousands of fellow-beings ! Then we24*282 MR. Everett's speech.have the testimony of Mr. McCoy. He saw the country. Buthow much did he see of it ? — low far did he go westward ? Fortnightmiles only. He admits that the land is good only fortwo hundred miles west front Arkansas ; and three quarters ofthis he took on trust, for he went only forty-eight miles into it,in a westerly direction. Js this an exploration on which we candepend — a hasty excursion, for a hew miles, into the district, towhich we arc to transplant the Indians Sir, it would do towrite a paragraph upon in a newspaper; it would serve as avoucher for an article in the gazetteer. But, good heavens!will this warrant us in taking up dependent tribes of fellow beingsfrom their homes, and marching them, at a venture, intothis remote desert, upon the borders of which an agent had justset his foot ? From the time that Mr. McCoy left St. Louistill he got back, there were just sixty-two days. His descriptionis as follows ; and I quote the passage because it containsthe strength of his recommendation : —"I may not be so fortunate as to meet with many who concur withme in opinion relative io the country under consideration, (1 mean thewhole described in our remarks,) yet 1 hesitate not to pronounce it, inmy estimation, very good, and well adapted to the purposes of Indiansettlements. I think 1 risk nothing in supposing that no State or territoryin the Union embraces a tract, of equal extent and fertility, so littlebroken by lands not tillable, to that lying south of Kanza, and on theupper branches of Osage and Neosho, the extent of which I have notbeen able to ascertain. This country also has its defects, the greatestof which is the se-nrcity of timber; but, by a judicious division amongthe inhabitants of woodland and prairie, there will be found a sufficiencyof the former, in connexion with coal, to answer the purpose inquestion with tolerable convenience."Again : " The greatest defect in this country (and I am sorry it isof so serious a character) is the scarcity of timber. If fields be madein the timbered land, which most persons, v. ho have been accustomedto timbered countries, are inclined to do, (the Indians more especially,because often unprepared with teams for breaking prairie,) timber willson become (oo scarce to sustain the population, which the plan underconsideration contemplates. 1 trust that I need offer no apology for supposingthat measures ought to be adopted immediately, for marking off toeach settler, or class of settlers, the amount of tendered land really necessaryfor their use, severally, and no more. The limber, generally, is sohappily distributed in streaks and groves, that each farm may be allowedthe amount of amber requisite, and then extend back into the prairiefor quantity. The prairies being almost universally rich, and well situatedfor cultivation, afford uncommon facilities for the operation ofsuch a niethoJ. By pursuing this plan, wood, after a few years, willincrease in quanli'.y annually, in proportion as the grazing of stock andthe interests of the inhabitants shall check the burning of those prairies.These regulations, essential to the future prosperity of the territory,cannot be made without the existence of the superintendency ofwhich I speak. Let it bo said that the country within such and suchboundaries shall be given to the Indians, for the purpose under consideration.Next establish such a course of things as will render it possibleto make a fair distribution of it among its inhabitants, in view oftheir numbers and circumstances, and which will secure to them thepossibility of future prosperity."MR. Everett's speech. 288I believe, Sir, that Mr. McCoj^ is a very vvortliy and benevolentperson. Having been connected with a mission to somenorth-western band oi' Indians, which has been nearly or quitebroken uj) by the encroachments oi" whites, he appears to haveconsidered removal as the greatest good tor ail Indians, underall circumstances. While the Indiiuis, whom pie conducted,were evidently dissatisfied with the country, Lie umkes the bestof it. He was there a very short time, and penetrated a shortdistance, but tells us "the jirairics van almost universally rich,"and that even the single harms can be laid off with a. patch ofwoodland. He could not possibly know this to be true. He sawas much of this country as a traveller would see of Pennsylvania,Maryland and Virginia, who should go by the straightestroad from Philadelphia to llarjMr'.s Ferry, and thence back toWashington. Tins region is said to be six hundred miles longand two hundred and silty broad. Mr. McCoy's whole line ofmarch within it, going and returning, was about four hundredmiles !As for the project of settling each Indian family under a governmentsuperintendency ; persuading them to spare the wood ;counting out such a nui:iber of trees as is absolutely necessary ;and thus making provision "for the possibility of futile prosperity,"and for " tolerable convenience" in respect to i'uel, itdefies gravity. The wildest delusions b}^ which waste lands indistant countries are {;uff'ed off Ijy jobbers do not go beyond this.One coarse fact, like that which I have already cited fj-om Mr.Nuttall, showing the wretched shifts to which the Osages wereput for fuel,* is worth a voliuiie of these well-meeting speculationson the providence, thrift and foresight of the Indians, inhusbanding their timber. This incontestable want of timber inthe region in question would make it uninhabitable to the thriftiestpeople on earth. Sir, mere benevolence, piety, and zeal,do not qualify a person to promulgate opinions which are toaffect the well-being and lives of thousands of fellow men. Youtell an Indian, shivering in the winter, over the wretched substitutefor fuel which Mr. Nuttall describes, that there is a " possibility,"sojuc years hence, of his having wood enough to enablehim to get along vvith "tolerable convenience," if he is veryprovident in the mean time!What are the Indians to do after they get here ? The original}>lan of going over the Mississippi was to find ample range forthe chase. That oi.jeet was sanctioned by Mr. .jefferson, in1808, when proposed by the emigrating portion of the Cherokees.It now seems abandoned ; and we are told of raisingtheir character, of jutting them on an equality with ourselves,and fixing them in snug farms of so much woodland and so muchprairie. Can they pursue their accustomed occupations in thisnew region ? Can any man on his responsibility say, they willfind wood and water, and soil, and access to market, and convenienceof navigation, like what they have left.' No mal canThe use of bisons' ordure.284 MR. Everett's speech.say it. What does experience teach ? The Cherokees in Arkansas,after encountering great hardships, were doing well, and,after ten years' residence, have been pushed further westward.A lavish expenditure by the government, and the untiring benevolenceof the i)ioHS and liberal, has re-established them inseeming comfort; but the result is yet to be seen. We are alreadythreatened with a general Indian war on the frontier.But the case of the Cherokees of Arkansas is the only one, whichis not a deplorable failure. What says general Clark, writingto the department, 10th December, 1827 ? "I must request youto draw the attention of the secretary of war to the moving oremigrating Indians, who are continually coming on to this sideof the Mississippi. Those that have come on, and not permanentlysettled, (many of them,) arc scattered for the purposeof procuring subsistence ; and iixquent complaints are madeagainst them by the white ])co|>le, and considerable expense incurredin reconciling the difficulties."This "scattering to procure subsistence," (leading to complaints,by the whites, and expense in reconciling difficulties,) Itake to be a periphrasis lor roving about, begging and stealing.Again : "The tribes on this side of the Mississippi are wretched,and moving from place to place. I have just heard that the.several scattering bands, who resided near Fort Towson, haveremoved near Alexandria on the Red river."It will be necessary, that authority be given as soon as possible, toexchange lands with the Delawares, Kickapoos, Shawnees, Pinkie&c., and settle (hem on the Kanzas liver. And it is also necessary,that some assistance should be given to remove them there, and,when there, to assist them in preparing the earth for cultivation andprovisions, till they can raise a support. Without this aid, the Indianswill be more wretched than they were before they moved.The Shawnees and Delawares of Cape Girardeau, who were, twentyyears ago, doing well, wil;h good houses, little farms, with stock inabundance, are now in distress, roving in small parties in every partof the country, in pursuit of subsistence. Those who have come fromOhio will, if not supported, in a short time be in the same situation.The distresses of the indians of this superintendency are so greatand extensive, and complaints so request, that it is and has been impossiblefor me to report them. I therefore have taken on myself agreat deal in acting as [ thought best ; I have not troubled the governmentwith numerous occurrences which they could not remedy."Sir, general Clark is your most experienced superintendentof Indian affairs; and his superintendency lies in this vauntedIndian Canaan, beyond the Mississippi. Let us learn wisdomfrom the fate of the Shawnees and Delawares, who, in twentyyears, have sunk from the possession of comfortable farms andcompetence, to abject, roving poverty. One statement morefrom an official letter of general Clark, of March 1, 182G, and Ileave this topic : —The condition of many tribes west of the Mississippi is the mostpitiable that can be imagined. During several seasons in every year,they are distressed by famine, in which many die for want of food, andduring which the living child is ojien buried with the dead mother,MR. Everett's speech. 385because no one can spare it as much food as would sustain it throughits helpless infancy. This description applies to the Sioux and Osages,and many others ; but 1 mention those because they are powerful tribes,and live near our borders, and my official station enables nie to know theexact truth. It is vain to talk to people in this condition ' about learningand religion.' "This is the country to which the Indians are to be moved.This is the fertile region, in which tJiey are to be placed. Thistheir prospect of" inii)roveuieiit.TJ)e worthy californian of the committee told us of the causesof their degeneracy, seated in the nature or in the habit, thesecond nature of the Indians. Admit the truth of the representation.I am sorry there is any foundation for it. Myhopes have never been over sanguine of elevating the race to ahigh degree of civilization ; although within a few years betterhopes Jive been authorized than ever before. But these causesof degeneracy exist. The Indians, it is said, suffer from theproximity of the whites, and the jealousy and hostility betweenthem, and the conscious inferiority of the Indian. But this isnot remedied west of Arkansas: they will have a white populationcrowding on them there. T'lcre is one already. VVe aretold they are improvident. Be it so; will they not be improvidentthere? Mr. McCoy tells us, this happy land has but littletimber, and yet thinks that, if left to themselves, they wouldgo in and cut it down ; and that there must be a son of governmentforester, to parcel it out for them, and keep them front vvast-ingot. We are told they have an innate propensity to intemperance.Will they cease to have it in the wilds of Arkansas ? Ifthey thirsted for spirits by the pleasant banks of the Uistanala andCoosawattee, will they abstain in the salt jiruii'ies and parcheddeserts of the west ? What safeguard will they have there,which they have not here.' Surely, Sir, as they are removedfrom a surrounding civilization, as they cease to breathe the verytemperate atmosphere of the Atlantic States, there is reason tofear, that the causes of degeneracy will remain in all their intensity,while the checks will be fewer, and the remedies weaker.I have already hinted that this great project fails in the pointput forward as its recommendation — the permanency of the newabode. There is no well-grounded hope of permanency in it,and our experience shows that it is delusive. The Cherokeesof Arkansas were permitted to remain just ten years! If the landsto which you remove them are what you describe them to be, youmay as well push back the tide in the bay of Fundy as keep) outthe white population. Its progress onward is sure, and as surelywill it push the Indians before it. This new wilderness, whichyou parcel out to them, is not a permanent home. It is a merehalting place — a half-way house on the road to the desert.We talk of pledges, guaranties, and patents. Now, Sir, Ihave not the least doubt of the good faith of the President, of hiscabinet, of every gentleman in this House friendly to the bill,and of every honest man in the community who supports it.They all honestly mean that the Indians should be safe in their286 MR. Everett's speech.new residence ; and if they are not safe, it will not be the faultof the friends of the bill. Having said this, I must be permittedto add, that I would not give one farthing for the best patentthat could be issued to this new country, with the seal of everymember of the government. 1 would not |)iek up the unmeaningscroll Iron the earth. What ! take a patent to secure my titlewest of the Mississippi, when listy treaties on the east side, signedby ail your Presidents, sanctioned by all your Congresses,have proved themselves not worth what it cost to engross them!I would regard the other of it as nu instil. Treaty and patent;what is the difference, save that the former is the more solemnand authentic pledge of the public faith ? Are they not both ofthe like ]parchment, signed and sealed .' Wliat is there in a patentto give it a binding ]power? Is there auy principle of obligationin it ? any life or voice to upbraid its violators ? Thereis nothing in it. It is a word, a name. It signifies nothing — itcan do nothing. It is meant welland that is well— and thatis all.But, Sir, these Indians could not live in tliiseountrj-, not evenif your advancing population would let them alone, and thecountry itself were a pretty good one. It requires some of thehighest qualities of civilized man to emigrate to advantage. Ido not speak of great intellectual elevation ; not of book learning,nor moral excellence ; though this last is of great importancein determining the prosperity of a new settlement. Butit is only the chosen portion of a community, its Mte, that canperform this great work of building uj) a new country. Thenervous, ardent young man, in the bloom of opening life, andthe [pride of health, can do it. It is this part of the populationI'l^t !ir,» ,'.oiic Jt> This is the great drain of New England andthe other Atlantic States. But to take up a whole population ;the old, the feeble, the infant, the inefficient and helpless, thatcan hardly get through life any where, to take them up by ageneral operation, and scatter them over an unprepared wilderness,is madness. It is utterly impossible for them — I do notsay to ]prosper — but even to sid)sist. J^vich a thing was never*heard of Low narrowly did the pilgrims of New England escapedestruction, although their ranks were made up of men ofthe sternest moral qualities, well provided with pecuniary resources,and recruited for several years by new adventurers! TheIndians are to be fed a year at ourexjjense. So far is well, becausethey will riot starve that year. But are the prairies to bebroken up, houses built, crops raised, and the timber broughtforward in one year ? Sir, if a vigorous young man, going intothe prairie and commencing a settlement, can raise a crop to supporthimself the second year, I take it he does well. To expecta community of Indian families to do it, is beyond all reason.The chairman of the committee tells us, it would be cruel to castthem oft" at the end of one year ; they must be helped along.Doubtless they must. And in the progress of this way of living,partly by the chase, partly by husbandry, and partly by alms, ifa people naturally improvident do not speedily become degene-MR. Everett's speech. 287rate and wretched, they will form an exception, not merely toall their brethren, with a single exception, who have precededthem in this course, but the laws of nature. The earnest volitionto go is the great spring of the emigrant's success. Hesummons u]) his soul, and strains his nerves, to execute his ownpurpose; but drive a heart-sick family, against their will, fromtheir native laud; put them down in a distant wilderness, andbid them get their living, and there is not one chance in fiftythat they would live two years. While you feed them they willsubsist, and no longer. General Clark tells you, that those whowere in comfort twenty years ago must now be fed. Sir, theycannot live in these dismal steppes. They must starve; weknow they must. General Clark tells us they do starve; andwhen the mother starves to death, they [put the living child intothe grave with her! To palliate thisterritic occurrence, we aretold it is common, it is incitlcnt to Indian lille. But not surelyamong the southern Indians. And if it is meant only that it iscommon beyond the Mississippi, then what an image does it notgive us of the country into which we are driving these victims!If it were not as sterile as the desert of Arabia, it would yieldenough to prevent the recurrence of such horrors.View this subject in another light. What is to keep these Indiansfrom coming into collision with each other? Mr. Nuttallwas instantly struck with this danger; and numerous facts andoccurrences stated by him show how justly we may apprehendthe effects of what he calls " the imprudent and visionary policyof crowding the natives together, in the hopes of keeping themat peace."These 75,000 Indians, whom you propose to collect in this region,are not one tribe ; they are not cognate tribes. We aretold, in some of the papers which have been laiil on our tables,that the four southern tribes speak the same language. It isnot so. The Choctaws and Chickasaws speak substantially thesame ; the Creeks speak a different language, and the Cherokeesstill another. With these southern tribes and the northwestern,there is no affinity. There are between various tribesof Indians hereditary feuds. Mr. McCoy's Indians were atwar with the Osages, and had been for years. You put themdown side by side. You bid them hint in the same waste.You grant the same land two or three times over to differenttribes. The lands granted to the Cherokees of Arkansas hadbeen in part given, the year before, to the Creeks. The Chickasawsare to be put down on the Choctaw lands. The newCherokee territory runs over the reservation of the Kanzasand Osages ; and into this territory, thus pre-occupied, youare going to pour down from fifty to seventy-five thousand more.I will cite, on this subject, a paragraph from an Arkansas paper.I pretend not to claim for it any other weight, than what it derivesfrom the manifest reasonableness of its purport : —Proposed residence of the Indians. The whole country west ofMissouri and Arkansas (including the forty miles severed from the later.EVERETT S SPEECH.ter) is already parcelled out to the different tribes that now occupy it.The Cherokees and Creeks are already murmuring on account of theirrestricted limits, and complain that the government has assigned to boththe same tract of country. The productions of the habitable parts ofthe country, under the careless culture of the Indians, will be foundnot more than sufficient to supply the wants of the present population.If the proposition respecting the formation of an Indian colony, containedin the report of the secretary of war, should be adopted by the government,we will have, according to the secretary's calculation, 75,000at one litter, in addition to those already in the country. "V\ ill he telluswhere ho will put them ? and how he will support them under existingcircumstances ? I believe this plan rational and practicable, if theTexan country belonged to the government ; but, otherwise, the restrictedlimits in which he would have to plant his colony, would render itaperfect Indian slaughter-house."There is only one way in which we can prevent this mutualhavoc, and that is by the constant presence oi'a powerful armedforce; and on that I shall presently say a word.But the difficulty does not stop here. Where they now are,the Indians are surrounded by the population of the UnitedStates. Wlien they are removed, their western boundary willbe open to the desert. Is that desert empty ? Is it occupied onlyby the buffalo.' Sir, it is the hinting ground of the Pawneesand Camanches — the fiercest tribes of the continent. Theseare the masters in civilization, to whom we are going to sendour hoped pupils, to complete their education. Our Indianshave made some progress in the arts of life; and now we aregoing to put them down by the side of these dreaded hordes,%vhoare a terror even to our own armed traders, and still realizethat frightful ]picture of Indian ferocity and i)(;wer, which fillsthe early pages of the history of America. What iiuist be theconscience .' The answer is short: They will be destroyed.When these wild savages of the desert shall take our civilizedred brethren in hand, they will most probably crush them.This event can only be averted by another. If the Indians,whom you congregate in these prairies can (which I do not believe)ward off starvation ; if they take root ami flourish; and ifthey withstand the power of the untamed tribes in their neighborhood,it must i)e by resuming themselves the savage character.If they fight the Pawnees and Camanches, it nuts be byagain becoming themselves a warlike race. I have no faithwhatever in their being able to sustain themselves; but if theydo, what have you elected? Yon have built up a communityof near one hundred thousand Indians, obliged, in self-defence,to assume a warlike character, and ]provided, by yom amenities,with the means of military annoyance. And what sort of neighborswill they be to your own white settlements ? What sortof a barrier will you have raised to protect Arkansas from theCamanches.? for this is one of the prospective benefits, whichhave been set forth as likely to result from this measure. Theimpolitic character of the measure, in this view of it, did notescape the observation of the most judicious person who hasMR. Everett's speech. 289visited this country, and who, on this ground also, stronglycondemns the policy of concentrating the Indians upon it.Sir, these alarms of war are not imaginary. A hostile incursionwas made, as late as last January, into the south-westerncomer of the territory of Arkansas. One citizen was killed whileat work, and the neighboring settlements thrown into confusion,and threatened with being broken up. Affidavits proving thefact are on your table. A letter is Before me, from a highly respectablesource in the temtojy of Arkansas, stating it to be nowascertained that the Indians are preparing to make a general attackon our frontiers in the month of May or June next." WhileI speak it. Sir, the savage is, perhaps, on your frontier settlements.Will he spare your o\vn Indians, whom you propose to throw asabarrier between him and these settlements ? No, Sir ; he willconsider these new comers as intruders on his own domain. Thevast region to which we have extinguished the title of the Osagesand Kanzas, and over which we propose to scatter our tribes, isclaimed as their own hunting gix»und, by the Pawnees and Ca-marches; and you are not to suppose, that, while their war-partiesare insulting the regular troops of your own army, they will respectyour enfeebled Indians. Let gentlemen read the account ofthe expedition sent out to overawe these war-parties during thelast summer, and they will see this is to be no trifling business.Do gentlemen forget that we have already been called on forstrong measures of defence ? There is now a bill on our tables,from the Senate, to mount ten companies for the protection of thefrontier; and it is not alone against the unreclaimed savages ofthe desert, that we are called upon for protection. I find. Sir,among the paper accompanying that bill, a memorial from theLegislature of Missouri, setting forth the danger to be feared fromthe Indians collected by ourselves, in the region beyond the Mississippi.In consideration of facts and representations like these, you haveBOW before you a bill for mounting ten companies, a force equalto one tenth part of the army of the United States. You are actuallyobliged to turn one tenth of your army into rangers, to protectthat frontier, beyond which you are going to congregate yourIndian neighbors. If one tenth arc now required, can any onedoubt that our whole army would be little enough to repress theincursions of the wild tribes, and keep the peace among seventy-fivethousand of our own Indians, pent up in their new districts,and protect the frontier from both ? There is little doubt, in mymind, that it would respire the standing army to be doubled, inorder to effect these objects.And now. Sir, let us count the cost. Let us count the cost ! Ido not say this is to be the governing consideration. I do not say,that, if the object could be fairly, and rightfully, and with goodfaith, attained, I would not go with gentlemen, who have expressedtheir readiness, on the like supposition, to take a hundred millionsof doUai-s from the Treasures, and pledge the public creditfor a century in advance. I will decide that, when the case comesup But I will know, first, what this movement is really to cost.290 MR. Everett's speech.I will not vote in the dark. I will not be amused with a vote of fivehundred thousand dollars, to execute a project, of which the expensewill fall little, if any, short of five times five millions.There are several iteujs in the expenditure requisite to effectsuch a movement, which, though heavy in amount, Fire contingentin their nature, ami difficult to calculate. I shall take only suchas admit of being brought to a standard of calculation : 1st. Thefirst item is the original purchase inomy ; the price we are to givefor the title which the Indians have, (whatever we call that title,)to the lands they occupy. This has ever been a heavy charge inour Indian treaties. What will it cost to extinguish the Indiantitle to more than fifty miliioi>s of acres of land, the quantity occupiedby the Indians to be removed ? Here we can have no saferestimate than experience. I shall take, as the basis of the calculation,the last considerable treaty with the Creek Indians, that ofWashington, in 1826. By that treaty, we acquired four millionsseven hundred thousand acres of laid. The anoint paid for thiscession, nicjuding a principal sum, whose interest would equal theperpetual annuity of .$20,000, vas .$650,933. This sum does notinclude the cxpenscsof negotiation, the value of improvements relinquished,nor the purchase of the territory west of the Mississippi.The amount of land to be acquired exceeds fifty millionsof acres ; say eleven times the cession made by the treaty ofWashington, or 51,700,000 acres. Eleven times the price paid forthe Creek cession amounts to $7,100,133. I deem it fair, on everyground, to suppose that we shall have to pay, at least, as muchfor the other cessions as we did for that of the Creeks. The Creeksare the least civilized of the southern tribes, and consequentlyplace the least value on their lands. The Cherokees and Choctawscould not, in reason or fairness, be expected to sell a cultivatedcountry, for any thing like what is paid for the hunting groundsof uncivilized tribes. If the bill is passed, the Indians, in general,will feel and know that their lands will be purchased at whateverprice. On all these grounds, I am warranted in taking the treatyof Washington as a safe standard for tb.e calculation. I mightwith great propriety go above it ; for it is now ascertained that aconsiderable region of these Cherokee lands is rich in gold. Weareinformed that four or five thousand persons are engaged inwashing gold within the Indian country, and that they get twodollars each per diem. It may not be half that ; but if it is only aquarter, or fifty cents a day, (which is likely to be nearer the truth,)it makes the country an exceedingly rich gold region. Hosts ofintruders are aln lady pointing into the country, to rob the Indiansof their gold. We surely shall not imitate their example ; wesurely shall not take Irom them gold mines, yielding thousands ofdolIai"S a day, without an equivalent.* If the whole movement isnot to be high-handed force in its most offensive form, we shallSince tills speech was delivered, illic goveniiir of Georgia has issued hisproclamation declaring that the State of Georgia has " the entire and exclusiveproperty in the gold and silver in the lands" occupied by the Cherokee Indians,sid forbidding the said Indians to dig fortress metals in their own soil ! Andthe President of the United States has co-operated with Georgia in this step !MR. Everett's speech. 291pay them something like the valid of the treasure, from the possessionof which we expel them. If we do this, as we are bound,in equity and in common justice, to do, we shall have to pay, forthe gold region alone, a sum equal to the v^'hole of what I haveestimated for the entire extinguishment of the Indian title. I am,therefore, amply warranted in taking the price of the Creek cessionas the standard of the estimate, and putting down the firstitem at more than seven millions of dollars.The next item is improvements. The hill provides, that we areto pay for such as add real value to the land. This term improvementsis an expression somewhat vague in its import. But thepromises which we have made to these Indians, as well as thedictates of the barest justice, will require us to inalce the Indiansin the new country good. If wc fonte them from their houses,we must build them other houses as good. We have solemnlypromised we will. We shall be barbarous ourselves if we do not.We must rebuild for them, in the far distant wilderness, wherewood is scarce, even for fuel, houses, mills, and workshops, suchas thej^ have left. They have expended no small sums, .out oftheir annuities, in roads. Shall we set them down in the pathlessdesert, and do nodding to open avenues of communication to it,and between its different parts ? They hawse here extensive enclosuresto their fields ; we must replace these in the prairie.They have wagons, ploughs, looms, and boats. These cannot betransported but at an expense beyond their value. They must bepaid for, or replaced to them. Tliey have a large amount of livestock,most of which will be an entire loss to them unless we purchaseit, or put it in their power to replace it in the desert.All this furnishes a abc anoint. I will not undertake to makean estimate of my own ; but I will take one furnished from thewar department, by colonel McKenncy, in reference to the Chickasaws.After a detailed enumeration of the items of the estimate,he gives the aggregate sum at §184,750, ibr the Chickasaws alone,a tribe amounting to four thousand souls. Now, it is perfectlywell known, that this is not the most advanced trilie in civilization.They do not exceed the Ciioctaws, and they hall behind the Cherokees.I consider it, then, safe to take this estimate of the department,for the Cliickasaws, as the standard of the estimate forthe Indians tr> be removed. This v/ill give us, as the value of theproperty of seventy-five thousand Indians, to be }>aid foi, reimbursed,and replaced, $0,075,000.The next item is the cost of collection and transportation. Herewe have not merely official estimates, but experience to guide us.Two parties of Creeks have been sent over. That headed by Mr.Barley, the agent of the emigrating Creeks, cost 852,297, for1,200 individuals. The other party, headed by colonel Cromwell, cost$27,585, for 1,300 individuals. The expense of the first [party is$43 58 per head ; that of die second $21 22 per head ; an averageof $33 40. Now, we are told from the department, that theprice may be still farther reduced. Why ? If we form an estimateon two fair experiments, the only reasonable mode of procedureis that of average ; otherwise, we may make fancied esti-292 MR. everett's speech.mates that it will cost nothing, .supposing it may be done for lessand less each time. But we are to move them by contract, saysthe second auditor. Not, Sir, with my consent. Though I deprecatebeyond measure the ])Ui;sage ofthis Jill, I will, iftlie Indiansmust go, vote the appropriations to carry it humanely and equitablyinto execution. But I will not vote a dollar ibr this dreadfulcontract. Sir, scud these Indians off by contract, and theirremoval will ]present a scene of suffering unequal 1 by that of aflying army before a triumphant foe. It will be the direct interestof the contractors to stint them in every supply and accommodation,and to hin-ry them to the utmost limits of human strength.I cast no imputations oji the contractors ; I know not avIio theyare to be. But they are men, engaging in this business asamon-ey-maldng speculation ; and the most ordinary principles of humannature show, that, if transported in this way, numb of theseIndians will he destroyed on the march. Let us have no contracts; but send them under the guidance of men of high responsibility,and let us cheerfully pay Lie necessary expense. Theaverage expense of the two parties of Creeks, which have alreadyemigrated, is >?32 48, taking the statement of the department, inwhich many things are omitted, fairly chargeable to the account.I will, then, take the cost of collection and transportation at $30per head — an expense less than the actual average. The result is$2,250,000 for the whole number to be removed.The next item is subsistence'foi- one year. I have made some effortsto estimate this correctly I am convinced that in the statementsmade in debate, on this floor, it has been very much underrated; fi-om not adverting to the circumstance which most directlyaffects the cost of the ration, which, we are told, is not to exceedeight cents. On application at the proper department, 1 leanthat the cost of the station at our several military posts, west of theMississippi, is as follows : —At Cantonment J-up, 25 miles from Natchitoches, , . 13^ cts^,Cantonment Gibson, (JCO miles up the Arkansas, IG4 "•Jefferson barracks, near St. Louis, .,., ,., 6| "And that " the great facility of transportation is the catise of thedifference in price of the ration, in favor of the last named place."This is obvious ; and, in calculating the value of ll."^; ration, at anygiven spot, we must take into consideration, not merely the prierof beef, and pork, and corn meal, but that of transportation, whlclimakes a difference of two hundred per cent, between St. Louis andNatchitoches. Now, it is to be remembered, that this subsistence isto be furnish d in the interior of a very remote inhmd comUry. AtCantonment Gibson,, which is, )perhaps, the farthest point onthe route, to which there is navigation, the ration is 10^ cent:'^.The country whirr the rations are to be distributed, is, as Mr.McCoy says, one in which " the privileges of navigation will bovery moderate. Should the territory prosper, the time will comewhen this circumstance will be felt as a serious inconvenience."We see how greatly the cost of the ration is enhanced at CantonmentJesup, Which is but twenty-five miles from Red River.MR. EVERETT S SPEECH.These provisions aise to be carried by land where there are no roads.The chairman of the Indian committee tells his that there arcfine droves of cattle on the head waters of the Washing. Butthe Washing does not penetrate this region, and there is a rangeof hills between. The ration will, unquestionably, cost more in therecesses of this comites', than it does at Fort Jesup, within twen-ty-five miles of Natchitoches. It is dire 13^ cents. I believe it,will be twenty cents, on an average, throughout this pathless wilderness— without rivers — without roads — without population ; butI will take it at only fifteen, being but one cent and a half beyondthe military ration, within twenty-five miles of steamboat navigation.Taking the ration at 15 cents, one year's subsistence, withoutany extras or any contingencies, would be $4,108,250. Doesthis seem a vast anoint ? The operation is vast. Here is anany of 75,000 souls. Look into the accounts of war operations,and see if such an army can be subsisted in an untravelled wilderness,for a year, at less expense. I say nothing of the supportwhich the government, unless it leaves them to starve, will indubitablybe compelled to furnish them, at the end of the year, andfor years to come.Then, Sir, we have titles to extinguish. The Chiekasaws are tobe put down on the Choctaw lands. Will this cost nothing ?The basis of all our operations has hitherto been to give acre foracre. The Cherokees are to be established on lands already grantedeither to the Creeks or to the Arkansas Cherokees. ' Somethingmust be done to quiet the claims of the Osages and Kansas,on whose reservations we are already encroaching ; and very extensiveextinguishing bustle made for the north-western tribes*.I say nodding of the claim of the Pawnees and Camanohes, whosoright to hunt in the whole region we must cither buy out or fio-htout. For this purpose, numerous treaties are to be held ; and thewhole aggregate expense, estimating the present value of the annuities,which will probably be the form of the payment, cannot be lessthan one million and a half. We have, then, the following iteninof the expenditure, incident to removing the several nations ofIndians from their native homes to the western wilderness : —Fii-st purchase of their title, $7,160 13:1Expense of improvements to be paid for or replaced,9,07.5,000Collection and transportation, 2,950 000Subsistence for one year, . , 4,106 250Cost of new lands in the West, ] 500000$24,091,333But, Sir, we have not done, even at this rate. We have promisedthese Indians, that, if they remove, we will keep up theirschools, now existing in considerable number. We have a territorialgovernment to support among them, which, we are toldby the department, will cost as much as that of Florida, which isabout $25,000 per annum. It must be much more expensive,considering the materials to be governed, and that the "ovens°294 MR. Everett's speech.ment is to descend to such details as counting off the trees, whicheach Indian family is to have in its wood lot. But I take it at$25,000. Then there is the expense of the military establishmentto be kept up. I will go into no considerations to show thata very large niilitaiy force, beyond any thing proposed or contemplatedhitherto, will be required to keep these Indians at peacewith each other ; to defend their against the unreclaimed tribes ;and to protect the frontier. I will confine myself to the expenseof the ten companies of rangers already asked for. I have examinedthe report of the quartermaster general, of the 8th of lastMarch, containing an estimate of the lii-st cost of mounting tencompanies and their annual support. Taking the cost of thehorses at $100 each, which we are told by general Jesup, "itwill be safer to assume," the first year's expense will be $83,750,and the annual charge, $39,875. So that the civil government ofthe new territory, and the military defence of the frontier, Avillamount to $G4,875 per annum, according to these estimates. Butno man can believe it v/ill rest within any such limitsI return to the cost of the operation, which I have calculatedon official estimates. It is twenty-four millions — almost twodollars per head for the estimated population, at the census of thisyear. This enormous sum is to be raised by a tax on the people.Let us see what proportion of it is to be paid by the severalStates. I take the estimated number fi-om a document submittedto the House, in reference to the apportionment of representatives,under the new census. On that basis, there will be paidfor removing the Indians, byMaine $748,000New Hampshire, 564,000Massachusetts, 1,152,000Rhode Island, 184,000Connecticut, 380,000Wei-mont, 548,000New York, 4,080,000New Jersey, 650,000Pennsylvania, 2,800,000Delaware, 156,000Maryland, 652,000Virginia, 1,400,000North Carolina, 920,000South Carolina, 570,000Georgia, 476,000Kentucky, 1,120,000Tennessee, 026,000Ohio, 2,000,000Louisiana, 200,000Mississippi, 120,000Indiana, 664,000Illinois, 390,000Alabama, 396,000Missouri, 290,000MR. Everett's speech. 295I ask gentlemen from every State in this Union, if they feel justifiedin laying such a tax on their constituents for such an object? Iwill not admit, that my constituents are less hl)eral than those of anyother member. They are a frugal people, Sir, and their frugalityenables them to piroA'ide honorably lor all just and equitable demandsof the government. But if we should go home, and tell thepeople of Massachusetts, that we have voted away eleven hundredthousand dollars of their money to remove these Indian nations,I believe they would call us to a very strict account, — an account,which I, for one, should not know how to meet. Sir, 1 solemnlybelieve, that I have not estimated the expense for removing thishost one dollar too high ; — but take it at a half; take it at a quarter,(and the chairman of the committee tells us, it may amount to$5,000,000,) is there a gentkmau here who thinks that his State,if the question were fairly put, would agree to be taxed to suchan extent for such an object ? The State of New York will haveto pay one million of dollars as her share of the expense, on itsadmitted cost. Let a resolution be introduced at Albany, approvingsuch a tax, for such a purpose, and what would be its fate .-'But the amount of this expenditure is not my greatest objectionto it. The mode of its disbursement is still more exceptionable.The bill. provides no check upon it. It is placed withinthe uncontrolled discretion of the department. Whatever confidenceany gentleman may place in that department, such a discretionis at var with the character of our institutions, and is peculiarlyso with the principle of si )specific appropriations, which hasbeen so strongly m-ged upon us as the rule of our conduct. Ofall the various objects connected with this bill, and comprehendedunder it, no one is specified. We cannot pass our appropriationbill for the support of government, without specifying the lowestofficer who is to receive a salary, and the amount of that salary ;and this, too, notwithstanding the existence of previous laws creatingthe office. Here we have a vast operation, extending totribes and nations, to tapis of thousands of souls, ]purchasing andexchanging whole regions, building fifteen thoissjuid'haljitadonsin a distant wilderness, and putting 75,000 individuals in motionacross the country, and not an officer or agent specified ; not asalary named ; not one item or expenditure limited ; the wholebut into the pocket of one head of department, to be scattered atills will !Sir, I impute no corruption, nor purpose of corruption,, to anyofficer, high or low. But I say a bill like this, which is to send agovernment agit to every Indian in the country, in order totempt him ofi"; which is to apprise the value of every Indianhabitation, from the comfortable dwelling of the Cherokee, to thewretched cabin of the fugitive Seminole ; which is to establisha home in the western prairie for evei-y Indian who has left oneeast of the Mississippi)! ; and to do all this, merely under the discretionof a department, is a thing unheard of in legislation. Sir, itmust of necessity be a scene of corruption without example.Your commissioners may be men of honor and probity ; but thenature of the operation will require an army of agents and MR. Everett's speech.agents, contractors and sub-contractors, appraisers and sub-appraised.Were it but for its effect on the morals of the countryin this respect, the passage of the bill ought to be earnestly deprecated.And now. Sir, what is the necessity of this measure ? What isthe necessity of removing the Indians ? Shall I countess my weakness,Sir ? I have really tried to tint a necessity for passing thisbill. So great has l)een the sensibility manifested in the Statesmost particularly interested ; so strong their urgency ; so alarmingthe consequences denounced upon us, if we do not pass it,that I have tried t(} tee] myself under a mora! necessity to pass it.I would gladly have gone for it, as the least of evils. But I cannotcatch a glini])se of any such necessity. I look in vain, in allthe documents from Georgia and elsewhere, to find a positivestrong reason wliy the Indians should be removed. I find nothingbut vague propositions, to which (with the utmost willingnessto feel their force) I can attach no clear, cogent sneaking. Theytell us, that, till the Indians are gone, they cannot consolidate theirsociety, nor complete their improvements. These generalities earlyno meaning to my nfnid ; at least, none to warrant such sternlegislation. " Coiisohdate their society !" Is not the social systemas solid in Georgia as any where else ? "I woidd not hear herenemy say so." And what obstructs her improvement ? Not,surely, the ]presence of a handful of Indians iij a corner of theState. What is the population of Georgia, where there is no roomfor these few Indians ? It is less than seven ta the square mile.We, Sir, in Massachusetts, have seventy-four to the square nile,and space for a great many more. And yet Georgia is so crowdedthat she must get rid of these Indians in her north-western corner !Sir, my eye was arrested this coming by a jjaragrajih in thepaper, said to be an extract from a letter of a most worthy andestimable gentleman, remembered with regard by many who hearme, as by myself — the governor of Georgia. As it contains nothingbut what I sincerely hope and believe is true, I will quote it : —The governor of Georgia, in a letter to a gentleman of Philadelphia,says : — " We have no such, class, as the poor. Our landsare so cheap, and the absolute necessaries of life so easily obtained,that the number of dependent poor are scarcely sufficient togive exercise to the virtues of charity in individuals. A beggaris almost as rare with us as a prince. Children, instead of beingan incumbrance lo the poor of our country, are their riches."[Mr. Wayne of Georgia here said — " It is true"]My friend from Georgia tells me it is true. I am heartily gladof it ; I hope it will always be true ; and I wish 1 had known it aweek or two ago, when I was trying to prove that the tariff badnot mined the Southern States.Being true. Sir, I appeal to that high-minded people to be asliberal as they are prosperous, and leave these poor Cherokees inthe possession of their native lands.I have been struck. Sir, with the prophetic import of a speechthat was uttered by a celebrated Cherokee chief, on occasion ofthe first cession that was made by treaty of the lands of that trilie,MR. Everett's si'Kiicii. 297in the now powerful and flourishing State of Tennessee. I wishthe historian* had given it in the very words of the chief; for everyman of taste will agree with me, that, among these moi-selsofnative eloquence, there are some which would do honor to thebest days and most gifted minds of Greece or Home. That treatywas negotiated in the memorable month of April, 1775. On thatoccasion, 0(^onnostata is said to have delivered " a very animatedand pathetic speech. He began with the flourishing state inwhich the nation once was, and stated the encroachments of thewhite people from time to time, upon the retreating and expiringnations of Indians, who left their homes and the seats of their ancestors,to gi-ratify the insatiable desire of the white people for moreland.Whole nations had melted away in their presence, likeballs of snow before the sun, and had scarcely left their namesbehind, except as imperfectly Recorded by their enemies and destroyers.It was once hoped that they woidd not be willing totravel beyond the mountains, so far from the ocean, on whichtheir commerce was carried on. But now that hope had vanished; they had passed the mountains, and settled upon the Cherokeelands, and wished to have usurpations sanctioned by a treaty.When that shall be obtained, the same encroaching spirit will leadthem upon other lands of the Cherokees ; new cessions will beapplied for, and, finally, the country which the Cherokees andtheir forefathers had so long occupied would be called for, andthe small remnant which may then exist of this nation, once sogreat and formidable, will be compelled to seek a retreat in somefar distant wilderness ; there to dwell but a short space of time,before they would again behold the advancing banners of thesame-reeds host who. not hf^i'y ^^'jlr; tn 'jcir.t CUt cr.V illlthc ""-threat for the miserable Cherokees, would then proclaim the extinctionof the whole race. He ended with a strong exhortationto run all risks, rather than submit to any further encroachmenton their territory ; but he did not prevail !"This was in 1775. Since then, Br, there has been more thanone period, when, though we talk (if 'misgiving peace" to these Indians,we have been glad to t;.ii;' it ; when they hung fearfullyupon the flanks of your settlements ; when Spain used them aaher allies, and held you in check through them. There havebeen times. Sir, when, had these Indians been inspired to foreseethe future, it would never have ! cen a suspect of dispute, forwhose benefit the treaties of Hope\vell and Houston were made.I assert, fearlessly, that there have been [periods when the preservationby them of the faith, plighted "between them and nsjwas an object as important to us, ar* ii Is now to them.But times are changed. Sir, in a Ji(t« visit to the public graveyard,my attention was an-rested by the simple monument of theCboctaAV chief, Push-ma-ta-ha. He was, I have been told bythose who knew him, one of nature's nobility, a man who wouldhave adorned any society. He lies quietly by the side of ourJudge Haywood's Civil and Political History of Tennessee, p. 43.298 MR. Everett's speech.statesmen and high magistrates, in the region — for there is onesuch — where the red man and the white man are on a level Onthe sides of the [plain shaft that marks the place of his bm'ial, Iread these words : —Push-ma-ta-ha, a Choctaw Chief, hies here. This Monumentto his Memory is erected by his brother Chiefs, who were associatedwith him in a Delegation from their Nation, in 1824, to theGeneral Government of the United States. He was a Warrior ofgreat distinction : he was wise in Council ; Eloquent in an extraordinarydecree : and, on all occasions, under all circumstances,the White Man's Fr.eud.''*The chief, whose grave-stone is so touchingly eloquent, Alasamong the head-men of the Choctaw people, who negotiated,with the present Chief Magistrate, the treaty of Oak's Stand.His name and that of the President are side by side on the parchment.It is well that he is gone ; for, Avere he alive, and did hepresume to exercise the office of chief, in which you recognisedhim, and do the acts which it is stipulated by the treaty he shoulddo, he would subject himself to the penalties of the lav of Mississippi,to be fined a thousand dollars, and imprisoned for a year.Sir, this policy cannot come to good. It cannot, as it professes,elevate the Indian. It must and veil! dishearten, deju-ess, andcrush him. If lie has within him a spark of that stride, withoutwhich there can be no rational improvement, this gloomy policywould subdue it. I have labored hard to take an opposite viewof the subject ; but there is no bright side to it. It is all unmingled.unmitigated e\\\. There is evil on the oth^^- zvl-, but nonecommensurate with that of this compulsory removal.There. Sir. T Sf t nev i;.r.f^=^V o:<,^^ ^i,.,/«m-» ir 1.".^ y-'lj ^,.„„^ ,f -,-, ■-•'■ J '■ "^- - ^-^^-■■.^ ^. . . J v^i. >>iu LI cat UJCIndians as free agents; if you Avill withdraw your legal duress ; ifthey are willing, after exploring the country, to go, I am willingthey should, and will join in making the appropriation. Butwhile the laws exist, beneath which they cannot live, it is in vainto tell me they are willing to go. Hove do you know it ? Doyou tell me a man locked up in prison does not wish to come out?Unlock the prison doors, and then you can tell.I have heard it sail, these laws are passed m terrorem ; that it isnot intended to enforce them. In terrorem, Sir, and the removalstill voluntary ! Are gentlemen serious ? Rcptal the knvs ; purthe Indians in a condition to act voluntarily, and then, if theychoose to go, I Avill not withhold my vote from any reasonableappropriation ; scarcely from an unreasonable one, to pay the costof the removal.Push-ma-ta-ha is said to have addressed himself to his brethren in thefollowing manner before his death : —I shall die, but you will return to our brethren. As you go along thepaths, you will see the flowers, and hear the birds sing; but Push-ma-ta-hawill see them and hear them no more. When you are come to your home,they will ask you, Where is Push-ma-ta-ha .' — and you will say to them. Heis no more. 'They will hear the tidings like the sound of the fall of a mightyoak, in the stillness of the woods."MR. Everett's speech. 299I adjure you, Sir, to recede : there is no disgrace in it. OtherStates, more powerful than Georgia, have receded, on points wheretheir honor and interest were equally involved. Sir, if" Georgiawill recede, she will do r.iore for the Union, and more for hei-self,than if she could add to her domain the lands of all the Indians,though they were all paved with gold.The evil, Sir, is enormous ; the violence is extreme \ the breachof public faith deplorable ; the inevitable suffering incalculable.Do not staiji the fair fame of the country : it has been justly said,it is in the keeping Congress, on this subject. It is more wrappedup in this policy, in the estimation of the civilized world, thanin all your other doings. Its elements are plain, and tangible, andfew. Nations of dependent Indians, against their will, under colorof law, are driven from their homes into the wilderness. Youcannot explain it ; you cannot reason it away. The subtletieswhich satisfy you will not satisfy the severe judgment of enlightenedEurope. Our friends there will view this measure with sorrow,and our enemies alone with joy. And we ourselves, Sir,when the interests and passions of the day are past, shall lookhack upon it, I fear, with self-reproach, and a regret as bitter asunavailing.Extract from an Opinion of Chancellor Kent, on the SovereigntyOF THE Indian Tkiees. Jo/msoTi's Reports.*• In the treaty between the United States and the Wyandots, Ottawas,Chippewas, and others, in 178"), it was provided. that if any Indiancommit murder, or robbery, upon a citizen of the United States, theyshall deliver him up to be punished according to our law. This surrenderof criminals is here made part of a national compact, and thedistinction is preserved between Indians and citizens ; and, v.'hile weassume the right to redress the injuries of the one, wo abandon theother to the protection of their own people. The treaties with theCherokees, in 1785 and 17i'l, go further, and provide, that citizensof the United States, committing robbery, or murder, on the Cherokees,shall be punished b}^ us in like manner as if the same werecommitted upon one of our own citizens. They also contain a newand striking provision, and that is, that citizens settling upon theirlands, thereby forfeit the protection of the United States, and theCherokees may punish them as they please. The same provision,relative to the surrender and puuisiunent of persons guilty of murder,or robbery, is inserted in the treaties with the Choctaws, Chickasaws,Shawanese, Creeks, Ottav.'as. Chippewas, &c. And, in thetreaties with the latter tribes, in 1789 and 1795, citizens settling ontheir lands are declared to be out of the protection of the UnitedStates, and liable to punishment at the discretion of the Indians.It would seem to me to be almost idle to contend, in the face ofsuch provisions, that these Indians were citizens or subjects of theUnited States, and not alien and sovereign tribes."Extract from an Opinion of the Supreme Court of the UnitedStates.The Court say, " The original inhabitants of this continent wereadmitted to be the rightful occupants of the soil, icith a legal as wellas just claim to retain possession of it, and to use it according to theirown discretionary Again : —If an individual might extinguish the Indian title for his ownbenefit, or, in other words, might purchase it, still he could acquireonly that title. Admitting their power to change their laws orusages, so far as to allow an individual to separate a portion of theirlands from the common stock, and hold it in severalty, still it is apart of tlitir territory, and is held under tum, by a title dependent ontheir own lacs. The grant derives its efficacy from their will ; andif they chose to resume it, and make a different disposition of theland, the courts of the United States cannot interfere fur the protectionof the title.The person who purchases land from the Indians, within theirterritory, incorporates himself with them, so far as respects the propertypurchased ; holds their title under ihcir protection, subject totheir lacs. If they annul the grant, we know of no tribunal whichcan revise and set aside the proceeding."Close of the professional Opinion of the Hon. William Wit,late Attorney-general of the United States.On every ground of argument, on which I have been enabled, bymy own reflections or the suggestions of others, to consider this question,1 am of the opinion,1. That the Cherokees are a sovereign nation ; and that their havingplaced themselves under the protection of the United States doesnot at all impair their sovereignty and independence as a nation."One community may be bound to another by a very unequal alliance,and still be a sovereign State. Though a weak State, in orderto provide tor its safety, should place itself under the protection of amore powerful one, yet, according to Vattcll (B. 1. C'h. 1,§ 5 and 6,)if it reserves to itself the right of governing its own body, it ought tobe considered as an independent State." 20 Johnson s Jiejwrt, 711,712, Goodwill vs. Jackson.2. That the territory of the Cherokees is not witling the jurisdictionof the State of Georgia, but within the sole and exclusive jurisdictionof the Cherokee nation.3. That, consequently, the State of Georgia has no right to extendher laws over that territory.4. That the law of Georgia, which has been placed before me, isunconstitutional and void — 1. because it is repugnant to the treatiesbetween the United States and the Cherokee nation ; 2. because it isrepugnant to a law of the United States passed in 1802, entitled " anact to regulate trade and intercourse with the Indian tribes, and topreserve peace on the frontiers;" 3. because it is repugnant to theConstitution, inasmuch as it impairs the obligation of all the contractsarising under the treaties with the Cherokees ; and affects, moreover,to regulate intercourse with an Indian tribe — a power which belongsexclusively to Congress.WM. Wit.Baltimore, June 20th, 1830.EXTRACTSFROM A SPEECH OF THEHON. JOHN TEST,Representative From INDIANA,DELIVERED IS THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, WednesdayEVENING, MAY ID, 1830.The first thing that strikes the mind in the case is its novelty.The government, ever since its cstablislnneiit, lias viewed thoseIndians in the light ol" sovereign communities, and treated withthem as such. In all oiu* intercourse with them for fifty orsixty years, we have negotiated and dealt with them as independentsovereignties, without a single exception ; but this bibnow proposes to change our policy, and throw all these tribesof Indians into the hands of the President of the United States,to be bargained with like individuals or petty corporations.No treaty is contemplated by the bill ; no condition withthem as a nation ; but a door is to be thrown open, by whichyou can approach every individual of the tribe, and make aseparate h.'irgain with him for his little improvement. Moreof this, however, when I conic to examine particularly the principlesof the bill. But I would ask, Sir, \V'iiy is it >ir,w necessaryto change our ])ohcy towards these sons of the forest?What has produced this necessity ? Will not the Indians agreeto sell their lands, and must they be made veiling at any rate,and by any means? Is it necessary to descend to making individualcontracts instead of national ones? If you cannot obtainthe consent of the nation to dispose of its domain, is itright and just to tamper with individuals, and thereby weakenits power, by distracting its councils, setting its members at waramong themselves, creating strife, feuds and separate interests,in order to accomplish, in this manner, what you could not byfair and honorable treaties ? Sir, I have said that our policyof treating with the Indians as sovereign communities has beensettled ever since the establishment of our independence ; and,I will say further, it has had the sanction of a!! the distinguishedstatesmen and patriots from the revolution down to thepresent day. General Washington and his cabinet solemnlyrecognised the principle, as appears by the document read tothe committee of the whole, by the honorable gentleman fromNew York, (mr. Storrs.) Alexander Hamilton, the elder JohnAdams, Mr. Jefferson, Mr. Madison, Mr. Monroe, and JohnQ. Adams, have all maintained the same opituo-n ; and theAmerican people recognise the same principle at this moment ;302 MR. test's speech.nor will they ever sanction any other, so long as the Indiansremain a distinct and separate race of men.Now, Sir, what have we done, and how stands the case ? In1785, 91, 95, and every year since, we have told these Indians,We will protect yon — you shall live under your own laws— nowhite man shall step) his foot upon your soil — your lines shallbe marked — and if a white man intrudes upon you, you maypunish him as you please, and we will hold him as being withoutour protection. Those treaties have been renewed — theynow subsist, and are in full force The national I'aith, and thenational honor, are all pledged for their support and maintenance.Nay, the very same person, who now holds in his handsthe national prerogative, has himself sanctioned the doctrine,and renewed all the pledges, while acting under other functionariesof the government. And now, since he has been elevatedto the lofty station which he holds, he has reversed allthese solemn decrees. He now holds a very different language.He tells the poor savage, I cannot protect you — you must submitto the laws of the States, or you must march to the wilderness; you must seek in the desert that repose which is deniedyou here. Georgia is a sovereign State — I cannot undertaketo control her: she must do as she pleases with you. If I wereto attempt to control her, she might do something injurious tous,and ruinous to you. Sir, this is a language the poor Indiannever heard before from this government, and never had aright to expect to hear. Nor is this an overdrawn picture : itis short of the tnuh. I need not refer to the book containingthe language : I hold it in my hand ; it his su every gentleman'stable in tho huusc.The first prominent feature in this bill, and which must strikeevery man the moment he casts his eye upon it, is this, that itproposes to withdraw from the Senate their registry powerover the treaties and compacts entered into by the Presidentof the United States. The whole burthen of this business is tobe thrown into his hands, to be disposed of according to hisdiscretion. No treaty is to be made in form. The bill declares"the President may lay off the districts of land," "the Presidentmay exchange lands," "the President shall do, and shallcause to be done," every thing proposed by the bill. The Senatehave yielded themselves into the hands of illic Executive, todispose of, no one knows how much of the ]rubric lands, butsurely not less than one Indeed millions of acres; and besidesthat, not less than twenty millions of pnbhc moneys ; and allthis without any check or control from any quarter whatever.This enormous sure of money is to be disbursed hinder his discretion,by such persons as he may think jjrojter to appoint,and who are answerable to him alone. All those vast contractsare to |}e carried into execution by men appointed solelyby the President, without consulting any power, save his own.If a petty officer ot' the government, without pay or responsibility,is to be permanently appointed, the President has to askthe advice and consent of" the Senate : but here, Sir, one .Test's speech. 303dred, and for what I know, or any one else, one thousand willbe appointed, for the disbursement of some twenty millions ofdollars of public money, subject only to the will and control ofthe Executive. If, Sir, I had the most implicit confidence in thediscretion, the energy and firmness of the President, I wouldwithhold from him this vast power and patronage. It is possiblehe may make some improvident appointments, as we haveundeniable evidence that he has done in some instances ; and theindividuals appointed may make some very onerous contracts:but the moment they are mule, they are binding upon the government,and you will have to appropriate money lor their payment,because the nation is pledged to do so. Where is thisvast scheme to end ? Seventy or eigjily thousand Indians areto be removed across the Mississippi, aud no principle establishedupon which it is to be done, except what maybe devisedby the Executive, within the provisions of a loose and indefinitebill. I ask again, Sir, if it were intended to consult the feelingsof the Indians upon the occasion, why was it necessary to withdrawthe subject from the treaty-making power? Why was itnecessary to throw the whole into the hands of the Executive,without, at least, consulting his constitutional advisers (theSenate)? He ought to have, in an affair of so nuicb importance,the counsel of the whole nation.Sir, I have another insuperable objection to this hill, and onethat it is impossible for me to reconcile with the duty I owe tomyself. I believe those Indians are sovereign communities, atleast so far as to render it necessary to hold treaties with them,as with other powers, and not mere compacts, as with individuals.The language of the Constitution is express, " thatCongress shall have [power to regulate commerce with foreignnations, among the several Statesmen and ivilh the Indian tribes*"And that the President shall have power, by and with theadvice and consent of the Senate, to make treaties, providedtwo thirds of the Seiiatoi-s present concurs'' Now, Sir, \n relationto the regulation of coHwnerce with foreign powers, andwith the Indian tribes, there is no kind of distinction made inthe Constitution between the modes to be pursued in relation toforeign [powers and that of the Indian tribes : hence, I take itfor granted,. there is no differences allowed to be made in themode of procedure between the two. It is to be done by treaties,and by laws in ]pursuance of treaties, and no other modecan be adopted by Congress without a violation of the Constitution.There is a treaty-making power created by the Constitution,and that is to be exercised in a particular way pointedout by the Constitution ; that being the case, this house, or bothhouses, cannot nullify or change that mode, without an expressviolation of its principles. What was the treaty-making powercreated for, if Congress may adopt any other mode they please ?I say it cannot be done by this, house, or by both houses, orotherwise the Constitution is a dead letter. If the President,by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, is alone authorizedto make treaties, how can Congress substitute any other304 .h Sir. test's speech.mode ? No one, I believe, would be hardy enough to affirm thatthe President alone could make a treaty with a foreign power;and if he cannot do so with a foreign power, I ask how can he doitwith an Indian tribe, when the power to do the one is grantedin the Constitution, by the very same words as is that to dothe other. What would the people of the Union say, if Congresswere to ]pass an act authorizing the President to negotiatea treaty with England, or any other foreign power, to adjustand fix a tariff of duties to suit his own notions, withoutconsulting the Senate or this house ? Would they not say theact was unconstitutional, as well as an infringement of theirrights ? Would they not say, that was a power they neverauthorized us to confer, and pronounce us usurpers for doingso.' Tliey certainly would, and justly too. I say. Sir, wouldnot such a proposition shock this nation ? And yet this billproposes to do what is in principle precisely the same thing,and, indeed, a scheme of equal magnitude, and of more alarmingand dangerous consequences.* * *-X- * *Sir, I have but a few swords more, and I have done. There isone feature in the law of Georgia which I have not mentioned,and which is prrJKips more onerous and more calculated tosecure impunity lo the wicked and malevolent, in the violationof the rights of the Indians, than any other: it is this, that noIndian can be received as a witness against a white man.Now, Sir, I would not find fault with such a provision, if Georgiadid not conii)el them to subnnt to her own laws : if shepermitted them to be governed by the rules and regulationswhich they prescribe for themselves, they would have no rightto complain, or, at least, not the same right ; or if she limiteddie provision of tl.e act to her own acknowledged dominion,and did iidt extend it to the lands and villages confessedly to the Indians ; but as it stands, how does it operate ?Why, Sir, the whites may go into their towns, anal murder men,women and children with perfect infinity, unless, indeed, thereshall happen to be an honest white man present, which willhardly ever be the case. The whole of the intercourse lawsof the United Stales are let loose, and rendered null and voidby the construction given them by the President of the UnitedStates. And white men are permitted by the laws of Georgiato go among them whenever they please; and, indeed, the executiveofficers are paid mileage for going ; and when there,they have a perfect immunity to commit every kind of outrageupon the Indians, because there can be no witnesses againstthem.