DESTINY.*' Why, who cries out on pride.That can therein tax any private party ?'* Who can come in and ^y that I mean her,When such a one as she, such is her neighbour ?Why, then, my taxing, like a wiIdgoose> fliesUnclaimed of any**Shakspeare.DESTINY;OR,THE CHIEF'S DAUGHTER.BT TUX Author OFMarriage** and " THE Inheritance**Wliat*8 in a name ?** — SHAKsrKiRX.IN THREE VOLUMES.VOL. IlEDINBURGH :PRINTED FOR ROBERT CADELL, EDINBURGH;AND WHITTAKER AND CO., LONDON.1831.EDINBURGH :Printed BY BALLANTTNB AND CO., PAUL'S Stork, Canonists*^'DESTINY.VOL. III.DESTINY.CHAPTER I.Some time elapsed ere Edith could composeher spirits sufficiently to quit the spot, once thescene of so much youthful pleasure — now thesilent witness of broken vows and departed joys.At length, though with sad and abstracted mind,she was slowly retracing her steps homewards,when her attention was roused by hearing thehorrid accents of Mr M^Dow calling loudly tosome one to draw to a side — ^for any sake todraw to a side. Looking up, she perceived thepause of alarm was a wood-cart which obstructedthe way, and arrested the progress of Mr4 DESTINY.M*Dow*8 gig. Some trees lay felled by theside of the road, and increased the difficulty ofadvancing. The gig was evidently ill-drivenand overloaded, containing his own bulky person,and those of two ladies of large dimensions— the hapless Amailye prefixed to the whole.Edith saw with dismay that escape was impossible,unless she had actually turned roimd andfled, which her native politeness would not permither to do. The road was narrow, and whetherfrom awkwardness on the part of Amailyeor her master, the gig was in such a position,that for the cart to pass without upsetting it wasimpossible.Mr M*DoW was evidently in great agitationat the alarming predicament in which he hadplaced himself. " This driving is really a mostticklish business," said he, with a very red icelandmy beast has not been much used to it —and where there's ladies in the case, it's really —hem — I think my best plan is to get out, MrsM*Dow, and lead Amailye past the cart —-justtake the reins for a moment, my dear," to hisDESTINY. 5lady — ^^ just sit still; there will be no danger foryou, once I'm out**And thereupon Mr M^Dow descended, andtaking Amailye by the hair of the head, hedragged her past the cart ; and with the senseof safety his courage and. spirits rose to theirusual pitch*^* Your most obedient. Miss Malcolm; Ireally did not recognise you just at first — thismight have been a serious rencounters for thisis an awkward turn of road — but as it is, it hasturned out very well — this is a most pleasantmeeting Allow me to introduce Mrs M^Dowto you. — Colin, my dear, this is Miss Malcolmof Henry, whom you've often heard me mention."Mutual bows were of course exchanged.•* And this is Miss Violet Muckle, my wife'syoungest sister; we are but just come off ourmarriage tower which was a most delightful.one ! We were most fortunate in weather —scarcely a drop of rain the whole time. Wespent some days in Edinburgh — it's really a mostsuperb city! Mrs M^Dow was much pleasedwith it ; but I regretted that I hadn't thought of6 DESTINY.procuring letters to some of the principal literarycharacters there. Mrs M^Dow has rather a turnthat way, and Miss "Violet, we allege, is half ablue stocking. The Edinburgh ladies, it is said,are all rather blue." Then, in a tone of vulgarsympathy, protruding hia fex^e as near ^to Edithas possible, he was beginning, ^^ I was muchamazed and concerned to hear"When shrinking back, she said, " Excuse me,I fear I am rather late ;" and she attempted topass on.O, I don't think it can be late ; but MrsM'Dow's my regulator now — ^hoch, ho !"Mrs M'Dow here displayed a highly ornamentedwatch and seals which hung at her side,and proclaimed the hour.Ay, were come on very well considering;only considering though, Mrs M^Dow; for Idon't travel just so briskly now as I used to doin my bachelor days — snow that I'm tangled witha wife — ^hoch, ho, ho !"You must always have your joke, MrM^Dow," said the lady, with a laugh, and a tossof the head.DESTINY. 7Mr M'Dow, having now taken a safe positionwent on : ^^ I was desirous of taking the earliestopportunity of waiting upon my excellent patron.I considered it a proper mark of respectboth to him and myself, considering the manyyears we have lived upon such pleasant, friendlyterms ; and I was likewise anxious to make MrsM^Dow and you known to each other, MissMalcolm, as I flatter myself it will be a mutualadvantage. You must often find yourself lonesomeenough at Glenroy ; it's a great comfortfor a lady of taste and refinement to have asuitable companion of her own sex at hand."Edith tried to articulate something, but invain ; she could only bow in silence.Mr M^Dow proceeded : " I was vastly happyto find my excellent friend Glenroy so well andhearty. I had a long chat with him ; and I wasamazingly relieved to hear from him, that therewas no truth in certain evil reports, that someill-disposed wretches had been spreading on avery delicate subject. It's really most shameful,"in a louder key ; " I only wish I couldfind out who it was, I would not spare them !"8 DESTINY.Edith shuddered, aad attempted to pass, butinvain.« Isatalong time with Glenroy, honest man;he seemed really happy to see me ! / But,' sayshe, ^ Mr M'Dow, I wish you had come half anhour ago, when I had Reginald and Edith here,just waiting for you; they've been kept waitingAnd then, poor man, he gave me a good down*set for having stayed away. ' Why,' says I, ^ Imust plead guilty so &r, that we extended ourtower to a much greater length than w« hadthoughts of at first starting ; but you must waittill you've seen my apology, Glenroy ; I thinkyou'll admit if s a fair one — ^hoch, ho, ho !' "^^ You needn't put the blame upon me, MrM^Dow," said his lady.Well I confess I had no great objectionsto play the truant for a while — it's an amazingrelief for a man to get away from the duties of alaborious calling, such as mine ; and I found agood deal to see in Edinburgh, though the ladieswould not allow it was equal to Glasgow! the streets and shops are very well,"DESTINY. 9said Mrg M<Dow; «« but Vm sure Air Castleis not to be compared to our Green P'<^ The worst of it is* said Miss Violet, with asweet solemnity, <* it is so much in the way inthe Prince's Street Gardens."** And as for their Joint-stock Dairy we heardso muchabont,'' cried Mrs M^Dow, vehemently,^* I'm sure ifs not to be spoken of in comparisonof ours."*^ Well, I admit they must draw in their hornsthere," said Mr M'Dow, with one of his loudestlaughs.** You must always have your pun, minister,"said Mrs M'Dow, with a giggle of delight.I enquired for Sir Reginald," said MrM^Dow, again addressing Edith, who stood theimage of despair ; but ^' when I heard you andhe were both missing, I could not help saying,< I wish they may not have gone to steal a marchupon us, Glenroy ; it will be a pretty businessif they've given us the slip, after all— loch,hoch, ho'"Pray, suffer me to pass," said Edith, sickat hearta210 DESTINY.O, certainly** said Mr M^Dow, but withoutmoving a joint of either himself or his Amailye.^^ I was afraid we should have had a shower ;'but my wife is more weather-wise than me, itseems, for she and Miss Violet there, twould futon their best bonnets to wait upon you. I toldthem that was really putting the best foot foremost,and that they ought to have kept them forthe kirk on Sunday, but-will you stand still,Amailye !'*The two bonnets were of salmon-colouredsilk, with pink and green ribbons, and bunchesof roses and sweet pea. The faces were large,flat, broad, red and white, assured-looking faces,such as are to be seen in scores on every market-day.** It looks very like a change, minister, — Iwish we mayn't have a shower," said Mrs M^-Dow, looking up in alarm, as a passing cloudfor a moment obscured the sun.Ay, that's one word for me, and two foryourself, I suspect, my lady fair. Oh, theybonnets ! — Stand still, Amailye ! — I allege mywife thinks more of her new bonnet than sheDESTINY. 11does of me ; — is that true, Colin?" with a lookof triumphant love beaming in his face.O, Mr M'Dow, you're really too bad !'*replied the lady, in a tone of reproachful tendearness.^^ Bad as I am, you've taken me for betteror worse — remember you that, my dear — hocfa,hoch, ho !"^^ I really don't think I could have venturedto take you at all, if I had seen you as daft asyou are to-day, minister," said the lady, in atone of mawkish affectation.If you think you've got a bad pennyworth.Colly, you'll not easily get me off your hands,1 can tell you," cried the delighted Mr M^Dow,for I'm not disposed to part with my bargain,I assure you; but I flatter myself you and Iwill be able to put up together — What say you.Miss Violet?'A burst of laughter was Miss Violet's reply.^' Don't you believe her. Miss Malcolm, buttake my advice, and follow our example as estas you can. That was really a most scandalousreport, I was alluding to !"12 DESTINY.Edith's blood ran cold. ^^ I entreat you willsuffer me to pass, Mr M^Dow/' she cried, in atone, and with a look, that might have moveda stone, but which had no effect on the obtuseorgans of Mr Mcdowellget a shower, minister I" cried MrsM^Dow, in a flurried manner, as she again castan agitated look at the impending cloud.<^ There it is ! there's the bonnet again, MrsM^Dow ; but perhaps there's a little thought ofthe gudeman too, for I can tell you my wife's afamous nurse, — she's been doctoring my throatfor me, for I had a little of a hoarseness lately,and I alleged she was very anxious that I shouldmake a great show-off in the pulpit on Sunday,being my first matrimonial discourse; but wecan't agree about the text, I "O, Mr M'Dow, it's really getting veryblack in the west !" and Mrs M'Dow, gettingdesperate at the thoughts of her undone salmon-colouredsilk bonnet, gave a jerk to the reins,and a chirrup to Amailye.Hoot toot, Mrs M'Dow, this will neverdo ; what will my people say, if they see thatDESTINY. 13my wife has got the whip-hand of me already —hoch, hoch, ho ! — But I think," addressing Edith,^^ the Sjmod itself would be satisfied that I couldnot be in better hands, if it once knew MrsM^Dow." Here Amailye backed a little. sandif she should be the occasion of any backsliding,I think I may venture to say, they have only tolook in her fieu^e, and they'll forgive them all."And with this flourish Mr M^Dow resumedhis seat in the gig, and with a ^< Hap, hap," toAmailye, was once more in motion; but hisvoice was heard resounding through the woodsas he turned round his head, and called, to theutmost extent of his lungs, '^ I hope. Miss Malcolm,you will soon have some work for theminister !"14 DESTINY,CHAPTER ILIt would be a vain attempt to depict the stateof Glenro/s mind on the defection of his nephew.Not that he was at all aware of the nature orextent of the evil, for it would have been alikeethel and needless to have acquainted him withthe truth. His mind was now incapable of receiving,or at least of retaining, aught but theever-recurring images and ideas which seemedindigenous to the soil. As these followed notin regular succession, but came confusedly crowdingtogether, pell mell, so did their kindred emotionsof pride, sorrow, anger, impatience, anddespondency, commingle in strange disorder, tillhis benighted mind, still groping for happiness,would at length lapse into fatuity or forgetfulness.DESTINY. 15Dupe, not of tomorrow, but of to-day, hestill lived in the momentary expectation of Reginald'sreturn ; and as his notions of time were asindistinct as of every thing else, he thus remainedin comparatively happy ignorance, that days,weeks, and months, were like the brook flowingon, ^^for ever changing, unperceived the change**The present only was his calender, and deeplysunk is that mind where only the present findsplace !It was Edith's province to sit hour after hourstriving to beguile the old man's childish imparthence, or soothe his querulous disappointments,for Edith was now all in all to him. Independentof the feeling of natural affection which, evenunknown to himself, still lingered in his heart,her image was indissolubly united in his mindwith that of Reginald, the heir of his glory ;while she was near him, he seemed to thinkReginald could not be &r off, or else he viewedher as a sort of hostage that ensured his speedyreturn.It was a heavy burden that Edith had to bear,and a mere selfish worldly spirit could not have16 DESTINY.sustained it as she did. But a sacred and interestingduty lay before her, and to that she devotedherself.In most cases the offices of filial obedience andaffection may be considered as privileges, ratherthan as duties; for happy may they accountthemselves whom God permits to reflect backupon the hoary head 'tis their delight to cherish,even a feeble portion of that love and gladness,which from the first dawn of life had showeredblessings on their own daily path !But Edith could not be supposed to feel thefull influence of filial love, for there was nothingin the character of her father to fill the deepplaces of die heart. Mere natural affection isindeed a powerful sentiment in every breast —but how is it heightened and refined when thevirtues of the parent claim alike the love andreverence of the child ? They only can tell whohave most deeply venerated where they mostfondly loved ! Still she loved him as the authorof her being; and the infirmities of his mindand body seemed to endear him to her still morelAs the proud, turbulent, overbearing Chief, heDESTINY. 17had been the object of her fear — as the helplessinfirm imbecile old man, broken down by griefand with a dreamy sense of disappointmentcorroding his latter days, he possessed strongerclaims on her tenderness and sympathy thanever he could have had in his high and palmystate.So passed the winter, cheered by aughtsave many a kind visit from Mrs Malcolm andher finely. Glenroy's situation was a sufficientexcuse for his daughter declining to receivecompany, even that of Mr M^Dow, although hemade many attempts to intrude upon her privacy.She learnt accidentally that Sir Reginald stillremained at Dunshiera in no less strict seclusion;and, spite of herself, a vague and sickly hopewould occasionally spring up in her heart, that achange might yet take place — that Reginaldmight yet awake from the delirium of passion,and return to the hallowed affection of his earlydays. But the hope had no root in itself, and oftenas it might spring up it soon withered away, forEdith's better judgment and loftier feeling refuse.18 DESTINY.sed to cherish the flattering chimera. And wellfor her peace that it was so. At the end of somemonths she received a letter from Reginald ; itwas written in the language of complaint andreproach. ^ He dwelt on the wretchedness he hadendured on her account — she declared that lifewas insufferable to him — a, burden more than hecould bear — that, bereft of her regard, andbani^-ed from Glenroy, nothing remained for him butalife of exile and sorrow — that he was thereforeon the point of bidding a long adieu to Scotland— ism he knew not, he cared not where heshould go; but wherever he went, he shouldever fervently pray a better and happier lotmight be hers — and concluded by again protesting,that the only alleviation to his misery wouldbe the assurance of her happiness.Edith was deeply affected by this letter. Thethoughts of Reginald an exile from his father'shalls — from his own fair domain — from the landof his birth — and she the cause— even the innocentcause — added new anguish to her feelings.The illusion of love was not yet wholly dispelledfrom her heart, else she would have viewed theDESTINY. 19matter in a different light* She would have seenthat what appeared to her as sensibility, was, inreality, mere worldly selfishness, coloured overwith the sickly hue of a better feeling.Reginald despised the society of the country :He was wretched in solitude, and he had noneof that benevolence of feeling, or even manlypatriotism, which would have prompted hips toseek a refuge from his own misery in alleviatingthe distresses, or improving the condition, of hispeople and property. When he, therefore, bewailedthe necessity he was under of leaving hisnative country, he was sincere in believing whathe said, for he was unconscious that, in reality,he was merely going to seek amusement elsewhere.A long and dreary interval succeededhis departure, during which Edith remainedignorant of the fate of the heart-broken exile,whom fancy often painted to her as sometimessailing over the boundless ocean, seeking in anotherhemisphere to lose th keen remembranceof home, or wandering sad and solitary amidburning plains or pathless forests, reckless oflife, or rather courting death. Alas ! what brosDestinyken reeds will not woman's love cling to, ere itcan finally part with all its fond imaginations !Poor Edith had yet to learn another chapter ofthe deceitfulness, and the inconsistency of thehuman heart ! In little more than three monthsfrom the date of his mournful farewell, the newspapersannounced, in the usual pompous style,the magnificent ceremonial of the marriage ofSir Reginald Malcolm Baronet, to Florinda,,^Baroness Wa^deg^ave !•'■ :i'.-DESTINY. 21CHAPTER HI.And now Edith felt as though her destinywere sealed. Never more, ddd it seem, couldher heart awaken to the love of aught that licecould bestow. The idol her imagination hadfashioned, had Mien ; but even while it lay inshivers at her feet, still her fond, credulous hearthad unconsciously hovered amid the broken fragments,in the vain hope that the image it had soadored might again rise, to receive the homageof a still enslaved soul. But now it had turnedto very dust and ashes in her sight, — snow theillusion was dispelled, and the selfish, hollow characterof her lover appeared in its true colours.It was then a purer light dawned upon the darknessof her spirit. She now discerned that theimage of the creature had held that place in herheart, and exercised that sway over her mind.22 DESTINY.which belonged only to the Creator. The en->enchantment of life was then indeed dissolved, butwhat heir of immortality would wish to remainthe dupe of this world's enchantments ? Vainlabour,•" When souls of highest birthWaste their impassioned might on dreams of earth !*'I never was happy' says Adams, " till I knewI could not be happy in this world."To a mind so excited as hers had been, it wasnot the daily routine of common duties and pettycases that could fill that aching void, that desolationof heart, which, of all human miseries, isperhaps the most insupportable For, to borrowthe eloquent language of Chalmers, ^' The loveof the world cannot be expunged by a mere demonstrationof the world's worthlessness. Butmay it not be supplanted by the love of thatwhich is more worthy than itself?' The heartcannot be prevailed upon to part with the world,by a simple act of resignation. But may notthe heart be prevailed upon to admit into itspreference, another, who shall subordinate theDESTINY. 23world, and bring it down from its wonted ascendency? If the throne which is placed there,most have an occupier, and the tyrant that nowreigns has occupied it wrongfully, he may notleave a bosom which would rather detain hiathan be left in desolation. But may he not giveway to the lawful sovereign, appearing withevery charm that can secure his willing admittance,and taking unto himself his great powerto subdue the moral nature of man, and to reignover it? In a word, if the way to disengagethe heart from the positive love of one greatand ascendant object, is to fasten it in positivelove to another, then it is not by exposing theworthlessness of the former, but by addressingto the mental eye the worth and excellence ofthe latter, that all old things are to be doneaway, and all things are to become new."The mind of Edith gradually became bracedand invigorated by this new and wholesomeprinciple, which imparted to her soul that vivifyingwarmth, without which virtue is but aname. She felt her trials, but she no longerfelt them as the cruel mocking or wayward24 Destiny.caprices of chance or fortune ; for now she believedthat all human trials, painful as they maybein their endurance, transient and perishablein their existence, are nevertheless designed byDivine wisdom to exercise a purifying and apermanent influence on the immortal soul, bybring it to seek its happiness in Him, whoalone is the fountain of happiness, and with whomit is destined for ever to dwell.Ohy sacred sorrow ! by whom hearts are tried,Sent not to punish mortals, bat to guide ;If thou art mine, (and who shall proudly dareTo tel his Maker he has had his share ?)Still let me feel for what thy pangs are sent.And be my guide, and not my punishment."With this prayer at her heart, and in the dischargeof the daily duties of life, thus passed theeven tenor of three long years, during whichGlenroy lingered on in increasing dotage andinfirmities, unconscious of evil, unsusceptible ofpleasure—AU relish of realities expired.All feeling of futurity benumbed."And when at length the hour of his departurecame, all that could be said of his death was, that'DESTINY* 25he had merely ceased to breathe ; — but oh, thedeep mystery of that simple transition ! oh, thedread import of that silence, which mortal lipsnever can disclose !Edith felt as all must feel, more or less, at thebreaking of so dear and sacred a tie. Friendshipand love, dear and holy affections as theymay be, are the affections we ourselves haveformed and chosen, — ewe can look back upon thetime when as yet they were not, and their existencewas not linked with ours ; but from thefirst dawn of consciousness, it was a parent's lovethat beamed upon our hearts, and awakened alltheir best and holiest sympathies. Friends maymeet as strangers, — the tenderest bands of love,even wedded love, may be broken, — but 'tisGod himself who has formed that one indissolublebond, which neither human power nor humanfrailty ever can dissolve. But now thisoccupation was gone, — ^and oh, the sadness ofthat morning light, which dawns upon us onlyto proclaim that it is indeed gone !The grief of Benbowie and Mrs Macaulayshowed itself according to their different disposeVOL. III. Bsitioiiis md mode of feeling. The fono^ saidnothing, uttered neither sigh nor lamentation ;he only paced the floor with a. heavier step, oatlooked round with a duller and more stupefiedgee ; the latter, even in the midst of her afflictionssincere as that was, still contrived to findsome consolation in the preparation for, and inthe anticipation of, the magnificent ceremonialwhich should close her beloved Chief's mortalcareer. The last solemn rites were now all thatremained to be paid to the Chief of Glenroy ;and after vainly waiting in hopes of the arrivalof Sir Reginald, (who, with his lady, was abroad,)Captain Malcolm, ash . nearest relative of thedeceased, was obliged to taJ^e the lead upon theoccasion.The burying of the dead is a simple operation; but custom has varied and amplified theaccompanying rites to a great variety of formsand observances. The sacred and impressiveservice of the Church of England, in which themany sublime and affecting texts of Scripturethat bear upon man's mortality, are so forciblybrought before the mind, soothes the feelings.DXSTIKT. 27and elevates the soul of the mourner, when readover the remains of the righteous— one whoseglorious immortality we feel assured is alreadybegun ; and though we still feel that, ^^ in themidst of Use, we are in death," we feel also diesalutary and consoling truth expressed by diesaddest but truest of poets, —This troth how certain, when this life is o'er,Man dies to live, and lives to die no more**But to the thinking mind there are misgivings,and the whole seems little more than a solemnmockery, when pronounced over the sad reliesof worldly pride, unruly passion, and scom-fvl unbelief. The extreme unction of the Citopics professes to bear along with it a savingefficacy ; but the Church of England service, ifread over the remains of the wicked and theimpenitent, can serve no purpose but to harrowdie feelings of the living, and rake up the ashesof the dead. In the plain Presbyterian form, asfar as that goes, there is the power of adaptingit to most cases and circumstances ; and althoughit never attains to the sublime and finished excellenceof the Episcopal service, still, in the28 DESTINY.hands of a good and conscientious man, a solemnand a useful lesson may be learned from its simpleand impressive truths.But the service on the present occasion, asperformed by Mr M*Dow, more resembled aclumsy heathen apotheosis, than a simple Christianrite; though, to do him justice, he hadlaboured with all his might to show forth themerits of his respected patron, whose loss he,from various motives, sincerely and deeply regretted.A vast concourse assembled to pay thelast honours to the mighty departed; and theChief of Glenroy was consigned to the narrowhouse with all but royal pomp.And now Edith stood alone in the world, anda dreary prospect lay before her— deprived ofthat resting-place for the affections, which thetender relation of a parent more or less affords,she by the same stroke found herself suddenlyreduced from a state of wealth and consequence,the state in which she had been born and reared,to one of actual poverty and dependence.Glenroy's estate was strictly entailed on themale heirs, and his personal property was foundDESTINY. 29not equal to the amount of his debts. His marriagehad been made without the formality ofsettlements ; and his natural indolence of mindin all that related to matters of business, togetherwith his habits of reckless profusion andostentation, had ever prevented him from takingany steps towards securing a provision for hisdaughter. The worth or the affection of a parentiscertainly not to be estimated by the amount ofthe wealth he may bequeath to his children, since,in the dear remembrance of a good life, a virtuousexample and an unsullied name, a parent mayleave a more precious inheritance to his posterity,than all the boast of wealth or pride of ancestry— while another may gather up accumulatedriches, which turn to dust and ashes even inhis own sordid grasp, or may transmit them tofuture generations with a blighted name, a despisedmemory, and a character stamped with itsown base ignoble features. But Glenroy did notbelong to either of these classes ; he had led alife of mere worldly pride, vanity, ostentation,and prodigality ; he had sown the wind, leavingit to those who should come after him to ^^ reap30 DESTINY.tube whirlwinds he had lead his good things in4iJ!S owB life — Cleaving it to his child to eat thebitter fruits of poverty, humiliation, and dependence.In due time, it was necessary that Edithjdu>uld be apprised of her situation; and that was done with all possible delicacyaxed precaution by her kind friends the Ms^-epimB^ still there was no way in which the tnxAi.could be told so as to blunt its severity. Hiefact itself could not be disguised, however muchfriendship and tenderness might strive to s(^enit. She, the daughter of proud Glenroy, rearedamidst the rude magnificence of feudal state,and accustomed personally to habits of noble.expenditure and costly refinement, to be aU atonce sunk to a condition of the most sordidpenury and abject dependence !It is not those who have been born and bredinaffluence, who can all at once comprehendthe nature of absolute poverty — those who havebeen accustomed to will their every gratificationcan ill conceive the privations of want — the slitsand expedients of Mien fortune— the difficultyDBtinnihr. Siwkioh the mind has to extract ks desire Mdthe habits of self-indulgence and luxury wbl^fauve to be overcome or annihilated ; in short,nothing differs more than abstract and actingpoverty.Edith was, as may be supposed, profoundlyignorant of all those things in detail ; but thesimple fact that she was destitute, was sufficientlystrange and appalling. In vain did MrsMalcolm, as she folded her to her heart assureher, she looked upon her as her own daughter ;and besought her, in all the fervour of the fondest,warmest affection, to look upon Inch Organas her future home. Edith assented to itsaffording her a temporary asylum ; but she couldnot bear to think of it as her permanent residence.The state of Glenro/s affairs had beencommunicated to Sir Reginald by letter. Areply was received, requesting that Edith wouldcontinue to consider Glenroy as her own, andmake him her banker, until proper arrangementscould be made to secure her futurecomfort and independence. But to remain atOleiiroy, or receive pecuniary aid from RegisDESTINY,bald, were both out of the question ; and shetherefore prepared to bid a long, a last adieuto the home of her youth — to her father's house.Vain would be the attempt to depict the feelingswith which that was done —Ye who laye known what 'tis to dote uponA few dear oli|}ecta, will in sadness feelSuch partings break the heart !" —DESTINY. S3CHAPTER IV.The invitation to Inch Orran had been noless kindly and cordially extended to Mrs Macauley,who, indeed, like Dominie Sampson, haddeclared her resolution of sticking by her patron'sdaughter to the last gasp. Mrs Macauleyfelt this as she felt every affliction, in her ownpeculiar way. Prone as she was to indulge thevisionary belief that she beheld coming eventscasting " their shadows before," she was no lessgiven to reverse the figure ; and no sooner didan evil befall, than she was busy seeking for theblessing which she was certain was followingclose in its train. " O, what Curious creatures weare!" exclaimed she to Benbowie, as the tearsflowed down her cheeks ; " to think of Glen-toy'sdaughter being brought to such straits ! —Oh, if we could but see to the back of this greatcloud that's upon her — not a bit but we wouldB-234 1>SST|NY«b^. lurked at the grand things that are providedfor her, if not in this worlds sorely in thatwhich is to come; but we are such po<^ bend%^raat creatures, that we can only dp as goodJob did, put our hands upon our mouths, 9Jfidhold our tongues. Oh, surely, if it had not been6if 0€»ie great purpose, filings would jDer^rJIayebear permitted to take this turn. Such a goodnan as Clearly,, and so proud of his omni daughter,would never have got leave to forget to dowhat was right, if it had not been appointed forour good ; and, after all, we have great reasont^Mbe thankful. Oh ! I read such excellent wordsi^.a good book of Holy Living, the t'other day,tliiat, 'deed, I learnt them by heart, and I'veoften said them over to myself since ; but I neverthought they were to be made suitable for Glen-soy'sdochter. Now hearken to me, Benbowie,loidviBee if you can understand me — ^ Is thatbeast better that hath two or three mountains tograze on, than a little bee that feeds on dew ormamma, and lives upon what falls every morningfrom the storehouses of heaven, clouds, andProvidence ?' But one thing I'm sure of, Ben-bowie,that if I was you like the great beast,with hk mouiitaiiM to gfsxe mi, and wm GlM*My's cochlea, like die little bee dist htti t6 b^$Bd firm the Storehouses of Providence, tt4»tfiiHt ^ttl I would think myself highly fitvoUMd,if I was permitted to make her a present ctf maybeten thousand pounds, or so— that I would I"* '^Benbowk's eyes grew rounder and rounder*^ Ten thousand pound is a great deal of money,Mrs Afaeauley— a very great deal of money. Okimy conscience, it's a great deal of money .^^Iwish you goodnnorning, Mrs Macauley Y* AitBenbowie ordered his chaise, and departed.Various were the communing which MrsMacauley held, as her mind revolved high mattersof expediency and propriety as to where herbeloved charge should, or could reside, with thegreatest comfort to herself, and the dignity dueto Glenroy's daughter. But, with a true delicacyof mind, which would have shamed many in a &rsuperior station, Mrs Macauley abstained fromall appearance of commiseration, nor even alludedin the detest degree, in presence of Edithherself, to her change of fortune. A little tingeof additional respect, was all the difference perceptiblein her mannes.36 DESTINY.Tbe. only person on whom Edith possessedany near daim of relationship was a half sisterpoi her mother's, but in all other respects an utterstranger to her, or known only by the contemptuousmanner in which she had heard heroccasionally mentioned by Glenroy as a cit — acockney, and so on. At the same time, as shewas rich and childless, he did not disdain to conciliateher favourable opinion, by occasionallyordering a box of game, or some such demonstrationof regard and affinity, to be sent, as might,he thought, entitle him or his family to a goodlegacy in return. But as yet, Mrs Ridley'stestimonies of affection had consisted in sending,at three several times, to Edith, a small Tunbridgeware work-box ; a copy of " Fordyce'sSermons to Young Women ;" and lastly, " Lettersto a Young Lady, on a variety of Usefuland Interesting Subjects, calculated to improvethe Heart, to form the Manners, and enlightenthe Understanding. By the Rev. John Bennet"inscribed, from her affectionate aunt, CatherineRidley.It was by the maternal side that Glenroy'slady and Mrs Ribley had been related The fa-destiny,37ther of the former, a poor Highlander, had lefta handsome widow and an only child, to pushtheir fortune as they best could. The child hadbeen taken by her father's relations, and becameafterwards the wife of Glenroy. The widow wentas companion to an old lady in London, where shecontrived to captivate a citizen of credit, if notof renown. An only daughter was the offspringof this union : heiress of her father's wealth,at his death she bestowed it with her handupon Mr Peter Ribley, a sleeping partner inthe old-established house of Judge, Ribley, andCompany. As there was no family to inheritthe concentrated wealth of this pair, Glenroyhad made it out as a clear case, in his own mind,that a portion of it would certainly descend to hischildren ; and, indeed, he seemed to think it wouldbe a great honour for the old cockney's moneyto be permitted to flow into so noble a channel.Edith had received a letter of condolence fromMrs Ribley on her father's death ; it was sucha letter as any body, or every body, might write,a neat, clear, plain, commonplace letter, containingthe ordinary expressions of regret usual on38 oesnNV.tboBfe ocottioBS) where little or soaking ^f theland 18^ or mean he felt ; concluding with an inyi-'ti^cm to spend a year with Mr Ribley and Jief^smitten they should be happy to assist her ^iarranging her plans for her future mode ^ life.Edith had answered this letter, defining theinvitation for the present, but with a half promiseof accepting it at some future time, whenher health and spirits might be more equal tothe exertion. But months elapsed, and she stillremained the cherished inmate of Inch Arran,secluded from all but the society of those dearfriends, the salutary intercourse of their piouspastor, and visits of kindness to the neigh*louring poor. Many who had experienced herhti^fs hospitalities, had sought to repay thento his daughter ; and she had received many kindand pressing invitations from some of those whomshe had ever welcomed in the days of her prosperity.Some more sordid and selfish spirits,indeed, ceased to notice her whom they hadformerly flattered and caressed, when presidingover an almost princely establishment ; others ofvulgar minds and inferior station, seemed to thinkDestiny. 39'die nere lack of weaJbh had reduced the danger%gr (oi Gkcnr9j to a level with themsehnea^jAmkmgti the number was Mr M^Dow, whofired with the noble ambition of patronising theangler of the lordly Chief to whom he owedhit preferment, wrote to her as £oUow8 :^' My !>£▲& Madam,^*Ab 1 have not had the good fortune tofind youlit home on my late visits to Inch Orran, and itia rather inconvenient for me to ride so four for amorning call, I take what I conceive the preferale mode of communicating with you on a malter whidli Mrs M^Dow and myself have muchai heart By the lamented death of my lateexcellent friend, your father, I am truly concernedto learn your circumstances are not altogetheraud as might have been reasonably expectedfrom the high station which your father occupied,and which, consequence, you had always beenaccustomed to enjoy. I beg to assure you thischange in your circumstances will not in anyshape affect the high opinion I have all alongentertained of you. No doubt die bereavement,40 1)estinV.801^ as it was, of so valuable a life as that of yougood'ftitb^s, has been pretty eonsidembl;^ augmentedby the distressing turn which affairs havetlA:en, which have rendered this, I may sayi^avariegated calamity of no common complexionsand since misfortunes will befall the best of us,it behoves us to make up our minds to them ; foras Solomon says, ^ There is a lime for all thingsI therefore hope that your own excellent sense,and the company of some cheerful KodiraMonal^regions friends, may go far to bring about agreat improvement in your health aUd spirits ;aid I will be extremely gratified if it should bethrough my instrumentality that it is so. Forthat purpose Mrs M'Dow and myself are of opinion,that a change might prove highly beneficialto you, and it will give us both great pleasure tohAve your company at the manse for a few wets.We are hopeful you will favour us by namingan early day, as we can promise you more ami^e-nient at present, than it may be in our power toprocure for you hereafter. Mrs M'Dow's sister,Miss Violet Muckle, is upon a visit to us just now,as likewise my nephews Mr Andrew M^Fie, (whoDESTINY. 41is breeding a surgeon with hb fa.tiker ;) jny friend,Mr Duguld M^Dowj is expected to join as in afew days; so you will find us, I flatter myself apretty agreeable party. And as my wife andmyself are of opinion, there is nothing so enliveningas the stir of a young family, we arehopeful you will experience much refreshmentfrom the mirth and vivacity of our young folks,who are nowise shy — but, on the contrary,amazingly taken with strangers, so we can promiseyou many a good game of romps withthem, poor Iambics I Our eldest daughter, whohas nearly attained her third year, is a finesonsie lass, with a will of her own already.My second girl is an extremely forward, smartchild, (more of a Muckle than a M'Dow,) fasttreading on her sister's heels, and can alreadykeep her own with her. My son (who is quitea young giant) has just begun to be weaned, (in£eu that has been the hinderance to his mother'swaiting upon you, which she would otherwisehave done,) and has, I am happy to say, stoodhis trials in that way hitherto as well as wecould possibly expect; indeed his mother hadtis Distant*1>egim him with his porridge three suits dg<s^ENnd i^8 amusing to see how he sups &@m I Wcare hi^>efttl you will find him great resoitfo^notice the first speaking brash is fairly over wiAhim, poor man I-^Mrs M'Dow unites with tUfein kind regards. And I am, dear mach, faidi*-fishy yours, , ;Du«roAN M*Dow.^^ Pes. — In case you could not be able toSecure the accommodation of the Inch On^ancarriage, I will hare much pleasure in taking «ride over for you any day in my gig, as my wikandmysdf are anxious youBh««ldiietiac«r«iyexpense by your visit to us'Even Mrs Macauley reddened as she read Aisletter. — " Did ever ony body hear the like ^that ?" cried she ; *^ to think of Glenroy's datigb-ter going sadden about the country in a gig withMr M*Dow! — 'Deed he's no blate! — I h<^eI'm not proud; for pride was not made for msn,&r less for woman, helpless creatures that weare! But 'deed I never would have dreamt ofDistant. 4Bmark a thin as that ! — Lier that* s been used allk^r days to travel like any princess, to think «fker going about in that waffvmy — as sure asdeath, I'm very ill pleased at Mr M^Dow for-taking such a liberty with Glenroy's daughtersnow that she's not so rich, as else should be !And to think that the skirling' of his weans couldbe any comfort to her in her distress !"There is no situation so humble in whichdemonstrations of regard and Respect, or even^afiieetion, may not be rendered acceptable and•^eTea gratifying to those in the most exaltedstation ; and when indicative of a right feeling,they cannot fail to be accepted in the same spirit,and duly appreciated by all whose esteem isworth conciliating. Probably, Mr M*Dow meantto act kindly — but his was the kindness of acoarse, vulgar, sordid mind, incapable of actingwith delicacy under any circumstances ; and ofcourse his attentions could only wound and revoltthe feelings of those whom he intended tobenefit It is almost unnecessary to add that hisinvitation was declined, to his great surprise andmortification.44 DESTINY.The next letter which Edith received wasfrom her stepmother.My dear Edith,I HAVE been extremely shocked by the intelligencethat has just reached me, of your poordear father's death* I assure you I was not inthe least prepared for it — so you may easilyimagine how sadly I was overcome. I am now,thank Heaven, more composed, and was able totake an airing, which has done me good* But DrBelloni is of opinion it will be some time beforemy nerves are restored to their natural tone*My spirits are, you may believe, much indisposedby this shocking event, and I am sure youwill feel it also. It was particularly severe uponme at this time, as I had scarcely recovered fromthe shock of losing my darling Amoretta* Herillness was very lingering — but this is too sad asubject to pursue* It is, however, a great comfortto me now, that I did go to Scotlandto see your poor father, as I am sure it gratifiedhim, though it certainly was too much forme,and I must always think that the severityof the climate was the cause of Amoretta's decline.DESTINY. 45'but that was a sad expedition altogether ! —You may remember also, how near I was to losingdearest Florinda in crossing your frightful lake,and had it not been for Sir Reginald, I wasassured she certainly would have been drowned*The consequence was, you know, she thoughtherself obliged, poor love, to marry him in return! — I assure you I did all I could to preventher from throwing herself away ; but she was socriticise with him, that it was peine perdue. Be*teeth ourselves, I believe she now wishes she had'taken my advice, for, to tell the truth, (but thisall entre nous,) I think she is far from being sohappy as she ought to be, although she is prodigiouslyadmired wherever she goes. She was at aball at the ambassador's lately, dressed a la Rei-neHenrietta, and covered with diamonds ; never anythingwas seen so perfect. It made me almostcry, I do assure you, when I thought so charminga creature should have sacrificed herself froma mistaken sense of gratitude to a man so perfectlyunworthy of her in every respect, as PrinceCamarascha and le Due de Chi^pinelle bothsaid to me. It is very well known that he games,46 1»BSTINT.keeps race-horses, and does every thing that isfoolish, and expensive. As to Florinda, her house,dress, and equipage, are quite unrivalled, apudher taste is perfect She gives quite the tb&eijk every thing. I have got a very pretty houseof my own, as there was no accommodation torme and my suite in Lady Waldegrave's palaziea.^But I make a point of going wherever she goes-—as with a husband whom it is impossible idfaecan love — and so excessively admired as she is, Ithkok it absolutely necessary that she should stillbe under protection. At the same time, I findh ruinous to my slender income to keep up withher. I am happy to say, I am in excellenthealth at present, and indeed it is likely to conIme, as Dr Belong i& a most skilful man, andunderstands my constitution perfectly. It hadbeen sadly injured by the mistaken system of DrPrice, who was a good creature, but certainly themost stupid, ignorant, and selfish man in theworld. Belong says it is quite a miracle that Iam alive after such treatment. How very shockingto think of such a thing ! I think it woulddo you good to take a little trip to the Continent,Destiny. 47my dear Edith — it would amuse you. I shouldhe very happy to introduce you into society— *Do think of it. Apropos it is possible, we mayreturn to England by and by. Sir Reginald hattaken it into his head that the climate does notagree with their little boy, which Dr Bellonifissures me is nonsense.,. ^^This is a very long letter; but I thought it^pvouU amuse you to hear all about those dear^i^ndsy.who, I assure you, have not forgot you,^loiwda sends her love and sincere condolenceapt has long intended writing to you, but willCertainly carry it into effect soon. Meantimesbe says, she will be delighted to receive a letterfrom you.'^ Believe me, dear Edith, ever affectionatelyyours,K Malcolm.^^ Qf course you have heard of Madame 'sshameful behaviour, in having married amaa twenty years younger that herself, after^viiig got. Florida to settle L.500 a-year uponher for life!"48 DESTINY.CHAPTER V,Mrs Malcolm perceived with deep regret,that it was not at Inch Orran Edith was likelyto regain her cheerfulness and animation. Theoccupation of the heart and affections was goneThere was no lover now to watch her c(»mng>steps — no father to weary for the voice of hischild. And yet the scenes of her past happinesslay spread out before her eyes as feir and sad-liiias in those bright and prosperous days.There, wherever she turned, stood the greytowers of Glenroy ; but now silent and deserted,the appearance of desolation and neglect graduallystealing over its once cherished domain.The only sound that now echoed from its shoresof the axe ringing amongst its green woods,and reverberating amid its mountain solitudes, asits leafy honours were brought low.dDEsmnr. 49In her long and dreary attended en barfisher's death-bed, her spirits had been sustainedby the influence of those divine truths whichstill breathed peace into her heart Bat thenatural elasddty of her mind had been depressed,and a character of stillness and seclusion wasgradually stealing over it, which it would requirea strong effort to counteracted closest ties ofrelationship had one by one been severed fromher heart, and she now felt as if standing acmein the world. It is perhaps only the two extremesof human nature-the selfish or the spiritual*minded— rto whom the solitude of even worldlyaffections is not the saddest of all descdadons.Her tender friends were willing to make everysacrifice in their power for the recovery, of oneso dear to-them ; but it was difficult for them toarrange any plan which was likely to accomplishthis purpose It was in the midst Of this perplexitythat li second letter arrived from MrsRiley, renewing her invitation to Edith. Thusa sew vista was event in the prospect ; andevents it were not Tery alluring, it possessed atVOL. ui. c5© DESTINY.least the recommendation of novelty* The letterwas as ftdlowB :—My dear Niece,*' I HAD the pleasure of receiving your letter ofthe 24th February, and it afforded Mr Rileyand me much satisfaction to see that yon wereresigned to the will: of Providence, which it isat all times our duty to be. The books which Iwould particularly recommend to your seriousconsideration at this time, are those valuableworks, which, on former occasion, I had thepleasure of sending you and from which, I trust,you have already derived much improvement ;but they cannot be read too often ! I allude toFordyce Sermons to Young Women,* and^ Bennet's Letters to a Young Lady on a varietyof useful and interesting subjects, calculatedbeyond any book I am acquainted with) toimprove the heart, to form the manners, andenlighten the understanding.' You have certainlymuch cause for thankfulness, in being sofortunate as to possess such worthy and respectablefriends as Mr and Mrs Malcolm of InchDestiny. 51Arran. Mr Ribley and I trust that the stateof your health and spirits is now such as willenable you to make out your promised visit tous.And we hope you may find your slay withus both pleasant and advantageous. J^ thecommunication between England and Scotland18 now very frequent, you will no doubt be ableto hear of a modest and respectable opportunity,and you have only to favour me with a line whenthe time is fixed for setting out, and also onewhen you can calculate upon the precise time ofyour arriving here.*^ Mr Ribley unites with me in offering bestrespects to Mr and Mrs Malcolm ; and acknowledgmentsfor the kind attention they have paidyou ; and with good wide, I remain, my dearniece, your affectionate aunt,Hath. Ribley."It was evident from this letter that Mrs Ribleywas at least fifty years behind the rest ofthe world in her ideas, and there certainly wasnothing very alluring in the manner in whichthis invitation was couched. Yet it is well known&'i D£STIMV«there are persons o£ warm and gen^roii$ feelingswho are devoid of the power o£ j^^rea^ing ihem^and who, conscious of their own inability,, free(jnenfly fly to the very opposite extreme vosecMneto and resenre^rr-reirQii as there are otherswhose hollow hearts are for ever reyer))0ratiiQgmuneening civilities and empty pro|<^on%; tpwluH^h their whole life gives the He*-/ It w«^evident Mrs Ribley did. not belong tq. the }at]^jrand more odious class, and it was just possibleshe might be of the former* , Mrs Malpolii^whose judgments were always lenient am .oh{|frits^le, strove to encourage this idea , , She sawif was of the utmost importance to fldithV&turewell-being that her mind should be i^c^^d^tpPortion, .even though that exertion i9bf[>ul(ivi)^of a painful nature, — ^that her thoughts j^ou]4be forced into .another channel, even althoughthat channel might abound in rough and stonyplaces. In the circumstances in which Edithwas placed, she had but a chance of evils-eitherto remain as a member, of a finely on whew herclaims of relationship were slight, or to avmlherself of the protection of those whom Proving53deuce had appointed as her natural §ruardian«».Tie straggle of her mind was great; butasensciof duty prevailed, and she accepted the invitation,though with repugnance. Neither on thel^^^r, nor on the deliberations that ensued didMre Macauley offer a single comment contraryto her usual practice, which was that of beingalways ready to think aloud on every subjectthat was presented to her.Mrs Macaulay had all that instinctive feelingwhich it is said belongs to her sex, even whenmost deficient in habits of reflection ; and herinstinct made her titus commune with herself:^ 'Deed, and Vm not fond of that letter at all-^if s but a hard, dry morsel ; ^ but they thatwould eat the kernel, must crack the nut.' Ithas been so ordained that Glenroy's daughtercannot pick and choose for herself as she mightonce have done ; and so I would not be the oneto put her from taking what He tiiafs wiserthan us all has been pleased to set before her.And though if s true we must leave other-handand mother-land, yet did not SEUthfiil Abraham54 Destiny.do the very same thing before ms, good luck tohim and ns both !" * * * *Dear Macky, you do not tell me what youthink of this proposal of my aunt's'' said Edithto her, as, with a sigh, she took up her pen toanswer Mrs Ribley's letter, in the affirmative.^^ O 'deed, my dear, my thoughts are not justwhat they used to be ; they've had a great dealto vex them, you know, — ^not but what it's allfor our good ; no doubt we'll be all the wiserand. better for our affliction, if not in this world,at any rate in another."You say true, dear Macky ; but ^" anda tear dropt from Edith's eyes on the paper —^^ but it grieves me to think I must part fromyou, if I go to England,"*^ Part from me, my dear !" exclaimed MrsMacauley, in astonishment, *^ what could putthat in your head ? Did not I tell you that nothingbut death, or maybe marriage, (if so beyour husband did not like me,) should ever partus in this world"'DESTINY. 55f^^ Then I must not think of going amongstthese near relations'' said Edith, laying downher pen, ^^ for I will not forsake you, my searold friend ; and I fear I may not hope they —Ah, dear Macky, I fear, finom this letter of myaunt^^ My darling, oh do not vex yourself at allabout that, for I have my own little plans readycut and dry, and I need not be a burden uponany body that s not a drop's blood to me ; I havemy own small means, such as they are, thanksto that good man your papa ! — and I have anephew of Mr Macaulay's, that's a workingjeweller and watchmaker, and a wise, well-doing,respectable creature, and married to a decentwoman, and they live in the city of London ; Ihave their direction in my drawer ; they've invitedme, before now, to pay them a visit, — andso, my dear, when you go to yoilr friends, I'llgo to mine ; and I'll never have my eye off you,for, 'deed, we cannot always be quite sure thatour relations will be what they should be ; butwhat signifies that in comparison when I amat your hand, (not that I would be so foolish56 DESTINY.-•^and-conceited as. to think tile help was in m^,,) toi^-fltal^hobody cures so much as meddle.with.,/■ •••-■ ■ ' .yotir Battle finger without my knowing it ; — ^notLei Ht but thais a comfort I .would not part with16 be made queen o£. all England I"It was a comfort to Edith also "to find sbewas not to be wholly severed from all she, hadever known and loved; and .she fondly embracedthe dear and faithful' fidefid^whoy at the ageo{ threescore years and ten^.was ready to followhe fiEiUen fortunes tibi all the alacrity of youth*Nor was aught wanting on the part of Mr andMrs Malcolm to testify the tenderness and sincerityof their affection. Inch .Orran was toconduct his beloved charge himself to London,lind consign her from his own hands into. 4hosbof her natural guardians. edith: would haveresisted this proof of attachment, but aU herobjections were overruled by her. generous anddisinterested friends ;.'andL Mrs^Macaday wascomforted by thinking,. Aat: though Glenroy'sdaughter was to travel in ^f a modesty respectablelanner' twould also begin a genteel, ladylikestyle.DESTINY. 57"^. »The hour of departure came, andwid^ j|;, footEdith's last trial — ^for fairer and dearer tl^tfi eYejrseemed each long cherished object, when aib9iitto tear herself from them. In the silence ofanguish she parted from all ; but even in sorrow,though cast down, she fel she was not forsaken;and Faith and Hope still gilded the path, joyl^ftTas it was; which duty led her to tread.u48 JIESTJNY.>■'■ ',•CHAPTER VI.'"1 » *It was the month of May when the travellersentered England — ^meny England — with all itsbroad meadows and blooming orchards, each setin its own verdant frame — its lordly towers, withtheir fair demesnes and far-spreading woods —its baronial halls and ancient manors, with alltheir pride and privileges — its antique churches,with. their sweetly chiming bells— its smilingvillages — ^its peaceful hamlets — and, more thanall, its lowly cottages, their rustic casements,brightly glancing through a " shower of shadowingroses," and their garden plats, as if proud todisplay their gaudy neatness to each passer by.All who have perceptions must be aware thereis a difference between England and Scotland,and that all the powers of steam and locomotionhave not yet brought them to assimilate. Wealththe progressive wealth of bygone ages, withallits power and its experience, its confidenceand its consistency, is there every where apparent;while, in Scotland, the marks of iron-handednecessity fate still visible, even throughthe beauteous covering which genius and ronumcehave cast over her. And what though it be sa?and why should Scotland blush to acknowledgea somewhat harder lot than that of its richer,£surer sister? What though its soil be moresterile, its skies more stormy? Are not thesedefects more than atoned for, in the ever-varyingbeauties of its winding shores, its rocky streams,its lofty mountains, its romantic glens ? And theeye accustomed to these will feel even amidEngland's direst scenes —England, tby beauties are tame and domesticTo one who has roam'd on the mountains a&r.*'And Scotland with all its wants, will even' beto its own children the ^' land of our love, ourothers' home I"On approaching the metropolis, the indicatons ^f wealth become still more striking.VlAftfo^iv palariciaii HUagesj^: sliceeed^4iie sttlniiMIjiA/jf^iti^ wych radiate ;fr«nr/&eiBiglBty>ce]ttremriBJl directions, wkh their streets, aadflqnareS)^^riSB^oea^ andrterracea, —« A mighty maze, but not without a plan."< • ■ " •r»^ were Taint attesipidqdctiDgi^Ae^ TOtienaiwhick fill the aaiiid^oii first^tenteiiiig Non*'desks there is «> mudbi toi astonish, i tcB didigiH^aiwAtoi disappoint, ta bewilder and/to ^ezcite^ onaiiK8i'Snn«y'^iluitaUbecQnc8^i»n£aflieai^^oonfipimded,'' in c the : attempt to^innnestigato theiiiiliiittf of oar. feelings.' It was aioisefy eveningnae die lite >patftjr entered* the cityvwd beganto thread the intricacies of its nartfow-streetGi)swarming as they ever are with coaches, omnibuses,drays, waggons, vans, carry, cabriolets,and vehicles of unknown names, and of everyand no description. While, on either handthis busy mi^titHde 'flows eeaselesdy^alang^ meeing and mingling in one vast tide of' human lifeI|;.iaaotalw«ys thaibnovelly^haitns by it»ownpower; and ta Edith and^^Afrs 'MJaeasdey-'theDxnnnnSMMi'iprii' mate stiMige • tbm {deaan^^ Themmp\» dwrikmi' ht n^veBiote ond/diktly'TMfliicomitis wire Mdi^isdiifMvdf iiidthaUthk^fit^paused with, they looked jdmoit/iirith lAriigllfon the busy crowd that every^^re snnoimdedthem, and beheld with amazement the busdtfthe activity, the energy, that everywhere per*vade4'thir livings nana; whiles in the midst ofswearing anarAy^ 9txk and all mored in his ownsphere ?one of myriads yet as MuAapaiUftiiatt-Mlowriiip' or oogsiflcnce of-those arooilhim, ash though he stood alone in the nniverse^t^:^ O^ will not that stupid man^stop andjaioiwfaat>*is Ae meaning of this great mob ?^ cried'Mn Macanley, as they entered on astili meredense and stirring scene. ^ Surely SomefUlig -extraordinary has happened; maybe <iiere^<#lurase enifire^ or they're trying to-catch athi^'or^'ssmebody has been killed, or^^nt-^bnt olim •nota bit if it is not'die King himself 1^^ as sb^caught. a glimpse .of one of the riieriflb^- ^9Mdf^'equipages. << O^ if we could but get a sighshis awn royal person'* '"'.62 DBSTimnCaptain Malcolm smiled at her shnplidty^^and strove to tranquillize and enlighten her minda little, as to the actual state of things. Butpoor Mrs Macaulay was too busy with her eyesto receive any information by her ears. For thepresent, therefore, **■ Knowledge was at oneentrance quite shut out'' and she went on soliloquizing.O, if that silly man would but stop tffl^ aflthis hubbleshow's past ! Where can the peopleall come from, and where can they be going to ?And to see what heartless,* unfeeling creaturesthey are to one another ! Not one of themshakes hands or stops, or so much as looks at hisi^igfabour, as if he had ever seen him before, oras if he were any thing more to him than thestones of the streets ! And to see how we arejammed in and compassed on every side ! Andthe shops, they are more than can be numbered,and yet I have not seen Johnnie Macauley'sname amongst them ail! O, this is a fearfulplace, and now that we're in, I wish we mayever bc able to find our way out."And so Mrs Macaidey Went on, as the 68rage slowly proceeded though the crowdedmazes of the city, till at length it turned into »quiet, but still answer street, which conductedto their destination* This was a snudl dingycour surrounded on three sides with dark, redbrickhouses, the windows &uceA with white, andmost of them decorated with pots of London*pride and wall-flower. In the middle, of thecourt was a bunch (for it had not the dignity ofa clump) of poplars, enclosed in an elaborateiron-railing. The fourth side displayed the badefront.of a mean-looking church, its yellow gn^yelled path bordered with thrift or sea-pink.All looked gloomy and arles yet all borean appearance of the most scrupulous neatnessand cleanliness, even in the midst of Londonsmoke. The court itself was in the shade ofevening ; but the upper windows were glitteringin the rays of the setting sun, and Edithsighed as she thought how its glories were nowresting on hereon Highland hills !Aid is this the place for Glenroy's dochter ?*exclaimed Mrs Macauley, in blank amazement.^^ 'Deed, then, if s but a poor hole we've brought64^ Dl^TINY.her to ;** and. poor Molly** HigUsind prideswelled up to lier very eyes.•* You must not judge by appearances teire,"^said Captain Malcolm, with a smile. ^^ Thereis plerlmps more with concentrated in this littlefist than-wofdd buy Gl^iroy and Inch Arranten times over."Well, well, but they cannot buy our goodHieland blood, that's one meroy,'' cried MrsMacaulay — " But they may be very ^laacentpeople for all that ; and at any rate, pride wasnot made for man. So it is our duty to be satisfied,whatever beaus us !"The carriage stopt at Mr Riley's door; whichwas opened by a respectable-looking Hv^ servant,who ' listened the strangers into a^. sold*fittHhioned hall, where Mr Ribley was stationedto receive his guests. He was a little, round,good-humoured-looking man, with «nall features,florid complexion, light blue eyes, a flaxenwig, and a shambling gait.How d'ye do-^hbw d'ye dp ? — Happy tosee you — expected you sooner-along past dinnerhour, but you shall hure something," cried he,Destiny. 6$in jE quick, shrill key ; ^^ so come along— followV.' •me — Here, Kitty, my dears leading the ivyto a parlour, ^^ here are Mr, and Mrs, and Miayonriniece, and all of them*— Can give them an4np<«teak-^-can't you,' Kitty, my dear ?^Mrs Bibley, to whom this was addressed, wasseated in a small, dull, tidy, old-cushioned parlour,before a lite work-table, with a large ominous-lookingbag attached to it She was, in outwardappearance, a complete contrast to her husband*She was a tall, and rather stately-looking per-son well made, well clothed, and yery upright.She had a grey complexion, large Roman nose,eyes such as Wordsworth describes, —• " Two eyes, not dim, but of a healths stare,Wide, sluggish, blank, and ignorant and strange,Proclaiming boldly that they never drewA look or motion at intelligence'*Altogether she was of , a grave and imposingaspect. She welcomed the party with formalpoliteness, and saluted Edith with what wasmeant for affectionate kindness, but lacked itsgenii warmth; which, however, Edith's own66 fiESTINY.emotion, Mr Ribley^s flurried movement anddie usual bustle of arrival,, rendered less observable.^^ Kitty, my dear, sure Miss your niece,and her friends, must be hungry — can't you letthem have a rump-steak — London rump-steak ?*a great delicacy to Scotch' people !"Certainly, Mr Ribley, if you think proper,and our friends dp not object."But here, with one voice, the offer was declinedby the whole party.^ Not have a. nice rump-steak!" exclaimedMr Ribley, in astonishment ; ^^ why, if s quitea restorative after a journey. Perhaps you prefertea and toast ? — tea and toast very good*'repeated he, as he ambled up and down the room.Kitty, my dear, ajji't it our tea-time ?'^^ It will be in a quarter of an hour, MrRibley," replied Mrs Ribley, looking at herwatch ; " and in the meantime "Ah, in the meantime," interrupted Mr Ribley," shan't we order a sandwich — nice hamsandwich? — Westphalia ham in the house atthis moment — beautiful ham ! — bought it my-destiny.67self ! — the flesh as red as a rose, fat as white asalily ! — quite a nosegay ! — Aii*t it, Kitty, mydear?"** A very fine ham indeed, Mr Ridley** respondedMrs Ribley. But here another protestwas entered against the sandwiches ; and as thecarriage was still waiting to convey CaptainMalcolm and Mrs Macauley to their respectivedestinations, they declined waiting even for thetea and toast, but took leave, promising to returnto dinner the following day. Poor Mrs Macauleycould not trust herself to speak to Edith,but, struggling to repress her feelings, after slong embrace the affectionate feature tore her-«self away, and Edith was left to the combinedwretchedness of loneliness and constraint.68 0BsnKY.• ICHAPTER VII.Me and Mrs Ribley were in their own waya i^ery respectable, comfortable pair ; but it wascomfort and respectability from which mind&ofa higher cast would have turned away. - Andindies there was Httle to love or adore iiieilber, ,Mr Bibley was what he at first sightappeared to be, a mare gossiping, good«<natur|Bdbody, with a silly aspiration of, and respect forlu»own wife, and a constant habit of referringto her opinion on every and on no occasion.Mrs Ribley's character was best described bynatives. She was neither a weak nor an unamiablewoman ; she belonged not to the class ofeither lamenting women, nor advising women,nor bustling women, nor imprudent women*Neither was she an ordinary or an extraordinarywoman ; but she was a phlegmatic, conscientiouswoman, without taste, feeling, or &ncy, who didwhat she conceived her duty in all cases, andwas quite satisfied that she had done so. Nogenerous impulse ever led her beyond the strictline of duty; no compunctious visiting evercaused her to mourn that she had fidkn short ofit She was a woman of dub proprieties, andminute observances. She was at least forty yeanbehind the rest of the world in her ideas;, adadunce of other times is perhaps still worse limaa dunce of our own* They were religious asfind as mere outward observances went, — ^wfaieb,indeed, with them, as with many others, weremistaken for religion itself ; they were regulartenders of church, repeated the responses mostaudibly, were punctual observers of all feastsfasts, and festivals, because they had been sotrained, and, living under the Christian dispensationstheir morals necessarily partook in sobdegree of its benign influence ; but to the sub*Unity and the beauty of its divine nature theywere utter strangers, for they were mere religiousanimals on Sundays and churcb-day&> hishort, they were dull plodders through life mHi^70 DESTINY.out any other purpose than that of fulfillingsmall duties, and contributing to their own selfishcomforts.Such Was the pair with whom Edith washenceforth to be associated, and already herheart sickened at the dreary anticipations .whichimagination placed before her. For the firsttime the misery of dependence was felt by herin all its bitterness, and all the bright and lovelypensions of her early ^ys rose before her, as ifto mock the joyless realities of her present condition.Oh, could her father have foreseen thatsuch was to be the destiny of the last of hismighty line !— that she, the child of wealth andstate, and high-bon pride, was to sink into thehumble dependent of the sordid and obscurerelation, whom, in the days of prosperity, hescarcely deigned to acknowledge ! Such wereEdith's last mournful reflections ere she sunk tosleep, the tears still wet on her eyelids.True as the dial to the sun*'the following morning brought the faithful MrsMacauley to the bedside of her beloved charge ;Destiny. 71andwlieA Edith opened hier eyes, the first Objectthat presented itself was the round, happyface of her old friend beaming upon her withlooks of love and gladness, as she sat by thebed, with a nosegay in errand.^^ Good morning to you, my darling," criedshe, in her usual bathe tone. <^ You done knowhow sweet you look in your sleep I — as sweetas this bunch of new-blown roses, that I boi^htas I came along, and only smell how sweet theyare { Tm sure you must hare had good andpleasant dreams — have not you, my dear 7*^^ At least my dreams were less sad than mythoughts," said Edith, with a sigh, '^^ for theywere of past times !"'^ Well, my dear, that* s a good sign to dreamof the past, and something to be thankful for —and this is a very neat, comfortable room — andMr Ribley looks a fine, hospitable, good-naturedbody ; and 'deed I think Mrs Ribley seems<a very decent, perrin woman — and every thingis really very creditable-like about them — Andso you must do your best to be as well pleasedas ywi can."72 nfifitconr*:<M bope^ dew Maoky^ ycm hare reason ta befleaffed with your relations, and that yon aidywjTsdif comfortable ?- said Edit*' And 'deed I have great reason to be thank-fill.Johnnie, and bis wife made me very welcome,and lare yery kind to: me and I have ayeijy neat, Uttjte, light bed-*doB^ tx^myself^iwbidiholds a bed very well— rand 111 ion gei iMdtp the. noise of the street «ndil do sol andthe children above my head, thon^it reallymade my heart sore to hear >11iat foot baby cryingthe whole night through onaecovntxef listeeth, poor lamb ! When Iheardit^MBreeekiitglike, to .end, I thought to myself how tharidnlI ought to be, that never had the^tonnd'of ittootbach that , I remember of, for as old as J atn.''^^ Pear Macky, when shall I leamto^nc^ theevils of life as. you do ?" cried Edith. /<^ My dear it cannot be «2^»ec^ thiokt yOdshould be so early pleased as me ;. for have notI a great deal mote. gi¥en.to me than I deserts,and did not I owe a great deals under Providenceto your good papa? jLndwas not lethe persto give Johnnie Macauley no less than; twentyDEsnm. 7S•ffmrnnAia a present, to ring h» out waken lieeaiie v^ a bare Hieland lad to London? 'I>Miiand Johnnie haa not forgot it, and Fm sure nertt^ ]?9fA was always generous'' said Edith.• ^^ He was that, and he meant to be very jvdttoo ; but someone that is not so much wMtprofiles nature. I hare promised Johnnie, thsitpersia some day you will let him get a sight ofyiaiit just for your good papa's sake."^< I sliaU be happy in this land of strangers tasee any one who will value me for papa's sakessaid Edidif mournfully.^^ 0» but Johnnie will be very proud of beii^introduced to Glenroy's dochter; but ma^^you'll not think just so much of Johnnie as hewill think of you. I thought he would havebeen taller ; but he is thick and stout, which, isbetter, for the whither of a fiEunily of seven childwho has his bread to make. 'Deed I thinkhe Bas been a lucky lad, considering ; for, thoughhis wale is not a beauty, she is a well-behaved,disen^ woman, and he got well on to threetheiiimd point with her, forbye the good will 4»fVOL. III. D74 Resting.Iiij6 diop-^-«md a thriving family; and thoughsome af them have got his cast of the eye, whata; mercy it is, there's not one of them pockmarkedlike him ! And now, my dear, that Ihave seen yon, I'll just go back to my breakfast,for it is but a step between us ; and Johnnie wasse good as to walk with me himself, and he's justtaking a tui?i till I come out to him; and maybeit will not be so discreet in me to com so ofkoathe first day— so I will not see you again tilldinner-time ; but keep up your heart, my dear,and see what a fine simony morning there is."Ah, Macky, what are its beauties here !"exclaimed Edith, with a sigh, as she thought ofaU that the genial ray of morning was gliding atGlenroy.Oh, niy dear, do not speak that way ; butthink what a good thing it is to be able to riseup and to see the sun shine, and to behold eventhat bit of bonny blue sky that we see here, andthe very bits of trees, though they are but stiffpookit things, yet they look as green and ascheerful as if they were growing in their ownhappy land — and there, at a window over theDestiny.way, IS a grey-lathe, singing as blithely as if itwere among the sweet gold blossoms of a whin .bush — and if it can be so merry in its prison,poor senseless thing, ought not we, who havegood understandings, and the Word given to us,to be contented and thankful for our mercies?'And with an affectionate embrace, Mrs Maoaa-ley took leave of her beloved protege and toddied away.r I ,'"> ij7^ DESTINY.CHAPTER ViiThree was something in the laxity of MmhMacanley that always left a glow behind it, andEdith joined her relations at breakfast with lessdepression than she had hitherto felt ; but, alas !it was only to experience a renewal of her disappointment,for the morning disclosed no charmsin Mr and Mrs Ribley, which had been overlookedthe preceding evening. They were bothexactly what they had appeared at first sight.The only difference was, that he was, if possible,still more fidgety and talkative, she morestaid and serious.Come away. Miss — come away," cried heto Edith, as she entered ; ^^ sure you must haveslept well — so beautifully quiet here — mighthear a pin fall in the court — might fancy yourselfin the Highlands, if it was not for the watchDEsnvT. 77man and the neighbouring clocks — no clocksand watchmen there ! And then by day you'llhear such beautiful bdk — a beautiful chime hasour church — Haunt it Kitty my dear? Andthen, when you've a mind to be gay and see allthais going on, can be in Cheapside in fourminutes and a half — and at the Bank, the IndiaHouse, and Lloyd's, in no time — charmingsituation is our square— must show Jdiss yourniece all these things — Shan't we, Kitty, mydear ? Now here comes the muffijo-^must tauit while if s hot — sure you never tasted such amofEin ; from the very first muffin-maker in theworld — Hogg's muffins' celebrated all over Lon-^don. — Now only think how lucky it is you cameto us before we left town — couldn't have givenyou Mogg^s muffins in the country — shot rcdlsthere — shot rolls more rural than muffins-*- An'tthey, Kitty, my dear?— *only think, made threehundred thousand pounds by his muffins — whiteas snow, soft as down, are Mogg^s muffin— rAVt they, Kitty, my dear ?'^^ They are extremely delicate indeed Mrspinstesrnnr.Ribley } but with your leave, I would now proposewe should arrange our plans for the day'Surely, surely, my dear ; Miss your niecelEUid her friends dine with us, and Charles — fineyouiig man, is my nephew, cous to the great^ Charles Penshurst, Bart* of Penshurst Hall,M.P- — has been at Oxford — sis going abroad —very fine gentleman is Charles Penshurst —An't he, Kitty, my dear ?>'^^ He is, indeed, Mr Ribley, a fine youngjoan at present**Kitty, my dear, what will you give ourfriends for dinner to-day? Pray, Miss*' to Edith,*^ did you ever taste Birch's turtle-soup ?*Edith replied in the negative.Never tasted Birch's turtle-soup f exclaimedhe, in astonishment ; ^^ why Birch's turtle-soupgoes all over the universe — East and WestIndies, China, America — Scotland is sadly outof the way, to be sure. Why, if you nevertasted Birch's turtle-soup, you have tasted nothing.— Kitty, my dear, let us have Birds'sturtle-soup to^day-^three quarts for a party ofsix, eh ?"^^^ That is the proper quantity' said MtsRibley; " and as you observe, Mr Ribley,Scotland is sadly out of the way'^^ Sure, ^y dear, we must show Miss yourniece the Tower, and the Regalia, and the Lions-T-oo lions in Scotland, eh? — Lions won't eatporridge, eh? — ^and we'll get Charles to go too—-^must have him introduced to Miss Mogg— -old Mogg given up business — bought a finehouse on our common — Myrtle Grove — can seefrom our parlour-window every body that goespoi and out — beautiful creature is Miss Mogg —been educated at the first boarding-school intown — finished off at Paris — pays five hundreda-year to the lady who lives with her-sand is tobring her out — suppose you haven't broughtmuch money from Scotland — ^not much comesfrom it — not much goes to it either — Kitty, mydear, you'll get every thing that's proper forMiss your niece ?"Edith assured him she required nothing, whichassurance seemed to please Mrs Ribley, who said,You are very kind, Mr Ribley ; and I shallcertainly have pleasure in fulfilling your liberal80 Destiny.intentions ween necessary. Young people, knowlittle of the value of money, and are very liableto be imposed upon, unless when they are guidedby an experienced and judicious friend."Sure, my dear, you are always right, andnow rU walk as far as 'Change — and Kitty, mydear, shall I call at the fishmonger's, and orderhim to send you a nice piece of Thames salmon ?sad tricks played with fish — I remember theday Mr Alderman Winkle dined with us,«boughta beautiful piece of Thames salmon myself —paid seven shillings a pound for it— six pointsand a quarter — ^and what do you think — it was'14'changed for Scotch salmon changed for Scotchsalmon !'^ repeated he, in a still louder and shrillerkey — " Never was so ashamed in my life aswhen I saw Mr Alderman Winkle helped toScotch salmon — ^hasbeen quite affronted — never'asked me back ! — And Mrs Ribley didn't geta card to Mrs Winkle's last party, and all becauseof the Scotch salmon."And with this pathetic exclamation, Mr Ribleyset off for 'Change, having previously settledDESTINY. 81to return, and escort his lady and £dish to th<{.Tower.Edith would fisun have had her good old friendMrs Macauley included in the party, knowinghow much her fresh and unsophisticated mindenjoyed every exhibition, whether of nature orart ; but it formed no part of Mrs Bibley's sith.ten to do more than what she deemed her duty,in the strictest sense of the word; and if shqdiscerned Edith's wishes, it was only to make itapparent they could not be gratified* A handsomecarriage was at the door at the hourappointed ; and, accompanied by Mr aid MrtfRibley, Edith set forth, in the most literal meaningof the phrase, to see the Lions. Probablythe same train of feelings and reflections fill theminds of such as are in the habit of feeling andreflecting at all, on approaching, for the firsttime, the Tower of London, — its grim was andsullen moat, associated as they are with so mundithat is dark and tragic in the page of Englishhistory. But these have been too often felt andexpressed, to be repeated on the present occasion,and had Edith ventured to utter thenif wouldd2Urtre'be^ little understood by her vidgar4ftfai^'tiff matter-of-fact companions, t v:u!>]K[r Bibley was in raptures at aU he soirtittitigh probably seen for the twentieth time ^uneven turtle-soap and Thames salmon were|br a time forgot in the nobler adjuration of thehans and the crown* The judicious Mrs Eibley^however, reminded him of the lapse of time byher iiirateh>*— which, like herself, was always they returned home At the diasodrhour Captain Malcolm and Mrs Macauley arrived,and were received by Mrs Ribley in atafige^ dull, stiff, respectable drawing-room, withilk' little serpentine sofas,' and formal circle ofehairs,^ — ^its small elaborate mirrors, stuck up the wall, — ^its high mantelpiece, decoyriled with branching girandoles, and Dresdenshepherds and shepherdesses, — ^its Brussels caret,with festoons of roses, — ^its small bare satin-woodtsJ^les, — ^its tall twin fire-screens, embroideredforty years ago by MrsRibley'sownhandi^;suit a vestige of book or work, or any such lumber,was to be seen in this room, appropriatediiiilely to the purpose oi fitting iui edit uprightGreat impatience was now expressed ior-ikibarrival of Mr Charles Penshurst^ and the raterapid sketch of his history which had been givento Edith, was now repeated to Captain Makholm :»-4^ A fine young man — been studyingat Qxferd^^ — going abroad for a year-*-<-a wetsgenteel man, cousin, as I said, to Sir ChartPenshurst, Bart and Map. — married my sister-'•-^ent all her money, and broke her heart ;-t4-Charles, my nephew, must make a rich marriageswill settle handsomely upon him if he does• — wouldn't go into the connting*house — muflttake either to the law or the church," and so ontill in a few minutes a cabriolet drove into thecourt, and in a second Mr Penshurst was announced.Edith had certainly not thought mobabout Mr Ribley's nephew, but it is scarcelypossible to hear a person talked about withoutattaching some ideas to their name, and thusidentifying them in our own imagination. InMr Charles Penshurst, the nephew of Mr Riib^ley, and the intended lover of Miss Mogg, themuffin^maker's daughter, she had expected tobehold oddity and vulgarity coinhoied |ii.l«o64 DESTINY.OQttuQon degree; — her surprise was thereforegK^ at the entrance of an elegant-lookingyelping man, with something even of aristocraticair and address; but there was scarcely time foran introduction, before the company were shun*money to the dining-room, where stood a handsomeSilver tureen of Birch's turtlensKrap in solitarymajesty. •r " Now," exclaimed Mr Ribley, " you shalltaste nectar and ambrosia ! 'Just half-a-guineaquart ! to think how chei^ ! Now, do taste itTT-pit you ever taste any thing so delicious ?'Aid he looked at Edith, as though he expectedhex to swoon with delight at the first spoonful,an seemed rather mortified at the calm mannerin which she received her initiation in this ambrosialbanquet. To do Mr Ribley justice hewas as much of a benevolent as a selfish ,— for although he enjoyed good thingshimself, he had no less pleasure in exciting theadmiration of others at the super-excellence ofhis repasts ; he was likewise a gourmand of thetie John Bull breed, and, with the single except*'tio^<^ Birch's turtle-soup, liked nothing that wasDssnNT. 85not phdn,* no matter how costly the material)provided it were of genuine English productand mannfiEtetnre. The same thorough Englishstamp iof solid comfort and consistency pervadedthe whcde establishment ; all denoted unostentatiouswealth, that had gone down from epithetto son; there was nothing aimed at that was notaccomplished, and if that was not in the firststyle of elegance or £E»hion, it seemed as if thedeficiency were not from lack of means, but ttfambition or pretension. All this proceeded fromno superiority of thinking or acting in Mr* <nrMrs Ribley, but was merely the effect of diehabits in which they had both been trained-^those of wealthy London citizens, whose householdgods were all united in one, and that one-^comfort. With all Mr Riley's absurdity therewas so much good-nature, that even the mostsplenetic could scarcely have refrained fromsmiling at some of his sallies, which formed atleast a relief to the dull monotony of the mistressof the house. Mr Penshurst, indeed, was noinconsiderable acquisition to the party; as ifanxious to screen his unde as mud as possible86 IQIKSTINV.^1^0^ observation) he took the lead in oonv^mi^tibi and carried it on with so much good «ien$eand pleasantry) and was so perfectly well-bred^d possessed of the tone of good society thathe already stood sir in Captain Malcolm emanationsand had almost captivated even MrsMacauley* Under these appearances, StainMalcolm felt tolerably satisfied at the prospect«e leaving Edith for a time in her present situa^n. The good nature of Mr Ribley, the quietsweetness of his wife, the pleasing manner^u^ amiable appearance of the nephew the air^ respectability and comfort diffused over thedomestic arrangements — all these, though eachliken 'singly could do little to excite her mindor promote her happiness, yet taken altogethersecond to form as inoffensive a home as circumstanceshad led him to expect..A few successive days passed on, during whichthe microcosm of London was gradually unfoldedto Edith's wondering gaze. The august complicityof St Paul's, the hallowed perfections of!westminster Abbey — these, the two great tike giant and the beautiful with thevttliovis spectacles and exhibitions, each r^pl^w^ novelty ind interest, — the ceaseless flow ofliving nmltittides and splendid equipages, so HP*blent fnm. the dull vacuity, or vulgar bustle ofother towns, were a perpetual, though uneon«^sous stimulus to the attention of the navies'as lliey swept along in all the brilliancy andvariety of wealth and fashion. In a short tisMi^Edith's good taste and right feeling would havled her to perceive the unsatisfactory nature i4the empty pomp and senseless glitter that everywherecourted her eye. But who ever madesadi a discovery, when for the first time seeing*London ? Yet the gay and the fashionable wouldhave smiled in scorn at the objects that excitedEdith's notice, and made even her City life,notwithstanding Mrs Ribley's deliberate caution,appear a rapid whirl of novelty and variety.Mr Penshurst was frequently of their parties,and by his general, if not very profound, knowledgeof society, as well as of arts and literature,greatly added to the enjoyment, by theinformation he contrived to impart. He alsoserved to restrain the exuberance of Mi Rihkffs88 Destiny.remarks, as it was evident his uncle regardedhim with a degree of deference, at least equalto that which he so lavishly bestowed upon his<< Kitty, my dear ;" and, in public, he formeda sort of barrier to the obstreperous vulgarity ofMr Bibley. He was ever ready to screen Edithfrom his attentions, and to interpose his arm,when she would otherwise have been obliged toaccept Mr Ribley's. These were trifling service,to be sure ; but ^^ trifles make the sum ofhmnan things," and even the wisest must havesometimes felt their importance.DESTINY. 89CHAPTER IX.One morning as Mr Ribley, according tocustom, gabbled the newspapers aloud, underthe bead of Fashionable Intelligence of the Day,he read as follows: *^ Lady Waldegrave hasissued cards for her first ball which will takeplace at Waldegrave House on the 29th, on ascale of unprecedented magnificence. Uponthis occasion the whole suite of noble apartments,which have been recently fitted up, will bethrown open'* And immediately followed —We regret to state, that Lady Elizabeth Malcolm'smusical party, which was to have takenplace at her residence in^Brook Street, has beenpostponed on account of her ladyship's indisposition."Till now, Edith had not been aware of thereturn of her relations to England, the notice190 JQOBSTINT.^ their arrival amongst a host of other ^^ fashion-titles,"a few weeks before, having escaped MrRibley's observation. And when, soon after her^wn arrival in London, she had been interrogatedby Mrs Bibley, as to the state of herfather's family, and the footing she was upontvith his widow and heir, she had evaded theenquiries as much as she could, by simplyi.Madng, that, owing to their absence on theincontinent, she had had little or no intercoursewith them. But now it seemed they wereinhabitants of the same city — show near, yet howt' widely asunder ! Geographical distance no longerseparated them, but far stronger barriers were(between. How closely allied by blood and connexion,by the memory of childhood, and leelove, and affection, and trust of former days ;but how disunited by injuries never to be repaired— by hopes, thoughts, feelings — by allthose qualities of mind and heart which form theV character, and which never again could amalgamatetogether! There was somethinghumiliating,i> too, circumstanced as she now was, in courting:' their notice. In the days of her prosperity, howftVestra. ^had her heart been wrung, and her afieotidiistrampled upon by them ! And fallen as diewas, into poverty, and obscurity, and dependence,identified with the plebeian vulgar,^'toclaim kindred with them now,— oh ! there washumiliation in the thought! Yet, without complainingto her inquisitive relations more thandie chose to reveal, (for, with the prying cum-city^ little minds, no half communication wardhave satisfied them,) how was she to refuse herAssent to the decision they had already fcnwedfor her, that it was her duty to wait upoii Xjttdyelisabeth, and that without delay. Harassedand perplexed, she retired to her own apartment,to *^ commune with her own heart'' andask if it indeed could ^^ be still," even whenbrought in contact with those who had so deeplyinjoiredher.In the midst of her doubts and perplexity,Mrs Macauley arrived, and Edith made knownto her the cause of her disquiet Mrs Macauleywas silent for a few minutes, and the tears swelledin her eyes; at last she said, " *Deed, and yourfeelings are quite natural, my darling, for this isS8 lassTtufY.Initio tk poor hole foi: Glenrojr's daughter to beMMn dwelling' in ; but since it has pleased Godt0'f^ermit it for a time, (for no fiiult of ycmrsthat we can see,) I think we ought not to beashamed to show ourselves."*f You say true, dear Macky, but stills**Edith stopped and sighed.'i>f^ No doubt these a bad pack and deservemk favour at your hands, my darling ; but, for allthat you know we are commanded to forgiveeven our very enemies'*vi I have forgiven long, long since'*>i^^Deed, I do not doubt it, for you was alwa3r9a, gentle, forgiving creature ; but, &a all thatyou know we never can be sure we have forgiven,unless we are ready and willing to bereconciled**^^ I am ready to be reconciled*' said Edith,^^ but surely it is not my part to court the recon-^citation? were they in my situation, and I intheirs, it would be otherwise**^* O, I'm sure if they were reduced to straitsany one of them, you would be the very first togo 'and help thc^, and be kind and loving toDestiny. 99tiber. Bay its because they have more ofiviorld's pelf, that we think shame to let them seithat we are not so grand and so rich as we onewere ; and we think that s our humility, whatmaybe if s nothing but pride — ugly pride, as thechiltern's book calls it — working in our hearts'Edith mused for a little while, then said,^ You are right, dear Macky, it is pride thatstruggles in my heart, and would prevent mefrom doii^ what I feel it is my duty to do— towait upon my whither's widow. If I could havepower to confer any thing upon her, any mereworldly gift, I should not hesitate for a singleinstant— there would be no self-sacrifice There;but to go poor, dependent, and friendless-»^Vtears built from her eyes — then throwing herarms round her old friend's neck, ^ but not,friendless," she cried, " while I have you to loveand counsel me in the path of duty."The result was, that she should that very daywait upon Lady Elizabeth, as the next was thatfixed fer the Ribleys leaving town for the summer.Accordingly, at the early hour of two, Edithaetlouty accompanied by Mr and Mrs Bdbley^,Ao,m case of her finding access, were to dropJitotbere, and proceed to take their ^^ ride" intiie^Park, while she paid her visit*V tUpon sending up her card, she was admitted,and ushered into a small room, where a hot sunsli;eamed through rose-coloured curtains, aad astill hotter fire blazed, as if for the benefit iD»fthree lap-dogs, who lay rolled up on cushionsbefore it Two paroquet were scolding at <>neide.; on the other,, sunk in a/auteuily and etb-tfllf^ped in shawls, sat her ladyship, with breakfastbefore her, and a bullfinch pecking sugaryas^lo chairs, tables, couches, cabinets, musicalinstruments, busts,, screens, plants, flowers, andIJbina, literally left scarcely room for the sole, of4}ie foot to tread its way through this labyrinth*leith, however, succeeded in steering her courseio the middle of the room, where she teas assaultedby the three dogs.,i.(^ Don't be afraid, my dear," called her in a weak, tremulous voice, as she laid her^f^k to Edith's ; ^^ they are the sweetest loves !-Htkey never do bite, except in played — amor,Binding, Ch^ri, have done ! — ^Yoa rememberikiy darlingS) Amoretta and Bijou?' putting Iwhandkerchief to her eyes. ^< But it is too sadiwe won't talk of such things — And dearest Amdvis getting delicate !" with a deep sigh. << Mydarling Bully, don't make yourself sick I-»» t i»iWh^i did you come to town, my dear ? I aai»sore you I am quite happy to see you; and pottlook very well — every well indeed !"This was said with a tone of chagrin, as shglanced from Edith's lovely serene countenanceand finely-moulded form, to her own haggardpeevish. ace, and shrivelled, made-up shapewhich not even the aid of an elegant dfyhabiBitavld either adorn or disguise. In answer tdedith's enquiries she replied, — ^^ Speak loudermy dear* I have got a little cold, and am siwrapped up I can't hear any things The fiiotwas, she was now very deaf, and somewhat bliikl^two disgraceful circumstances, which shouldjG^ have passed over. ^* Yes, I Jive got a coldiriiich would have prevented my singing to*tights so I thought it best to put off my party.-^^You are more embonpoint than you used to be ;96 DESTINY.yoa must beware of that. — Are you fond of birds?These paroquet were a present from Miranda.She is ia town — shave you not met her yet ? —Were you not at Lady Ellington's ball lastnight ? I have got a little cold, and did not go.I fun nursing myself in hopes I shall be abletor the Duchess of St Leger's party tomorrow.Perhaps you gyp ? — I would offer to call for you,but the jGEu;t is, Lady Mowbray is to call for meinher carriage ; — but another time I shall bequite happy to take you. — And, by the by, canI io any thing for you ? My milliner, MadameLa Roque, is perfect — trader expensive, to bemure ; but one must pay for pretty things, youknow. I am sure Florinda will be delighted todoany thing in the world for you, and will behappy to send you a card for her ball — Praywhat is your address ? — ^for I really would notmake it out upon your card ; something Court,is it not ? — Where can that be, my dear ?"Edidi blushed as she relied, that she was toleave town the following day ; then added, ^^ Ireside in the City will relations of my mother."^ Shocking ! In the City ! why that s tooDESTINY. 97dreadful ! How could you think of going to.such a place ? — ewe must endeavour to get youout (tf it as soon as we can" said her ladyshipsgravely. ^V I must consider what is to be donfor you— I forget whether poor dear Glenroyleft much fortune — I'm afraid not — ^tha^s a pitybut it can't be helped. Apropos I have gotsuch a pretty set of coral for you ! I must desiremy maid to fetch them," and she rang the bell;but before it was answered, she exclaimed, ^^ Ah,by the by, I forgot them in the hurry and themultitudes of affairs, on leaving Naples — Nev€|imind, I shall get something for you here ; wecan do that any day. — Now, before we part,my dears? continued she, ^^ let me settle somethingfor you. You are with very good sort ofpeople of course ; but, you know, to be of anyservice to you while you live in th City, is outof the question. And to have any success inthe world, you must leave it immediately. I anisure Florinda would tell you the same thing.As' for Sir Reginald," here she shrugged hershoulders, then in a low tone whispered, ^' letme tell you, my dear, you had an escape fromVOL. III. E98 DESTINY.that man— most unfortunately for my poor dearFlorinda— in fact, it was quite a mesalliancefor her. But she quite sacrificed herself to theromantic goodness of her heart. She thoughtit necessary to fall in love with him, because hehad saved her from being drowned; but as Isaid to her, why if your footman had saved youfrom drowning, would you have thought it necessaryto marry him ? But, however, we shall nottalk of that at present — ewe must think of whatcan be done to save you. My house, as you see,is very small, and I require a great deal of accommodation; but perhaps I might — eyes, I ratherthink I could manage to have a room for youduring the few weeks I shall remain in town —and then"Here Edith, with thanks, begged leave todecline the honour intended, assuring her thatshe was satisfied to remain in her present situation; that it was one she had voluntarily chosenfor a time ; and therefore it would be using Mrand Mrs Ribley very ill, were she to quit theirhouse, merely because their station in life wasnot sufficiently elevated.DESTINY. 99Why you ought never to have gone to sucha place. Certainly my permission ought to havebeen asked before you involved yourself in amanner which may put it quite out of mypower to bring you forward. How can I possiblybe of any service to you, after you havespent six weeks in such society ? How could Ipossibly introduce you with any effect? Scotlandand Scotch people, and Scotch books andscenery, and so forth, happen to be in fashionat present; and I could present you perfectlywell, as just arrived from Scotland. And as at.present there is rather a want of any thing verydistinguish amongst the dSmtantes of the season,(Florinda unhappily being out of the field,)with your face and figure, both, I must say,astonishingly improved, I have no doubt youwould cause a sensation, and get very well marriedbefore the end of the season. But if youremain where you are, I can positively do nothingfor you**Here Mr Ribley's carriage was announced,and Edith could only repeat what she had beforesaid, as she hastened to take leave.100 DESTINY.WeD, I shall tiny what can be done, andwhether Florinda can send you a card for herball. But where in the world will it find you ?"I should be sorry that Lady Waldegravetook so unnecessary a trouble," replied Edith,since I could not, even if I would, avail myselfof it. I leave town tomorrow with Mr andMrs Ribley."Her ladyship here began to remonstrate stillmore vehemently on the impropriety of herremaining where she was ; but Edith was firmin her resolution to remain where she had voluntarilyplaced herself; and, indeed, the inducementheld out by Lady Elizabeth was sufficientin itself to make her recoil from her proposalEdith was too ignorant of the little, mean,crooked ways of .the world, to discern aught butmere weak, mistaken kindness in her stepmother'sanxiety, to have her thus brought forward.But the fact was, her ladyship had her own endsto answer in this " fair seeming show." She hadfallen very much into the " sear and yellowleaf' of fashionable notoriety — ^her parties wereill attended — she was not invited to those sheDESTINY. 101wished most to be at — ^and when she went intopublic, she found herself slighted and neglected.In short, her life was one constant scene of pettymortifications, and insignificant attempts to regainher place in society — a place long sincefiled up by others, who, in their turn, would bepushed aside, when their little day was passed.She had, however, enough of worldly craft to beatvare that she might rise into consequence, ifshe could introduce any thing to cause a sensationin the gay world. She had, indeed, a recentexample before her eyes, in the wonderful successwhich had attended a declining dowager'sintroduction of a handsome niece ; and the firstsight of Edith immediately suggested to herwhat great eat she might attain by becomingthe patroness of one young, beautiful, and anovelty — one whose birth would not disgraceher, and whose native grace and elegance wouldstand the scrutiny even of the ill-natured well-bredworld.102 DESTINY, *CHAPTER X.The time had now come when Edith was topart from her kind friend Captain Malcolm, sheknew not for how long. He was to set out forInch Orran the same day that she was to leaveLondon.^< Remember, Edith*' said he, as he partedfrom her — " remember that Inch Orran is stillyour home, and that we shall never cease to consideryou as one of ourselves — o. daughter's placeis yours in our hearts, and at our board, while Ilive — when I die, a daughter's provision will beyours. Promise me, then, before we part, youwill always, and in all circumstances, still beone of us !"Edith's heart was too full to speak ; but shepressed the hand of her excellent friend in hers,DESTINY. 103for she felt as if she were again losing a father'sprotection, and was now in truth an orphan.Edith felt this parting the more, that she wasalso to be separated, though but for a short time,from her faithful Mrs Macauley. With thehelp of her nephew Johnnie, she said, she hadprocured a very comfortable and respectablelodging, within half a mile of Mr Bibley's villa;but it was undergoing some repairs, and wouldnot be ready till the week following that inwhich her loved proteffee was to leave town.Mrs Bibley, although aware of the faithfulcreature's attachment, made no offer of accommodatingher with an apartment at the Grove ;for Mrs Ribley was little given to consult feelingsupon any occasion, and rather seemed toconsider them as weaknesses, which ought notto be indulged. Edith had been accustomed toassociate ideas of romantic seclusion with thevery name of the country ; and soon weary andexhausted with wondering at the works of art,she had longed for the calm soothing influenceof nature. But the nature of a gentlemanlyIjQ^ J>£STINir.english village, how different from the natureof a Highland chief's mountain solitudes !i Mr Ribley's villa, the Grove, (so called froma little patch of poplars and Portugal laurels atthe back of the house,) was in one of the manypretty villages with which the environs of Londonabound. It stood at the end, and a littleapart from a row of houses, in front of whichwas a broad gravel walk, garnished with a rowof poplars, and dignified by the appellation ofthe Mall. Before this stretched a fine expanseo£ common, interspersed with other rows andcrescents, as well as with detached and moremoral dwellings ; some embowered in their ownlittle grove, or tiny park and pleasure-ground;others with their simple paddock and little walledgarden ; while a still humbler class boasted onlyof a flower-plat, and a single tree of statelygrowth, shading their thatched roof and latticedwindow.Mrs Ribley had frequently alluded to the planof life that was to be pursued when they shouldbe settled in the country, as something that wasto be no less edifying than delightfuL AndDESTINY. 105though Edith's expectations were certainly notsanguine as to the pleasure she was to experiencefrom being associated in anyway with her aunt,still she was not prepared for any thing so intolerableas the mode of life she found chalked outfor her, — ^to sit in the parlour all the morningwith this inane pair — Mrs Ribley hemming frillsfor Mr Ribley's shirts, while he gabbled nonsense,or by his lady's desire read aloud some edifyingand instructive work of her own selection. Todopoor Mr Ribley justice, he would have resistedthe task, if he had ever been in the way ofresisting any of Kitty my dear's commands ; bib;all that he had energy for, was to try every shiftto avoid it. Tien to play over on an indifferentinstrument Mrs Ribley's old sonatas, and singher antiquated airs — to pay and receive visits-takean airing — thus was the morning consumed;while the evening was devoted to walking backwardsand forwards on the Mall, chatting andgossiping with dull idlers like themselves. Theonly relief to this life of monotony was, that MrFenshurst generally drove out to dinner, andcontrived to secure Edith's arm for the evening£2106 DESTINY.walk. Mr and Mrs Bibley expressed their surpriseto each other, at the frequency and lengthof their nephew's visits ; but Mr Bibley alwayssettled the point by summing up his animadversionswith, << Ah, Charles knows what he'sabout — looking after the elegant and accomplishedMiss Mogg. Three hundred thousandpound, and old Mogg in a dropsy !'*Nothing could be more methodical than MrsBibley — she had her days, her hours, her months,her minutes marked out, each and all for theirown especial purpose, and these purposes themost dull and insignificant imaginable. ^^ 'Tweregreatly wise," says Young, " to talk with our pasthours, and ask them what report they bear toHeaven." But meagre and unsatisfactory wouldhave been the register of Mrs Bibley's doings,even on earth. Hers were the doings of a dull,worldly mind, operating in the narrow sphere ofearthly duties, and affixing undue importance tothe most trivial affairs of life. And perhaps, ofall the varieties of character, there are few moreinsupportable as a companion than a dull serioustrifler. Even Mr Bibley's silly, vulgar loquacity,Destiny. 107Twas less irksome than the <^ leaden reiteration''of his lady.It was Mr Bibley's regular practice, everymorning after breakfast, to take his station atthe parlour window, to spy all that could bespied, and to communicate the knowledge soacquired to Kitty my dear, as she sat at herwork ; not that he confined himself to that particulartime for taking his observations, for hewas one of those restless, fidgety bodies, whonever can be still, and his head was to be seenpoking out at the window, or peering over theVenetian-blinds, all the hours of the day ; butthat was a favourite hour with him, as the one inwhich the various trades-people were, with trueEnglish punctuality, making the rounds of thevillage, to supply their customers with provisionsfor the day. This was a high treat 'to Mr Ribley,and thus was he wont to impart his informationto his lady :Kitty, my dear, here's the butcher's boywith some lamb chops and a loin of very nice-lookingveal, — sis that right ?'Quite right, thank you, Mr Ribley."it108 DESTINY.And a shoulder of mutton for the servants,eh?"Perfectly, Mr Ridley*Kitty, my dear, I suspect the Moggs havetaken possession of Myrtle Grove : I saw thebutcher's boy hand in just now a very fine-lookingfillet of veal."Indeed ! that does loot as if they had arrived,Mr Ribley."** And, Kitty, my dear, there's a loin of pork,a calls head, and a rump steak gone to MrsMartha Budget — What can she be doing withthree meats ? Single lady — bad health — only twoservants— very rich, to be sure — and three meatsevery odd, a'n't it, Kitty, my dear ?"** 'Tis, indeed, Mr Ribley ; there must be sadwaste, I fear, with the servants."** There's a shin of beef and brisket of vealto the Blankets, — and only a scrag of muttonfor poor Miss Judge ! Sad thing is a scrag ofmutton, a'n't it, Kitty, my dear ?"'Tis, indeed, sad to those who have knownbetter, Mr Ribley !"^^ There's such a noble sirloin going to ourDESTINY* 109neighbour, Mr Coleridge — thirty pound weight,I'm sure ! why, it does one's heart good to seesuch a sirloin ! Sure they must be going to havea party !"I liiink it very probable, Mr Ribley."." But here's the poulterer: A pair of mostbeautiful plump ducklings for ourselves: andnow he has given in a green goose to Mr Coleridge;and there, there, I declare, is a delicatelittle turkey poult to Mr Mogg ! Surediere must be some mistake there ! white meat,white fowl ! brown meat, brown fowl ! Now, youmay depend upon it, the poulterer has made amistake — the turkey must have been for MrColeridge, the green goose for Mr Mogg : thenall would be right ; there's white meat, brownbird — brown meat, white bird ; but if they don'tfind out the mistake, only conceive how awkwardit will be ? Don't you think so, Kitty, my dear ?"Uncommonly so indeed, Mr Ribley; butperhaps something may depend upon the fishthey are to have."That's very true, Kitty, my dear, somethingmay depend upon that. A very fine pullet, an110 DESTINY.half-ia-dozen plovers' eggs, for Mrs Martha —sure she must be picking up !"<^ Charming air has our Common, Mr Bibleyy!"^^ I can't think enough of the veal and theturkey poult having gone to them, and the beefand the ducklings to the Claridges ! — Sure wemust find out whether there has been a mistakebetween the Moggs and the Claridges, and whetherit was the fault of the butcher or the poulterer.— Why, you know, Kitty, my dear, thevery same might happen to ourselves !"<< It might indeed, Mr Bibley. Bvt'perhapsyou will now favour us with a little improvingreading ?"** Good la ! come here, my dear — only see !-here's the fishmonger with a pair of mulletsfor us, stifle as pokers, I declare ! — and — sure ifhe a'n't taking a pair of soles to the Moggs ! —and let us see what he has got for the ClaridgesA beautiful eel for Mrs Martha — sure shemust be quite well ! — Now, now, let us see what—I declare, if there a'n't a large piece of salmonand two lobsters for the Claridges ! — salmon andDESTINY. Illlobsters! sirloin and green goose! — why, whoeverheard of such a dinner ? Well, sure thatis the very strangest thing — a'n't it, Kitty, mydear?*"Ks indeed a bad arrangement, Mr Ribley."'^ And to think of the Moggs, with three hundredthousand pound, having white meat, whitefish,white fowl ! I declare I shouldn't wonderif their soup was white too !"** Indeed I shouldn't wonder, Mr Ribley,some people are so very odd !"Much more of the same colloquy went on,till the forms of the butcher, fishmonger, poulterer'boys, faded into distance, or vanishedabruptly from the view.112 DESTINY.CHAPTER XLAs the mind commonly finds its own level insociety, it may be inferred that Mr and MrsBibley's circle of acquaintances was composedof common-place, vulgar-minded persons, likethemselves, full of the paltry gossip and pettydetail of the narrow sphere in which they moved.Cards had been exchanged with Miss Mogg, butno introduction had yet taken place — occasionalglimpses, however, had been caught of her by MrRibley, as she walked, accompanied by the ladywho lived with her as her chaperon — or, as shewas to be seen sometimes, driving out withOld Mogg," in a very handsome carriage withrichly liveried attendants.Amongst the little coterie of the Mall and itsneighbourhood, there was a constant interchangeof tea-drinkings, or, still worse, what they calledBESTINT. 113evening parties, including cards, cake, musiclemonade, and ennui It was at one of thesethat'the "elegant and accomplished MissMogg"made her first appearance, and Edith was againsurprised to behold, in the person of the muffin-maker'sdaughter, a very pretty, fashionable-lookinggirl, who talked, laughed, played, andsung, in a very well-taught manner. In short,Miss Mogg was like thousands of other prettygirls who have been educated at fashionableboarding-schools,' and acquired that external polishwhich is now the great aim and end of educationto impart Edith had not mixed muchin general society, but she had been all her lifeaccustomed to do the honours of her father'shouse to many a noble and distinguished guest,and to receive, in return, those marked and peculiarattentions due to the fair and youthful mistressof a noble establishment. But now, amidstthis plebeian coterie, she found herself a personof no consequence whatever, compared to MissMogg, the muffin*maker's daughter — so relativea thing is personal importance ! She was slightlyand civilly, sometimes compassionately, spoken1 14 DESTINY.to, evidently as the poor dependent niece wholived with good Mrs Ribley ; but all was wonder,and admiration, and exclamation, at thebeauty, the dress, the accomplishments, of thecharming Miss Mogg. Edith felt the difference,but she had so little personal pride or vanity thatshe felt it without pain — except as it forced uponher the retrospect of changed days, and fallenfortunes. Mr Penshurst, who unexpectedly joinedthe party, was the only one who did not enterthe charmed circle which surrounded Miss Moggas she sat at the piano, but took his station byEdith, who sat a little apart. This faux pas atthe very outset would not have been passed overin silence by Mr Ribley, had not he and his ladybeen both at cards in the back drawing-room,and ignorant of what was going on, while Edith,viewing him as the intended lover of Miss Mogg,gave him credit for the delicacy which kept himfrom jostling and elbowing with the crowd ofher admirers.How you must despise us mercenary English,"said he to Edith, as he stood by her chair,and looked with something like scorn on theDESTINY. 115rest of the company, ^^ when you see the homagewe render to mere wealth ?'^^ Is it not the universal idol, under some formor other ?' replied she.^^Yesy with the vulgar; even mere vulgarcoin commands reverence — but you, I am surewould be no worshipper of wealth under anyform."Every country — nay, every heart, has perhapsits own false deity," said Edith.^^ It may be so but surely there are none sovulgarizing as the love of money. When I thinkof the mass of wealth which even this room contains,it almost sickens me at the thought ofriches. Here it displays none of those charmswhich render it so fascinating in refined society ;and, I confess, the idol appears to me in all itsnative deformity."^^ I should imagine it was seldom seen to greateradvantage than in the person of Miss Mogg,"said Edith ; " she is very pretty."Yes, she would look very well even at alack's.She sings well, and, I have no doubt,waltzes well," replied he, carelessly. " I see116 DESTINY.you are incredulous about the sincerity of myhomage at a nobler shrine ; but you are right,Miss Mogg is a very nice girl, to use the favouriteexpression of the caste to which I partly belong;not that I mean to affect any aristocratic$drs," he added, smiling, ^< or to depreciate theexcellence of a body of people so respectable asthat of the commercial class of England — ^in itthere are many members who would do honourto the highest rank or station, just as there arepatricians by birth who would disgrace th mostplebeian extraction — I only regret that youshould have been made acquainted with so unfavourablea specimen of English taste and manners."^^ I flatter myself," said Edith, " I am morein the way of losing prejudices than of acquiringthem. I have already got rid of a few sinceI came to England."So have I, since you came to England.Come, let us compare notes. In Mrs Ribley'sniece, I expected to behold — no, I really cannotbring myself to describe what I expected to findDESTINY. 117you — except that it was in every thing the reverseof what you are,"That may or may not be a compliment*'said Edith ; *' but since you have set me suchan example of candour, I can do no less thanfollow it, as I am sure Mr Ribley's unseennephew might have rivalled Mrs Ribley's niece."Mr Penshurst laughed while he said, " It iswell the phantoms have destroyed each other ;let us hope they never again may revive evenin imaginations * Then, as the card parties inwhich Mr and Mrs Ribley had been engagedbroke up, and they were entering the room,he exclaimed, " But I must be presented to MissMogg, if I would prevent my good uncle fromexposing himself and me." He then hastenedtowards the spot where she was, in time to saveappearances, and poor Mr Ribley could scarcelyrestrain his transports when he beheld his nephewactually engaged in conversation withthe elegant and accomplished Miss Mogg."The entertainment was drawing to a close —the company took leave — and as the distance wasshort, and the evening fine, Mrs Ribley walked1 18 DESTINY.home in her clogs and calash, leaning on MrRibley, while Edith was, as usual, consigned tothe care of Charles Penshurst. As they walkedalong, Mr Ribley kept repeating, " Sweetpretty creature is Miss Mogg, and so affable !All the gentlemen are in love with her — An'tthey, Kitty, my dear? Hope she noticed youparticularly, Charles ? And you may dependupon it, old Mogg's in a dropsy, and she'll havethree hundred thousand point ! Three hundredthousand pound, and old Mogg in a dropsy ! ! !"DESTINY. 119CHAPTER XII.Edith had felt the want of her kind, kindheartedMrs Macaulay, and had many timeswalked to the cottage where her lodgings weretaken for her, to watch, and, if possible, hasten theprogress of the little alterations that were takingplace, and which had been protracted from oneweek to nearly three. These were now completed,and she came, blithe as a bee, to takepossession of her apartments. The cottage belongedto a respectable, elderly pair, well skilledin all those little domestic comforts whichmake an English cottage a perfect epitome ofsimple enjoyment. It was an irregular, building, with pointed gables, andlatticed windows, shrouded amongst honeysucklesand jasmine, and surrounded on three sideswith a garden at least coeval with itself, which• 120 DESTINY.opened upon a wild secluded comer of the common,sprinkled with aged thorns, and gay withfurze. From this diverged many a green andbosky lane,'* Bowed with wild roses and the clasping woodbine."It was a happy meeting between Edith andher old friend ; for although no companion forthe cultivated mind and refined taste of her eve,still, in the simple overflowing of her love, andthe hilarity of her temper, Edith found a charmwhich she would vainly have sought for even inthe most polished intercourse of society. If, asAdam Smith says, " the greatest pleasure in lifeconsists in being beloved," that pleasure assuredlywas Edith's, and her own heart seemed torevive and expand beneath the brightening influenceof another's joy.O, my darling !" cried she, as the tears ofdelight rolled down her somewhat faded cheeks,how happy I am to see you again ! — ^not butwhat I've seen you every night in my dreamssince we parted — and was not that a great comfortto me, think you, and one I ought to beDESTINY. 121Very grateful for ? 'Deed I think &(o, for it is notevery body that has so great a gift, if I may sayso, vouchsafed to them. Oh, what would hfkvebecome of me in the heart of that great dungeon,if I had never been blessed with a sight of yoursweet face !"^^ Dear Macky !" said Edith, as she returnedthe fond embrace, ^' I trust you have been wellandtolerably happy even in the heart of yourdungeon, as you call London ?"^' 'Deed, I ought to be very happy, for surelyI am a surprising creature, to be so stout at mygreat age, — ^and to have the sense granted me,too, to be sensible of the favour that has beenshown me ; for some have the strength withoutthe sense, and some have the sense, but are weakin the body ; but though your good papa wasnot pleased to think I had sense, yet I alwaysthought I had my share, and that I would haveto give an account of that, as well as of my greathealthy some day."You have been very busy, then, doing good,as usual ? Come, tell me what you have beenabout, dear Macky, since I left you."VOL. III. F122 DESTINY.^^ O, 'deed, my doings have been but small,for they were all with Johnnie's people, poorthings ! Two of them, Duncan and Nancy, tookthe settlers, poor lambs, and that made themvery rabbit and ill to manage, especially as theirmother, poor body, is rather — is just maybe toogood to them in the way of humouring them, —which, to be sure, is very natural, consideringwhat poor, singing-like things they are; andArchie, he was sent home from the boarding-schoolwith the mmnps, and his hand was neverout of mischief; but is it not very natural, consideringhow strict they keep poor chiltern atthey schools, that they should go like temperswhen they get out of them ? Then the baby hada sad town with its teeth ; and the lass that takescare of the bairns, she burnt her hand, and wasnot able to part them when they fought wi' oneanother. I really thought Archie and Duncanwould have ruggit the very heads off one another,poor things, so it was a great mercy Ichanced to be in the family at the time when Iwas able to help them in their straits ; and nowthey're all set to rights again — Archie away backDESTINY. 123to the school, and the baby has cut two greatteeth, and the lass's hand is healed, and they'reall to come down and take their dinner wi' menext Saturday, and that will be a fine ploy, andthey will be so pleased to see how comfortable Iam. This is really a bit bonny spot, and a neathouse, and discreet, purpose-like bodies that keepit ; and so, my We, we ought to be thankful,even though we are in England, for we mighthave been in a worse place."Edith would gladly have exchanged the senseless,soulless life and luxurious board of the Rib-less,for the heartfelt pleasures and simple £Eureshe would have enjoyed with her old Mend, butthat might not be; she resolved, however, toappropriate her morning hours to her, as alsosuch other portions of the day as she could abstractfrom the claims of Mrs Ribley. Frequentthough formal invitations were also given toMrs Macauley to dine or drink tea at the Grove ;and thus several weeks passed away without anygreater varieties than occasional parties, whenMiss Mogg always shone forth as the star of theevening.124 DESTINY.Edith had all her life been accustomed to mixfreely in gentlemen's society and to receive agreat deal of attention, without attaching to it anyof those ideas of love and marriage, or even exclusiveadmiration, which young ladies are soapt to indulge, when they find themselves at alldistinguished beyond the common forms of well-bredindifference. She, therefore, conversedwith gentlemen with the same absence of design,and consequent ease of deportment, as shewoidd have done with companions of her ownfie, and there was a simple quiet refinementin her manner, equally remote from prudery asfrom coquetry. Something of this might alsohave been owing to her affections having beenso exclusively engrossed by one object. Theseaffections had been deeply wounded, and thoughthe wound itself had long since closed, it hadbeen succeeded by an insensibility which renderedher alike. unconscious of, and indifferentto, ordinary impressions. Not even Mrs Ribley,with all her cold correctness, could find faultwith the manners of her niece ; not that she admiredthem ; they lacked that formality whichDestiny. 125with her was the criterion of virtue, and madeit difficult for her to comprehend how far therecould be purity of heart, and sincerity of mind,and dignity of behaviour, without this her guardianangel to protect the whole. Although shecoidd, not say that Edith encouraged the attentionsof Charles Penshurst, she began to suspectthat Charles Penshurst was rather too particularand unremitting in his attentions to Edith.At length an Sclaircissement took place. Oneday as the ladies sat in solemn silence at theirwork, Mr Ribley came twaddling into the room,his wig all awry, his eyes goggling, his handsshaking, and his whole person indicative of greatmental agitation. He looked for a minute ortwo, as if doubting the evidence of his ownsenses ; then, with a sort of scream, burst forth,'<< Refused Miss Mogg ! refused Miss Mogg !three hundred thousand pound, and old Moggin a dropsy !" And he wrung his hands, andambled up and down the room, repeating thesame thing at least a dozen times to himself.Pray be composed, Mr Ribley," said hislady, as she calmly threaded her needle, and126 DESTINY.even made a knot at the end of her thread ; ^^ becomposed pray, Mr Ribley."Why, Kitty, my dear, you don't know —why now what do you think ? After all, such aa fine education — been at Oxford — and — ^andwould have settled fifty thousand pound uponhim at once — to refuse Miss Mogg !" Here hisvoice rose again to a treble shriek, '^ To refuseMiss Mogg ! three hundred thousand pound,and old Mogg, as sure as I'm alive, in a dropsy !Seen him myself — legs as thick as three of mine ;an't they, Kitty, my dear ?"Indeed ! the poor old gentleman ! — But Ihave not seen Mr Mogg of a great while, MrRibley."Well, all over now," said he, in a calmertone, and standing still — " refuses to pay hisaddresses to Miss Mogg ! refuses Miss Mogg !and after I had sounded old Mogg myself"Here Edith had risen to quit the room, thatMrs Ribley might be more at liberty to receivethe full disclosure she saw about to take place.But Mrs Ribley, with compressed lips, glassyeyes, and an emphatic waive of the head, said,DESTINY. 127You will oblige me by remaining where yonare, Edith, till we have finished these frills. Itis of importance that the frills that are to beworn together should be hemmed together."^^ Sounded old Mogg myself! found himquite agreeable — told him what a fine youngman my nephew is — cousin to Sir Charles Pens-hurst— only one between him and the title-settlefifty thousand pounds upon him myself —and after all, to refuse to pay his addresses toMiss Mogg ! the elegant and accomplished MissMogg ! three hundred thousand pound, and oldMogg in a dropsy !"'Tis indeed very extraordinary, Mr Ribley,that Charles should be so disobedient, when it'sall for his own advantage too." And she cast alook of cold scrutiny at Edith, who sat quiteunconscious, either of it, or of the suspicionswhich were now beginning to be bodied forth inMrs Ribley's dull brain. " Can you assign noprobable motive. Miss Malcolm," said she, ^^ forthis extraordinary behaviour of Mr Penshurst ?*Edith looked with such innocent surprise, asmight almost have sufficed to answer the DESTINY.tion. " None," replied she, " except that hedoes not particularly admire Miss Mogg, Isuppose''Not admire Miss Mogg !" exclaimed MrRibley ; ^^ not admire three hundred thousandpound ! Sure he can't be such a fool, eh, Kitty,my dear ?*^^ I should be still more surprised, if he iscapable of disobeying such an uncle as you havebeen to him, Mr Ribley." Then turning toEdith, " If you know who Mr Penshurst doesnot admire, can you tell us whom he doesadmire ?" And Mrs Ribley fixed her large solemneyes full upon her £Etc, as she put theinterrogation.The truth for the first time flashed uponEdith's mind. She saw she was suspected, andwith the rapidity of lightning various little circumstances,which at the time she had passedcarelessly by, now darted into her mind, as if tobring conviction home to her. With a deepenedcolour she said, " I have never been honouredwith Mr Penshursf s confidence. I beg I maytherefore be spared any farther discussion on aDESTINY. 129subject in which I never can be interested, otherwisethan as the friend of the parties'Then calmly laying aside her work, she roseand left the room — Mr Riblejr's pathetic exclamationsresounding in her ear as she closed thedoor.Desirous of avoiding being again called toa discussion, which delicacy forbade that sheshould ever have been made acquainted with,she resolved to go and pass the day with MrsMacauley, and thus be out of the way of thisunpleasant family altercation. Leaving a message,therefore, with the servant, to say whereshe had gone, she set out on her walk alone,contrary to Mrs Ribley's disapproval of youngladies walking by themselves. She had gonebut a little way from the house, when she foundherself overtaken and joined by the very personshe most wished to avoid — Mr Penshurst. Heoffered her his arm as usual, which for the firsttime she hesitated to accept; and with someembarrassment added, that, as she was going tospend the day with her friend, she begged shemight not interfere with his arrangements.f2130 DESTINY.^^ Is there no other reason for your decliningmy attendance ?'' he enquired, looking earnestlyat her.Edith was silent ; for truth forbade her to saythere was not, and to acknowledge there was,would have been to lead to an explanation shewished to avoid.But her companion seemed to penetrate hermotive, for he said, " I see how it is — ^you areaware of what has passed between my gooduncle and me, and you are afraid to give countenanceto the rebellious nephew."I certainly wish to avoid doing any thingthat might be construed into disrespect of Mrand Mrs Ribley," replied Edith.** But I flatter myself soit do not carry yourrespect for their prejudices beyond your wishesfor my happiness ?"I would hope that both might be combined,"replied Edith.Impossible in the present case — ^and if Ibelieved you sincere, or at least that you wereaware of the nature of the hope you have justexpressed, suffer me to say, it would give meincalculable pain."DESTINY. 131^^ The wish toes sincere'' said Edith, gently ;^^ the pain was unintentional."You wish then," said Mr Penshurst, warmly," that I should sacrifice myself for gold-^that I should join the mean herd who are payingcourt to the muffin-maker's daughter — ^that Jshould suffer my well-meaning, but misjudginguncle, to set about negotiating for my futurehappiness, just as he would for a transfer of hisbank-stock. Is this what you wish ? No. I amsure it cannot be."I have certainly no wish to give even anopinion in a matter which, pardon me for saying,ought to be confined entirely to the partiesthemselves, Mr Penshurst."^^ Pardon me ! I acknowledge I have taken aliberty in intruding myself and my concerns onyour attention ; but I had flattered myself, thatneither were so entirely insignificant as to bewholly beneath your notice."My notice can be of no value," said Edith,^' for it can render you no service. I possess noinfluence whatever with either Mr or Mrs Ribley."132 DESTINY.And if you did," interrupted he, " I trustit would not be used in such a cause ; for it istoo absurd a one to require serious interference ;and I certainly never should have even alludedto it, had I not already experienced the badeffects of my uncle's imprudence, in the distanceof your manner towards me."He paused, and Edith made no reply, for intruth she knew not what to say. Mr Penshurstresumed : ^^ Your silence is a tacit acknowledgmentthat it is so, and I can easily conjecturewhat has occasioned the change ; but, howeverI may admire and respect the delicacy whichprompts it, I cannot but deplore that any thingshould have occurred to interrupt the happyintercourse I have hitherto enjoyed with you."When you are reconciled to your imcle,"said Edith, gently, <^ the interruption will cease,and every thing will return to its former friendlyfooting."No, that can never be ; it is only by mutuallyunderstanding each other that confidencecan ever be restored. - Forgive me, therefore, if Iam led to explain myself sooner than I shouldDestiny* Missotherwise have ventured to do, in avowing that,even had no other obstacle existed, the sentimentsI entertain for you would have formedan insuperable bar to my complying with myuncle's wishes'*Edith was not overwhelmed by this declaration,for her heart was untouched by it; but,slightly colouring, after a moment's pause shesaid, ^^ Gratifying as your preference might beto another, I can only regret that it should havebeen bestowed upon me. My esteem and friendshipare yours, as I trusted yours had been mine ;but beyond these I can make no return."But you will — suffer me to hope you willwhen the obstacles which appear to stand inthe way at present are removed, as I pledgemyself they shall be in a very short time. Myuncle loves me too much, and is too easy in histemper, to hold out against my resolution ; andeven Mrs Ribley, to do her justice, acts toomuch upon principle to render her influencedangerous. The provision allotted for me, evenin my uncle's lifetime, is amply sufficient toenable me to take that station in society which134 DESTINY.my birth and fSEunily entitle me to claim. Theconsent of my uncle, and, if you will, youraunt, once obtained, I flatter myself you will atleast allow me to try the effects of time and perseverancein creating an interest for myself inyour regards."No, Mr Penshurst," said Edith, mournfullybut firmly, ^^ I will not for one instant deceiveyou. I am not insensible to the advantages youoffer me — I am not ungrateful for the preferenceyou honour me with ; but believe me, I speak alanguage that never can alter, when I say, Inever can be more to you than I am at thismoment — ^your friend and well-wisher. As such,let us part for the present;" and she held outher hand to him, as they now came in sight ofMrs Macauley's cottage.Mr Penshurst seemed to struggle with hisemotions — and mortified pride, no less thanwounded feeling, showed itself in his countenance: " At least a few days, or even hours,might have been bestowed upon the considerationof my claims to your regard; and still Iwould flatter myself, that courtesy alone willDESTINY. 135incline you to grant them a more calm and dispassionateconsideration than you can possiblydo now ; — ^a week — a month — a. year, if you willI am content to wait your final decision."Tears rose to Edith's eyes, while she answered— " Believe me, Mr Penshurst, the measurewould only be one of protracted pain toboth of us ; my sentiments cannot now waver ;what I say to-day, I should only repeat a yearhence. My best wishes are yours — may Godbless you I" They had now reached the gardengate, and Mrs Macauley was seen joyfully hasteningto meet them.Again Edith, extended her hand to him. Hetook it in silence, then turned abruptly, andhastened away. Mrs Macauley looked aftciirhim for a few minutes, then shook her head witha significant expression, as she regarded Edith :^^ He's a fine, genteel, weel-fared lad," thoughtshe, half aloud, and as if communing with herself,^^ and many a one would be glad of hinoi)though may be he should not look just so highas Glenroy's dochter."136 DESTINY.CHAPTER Xii.Ox returning home, Edith found Mr Ribleystill vibrating to the sound of <^ Refused MissMogg, and old Mogg in a dropsy !" If MrsRibley's suspicions of her nephew's attachmentto Edith had been excited, they now appearedto be completely dispelled by a note just receivedfrom him, declaring his intention of settingout for the continent in a day or two. Thiswas quite conclusive, in her opinion, that shehad been for once mistaken in her surmises, andshe therefore took the first opportunity ois assuringEdith, that there appeared not the slightestground for supposing that Mr Penshurst hadbeen at all influenced by any secret preferencein refusing to pay his addresses to Miss Mogg.Mr Ribley was too good-natured to retain hisdispleasure, which, indeed, scarcely ever amount-destiny.137ed to anger, however strongly he might expresshis disappointment ; and he therefore hastenedto town the following morning, to be reconciledto his somewhat spoiled nephew, before he tookhis departure. Edith felt the loss she had sustainedin an agreeable companion, and the dullne and vacuity that reigned in the £Emily,would have been at times almost too much forher spirit to sustain, had it sought support inoutward things* But she had ^^ that within whichpasseth show," even ^^ the ornament of a meekand quiet spirits seeking not its own in thethings of this world, for of all those which hadonce been hers she was now bereft; the tenderestties of nature ^d of love had beenbroken asunder, — ^her pride of ancestry had beenabased, — habits of almost prodigal munificencehad been exchanged for the galling yoke ofpoverty and dependence ; even the slight solaceof pleasing social intercourse, she had been obligedto surrender. A mere worldly mind wouldhave flown from the contemplation of such disasters,— ^a superstitious one would have givenway to gloom and dejection. But the Christian188 DESTINY.sees in all that befalls him, whether it be good,or whether it seem evil, only the manifestationsof Divine love, as exercised in training and preparingthe soul for its approach to that perfectionwhich it is one day destined to realize. Thevalue of this great and all-important truth dailypressed itself more strongly on Edith's conviction,and cast its hallowed radiance even acrossthe weary path she was destined to tread. Inconstantcommuning with her dear friends atInch Orran, she had always a source of pure,unmingled pleasure, which, with the fond andsimple tokens of her dear old Mack/s affection,seemed now the only fragments that remainedto her of her former happiness ; and these shedid not sullenly reject, but rather cherished withallthe warmth of a still susceptible heart.So passed the time,' — the only varieties, suchas were afforded by dull village parties, andoccasional airings in the environs with Mr andMrs Ribley, from which she sought to extractsuch amusement as could be afforded by theobjects that met their view. Amongst the manyclosely-embowered villas which lay on everyBESTINT. 139side, there chanced to be one which more particularlyattracted Edith's attention, from thebeautiful disposition of the grounds, and theglimpse she caught of the house through therich and varied foliage, which formed a leafyscreen all around, as if, in the true spirit ofEnglish seclusion, to hide the home beauties ofthe scene from the vulgar eyes profane of thepasser-by. She enquired of Mr Ribley to whomit belonged.Sure ! don't you know ? Why, that isWoodlands ! — belongs to your relation. LadyWaldegrave — sweet, pretty place, and such afine bouse ! — never lives there, though; supposeyou were to get an order from her ladyship togo and see it ; and we'll make a party, and askthe Claridges, and the Judges, and Mr andMrs Bodkins, and Miss Mogg, and a few friends,and have a pic-nic in the pleasure-grounds. Sure,Kitty, my dear, that would be very pleasant ?"^^ And this," thought Edith, as she gazedupon it with mournful feelings, undefinable toherself — " This is one of Florinda's many fair,140 * DESTINY.but neglected homes !'' The contrast of herown situation, homeless and dependent, swelledher heart with new and painful emotions; butsuch feelings were alien to her noble, generousnature, and were quickly dispelled by betterthoughts. She shook away the tear which had*risen to her eye, and looked serenely on thelovely, though deserted spot. " And be it so,"said she, mentally; <^ all are the gifts of God —and, oh ! may He grant that, wherever her homeis, it may be a virtuous and a happy one !"Mr Ribley continued to talk of the projectedpio-nic till they returned home ; and Edith hadsome difficulty in evading his request, that shewould make immediate application for an orderto carry it into effect. But he seemed likely tobe gratified sooner than he expected, for, onreaching home, she found the following note,which had been delivered in her absence : —My dear Edith,^^ I have just heard from mamma you are intown, and wish for a card to my ball. I have theDESTINY. 141greatest pleasure in sending you one, and assureyou I shall be quite delighted to see you there.I wish very much I could see you before then,in a quiet, comfortable way ; but, unfortunately,I have not a single day that is not crowded with.engagements; but I trust by and by we shallhave some pleasant meetings, as mamma tells meyou are going to live with some relations atWoodley Common, which is in the neighbourhoodof Woodlands, and I shall probably bethere for a month or two, this summer. In themean time, I am going to send my little boythere for change of air, after the hooping-cough.I have such perfect confidence in the peoplewho are about him, that I know he will be quiteas safe as under my own eye, and I shall make apoint of seeing him as often as I possibly can.But I should think it very kind, dearest Edith,if you would go and see him occasionally itwould really be the greatest possible comfort tome,and do tell him some little stories — ^for hequite doats upon stories. It almost breaks myheart to part with him, even at so short a distance! Tell me, if you don't think him an142 DESTINY.angel ? — Adieu, dearest, dear Edith. I do hopeyou will come to my ball. And believe me, everand ever, your affectionate Mend and sister,Flortnda Waldegrave.** Wald^ave House, Sunday."Pes. — " If you do think of my ball, as I hopeyou will, pray consult my milliner, MadameDual. She is ruinous, but her taste is perfection.And, for Heaven's sake, beware ofmammals friend and counsellor, Madame laRoque ! I enclose a general order for youradmittance to Woodlands, but I must be veryexclusive against admitting the village folks,while Dudley remains there."A momentary flush burned on Edith's cheekat the heartless, unfeeling impertinence of thisbillet ; but it passed quickly away, and was followedby a sigh of regret at the thought, how illits selfish, unfeeling levity augured for herselfand others. One thing particularly struck her,was it delicacy or indifference that withheldher from once mentioning her husband's name ?DESTINY. 143It could scarcely be the former; for of truedelicacy of mind Lady Waldegrave had shownherself hitherto incapable ; and Edith shudderedto think it could be the latter: she attachedso little credit to Lady Elizabeth's testimony,that her insinuations had produced no effect uponher mind. But this equivocal silence seemedbut too much in accordance with them. Shouldit be so, she thought, how little are her outwardcircumstances to be envied ! Edith knew notyet half the selfish egotism of a fine lady. It costher a struggle to write a reply to the note. Herworldly feelings shrunk from the task ; but herbetter and more Christian principles prevailed.144 Destiny*CHAPTER XIV.It may be supposed that Mrs Macauley's artlessnessand, indeed, ignorant good-nature, exposedher, in no common degree, to the variousarts of deception as practised in civilised com-Unities, and which are commonly found to keeppace with the increasing refinement and luxuryof society. While in London, she was a preyto every species of petty imposture with whichits streets abound ; at least as far as her limitedmeans admitted. Her large pockets were dailyreplenished with half-pence for the beggars — ^herroom was filed with trash bought as bargainsfrom the fortress hawkers who beset the passengers; all which, to her surprise and mortification,turned to nought in her hands ; and theauthority of the wise Johnnie himself, had beenscarcely sufficient to restrain her from turningDESTINY. 145his house, small as it was, into a house of refugefor persons of no doubtful character. Her zealwas good, but it lacked knowledge. Even* inher rambles on the Common, or its more secludedpaths, few days passed without her meeting withsome extraordinary claim upon her wonder, admiration,sympathy, or charity. Edith was thereforetoo much accustomed to interesting stories,and had seen too many proofs of the fiEdlacy ofher good friend's judgment, to feel any verylively interest in the objects of her generous butmistaken ardour. She was, therefore, but littlemoved when Mrs Macauley entered her roomone morning at a very early hour, and with evenmore than her wonted animation and intelligencebeaming on her face — " I daresay you willwonder to see me so early, my dear," said she,seating herself, almost out of breath ; ^^ but 'deedI could not wait for your coming to me, for Ihave scarcely been able to sleep, for thinking ofwhat I met with last night"Dear Macky ! that is too serious, if youradventures are to rob you of your rest as well asof your money," said Edith.VOL. III. • Gr146 Destiny.<^ O, not a bit I grudge my sleep any morethan the pi(Me silver, when I have it to give ;but it was my own fsiult that I did not sleep anylast night ; but I could not get him out of myhead, do as I would."^^ I hope you have not taken this same unknowninto your heart, for, large ah that is, Ithink it can scarcely be capacious enough tocontain all that you are inclined to open it to ;besides, dear Macky,'' added she, smiling, « youmust own I should sometimes find myself insuch strange company !"** Well, well, but you need not be feared thistime, my dear, for I'll let nobody dwell therethat is any ways disagreeable to you; but Vmas sure as I'm alive, you would not object tohim if you but saw him. However, I'm notgoing to say black or white about him, for Iknow very well that you rather misdoubt menow; to be sure I have been sometimes mistakenas well as my neighbours, and I'll not saybut what I have been a little unfortunate in mygood opinions ; but for all that, I have my sensesstill, for which I am very thankful, even thoughDESTINY. 147I maybe do not turn them to so much good assome better and wiser people might do."For the first time in her life, Mrs Macatdeyspoke to Glenroy's daughter in a tone slightlyindicative of pique.^^ Dearest Macky, forgive me" cried Edida^embracing her, ^^ and do not look so grave, ifyou would not have me dislike your new friendfor having caused me to offend my own old andvalued one."^^ My darling, it's not in the power of Glen-roy'sdochter to offend me ; and the creature'snot living that I would put into comparison withyou for your own sake. I'm only a wee vexedthat I cannot get you to believe — that is, to understand— or — or to comprehend; but 'deed Ido not know that I do it right myself."^^ No matter," said Edith, smiling, <^ only tellme what it is you wish me to know, and I willdo my best to comprehend it; but now, let usset out upon our ramble this lovely morning."And, taking her old friend's arm within hers,Edith and she set out most lovingly to enjoy148 DESTINY.tthe pure air and balmy fragrance of a delightfulBummer naming.<^ Well, then, my dear, this is what I was goingta tell you. You know what a sweet evening itwas when we parted last night ; so after I had gotto my own door, I thought I would just go andask after that poor ne'er*do-weel creature that Itold you about. I went to his mother's, and Igot very little satisfaction, but that cannot behelped; so as I was coming home by the t'otherside of the Common, which, you know, is verywild and lonesome, especially at night, 'deed Ibegan to think whether I was not rather foolhardyto be walking there by myself at thattime; then I thought of how many stories ofrobberies and murders I had heard, upon peopleno better or richer than myself and what uglypits and places there were among the whins;no doubt it was very foolish in me to be thinkingof such things in such a place, and no. creaturenear me. Well, what do you think, butat that very moment I saw a person on a finetall horse coming riding straight up as it were,Destiny. 149to me — then if I was not frightened ! and myheart began to beat like any thing. However,I thought I would put the best face Icould upon it, and not let on that I thoughtany mischief of him — so, I pretended as if Ihad been just looking at the bonny young moon ;but I cast the tail of my ee at him for all that,and I tried to sing — but 'deed my voice was notvery steady — Well, just at that moment he rodeclose up to me, and what does he do but jumpoff his horse, and grip both my hands in his ! —Oh ! I really thought I was as good as robbedand murdered, and I gave such a screech ! —With that he let me go, but he looked me in theface, and then I saw the tears in his eyes — soI took heart hat that — and says I, * Sir, oh, Fmbut a very poor person, but you shall be welcometo aU that I have in my pocket, if youwill please to do me no harm Still he did notspeak, but he stood as if he had not heard me,and I saw his lip quiver, and his heart heaVeas if he was in distress ; so then I got more courage,and thinks I, this is a poor young creaturethat has maybe an old mother, or a sick wife150 Destiny•r some starving children, that s driven him outto do this — BO I took more heart, and said, ^ I see,sir, you have not been used to this sinful lifeand I hope you never will* I have nothing butapoor sixpence, a few bawbees, and a silverthimble in my pocket, (I quite forgot that I hadmy watch at my side,) which, if they can do youany good, are at your service, and an old woman'sblessing into the bargain.' Well, even wi' dietear in his ee, he gave such a sweet smile, I cannotforget it, and then he said, ^ I beg yourpardon for the alarm I have occasioned you, andfor the liberty I took with you — but I am notwhat you suppose — I am no robber.*** * 'Deed then, you do not look like one,' saysI, * and I hope for the sake of the mother thatbore you, as well as for your own, you neverwill be one ; but if you only wanted to frightenme, I do not think it was very well done ofyou.'ti t No— no,' said he, quite earnestly, • thatwas far from my intention. I took you for anold friend — one who is associated in my mindwith all that is dear to me ;' and then he stoppedDESTINY. 151and I saw him just gulping down his verythoughts as it were — and then he said, scanyou, will you, forgive me?*^^ ' 'Deed that I will, with all my heart,' saysI, ' and I think all the better of you too for thefright you gave me, now that I know the reasonof it.'' Well then,' says he, * to show that you nolonger mistrust me, you must allow me to seeyou safe home ;' and before I knew where I was,there we were walking arm in arm, chatting toone another, as if we had been friends all ourdays. Now is not that very surprising ?"Why, it would certainly be something of anadventure with any body but you ; but I think Ihave heard you relate still more marvellous incidentsin your life," said Edith.'^ But wait till you hear the end of it, my dear.Well, we went on this way, him leading hishorse with one hand, and me hanging on hist'other arm, and he told all how it was he lu^-opened to gave me such a fright — that he had beendining with a friend in this neighbourhood, andwas riding back to town, but lost his way, or at152 l>£STINY.•kast was not sure about it and so when he sawme coming, he thought he would just ride up to-me, and ask me to direct him; and then themoment he set his eyes upon me, as I told youbidfove, he was so struck with my likeness to anold friend, that he had not seen £rami the time hewas a. boy, that, as he said, he quite forgot himself— Now was not that very natural ?"(In the true Scotch style, to answer one questionwith another — shave you still* got yourwatch?' enquired Edith, with a smile. MrsMacauley reddened.^< O, not a bit of that question is like yourselfnow ; 'deed, and I wish that your heart, thatwas so innocent and unsuspicious, may not beg^tmg corrupted, and like the rest of the world,just with dwelling amongst such unclean creatures! My watch ! 'deed, then, he was far morelike to give me a watch, if I had wanted such athing, than to have taken it from me I Oh, mydarling, beware of hasty judgments — they iUbecome us, poor, ignorant, sinful creatures thatwe are."<< Forgive me, dearest Macky, but you knowit is but a minute since you introduced yourhero to me as a highwayman." '•■'''^^ But did not I tell you, my dear, that msnothing but a foolish fancy of my own ? and cueI've drought much shame of ever since ; for if Ihad not been quite stupefied with my own senselessfright, I never could have seen his face andthought ill could come of it."^^ Yet, 'tis but a few days since you declaredyou would never trust to appearances agBOBfafter the "WeU, well, my dear, but that was quits adifferent thing; and no doubt there are manyfair faces that hide foul hearts, just as thereare many worthy, respectable, ill-£giured people.My own good Mr Macauley, many peo|^thought, was not very pretty, because of his beingpoor-marked ; but he was very hit to my sight,for there's no face like the face that loves us*^^< You say true," said Edith, with a sigh, asshe thought how few were the pieces that nowlooked on her with love and gladness.Well, then, my dear, is not that one good reasonsoft my being so well pleased with this youngg2154 Destiny.gentleman that I was telling you about? Not acity but he says he is so fond of my fisice, for itputs him so much in mind of an old friend's —and, Meed, he looked at me with such sweetearnest eyes, I could not but believe him."^ And so you gave him your last guinea,"said Edith, with a smile.« O, my dear, but it grieves me to think youshould be grown so uncharitable in your words,when I'm sure it is not in your nature — deed, Icould almost find in my heart not 'to tell youany more."^^ Ah, pray let me hear the conclusion of yourtale, or romance, or whatever it may be. DearMacky, I am only sorry that so much goodnessshould so often meet such bad returns."^^ But you need not vex yourself about thatthis time, my dear, for there's nothing of thekind that will be likely to happen, as you shallhear. * WeU,' says I, * if s very surprising thatit seems to me as if I had known you too somewhere,but I cannot for the life of me say where.'Perhaps,' says he, ' in sophie former state of existsonce, and therefore let us look upon this as theDESTINY. 155renewal of old friendship, which is a much betterthing than the beginning of a new one — Don'tyou think so?' — ^ 'Deed, and I do says I,^ though I am not altogether sure about a formerstate, as we have no authority for it; butmaybe I have seen you at Glenroy Castle, forI used to see so many grand and genteel peoplethere, that I cannot remember either the fecesor the names of one-half of them.' But justthen, he stopped to sort the bridle of his horse,,and did not attend to what I was saying. Sos.after he had put it to rights, he said, ^ I begyour pardon — to whom does Glenroy Castlebelong ?' So I told him how it had belongedto your family for generations, and how it hadpleased Providence to put it past your goodpapa's family — and then my heart was full —and so I told him more maybe than I shouldhave done — and so we went on cracking togethertill we came to the door of my cottage —then I was going to wish him a good nightywhen he looked about him, and said, ^ What asweet little dwelling you have got here — how Iwish I could find just such another in this neigh.-^166 DESTINY.boyhood, for I want lodgings in the countrySo I told him it was not my own, but belongedto a very decent couple, who let part of it forlodgings, and that I knew they had two roomsat the t'other end of it to let. Well, just as Iwas tweaking, out came Mrs Smith herself; andt» the short and the long of it is, that he tookh^ lodgings for three months, and is to enterupon them tomorrow. Now what do you thinkof that, my dear ? Is that like a oliver, thinkyou ?"This went so far beyond Edith's worst anticipations,that she actually turned pale with fear,as she thought of the evil consequences thatmight ensue to her poor old friend from havingg^ thus involved (as she had no doubt) withstate artful swindler ; and she exclaimed, ^^ Howcould Mrs Smith be so imprudent as to take anutter stranger into her house ?"O, 'deed Mrs Smith's but a narrow-mindedsuspicious body; for she hummed and hawed,and spoke about references and securities ; butI said she need not mind that, for I would beanswerable for him."DESTINY. 167O, Macky, this is really too much !" criedEdith) shocked at the imprudence of her good(^d guardian.Well, my dear, but you should wait.tiHyou hear me out. So then Mrs Smith sidd^that was sufficient. — * So then, says I, if ryanplease, I would take the liberty to ask yOBfname. My own name is Macauley, now in myseventieth year Well at that his face W98overcast, and he hung his head for a minute ortwo with a very mournful look — and I saw hiscolour come and go— and 'deed I was beginningto feel not quite so satisfied, when he lifted uphis head, and looked at me with his full, dearblue eyes. — But when I saw his fine open face Iwondered at myself for my misgiving — ^and then;he said, * I am called WeUcome.' WeU, then,I thought very naturally that he meant Malcolm;(for you know the English have such a way <rfclipping every thing away to nothing) — 'SO Icoidd not but cry out, what a wonderful thing thatwas, for that surely he must be some relation ofthe family, though he did not know it. But hesighed and said, ^ The names were different ;'158 DESTINY.and then (what I thought was very well-bred)he said, ^ He would be very glad to change theone name for the other.' And was that like arobber, think you ?"Edith saw it was in vain to attempt to openthe eyes of Mrs Macauley's understanding as tothe dangerous predicament she had brought herselfinto, by introducing a person of so suspiciousa character to the family with whom she lodged,and making herself responsible for his conduct.This was the very climax of her Quixotism !Edith now felt the want of some friend andcounsellor to whom she could apply for advice ;for dauntless as is the heart of woman on greatand heroic occasions — still, in the coarser occurrencesof this working-day world, she is ill qualifiedby nature or education for taking a part ;for truly has it been said, " Women are hopelesslyand incurably unfitted for business."Edith experienced this, as she vainly triedto devise some means for extricating her oldfriend from this dilemma ; but she could do nothingherself, and there was no one to whomshe could apply. She would not expose her toDESTINY. 159the Ribleys, for they were quite incapable ofappreciating the excellence of her character,and comprehending the simplicity and purityof her motives and actions, and she shrunk fromthe thoughts of subjecting either herself or herpoor Macky to the cold inquisitorial scrutiny ofMrs Ribley, or the senseless loquacious tattleof her husband. The only scheme that presenteditself, was to try to persuade Mrs Macao*ley to write to her nephew, the wise Johnnie,acquainting him with what had passed, and requestingof him to endeavour to find out whatdescription of person it was, she had now involvedherself with. Should that fail, she couldonly wait with patience the result of this strangesuspicious adventure.160 Destiny.*".','■'* •■' ■■} ■*."■ i .1CHAPTER XV.Accordingly, the following monuBg, Edithstet forth as usual for the cottage, and found ihi^ever active Macky chanting away to hersei^*^• ■ « »What beauties does Flora disclose,How sweet are her smiles upon Tweed** —as she was diligently culling a nosegay (^ thesweetest and the fairest for her beloved erewhileher Bible and her stocking lay near herona rustic seat, canopied with honeysueklsfiuAfter the first affectionate salutations and tenderenquiries were made on both sides, and Edith,as was her custom, had read to her old Mend aportion of that book whose words were as bidto them both, she began to suggest her schemewith as much delicacy and finesse as possible ;DESTINY. 161but she had not proceeded far before she wasinterrupted.I beg your pardon, my dear, for interruptingyou, which I know is not good breeding ;but I see very well how it is — you are vexingyourself with the thought that maybe I will beput in prison for having been caution for thatyoung man, Mr Melcombe — am I not right ?'^ Mot quite so bad as that, dear Macky," saidEdith ; ^^ your friends would never allow thatto come to pass, I am sure."Well, whatever it is, you may make yourselfeasy, for I can tell you he has paid the priceof his lodgings in advance for three months beforehe entered upon them ; for he said he couldnot expect them to take the word of a stranger,and neither would he take advantage of mygenerous confidence in him (or something likethat;) now, I do not think that is very like arobber ! — Oh, my dear, should not this be alesson to us to beware of forming such rash andhasty judgments of one another ?"Edith smiled to hear Mrs Macauley's applicationof the terms rash and hasty, but she was1612 DESTINY.in part relieved to find she was free from theresponsibility she had so thoughtlessly incurred*Still she had some vague misgivings as to diecharacter of the person with whom she hadformed this sudden and somewhat suspicious in-timaey. With all Mrs Macauley's excellenciesshe certainly was not a person to captivate ayoung man at first sight. Neither could a stranger,who was ignorant of the qualities of herheart, be supposed to enter into the peculiaritiesof her manners, and the simplicity of her conversation.Even allowing that her resemblanceto an (dd friend had first attracted his notice, yetthat resemblance must soon have disappeared ona more intimate recognition ; for it was scarcelypossible there could be two Mrs Macaulay inthe world. — Yet why, after all, should I be souncharitable in my suspicions ? she thought ;this poor stranger, whom I am so harshly condemning,may, like myself, be almost alone inthe world ; and his heart may have yearned, asmy own would have done, towards even thefancied resemblance of one known and belovedin happier days. — While thoughts like theseDESTINY. 168were passing through her mind, Mrs Macanleywas doing she best she could to aid the more£KTOurable change that was taking place inEdith's sentiments.^ O, if you were to see him, my dear, Fmsure you would almost think shame of yourselffor ever having event him to any thing thatwas bad ! But maybe you'll not see him at aU ;for he says he wishes to live very retired, thoughhe has some friends in the neighbourhood. Itold him that I thought it would be very dull forhim to live here without he had some other companythan me ; for that 'deed my best days werefled, and I was not so merry as I had been''<< < No more am I,' says he, with a sigh, ^ sowe shall suit very well in that respect; andwhen I am here I do not desire any better companythan your own.' "Again Edith's suspicions returned. — '* Anddoes he assign no reason for the love of retirement,beyond that of enjoying the pleasure ofyour company ?'** Not yet ; but I dare say he will tell me allabout himself by and by; consider, my dear.1B4 DfiSTINY.lldW very short a time it is since we have beenacquainted."^^ I do, dear Macky; and therefore I cannotbut wonder that your friendship should havemade such rapid progress in so short a time."** There's no accounting for these things, mydear," replied her friend, gravely ; " and weought to be very thankful when a blessing comesin our way, and not be too curious in examininginto it, and taking it to pieces to see whafs intt, just like the children with their toys. Oh, ifwe had but the spirit of truth and thankfulness,how many a pearl we might find in our dailypaths, that now in our pride and unbelief wetrample under our feet ! But with regard to thisyoung gentleman, his health is maybe one reasonthat he wishes to be quiet ; for when I sawhim in daylight yesterday, he looked very pale,and he told me that he was but just recoveringfrom an illness, so he would need somebody totake care of him, for he looks like one that couldnot take care of himself."Well, dear Macky, I shall rejoice if youhave found a real acquisition in your new friend ;DESTINY. ^fi5one who will cheer you in the many lopj^lyhours you must pass while I am engaged withmy aunt."^^ Speaking of that, my dear, I really think.itwould maybe just as well to say nothing aboutthis to Mr and Mrs Ribley for a little while,jijist till I know all about Mr Melcombe, whl^I have no doubt will be very soon ; for thoughthey are very good people, and very discreet tojoe, yet I think they are not just so — so *.\'^ So credulous as you are, dear Macky," sindEdith, laughing, as she embraced her in taklogleave ^ " well, I shall keep your secret for ypuin the mean time, but don't tax my forbearancetoo long."Several .days passed, and still no new disclosurewas made, though Mrs Macauley's infatuationfor her new friend seemed daily to increase,in spite of the reserve he maintained.I don't know how it is," said she, with aperplexed air, one day, in answer to Edith'srenewed remonstrances ; « for he is any thingbut reserved — quite the contrary — ^for he tellsme ^ seat deal that I never knew before ; wd166 DESTINY.he takes pleasure, too, in hearing me tell him allthat I know — which, to be sure, is not much. Butwhenever I speak to him of his family, the cloudcomes over his open brow, and he changes thesubject ; so I'm thinking they may be no greatthings, any of them ; and it would be very illdone in me to distress him, by seeking to pryinto his private affairs."Edith again felt how vain was reason or argument,when opposed to prejudice or partiality,and wisely forbore to press the matter farther.She resolved, however, to watch over the interestsof her old friend as zealously as she could,and upon no account to suffer herself to be ledinto an acquaintance with one whom she couldnot yet consider as any thing but a mere adventurer.She had little doubt but that Mrs Macauley,in the simplicity of her heart, had acquaintedhim with her suspicions ; and, either fromdelicacy or conscious deception, he seemed tobe equally bent upon keeping his distance. Althoughhis apartments had a separate entranceat the other end of the cottage, yet the windowof his sitting-room opened upon the garden;DESTINY. 167and, from the smallness of the cottage and itsboundaries, Edith was convinced he must oftenbe near them. It therefore required no commoncare in one of its inmates, to preserve suchstrict seclusion. Mrs Macauley, indeed, representedhim as much occupied in study of somekind or another, and that the only relaxationshe allowed himself were a ride on horseback,and a friendly chat with her. But, with all thesefriendly chats, however, there came not that confidentialcommunication which his friend dailylooked for ; but still she kept a stout heart evenagainst " hope deferred'*168 DESTINY.CHAPTER XVLEdith went to visit Lady Waldegrave's child ;and though she looked upon him with interest,it was interest free from all emotion — proof sufficient,had any been required, that the dreamsof her early love had completely died away,never more to return. . The boy was, indeed, aparagon of childish loveliness; and already thedelicate, yet majestic contour of his head andfeatures, and the grace and elegance of his airand movements, indicated the child of high descent.Youth, beauty, and sweetness combined,are sure to win their way to every heart, andEdith soon gained the good graces of her littlerelative — at least, as much as any one can evergain upon the love of a very indulged and pamperedchild. He testified great repugnance towardsMr and Mrs Ribley, whose awkwardDestiny. 169overtures he rejected with disdain. From whatevercause he might suffer, it certainly, to allappearance, could not be from neglect, as hewas most zealously attended by a French Bonnehis Italian nurse, and German footman, all ofwhom seemed sedulous to please and amuse thelittle idol committed to their charge. The Rib-lesswere too fond of seeing sights, not to availthemselves of this opportunity of seeing all thatwas to be seen ; and Edith, .ever willing togratify others, even at the expense of her ownfeelings, accepted the offer of viewing the houseand grounds, and thus allowed herself to be associatedwith them in all the little, mean, pryingways, in which vulgar people delight to go abouta great house. There was much to admire :The house, of the purest style of Italian architecture,stood on a gentle eminence ; the velvetlawn was studded with beds of the richest andrarest flowers and shrubs, while trees of statelygrowth were scattered here and there, till timeground gradually sloped to the noble river whichformed its boundary. All that taste and wealthcould do to embellish nature, had been bestow-vol.III. H170 DESTINY,ed on this, as it seemed, cherished, though nowdeserted abode.The interior of the house would have requiredtaste more cultivated and refined than those ofthe Ribleys to appreciate. The entrance-hallwas filled with noUe specimens of sculpture,the apartments were adorned with some of thefinest works of the Italian masters ; and in one,appropriated entirely to ike work, of modemartists, there were placed two of the happiestefforts of Sir Thomas's pencil, in full lengths ofSir Reginald and Lady Waldegrave. It was butamomentary throb of surprise with Edith whenshe came suddenly and unexpectedly upon theall but breathing form of her breathless lover — andwhen it passed away, she stood, and looked calmly,though sadly ilion it, as upon the ice of onewho had injured Lier, but with whom she wasnow at peace. The servant pointed to a doorwhich conducted, he said, to Lady Waldegrave'sprivate apartments, but ker ladyship had givenpositive orders that they should upon no accountbe shown until they were put in order, for a first-rateartist and his people were ^niployed in un*DESTimr. 171packing the^variouB articles purchased by SirReginald and her ladyship when abroad.Mr Ribley's curiosity, in the true spirit ofCockneyism, became very importunate cm hwing of the locked-up apartments ; he seemed itbthink nothing of what he had seen, in oorapvi^son of what he had not seen, and he lingered behind,and even peeped through the keyhole, inhopes of spying something to make a wonder oibut in vain — she could make nothing of it ; andhe was fain to return home, exclaiming, ever andanon, <* Well, to be sure ! what can be in theseapartments ? — should just like to know — canguess — Can you, Kitty, my dear** For somedays, IMbr Bibley could talk of nothing but whathe had not seen* Soon after her visit, Edithi^ehred the following billet from Lady Wade*grave :<< Dearest dear Edith,'^ I AM so much obliged to you for going tose my daring Dudley — it was quite a comfortto ite to hear you had been «t Woodlands. AndI hcqpe die bowed y^m ev tiling, and gave178 Destiny.yoti fruit and flowers ? I have a letter every dayfrom Mademoiselle Le Clerc, with a bulletin ofmy Sweetest boy ; but still I shall be glad ifyou will continue to visit him now and then.There is another thing, my dear Edith, whichI.must beg your good offices in, and I shall notteaze you with apologies, as J know you too wellto doubt your readiness to oblige. You musttrow that mamma has taken it into her headthat she requires change of air, which indeed isvery probable, as the weather is now so very hot.I wish her of all things to go to the sea-side, orat any rate, to some distance from town. I haveeven offered her Waldegrave Abbey for thesummer, as we shall not go there till very latein the season, but she persists in wishing to takepossession of Woodlands, which would be themost inconvenient thing in the world for me, asit is all in confusion at present with my foreignheavy and I cannot have it put to rights till I amon-the spot myself; and to get any thing doneas it ought to be done while mamma is in thehouse, you must be aware, would be quite imposesable ; besides there Is not accommodation for ji^DESTINY. 1 73both. Now what I wish you to do, dear Edith,is to take the trouble to find a furnished house,which you think would be suitable for her, asnear to where you are as possible. She is reallyfond of you ; and as she is of course in the bestsociety, it would also be an advantage to youto be with her. Now, I do hope you will beable to gratify me in this, and the sooner youcan accomplish it the better. You would seeby the papers how illustrious and renowned SirReginald has become upon the turf !Adieu, my dear,<« Believe me ever, your affectionate,F. Waldegeave.<^ Mamma does not require a large house, youknow, only don't let it be vicar — and citish."This commission, it maybe supposed, was notof a nature for Edith to undertake, and she wroteLady Waldegrave briefly and coldly, decliningto execute the ungracious office.In a few days, however, she received a billetfrom Lady Elizabeth, apprising her of her arri-174 Bestir.hai in the neigUKMirliood in a very indifferentslate of health, and requesting te see her immediate,as she had much to communicate* Asherladyship's carriage accompanied the summons,Edith had no excuse to offer for notcomplying with it ; and she accordingly set offcharged by Mr Barley to endeavour to find outwhat sort of things were in the locked-up roomsat Woodlands, and when he was likely to get asight of them.She found Lady Elizabeth in a charmingcottage omee^ within a beautiful park ; but theinmate of this little Elysium formed a sad contrastto the loveliness that bloomed around. Shelooked haggard and worn out, and was in oneoi her most peevish and irritable moods-of mind.The day was sultry, yet she reclined, with herdogs and parrots around her, by the side of ablazing fire, with curtains, as usual, almost closedrawn.You find me excessively unwell, my dear,"said she, in answer to Edith's enquiries ; ^^ andI impute much of my illness to the treatment Ihave received from that shocking man, yourDESTINY. 175<ioiinn» and from my own daughter— <vBut prayring the bell; this is the time when my dogsought to haire their walk. — Go, darlings goPray, Dawson, be careful of them, and carryAmor when he appears fatigued.— There now,my sweets'' kissing each severally as she dismissedthem, to Edith's great relief. ^* Yes, Ihave been exceeded ill used, which, togetherwith the injudicious treatment of that wretchBelloni, has almost killed me* Thank heaven,I got rid of him, and I have got the best andmost skilful man possible, Monsieur Lamotte —quite a treasure ! — But the cruelty and ingratitudeI have experienced — I — 1-; — Do ringquickly, for I must have my drops ! — it makesme quite iU to think of it !— I am so £Aunt !"Monsieur Lamotte obeyed the summons.He was a grimacing, high-dressed, under-bredFrenchman ; but he knew his cue, and havingcajoled his patient, and administered some drops,he was then allowed to depart ; and her ladyshipwas returning to the subject,* when Edith besoughther to refrain fnmi it, since it was onewhich agitated her so much. But, like all weak176 Destiny*^people, she liked the excitement of her ownpaltry feelings, and went on.** It is but too apparent that I have been veryunwell ; however, it was merely a sort of nervousattack, that any body might have, and whichLamotte assures me will entirely pass away,and that in a few weeks I shall be quite myselfagain. But I found it impossible to be quiet intown, — when one is so much recherches that 19out of the question, — so, by the advice of themedical people, and indeed at Florinda's earnestentreaty, I resolved to try the eJBTect of changeof air, and proposed to go to Woodlands for afew weeks. Besides liking the place itself, Iwas sure it would amuse me to superintend thearrangements making there — the pictures, marbles,and all sorts of pretty things that my daughterpurchased abroad ; and, in short, I told FlorindaI should wish to go to her house for a shorttime. Only conceive her telling me that wasimpossible, for that Sir Reginald and she weregoing themselves very soon, and had invitedmore people than the house could hold, to celebratetheir child's birth-day ! You may believeDestiny.how excessively angry I was, and we had qtdt^a sine. But she cried, poor dear, and saidhowit distressed her to refuse me, but that, in short,she dared not disobey her husband. ' And so,because you have a bad husband, you must beanundutiful daughter !' said I ; and I told herthat she ought not to pay the least regard to thewishes of such a person ; — that she had done himalready too much honour by marrying him ; —and I even hinted that, rather than submit tosuch tyranny, she ought to separate from him."Edith was shocked at this new proof of florida'sduplicity, in throwing the blame of herown selfish and undutiful behaviour on her husband,and thus setting at variance those sheought to have been most desirous of uniting inaffection. She, therefore, strove by every meansto soften the injiuy, and soothe the irritatedfeelings of the despised, yet still doting parent ;and there are few natures that are not benefited,in some degree, by the bland voice of sympathy.Lady Elizabeth's manner became less feverishand irascible as she proceeded — " Yes, it' is allvery well, as it ha turned out. This is a prettyh2178 DESTINY.tiny cottage) and my dogs are quite safe in theperk, no thanks to my daughter — though, poordear, it was no &,vlt of hers either; but my goodcousin Lady Arabia Conway, happened to callat the very time when Miranda and I were bothalittle agitated with what had passed, and so Itold her exactly how it was ; and she — the bestcreature in the world — next day sent to offerme this cottage, which had been built by AdmiralConway for his mother, — and, in short, mevoid ; and though I am not particularly fond ofa cottage, yet it suits me, with, my very limitedincome, to have a house without paying for it."Thus she run on, till the return <^ her dogs fromtheir walk, when Edith would finn have left herto the pleasures of their society; but her stepmotherwas not willing to part with her soeasily, for even she could feel, though she couldnot properly appreciate, the harmonizing influenceof Edith's presence— that gentle forbearance,and total absence of all selfish egotism,which are charms in themselves of no negativedescription. On her part Edith compassionatethe mother, such as she was, thus disregardedDestiny. 179and cast off by her owb, lier only child. Workand fi]iroloii& as she was, she trusted her mindmight yet be turned to better things; and thatbad heath and disappointment might lead her,as they had dome many others, to relinquish thosevanities which only served to mock and cheat herhopes. With these benevolent views, Edithconsented to pass a week or two with her step-^mother, provided Mrs Ribley would give jxp herprior claims upon her ; and having promised, atall events, to see her as often as she could, sheat loigth departed.In her way home she stopped at Mrs Mao-audley's.humble abode, and, upon entering herlittle parlour, foimd that wo^y, with a face ofdeep deliberation, musLog upon the contents ofa letter she held in her hand. The letter wasfrom the wise Johnnie, and the purport of it wasto this effect-that. Mrs J. Macauley and hewould take it very kind if their good aunt wouldretuni to them as soon as possible, Archie havingjust been sent home from school with the modifiedsmallpox — the baby having got St Anthony's fire-!-they had had to turn off the nursery-maid, &cISO mBSTIKT.&e. &c.; the whole concluding with a request,that his good aunt would remain till after MrsMacauley's confinement.<' This is certainly not an alluring invitationdear Macky," said Edith, as she finished readingthe letter.*^ Oj my dear, as to that I do not mind, orrather I ought to be very thankful that, inmy seventieth year, I can be of any use in theworld, when many a one is just a burden and areproach ; but what vexes me is the. thoughts ofleaving you." Here the tear rose to her eyesas she gazed fondly on her darling live.^ And I shall miss you, my own dear, kindfriend," said Edith, equally affected; ^^ but thatis not what is to be considered. At your age, itis really too much to call upon you to encounterso much fatigue, and anxiety, and discomfort."My dear, at no age are we ever unable toi^rve God in some shape or other-that is ourdestiny from beginning to end ; and how can Iserve God so well as by serving his children andmy fellow-creatures ? and maybe I did not thinkof serving Him so much as I should have doneDESTimr. 161in my younger days, and I ought to be verygrateful in being permitted to do it in my oldage ; so I will just put my foot in one of thecoaches tomorrow morning."Edith knew the generous devotedness of thtgood old woman too well to attempt to turn herfrom the path of her duty. The claims of Glen-roy'sdaughter only, would she have consideredsuperior to those of Mr Macauley's nephew Jbut as she did not stand in need of her servicesat that time, the claims of Johnnie Macauleywere paramount to all others. Those only who.love the country as much as Mrs Macauley diiscan fully. appreciate the sacrifice she made inquitting her sweet rural dwelling, with its flowers,and birds, and busy bees, for the crowded city,the noise of a small inconvenient house, and thestrife of sickly, unruly children.Another thing I am really sorry for," saidshe to Edith, " besides parting from you, is theleaving that fine interesting young man MrMelcombe, without getting his history, whichI have no doubt I would have done, if we hadbeen to stay much longer together ; and then I1^2 IHSSTINY.voold have liked so well to have made you acquaintedwith each other ! Vm as sure as Fmalirey you would have come to be very fond ofone another, for I think there's a something, Icannot tell what — a sort of resemblance, as itwere, in your ways of thinking, for he is everyhit as good as you, my dear — in his sentimentsI mean. As to one another's hearts you knowwe cannot tell what s in them*" And with manya tinder embrace hopes of meeting soon, andpromises of writing often,, Edith took leave ofher dear old friend, who was to set off betimesthe following morning.Destiny. 188CHAPTER XVII.From this time seaorcel j a day passed in whichXady Elizabeth did not either come in person,or send her carriage with an invitation amountingto a demand on Edith, till at length nothingcould satisfy her but that die should take up herresidence with her entirely for a few weeks.Edith would han have excused herself; not thatit wa worse to be with her tian with the Ridleybut that she shrank som the thought of beingbrought into intercourse with Sir Reginald andLady Wald^prave, as she doubtless would be, ifan inmate of her stepmother £Emily. But LadyElizabeth disliked contradiction too much everto submit to it when she could help it, and, bentupon carrying her pointy she made a direct appealto Mrs Ribley, who, flattered by this condescenaon, at once decided upon the propriety164 DEiSTlNY.of Edith's accepting her ladyship's invitation. Italso happened to suit her own plans particularlywell, as Mr Ribley and she were meditatingtheir annual trip to Cheltenham with their goodfriend Mrs Rose Poplin, who, for the last fifteenyears, had been their travelling companion. Andas Edith could not be taken with comfort tothem, nor left with propriety by herself thismode of disposing of her was the very thing thatseemed to suit all parties. Accordingly, Edithhad to acquiesce with thebes grace she couldto take up her abode for the present at Oak.Cottage.In one respect Edith was benefited by thechange. Although the great proportion of LadyElizabeth's visitors probably did not rank muchhigher in the moral and intellectual scale thanMrs Ribley's, still their manners were more elegant,and their conversation more refined. Asintelligent beings, or rational companions, theywere perhaps no better J but as mere passingacquaintances, they were certainly superior. Preeminentamongst them, were the kind owners ofher little demesne — Admiral and Lady ArabellaDestiny. 185Conway : the former a still handsome, thoughsomewhat disabled-looking man, with open countspenance, fine bald head, frank, bluff mannersand a sort of hasty, peremptory good nature*Descended from noble ancestry, Lady Arabellainherited the dignity without the pride of birth,and possessed that inherent nobility of mind,,which sheds its own native lustre upon the ad-^adventitious gifts of fortune. She was nearly relaysted to Lady Elizabeth — they had spent much oftheir childhood and youth together, and hergoodness of heart led her still to feel an affection,and take an interest even in the vapid, frivolousbeing, with whom there existed no other affinity.Edith had been charmed with the unaffectedsweetness, and dignified simplicity, of Lady Afar*bella's manners, and expressed the prepossessionshe felt towards her to Lady Elizabeth*"Yes, my cousin is a very good woman,though un pen devote. You know, I suppose,that she was a daughter of the Duke of warrington's,and you may still see she has beenhandsome ; but she and I made our d&mt together,and somehow I — in short. Lady ArabellaIs Destiny.tibpiigbi the be creature m the woi Id, ptodur0^ no sensation whatever, while I" — Heir herladyship gave one of her little haggard aoijleSfaadl Edith smiled too as she contrasted time nato»1 i%mty, and channing, serene countenanceq£ Lady Arabella, with the withered. shrivelledgoblin at her side ; — ^^ however, she naught havemade tm honparti^ it was said; but she chose tosnake a love match, and married the honourableCaptain, now Admiral Conway. However,after all, it has turned out well; he has got ahandsome fortune somehow, and she has beenexcessively ludiy in supposing 4sSih^x family :her. daughters are both greatly married, one toLord EUersly,; eldest son of the IHike of Tareaster — the other to Lord Beeches. Her sonshave also made grei^ alliances, and are in verygood situatkma ; so that she may have a greatdeal of power and patronage if she chooses. TheAdmiral has a charming house in this neighbourhood,where we shall go some day when I feelquite able; but he is become very lame, andrather dea and it quite kills me to, raise myvoice ; indeed Dr I^amotte is of opinion, that«••DESTiKin; 187my complaints are e£ an mcipiexit pulmonarynature, and recommend* my going abroad beforewaters wych I shall certainly do otherwise niydee will be completely mined. Dr Price allowedme to exert myself a great deal too much ;and J ought not to have been permitted to seyour poor, dear father when I was last in Scotland; in act I lost three notes by being obligedto raise my voice to him — ^if Dr Price had notbeen a fool, he never would have allowed itThen, you know, I had that odious German twho drank beer and smoked ! shocking andfoolish I but we wont talk of that As for Belloni,he was the most mercenary creature in theworld, and, I do assure you, thought much moreof his own fortune than of my health ; howeverI trust, by care, and the uncommon skill of DrLamotte, I shall get round in time."In a £Heir different strain was a letter from MrsMacauley, exulting in her own humble way atthe various uses to which she was put ; and verytriumphant at a visit she had had from Mr Melcombe,who had bought and paid for a handsomegold watch of Johnnie's own making. The com-.V188 DESTINY.animation ending with the usual interrogationWas that like a robber, my dear ?*The distance between Oakley House and theCottage was so short, that scarcely a day passedwithout some intercourse taking place with thegenerous kind-hearted pair, who possessed notless the will than the power to promote the comfortof their neighbours. Edith prepossessionin favour of Lady Arabella daily ripenedinto a warmer sentiment of 'affection, and wasmet by corresponding feelings on the part ofthat lady. But as Lady Elizabeth had all theexclusiveness of a little mind, she would havebeen quite jealous of this increasing intimacy —had she imagined there was more in it thanattention to her protege. For the first timesince she left Inch Orran, Edith found herselfin society congenial no less to her principlesthan to her taste and feelings. Lady Arabellareminded her much of her dear Mrs Malcolm.There was in both the same benign spirit ofChristianity, shedding its divine halo over thedaily actions of life — ^not dwelling on theirtongues, but reigning in their hearts — makingDESTINY. 189^their light to shine before men — but never usingit to burn the conscience of those who dijOTeredfrom themselves. The same bland, genial spiritseemed to pervade ^her emily — ^her daughters,with all the true refinement of birth and breed->ing, were free from the pitiful frivolities andpaltry airs of fashion. They sought not in itsweak beggarly elements," either for happinessor distinction — but, young, beautiful, rich, andnoble, they dared be " wise and good." Cheeredand invigorated by this communion of mindand similarity of tastes and pursuits, Edith'sspirits gradually rose to their own natural pitch ;and her eyes beamed, and her cheeks glowed,with all the animation, and more than all thebeauty, of former days ; for it was now beauty,matured and embellished by expanded intellect,and more exalted feelings.The time was thus passing pleasantly away,when Lady Waldegrave arrived to take possessionof Woodlands for the remainder of thesummer. This event was no sooner known, toLady Elizabeth, (for she did not even wait tillit should be communicated,) than she was on the190 DESTINY.^ fidgets to go to her daughter, whether for thepurpose of embracing or reproaching, seemeduncertain — probably both. She accordinglyordered her carriage, without even consultingDr Lamotte; and, attended by her dogs, setout to spend the day where she had little reasonto flatter herself she would be a welcome gest.Edith had declined accompanying her ; and,haying a general invitation to Oakley House,gladly availed herself of her liberty to go andspend the day with her Mends there.Destiny. 191CHAPTER XV III.Although the distance between OakleyHouse and the Cottage was in reality short, itwas lengthened to a considerable space by thebeautiful diversity of the ground which intervened,and to which the walks and drives hadbeen judiciously adapted. Edith could not helpcontrasting in her own mind, as she walkedalong, the difference between the sylvan gracesof an English home scene, such as this, and themore picturesque beauties of her own Highlanddomain. At the dear recollection of Glenroy,her heart flew back to the loved haunts of itsearly days; and the thoughts of the presentwere all suspended while again she lived overthe past The gay visions of her childhood roseto view — but they who had formed her felicitythen — where were flies now ? Ronald — Norman192 DESTINY.Reginald ! For each and all of them how manywere the bitter tears she had shed ! and whathad ^jle reaped from these fair blossoms of life'smorning ? Alas ! nought but regret, sorrow, anddisappointment-fromcontemplations such as these she wasroused by coming suddenly in contact with AdmiralConway, as he advanced from an adjacentwalk, leaning on the arm of a gentleman, withwhom he appeared to be in earnest conversation.Conscious that the traces of her emotion mustbe visible on her countenance, Edith scarcelyventured to raise her eyes, still swimming intears, and having exchanged salutations, wouldhave passed on. But this the Admiral wouldnot permit.*^ Come, this is a fortunate encounter," criedhe ; ^^ Lady Arabella has half quarrelled withme this morning, for depriving her of thisgallant convoy," pointing to his friend, " withwhom she had intended to figure off to the Cottage; but I shall make my peace handsomely ifI return with such a £air prize. — Miss Malcolm,allow me to introduce Mr Melcombet"Destiny. 193Edith looked up in amazement at the mentionof this name, and beheld a young man of noblemien and features, but so pale, and with suchvisible emotion on his countenance, that shecould scarcely refrain from uttering an exclamationof alarm. But the next moment she smiled,to think this must be the unknown friend of MrsMacauley, and she at once felt she had wrongedhim by her suspicions. Ail this was the convictionof a moment, while the Admiral wenton, —^^ Tie similarity of your names is so great,that I know not how we are to distinguish themin England, where we don't give the vowelssuch fair play as you do in Scotland. You mustteach me the true pronunciation of your name.Miss Malcolm, that I may not offend its Celticantiquity by confounding it with our Saxonappellatives."<^ England has rid me of some of my Celticprejudices," said Edith, ^< and has taught mewhat I certainly might have known before-thatthere is nothing in a name beyond the associationof ideas we connect with it."VOL. III. I\1^4 DESTINY.•* And the Bssociatbns/' replied he, " arerather in fityour of your none, distinguished asit has been in ancient times, as iprell as in moderndays. I ani) therefore, glad that England meanlay daim to-sto the patronymic of my gallantfriend here. — Melcombe, what is the matter?are you ill?*Hie question brought back mcnre than theglow of health to Mr Welcomes ace, as heuttered hastily, ** Yes — quite — but -"** But you turn pale at the thoughts of hearingyour panegyric proclaimed in a fair lady'sear ? Well, depend upon it the deeds of CaptainMelcombe would have shone ten thousandtimes brighter in her eyes, and sounded a thousandtimes sweeter in her ears, had they beenachieved by a Captain Come ^ Mak-kum —wWdiisit?'Neither," said Edith, smiling ; " and youmust not Batter yourself you will be able topronounce a Highland aime until you have firstbreathed our mountain airs'♦< Well, I hdf^ to do Aat some day before Idie ; and that I shtfi take my fiifit lesson fromi>£Stiny; 195you on the top of some Highland Parnassus.What say you to joining me in that expedition,Melcombe ? I suspect you would find it a morearduous tad to haul me up to the top of Ben-lomond,than it was even to hoist the Greekflag oyer the Turkish crescent ?**^ I trust I shall one day be allowed to makethe attempt," said Mr Melc(»nbe.There was something in the tone oi the voice,full, clear, and melodious as it was, which madeEdith start, and unconsciously she looked withan enquiring gaze at the speaker. Again thecolour mounted almost to his brow as he met herlook. An unaccountable feeling of constraintseemed to take possession of hun ; and althoughthe Admiral continued to talk away, withoutnoticing the embarrassment of his companion,he remained nearly silent during the rest of thewalk.^^ Now, have I not made a good cruise of it ?"said the Admiral to his lady, as he presentedEdith, who was received, as usual, with openarms. *^Wbat more could you have done hadyou led the expedition yourself, my lady ?"196 imsTimr.: i^f I could at least hare had a little more fleshsure) even if I did not presume to claim any ^the merit of it," said she, smiling..r^^ I was sure of that," exclaimed the Admiraltynidi a triumphant air ; ^^ I was sure diere wouldbe a but, or an if, or an only in the case^^womensoever are contented. — When you marry, Melcombe,take my advice and marry a real genuinediscontented woman at once, and then youknowtitian you are about ; but we never know what todowith these laughing hyenas," pointing to ladyArabella, whose smile was. now turned into alaugh. " They are really very trying to thetemper, for there's no knowing when they're ingppd humour or in bad; for my part, I'm kepta9 you may see, in a constant state of alarm.". f^^ Conscience makes cowards of us all !' Xsit not so, Mr Melcombe ?" said Lady Arabellagaily.Again Edith naturally directed her lode tothe person addressed, and again she was struckwith the changing colour and embarrassed explosionof his countenance, as, with a forcednoiyie, he was about to reply, when^l^ Adxaj^Bestir. 197»interposed :— «-^^ I see how it is,'^ said he, kindlylaying his hand on his shoulder, ^^ < the native hueof resolution is sicklied o'er with the pale cast ofiho^i^t,' at the discussion we were engaged in,mod the best cure for that is, to have recourse i»<mr darts and compasses to settle the point ; so,ccrnie along to the library ;'' and, taking Usfriend's arm, they left die room.Lady Arabella was silent and thoughtful for afew minutes, and then said, ** Pray, may I actwhether you had any previous acquaintance withMr Melcombe ?*None," replied Edith — " at least none that Iam aware of, though 'tis like a dream to me havingseen him before, but when or where I cannottell." She then recounted to Lady Arabella,Mrs Macauley's adventure, and her own (as itnow appeared) groundless suspicion.Lady Arabella laughed heartily at the idea dfhis eyer having been taken for a highwayman,and said, he had probably been dining withthem the evening of Mrs Macauley's rencontreIt must have been at Glenroy we met," saidEdith, musingly ; ^^ and I think I recollect some1^8 Destiny,thing of his air and features, distich I fished torecognise him."^' That id scarcely possible' said Lady Artbella; *^ his is a countenance that once seancould not be soon forgotten''Edith sighed to think bow sl^ht and transientwere the impressions the most noble and giftedhad made upon her then, when there was butone object om which her thoughts cared todwell.'^ This young maui" said Lady Arabella, ^^ is*as you may perceive, a prodigious &iFOurite ofthe Admiral's, and I may also add, of mine.Besides haying been the means dF saving the lifeof my second son, at the risk of his own, thereis something so prepossessing both in his countpenance and manners — s(»nethiBg so sen andingenuous in his whole bearing, that a muchslighter recommendation than Edward's, wouldhave inclined us to him. Hitherto we havefound him a very delightful companion ; but hismanner is much changed to-day, or it may bemy fancy. Were you struck with any thingpeculiar ?"Destiny. 199^^ I certainly wast" replied Edith, ^^ even atthe first moment we met ; and now I think Irecollect when a child, a Lady Melcombe spendingsome days at Glenroy, and having two sonswith her. Probably this may be one of them*"^^ If it were so' said Lady Arabella ^ hisemotion, poor fellow might be easily accountedfor, by the circumstance of his mother havingbeen afterwards divorced''<< Do you know nothing of his family ?" enquiredEdith*^^ Nothing. All that is known of him is, thathe was serving on board a merchant ship at thetime when it was chased and attacked by pirates*I wish the Admiral were here to explain theaffair to you, for I cannot do it justice : but youwould have to listen to so much nautical detail,which (like myself) you could not understand,that it is perhaps as well to give my round unvarnishedtale ; the substance of which is, thatthis young man, by his skill, bravery, and resolution,not only was the means of saving the ship,but, by his boldness and heroism, succeeded inboarding and finally capturing the pirate, laden^Ib'ridk Ibobty, of wiiidi a etimiet&U'&Stk^IM idlbtfed to bim* He afterwards fitted oats i@t«ek armed vessel of which he took die c<^-allHkl) and has performed many gallant and eventbrilliant exploits in the cause; but he was isoseverely vomited in one engagement, that heinn obliged to retire from service. His health,however, seems now nearly re-established : butwhat are Its future plans, the Admiral and heonly know, as I am not of the council. —-andnoW I have told you all I can tell of our heroand your highwayman''And that little was sufficient to make Ethabbacy feel an interest in one, to whom, even inhis bright career, some painful or melancholyhistory seemed attached.When the Admiral and his young friendreturned to the drawing-room, the party hadbeen increased by the arrival of Lord and LadyI^ersley, and one or two chance guests. Theconversation, both before and during dinner,became general ; and Edith remarked, thatMr Melcombe bore his part in it with an easeand spirit, very different from the constrained^ and abrupt inner which had macrked^biijet introduction to her. She could not «ay#Mobserving) too, that he seemed carefully to «hifliall occasions of addressing her, or even of murderingthose little ordinary attentions, wM^become more marked in the breach than thobservance ; yet, more than once, she had caug^his eye fixed upon her with an expression oldeep undefinable meaning, which confirmed hearin her surmises, that somehow or other she wii«associated in his mind with recollections of painfid import. Under this impression, Edith £^mo less distant and embarrassed in her demeanourtowards him; and when they separated in theevening, it seemed as if they parted still greaterstrangers than when they had met. >iEdith failed not to make Mrs Macanleyacquainted with thk favourable introduction %|her Mend; and received a delighted and triun^f^ant letter in return, interspersed with reflectionsin her usual style, and containing variousparticulars of Johnnie and his emily, who werenow in more comfortable circumstances. Jcimi^^had got payment of a large account; and H^i2202 DESTINY.children were all better, and Mrs Macauley,junior, keeping up wonderfully ; and so therewas great reason to be contented and happy,especially since this fine young man had turnedout so well.Distant. 908> ; i .i!-, ICHAPTER XIX.Lady Elizabeth returned from her visit ingreat good humour. Lady Waldegrave» shesaid, had been delighted to see her — shad onlydekyed informing her of her arrival tiU she hadgot every thing arranged — and was to havedriven over for her, (that very day,) had shenot been anticipated by her arrival. To sumup the whole, Florinda had presented her withsome of what she called perfect gems of art —but which were, in fact, the mere rubbish of hercollection. She was so occupied in admiringand arranging her baubles, that Edith learnedlittle more from her than that Sir Reginald wasnot at Woodlands ; that Florinda had appearedrather abattu but had promised to take an earlyopportunity of calling.^ ^Thie foUowixig dajr, as Edidi sat alone in thedrawing-room, (Lady Elizabeth always spendingthe mornings in her own dressingnxMiny) acarriage drove up, and presently Lady Wade*gave was announced. Edith started up, andfor a moment stood aghast at finding herself"flies suddenly confronted with her heartless,treacherous rival. Lady Waldegrave, however,cKd not appear to notice her agitation; butadvanced with the most perfect ease, and, embracingher, laid her cheek to hers ; and, with'her speedy modulated voice, said, " How happyI am to meet you again, dear Edith !'*Edith could only bow in acknowledgment,and for some moment remained in silent agitation; but making an effort to regain her composure,she rang the bell, and desired the servantto inform Lady Elizabeth of Lady Waldenarrival.•* I beg pardon, Edith, love," said her ladyship,^^ but the visit is not to mamma, but toyou. I was so sorry, love, we could not meetin town ; but it really is impossible to do as onewishes there. And by the by, how much betterDestine 806yon look than whenlaawyou in Sootia^dt XdDn'tthink the Scotch air at all favourable to beai:^)you most know; but you hare made a wonderfulescape from Scotchmen of every kind*-'^And she sighed as she said it, while she^Bui*-reed her with the patronizing air of one sogifted in herself, that she could afford to bestowapproval on another. And certainly Lady Waldgrave'scharms had suffered no diminution, forshe looked, if possible, more beautiful and captivatingthan ever.^^ I came early, and alone, because I veaSfywished to see you by yourself, and to explainmany things, which I am aware must haveappeared very strange and unaccountable toyou, and which I fear have prejudiced you sacByagainst me."<< Excuse me'' said Edith ; ^^ but I cannotnow listen to any explanation — the facts spokefor themselves at the time ; that time has beenlong since passed, and with it all resentment,all regret, on my part"Then, you do forgive whatever may have((206 DESTINY.appeared mysterious and inexplicable in myconduct ?'<< I forgave all who ever injured me'' saidEdith, mildly, but emphatically, ^^ as I hope tobe forgiven."*^ Dear Edith 1 you were always kind andgenerous. But, if I injured you, Heaven knowsit was unintentionally ; for, indeed, I ever lovedyou ; and, I do assure you, it has many timesmade me quite wretched, to think of the cruelestrangement that took place between us." Andher ladyship put her handkerchief to her eyes.<< But for that artful designing woman, MadameLatour, whom mamma foolishly committed meto, I am sure it never would have happened.Indeed, had I been at all aware that you hadthe softest tendresse for your cousinsI must again repeat, Lady Waldegrave,that this retrospection is worse than useless — itis painful."^^ Well, then, dearest Edith, let all be forgotten; and henceforth let us be as friends andsisters."All is forgiven," said Edith, with emotion.DESTINY. 207^^ And, in sincere heartfelt wishes for your hip*pines, I am your friend — more, I cannot says^* Then we are reconciled, and you will comeand visit me — indeed, if you are sincere in yourwishes for my happiness, you will ; for I cannotpossibly be happy while this estrangement lasts.Say, then, you will come to* Woodlands— do,dearest love !"^* I cannot promise at present," said Edith.There is one thing I can assure you of**said Lady Waldegrave, ^^ if you have any dislike— any unpleasant feeling, at the thoughts ofmeeting another person, you need have noiscru-ple on that account, as he is absent**Editors cheeks glowed as she said, — *^ I canhave nothing to dread in meeting the husbandof Lady Waldegrave. But do not urge me fartherat present'* At that moment a messagewas brought from Lady Elizabeth, desiring tosee Lady Waldegrave in her dressing-room.^^ Promise me, then, that you remain here tillmy return, for I have still something to say toyou that nearly concerns my own happiness.%rely9 you will not refuse me that?' 1A414Edith promised to await her return. .':•.{r, - Left to herself, she began to reflect more0P|lmly on the part she had to perform* ThatFlorida should have wished to be reconciled UihttTf and have even sought to exculpate herselfwas natural; but that she should have sought arenewal of intimacy with so much eamestoeu,was more than she had anticipated* Selfish,heartless, and treacherous, as she had hidi^rtQ^appeared, surely this could only proceed firoBi %good motive. For in what could she, po<^ independentas she now was, benefit the gay, prosperous.Lady Waldegrave? Perhaps she wasentitled to the allowance she claimed, from theweak and evil counsellors who had been timeguides of her youth ; and if, even after all, she,was not happy — as she feared she was not-r*^might she not even yet prove of service to hersand should she allow any wayward feelings ofher own to stand in the way of such a duty ? Theresult of Edith's deliberations was, that in ap-^accordance with those divine precepts, by which1^ professed to be guided ]^ would, saoiifio^lier' feeling ' even for those who had saefifliMilher happiness to ihehr own, ' .' ?.!Liidy Waldegrave's visit to her mother extrasnot of long duration. When she returned, flkiiisaid, ** I have just settled with mamma, that shipis to come and dine qidetiy at Woodlands tomorrow,and stay all night ; now, let me b^dearest Edith, that you will gratify me by accom*panyingher. It will be charity to me in everyway, for I do assure you, nothing can be motiriite than I am at present. You won meet 4fikml, but two very charming girls. Lady IrritantLady Maria Singly, and I shall be hetUSiable to open my heart to you, and to ask youradvice — But who is this?' cried die, as she castaglance towards the window. Then suddenly"starting up, she exclaimed, ^^ Lady ArabellaConway I the very best of good, dull women— ^I must make my escape : — But who is it thaiaccompanies her? What a very fine^lookingman! I surely have seen him somewhere intown." Edith named Mr Melcombe, as she alsocaught a glimpse of Lady Arabella and him approaching.<< He is very handsome, find will be210 Destiny.tke greatest acquisiUQii to my corps dramatisfor you must know I intend to bare privatetheatricals ; but pray, don't iMreatke a syllable ofit to mamma, or she will want to take a partNow, pray, present him to me'The entrance of Lady Arabella and her pr^^tfjfee here stopped all farther commentAfter the usual enquiries had been madeand Mr Melcombe had been presented to JuicyWaldegrave, she said, with all her fascinatingbut artificial sweetness, ^* I fear we are notentitled to rank Mr Melcombe in our wild clan ;fortunately twt himself he belongs. i» a Vf^fH^civilized community."Mr Melcombe slightly bowed, and colouredas he replied, ^^ I was not aware it was morefortunate to have been born an English than aScotchman, since both are alike Britons, But,"he added, with a still deepening hue, ^^ the seais the only country to which I lay claim."** What would Sir Reginald say to that com-pUment of yours, Lady Waldegrave ?' enquiredLady Arabella.^^ Sir Reginald is already aware of my senti-destiny.211ments on the subject** said Lady Waldegravecarelessly; ^< he knows that I prefer Englandto Scotland in all things and only love it lessthat France and Italy. — How grave Edith looksat this declaration I Do yon remember howshock-ed you were at Glenroy, when I ventured towhisper that I preferred myrtle to heather? Iam sure you expected some of your dark brownmountains to &11 upon me — Did you not**^^ I hope I did not carry my cmorpatriiB quiteso far** said Edith. And she could not repressa sigh as she added, ^^ But we are naturally hurtwhen we hear the objects of our affection lightlyspoken of by others'**^ Especially, as you know 'tis said, the uglierthe object, the more intensely and unreasonablywe love it*' said Lady Waldegrave, laughing.<^ Mere beauty certainly does not long retainits influence on the affections," said Mr Mel*combe.^< So it has been said, but I very much doubtthe truth of the assertion," replied Lady Waitegrave, with a slight shade of displeasure oa h^countenance v ^^at least I have never heard any418 DEsmnr.gMxl reason why it should not' And she ^-reed herself in an opposite mirror with an tStof haughty satisfaction.'< I am no metaphysician' said Mr M^combe, ^ so I cannot pretend to enter int fb^subtleties of the question ; but it is easy to coh^eeive, that the influence of the mind must be'much more permanent than that of the senses'** Constancy** said Lady Arabella, "is one citRose good, old-fashioned, moral virtues which ikno longer d la mode ; we rarely hear of such iathing now-a-days.'**^ It surely does not deserve the naMe of inconstancy,when we withdraw our affections froman undeserving object— does it, Edith ?' saidLady Waldegrave.Edith was shocked at what she felt was impliedin these words, and for a minute or two Wasunable to reply* When she raised her eyes,she encountered those of Mr Melcombe fixedupon her with an expression of the deepest interestBut the serenity of her countenance returned,and she replied, " Every thing mustdepend upon circumstances; in some cases iti^iist lee A4uty to renounce a misplaced attackment — ^in others, to adhere to if .^^^^ I am not such a casuist as you," said LadyWaldegmve^ carelessly, ^^ for I really cannotperceive the difference ; but how in the worldlm9 a passing remark on the respective beautiesof heath and myrtle, turned into a lackadaisicaldiscussion on the dudes of constancy ? I reallyniust.bave something to sweeten my imaginationafter it* Prays Mr Melcombe, have the goodnessto fetch me a bit of something very fragrantfrom the conservatory."^' You could scarcely find one worse qualifiedto execute your commands," said he ; ^^ for mybotanical lore is almost confined to seas-weed* ^am so utterly ignorant, I fear I may commit^me unpardonable solecism in good taste, if notin good breeding, by my selection." .** Well, to render your offence less glaring",said JjsAy Arabella, ^^ you shall bring something;for each and all of us." .,./^ What! and so run the risk of offendingthree ladies instead of one ! And am I to havi^214 Destiny.no reward if I diouU succeed in pleasing all orany of you ?"^ Mr Melcombe is die yery last person fromwhom I should have expected mercenary stipulationsof amy sort'' said Lady Arabella ; *^ butit proves the old and homely saying to be a trueone, that every man has his price. — May I askwhat yours is upon the present occasion ?'<^ My reward shall be discretionary*' Said he,with a smile ; ^^ and any thing given wiA goodwill,will be acceptable ;" and he stepped intothe conservatory."*^ That is rather an odd person," said LadyWaldegrave ; ^^ his manner, plough somewhathru9que^ piquant, and he certainly is very handsome,and I must say, distinguished looking.Mermaid said to me yesterday, she was sure myladyship would approve of my new groom of thechambers, for that he had Fair distinguish ; serthat I cannot think of bestowing it upon MrMelcombe."In a few minutes he returned with a handfulof flowers.DESTINY. 216<^ I wiflh I ware as versed in their varioussignifications as Ophelia was, that I might nudemy offerings appropriate. There is geraniumfor your ladyship," said he to Lady Arabella ;^^ but of what it is emblematic I must declaremyself ignorant*"Genteel geranium,"With a leaf for all that comes**said she, as she plucked one and gave it to him,^ thaly and « thank you, k all I can bestow'Mr Melcombe then presented some slipsof myrtle to Lady Waldegrave, and said, ^^ Asyour ladyship has declared your preference, Ihave been spared a choicest And without waitingfor an acknowledgment, he turned to Eklitii,and offered her two q[>rigs of heath. << I wish theyhad been Highland heather instead of foreignhead," said he, <^ for then you wcmld have jmzedthem more''^^ But with all my national prejudice, I couldnot have admired them so much," said she, asshe took the brilliant exotics.^^ But you would perhaps have rewarded metl6 msTunr.better' said he, forcing a laugh to hide hisembarrassment** What a reproach for my chnrlishneses'' saidEdith, as she returned him one of the sprigs,but she coloured at the pleasure that beamed inhis eyes as he received the trifling gift. LadyWaldegrave never could endure that anothershould engage attention while she was present.Unaccustomed to meet with neglect, on the fjf^sent occasion she mistook it for shyness; andself-love whispered to her, that the handsomeunknown stranger was only dazzled by hercharms and distinction into distance and reservestherefore, in her sweetest and most winningsmanner, called him to her on some frivolous pretext,and contrived to detain him in exclusiveconversation till Lady Arabella rose to take leave*She then said, ^< I flatter myself, Lady Arabella)we shall meet very often wlule we are such nearneighbours ; and that I shall also have the pleasureof seeing Admiral Conway and Mr Mel*combe at Woodlands."Mr Melcombe acknowledged the compleatby a bow, and the visitors severally departed.Destiny. 217CHAPTER XX.It was not without some violence to her feelingsthat Edith went to testify her reconciliationwith Lady Waldeg^ve, by visiting her in heroim ikoVMe ; but she repressed these indicationsof feelings not yet wholly subdued, and calmly,meekly returned herself to the duty requiredIf she had admired Woodlands on a first survey,it appeared to still greater advantage now, whennature and art seemed to have been taxed totheir utmost to give the last finish to its charms;and all around breathed only of the refinementof hcmry and pleasure. To those who couldbelieve in the happiness caused by externalcircumstances, this would have seemed a veryparadise.Lady Waldeg^ve received her guests in themost hind, caressing maimer ; and having pro-vol.III. K218 DESTINY.vide a lively old French marquis as an escortfor Lady Elizabeth, she consigned them to thecare of each other ; and thus happily rid of her,she directed her whole attention to Edith, whomshe introduced to her friends, Ladies Harrietand Maria Singly, as her dear and only sister ;and she brought her child to kiss and welcomehis pretty aunt to Woodlands. Then she mustshow Edith every thing herself, and have heropinion about many things ; and Edith was ledfrom drawing-room to drawing-room, and fromboudoirs to conservatories and aviaries; andthere was so much to look at, and praise andadmire, that it was impossible to enjoy. Therewere pictures, and marbles, and china, andcabinets, and tables, and vases, each and any ofwhich would have been a study for a day ; butivhich were yet too various and numerous to beduly appreciated on a first survey. Tradespeoplewere still employed in some of the roomsarranging the varied treasures of art, whichwere designed to form one exquisite and entireprotection.^* All this, you may suppose, has not been doneDestiny. 219for nothing," said Lady Waldegrave, as theyended the. hurried and imperfect examination,end she threw herself on a couch in her ,^' and indeed I am abnost frightenedwhen I think how .much it has cost Then wewere so cheated at first, and bought such rubbishat such enormous prices; but that is thecase with every body at first. One must payfor a knowledge of the arts, as well as for knowledgeof every kind ; and at any rate, it is surelybetter that money should be spent upon finepictures and marbles, than on the turf or at thegaming-table." Edith was hurt at this indirectattack upon her husband, and thought how differentmust be the perception even of taste inthe material, from what it was in the moral world,when a wife could thus seek to excuse her ownextravagance by proclaiming her husband'serrors. Lady Waldegrave went on** But thegreat work 1 have now in hand — for there is noliving in the country without occupation — sis tipretty little theatre. I have been re-modellingin fact I may say building — it was originallya pavilion or a banqueting-room, or some of theseS20 Destiny.Stupid, senseless, antiquated things, which one -sancestors deformed their grounds with. I herehad it turned into sometMog both useful andornamental ; and I intend to open it on Dudley'sUrthnlay with a French play and ballet, in wychyou, dear Edith, will take a part Don't^tayyotL wont, for you positively must. But althoughI have gone to work as economically as possibleand lead plans, and estimates, and all those sortof things sent to me, yet it has grown into somethingexpensive too— not that I should gnidgeit at all, as it will be such a source of abasementto myself and friends, besides having givenemployment to poor people; in short, it is atiling calculated (in my opinion) to do good.But in the meantime, I am persecuted to deathfor money by the man who undertook the thing ;although he must know .that of course he will bepaid, yet he is for ever boring me with his bills'*^^ But he only asks his own'' said Edith;^^ poor people cannot work without litres.How are they to support themselves and theirfamilies?'^^ O, there ate a thousand ways of ineftku^^tng■^ .mcsTiKTv 221that.; and there is nobody so poor that cannotget credit somewhere'^^ But how ruinous for the poor to contractdebt, if even they could*' ^^< As to that, it can be no worse for the poorthan for the rich."<< It is bad for both," said Edith ; '< but thepoor are most to be pitied when their sufferingsare occasioned by the thoughtlessness and extravaganceof the great."« O, certainly, it is very wrong in people notto pay their bills when they can do it."^^ Can do it 1" exclaimed Edith ; ^^ why shouldpeople ever have bills that they cannot pay?Surely that is robbery of the worst description."<^ Why, there are many things that people inacertain station must have, and if they happennot to have the money just at the moment topay them, where is the harm of having a bill?"^^ Nones if they are sure of having the moneyto discharge them— otherwise it is contractingdebt."^^ Well, there is no harm in that, I hope?else you will think me very wicked ; for, to tell222 SESTIKT.the truth) I am over head and ears m ddbt^and at this moment do not know where to geteven a few guineas !" This was said witherected levity, and Edith could only utter anexclamation of surprise and consternation.The fact is," continued her ladyship, speakingwith great rapidity, " I have been veryunfortunate. First of all, my fortune was netwhat it was said to be, by several thousandsa-year ; then, when I married," here she heaveda sigh, " I was quite ignorant of the value ofmoney, and of course spent a great deal ; linensSir Reginald has never chosen to give himselfany trouble in the management of our establishment,and I can't do it — so we have had horridpeople, who cheated us on all hands : and youmay imagine how that was, with three establishmentsto keep up — Waldegrave Abbey, mytown residence, (both of which, by-the-by, Igreatly improved, and entirely new furnished ;)and this, besides those Highland places, which Iam told are very expensive also. To completethe whole, at the time of my marriage I made anenormous settlement upon mamma, quite out ofDESTINY. 228all pf portion to my income — you will scarcelybelieve that she actually draws very near threethousand a-year from me ! It is much more, Ido assure you, than I can afford, or she can havthe slightest occasion for."^^ Surely there must be some mistake on oneside or other," said Edith, ^^ for Lady Elizabethcomplains of being very much straitened in hercircumstances."^^ Yes, she is always complaining," said LadyWaldegrave carelessly, " but I assure you it i«the case. With her jointure from the Glenroyestate, and what I allow her besides, she hasabove three thousand a-year — A monstrous sumfor her ! She certainly must either be savingmoney, or she is pillaged by the people abouther in a scandalous manner. I ventured to hintthat to her some time ago, but she was quiteangry, so I have never entered on the subjectagain; but if the thing was placed before herin a proper light, (and I know no one who coulddo it so well as yourself, Edith, love,) I am sureshe would see the propriety of giving up at leastone thousand a-year."224 Stint.EcUlh was unable to articulate a word, sonnteh was she struck by this extraordinary .Lady Waldegrave took no noticeof her silence, but went on — ^^ I should beready to make any sacrifice myself ccmsisteiitwith what I owe to my rank and statim — ^t Idon't see how I can do it I might, to be surepart with a few servants and horses, perhaps;but that would make very little difference — afew hundreds a-year, more or less, is really notworth breaking up one's establishment £(»•"** But if you were to begin, it is more thanprobable Sir Reginald would follow your example."^^ But it is not with me the retrenchmentought to begin."*^ Whether or not, you might at least maketrial of it."And, in other words, make myself wretchedand uncomfortable ; and give up my own innocentgratifications, that he may have more moneyto squander in all sorts of horrid ways ; besidesI am certain I only spend what I have a rightto."DESTINY. 225<< And what does Sir Reginald say?^ enquiredEdith fearfully.** O, as to Sir Reginald," replied .LadyWaldegrave, contemptuously, ^^ he is the lastperson I should think of consulting ; — the manwho spends his life between Rochford's andNewmarket, you may guess, is no very wisecounselled:, and is not likely to extricate mefrom my difficulties. — But what is the matter ?are you ill ?"<< Oh, Florinda, how shocked I am at all youtell me !" exclaimed Edith, bursting into tears — -how dreadful to be living in such a state ! —wronging the poor, deceiving and ruining yourhusband I Seeking to deprive your mother ofwhat is due to her — neglectful of what Godrequires of you. Ah, Florinda ! how can youbarter your happiness and the happiness of othersfor such toys as these ?"<< Really, Edith, you talk in a most extraordinarymanner !'' said Lady Waldegrave, ingreat displeasure. ^^ Any one who heard youwould suppose I had committed every crimeunder the sun! Instead of which, the sole amountk2226 DESTINY.of my wickedness consists simply in being ratherin want of a little money — ^that's all ; and as forSir Reginald, he must know how I am teasedfor money; for we have several limes beenthreatened with an execution in the house bysome of those horrid people''** Oh, Florinda ! forgive me, if I have spokentoo severely'' said Edith, in deep emotion ;but"« O, I am very forgiving," said Lady Landgrave,coldly, " and very charitable too, for Ireally don't believe you meant the cruel thingsyou said ; and if they had been addressed to SirReginald, they would have been very applicablethe sums he has lost at play are enormous — Iknow that from the best authority ; and also thatat the last Newmarket Meeting, he threw awayupwards of thirty thousand pounds upon foolishbets on a favourite horse; so I have little toreproach myself with in comparison of that !Indeed, I only do as the rest of the world does ;but I &m sure I have bored you to death with:my annoyances, so come let us return to thedrawing-room, and do try what you can do formewith mamma-I fear die will be qiaite angryat me for having monopolized you so long — sheis so fond of you ! I do think you have more tosay with her, and could, if you chose, manageher better, than any body in the world; batthere is the dressing-bell — swill you have one ofmy maids to assist you ! But you need not bevery redierche in your toilette, as I expect nocompany, and indeed I am not in spirits soitcompany at present — Fanchon, show Miss Malcolmto her apartment."2S8 DSSTimr.CHAPTER XXLWhen Lady Waldegraye joined the paiiy)th brilliancy of her appearance but little accordedwith the account of her pecuniary difficulties ;and even Lady Elizabeth exclaimed somewhatspitefully, " Why, Florinda, you dress in yourcountry house as though you held a court !"^^ You must scold Mademoiselle Faction then,mamma," said Lady Waldegrave, carelessly,^* as I submitted myself entirely to her discretiontoday. Dress, I assure you, was least in mythoughts''In spite of the flattering introduction of Edithto the Ladies Bingley, they seemed to regardeven the dear and only sister of Lady Landgravewith somewhat of suspicious distance ; forthey were mere elegant automatons, fearful ofcommitting themselves by any thing approachingDestiny. 2fi9to familiarity with one who dressed indifferently,according to their estimation, and who had neverbeen at D House — and who, of course, hadnone of the current phrases of the day. Edithwas too meek and gentle to resent the sort ofrepressed ill-breeding (how different from nativepoliteness !) of such manners ; she felt only pityfor those whose minds had been thus crampedand fettered by the bondage of their own littlesphere, falsely called the great world.The same magnificence pervaded every partof the establishment— every thing was perfect inits style, and yet how little enjoyment thereseemed in the midst of it all ! Lady Landgravewore an air of languor and discontent —the two ladies lacked beaux, and were dull andvapid — Edith was depressed by what she hadheard, as contrasted with what she saw — and theonly two who seemed to enter into the pleasuresof the table were Lady Elizabeth and the oldMarquis Duboci^e, who ate like pigeons andchattered like magpies.Dinner was over, and the dessert had be^riplaced on the table, when a carriage was heard280 Destiny.driving round to the entrance ; the dog barkedthe bell rang — voices were heard in the hall.Who is that ?" enquired Lady Waldegrave.<^ Sir Reginald and Mr Harris my lady" wasthe reply.^^ Sir Reginald !" exclaimed she with moreof surprise than pleasure ; ^^ and that odious MrHarris ! — Have they dined ?"^< Sir Reginald has ordered dinner in thelibrary, my lady,"Lady Waldegrave coloured ; but said, " Weareobliged to him, at least, for sparing us a. renewalof even Fribourg's ambrosial cates, whichcertainly would not be improved by a seasoningof Newmarket dust, especially a^ it never is golddust."To Edith the sensation was strange and painful; but a few steps were between her and Reginald— Reginald, once the beloved, the betrothedof her heart — the arbiter of her destiny* Reginaldthe faithless — the forsworn — the husband ofanother ! And all the sad and solemn scenes thathad passed between them rose to her view* Sheshuddered, and, for a moment, felt almost over-destiny.281powered by the conflict of long dormant feelings,suddenly awoke to painful consciousness.How I dislike these abrupt arrivals** saidLady Elizabeth, in an ill-natured tone ; ^^ theyalways do flurry one's nerves. I see it has thesame effect upon you, my dear," to Edith.^^ If there is to be any thing of a scdnje^^ saidLady Waldegrave, sarcastically, " w^ had bestreturn to the drawing-room; we shall at leasthave the benefit of Eau de Cologne, and couchesthere."Edith felt the taunt, and the colour returnedto her cheeks with a deepened glow. At thatmoment, the little boy entered, and came run-»king up to his mamma.** Do you know, mamma, that papa is come ?'he cried.^* Yes, love, have you seen him ?"Yes, mamma ; but I don't love him to-day."Why so, my darling ?"^^ Because he bade me go away, and not teazehim."What a kind good papa you have got, Dud-»ley," said her Ladyship, " is he not ?'232 DESTINY.^* He is very good sometimes; for you know,mamma, he sent me such a pretty little phaetonfrom town, and two poneys so small !" and hedated his hand, in addition. ^*^ Don't lean upon me so, Dudley," ned herladyship, in a tone of displeasure, <^ and seehow you have dropped your grapes ! How tiresomechildren are ! Now, go, my love, 'tis verylate— time you were in bed. We are going tohave coffee. Good night, my sweetest'' andwith a kiss the child was dismissed, as the ladiesand their old beau returned to the drawing-room.The evening passed heavily along. Lady Elizabethand her Marquis played at ecarte. LadyWaldegrave and her friends played, and sung,and talked of operas, and turned over newmusic, and Edith sat apart trying to read, butunable to turn her thoughts from the strangeanomalous scenes that surrounded her. To thesenses all was light, and beauty, and fragrance,and melody ; but oh, the evil passions, the moraldegradation, which lay hid beneath the speciousshow ! Her train of reflections was suddenlybroken by the entrance of Sir Reginald and hisDESTINY. 239friend He accosted Lady Waldegrave wHba careless " How do you do** as he merelytouched her lund, and bowed slightly to the restof the company without observing Edith, whosehead rested on her hand as she still bent overher book.Pretty well," replied Lady Waldemar,with a disdainful coolness. <^ Perhaps I oughtto rise, and make my best curtsy for the kindenquiry, tardy as it is'*Sir Reginald turned on his heel, and as he didso, his eye fell on Edith ; he started, and for amoment stood transfixed to the spot, then dartingforward, he exclaimed, ^^ Edith !" and, seizingher hand, he held it in both of his, andgazed on her with looks expressive of surpriseand delight. But far different feelings wereEdith's. Surprised indeed she was; but stillmore was she shocked at beholding the ravagesa few short years had wrought on the person ofSir Reginald. How different from the Reginaldshe had once fondly loved ! Lit up as his countenancewas with the expression of pleasure, itshabitual cast had stamped its character on every234 DESTINY*feature. All were sharpened and contracted asby strong excitement and violent passions ; andhis flushed cheek, haggard eyes, and reckless air,told a tale from which Edith turned shudderingaway. But Sir Reginald had evidently drankenough of champagne to make him either insensibleof, or indifferent to, the nicer shades offeeling. He seated himself by her, and continuedto gaze upon her with looks of admiration.^^ How glad I am to see you, Edith," said he,taking her hand, ^^ and to see you here ! I had'ntan idea you were even in England !"Edith answered as calmly and briefly ashecould, that she had been residing for some timewith her maternal aunt.^^ But you have left her now, I hope, and arecome to us ?"I at present reside with Lady Elizabeth."With Lady Elizabeth !" repeated Reginald,contemptuously, "that is no home for you, Edith.You must remain with us —-you must indeedBut you look well and happy," said he, gazingintently upon her. " You have grown handsomerDESTXKV. 29Sthan ever you were. I should scarcely haveknown you !"There was something in the manner as well asin the matter which offended Edith's feelings.True, there was still a grace and refinement inthe mien and air, remote from the coarse familiarityof vulgar life and manners. But howmuch of moral deformity may be veiled beneaththe mask of worldly refinement ! Edith wouldhave risen to join the rest of the party, but SirReginald would not permit her.Why should you wish to leave me'* he said,again seizing her hand. ^^ Surely, after so longa separation, cousins might have something tosay to each other. — It was not so we used tomeet ! Ah, Edith ! surely you have not quitelost all interest in me ?" He spoke with a kindof melancholy earnestness that affected Edith,and she looked upon him more in sorrow than inanger.No," said she — " indeed I have not. I feelsincerely interested in all that concerns LadyWaldegrave and your little boy."Sir Reginald sighed, — " You were always an986 Distant.ai^el, Edith ; and I • Now, dx)n't go. Iwill talk to you of any thing — of my boy. Youhay you take ext interest in him ! There is somethingthen, we are both interested in-perhapstike only thing."At that moment Lady Wald^raye called, inasarcastic tone, while she touched the harp, —<^ As your success on the turf is always a matterof certainty Sir Reginald, I am prepared tocelebrate it with an lo Pesanj as soon as youthink proper to announce your victories; ar,perhaps, Miss Malcolm is to come forward aschwrum and proclaim your triumphs?'Six Reginald's brow contracted, and bia eyesflashed fire at this insulting speech. ^< MissMalcolm knows enough of my history to knowit is one which ajSbrds no matter of exultation,"he said, bitterly.Edith felt the taunt, and it raised a momentaryglow on her cheek ; but she only answered itby looking calmly at Lady Waldegrave, whoseeyes sank beneath the mild rebuke ; and, colouringwith shame and resentment, she swept herDESTINY. 287fingers across the harp, and calling to Lady Harnet to join her, they commenced.Edith rose, and drew dose to the table whereLady Elizabeth sat Sir Reginald, after standingfor a few minutes with his arms folded, andhis eyes fixed upon her, suddenly started fromhis reverie. " Come, Harris," he said, " let ushave a game at billiards ;" and, quitting theapartment, Mr Harris, who was lounging evera newspi^r, rose and followed.Eldtth was glad when the evening was ended,and only wished her visit was also brought to atermination. Lady Waldegrave and she paredfor the night with mutual coldness and constraint.SdB Petit.CHAPTER XxiiWhen the party met at a late breakfast thefollowing morning, Sir Reginald's brow wore astill deeper gloom, and Lady Wald^rave seemedinclined to be no less peevish and sarcasticthan on the preceding evening. The two ladiesmaintained their chilling reserve, and thoughMr Harris talked, his conversation was addressedto Sir Reginald, and related solely to thturf,Edith felt the painfulness of her situation, foralthough Sir Reginald's manner was less empressethan it had been at their first meeting,yet he still singled her out as the only person towhom he paid the slightest attention. Such wasthe state of the party, when a servant entered tosay, that a Mr and Mrs M^Dow begged leaveto wait upon Sir Reginald and Lady Walden289grave. Sir Reginald repeated th name in surprise,and he looked at Edith as for an explanation,but she could give none.** Some of Sir Reginald's Highland friends,"said Lady Waldegrave ; " I can have no acquaintancewith them, you had therefore betterreceive your own guests in another room."Any one who comes from Glenroy is welcome,"said Sir Reginald, as if stung to contradicteven his own feelings ; " show Mr and MrsM*Dow in."Straightway, preceded by the groom of thechambers, entered Mr and Mrs M*Dow, leadingbetween them their eldest born, a great, child. Mr M*Dow had evidentlybeen in the hands of a London tailor, but tolittle purpose ; for not all the leather and prunellaof London could re-model Mr M'Dow.No cost seemed to have been spared in theattiring of his lady, who was decked out in amost brilliant pelisse and bonnet, in the extremeof the fashion. Miss M^Dow was arrayed in asimilar costume, and, like her mother, was standingout with finery.940 BB6TINY.<' How do you do, Mr M<Dow?' said SitReginald, rising and shaking hands with shinheartily, as if determined to early off mafctetsboldly. '' Mrs Meadow, Lady Waldegrave,"waving his hand; ^^ pray, sit down. You. arein very good time for breakfast."^^ You are extremely obliging. Sir Regime*'said Mr M'Dow ; ^^ in fact, this is our secondmeal, for we breakfasted before we set out.However, I dare say we are all pretty wellappetite again — But is it possible I see IStfissMalcolm here ?' for the first time perceivingEdith. ^^ I'm amazed and delighted to see youhere;" and stalking up to her, he shook iivehemently by the hand ; <^ this is just ^as itshould be ! and how amazingly well you look !"Here is a chair for you, Mr M*Dew,**called Sir Reginald, pointing to one nextarim-self.^^ You are extremely polite. Sir Reginald."Then addressing Lady Waldegrave, " I needscarcely ask how your ladyship has been sinceI bad the honour of seeing you at Glemoy ?'A slight, haughty bend of the. head was the onlyitDESTimr. 241answer vouchsafed ; and, nothing daunted, MrM^D<yw resumed, in a still more insinuatingmanner, ^^ I hope we hare not taken too greata freedom in bringing our little Missy with us $but die can behave herself like a lady when A^chooses. — Mrs M^Dow, I think you had bettertake off her bonnet and pelisse ; she'll be coolerwithout them."Here Miss M^Dow was disencumbered o herpelisse and bonnet, and exhibited a coarse,blubber-lipped, sun-burnt visage, with staring*sea-green eyes, a quantity of rough sandy hairsmulatto neck, with merely a rim of whiteabove the shoulders.<^ I think she would be better wanting hergloves too," said Mr M^Dow, anxious to displayas much as possible of the beauties of his offspring.The. gloves were now taken off, and apair of thick mulberry paws set at liberty.<^ Now you must not touch any thing,Mysie," whispered Mrs M'Dow, as Mysie preparedto lay hands on a Sere cup and saucer." You had better send her over to me," saidMr M^Dow, *< and PU keep her in order."VOL. III. L242 DESTINY.She'll be very good with me, Mr M^Dow,"replied the lady, in a brisk provincial accent,and, with a strong arm hauling up Miss Mysie,planted her upon her knee. She then poured outtea from her own cup for her, which was suckedin with an avidity that threatened to carry thesaucer along with it.She is very dry !" said Mrs M'Dow, in amanner as if she thought it of importance.<< She seems really very thirsty, poor wife,"said Mr M'Dow, in a similar tone ; <^ but theday is imconmionly warm, and we met a greatdeal of dust on the road; it was an amazingrelief to enter your policy : this is a most beautifulplace of yours. Sir Reginald, and a mostelegant and shooters house ! You'll think littleof Glenroy after this ?'A mere cis box," said Sir Reginald, contemptuously.A cee^s box. Sir Reginald ! it's a perfectpalace ; I don't know that ever I saw any thingso shooters ! and there's so much taste in thegrounds, and every thing in such high order.Mrs M'Dow was prodigiously struck with theDESTINY. 243grandeur of the flowers ; and I was amazinglydiverted with our little Missy's remark, * Father,'says she, ^ this is a far finer garden thanyours, but there's no berry-bushes isn't' — ^hoch,hoch, ho ! Altogether it's really a perfect paradise!"Edith's native politeness prevailed over herfeelings, and seeing Mrs M^Dow had no chanceof being noticed by the other ladies present, sheaddressed a few words to her, and received suchanswers as might be expected from a commonplace,vulgar woman, full of the egotism of herown concerns.•* I hope we are to be favoured with a sightof your young folks, Sir Reginald," said MrM^Dow.I have only one spoilt little fellow," repliedhe, ^^ but you shall see him." And he orderedone of the servants to fetch him.^* This is his walking hour," said Lady Landgrave,with a look of displeasure.Only one !" exclaimed Mr M'Dow ; " heream I with no less than four — two girls and twoboys — But here comes your young gentleman.244 DESTINY.Come away, sir," in his most conciliating tone ;<< will you shake hands with me?' But thechild looked doubtfully at him ; ^^ then will yougo and speak to that lady ?" pointing to MrsM^Dow.<^ No ; mamma does not choose me to speak topeople I don't know."Ay ! but would you not like to kiss thatpretty little missy there ?'^^ O no, not at all ; mamma does not allow meto kiss any body, and I would not kiss her, sheis so ugly."Mr and Mrs M^Dow both turned very red atthis insult to the charms of their daughter, whileLady Waldegrave, with a smile, called, "Youmay now go to your walk, love, you have donevery well."But Sir Reginald catching him up in his arms,said, with directed anger, " You are a saucylittle dog, and I must send you to Scotland tomake a Highland laird of you."Ljidy Waldegrave shuddered, and in a lowvoice exclaimed, " Heaven forbid !"<' But I won't be a Scotch laird," replied theDESTINY. 245young master ; ^^ for my mamma says I am tobe a British Peer, and that is much better."Ay !" exclaimed Mr M^Dow, " you arereally very nice ; you'll not be a good Highlandlaird, and you'll not shake hands with me, andyou'll not speak to my wife, and you'll not kissmy daughter ! — Will you tell me your name,then ?"^^ O, yes, papa calls me Reginald; mammacalls me Dudley ; but my real name is ReginaldDudley Waldegrave Malcolm."That s a very grand name ! I have a littleboy of my own, who has a good long name ; butit's nothing like yours.'^What is your little boy called ?" enquiredMaster Reginald Dudley.Donald M'Craw M'Dow is his name."And is she called Donald M'Craw, too ?"demanded Master Dudley, pointing to MissM^Dow, as she stood gazing at him in vulgaramazement, her clumsy shapeless figure, andbroad plebeian face, contrasting themselves withthe elegant graceful form, and high delicate features,of the young patrician.Ii46 DESTINY.No, no— Donald's not a lady's name. She'scalled Marjory Muckle M^Dow. But, if youbeat my boy in a name, I think he would havethe best of it in a fight — she would make twoof you, I can tell you. — Don't you think so, mydear ?" To his lady.Oh, yes — our Donald's much stouter; Ithink Sandy is more of his make. But Patsy'sthe smallest of our children."She's very spirit, though !" said MrM^Dow, in a tone of admiration.Yes, yes — she'll keep her own," respondedhis lady. *^ Does not Patsy sometimes get thebetter of Donald and you, Mysie ?"Here Miss ^M^Dow, who had been playingwith one of the beautiful Se plates, let it fall,and it was broke to pieces.** I hope she hasn't cut herself?* cried MrM^Dow, in a voice of tender alarm.Lady Waldegrave hastily rose, and the restof the ladies were following her example, whenMr M^Dow said, — " I'm extremely anxious,Miss Malcolm, if it's not asking too great afavour, that you would remain a little with MrsDESTINY. 247M^Dow and me, while I communicate with SirReginald on the business that has brought meup at this time. It will soon be no secret — soit'sjust as well to speak out at once ; and Ialways like to have the ladies on my side''But even if I were to be on your side, MrM*Dow, I am very sure I can be of no serviceto you," said Edith, moving away, while MrsM^Dow sat like a rock.^^ At all events, I would take it extremelykind if you do me the favour to hear me tell myown story, as there will no doubt be many falsestatements made on the occasion ; indeed, it hasexcited a great deal of animadversion already, Iunderstand."Many people think I have influenced MrM'Dow," said Mrs M'Dow, with great warmthand importance of manner. ^^ But I am surethat was not the case, for, with Mr M'Dow'sabilities, he needs nobody to direct him, I amsure." This was uttered in the peremptorymanner of one who was well accustomed to laydown the law at home.Yes — eyes, Mrs M*Dow has come in for herS^ J>£$TINT.i^iare of what has been going ; but luckily, she'sabove minding those sort of clashes. No doubt)some of them have found their way to London,by this time ?'<^ I am quite ignorant to what you allude, MrM^Dow/' said Sir Reginald, now heartily sickof his guests. ^^ If it is any matter of business,I beg you will apply to my law agents — theyunderstand these things much better than I do.Besides, I am sorry a particular engagement callsme to town this morning." Mr M^Dow lookedvery blank at this information.So, you're going up to London this forenoon? I understood you had been settled herefor the summer. But, however, I shall notdetain you many minutes. Sir Reginald — a veryfew words will let you into the whole mystery."Then taking a long pinch of snuff and clearinghis throat, he began, —^^ As you. Sir Reginald and Miss Malcolm,have both had opportunities of judging for yourselvesof my ministry, I shall not detain you byoffering any explanation of my views on thathead. All I shall say is this — That I have actedilitirongliout most conscientiously, and no man sitdo more**Mr M^Dow paused, as if expecting a burstof applause to follow, but Sir Reginald waschafing with impatience ; and Edith could onlysigh to hear a man boast of his conscience, whileit was yet in such a darkened state.•* It would be well if every body's consciencewas like yours, Mr M*Dow," said his lady,Wannly.** It would be well if every one's consciencewere enlightened by the Word of God," saidEdith, mildly.I am sure that s true !" said Mrs M*Dow,taking the remark as a compliment.I can only impute the ill will with which Ihave been visited as proceeding almost entirelyfrom ignorance," said Mr M^Dow, with affectedmeekness.** There's more than that, Mr M*Dow," saidhis lady, with a toss of her head.Well, well, my dear," said Mr M*Dow, inaby-way of soothing manner, " whatever it is,l2^50 DESTINY.1 tear them no ill will, Fm sure'* Sir Reginaldnere pulled out his watch — " But not to detainyou, Sir Reginald, I shall come to the point atonce— the short and the long of the matter isthis, I find my situation by no means so pleasantas it ought to be. The neighbourhood issadly fallen off; since the death of my respectedfriend Glenroy, it has never been the same placeto me.— (Mrs M*Dow, will you take Missy'shands out of the nellie ?) — Then a mischievousspirit has got in amongst the people ; they arenot satisfied with my ministry ; they cry out thatI don't preach the gospel, and a great deal ofnonsense of that kind ; in so much, that the yerylast time I preached, there were just seven peoplein the church, besides my own family and theprecentor*'Its very true*' said Mrs M*Dow, with in-framed cheeks ; " but a great deal of the mischiefis owing to Mrs M^Taig, for Miss M^Tavishtold me ""Whisht — whisht, Colly, my dear, ifs notworth our while to mind what she said — thewoman a perfect enthusiast — but indeed theyDESTINY. 251ere all tarred with the same stick — (O, my lambyou mustn't drink out of the cream jug,) — However,as I was saying, Sir Reginald, it's not pleasantfor a minister to be on such terms with hispeople — especially situated as we are at such adistance from genteel society — and I feel thateven more upon Mrs M'Dow's account than myown, fit she has always been used to a good dealof genteel company — and it's what she had a titleto expect when she married me ; for, like yourself,Sir Reginald, I was so fortunate as to be honouredby being the choice of a lady with a prettyconsiderable independence of her own, and ofcourse she is entitled to more at my hands theaif she had brought nothing along with her."Sir Reginald here rose, and rang the bellviolently, " Why is my carriage not ready ?"I don't know, sir."<^ Then enquire, and desire it to be broughtimmediately."Well, Sir Reginald, since you're in a hurry,I'll not detain you many minutes. You understandhow matters are situated between me andmy people — and you may conceive how little%0 DESTINY.t bear Aem no ill will, Fm sure'* Sir Reginaldtere pulled out his watch — " But not to detabyou, Sir Reginald, I shall come to the point atonce— the short and the long of the matter isthis, I find my situation by no means so pleaSJEUit as it ought to be. The neighbourhood issadly fallen off; since the death of my respectedfriend Glenroy, it has never been the same placeto me. — (Mrs M^Dow, will you take Missy'shands out of the nellie ?) — Then a mischievousspirit has got in amongst the people ; they arenot satisfied with my ministry ; they cry out thatI don't preach the gospel, and a great deal ofnonsense of that kind ; in so much, that the verylast time I preached, there were just seven peoplein the church, besides my own family and theprecentor'*Its very true*' said Mrs M*Dow, with inflamedcheeks ; " but a great deal of the mischiefis owing to Mrs M«Taig, for Miss M^Tavishtold me ""Whisht — whisht. Colly, my dear, ifs notworth our while to mind what she said — thewomati's a perfect enthusiast — but indeed theyDESTINY. 251ere all tarred with the same stick — (O, my larnb^you mustn't drink out of the cream jug,) — However,as I was saying, Sir Reginald, it's not pleasantfor a minister to be on such terms with hispeople — especially situated as we are at such adistance from genteel society — and I feel thateven more upon Mrs M'Dow's account than myown, jGpr she has always been used to a good dealof genteel company — and it's what she had a titleto expect when she married me ; for, like yourself,Sir Reginald, I was so fortunate as to be honouredby being the choice of a lady with a prettyconsiderable independence of her own, and ofcourse she is entitled to more at my hands theaif she had brought nothing along with her."Sir Reginald here rose, and rang the bellviolently, " Why is my carriage not ready ?"I don't know, sir."Then enquire, and desire it to be broughtimmediately."Well, Sir Reginald, since you're in a hurry,I'll not detain you many minutes. You understandhow matters are situated between me andmy people — and you may conceive how littleS54 llfiSTINY.carriage, " I must wish you good jnomii^/'Then with a slight bow he quitted the room, butturned back, and taking Edith's hand, sais ^^ Ihope I shall find you here when I return."£eth merely bowed, and in another instant h^was gone.<^ Sir Reginald is very much altered'' said|dx M^Dow, after a long and rather solemnpause. ^^ He's not Uke the same person. Idoubt he leads a hard life ; and it's said he's overheadand ears in debt already. In fact, if it hadnot been for your friend Captain Malcolm, whobought some of the finest wood at Glenroy, Ibelieve there would not have been a stick standing."But the poor people!" exclaimed Edith,mournfully, " what will become of them ?"^^ Indeed, they're going to the mischief as histfuse they can," said Mr M'Dow. " What withwild doctrines, absentees, and whisky, there'sno dealing with them."" Yet I hear good accounts of Mr Stuart'speople from Inch Orran," said Edith ; " that they^e sober, peaceful, and industrious."DESTINY. 256*• There was outcry enough about the improvementsthere I can tell you, when they werefirst set going," said Mr M^Dow, evasively;but, however, Mr Stewart makes himself a perfectslave amongst his people. I woud'nt leadthe life he does for three times the money*Surely, Mr M^Dow," said Edith, earnestly,** it is incumbent upon every clergyman to labourdiligently in his calling. If the poor ask nothingfrom you but the words of eternal life, andyou disregard their cry ! *^** O, these were different times from the present,"said Mr M*Dow, coolly.Fm surprised to hear any body speak in thatway to Mr M*Dow," interrupted his lady warmly; " his sermons would stand the printing anyday ! but he's just thrown away where he i6 P*and Mrs M'Dow rose with a very angry face.^* If 8 a sore trial to one's patience," said MrM^Dow, " to be preaching to a set of wretchesthat will not take the pains so much as to comeand listen to what s said to them. How can youmake any impression when that's the case ?"By going to their houses," said Edith ; " the3M Dissiiry^.Tint of a ciergymui is always gratifying even todie worst of his flock."'. ^^ I don't think ifs for a minister, with a youngfinely of his own, to be going much amongstside people," said Mrs M^Dow.*^ Was not he a £Edthfial pastor who said, * Iam as much in God's keeping in the sick man'schamber as my own ?' " said Edith.<^ Ay, ay, it's easy speaking," replied MrM^Dow ; ^^ but the truth of the matter is, I reallydon't like to go to their houses — they're a dirtyset, and I have an extremely delicate stomach."Edith turned away in disgust.^^ Stand still till I fasten your pelisse," saidMrs M'Dow, giving Mysie a shake ; ^< and youmust not take away that," trying to wrest fromthe reluctant grasp of Miss Mysie a cup whichshe had appropriated to herself, and which sheset up a great roar at being forced to relinquish.** Whisht, dear Mysie," cried the fond other ;*^ you know you must not take away that ; andifs not Uke a lady in a fine new pelisse to becrying that way. Such a grand pelisse too, and*you've been so good till now ! You know I'llDESTINY, 257not bring you back again, my dawtie, if yotigreet that way — the fact is, I believe she's wearied,poor bit wife ! So, perhaps, we had aswell be moving."Edith was too much shocked and disgusted toask them to prolong their visit; she sighed inbitterness of heart as she thought of the wide-spreadingevil of even one worldly-minded andremiss clergyman, and of the awful responsibilitythose incur who appoint such to be the ministerof God ! '** You'll make our apologies to her ladyship"said Mr M^Dow ; " and I shall write my viewsmore at large to Sir Reginald — it was unfortunatethat he should happen to have been engaged,as the fact is, Mrs M^Dow and I had madeup our minds to spend the day here ; but I've nodoubt he'll think better on the subject when hegives it a fair consideration."Edith felt relieved when she saw the partydrive off in a very gay carriage hired for theoccasion.258 DESTINY.CHAPTER XxiiThe day was now advanced, and Edith elpetted that when Lady Elizabeth should emergefrom her apartment, it would be to take herdeparture ; but instead of that, she received amessage, requesting her to wait upon her ladyshipin her dressing-room. Thither she repaired,and found her in her usual little, frivolousbustle.^^ I sent for you, my dear, to say, that as Idon't feel quite well this morning, I think I shallremain where I am ; and I have just been wri-^ting a note to Monsieur Lamotte, to desire him tocome hither. I must say it was very cross in Florindato prevent my bringing him ; and my poor,dear loves of dogs, it makes me wretched to thinkhow they must be pining in my^^absence ; but Ireally think the air of this place suits me betterDestiny. 26dthan that of the cottage. To tell you the truthsI never liked a cottage ; His always unbecomingand it was a mere matter of convenience mygoing there at all ; but with my poor pittancewhat could I do ? However, I am now resolvedto come to an understanding with my daughter,as I think it quite shameful that I should bestarving on a miserable two thousand a-year,while she is living en princesse. I have seen agood deal, but I have never seen any thing tosurpass the style of living here, and the extravaganceof the whole establishment my maid tellsme is excessive. Did you ever see such a house,such a table, such dress, such equipage — allperfect, to be sure — but the very perfection ofextravagance ?"I fear Lady Waldegrave will indeed bringherself into great difficulties," said Edith, ^^ un-»less something can be done."<^ Something must be done," said Lady Elizabeth,sharply. ^^ It is absolutely impossible Ican live in this country, upon the wretched sumallowed me; as it is, I have been obliged tocontract debt which I must look to her for DESTINY.charging and then let there be a proper allowancesettled upon me. I mention all this toyou, my dear, because I think you are the personto manage matters between Florinda andme ; I have too much delicacy to enter on thesubject myself either with my daughter or herhusband."Edith almost sickened at this new developmentof folly and misconduct ; she saw the evilswere &r beyond her reach, and that all herattempts to stem the torrent which was advancingwould be in vain.You must excuse me. Lady Elizabeth,"she said, mildly, ^^ from undertaking the officeof adjusting your difference with Lady Landgrave; if I could render you any service, I wouldmost willingly do it ; but I have reason to believeLady Waldegrave is not in a condition tobetter your circumstances at present."^* The fact is, child, you know nothing at allabout it," said her ladyship, angrily; " and Imust find some one else who does ; so I shallremain here for some days at least ; during thattime I shall endeavour to come to some arrange-destiny.261ment with my daughter. In the meantime, Imust send the carriage for my physician." Andshe rang the bell to give her orders.The thoughts of a prolonged stay in such ahouse, and under such circumstances, was mostpainful and embarrassing to Edith, and onlyone way appeared from which she could extricateherself from it. Lady Arabella Conwayhad repeatedly invited her to spend some timewith her ; and she had promised that if she couldleave Lady Elizabeth before the Ribleys' return,she would do so. At any time, the performanceof this promise would have been a pleasure toher, but doubly so on the present occasion. Shetherefore immediately made known her intentionsto Lady Elizabeth, who, seeing she was notlikely to be of use to her at present, gave herassent to the proposal.Lady Waldegrave heard of her mother's extendedvisit, and Edith's proposed departure,with surprise and displeasure. <^ If mamma reallyhas a cold, and will keep quietly in her room, itwill be all very well," said she ; " but in a fewdays, when those tiresome trades-people will have362 DESTINY.made an end of their work, I expect my wholecorps dramatists — and if her ladyship attemptsto join it ** Here she gave a groan and ashrug, ^< And then it is so cruel in you, Edith, todesert me at such a time, when you might beuseful to me in a thousand ways. In the firstplace, I am quite certain you could, if youwould take the trouble, get mamma to assumein my present difficulties. Indeed, if shedoes not, I do not know what I shall do— I amso pestered for money'*And you are going to have a houseful ofcompany ?"Certainly — I must have company, and Imust have amusement. I am already dying ofennui"*^ And yet you have every thing the worldcan bestow — rank, wealth — youth, beauty —the husband of your choice — a lovely boy. Ah,Florinda, since you find all these insufficientfor your happiness, will you not seek it in stillhigher, better things ?'Oh, for Heaven's sake, don't begin to preach !DESTINY. 263^or, if you will, pray reserve your sermon for SirReginald, who requires it much more than I do.In truth, Edith, you know nothing of the world ;^d I assure you, you greatly overrate my advantages.In the first place, my rank is next tonothing, and but for other accompaniments, Icertainly should never have attained the consequencein society which I have done. Then as tomy fortune, that is not half sufficient to enableme to keep pace with the people I live among.As for the * husband of my choice,' you saw thehumour he came home in last night — No — ^by-the-by you did not see it, as it was all Reservedfor me. But I shall not enter upon that subjectat present. What I wish to say is, that beforeyou leave me, I do wish you would sound mammaa little on money matters. If she would assistme with a thousand pounds or two, it would, Iassure you, be a relief to me at present." Edithnow ventured to hint to her the real state of thecase with regard to Lady Elizabeth's finances ;but Lady Waldegrave heard it with an increduloussmile*^^ All that only tends to confirm me in my264 DESTINY*belief that she is actually hoarding money," saidslur ; ^^ and indeed, it is scarcely possible it canbe otherwise ; for although she is for ever buyingtrumpery of some sort, yet the things ske-bnysfare such trumpery, that 'tis impossible she cmspend her fortune in that way'^^ So four from hoarding money, 'Lady F.1ia»'beth assures me she is actually in want of it,?said Edith.^^ Pshaw, that must be absolute nonsense,"said Lady Waldegrave, impatiently. <^ However,I see you don't know mamma, so you areno hand to deal with her, since you take homgospel all she says. I must get my steward tospeak to her, though these sort of people are allso stupid and tiresome, I hate to have any thingto do with them. I hope you will prove a betteractress than you are an agent, for I see you arereally not au fait in that department. If youare resolved to go to-day, do pray return soon,as I wish to begin the rehearsals ; and, (aproposdo secure that handsome Mr Melc<»nbe for me.I shall invite him as soon as the house is ready.Pray, tell him all this, and" but here theDESTINY. 265But here the entrance of visitors interruptedher ladyship before Edith could reply. Theparty consisted of some fashionable, and ofcourse favourite, young men from town, andwere hailed with delight by Lady Waldegrave,who was again all animation and seeming happiness.The Ladies Bingley made their appearance,and for the first time showed signs ofanimation.In a little while Lady Arabella Conway wasannounced. She had received Edith's note, asshe was stepping into her carriage, and hadimmediately driven to Woodlands, as she said,to carry off her prize. Edith was too sincere toattempt to return in kind the expressions ofregret Lady Waldegrave then thought properto utter at losing her, and she almost recoiledfrom the tender embrace that was bestowedupon her at parting. It was not tiU she foundherself within the precincts of Oakley House,that her spirits revived, and she felt that shebreathed a purer, better atmosphere.VOL. III. M266 Destiny.CHAPTER XXIV.Admiral Conway and Mr Melcombe werewalking before the house, and a groom was inattendance with a led horse.<< So, you have left all the gaieties of Woodlands,to come and rusticate with us ?' said theAdmiral, as he welcomed Edith with all a sailor'scordiality. ^^ After that, I forbid any man, woman,cMd, or animal, to quit my dominionswhile Miss Malcolm remains ; we must all makecommon cause, to show our sense of the complimentshe has paid us. — Parker," — (to thegroom,)" Mr Welcomes horse may be turned out tograss, for he won't require it for six weeks atleast."^< There is no disputing such commands," saidMr Melcombe, with a smile ; '^ so," addressingthe servant, " I shall not want my horse to-day."<* No, nor tomorrow neither," said the Ad-destiny.267moral. Then turning to Edith — " Here have Ibeen urging this gentleman to remain a weekor two with us quietly here, to no purpose ; butno sooner does a fair lady appear, than he knocksunder at once. You see your influence, so makea good use of it — it will be all the stronger forbeing exercised, as my Arabella knows," said he,patting his lady on the shoulder with an air ofgood-humoured raillery.^^ My influence must be so very small," saidEdith, ^^ that I suspect it can only serve as asort of caf s-paw for your own power."^^ What an invidious insinuation !" exclaimedthe Admiral. ^^ I appeal to you, Melc<^be, ifsuch is the case ?"^* Not on the present occasion," said Mr Melcombe; and he coloured as he said it, as thoughhe meant more than he expressed.<^ That is spoken like an honest man," saidthe Admiral ; ^^ but, indeed, let women say asthey will, we are, upon the whole, much moreopen and avowed in all our proceedings thanthey are — Don't you agree with me, Melcombe?"968 DESTINY.Mr Melcombe was silent for a few moments,as if struggling with his emotion ; then, in anagitated voice, replied, " Not in my own case" — •then, as if he had said too much, he turnedabruptly round and walked away.A pause ensued, which Lady Arabella was thefirst to break: <^ Much as I admire both MrMelcombe's character and manners," said she,^^ I confess there is a mystery about him, that(to say the least of it) is not pleasant."There is no mystery about his character",said the Admiral ; ^^ that is well known, and I'llventure to say, a braver and a better man doesnot exist. There are only two things I wishrespecting him ; the one is, that he belonged tothe British navy ; the other, that I had a sparedaughter to bestow upon him."^^ There is something so open, — so noble Imay say, — ^in his countenance and air, that seemsquite inconsistent with concealment; and yethe sedulously shuns all allusion not oily to hisfamily, but even to his birth-place, or connexionsof any kind," said Lady Arabella.In short, you have just the besetting sin ofDESTINY. 209your sex, Bell; not satisfied with all you haveheard, from good authority, of this young man'scharacter and conduct, you must have the historyof his parents — his mother's maiden name, ofcourse, with a certificate of his birth and baptism.What the plague does it signify in whatparish such a man was born?'** I have never been able to discover even towhat country he belongs," continued Lady Arabella.^^ His name is English, but his accent andpronunciation, though good, are not perfectlyEnglish. In short, Miss Malcolm," said she,smiling, ^^ take an old woman's advice, and don'tfall in love with him till you know more abouthim."*^ I shall certainly follow your advice," repliedEdith, in the same tone.^^ And if I were a bonnie lass," said the Admiral,^^ and such a noble fellow came to courtme, I should at once give him my hand, and say,if I could not sing,O yes, I will follow, I will sal the world over,Nor think of my home, when I look at my lover.' "Q70 DESTINY.Lady Arabella and Edith laughed at the Admiral'sromantic ardour in his friend's cause.<^ But I can tell you whats" said the Admiral,^^ you need not trouble your heads aboutMr Melcombe's heart ; for, on my rallyinghim on that point to-day, he acknowledged tome,that his affections were engaged to onewhom he had loved from childhood — there'sconstancy for you !"Edith felt a little piqued at the Admiral'ssupposing the state of Mr Melcombe's affectionscould be of any consequence to her ; andafter a little more chat they separated to dressfor dinner. The dinner party was increasedby the arrival of some chance visitors, butMr Melcombe contrived to place himself besideEdith at table, and, in spite of all her resolutions,her reserve gave way, and she foundherself insensibly talking to him of Mrs Macauley,Glenroy, and Inch-organ, as she wouldhave done to an old friend. In reply to a questionof Edith's, he acknowledged having been inthe Highlands when a boy ; but he evinced somuch emotion at the interrogation, that she was[-DESTINY. 271sorry she had put it, and immediately changedthe conversation.Certainly some painful mystery attaches tothis young man," she thought ^^ I wish I knewwhat it is, for he seems very amiable, and attimes looks very melancholy''S^ I^SSTIMT.CHAPTER XXV.There is no surer mark of a selfish character,than that of shrinking from the truth. Even inits gentlest) mildest form, it comes an abhorredapparition to those, who, sunk in their own silkendreams, would keep their eyes closed against allthe convictions of unpleasing reality. So it waswith those whom Edith had tenderly sought toawaken to the knowledge of the simplest andmost obvious of even worldly truths. Each dislikedeven the little she had done, although theywere too much disunited to agree even on thatpoint, or indeed to be aware of what had passedon either side. Edith was, however, no suffererby the disgrace into which she had fidlen, as shewas allowed to remain for some days in uninterruptedtranquillity, and seldom did days passaway more pleasantly. Each brought its roundof religious duties— of benevolent actions— oftranquil pleasures, and rations enjoyments.When there was no company, Mr Melcombecommonly read for an hour or two in themorning ; and he possessed all the requisites forthat most rare of all accomplishments, having afine voice, a correct ear, quick perceptions, goodtaste, and perfect simplicity. A discussion oneday arose as to the choice of a book from amongthose which lay scattered on the library table*Lady Arabella proposed the Life of Howard thePhilanthropist ; the Admiral wished to hear theMemoirs of Pepys — " For," said he, " the onewill send us all to prison — the other will take mto court and the Admiralty, there we shall surestly find ourselves in better company — what sayyovLf Miss Malcolm ?"^^ I am rather inclined to go to prison withHoward, than to court with Pepys," repliedEdith.^< Let us try both, and see whether the philanthropistor the courtier has the best of it," saidMr Melcombe ; and he read a few passages fromeach alternately.M 2374 stint*Extracts from the Diary of S. Pepys, and fromthe Journal o/* Howard the PhilanthropistsPepys,<^ This morning I put on my best blade clothsuit, trimmed with scarlet ribbon, very neat, withmy cloak lined with velvet, and a new beaver,which altogether is very noble."Howard.^^ Let it be my earnest enquiry, how I shallbest serve God in the station which he hasussigi^ed me"Pepys,^^ Thus I have ended this month with thegreatest joy that ever I did any in my life, becauseI have spent'^^e greatest part of it withabundance of joy and honour, and pleasant journeys,and brave entertainments, and without costof money. Thus we end this month as I said,after the greatest glut of content that ever I had ;only under some difficulty, because of the plaguewhich grows mighty upon us — the last weekbeing about 1700 or 1800 dead of the plague."Howard.^^ Ease, affluence, and honours, are temptsDESTINY. 275tons which the world holds out ; but rememberthe fashion of this world passeth away. On theother hand, fatigue, poverty, suffering, and dangers,with an approving conscience — Oh, God !my heart is fixed trusting on Thee ! My God !Oh, glorious words I there is a treasure, in comparisonof which all things in this world are across."Pepys.Lord's Day. Up : and put on my colouredsilk 8uit-yery fine-and my new periwig,bought a good while since, but durst not wear,because the plague was in Westminster whenI bought it ; and it is a wonder what will be thefashion after the plague is done, as to periwigs,for nobody will dare to buy any hair, for fear ofthe infection, that it had been cut out off theheads of people dead of the plague."Howard.I would look to the moral sourcefrom whence all evil and suffering have beenderived, and should, at least, endeavour to diminishtheir bitterness. And, oh,— hew shouldI bless God, if such a worm is made the instrumentof alleviating the miseries of my fellow*976 l^ESTIKV.creatures, and to connect more strongly the socialbond, by mutual exertions for mutual relief !"Pepys.^* To church, and heard a good sermon upon,^ Seek ye first the kingdom of heaven, and itsrighteousness, and all things shall be added toyou ;' a very excellent and persuasive, good andmoral sermon. He showed, like a wise man,that righteousness is a surer way of being rich,than sin and villainy."Howard.Sunday Evening. Very desirous of returningwith a right spirit, not only wiser, but bettera cheerful humility, a more general love andbenevolence to my fellow-creatures — watchful ofmy thoughts, my words, my actions— resignedto the will of God, that I may walk with Godand lead a more useful and honourable life inthis world."Pepys.^^ Abroad with my wife, the first time thatever I rode in my own coach, which do make myheart rejoice, and praise God ; and pray Him tobless it to me and continue it."DESTINY. 2?7Howard.((Look forward, oh, my soul ! — how low, howmean, how little is every thing but what has aview to the glorious world of light, life, and love !The preparation of the heart is of God. Preparethe heart, oh God ! of thy unworthy credoture — and unto Thee be all glory, through theboundless ages of eternity."What important lessons may be learnedfrom reading these passages," said Lady Arabella." Who could recognise in these charactersthe creation of the same divine mind ?"Oh !" exclaimed Edith, with fervour, " whobut must feel the contrast which they exhibitbetween the love of duty and the love of self ?between the pure and exalted aspirations ofChristian piety and benevolence, and the grovellingsentiments of mere worldly interest ?"Why, surely no one will pretend to saythese varieties of human nature are fair specimensof any two distinct classes in the world?"said the Admiral, who loved a little argumentfor its own sake. ** At least if there be occ»*;278 Distant*signally a Howard, who in all the emergenciesof life can raise his mind to the first great Cause,surely we have few or no Pepys' in these days ofmental cultivation'^^ That there are few Howards may be granted,"said Melcombe ; ^< but Pepys's character Ifear is neither an antiquated nor an overchargedpicture ; his dialect may be out of £Fashion, as hisdresses would now be, but his sentiments arethose felt by all vain and vulgar minds to thisday ; and it must be the very truth and universalityof their application which gives his Diaryits chief interest"Ay, to be sure," said the Admiral, " I hadforgot the breed of modern dandies, male andfemale, whose Sabbath-day thoughts, were theyput in black and white, like poor Pepys's, wouldnot be — * Wherewithal shall I come before theLord ?' but how shall I most becomingly trickout and adorn my body, so as to excite the admirationand envy of my fellow creatures ?Himself so much the source of his delight,His Maker has no beauty in his sight,'as your favourite Cowper says."DESTINY* 979^^ And the mind of Cowper, awfully and mysteriouslyas it was occasionally eclipsed, stillshone with a divine light, which has awakenedand exalted the hearts of thousands of his fellowcreatures," said Melcombe.** But," said the Admiral, " if we could makea free choice, and form our own characters, couldwe hesitate, think you, in preferring the mind ofa Howard to that of a Pepys ?"^^ That is entirely a supposititious question,"replied Melcombe, " since we know that of themany millions of spirits called into this state ofexistence, there are none whose natural biasis not to evil. But He who gave to Howardthe power of becoming a ministering spirit toall who required his sympathy and aid, andenlightened his mind with that divine lovewhich communicates itself to all around — He,too, placed Pepys in this visible world, and surroundedhim with like means of improvement ;yet how strange and sad to read the transcript ofhis heart, in his Diary, filled as it is with disgustingfrivolity and unfeeling levity ! His ideas ofGod are scarcely worthy of a savage. Of moral3^ Bestir.toaaty he seems to have formed no eoneej^tii^;the sufferings of others he appears to har^'neir^ed with perfect indifference, and even wkh pleadssure, if he were likely to gain any advantage bythem. Surely, had his ^ one talent,' sadi as itwas, been well applied, he would have handeddown to posterity a very different account of h»stewardship from that which now stains his memory."^ I hope you don't mean to say, it is requisite)we should all be Howards ?' said the Admiralsomewhat testily.By no means," replied Melcombe, " at leastnot to the same extent, or in the same way ; butI think each may be, and many doubtless are,Howards in their own sphere of action. Were itotherwise, some of our noblest faculties wouldhave been given in vain, and must lie useless andunemployed."But how do you account for Pepys's constantflow of cheerfulness and contentment?" demandedthe Admiral ; ^^ to all appearance he was ahappier man than Howard ?'^^ I cannot dignify Pepys's inane selfish €<»n-«plfteency with the name of happiness' repliedMelcombe ; << at lest it must have been mereljT-the hairiness of an animal or an idiot; whileHoward's must have been that of an angel orsuperior being. His tranquillity rested on prin*doles which time would only confirm and enlarge,while the enjoyment of the other dependedon mean trivial circumstances, whidb could yieldno rational satisfaction, and which, consequently,must have been as perishable in its nature, as itwas worthless in its results."Believe me, my good friend," said the Admirals^^ your standard is too high; were allhearts laid as open as poor Pepys's, we shouldfind thousands and tens of thousands of respectablewell-behaved people every whit as bad,many much worse, and all believing themselveson the high road to heaven."That may be," said Melcombe ; " for thescale of humanity rises by innumerable steps,from the lowest to the highest state ; but surelythe more our moral and intellectual powers areenlarged and improved in this stage of our existence,the higher will be our destiny hereafter ;Se DESTINY.for we can scarcely doubt that time and eternityare but different periods of the same state,requiring the same dispositions and Cities ;and if so, who would not have lived and died aHoward, rather than a Pepys ?'<^ I like the notion of our retaining our identity'said Lady Arabella; ^^ and to think thatthat many-coloured web called experience, whichwe weave here mingled with so many bittertears, is to serve some purpose hereafter. I havealways loved those verses of Gambols's, wherethis idea is finely expanded." And she rose, tookdown the volume, and readTHE MYSTERY OF LIFE.So many years I've seen the sun,And caU'd these eyes and hands my own ;A thousand little acts I've done.And childhood have, and manhood known ;O what is life ! and this dull roundTo tread, why was a spirit hound ?** So many airy draughts and lines,And warm excursions of the mind.Have fiird my soul with great designs,While practice gravelled far behind :O what is thought ! and where withdrawThe glories which my fancy saw ?DESTINY. 888*' So many tender joys and woesHave on my quivering soul had power ;Plain life with heightening passions rose,The boast or burden of their hour :O what is all we feel ! why fledThose pains and pleasures o'er my head ?So many human souls divine,So at one interview displayed,Some oft and freely mix with mine.In lasting bonds my heart have laid :O what is friendship? why imprestOn my weak, wretched, dying breast ?So many wondrous gleams of light.And gentle ardours from above.Have made me sit, like seraph bright,Some moment on a throne of love :O what is virtue ! why had I,Who am so low, a taste so high !*^ Ere long, when sovereign wisdom wills,My soul an unknown path shall tread,And strangely leave, who strangely fillsThis frame, and waft me to the dead.O what is death ! *tis life's last shore,Where vanities are vain no more ;Where all pursuits their goal obtain.And life is all retouched again ;Where in their bright result shall riseThoughts, virtues, friendships, griefs, and joys."That is a very pleasing creed, and moreespecially at our time of day, Arabella," saidi384 Destinythe Admiral ; ** for I should be sorry to think,that after having weathered it together theseforty years, we should lose sight of each otherfor evermore when once we parted company.Come now, lay aside your books and work,and get your cloaks and bonnets."DESTINY. 285CHAPTER XXVI.On the return of the little party from theirwalk, they found that Lady Waldegrave and SirReginald had been calling; at least so it wasto be inferred from cards which had been leftfor each individual of the family. There wasalso a note to Edith, requesting of her to returnto Woodlands the following day, as arrangementswere now making for the theatricals, inwhich she was expected to bear a part, A Pes.expressed a hope that Mr Melcombe would likewisejoin the party, adding that a choice of twoprincipal characters should be reserved for him asamark of especial favour. When she had readthe note, Edith presented it to Mr Melcombe.I have no right to withhold an invitation''said she ; " but I certainly wish Lady Landgravehad conveyed this one through some othermedium."286 DESTINY.^< Through no other medium could it havebeen so acceptable," he replied, as he took thenote. ^^ But even through it the invitation is notagratifying one. I am sure I need scarcely askwhat is your intention ; but may I beg, that sinceLady Waldegrave has done me the honour toinsert my name in your invitation, you will obligeme by including me in your refusal ?"** You shall ride there with me tomorrow, andmake your own excuse," said the Admiral : ^^ wehave been rather remiss in our duties in thatquarter."I must beg to be excused from that also,"said Mr Melcombe.Why so ?" enquired the Admiral ; "SirReginald left a card for you, and his lady invitesyou to the house in any character you choose —What more would you have ?"Sir Reginald could not intend to call uponme," said Mr Melcombe, with peculiar emphasis,and colouring deeply ; « but, at any rate, it isnot for me to return the visit at present— thetime will come, I trust, when " He stopped,and seemed to repress the words which werealready on his lips.DESTINY. 287Alien what ?" asked the Admiral bluntly.Mr Melcombe's eyes were east down, as ifin meditation, while his varying expression testifiedthat it was of no tranquil kind ; but themomentary cloud passed from Ms brow, and,looking up, he said, " When Sir Reginald andI may meet upon more equal terms than wecan do at present."I begin to think you are really a strangefellow, Meleombe," said the Admiral, gravely.^^ In other words, a suspicious character," saidMeleombe, forcing a smile.^^ No, no ; there are no suspicions as to eitheryour character or circumstances ; both are openas noon-day : but still I don't know what to makeof you."Mr Meleombe was silent for a few seconds —he then said, in a calm but melancholy tone,^^ Think of me as one whom a single rash, imprudent,but I may add, guiltless act, has divestedof home, friends, and country; but, believeme when I say, the time is not far distant whenI may again claim them all."^^ And all, I doubt not, will be ready to claimDSSTINir. 2^In quite of the Admiral's remonstrances Mi'Melcombe permitted in going to town ike followingddy, but under promise of a speedy return ;and the ladies, with their veteran, set off toWoodlands.They must have been nice observers who couldhave detected any thing amiss beneath the smilingsurface, that there met their view. Allaround, within and without, breathed only ofpleasure^pleasure in its fairest, most seductiveform ; the young, the noble, the beautiful, seeminglyhappy in themselves and rich other, andamidst all the charms of nature and the refinementsof art. No unpleasing thought or corrodingcare was visible in Lady Waldegrave'scountenance, which was all gaiety and delightbut it was the gaiety and delight of a mindunder the influence of excitement, and closedfor the time against conviction or feeling. Shewas surrounded by a little band of admirers, whoseemed to vie with each other in paying homage,and offering up incense at her shrine.I am delighted to see you, dear Lady Arabella,"said she, in her sweetest of else manners,VOL. III. NS90 Destiny.^ and thank jcm for having brought badk'Onrrunaway," embracing Edith as die spoke*^< You are givii^ me credit do net deeeire^''said Lady Arabella, << as I assure yon I hare nodesign of parting with her ; and even if yea hadmy consent, you would find it no easy matter toobtain Admiral Conway's." • v^^ O, apropos Sir Reginald will of course bein the billiard-room, I must let him know AdmiralConway is here," said Lady WaldegtayeiThen tunis to Edith, she enquired, in alow but significant tone, << Has a certain MrM welcome nothing to answer for in detainingyou from us ?"Edith coloured as she replied, ^^ There wasno occasion for any one to give advice on asubject on which my own mind was made upfrom the first"It was only for the ballet you were required"said Lady Waldegrave, carelessly ; " but if youlook upon dancing as one of the seven deadlysins, I should be sorry you committed it to obligeme ;" and she turned contemptuously away.When people are disposed to ridicule 'tas inDESTINY. SOIvain to attempt to enter into any explanationwith them; Edith, therefore, suffered the sarcasmto pass without contradiction.Lady Elizabeth now entered from an adjoiningapartment, and, having welcomed theAdmiral and Lady Arabella, and conversed foralittle with them, she next fastened, as usual,upon Edith.'^ I hope you are come to remain with us,my dear," said she, ^^ for I have much to say toyou*<^ I have engaged to remain with Lady Afarbella until you return to the cottage'' saidEdith ; <^ and, to judge from appearances, thereis no want of company here''* Why, there is, to be sure, a mob of pe<^e—rather too many, indeed ; but I don't know howit is, every one is employed in their own way—and, in short — but come this way — let us gointo the veranda, where we shall be quiet. Yousee how wonderfully well I am — indeed I feelquite restored — quite renovated; Lord Mulberrysaid to me yesterday, I had got k teini reposecomme <i ^pmtce inn."292 DESTINY,Edith could with truth say, she was happy tosee that her ladyship looked better; and thelady went on, ^^ It is particularly fortunate thatI should have regained my looks at this time, asI have a little plan in contemplation, the successof which will depend very materially upon myappearance* You are aware, I suppose, ofFlorinda's intention of having a French play andballet performed here next week. I should havebeen happy to take a part in the play ; but reallythe labour of getting by heart I found wouldbe too much for me — in fact, I cannot take thetrouble to commit any thing to memory — thenthe fatigue of dancing in the ballet is more thanI am yet able for — indeed, the very thoughts ofit made Florinda, poor dear, quite wretched — soI gave that up also — but something is expectedq{ me on the occasion."Nothing more, I am sure," said Edith," than that you should be a pleased spectator."You are quite mistaken," said Lier ladyship,with an air of displeasure ; " any body maybethat, but / must be something more — I amexpected to show off — it is the tax always leviedDESTINY, 2936n talented persons ; in fact, we are public property*'Edith saw remonstrance would be vain,so she remained silent, " However, as I cannotundertake the drudgery of the play, and am notequal to the exertion required in the ballet, Ihave devised a little interlude for myself, whichI think will have a charming effect I intend tocome upon the stage in a little car, as a — a — inshort, as Venus, with little Dudley in my lap, asCupid, in a flesh-coloured silk dress and silverwings. My own dress I have not determinedupon ; but I think of having it couleur de soupiretouffe; that, you know, will be appropriate, andI shall sing Mcco d^Amor il Tempo, The designis pretty-don't you think so ?"Edith felt as if she could both laugh and cryat the idea of this preposterous exhibition, andshe said something about Lady Waldegrave notapproving of it.O, as to that, the whole is to be kept a profoundsecret from Florinda, and to be quite acharming surprise to her. You must thereforepromise me not to breathe a syllable of it to anybody;indeed, had I not entertained a very high296 DESTINY.surrounded her. Sir Reginald conversed withthe Admiral, but his air was abstracted, and inthe midst of all that was gay and brilliant, hisanimation seemed forced and joyless. The visitwas indeed productive of little pleasure to anyof the party, and Lady Arabella availed herselfof the privilege of fashion, to make it a short one.When taking leave, the Admiral, as if recollectinghimself, said, " By-the-by, I believe I oughtto apologize to you. Sir Reginald, for my friend,Mr Melcombe ; he is gone to town this morning."Sir Reginald slightly bowed in acknowledgement,while he said, " I am not aware, Admiral,that any apology is due to me, as I have not thehonour of Mr Melcombe's acquaintance."I beg your pardon, Sir Reginald," said theAdmiral, in his usual straightforward manner,but I understood you had left a card for myfriend, at the same time you called upon me."Sir Reginald turned on Lady Waldegrave alook of enquiry, which changed to one of displeasure,as she said with affected carelessness,^' I believe a card was left for Mr Melcombe,DESTINY. 297,(.* .If report says true," she added, with a malicioussmile, to Edith, " he is likely to prove more tousthan a mere visiting acquaintance."Perhaps your ladyship is in Mr Melcombe'sconfidence," said the Admiral, " andcan tell us the name of the fair lady who hasbeen able to fix even a roving sailor's affectionsfrom childhood ?"No," said Lady Waldegrave, haughtily ;Mr Melcombe and his liaisons are alike unknownto me."Lady Arabella saw a blunt retort ready toburst from the Admiral, and hastened to put astop to all recrimination, by taking leave. LadyElizabeth again whispered secrecy to Edith, asshe embraced her at parting. Lady Landgrave'smanner continued cold and pettish? and)^r Reginald as he handed her into the carriage,uttered a half-angry, half-sorrowful remonstranceagainst her for not remaining with them. Buthomeless as she was, Edith would have preferredany species of dependence to the gilded snaresof folly she there saw spread around.j^ 2li ' ' - ^ .CHAPTER XXVII.The following day, as Edidi nt alone in duedyawingHTooBi, Mr Melcombe entered* Disappearancewas so unexpected at the mcmient^that she coloured a little with surprises as shemet his salutation. He, too at first q>pti&r^somewhat embarrassed, but quickly regaininghis self>^^ossessi(»i, he advanced to die table atwhich she was sitting.'^* I dare scarcely hope for a welcome after soriibrt an absences' said he, as he extended hishand to her, with something of heatatian in hismanner.^ It would be a bad component to soy, thatabsence enhanced any one's Value," repliedEdith, with a smile, as she shook hands with!^< Even if it did, it would be paying afanoBtDBSTtior. 399too great a price'' said he, and he fixed his eyeson her with a look and meaning she could notmisunderstand; ^^ but," he added, ^^ I flattermyself I may claim a welcome from you, when Itell you, I have seen your old friend, Mrs Macauley."^^ Have you indeed been to visit Mrs Macauley?"exclaimed Edith, with glad surprise.^ Ah, how land ! is she well and happy asmal??<< Perfectly so ; and I am charged with manyaffectionate remembrance. to you, and apologie.for not having answered your last letters as.shehas been ev^oi more than usually 4>c€upied ^flate* . ;T V ';'^ Doii^ good, and giving pleasure to alttfousd her," said Edith. ^^ Oh, how I long, to9e^ her } I have never been so long separatedfrt>m her ; and I fear, at her advanced age suichange of Kfeand habite, such a total deprivationof all the comforts she has been aecustoittedto must be severely felt"^^ Do not be uneasy on her account," saidMr Mekombe ; << she looks almost as well andhappy as she did at Glenroy."aOO DESTINY.>^ You remember her then at Glenroy ?' exclaimedEdith ; but she was sorry she had yieldto the surprise of the moment, when shebeheld the agitation Mr Melcombe evinced atbeing thus reminded of what appeared to havebeen an involuntary acknowledgment An awk-!>ward pause followed, and while confusion wasstill visible on the countenances of both SisReginald Malcolm was announced.At that moment, Edith would have felt thepresence of almost any one else a relief but thesight of Sir Reginald only augmented her embarkassent She, however, named Mr Melcombeand him to each other; but she was struck withthe manner in which the introduction was takenby both parties. On the part of Sir Reginald,was an air of haughty scrutiny, which was melonthat of Melcombe with a glow that mountedalmost to his temples ; and his eyes, which for aninstant flashed fire, were then hastily averted, asthough he both felt and feared the interrogation.Neither spoke — but the bearing of both denotedthat sort of instinctive repugnance, for whichit: is sometimes impossible to account. WithDistinct ^1Melcombe, however, the emotion wad of a transientnature, and soon his countenance regainedits wonted expression ; but the cloud did not passso quickly from Sir Reginald's brow. Edithexpressed her regret that the Admiral and iJadyArabella should be from home, having gone topay a visit of condolence to an old friend in theneighbourhood.I met them as I came hither," replied ShReginald, ^^ and I learnt from them that I shouldfind you alone, and disengagement He pronouncedthe last word with marked emphasis.^' A few minutes ago, I was both," said Edith*And I was so fortunate as to find you so'*said Mr Melcombe. At the sound of his voiceSir Reginald turned quickly round, and regardedhim for a moment with a look which seemedto say, " Who are you, sir ?" and again it wasmet by the rising colour and embarrassed air ofone to whom the interrogation wa$ painfuLEdith felt the situation of both parties was unpleasant;but she regained her self-possessionand said, " Mr Melcombe had just arrived fromtown, and when you entered, I was engaged in.908 Dssmnr;letting of viy dear oU friend Mn Macanley^whom he ba. be««> kindly irtotiiig." : v^ I cannot claim mundi merit on fiat woaimftsaid Melcombe ; <^ there is something 80 deI^iil->fol in the sunshine of her heart, 'tb a please eto come within its influence." mlSir Reginald made no reply, but again castahaughty, scrutinizing glance at Mr Melcombe,which was evidently intended to silence him;but his embarrassment had fled, and it ww-nowmet by a look perfectly open and unthinkingand there was something so noble in the stampof the countenance, as seemed to denote that itnever had quailed — never would quail — for thefear of man. Sir Reginald turned away his proudgaze, and abruptly addressing Edith, said, ^^ Ibeg a few minutes' conversation with you Iwish to see you alone."Surprised, and somewhat piqued at the haughty, peremptory manner in which tim requestwas made, Edith hesitated to comply; but asshe marked Mr Melcombe's rising colour andSir Reginald's flashing eye, she hastily rose^d led the way into ih& smdil drawinghroom^DESnflNYi SOSFoi>ifiiie#^6ecdiid% Sir Reghudd wis silent* asif striving to regain bis Wlf^eoBiniaBd; he thensaide' in a tone of assumed calmness, <^ MayI hie to know nHko liii gentleman — this Mr(onaff some coll him) Captain Melcombe is, towhom I hare had the honour of being intro-^dnoed?*He is the friend of Admiral Conway," repliedEdith.>< And noting more ?' demanded l%r Regisin the same restrained tone.f^ That is surely sufficient to entitle him tocivility from Admiral Conway's visitors," sudEdith, coldly.^ In some circumstances it might be so; butI would know something more of this personthis Captain Melcombe. I would know whoand what he is ?" Edith was silent Sir Reginaldwent on, still preserving his formed composore; ^^ Though Admiral Conway may beimprudent enough to invite an adventurer tohis house, you nest permit me to say, Edith, itby no means follows as a matter of course thatyon ott^t to be drawn into an intimacy with aperson of that description."304 DESTINY.While I remain under the roof of Admiraland Lady Arabella Conway, I shall certainlynot shun holding intercourse with their friends,"replied Edith, mildly but firmly.The Conwayss would show a greater considerationfor you if they were more chary intheir friendships," said Sir Reginald, with asperity.Excuse me. Sir Reginald," said Edith;^^ but I have met with too much kindness fromthem to suffer them to be blamed, and especiallyon my account. I never can be injured by havingtheir friends for my acquaintance."Yet you are aware that your name is alreadycoupled with this adventurer's ! Is thatnot injuring you?" cried Sir Reginald, nowlosing his self-command. Edith's colour rose;but ere she could reply, he proceeded with increasingvehemence — " As your nearest relation,I conceive myself entitled to ascertain thetruth or the falsehood of this report."In no capacity whatever can I admit yourright to interfere in my affairs," said Edith, risingwith an air of displeasure, but he laid his handupon her arm to prevent her leaving the room.DESTINY. 305^' Then do you refuse me the satisfaction ofbeing able to contradict a report discreditableto yourself and your family?" said he, vehemently."I refuse to acknowledge the authority ofSir Reginald Malcolm to demand any explanationfrom me," said Edith, roused beyond herusual meek endurance.Then I shall seek an explanation elsewhere,"cried Sir Reginald, passionately.At this threat Edith's resolution failed her;she turned pale with apprehension at the thoughtsof what might ensue, were he to encounter MrMelcombe in the present irritated state of hisfeelings. " There is no one who can give anyexplanation," said she faintly. " There is noneto give."^' Thanks, dear Edith ; that is enough !" hecried, with a look of pleasure, as he pressed herhand. ^' And you forgive me — you forgive thesolicitude that the enquiry"I forgive every thing," said Edith, " andevery one; but I must consider the liberty youhave taken as unjustifiable on your part, as it wasunwished for on mine. And now let us part"006 Destiny.But Sir Reginald still held her hand, whilehe looked eamesd^^pon her ^^ I know you anetruth itself, Edith," said he. ^^I am satisfied therumour was as blue as it was malicious ; but* ' —and his eyes flashed fire — ^^ but I see plainlythat unknown— *that adventurer dares to loveyou I There is degradation in the very thoughtof your ever easting yourself away upon such aone. Promise, then, that you never will be his !"Edith's whole ice was in a glow, and for aoniieminutes she was too mundi confused to iiq>ly.Sir Reginald's eyes were bent keenly upon her,and his lips were compressed, as if to restrainthe workings of his breast. But soon regainingher self-possession, she replied, with calmnessand dignity, ^^ There is no subject which wouldbe proposed on which I would bind myself bya promise to any one, — certainly not to Sir Re-^^reginald Malcolm." And she again rose to quitthe room.^^ But tell me," said he, still detaining hmwhy did you quit Woodlands so hurriedly ?Did Lady Waldegrave — Was it in consequenceof any thing she said?" .».i.;^^ You em scarcely siypooe, > Sb . Begimddy^iiDESTINY. 307that your house and Lady Waldegrave's wouldhave been the residence I should have madechoice of' said. Edith.^^ But since you were there why leave it soabruptly?"f^ I went, at Lady Waldegrave's earnest solicitation,to spend one day with her."^^ And you would not remain another togratify me ? Ah, Edith, if you but knew thehundredth part of the misery I endure !"Why should it be so ?" said Edith earnestly;you have all that this world can give !"Sir Reginald's only answer was a deep sigh,and an impatient wave of the head.^ Ah, Reginald, since you do not find yourhappiness in the follies — must I say in the vicesH)f the world, as no one ever did, will you notseek it in other and better sources, — ^your homeH^yoiur child-T-^your country — ^your God?" andshe looked on him with eyes of almost seraph'spurity and softness;Sir Reginald's lq> quivered with emotion, andfor some moments he remained silent, as if Strutsgoing with himsel£ He then exclaimed Iwkhiym 'woiid talk to Lad WaUegmm on908 DESTINY.there subject — it is there the reform shouldbegin. By Heaven, her caprice and extravagancewoidd beggar a kingdom !"^^ But, were she to see you giving up any ofyour favourite pursuits ^"That would make no difference; or, if itdid, it would only be to afford her still greaterscope for her heartless folly."^' At least the experiment is worth trying."said Edith.Excuse me," he replied, impatiently; " butwomen cannot possibly judge of those things.They may be of use to one another in the wayof advice, and if you will take up your residencewith us, I am convinced you might be of serviceto Florinda — if any thing can be of service toone so selfish and hollow. Do, then, let mepersuade you to come to us."No, Sir Reginald, that can never be," saidEdith, calmly and firmly; " from my heart, Iwish Lady Waldegrave and you all happiness-^—I woidd do much to promote it if I could, butthe means seem beyond my reach."Happiness ! Ah, Edith, you little knowwhen you talk of happiness to me 1 There wasDESTINY. 309a time, indeed, when my happiness was in yourhands ; and had you borne with me a little longer,had you made a little more allowance for thefolly and infatuation of a mere boyish £Emmy, wemight both have been happier now !"A slight blush tinged Edith's cheek, but therewas no uncertain expression in her eyes, as sheraised them to his with a look, grave and mild,but full of pity, while she said, " On my ownaccount, I have no regret, and I never will listento yours. As the friend and brother of my brother— as the successor to my father — ^as mynearest kinsman, — ^in all these relations I shallever be interested in your welfare, but in noother may you ever lay claim to my sympathy."There was a dignity in her maimer that debarredall farther discussion ; and Sir Reginaldmade no attempt to detain her, as she returnedto th room they had left, but followed" with anair of haughty pique and mortification. Scarcelydeigning to notice Mr Melcombe, he took leave,and in an instant his horse's feet were heard gallopingdown the avenue.316 Destiny./ , ''i.*t )• ■■//HCHAPTER XXVIII.A SCENE such as this could not fail to d&tiirb'the serenity of Edith's mind ; but yet, amidstthe painful emotions which had been excited,'there was one of a more pleasurable kind. "SiReginald had said that Melcombe loved her,though that could not be, for his affections* itseemed had long been riveted on another, whilehers had been too cruelly blighted ever again torevive. No — love it could not be on either side,but it might be something better and more enduring.She admired Mr Melcombe's character, andwas pleased with his society ; his sentiments onmost subjects agreed with hers ; their tastes andpursuits were similar; and it was therefore butnatural that he should evince a degree of prefei'-^once for her, which one unacquainted with theDESTINY. 811real state of the parties might mistake for love.Thus argued Edith as she repeated to herself thewords which had called forth this train of reflections.But even while she repelled the idea, itnevertheless operated on her feelings, and whenale ag^un joined him, the ease and simplicity ofher manners had given pldjCe to an air of timidityand embarrassment, which he could not feelto. perceive.," Well," said the Admire on his return, addressingEdith, ^' you have had no lack of beauxin my absence, it seems ; here is one," pointingto Mr Melcombe, '^ who has found his way toyou, and we met another, whom I allowed to pass,after stipulating with him that he should not runawaywith you in my absence ; if he did, I promisedhim a hot chase from myself, and my captain,when he should return." Edith's head wasbent over her embroidery, and the Admiralwent rattling on. ^^ You had just come in thenick of time, Melcombe, to protect our fairprise," said he ; ^^ otherwise I suspect she wouldhav been carried oflF by a gay rover. Confess,"cried he turning to Edith, <^ that Sir reginaldcame with some such nefarious design ?"313 DESTINY.^< Not absolutely*' said Edith, trying to forcea smile, ^* I was only pressed to return to Woodlands,by my cousin*''^ But you told him, I hope, that you preferredthe company of an old couple and an absentlover'* laying his hand on Mr Melcombe'sshoulder, as he sat in pensive abstraction,* ** toall the gay doings at Woodlands'.Edith coloured as she thought of Reginald'sideal suggestion, when Mr Melcombe said in apeculiar tone, " Not absent only clouded*'^^ That is a nice distinction, I suspect, in yourcase, my good friend," said the Admiral ; " butwe shan't differ about a word. Was this yourfirst introduction to Sir Reginald ?**Not my first," replied Melcombe, with somehesitation ; ^^ but it is many years since wemet."^^ Many years !" repeated the Admiral, laughing5 " neither of you have been many years inthe world, according to my mode of reckoning.Pray, may I ask, what you call many years ago ?"Thirteen years — and many, many yearsthey have appeared to me !" answered Mel*combe, with a sigh.PESTiNir* 313^ K lie had known Reginald thirteen yearsago^^ ^hev must have known me too' thrustEdith ; for at that time Reginae and she wereimplacable ;hand die gazed nth wonder and entry." Why, to be sure," said the Admiral " thirteenyears must be a respectable portion of yourslife ; but, as your old Scotch song says,Should and acquaintance be £orgdt/I hope Sir Reginald and you renewed youracquaintance?"« No'' replied Melcombe, " Sir Reginalddid not recognize me."That is not surprising," said Edith ; " for I,too, must have known Mr Melcombe in thosechildish days, as my cousin and I were educatedtogether."^^ On some minds early impressions are fiedntand evanescent," replied Mr Melcombe, evidentlyevading the enquiry; « on others, theyare vivid and indelible ;" and, as he spoke, hiseyes were directed to Edith with a look of suchdeep and tender interest, as seemed to speak ofthoogfats Hxtked with many a fond recollection.VOL. III. o314 DESTINY./^ Don't be too secure of the insensibility ofcertain childish impressions' said the Admiralwith a significant look and an expressive tone**' I thank you for your caution," replied Melcombewith a smile, ^' but I think I may ventureto feel secure of sentiments which have stoodthe test of time and absence, and which everydaytends only to strengthen and confirm," andagain his look seemed unconsciously bent onEdith,What say you to the volatility or the insensibilityof early impressions. Miss Malcolm?"said the Admiral; ^^ Are they fugitives or fixturesthink you?"/^ The impressions made in childhood arecertainly very strong," said Edith; " but as thmind matures, it surely becomes our duty taexamine them by a better light than that ofnature, and to discard or retain them, accordingas we find them worthy of a place in our affections."You are a little philosopher," cried theAdmiral, " and I should fear you never wouldf^U iu love, were it not for that sweet blush ofyours ; but philosophy never blushes."DESTINY. 815** I may well blush at being styled a philosopher,"said Edith, with a smile.I suspect it is I who ought rather to do so,for having likened you to any thing so odious asafemale philosopher," said the Admiral; *' butyou must spare a poor old weather-beaten tar —and here comes Arabella — she will be jealous ifshe hears of all this blushing between us''Indeed, I have some reason," said LadyArabella, as she joined them ; " for I assure you,Miss Malcolm, the Admiral was so afraid of yourcousin's carrying you off in his absence, that Icoidd scarcely prevent him from returning toguard you himself; but, with a gouty foot anda shattered arm, I think he would scarcely havebeen able to cope with so gallant a knight as SirReginald. — I hope you did not find it a serviceof great danger, Mr Melcombe?"Had there been danger, I should certainlyhave welcomed it in such a cause," replied he ;but my trials were rather those of passiveendurance than of active enterprise."Again Edith read, in the expression of hisclear, eloquent eye, a meaning beyond the words316 DESTINY.he uttered. Strange disjointed thoughts againcame thronging upon her-r— <^ he lords one knownfrom childhood," she thought, ^ and to-day hehas all but 'acknowledged that he knew me inearly life."But in another instant she rejected the wildidea, with shame at ever having harboured. ift^and something of displeasure that the lover ofanother should thus presume to make it doubtfulwhether she was not the object of his secretaffections. These reflections rendered her silentand abstracted during the rest of the conversation.From that time she studiously avoidedall opportunities of being alone with Mr Melcombe,and woidd even have shortened her visitto Lady Arabella, had she known where to go.But situated as she was, she had no alternativebut to remain where she was. The return of theRibleys was very uncertain, Mrs Ribley havingbeen taken ill at Cheltenham, and their stayhaving, consequently, been prolonged.Lady Elizabeth's movements were too eccentricto be depended upon ; and Mrs Macauleywas still in requisition in the various capacitiesDESTINY. 317of sick-nurses governess, housekeeper, and universalfavourite, in the little crowded, comfortlessabode of the wise Johnnie.Such being the position of all parties, therewas nothing for it but to acquiesce in the presentarrangement of things. Mr Melcombeappeared to feel the change which had takenplace;, but though he looked thoughtful andmelancholy, he made no attempt to win her backto the easy, friendly footing they had hithertobeen upon. His attentions, if more guarded,however, seemed even more .devoted than before ;aad in spite of the reserve of both, there stillseemed as if a secret, though invisible, chord ofsympathy bound their minds together.318 DBSTIKT.CHAPTER XXIX.The invitation to Woodlands was again repeated,and again declined, in mild but decisivetents. Edith, therefore, flattered herself sheshould be allowed to remain, for some time ^tleast, in the repose of neglect* But )^t>8e Innot the element in which the idle and frivolouscan exist themselves, or allow others to indulgein.The day preceding Lady Waldegrave's fite^Edith received a summons from Lady Elizabethto repair immediately to the cottage. She wasat no loss to conjecture that the impending clairecasement between the mother and daughter hadat last taken place, and had terminated, as sheexpected, in a violent ^aca5. The Admiral andLady Arabella, alarmed at the thoughts of beingdeprived of their young favourite, proposed, thatDestiny. 319in case Lady Elizabeth had actually quittedWoodlands, she should be invited to take upher residence with them ; and Edith promised touse her influence in prevailing upon her stepmotherto consent. Lady Arabella and Mr Melcombeaccompanied her till within sight of thecottage, when the former turned back a few stepsto q>eak to one of the gardeners. Edith wasslowly retracing her steps to rejoin her friendsen Melcombe, in a hesitating tone, and with 9heightened colour, said, " Were it not very presumptuousin me either to hope or fear aught, onmy own account as connected with you, I shouldsay, I fear this interruption will prove only theprelude to a longer separation''^' I should have cause to grieve at any thingthat was to separate me from such kind and delightfulfriends as the Admiral and Lady Arabella,"replied Edith ; <^ but there seems no likelihoodof that at present.^^ But even should you remain — I must depart— I must return to Greece for a short time,"said Melcombe, earnestly ; ^^ and should thisbemy only opportunity of seeing you aloned90 nKSTDfr.may I hope — forgive me'— fled lie in busMoABgBgitaJdum*—^ forgive me if I venture "to hope,Aat even amid doubts and guspieMmy ^ro Idmrand understand each oder better than vriben* wemet?'Edith was spared like embarrassment of reply,as they were at ihat^moment joined; by LadyArabella, who, after repeating hep^invitation forXady Elizabeth, called upon her ndttctant companionto. retrace his steps, sand the fittte parlyseparated.Edith found Lady Elizabeth in her dressingextended on a couch — ^her physician andattendants bustling around her, and the atmosphereloaded with the fumes of hartshorn, ether,and such mental drugs as are usually supposedto minister to a mind, rather than a body diseased.The paroxysm, however, appeared to bepast, as she accosted Eklith in her usual wesdc,querulous tone, and having embraced her in asint, hysterical manner, :che dismissed) her attendants,and began — ^^ You find me excessivelyilh^my whole system has received adboek whichAny thegreaitest skill and; care will) enable meDestiny* 32-1to sucmaimt^T^aothing Q&cts tb looks aotmu^aSiagitadqiv and bdSore.l^ happened) I waslo(dung^^jBo particularly well !" Here her ladyships supplied her handkerchief to her eyes* andheaved repeated sighs.^< I trust soothing of a very serious nature .hasoccurred ?' said Edith, soothingly*'" Shocking !" was ' the reply, with a littlehysterical sob. ^^In fact, the usage I have metwith but my nerves are so shattered I shallnever be able to speak of it !" And the small sighsnow rose to title halftrepressed shrieks*^^ Then do not attempt to talk of it, dear LadyElizabeth," said. Edith, in the same bland tone.^^ Not attempt to talk of it !" exclaimed hierladyship, taking the handkerchief from her fence,in lat sudden transport of indignation. ^^ I shallmake a point of talking of it — the world shallhear of it ! Such ingratitude ! Such — I— I — itis too shocking and foolish I"By way of turning her mind from a subjectwhich seemed too much for it, Edith here reveredthe kind messages with which she had beencharged by the Admiral, and Lady Arabella;o2828 DSSTi2fy.but ih&f were received with peevish contempt.^ Don't talk about Adnuml and Lady AnMikConway at present," said sbe ^ ^' die cannot beof the slightest service to me, after the indignityI have met with. I can listen to nothing of thesort To be so treated by my own daughter,who owes every thing to me ! Hough, poordear unfortunate, it is all owing to that nn*principled man. I always knew it would be 90 !But, to dare to refuse me !" Here a little hystericallaugh wound up the sentence.^' Pardon me, if I venture to guess at thecause of this disagreement between you andLady Waldegrave," said Edith, gently ; '^ andstill more, if I take upon me to assure you, it isnot at present in her power to assist you."^^ Assist me !" repeated her ladyship, with intoindignation. ^^ You strangely mistake the matter*I required no assistance ; on the contrary, myintention was to have assisted her."^^ Undoubtedly there is some mistake," saidEdith.'^ There was much improper behaviour — muchingratitude — and — and folly — but no mistake !"DESTiarr* 828^^ Excuse me, if I still think there must (hesomething misunderstood between Lady Wsdde*grave and you," said Edith. ^^ Have reaaon^tabe assured, that any assistance you could affooclher would be most acceptable."<< Why, so I thought, and most people wouldthink; but it has been refused, in the most insultingmanner." And her whole frame quiveredwith indignation as she spoke.Edith felt more and more perplexed. ■^■I fear you will think me very troublesomein thus presuming to press my opinion on you,"said she ; ^^ but from what passed betweenLady Waldegrave and me on the subject, Iam certain there must be a misunderstanding onone side or other; it is very lately that sheurged me to endeavour to procure your assistanceto relieve her in her present embarrassmelts."^^ That is just of a piece with the rest of herbehaviour," exclaimed Lady Elizabeth ; ^^ suchduplicity ! I was certain that she must desireit ; it would have been ridiculous to suppose Iwould be otherwise than an acquisition to her ;i^i jiidi^>arediio ^iXfeme-^^ey^ry doing-hadibex prepared Ml i^: most perfect tafite^^mi&y earjquy .de^esy my wings-^r^^^U so purely classical V^r^.'HeBea.'Oon¥ulfiive sob choked her utterance.£with was confounded. v At first '>fihe .thei^litKMMUided section and nunrtified^Yanky had aetu-allyitanied hers braiii). till > the recoUeotioD;(tf/thefltarOBd the .great things destined for it flashedupon her memory aad the whole mystery wasunravelled* But what 4uijexlabU(»i of huioanfelly ! it was almost :too>hiumliatiiig to be ridiculous! Lady Elizabeth went on. '4,.>^ Conceive my feelii^^ after havingibe^QL atso mach trouble and expense, to^be tdd that shecould Bo possibly allow such an'e2diibitioii,>to-take place* An exhibition I what word ! «hook-^iBg.and. foolish! And such ingratitude, when Ihad. been at^the expense of getting ;a dress forher child — quite a beautiful thing, flesh-colouredsilk, with the sweetest little silver' wings ! altogetherthe whole device wa charming, and theeffect would have been irresistible ; but the £Etcis,^ I breve Flortnda i»i|ealous of' the successwhich she^.focesisw would attend my little inherited;but son I for that demon t»'femBck*^cdpfaef^-^to Buffer Mny Hal^itB' to lie 'useless ? Iebnsider^it.dite to myself sto make ao. appearancetrpon this occasion and I told Flortnda, ThattEUdess^I was to have my own way, and appear iaa manner worthy of myself, I should instantlyquit the house. The consequence is, you seemehere !" Emotion choked farther utterance.Of all mental suffering -^ perhaps the mostdifficult ta administer relief to by honest means,are ' Rose which spring from wounded vanity.The only panacea for a weak, vain mind, in astate of irritation, is flattery, and 4;h^t"was onewhich Edith would in no circumstances haveapplied* She sought, however, to soothe theangry feelings of her stepmother into composurly and llien;to reconcile her to her disappointment,-by such arguments as isle thoughtbest suited to ter capacity. ' • But i the attemptswere fruitless; thdady would listen to nothingbut her *own wrongs When in . the • midst ofone of bes? angry bursts she Siuddenlystopped,and.exclaimed^ <'sNow that you understand howtnattepsriare between <my daughter • and me the984 Mtmitr.and I.lyid/q[Mured]io eq>«Me*^e¥€ry doing hadfce^ prepared Ml llM^aofit perfect taisrt^^mjR.daresy my wings^t*^ so purely daattoai 1'^.:- Henaaoonvukhre aob ebokedkeruttetanoe.Edith was confounded* vAfc first 'she :tkeuglitmounded affection and mortified: lanky had actuallyturned her. brain . till the recollection ; oitikeftttf asd the great things destined foils washedupon her memory and iJie whole mystery wasunravelled. But' what tui ^ exUbiti(»i of hmtoanfelly ! it was almost too homiUatifir to be ridiculous! Lady Elizabeth went on. <^^ Conceive my feelii^^ after havingibeeii atso much trouble, and expense, to be tdd that sheooidd not possibly allow sue an* exhibition totake place. An exhibition I what a word ! hookingand. foolish ! And such ingratitude when Ihad . been at the . expense of getting ;a dress forher child — quite a beautiful thing, flesh-colouredsilk, with the sweetest little silver wings ! altogetherthe whole device was charming, and theeffect would have been irresistible ; but the feu^tis, I believe Florindaisijealous of^thesuecesswhich she. foresaw would attend my Ittdeiinter^BfiSTimr^ 6S5.Ittde;: but 'son I for that reason to* renmih^'Hoipfaef*-^to BtifiSer my talents to lie useless ? Ieonsiderat.dite to myself sto makeaa appearancetrpon this occasion, and I told Ftorindaj thattEUiless^I was to have my own way, and appear hxa manner worthy of myself, I should instantlyquit, the house. The consequence is, you seemehere !" Emotion choked farther utterance.i Of all mental sufferings, perhaps the mostdifficult toi administer relief to by honest means,are'Aose which q)Ting' from wounded vanity.The only panacea for a weak, vain mind, in astate of irritation, is flattery, aud th^t'was onewhich Edith would in no circumstances haveapplied* She sought, however, to soothe theangry feelings of her stepmother into compo*sure and thereto reconcile her to her disappointment,,by such arguments as 'she thoughtbest suited to her capacity. ' • But -, the attemptswere fruitless; the lady would listen to nothingbut her ^ wn wrongs. When in . the ' midst ofone « of bes? angry bursts she Siuddenlystopped,wddxexcbdmed^ ^'^Now that you understand howmatti^insriaTe between: oozy daughter > and me theSM Bcrrnnr*<mly way in virhich you can be of use i% to gesteher immediately, and endeavour to bring lier^tur asense of her duty before it is too late* I am atiUwilling to foi^ve her, upon receiving a properapology, and being invited — for I now muainsist upon being invited to act my part* I shallorder my carriage for you, for there is not amoment to lose."She was ringing the bell, when Edith stoppedher, — ^^ Pray, excuse me. Lady Elizabeth," said*she, ^^ but I cannot really undertake this officeat least, take a little time to consider of it, andallow me the same !" i<^ Not one instant !" exclaimed her ladyshipvehemently ; ^^ it must be done now, or not ataU."^< But it is late," answered Edith, << and theAdmiral and Lady Arabella are in hopes of seeingyou return with me. They expect no company,so you will find a quiet, family party."The thing of all others I detest !" exclaimedthe lady peevishly. " I detest family dinners,and I detest cottages, which are, in fact, neithermore nor less than small, dull, inconvenientholism; and if die Conway imagine I am taremain mewed up in this baby-houses they aremuch mistaken ; so let me hear no more of theGomvays and their clinne«^ but go directly tomy daughter !" again ringing the bell violentlyfor the carriage.Dear Lady Elizabeth' said Edith, earnestly,it pains me to refuse any request of yoursbut, indeed, I cannot go to Lady Waldegraveon such an errand. I would do much to reconcileyou, but I think with her, that the appearanceyou propose to make would be unbecoming hermother — the grandmother of her child — myfather's widow."Lady Elizabeth turned almost blue with anger,while she repeated, ^' Grandmothers and widows !coarse and gross ! Who ever hears of such thingsin good society ? Such terms are never used bythose who understand good manners," and alittle hysterical laugh rattled in her throat She,however, quickly rallied, and went on : " However,since I ^m, it seems, your father's widow,(certainly not what confers distinction upon me,)you will allow, I hope, that I am entitled to389 DSSXIXY*daim the obedience of his daughter, and thereforeI command you to go laimediateiy to XadyWaldegrave — or even to her husband— rend —and represent to them how excessively ill I havebeen treated by them, and that I desire I maybeinvited to return and sustain, my part, otherwiseI insist upon my car, doves, and wings,being sent to me immediately ; and then theyshall see what it is to have incurred, my. displeasure."Vexed as Edith was, she could not refrain fromsmiling at the mock dignity with which thistirade was delivered. Unwilling to accede. tothis preposterous request, or rather .command,but afraid of the consequences of a refusal, incompassion to the wretched old woman, she atlast undertook the painful, because almost hopelesstask, of acting as mediator between her andher daughter. She was not allowed much timeto deliberation the carriage had been orderedeven before her consent had beenasked^ and&hewas hurried away upon her embassy. . .Destined 331<* The purpose for which I have come'' saidEdith^^ You could only come for one purpose, I amsure," interrupted her ladyship, sportively ; '^ thepurpose of obliging me beyond expectation ;when that !s done, we shall then talk of otherpurposes-of wise and good purposes, such as Ioften, very often, intend to follow, and shall, Iam sure, some day or other begin to practiseunder your auspices ; en attendant you will putyourself under mine for this one day* Was itnot really too much, that of my principal j^^rtf-rates Lady Sophia Marley should have sprainedher ancle, and Miss Townshend's provoking oldgrandmother have chosen to die ? so there aretwo frightful gaps in my corps de ballet ; but youwill — I know you will, kindly fill one of them'*** Excuse me," said Edith, gravely ; " I camefor a very different purpose-I came at the requestof Lady Elizabeth."Lady Waldegrave's countenance changed —<« What ! has mamma been teazing you alreadywith her absurdities ? I thought you had been atdSS Destiny.Upon being conducted to Lady Waldeg^ve,Edith found her not less occupied than her guestsshe rehearsing her part with Lord Herbert, while<me of the Ladies Bingley acted as prompter.When Miss Malcolm was announced, she utteredan exclamation of pleasure, and hastenedforward to receive her with more than her usualsuavity and softness of address. '' This is sokind of you, my love 1'' said she, tenderly embracingher ; ^^ so very kind ! I almost feared you;would not come, and yet I thought you could noresist, when you knew the cruel dilemma I amiin'*^^ It was in hopes of extricating you from k'I came," replied Edith. >Lady Waldegrave pressed her hand* ** DearestEdith ! how very kind and affectionate ! Indeed,I cannot express how much I feel obligedto you. I always was set upon having you, though:you were so coy, and difficult to win ; but, however,since we have secured you, that is enough'**' You mistake. Lady Waldegrave ; I do notcome on my own account."^* Oh no, not at all — ^you come upon mine'*DESTINY. 381<* The purpose for which I have come* saidEdith** You could only come for one purpose, I amsure* interrupted her ladyship, sportively ; " thepurpose of obliging me beyond expectation ;when that is done, we shall then talk of otherpurposes-of wise and good purposes, such as Ioften, very often, intend to follow, and shall, Iam sure, some day or other begin to practiseunder your auspices ; en attendant you will putyourself under mine for this one day* Was itnot really too much, that of my principal j^-rates Lady Sophia Marley should have sprainedher ancle, and Miss Townshend's provoking oldgrandmother have chosen to die ? so there aretwo frightful gaps in my corps de ballet ; but youwill — I know you will, kindly fill one of them'*Excuse me," said Edith, gravely ; " I camefor a very different purpose — I came at the requestof Lady Elizabeth."Lady Waldegrave's countenance changed —<< What ! has mamma been teazing you alreadywith her absurdities ? I thought you had been at332 DESTINY.the Conwayss* I sent a note there to y^u tUsmorning'£with explained to her thai she had beensent for by Lady Elizabeth, and described thestate in which she found her; but Lady Waltergave wouhi scarcely hear her to an-end —^^ Really thus-is too tiresome !" cri sh^» ixxvp»rtwenty* ^^ Sturdy you might know manna bettertian to pay any regard to such seines ; and ifshe vnll be ridiculous, it is surely better thatiSheshould be so in her own dressing-r^Bi, that i^the fxMde of the whole world. Nothing will induceme to permit her to make such an esdbibitii^:^It might have passed at the Court of LouisQuatorze, when antiquated Senses were quited la mode; but in the present day, iduch an outrageagainst good taste is not to be endured !" ,Edith gave a gentle assent as to the improprietyof the exhibition, then,: as ; delicately asshe could, conveyed Lady Elizabeth's message ;andadded, '^that surely something xqoght be doneto deprecate her displeasure and eoncpOiiate he*:O, after the thing is over it will be , timDESTINY, 883enough to do that'' replied her ladyship care-^lessly.'^ But Lady Elizabeth declares i^e is determinedto go abroad immediately, unless yoiimake some concession to her' said Edith.^^ That is perhaps the very best thing she c^do'* replied Lady Waldegrave, in the same toneof indifference.^^ But if she goes now, she leaves you in angerAh, Florinda, can you bear to live under aparent's displeasure ? Will you not rather sacrificethe amusement which is the cause of thisstrife — relinquish your theatrical representation,and recall your mother to your house ?"How ridiculous !" exclaimed Lady Landgrave,angrily. " I can scarcely suppose youserious in making such a proposal, and I reallyhave no leisure at present for per stage J^Indeed I am serious," said Edith, gravely.Pshaw, that must be all make-believe. Iknow you would make a good actress; so, pray,put oflF your bonnet, and 1 will introduce you tothe ball-room, where my corps de habet are nowpractising. Now, do dispense with all the lackluad.I.4MMl/q>arediio ^uqpeii9e-*-ever]F thing hadfeetki piepiured in die; acifit perfect taste'-'^ipyi.clarefly m/ wings^r*^ so purely' classical V^^.•Heii&a.4N>iivtt]aiYe sob ehfokedherrutteranee^Edith was confounded. ;At first '4Bhe;tkeugiitwinded dObctioa and mortified; lanky had actually:;tamed hers braiD) . till the recollection \ oitik^fUttraaA the .peat diiogs destined for i1^ flashedupon her memoryy-aad the wheJe^niystery wasunravelled. Butwhatan^exhibkioii of kiutaaniGolIy ! it was almost too humiliating to be ridiculous! Lady Elizabeth went on. <M. >^ Conceive my feelii^^ after having been atso ^uoh trouble, and expense, to be told that thewould not possibly allow sue an. exhibitionstake place. An exhibition j what a word ! hooking.and. foolish ! And such ingratitude, when Ibad. been at .the expense of getting :a dress forher child — quite a beautiful thing, flesh-colouredsilk, with the sweetest little silver' wings ! altogetherthe whole deuce was disarming, i^d theeffect would have been irresistible ; but the £eutis, I believe Flortnda is 'jealous of ^ the successwhich she-foresaw would attend my litdeiinter^Ittde; 'But seem -I {E>r that reason to remain -adpfaef * ^ suffer « my 1al«its to lie useless ? I^bnsiderdt.dite to myself to make an appearanceloon this occasion, and I told Florinda, thatttiiless^I was to have my own way, and appear m1^ 'manner worthy of myself, I should instantlyquit, the house. The consequence is you seemehere !" Emotion choked further utterance.« ' Of all mental sufferings, ^ perhaps the mostdifficult to administer relief to by honest means,ai' those which spring from wounded vanity,the only panacea for a weak, vain mind, in astate of irritation, is flattery, and th^twas onewhich Edith would in no circumstances haveappMed. She sought, however, to soothe theangry feelings of her stepmother into composure and then; to reconcile her to her disappointment,. by such arguments as she thoughtbest suited to her capacity. 'But. the attemptswere fruitless; the lady would listen to nothingbut her sown wrongs When in ' the • midst ofone* of her angry bursts,* she suddenly ^sti^ped,andiexclaimed, ^^:Now that you understand howmatt!^a»ri«re between; any daughter and me the336 Dssmnr.I am Sony, my dear, I must leesre you behind,as I really cannot take you comfortably withme; besides, girls are rather an iaciuidbraiice'abroad ; but when I am settled myself I shallnot forget you. I shall endeavour to find tm, bouparti for you, and I think I shall succeed ; butshould I fail in that, you know you have «hvBysthe resource of a convent where yon will Bavethe very best society, so much better than liyjagwith bourgeois relations. In the mean timid yoiimust remain with me till I take my departurefor I have a thousand matters to arrange'' .■t''Destiny. 887CHAPTER XxxiAs Lady Elizabeth's night was day, and herday night, Edith had the undisturbed enjoymentai the morning to herself. She therefore availedherself of the opportunity of collecting the drawingsand papers which she had previously left atthe Cottage, and was so employed when MrMelcombe was announced. Her writing-caseand porte-feuille were open before her, and partof their contents were scattered promiscuouslyon the table at which she was seated* She roseto receive him, but there was something of mutualconstraint and embarrassment in the meeting.After the usual common-place salutationsand enquiries had been exchanged, Mr Melcombesaid, as if to deprecate her coldnessI. fear I have been guilty of an intrusion atthis early hour ; but if I have, you must forgiveme.VOL. in. p338 DEsmnr.Why should yon fear, and why must I forgiveyou T* enquired Edith, with a smile.^^ Because, when there is much to hope, thereis always something to fears<^ There is little room for either, in this ease''replied Edith, slightly. '*^ It is only indifference that would exi^Iudehope or fear," said he, looking earnestly at her.^^ From any thing so indifferent in its natureas a morning visit, they surely maybe excluded''answered Edith ; '^ though I believe we are allapt to expend our hopes and fears even in theissue of * to be — or not to be* at home**^^ The issue of even so trifling an eventmay, however, be important." He paused, thenadded, ^^ But even if I should have trespassed,I think you will forgive me, when I tell you theoffence is not likely to be soon repeated; andwhen next we meet, I trust I shall be in differentcircumstances from those in' which youhave hitherto known me'*His voice betrayed his emotion, and'Editiiwas immediately struck with the thought thathe alluded to his marriage with the object of hisDESTINY. 339early affection. A strange sensation oppressedher. It might be that the difference, of her ownfate struck her forcibly, when contrasted withthe more favoured destiny of another. Yet, washe indeed true to his early vows, or had shebeen unconsciously supplanting another ? Herheart shrunk within her at the dread surmise.Alternately her cheek glowed with shame atthe idea that she was the self-deluded sport ofan imaginary attachment, and turned pale at thethought that perfidy and falsehood could dwellin such a mind. All this was the work of amoment, but she remained silent for some minutes; then making an effort to regain her self-possession,she said, ^^ It is seldom, that after along separation, people meet under the samecircumstances: the change in yours, I trust,will be a happy one."^^ Yes, the change that will restore an unknownexile to his family and country must be a happyone," said he, in a voice Altering with emotion.<< That will entitle him to do— what as afriendless unknown adventurer he dares mottoseek, the regard of one long, and truly, andfondly loved."39B DIBTIHT.Upon being conducted to Lady Waldegrave,Edith found her not less occupied than her gneBte^she rehearsing her part with Lord Herbert, while<me of the Ladies Bingley acted as prompter.When Miss Macon was announced, she utteredan exclamation of pleasure, and hastenedforward to receive her with more than her usualsuavity and softness of address. ^^ This is sokind of you, my love J" said she, tenderly eiiibr»tking her; ^^ so very kind ! I almost feared yourswould not come, and yet I thought you could notresist, when you knew the cruel dilemma I son;in'^ It was in hopes of extricating you from ktI came," replied Edith. >Lady Waldegrave pressed her hand. «Deai>:est Edith ! how very kind and affectionate ! Lq<*deed, I cannot express how much I feel obligedto you. I always was set upon having you, though:you were so coy, and difficult to win ; but, how-»ever, since we have secured you, that is enough.'^^* You mistake. Lady Waldegrave ; I do notcome on my own account."^* Oh no, not at all — ^you come upon mine'Destined. 331<* The purpose for which I have come/VsaidEdith^^ You could only come for one purpose I amsure' interrupted her ladyship, sportively ; " tie.purpose of obliging me beyond expectation $when that is done, we shall then talk of otherpurposes — of wise and good purposes, such as Ioften, Tery often, intend to follow, and shall, Iam sure, some day or other begin to practiseunder your auspices ; en attendant you will putyourself under mine for tjiis one day. Was itnot really too much, that of my principal JiffUF^rates Lady Sophia Marley should have sprainedher ancle, and Miss Townshend's provoking oldgrandmother have chosen to die ? so there aretwo frightful gaps in my carps de ballet; but youwill — I know you will, kindly fill one of themes*.^^ Excuse me," said Edith, gravely ; ^^ I camefor a very different purpose — I came at the r&*quest of Lady Elizabeth."Lady Waldegrave's countenance changed —<« What ! has mamma been teazing you alreadywith her absurdities ? I thought you had been at332 DssTiinr.die Conwayss. I sent a note there to y0a thismorning'Edith explained to ker that she hid-beensent for by Lady Elizabeth, and described thestate in which she found her; but Lady WiiiMergrave wool scarcely hear her to. an-end —^< Really this-is too tiresome !" eii^d ship imparttwenty. *^ Surrey you might know maire bettertian to pay any regard to such seines ; ,and ifshe will be ridiculous, it is surely better lliat^sheshould be so in her own dressing-rOcuBi, ihaa inthe £Use of the whole world* Nothing will induceme to permit her to make su(^ an, exhibition'It might have passed at the Court of LouisQuatorze, when antiquated Senses were quited, la mode; but in the present day, Such an outrageagainst good taste is not to be endured !" ,Edith gave a gentle assent as to the improprietyof the exhibition, then,: as. delicately asshe could, conveyed Lady Elizabeth's message ;andadded, ^^that surely something sight be doneto deprecate her displeasure: and tK)nciliiite bc^/**^ O, after the thing is over it will be .tijn^Destiny. SS8enough to do that' rested her ladyship carelessly.^^ But Lady Elizabeth declares she is determinedto go abroad immediately, unless yoiimake some concession to her' said Edith.*^ That is perhaps the very best thing she cando,'^ replied Lady Waldegrave, in the same toneof indifference.** But if she goes now, she leaves you in angerAh, Florinda, can you bear to live under aparent's displeasure ? Will you not rather sacrificethe amusement which is the cause of thisstrife — relinquish your theatrical representation,and recall your mother to your house ?"•* How ridiculous !" exclaimed Lady Landgrave,angrily. " I can scarcely suppose youserious in making such a proposal, and I reallyhave no leisure at present for persiflage^^ Indeed I am serious," said Edith, gravely*'< Pshaw, that must be all make-believe. Iknow you wt)uld make a good actress; so, pray,put off your bonnet, and t will introduce you tothe ball-room, where my corps de ballet are nowpractising. Now, do dispense with all the lack*984 DESTimr.a-daisical, missis, can't and won*ts, and in-*deeds, and so forth, and I shall take them all fefgranted, for my moments are very precious''Edith saw that all hopes of touching a heart Wfseared by selfishness and folly were vain. Sitherefore relinquished the attempt, and calmlybut firmly assured Lady Waldegrave, it wouldbe in vain to urge her to take a part in anytheatrical representation. Lady Waldegravecoloured with displeasure as she said, *^ Yet youcan obstinately refuse to gratify me in so triflinga matter, while you expect I should sacrifice mownamusement, and that of my friends, for theunreasonable whim of another ?*^^ It is cutis that makes the differences saidEdith, gently.Rather our opinion of what our duties are''replied Lady Waldegrave. " I consider it myduty to make my house agreeable to my friends,and to prevent mamma from making herselfridiculous.— I also think it my duty to learn mypart, Lord Herbert," said she, addressing theintended lover of the piece.DESTINY. 385** And it is mine to see that you get it byheart — Is it not ?" said he with a smile.Edith rose to take leave, and, as she quittedthe room, felt it a relief to return even to LadyElizabeth and her cottage.The unsuccessful result of her embassy calledforth a fresh burst of indignation from LadyElizabeth, which was still farther increased when,upon demanding her car, doves, and wings,Edith was obliged to confess she had whollyforgotten to enquire into their fate. Anothermessenger was immediately despatched, withorders not to return without them, as, with thetrue spirit of a little, vindictive mind, she seemedwretched at the idea of any one else profitingby her misfortunes. In the prospect of disappointingany such design, she became morereconciled to her own discomfiture, and at lengthseemed to experience positive pleasure in thethoughts of the consternation that she flatteredherself her sudden flight would occasion.** And now we must talk of our arrangements,"said she ; " I have ordered my peopleto have every thing ready to set oflF tomorrow.336 DBsninr,I am Sony, my dear, I must leave you behind,as I really cannot take you comfortably withme; besides, girls are rather an incumbrance^ifaroad ; but when I am settled myself I shallnot forget you. I shall endeavour to find tm benparti for you, and I think I shall succeed ; butshould I fail in that, you know you sire-alwaysthe resource of a convent where y<ML will havethe very best society, so much better than liyiiigwith bourgeois relations. In the mean tiflMi, yoamust remain with me till I take my departurefor I have a thousand matters to arrange''Destiny. 887CHAPTER XXXI.As Lady Elizabeth's night was day, and herday night, Edith had the undisturbed enjoyment€i the morning to herself. She therefore availedherself of the opportunity of collecting the drawingsand papers which she had previously left atthe Cottage, and was so employed when MrCombe was announced. Her writing-caseand porte-feuille were open before her, and partof their contents were scattered promiscuouslyon the table at which she was seated. She roseto receive him, but there was something of mutualconstraint and embarrassment in the meeting.After the usual common-place salutationsand enquiries had been exchanged, Mr Melcombesaid, as if to deprecate her coldness,—^'^ I. fear I have been guilty of an intnisdon atthis early hour ; but if I have, you must forgiveme."VOL. III.838 DESTINY.Why should yon fear, and why must I forgiveyou T* enquired Edith, with a smile.'^ Because, when there is much to hope, thereis always something to fear*There is little room for either, in this case**replied Edith, slightly. '<^ It is only indifference that would excusehope or fear," said he, looking earnestly at ber.^^ From any thing so indifferent in its natureas a morning visit, they surely may be exclaimed**answered Edith ; ^' though I believe we are allapt to expend our hopes and fears even in theissue of * to be — or not to be* at homes^^ The issue of even so trying an eventmay, however, be important'* He paused, thenadded, '^ But even if I should have trespassed,I think you will forgive me, when I tell you theoffence is not likely to be soon repeated; andwhen next we meet, I trust I shall be in differentcircumstances from those in' which youhave hitherto known me'*His voice betrayed his emotion, and Edithwas immediately struck with! the thought thathe alluded to his marriage with the object bf hisf . •BESTINT. 339early affection. A strange sensation oppressedher. It might be that the difference, of her awnfate struck her forcibly, when contrasted withthe more favoured destiny of another. Yet, washe indeed true to his early vows, or had shebeen unconsciously supplanting another ? Herheart shrunk within her at the dread surmise.Alternately her cheek glowed with shame atthe idea that she was the self-deluded sport ofan imaginary attachment, and turned pale at thethought that perfidy and falsehood could dwellin such a mind* All this was the work of amoment, but she remained silent for some minutes; then making an effort to regain her self-possession,she said, ^^ It is seldom, that after along separation, people meet under the samecircumstances: the change in yours, I trust,will be a happy one."^^ Yes, the diane that will restore an unknownexile to his family and country must be a happyone," said he, in a voice faltering with emotion.'< That will entitle him to do — what as afriendless unknown adventurer he dares not—to seekrthe regard of one long, and truly, andfondly loved."3^ destiny.There was no mistaking the tone and the lookwhich accompanied the words ; these declared thesecrets of a heart too noble for dissimulation.Yet Edith strove to repel the thought that shecould be the object of his love; ahd^ while deepblush mantled her cheek, she said, ^^ Is she thennot aware of the constancy of your attachment P'^^ i^Qlu) I hope she is," replied he ; ^^ and thateven in absence, and under doubts and suspi;^cions, she will believe that a time will comewhen all will be cleared up. Would she bewrong in granting me this much of hope ?"^^ I cannot tell," said Edith faintly ; and shewould have withdrawn the hand he had taken*Ah, do not say so !" cried he earnestly, ashestill retained it.^^ I cannot judge for another," said Edith, inincreasing confusion.No, not for another — for yourself !"And she so long and truly loved?' — saidEdith, in tones scarcely audible.^^ It is she whom. I now ask, only to believethat one day I may aspire to her regard-whenthe mystery which now excludes me from herDESTINY; 341'sympathy is disclosed. Is this asking too match ?'he said, in deep agitation.** No," said Edith, in a low faltering voice.^^ That is enough," he exclaimed, as a glowof pleasure lighted up his countenance. *^ Inthe midst of dear approving friends, then, yoUwill acknowledge me ?'On the table which stood before them somedrawings lay scattered; and as Edith, in confusion,turned her eyes from the deep earnest gazcfwhich was fixed upon her, they fell upon a viewof Inch Orran by sunset — the parting gift ofLucy. Beneath were written these words fromOssian —My soul is fnU of other times ;The joy of my youth returns."There," said she, in emotion, " is the dearhome where, ere long, I hope to be."^< Inch Orran!" exclaimed Melcombe, in atone that thrilled to her heart. She started,and turned upon him a look of anxious enquiry,but his eyes were fixed on the drawing. Whyshould the simple pronouncing of a name consjure up visions of the past? Why should a tonef•^the tone of a' stranger's voice— thus suddenlyrecall the past, the lost, the lord of other timet6 him unknown ? These feelings were depictedon Edith's countenance as she contemned to gazein breathless suspense*^ Stick with her paleness, and die intense interestexpressed in her countenance, he seemed suddenlyto recollect himself, and said, with assumedcalmness, ^* That scene, once viewed, can newestbe forgotten* It was on such an evening I lastbeheld it," added he, and his voice quivered ashespoke, while his eyes were again riveted onIe drawing. With an impulse, for which shecould not account, Edith took from her writuig'-box a miniature of Mrs Malcolm ; it had beenpainted soon after Ronald's departure, and hadbeen destined fOr him ; but subsequent eventshad defeated the intention, and the picture hadbeen given to her. She now, with a feeling forwhich she could not have found a name, with atrembling hand placed the picture before him,'while she said, — " There is the picture of the'only mother I ever knew. Was she, too, knownto you ?'D£sxiJsnc» 343M «For a momfflit lie gazed upon it.witli a look ofth9,tm€M»t passionate fondness; — tears filled hiseyeS) but still he continued to gaze. Then shadinghis brow with his hand,, as if to conceal Lipsweakness, the tears forced their way through thefingers, vainly spread to ludfi Aem. Strugglingto repress emotions too powerful to be restrainedhe leant his head on the table, while his wholeframe betrayed the agitation of his mind, andike those voiceless feelings with which hisheart seemed panting. . -As Edith beheld this overpowering emotion,a thousand wild, vague, bewildering finchesfloated through her brain — k>ok% and tones, andwords, that told of the lost, the dead, camethronging upon her in a strange confusion minglingwith the present — the living . Strongerand stronger, the visions crowded on her brain-^-she felt as if reason was forsaking her : withthe paleness of death on her brow, and eyes whichseemed as if bursting from their sockets, shestarted up, and exclaimed, " Who— oh — ^inmercy tell me, who " Her gaze was fixed onhim with an expression of fearful scrutiny ; but344 Stint.ker pale lip were unable to utter more. Herlines agitation was almost equal to Er own ;words seemed to be struggling f(Mr utteranceswUlcL yet by a mighty effort he restrained th^ni*At lengthy in a voice of deep, yet subdued emotionshe said ** Edith, I have not deceived you,can you trust me ?'<^ Oh, you know not what you are doing P'she exclaimed, as she withdrew her hands wildlyfrom his ; *^ you know not — the dark — the wildthe impossible things I fitncy,'' and she gaspedas she spoke, and drew shuddering away.^^ Edith, dearest Edith, believe, only believethat I am true; and that nothing is impossible!"<* What ! not that the seas should give up theirdead ?' cried she, frantically.« Not their dead !— But, Edith, do not— oh,do hot tempt me thus to break a vow — rashly,perhaps impiously taken, but which I hold sacred^in a little while — a few short months, the timewill come — dearest — most beloved — ^my first — ;my only love — say that you will yet trust me —and then— and then let us part !"DESTINY. 345'For some minutes Edith could not speak but;at length restored to composure by the angrui^bwhich clouded his brow, she fidndy articulated"I ^1 !— I do !"At Inch Orran, then, let us meet Therelet me find you — there let me claim you."Edith faintly breathed a single word — a namewhich had ever lain cherished in her heart."Yours, and only yours — dearest Edith, bywhatever name — to all else — dead — forgotten" —"Oh, not forgotten," cried Edith, burstinginto tears; "still — still loved and mourned !"Edith, I conjure you, tempt me not — makenot the error of my youth to bring down perjuryand dishonour upon me now — ^you have said ^youwould trust me — may I not trust you ?"In a moment Edith conquered her tremors —her tears were arrested in their course — she didnot speak ; but the look with which she gave himher hand needed not words to attest her resolution.Melcombe pressed it to his lips, and torehimself away.p2S4B JMsmtirr.CHAPTER XXXII.How like a dream, a vision of the night, fidthis brief and passing scene appear to Edith'—Again and again she asked herself, Gould ft bethat the lost, the lamented, had thus, as it-irene,started into life — ^that the loved companion ofher childish days was now the chosen of her maturedaffections ? And these affections, had theybeen lightly transferred — could affectioiffi, onceso blighted as hers had been, ever again revive,and own a second spring ? Was it indeed lovethat she now owned and felt? Oh, how differentiron that which had cast its dazzling anddelusive glare over her young imagination, andtinged so many of the radiant years of yontliwith colours fair, 'tis true, but fading as the tintsof the rainbow!Love had formerly been a sentiment-^a fiilse.nalTOW, exclusive sentknent-^liared only by tbobject which inspired it; now it was a noblegenerous, diffusive principle, which glowed inher heart, and sought to impart a portion of itsown blessedness around. She had loved Reginald,as she could have loved any thing that fancyhad painted to her as feir and £Eisoinating« Shehad invested him with every noble and generousattribute which the young and imaginative solavishly bestow on those they love. But theillusion had long since been dispelled, neveragain to gather over her heart. Again she loved,but by a light which could not deceive ; by thatdivine light which taught her not to love themere perishing idol of life's passing hour, butthe immortal being, with whose soul her ownmight joy to claim kindred throughout eternity.And the dear ones who still mourned his loss-soh,theirs would be rapture almost to agony !But she dared not allow her thoughts to dwellon such a theme.It was long ere her spirits were sufficientlytranquillized to admit of her returning to the frivolousbeing with whom she was still associated,M8 jmmwuhnl fieom whom she was aooi^ lo^pttti^ l»o«l^ .fw^rbably for ever. With her own heart ^y^l^iifl^ifrpgtruth love BoA gratitude to the Difiae Dii^Miser^weatBf finn wool she hare sought t^, impartto another of His creatures a portion pf ^^hpthnrrealj^mindedness which was the fouiiikaa ofjeer own happiness. But Lady KHraWtib^ii^jectad with horror, as something that mf<i^§^of Methodism and enthusiasm, th sl%ht^ illusionto any thing of a sacred nature, whw spokenout of church, and preferred the jgudulgeneeof her own disturbed £Emmy — as it painted to 4m^7,pleasures and triumphs that might have beenhers*— to all the peculiar treasures of wisdom andpeace which could be offered to her.The day was far advanced ere she madeher appearance, if possible, in increased ill humour.As she dawdled over her defender 4 iaJinirfhette^ suddenly the sound of horses' feet, atfull speed, was heard advancing; and as Edithraised her eyes, she caught a glimpse of one ofLady Waldegrave's grooms, as he galloped pastthe window, his horse in a foam. He stoppedat the.prijp^ipal .^tr^ce, a^d presently ikJplutd,naisneailf^ elttfatcmhtottiidiii^ Mock was iieardii^ <f Whc^^'^^^diat that ?' cried Lady EMaiibeaii■'-■ff I tiiiakit it a mesaei^iBr som Woodlands«dd Edith . ^ ^ :. iK^^ Ah ! bat be comes too late. I will iistoito 11*6 apol(^ ii0w^-4lie time is past" ^ AaA:^Ijiat moment the butler entered with ocmittoui-tian era hia face. • , « .•* An express fire Woodlands, my lady's' j^^< WeU, what then?" demanded his lady,peevishly.^< Sir Reginald has been badly hurt, my lady'<* Badly hurt!" repeated she, much in thesame tone. iYes, my lady — wounded'*'^ Wounded! — how very unpleasant-showwas it— where? Edith, do you hear that?' Edithdid hear, but, pale and pam-struck, she wasunable to articulate.^^ The ball has not been extracted, my lady's'^' A ball ! — Good Heaven, how shoddng^ t Iam quito overcome I — How dreadful I— Do willMonsieur LunoHe* — I shall certainly Jpual I'tx^3&d DBSTimr;^ Ladjr WaMeprave is ni great dbtreflS^ mylady**Edilb waited to hear no more, but^qiiittizi^the apartment as Monsieur Lamotte Altered,like hastened to find the servant, and lean fromhimself what had actually taken place ; but theman seemed too much stunned and surprised tobe able to give a clear account of what had happened.What he did relate, however, was sufficientlytragical and appalling. Sir Regimenhad fought that morning with Lord Herbert,and been brought home severely wounded. Thereport of his death had circulated among his creditors,and executions wereulready in the house.Lady Waldegrave was in fits, and left almostalone, the party having dispersed.Such was the amount of the intelligence wiUiwhich Edith returned to the breakfast-table.^^ This is too shocking — much too shocking' Vexclaimed Lady Elizabeth, in ose of her hystericaltremors << what if to be done ?"f^ Had we not best go to Woodlands immediately?" replied Edith, who, though tremblingwith horrw, remained calm and oc^oted.** Why yesrf-^erkaps so-^^uadyet what sanI do now ? Had I been in the house, as I oughtto hare been, it would have been very different ;but now I can do nothing, the time is pass ' — ^-Oh, no-T-do not say so," cried Edith ; " tubis the time to be ci use to Lady Waldegrave, nowwhen she is in. affliction. — Oh, surely you willgo to her !"Why,, considering how I have been treated"*i-Hsaid her ladyship, with asperity.Ah, do not think of that at such a time"interrupted Edith, with emotion.^' It is the most inconvenient time for me thatcould possibly be !" replied her ladyship sharply.^^ At the very moment when I was setting off-^my nerves so shook too with what has passed !—How in the world did it happen ?"I cannot tell," cried Edith ; " I only knowSir Reginald has fought, and been wounded, perhapsdying," added she, bursting into tears.^' Shocking and foolish ! 'tis too much — and anexecution in the house ! that surely might havebeen prevented ?"'^ Let us still try wbsit may be done-r^hy hetus hasten to Woodlands !"\^«^Hat6 pftdenee, child-show is it j^oftibfFstir me, stated as I am — And trliat am I ta dafterI am diere ?' v >^^ Then suffer me to go— ^Ofw me to cariki^the carriage* ^'^^ Why, that is certainly very inconvenient i(Kif^me — but, however, I suppose I must |^;ive itp^thoughts of going to-day — at least I shall ndt^decide upon any thing till your return. Sd,pray^^make haste — Tell Florinda how excessively-JFhare been shocked. And, by-the-by, I shall send'my physician to poor Sir Reginald — Monsieur 'Lamotte will accompany you' - jBut Edith had learnt from the servant thatthere was abundance medical assistance alreadyprovided; she therefore declined the attendanceof Monsieur Lamotte, and the carriage having'been quickly got ready, she threw herself into it'every consideration absorbed in generous sympathyfor those she was so earnest to befriend. ' 'How changed was the scene that awaited feet* '-at Woodlands, frt>m that which she had witnessednot many hours before ! Then all had beeiisunshine, and gaiety, and melody; now theday 1^ chill aa dviU; ^e yel^t lawDty^andbeauteous, flower beds were already de£Q^p€4 ;«.d .ridden down ; <^ we l«du« i, <M.of ^tbe house ; the broad £might of steps was strewedwith every description of furniture and valueable.; the beautiful vases, filled with the choicestexotics had been overturned or broken in piecesand their fragments lajK mingled with the che?.wished plants that had graced them ; grim, scowling,hardened-looking men, were pushing and.swearing at one another, as they each laid daimto some article of value, and their loud execratetons and tumultuous din were still worse thanthe,, silent mementos of ruin which lay scatteredaround. The hall, lately filled with the fairestworks of Italy, now presented a similar scene ofdevastation. The publie rooms were fast ; Lady Waldegrave's suite had alreadybe despoiled of its treasures. Shuddering Bt,this painful spectacle, Edith, after some delaygot one of the housemaids to conduct her toLady Waldegrave. As she passed along, shemet sane of the surgeons coming from Sir Beginsbald's apartment, and she was relieved to bear,354 i^£8ninr«horn, him that tke wound was not considereddangerous; that the ball, which had entered diefleshy part of the shoulder, had been safely eac*enacted. The only danger now to be dreadedwas from the agitation of mind occasioned bythe distressing scenes that were passing, andwhich it was impossible wholly to conceal fromhis knowledge. With a heart lightened of halfits cares for the wretched finite of one who hadbeen so dear to her, Edith followed her guide,shuddering with horner at the scenes of ferociouspillage she every where encountered. At lengthyin a chamber in the attics, she found the refugeof the hapless mistress of all this splendid ruin !Lady Waldegrave was extended on the bed,perfectly calm, as if from exhaustion, but withmisery and despair impressed on every feature.On Edith's entrance she half opened her eyes,but immediately dosed them, as if determinedneither to notice nor be noticed Edith, however,approached the bed, and taking the handwhich lay almost powerless by her, pressed it inhers ; still Lady Waldegrave remained immovableD£6Tiinr. 35SEdith was silent for some minutes. A6Iengtkshe said, <' I hare come on Lady Elizabeth'saccount as well as my own ; she charged me t£express to you her sorrow on this occasioned'Lady Waldegrave made no reply. ^* She willcome to you, I am sure, if you wish it,f' re-isome Edith; but she received no answer. '^ Inthe meantime, if I can be of any service tdyou' *'^ Oh, those horrid sounds !'' exclaimed LadyWaldegrave, shrieking, and burying her face inher pillow, as a volley of abuse and imprecationsascended from beneath her window. ^^ Will noone save me from this?' and wild hystericalsobs shook her frame.^^ I fear it is impossible," said Edith, sooth*^gfy 5 ** distressing as it is — do try to bear it !"^* Is diere nobody to assist me ? nobody todrive away these people — these robbers — theyhave seized even my jewels !" i^e exclaimedcasting her eyes up to Heaven, as if in appeal.This is indeed a trial, painful for you toendure," said Edidi, in the same gentle tone ;^< but distressing as it is, there is still comfort inSM Destiny.ike midst of it; what a consolation to knoW il»tSir Reginald's wound is not dangerous !" UuSf^Waldemar waved her head with a gesture iiBimpatience. ^ Ah, Florinda, think what it mighthave been to himself; what he might have inflictedon another, and thank God it is no'woMe?''^< He could hare done nothing worse than hehas done," exclaimed she, passionately;''^ hehas been the ruin of my happiness, of mj fot^tone, of my reputation — this very name is lilyabhorrence !" . '^^Edith's blood ran cold— '< Oh, Florinda, - id'mercy do not talk thus ! remember, he is yourhusband — the father of your child !"*^ And has been the ruin of myself and mychild, by his madness — but do not mention h^/^Edith feared there was guilt, no less than folly*'^in the case, or at least imprudence bordering -upon guilt ; and she said in a filtering voice,^'^^'^ I am ignorant of the cause of this unhappyreneoritre,'* "^Lady Waldegrave's colour rose — ^^* Then *iiiwell you should remain so— But no, that cannot*be ; ywi will hear a thousand lies, and you wiU-Destiny. 9^;piedbtaps beUeye them all, as some other of. mj^.ficic^ds have done, and like them you will deceitfie ia the time of need." v^ . ** NV said Edith, " happen what may, I willnot desei^ you in your present situation,"Again Lady Waldegrave's colour deepenedwhile, with a rising at her throat, she said,^VWhat! not even if you should be told thatmy husband fought to avenge his honour ?'*Edith became pale as death, and for some,minutes she was unable to articulate. At length,in a low voice of deep emotion, she said, ^^ Noteven then could I forsake you in the hour ojfneed."Fou a moment Lady Waldegrave appearedslightly touched, then in increasing confusionshe went on : ^' The world had chosen to given^ Lord Herbert as a lover. I need not tell youwho know me, and had opportunities of judging ,for yourself, that it was a mere idle or maliciousrumour, such as are circulated in thousandsevery day, and which nobody pays any regardtq,; but having drank too much wine, or lost toomoth money; or in short, I cannot tel how— r358 DESTINY.but in a moment of delirium Sir Reginald thoughtproper to become jealous and to insult LordHerbert ; the consequence was, it was necessarythey should go out this morning ;judge thenwhether I have not cause of resentment ?'^' I cannot judge," said Edith, faintly ; '^ Nodonly can judge — but if you are innocentCan you doubt it ?' interrupted Lady Wal-degrade,indignantly.^' At least there must have been imprudenceto justify the suspicion of guilt," said Editfa.^^ I am no hypocrite — I never studied appearances"'' Then, since conscious of your innocence,you can more easily forgive Sir Reginald, if theimprudence has been his," said Edith*You know not what I have to forgive!"cried Lady Waldegntve, passionately ; <^ whenbrought home, even in presence of my servants,he ordered me from his sight. Can I forgivesuch an insult as that ?" . ;Forgive all, as you hope to be foji^ycsn,"said Edit^^ Do not talk to me any more of this horridDESTINY. 359affair, for Heavens sake ; but tell me what I shalldo ; how I shall get away from these dreadfulscenes."Sir Reginald cannot be removed," saidEdith; " surely then you will not leave thehouse while he is in it ?'To what purpose should I remain ?" criedLady Waldegrave, impatiently.*" To be near him," replied Edith.What ! after having suffered so great anindignity ?"** Yes, assuredly ; he must have suffered, heis still suffering, much on your account ; his statemust still be precarious"Pshaw — nonsense — the wound is a merenothing — Dr Smith told me so himself."^' But the agitation of his mind may render itdangerous ; should it prove so, (as who can tell ?)and if, in the prospect of danger, he should wishto see you once more, to exchange forgiveness —Ah, Florinda, could you ever forgive yourself, ifyou had forsaken your husband's dying bed ?"But how is it possible for me to remain inthis wretched state ?" she exclaimed, giving wayto m Tioknt bunt of lielfiflli scmrow m she emUher eyes around the room*«< Tills apartment is quite comfortable," saidEdith; '< and if you will allow me, I will shareit with you while you remain : But, oh ! do notthink of quitting the house while your husband is.in it If, as you say, your reputation is at stake,surely even on that account you are better herethan you could be ebenriiere."Tliatoonsideration seemed to handsome welglit,and at length Edith prevailed. She, therelbrc^sent back the carriage to Lady Elizabeth wMi a^note to prepare her for what she had to encountersand a request that she would lose no time-M -coming to her daughter ; then, with all ike ardourand sweetness of Christian charity, she devotedherself to the task she had undertaken, of stip- -porting the wretched being thus thrown upcm her ^compassion.Dj^anHT,. lastCHAPTER Xxxii\ -■Although Lady Waldegrave had expresseda wish that her mother should come to her, yetno sooner did she hear of her arrival, than it wasapparent it had only been for the sake of appear**areas she had desired her presence. ^^ YerIf^ay^'s sake, do not suffer mamma to talk tome,'\ <3-ied she to Edith; " it will kill me ifshf^ skies — I cannot be tortured with questionsIj^ialLgo distracted if she talk of what haspast."But the duel, its causes and consequenceshad made slight impression on Lady Elizabeth'smind, in comparison of the execution and itseffects ; these, together with her own injuriesand distresses, affected her so much, that sometimeelapsed before she was 'sufficiently com-voL. in. Q309 Distant.posed to be conducted to her daughter. Forsome time, sobs and broken exclamations ireneall the conversation.<' My poor, dear Florinda !" exclaimed she,in hysterical emotion — ^^ Good Heaveiifi ! howshocking ! But you know I told you, you certainlywould be punished for your undutiful behaviour.towards me. Not that I blamed you, my sweetestAnd all those charming pictures and mainbless — shocking ! — and that mosaio*table, whichDid covet — it qmte kills me to think* of . it. Iforesaw this marriage would be yourroiny mydarling; but we won't talk of it How sadlyyou must have been shook by all this I Dr Smitfliassures me, a wound in the shoulder is nothing;but you look very ill yourself, my dear quiteofttnz^e^— and I have had a wretched night. Onlyconceive how very inconvenient — such a icoaire^temps I — every thing was packed up, and ia^£K;t^:I was just setting off for the continent when Ireceived the provoking intelligence-*^but I haveput off my departure for a few days, that I maysee you tolerably comfortable before I go. I amhappy you have got dear, good Edith i she wdll^DESTINY. dS^I am sure, do every thing for you. But it isdreadful remaining here-surely my dear, yoawill leave this dreadful place P''>^^I know not whereto go'' said Lady Waldendespairingly./ ^ How foolish my dear, to talk so ! Canst yougoto town?*^ And find things worse, if possible, than evenheres' replied Lady WaMegrave in the same-tone;<< Shocking ! Well, go any where ; to anhotefl-^^x)— ^to— in short, you can be at no loss;butt, d propose what was the cause of that horridaffair ? how was it?' Lord Herbert is the best*natured maa in the world''Some foolish quarrel about anything, ornothing," cried Lady Waldegrave. *^ But pray,Hiamma» don't remain in this seene «f honron^;it HiakeS'Sne wretched tosee yoU"*-*it does indeed."- -^ tis indeed very-sad and Monsieur Lamottewas quite opposed to my coming; but I saidI'iwas determined, whatever it might cost, tomake «.pointtof (seing yoa.> I knew it would do9$4t DBBnirr.yoa good, aod that I should feel more comfortable; for, you know, there are suck absurd thingssaid upon these occasions. My maid told methis morning, the talk in the neighboorlicMKl was,that you had actually gone off with Lord Herbert-*-4diocking and foolish ! that Sir R^^ald hadpursued you, and fought ; and, in short, I can'ttell you what ridiculous things are sud ; but itis quite a comfort to me to see you so wellalthough you do look pale. But surely thoseodiottf people will be obliged to replace everything? And, d propos, they can have no rightwhatever to my car and doves, and I assure youthose wings cost me a great deal of money. Howkind in Lady Hey wood to take poor Dudley outof the way !"In this manner she continued to babble on, tillshe took her departure, with a promise of reiningthe following day. But in the interim, shehad caught cold by her visit to Woodlands, shesaid, which kept her at home ; and Lady Landgravewas seized with a nervous feverish attack,which confined her to bed. Slighted sid neglectedby the few attendants who remained itJ)£STINY. 86i5^WBS Edith's part to nurse and tend her, whichshe did day and night with the most unremittingware and tenderness.Florinda received many pretty little pink andi)hie bits from dear friends in town, who weredying to hear of her, and some even left cards ofenquiry in the course of their morning's airing ;But not one came to offer personal aid or sympathy.Lady Elizabeth seemed to think she hadamply discharged her maternal duties by a singlevisit; for the next account of her was, that sheshad set off for Paris, where she said she wouldexpect to hear from dear Florinda before proceedingto Rome, where it was absolutely necessaryshe should winter.Admiral and Lady Arabella Conway had beenkindly attentive, and done all in their power topromote the comfort of the wretched pair, titusthrown for the present on the resources of theirfriends. They were not ignorant of the rumoursthat were afloat concerning the cause of theduel; and without pretending to form a judgmenton way or other, they had from the first• agreed with Edith on the propriety of Lady386 Stint.Waldegrave remaining where she was* Sketeemed now on the brink of a precipice, and auncle false step might plunge her in irretrievableruin. She had also abated much of theUgly tone which she had at first assumed and itwas evident she was willing to submit to at leathe appearance of a reconciliation.During this period. Sir Reginald had beenmaking rapid progress towards recovery, aa waslearned from his medical attendants, for n^dierby word or deed had he taken the slightest noticeof Lady Waldegrave. The timc^ was now come,however, when some explanation must takeplaee.He had been able for the first time to be movedinto the study adjoining his dressing-room, andhaying stood that trial, he bad declared his determinationof being remoy ed to town the followingday. On receiving this information, Florindaappeared overwhelmed with surprise and mortification.It was evident from this that it*was SirReginald's intention to abandon her-^-^^o leaveher destitute, friendless — almost penniless —with a stain upon her reputation which tibi desertionwould render for eyer indelible. '• la 'theDestiny. 367tumult of her feelings she wrote to him, but herletter was returned in a blank cover, unopened.When the first burst of passionate indignation atthis insult had subsided, she besought Edith tosee him, and learn from himself what his intentionswere — ^to represent to him the sacrifice shehad made in refusing to quit the house while heremained in it ; and, finally, that it was the opinionof her family and friends, that no separationought to take place at present. No office couldbe more revolting to Edith's feelings than theone she was thus called on to undertake-andby whom? By her who had so cruelly supplantedher in those affections which had oncebeen her all. Was it indeed possible she wascalled upon to go a supplicant for favour to hernow deserted rival ? But Edith's pure and generousheart felt no base triumph at the thought —no unhallowed gleam of pleasure shone in her sadbut pitying eyes, as she beheld the wretchednessof one who had wrought her so much woe !Florinda's tears and entreaties prevailed overEdith's better judgment and finer feelings, and^e sent to request an interview witl^ Sir B^-^68 DEsnvT.DaLdL Only the parity and die rectitude of unintentionalcould have justified to herself the stepshe was now taking in thus interfering betweenthose bound by so near and holy a tie— a tiwhich, when once burst asunder, can never; behallowed and blest again I : : v.It was with such painful and embarrasaagffeelings that I^ith entered the apartment whsftSir Reginald lay reclining on a so, pale asdemaciated, with the languor of sickness and artrow diffused over his form and features. ^ He roseto receive her, his wounded arm suspended in msling ; and as he extended his hand to her, sheshuddered as she thought how recently that handhad been uplifted to take away the life of amother ! Both were deeply affected, and for someminutes neither spoke. At length, making aneffort, he said, ^' This is a kind visit, Edith, if Icannot say more " His voice Tered, andhe stopped.^' Do not say any thing on that subjects"replied Edith gently; ^' it is enough that youbelieve it is kindly meant."Sir Reginald pointed to an open letter, whichDESTINY. 367tumult of her feelings lie wrote to Urn, but herletter was returned ia a blank cover, unopened.When the first burst of passionate indignation atthis insult had subsided, dbe besought Edith tosee him, and learn from himself what his intentionswere — ^to represent to him the sacrifice shehad made in refusing to quit the house while heremained in it; said, finally, that it was the opinionof her finely and friends, that no separationought to take place at present. No office couldbe more revolting to Edith's feelings than theone she was thus called on to undertake — andby whom? By her who had so cruelly supplantedher in those affections which had oncebeen her all. Was it indeed possible she wascalled upon to go a supplicant for your to hernow deserted rival ? But Edith's pure and generousheart felt no base triumph at the thought —no unhallowed gleam of pleasure shone in her sadbut pitying eyes, as she beheld the wretchednessof one who had wrought her so much woe !Florinda's tears and entreaties prevailed overEdith's better judgment and finer feelings, and^e sent to request an interview witl^ Sir R^i-^68 DEsnvT.oaldL Only the parity and lite rectitude of htrintentions could have justified to herself the shepshe was now taking in thus interfering betweenthose bound by so near and holy a tie — a tiwhich, when once burst asunder, can nerert behallowed and blest again ! : rev?It was with such painful and embarrassingfeelings that Edith entered the apartment whistSir Reginald lay reclining on a sob, pale asdemaciated, with the languor of sickness. and artrow diffused over his form and features. theretoreceive her, his wounded arm suspended in •sling ; and as he extended his hand to her, ahshuddered as she thought how recently that handhad been uplifted to take away the life of aii*rother ! Both were deeply affected, and for someminutes neither spoke. At length, making afteffort, he said, ^^ Tbm is a kind visit, Edith, if Icannot say more ^" His voice faltered, andhe stopped. ,,(.-,Do not say any thing on that subject''replied Edith gently; "it is enough that youbelieve it is kindly meant."Sir Reginald pointed to an open letter, whichlay on the table before him; and, while woundedpride seemed to struggle with better feeling, hesaid, ^^ Do you know from whence this came ?is it from Admiral Conway ?"]edith took the paper, on which was « simply"written, " A loan from an old friend*' It ccm^stained bills to the amount of five hundred pounds ;and, even through the attempted disguise of thehand, she recognised, with an emotion of surpriseand pleasure, the writing of Mr Melcombe.^* I am certain it is not from* Admiral Conway's'she said; ^^ but there is a subject of greaterinterest I would speak to you of"^^ I am aware of all you have done,'^ said SirReginald, ^^ and I know you can mean nothingthat is not good; but," added he, in increasingagitation, ^^ the best intentions may be mistakenthey who mean well mal be misled."Edith hesitated to proceed, as she perceivedhim already prepared to deprecate the introductionof the subject on which she had come, andshe remained silent and irresolute.In a few minutes Sir Reginald, with more iirm^sed Mutiny.nid, ^< There is one.tidgeet, ^ditii^ andonly one, which I would not laye you iwimf toma^Mm any other say what you wHL^<< I will not affect io misunderstand you. SirBcginald,'' said Edith ; ^ there is a subject whichyoa may well deem too delicate to be intendedi^MML Ifeelitisso, and£un,Feryiuii9 I.wwvldbe qxired"^ I believe yo V' replied Sir Reginald bitterly; << the task is not one fitted Ant yoii«''<^ But I hare undertaken %** said Edith,£uttdy.^^ But ^you know not — ^you couldn't know—idbat it was you had undertaken ;. it ;lias beenimposed upon you by another'<' Be it so' said Edith, soothing. «f Canyou blame that wife who would try every methodto be reconciled to lier husband ?'The cloud still deepened on ^ Reginald'sbrow as he said — ^^ Yes, I blame the wife who,conscious of her own unworthiness, could stainthe purity of another, by employing her to pleadher cause."Then see and hear her plead her own cause,"said Edkh, earnestly, and with a deepeningcolour.Neither, and never P' answered Sir. Reginald,sternly.^* Oh, in mercy say not so-that's a fearsword ; as you hope to be forgiven yourself, ior-cgive her,-'>^rring and imprudent she admits^sfaehas been, but in the face of Heaven, she attestsher innocence." She paused, but Sir Reginaldmade no reply ; she trusted that he was relenting,and went on : *> Surely then you will notvisit her errors thus harshly ; you will not cae&tfrom you the being you vowed to love and protect.She is in sickness — ^in sorrow — ^your ownFlorinda ! the mother of your boy ! Ah, Reginald,surely you will not thus abandon her ?"*** Tis in vain !" answered Sir Reginald, witha convulsive gasp, and shining his face with hishand."Think how you once loved her !" said Edith,imploringly*You know how I did P* he replied, in a toneso deep and stem as thrilled to Edith's heart.87S i>«snNT.Ten rose to her eyes — she felt she could sayno more.Sir Ronald made another effort to regain hisfirmness, but his voice still Tered, when hegait — << This is perhaps the only request X cxmidhave refused you, but I do refuse it ; 'my happinesshas been sacrificed, my confidence has beenfor ever destroyed, and 'tis in vain to strive torenew it" He paused, then resigned in a firmand decided tone : ^^ When I . go to town,arrangements shall be immediately made for afinal separation. All that can be done for hercomfort, shall be done on my part Now, Grotbless you, Edith — will you not say as much forme?'^^ Ah, Reginald," said Edith, as the tears droptupon the hand which held hers, ^^ the blessingswhich I would ask for you of God, are thosewhich you would reject ; but I do ask of BBm,"added she with fervour, " to bless you with theknowledge of Himself." They pressed eachother's hands in silences and parted — for ever !There was more of indignation than sorrowin Lady Waldegrave's emotion, when made ac-destiny.373quaint with her husband's determination. Thesame day (having received a remittance fromSir Reginald) she set off for Paris to join Lady-elizabeth; and Edith returned to her dear friendsat Oakley House, to await the arrival of the Rib-less.d74 Distant.CHAPTER XXXIV.The autumn was now £eu: advanced ; and evenamid the pomp of groves, and garniture of fields,Eklith sighed as she thought of that gloriouseffulgence which, at this season more especially,would be lighting up her own mountain land !Of those setting suns — not, as in softer climes,sinking gently and imperceptibly to rest, butretiring in the full majesty of a splendid retinueof gorgeous clouds, and eVen with their last raysimparting new beauty to the purple mountain,the green wave, and the grey rock. And oh !what thick-coming fancies — what visions of evenearthly joy, were now associated in her mindwith the thoughts of her Highland home !The Admiral and Lady Arabella were awareof the attachment which had informed betweenher and Melcombe ; but they felt satisfied, whenDestiny. 375they also learnt that it was when she should bein the midst of her nearest and dearest friendshe was to return to claim her, and from theirhands that he was to receive her. After repeateddelays, the Ribleys at length arrived ; and Edith,to the mutual regret of herself and her kindfriends, bade them adieu, and returned oncemore to the Grove and the MalL The delayshad been occasioned by Mrs Ribley's illness ;she had had several bilious attacks, and was stillevidently Deut from being convalescent. She,nevertheless, relaxed nothing of her minute observances,but pursued her course of small, dull,frivolous occupations with unabated rigour.Been very near losing Kitty my dear !"said Mr Ribley, to Edith, with a shake of thehead. ^^ Sad thing, if I had lost Kitty my dear** You are very good, Mr Ribley,^-' said hislady, gravely; ^^ and it did occur to me, that,shoidd you have been deprived of me, probablyyour best plan would have been, at a properperiod, to have paid your addresses to our triedand excellent friend, Mrs Rose Poplin."379 DSfiTINY.^ Sure, my dear, if I didn't flikik the rei'same thing ! Mce little woman, is Mrs Rose^-^pretty fortune of her own ; iemd, sure, my deer;if it hadn't been for her, the water southey:would have been quite spoiled !"Mrs Macauley had made many attempts to bepermitted to return to her cottage, but in vain ; allher efforts to extricate herself from Johnnie and 'hit small people were fruitless. They had, one •and all of them, discovered her value ; and, whileshe remained within their reach, it was evidentshe would never be suffered to rest. Edith hadgone to visit her as often as it was in her powerand had found her the inmate of a small, crowned,noisy dwelling, beset with spoiled, sickly children,hanging round her, clinging to her, leaningand sitting upon her in all directions. The ef-^feet of all this was beginning to be visible up<m^her — ^her neat straight back seemed bending,' asif more from the weight of children than ixfyears; — ^her cheeks were drawn down as if bythe constant stroaking of fond hands ; — her brightsunny eyes looked red and heavy, as if fromwant of sleep— and she said, she thought :4di!eDKSTnrr. 37^WIS getting a little deaf; but, maybe, it turnsonly the din of the bairns, poor doings ! AlbOf^gedier, die had got what Mrs Johnnie, in herdialect, called ^^ a puled look," Edith, grievedto behold the ravages committed upon her dearold friend, by the concentrated affection offawhole family, prevailed so far as to have harbrought to the cottage for a week or two previousto the time when the Ribleys were toremove to town.^ Oh, my dear !" said she, to Edith, as thefirst day of her return she sat in the little garden,basking in the mild rays of an autumnal sun,-^<( this is a cordial to my heart 1 and how thanksfill I ought to be — though I am not just so stoutas I was — ^that I'm permitted to sit at my easehere, with all my senses about me ! and, for asold as I am, to be able to watch the sun goingdown, and to smell the flowers, and to hear thebirds sing. 'Deed, that sweet Robin red-breastputs me in mind of what I once read in an oldbook about it. And you know — though I'm nogreat reader — I never forget what I do read,which is a great mercy. ^ As oft,' says he, ^ as^8 DESTINY.I hear tke Robin red-breast chair it.as^c^eer-ftdly in September, the beginning of winter as inMarch the approach of the summer, why shouldnot we giro as cheerful entertainment to likehoary frosty hairs of our age's winter, as ta theprimroses of our youth's spring? . I. am sent tothe ant to leave industry ; to the done, to leaveinnocency ; to the serpent, to leave msdooce ;and why not to this bird, to learned patience fundcheerfulness ? But, oh! my dear, where amI to go to learn something more particular ofthat fine creature that has gone away and leftus?-^Not a bit, if I'm any wiser than I wasabout him! — But you know who I mean, naydarling, or your cheeks would not turn so red."^^ Dear Macky I you will learn all in tithewill meet us at Inch Orran, when '^Edith could not proceed — emotion choked herutterance^^Hshe could only press her old friend'shands in silence, as she laid her head on hershoulder to hide the tears which were swimmingin her eyes.Mrs Macauley understood what was impliedin this agitation, and she exclaimed, in rapture.DESTINY. 879** 'Deed then, and it gives me new heart tohear it — and ril bide my time patiently ! Didnot I always tell you he would turn out weil?Not a bit I would wonder, if he was to turned;a Malcolm after all !"In blissful anticipations of the great, thoughvague and shapeless things that were awaitingGlenroy's daughter) Mrs Macauley soon regainedher usual health and animation. When tiketime arrived for die Ribleys' removal to town,she again resumed her place in Johnnie's familybut the period of her sojourn was to be short, asthe winter was now advancing, and early inspring Captain Malcolm was to come in person toconvey them once more to Inph.Orran. Meanwhile,they both devoted themselves to the dutiesthat had devolved upon them. There was at leastmore of variety and animation in Mrs Macaulay'slife, than in Edith's ; for her sole employmentwas to bear Mrs Ribley company in herown apartment, to which she was chiefly confined.Certainly, if unfitness of minds in thosewho are condemned to associate closely together,be a species of torture, (as doubtless it is,)Sd DESTiMlr.Edith was sorely tried, but she bore it not onlypatiently, but cheerfully ; in so much, that evenIfs Ribley's cold nature seemed thawing* intosomething that could not be called affection, butwas decided approbation.Her health, however, now began to improve,and at length she was so much recovered, thatEdith was permitted to spend a week or twooccasionally with Lady Arabella, who seemedto have no fears of the contamination of the cit]^communicating itself to Grosvenor Square*At this time Edith received a letter from LadyElizabeth from Rome, written in her usual Style.The purport of it was, in the first place, to let hetknow that she had quarrelled with her daughter,who had gone to reside at Naples, and that sheherself, feeling the want of a protector, was aboutto bestow her hand upon the Principe Pompolino;avery charming, talented person, though possessedof no fortune, and not particularly handsome.Sometime or another she hoped to make himknown to dear Edith, who she was sure wovJdadmire him excessively.Edith recollected having heard her mentionDestiny 881this same Principe more than once as a frightful,tiresome, little wretch, full of pretensionwho was said to have married his first wife fatherfortune, and then starved and beat her todeath. Shocking and foolish ! So much for thepleasing prospect that had allured to him asecond, Edith felt really distressed at the foU^rof the infatuated old woman —-quid thought whatemblems she and her daughter presented of theweak and beggarly elements of mere worldlyadvantage$. As for Sir Reginald, he was livingin Paris on the debris pf his fortune, in a careerof heartless, joyless amusement — still the slave ofthe world, even while he hated the chain whichbound him to it.From contemplations such as these, it was arelief, even to turn to Mr.Ribley's transportsof astonishment, disappointment, delight, andwhat not, as he announced one day the newshe had just received. " Why, now, what dayou think ? Only guess — sure you never would !Refused Miss Mogg ! And now, what do yotfthink? going to be married — going to be maiHkred to a lady of quality 1 Refused Miss Mogg,and going to be married to a duke's daughter ! ! !ass Destiny.Why) iiow» only think of my being nnde-inrlawto a duke's daughter I But, then, refused threehundred thousand pounds ! Have it all in a letterfrom himself !" And he presented Edith-withthe letter he had received from Mr Penshurst,containing the intelligence of his being theaccepted lover of the Lady Mary Mordent ; andconcluding with a hope, that his uncle wouldenable him to. make such settlements as thelady's rank rendered requisite. ^^ Sure, now,Kitty, my dear, if he had but taken Miss Mogg^what a fortune there would have been! Fouihundred and fifty thousand pounds ! how comfortablefor old Mogg and me to have put ourmoney together — Wouldn't it, Kitty, my dear ?'^' It would, indeed, Mr Ribley ; but we mustexpect to meet with disappointments occasionally."^^ All his own felt; but to think of hisgetting a duke's daughter — must settle handsomelyupon her. Suppose we shall go to court,Kitty, my dear, eh ? and be presented to theirMajesties upon the occasion, eh, Kitty, mydear ? Wonder what they will say to us ?"Edith was rejoiced to hear that Mr PenshurstDestiny. 383had got the better of his disappointment; and ,having heard Lady Arabella mention the lady'sfamily in favourable terms, she trusted the marriagewould prove a happy one. Mr Ribley soonbecame reconciled to the loss of Miss Mogg'sfortune, in the splendour of this alliance; althoughhis sensibilities were again awakened tothe reality of the loss, when he soon after readin die papers, the marriage of the Most Noblethe Marquis of Carlingfbrd to Charlotte Augusta^<>g?9 only child of Mark Mogg, Esquire, ofMyrtle Grove. " Sure, now, to think howCharles could refuse Miss Mogg, and she a Marchioness! Three hundred thousand pound, anda Marchioness ! And, Kitty, my dear, to thinkof old Mogg being a dowager Marchioness ! ! !"884 ' DESTfKT.CHAPTER XXXV.It was now the season when ^^ the flowersappear on the earth, the time of the singing ofbirds is come, and the voice of the turtle is heardin the land" — the season when Edith was taexchange the crowded streets, and stifling atmosphereof London, for the silent glens and free,mountain air of her dear Highland home. CaptainMalcolm came, and joyful was the meetingbetween him and his beloved protegee. Edith hadmuch pleasure in introducing her dear and veneratedguardian to her friends, the Con A says —and the liking which took place was reciprocal.They promised to pay a visit at Inch Orran inthe course of the summer, " When 1 hope todance a Highland reel at a Highland wedding**whispered the Admiral, as he gave Edith a .366eternal embrace at parting. Mrs Ribley took itmore formal adieu, but ber \vt>rd8, though few,were to the purpose.** In consideration," said she, " of the proprietywith which you have conducted yourselfwhile a member of this family, I think it properto inform you, that in the event of my demise,I have, with Mr Ribley's concurrence, bequeathedto you one half of my fortune, at presentvested in the three per cent consols."Good by — good by," said Mr Ribley;^^ better have staid with us — won't find Birchesture-soup in the Highlands — perhaps find turtlesof another sort — ^no green fat upon themthough— eh, Natty, my dear ?"*' 'Deed, I'm wae to leave this great world ofbrick and dust, after all," said Mrs Macauley, as .she wiped her eyes, and turned her back on London,^' when I think on the bits of chiltern thatwere so fond of me, and them all greeting', poorthings, at my going away. Oh, surely that's oneof the mercies of Providence, that wherever wego we'll find something to love, and somebodylove us. Do not you think so, my dear ? — ButVOL. III. R8d6 IMISTINY*I begyoor pardon, I had forgot that X was notta speak of that till the time oomes.^Captain Malcolm smiled as, he perceived theblush which the omplidty of her old Mend calledup on Edith's cheek, and doubted diet but thecause would soon be revealed to JVfrs Malcolm.It was a joyous day when the little party arrivedat Inch Orran* The bright sun — the everyatmosphere — ^tjbe blue waters — the tender greenof the foliage just bursting ham the bud; but .fourbeyond all the loveliness of nature, were the gladaces, the fond tones, and the warm embrace oflong-severed friends. Much was there to sayand to tell on both sides; but, oh, howmuehmore . had Edith to conceal ! Still, as she lookedon the air and happy band that surrounded her,one place seemed empty ; still, amid all the lovinglo<^s that met hers, one look was wanting ; amidall the sweet gay tones that rung in her ear,the sweetest of all was silent. When the firstjoyful excitement had subsided, and affsctioi^faadreturned to the natural flow of calm, social intercourse, it was then Mrs Malcolm r^oiarked with«uj^rise the change that had taken dace inDESTINY, S&7Edith's manner. Instead of the cavan, sereneair which had formerly characterised her, shehad BOW an anxious and abstracted look-^-orwhen roused from her reveries, it seemed onlyto agitation or embarrassmentAt times, she appeared as if oppressed with aweight more than she could bear; at others, aglow of pleasure would suddenly kindle on hercheck and sparkle in her eyes. Again, herhalf-opened lips seemed about to breathe thetide she longed to disclose ; but as if recalledto sudden reflection, she would quickly flyfrom the social circle, and bury herself in solitude.Mrs Malcolm knew her too well, fd^ amoment to suspect Edith could have any attachmentshe would blush to avow, and she waitedpatiently for some time in hopes she would disclosethe mystery which seemed thus to be hauntingher But days passed on, and the symptomsof Edith's mental disquiet only became more striking.She seemed all eye and ear: the sightof a distant boat — the sound of a horse's feet —the entrance of a passing visitors startled andagitated her, as though they had been strangeIV888 ^ DRSTfKT.and ominous events. At length her kind ia»dgentle friend spoke as a tender mother wouldhave done to the daughter she loved, and besoughther to disclose the cause which was tbttsalienating her from the sympathies of all around.For some minutes Edith struggled With Heremotion, but in vain ; she could only throw into the arms of her friend, and yield to thepassionate overflow of feelings, taxed almostbeyond endurance.At length she looked up, and the glow andthe smile which shone through her tears told thata tale of happiness lay hid beneath this shroudedmystery. " Soon, very soon, all will be told'*said die, as her bosom heaved with emotion;^^ and oh, may your heart be strengthened tobear it even as mine has been ! But do not — doHot ask me more." Mrs Malcolm had too nniehdelicacy to press the subject further But shepaused and pondered on these strange words,vainly seeking to elucidate their import, -yA few days after this, as Edith sat at breidii-fast with the family party, a letter was broughtto hers which a glance told was fraughtDESTINY. 899ti^ngfi she had so long panted to telL With. aheart thi;<^bing with emotion yet imabld> to«articulate she hastily rose, and with trembling)iniha>^pught the. privacy of her own chamberQre:dh^ ventured to open it, and it was througha.^)ist of blinding, tears she traced its contents.:■ J • • ■ I i., >' Now, dearest Edith, the time is come whenI.jK^ay claim you as my own! To-morrow,!shall be at Inch Orran — sto-morrow I shall againji^ehold the dear ones I so madly deserted. Theqpi^cealment of nine long years will be at an.eod* Out oh ! Jiow dearly bought has this happy^y been to all ! With what shame I now^^close the wild act of boyish romance which hasso long divided us ! Nine years ago, I returneda shipwrecked sea-boy to my home ; but I learntthat my return would bring only poverty andruin «n all I loved. I saw them seemingly happy.I; believed myself forgotten, and I resolvedto sacrifice myself to the continuance of thehappiness and prosperity of osiers. I fled, farfr^sn all I loved. In my delirium, I even rashly,impiously bound myself by a solemn vow'nev«r890 Desire.to reveal myself till the period arrived when Ioottld give them a right to all the pooseasioiisthey then enjoyed; but of wick my return «tthat time would have stripped them. 'Tis to you,Edith, I commit my cause, to dead for meividithe dear parents I so cruelly injured, by bearingthe holy tie which should have bound meto them. But they will forgive me— you willbe the link again to unite us. To your hatads,then, I commit herself ; to your discretion I trustthe communication. Oh, how my heart has pinedfor this time, and how it feels overwhelmed atdie very thought! My mother! pray for her,pray with her, — and pray, too, my first-my onlylove, for your^< Ronald Malcoi«m»''^ To-morrow ! — Was it indeed so near ?* Andhow prepare their hearts for the tide of joy wiiiehwas about to-rush in upon them ? Hen callupon them to give up the dead which had «olong lain shrouded there, and receive in exchangethe living to their arms ? O, no ! it^nrasnot possible to prepare them for such transition.DESTINY. J891It was by na slow aad ^aadnal light tete truthcould be learned. One single ray must flashinstantaneous conviction on their souls. It wasthis consciousness which had hitherto retainedher from all attempts at a gradual disclosure. Ifthe idea: once took possession of the mind 'with,nought to feed and; sustain it but a baseless hopeand vague surmise, it. could only serve to feverand disturb the imagination. Better it were thatnolMng should be hinted till all could be told.But she must first still the tumult of her ownheart, that she might find gentle access to those(rf others While yet unable to compose herspirits sufficiently to venture on the allotted talc,a gently tap at the door was followed by Aeentrance of Mrs Malcolm, who, struck by theagitation of Edith's manner, and alarmed at herprotracted absence, came to be satisfied if allwere welL She looked wiihi earnest enquiryon Edith's eloquent countenance, where all wasstruggling to reveal itself.^^ Edith," said she, taking her hand, ^^ yoursj^it seems strangely stirred. If it is with joy,-youi willsnr^ shlurei£with,ine. If it is griefSIS Distant.or anxiety, will you not suffer me to ekare itwith you ?'<^ Oh ! it is something that differs from ail,"replied Edith, with emotion. <^ It it joy ; butjoy so strange — so"Mrs Malcolm looked at her with surprise.<^ It seems indeed strange, that any joy sihoukiwith have such an effect upon you."** No — oh no ! — You would not say so if youkaew«— if you could guess." — Her heart throbbedviolently, and her colour' went and camewith the quickness of lightning.*^ Then, will you not tell me, my lore whatit is that thus strangely moves you ?^ said herfiend, soothingly.After a struggle to repress her feelings £disucceeded. She became perfectly calnii butvery pale, as she said, — ^^ Do you rememberwhen once we talked of happiness? I knewnot then what it was — but I believed you happy"She stopped.<« Well, my love ?' enquired Mrs Malcolm,in a tone of surprise.** You said you were not," resumed Edith,in a low, suffocated voice; ** that wandering*thoughts, wild dreams of of one * . . dof " •Of my Ronald ?** said Mrs Malcolm, mournfully." Yes, long — too long — I struggled withthe mingled feelings of despondency, and hope,and fear."^^ You believed that he had perished ?' saidfxlith, once more regaining her composure.** At the end of thirteen years, could youwish me to doubt it ?" said Mrs Malcolm, almostreproachfully.But you did once hope, even while youfeared*'Mrs Malcolm sighed. ^^ But now the hopeand the fear are even, as he is — ^no more !'*Hope never dies, it is said," rejoined Edith,with a beating heart.Mrs Malcolm waved her head sorrowfully,and a sigh was her only answer.At least it may revive — return — with Godhall things are possible — He can loose the prisoner'sbonds — He can set the captive free — He3M D£^T1VX«can recall tl|e dead to life— oh ! He can makeeven the seas give up their dead !"Struck with the trembling fervour of hertones, for a moment Mrs Malcolm receded. thedeep glowing expression of Edith's countenance ;then, as the sudden conviction flashed upon her,she wildly exclaimed, ^^ My son ! Oh, do notmock me ! say"Edith-opened her arms to receive her, andwhile tears of rapture streamed from her eyes,she faintly articulated, ^' He lives !"The mother uttered no cry — shed no tears —she stirred not — breathed not — but every fibreseemed as if stiffening into stone, while withpale lips, and fixed but vacant eye, she gazedwistfully upon Edith, as though she looked onsome fearful and delusive thing.Will you not shed one tear, breathe oneword of thanks to God?" said Edith, soothingly.For what ?" enquired Mrs Malcolm, fearfully,as she laid her trembling hand on Edith's.^^ For Ronald — who lives, and comes to blessand be blessed by you !"DESTINY. 3&SAt length the mother's tears did flcvr, and thefervent ejaculation broke from her lips ! Thenshe called eagerly for her husband, for the dearpartner of all her joys and sorrows, to share inthe blest tidings; and Edith left them to theoverflow of feelings, too sacred for aught but theeye of Heaven to witness. Soon the joyfultidings spread, and every where they were receivedwith rapture for Ronald's name andmemory had ever been fondly cherished far andnear. Lucy, her husband, and two lovely children,were hastily summoned to complete thehappy group, that waited impatiently to welcomethe wanderer's return. " To-morrow !the blest tomorrow! when, when would itcome !"Hours crept slowly along — hours? — years !ages, they seemed to those longing hearts, whoseonly cry was, " My son ! my son !'*But these hours passed away, the day wasdrawing to a close, and now the evening wascome — such an evening as that on which Ronaldhad torn himself from all he loved — calm, fair,and holy. There sat the mother even as then,^ \396 DESTINY.the glorious firmament and the glowing watersspread out before her ; but her fervent eye wasfixed with unvarying gaze on the going down ofthe sun, as though she sought to hasten its tardycourse, by marking each lessening ray — thatsun, whose next rising was to form a new epochin her existence. And Edith was by her watchingthe course of a still distant boat, which wasrowed swiftly along ; its course was directed toInch Orran. With varying colour she markedits progress — nearer and nearer it drew — itreached the point, and in an instant, with lightstep, one sprang on shore."Us he !" she exclaimed, starting up."tis Ronald! Ronald is come P was theglad cry which broke from every lip.Eager 'steps the threshold pressing,Open arms in haste advancing,Joyful looks through blind tears glancing ;The gladsome bounding of his aged hound.Say he in truth is here ! our long, long lost is found X***.But no such manifestations of delight came• The Beacon.Destiny. 397from the mother, as lie was clasped in the armsof her son ; her joy was too deep for words, orlooks, or outward tokens ; and long she remainedunconscious of whose were the arms that supportedher — whose the warm tears that droppedupon her pale cheek ! When at length bythese fond, cares recalled to consciousness, ahwhat a gaze was that which dwelt upon thosedear and cherished features — changed they mightbe to other eyes ; but the look — the one look ofher own child, what can efface that from themother's heart ? Still all seemed but as a dream,till, with his family and household assembledround him, she heard the father offer up to Godhis thanks for the recovery of his long-lost son —that the gift was acknowledged with tears ofpious gratitude to Him, the giver of every goodand perfect gift !The Admiral kept his word — Lady Arabellaand he came to Inch Orran to witness the celebrationof a Highland wedding. Benbowie alsowas forthcoming, in a waistcoat ten times nitreconspicuous than ever. " That was very true,on my conscience, that was very true what you396 DBSTIMT.said of the grasdngs/' said he to Mrs Macaulay,as dough he had been ruminating on it eversince ; ^^ ai|4 I've brought a thousand pound foratocher to Glenro j^s daughter'^^ Ah, Benbowie, that is like you ; but 'deedyou've been rather long of thinking of it, forProvidence has been as kind to her as to thelittle bee that it feeds from dew and clouds; andnow there's the sunshine and the flowers, andshe wants for nothing."The marriage of Ronald and Edith was blessedby the venerable Mr Stewart ; and the Admitoral and Mrs Macauley danced a Highland reel,with great spirit, in honour of it. Thus, whenit was ended, she communed with her partnerupon the event — " Oh, what curious creatureswe are ! To think if Glenroy was to look up, whatwould he say to see his dochter the wife of RonaldMalcolm, after all I Not a bit but he wasvery near casting out with me once, for evening*her to such a thing ! Oh, should not that makeus humble and trustful, when it is shown to uspoor, blind craters, that it is not in man thatwalketh to direct his steps ? And to se howDESTINY. 399beautifully it is appointed to us as to the uftatralcreation, to have our tribulations and our consolations,if we would but look to the hand thatsends them ! for, as the old Hieland distich says,(but as you do not understand Gaelic, I mustgive it to you in English,)** There is neither knoll nor rising,Nor yellow (green) grassy hillock,That will not for a space of time he joyous,And for a while he sad and tearful."THE END.EDINBURGH :PRINTED BY BALLANTYNE AND Company',FAULTS WORK, CANONOATE.