DESTINY.** Why, who cries out on pride.That can therein tax any private party ?** Who can come in and ay that I mean her.When such a one as she, soe u her neighbour ?Why, then, my taxing, like a wildgooee, fliesUnclaimed of any**Shakspeare.DESTINY;OrTHE Chiefs DAUGHTER.BT THE AUTHOR OF«Marriage** akd " THE mHERITANCE.**** What in a name** — SHAKsriAai.IN THREE VOLUMES*VOL, LEDINBURGH:PRINTED FOR ROBERT CADELL, EDINBURGH;AND WHITTAKER AND C0«| LONDON.1831.EDINBURGH :PRINTED BY BALLANTTN I AVD CO., PAUL'S lUrOKK., CANONGATB.TOSIR WALTER SCOTT, BARONET,THESE VOLUMESARE RESPECTFULLY DEDICATEDBY AN OBLIGED FRIEND,THOUGH ANONYMOUSAUTHOR.Edinburgh, March 15, 1831.DESTINYVOL. T.DESTINY.CHAPTER I.All the world knows that there is nothing onearth to be compared to a Highland Chief. Hehas his loch and his islands, his mountains andIts castle, his piper and his tartan, his forestsand his deer, his thousands of acres of untroddenheath, and his tens of thousands of black-facedsheep, and his bands of bonneted clansmen,with claymores, and Gaelic, and hot blood, anddirks.All these, and more, had the Chief of Glen-roy.;for he had a family-tree, upon which all thebirds of the air might have roosted. Doctor JohneDESTINY.son, to be sure, has said that there are no suchthings as family trees in the Highlands; but theDoctor's calumnies against trees of every description,or rather of no description, throughoutScotland, are too well known to require refutation.Glenroy, therefore, had a tree; and as for hisrent-roll, it was like a journey in a fairy tale,** longer, and longer, and longer, than I can tell."However, as the Chief himself was not particularin ascertaining the precise amount of hisincome, but lived as if the whole Highlands andIslands, with their kelp and black cattle, hadbeen at his disposal; it would ill become hisbiographer to pry into the state of his affairs, forthe gratification of the curious. Suffice it thereforeto say, that the Chief of Glenroy lived in astyle which was deemed suitable to his rank andfortune, by all — and they were neither few norfdr between — who partook of his hospitality. Inperson, as in fortune, Glenroy had been equallyted. He was a tall handsome man, with fineregular features, a florid complexion, an openbut haughty countenance, and a lofty, thoughDESTINY. 5somewhat indolent air. The inward man wasmuch what the outward man denoted. He wasproud, prejudiced, and profuse ; he piqued himselfupon the antiquity of his family, the heroicdeeds of his ancestors, the extent ot his estatesthe number of his followers, their physicalstrength, their devoted attachment On theother hand, he was of an open temper, of a socialdisposition, liberal to his tenantry, generousto his dependents, and hospitable to alL Hismanners, though somewhat coarse, were by nomeans vulgar; and, when a little under control,he could be both pleasing and gentlemanly inhis deportmentHis supremacy being universally acknowledgedthroughout the extensive district wherehis possessions lay, he bore his faculties withthat sort of indolent pomp which betokens undisturbedpower. He felt himself a great man ;and though he did not say even to himself thathe was the greatest man in the world, he certainlywould have been puzzled to say who wasgreater.Such was Glenroy; and with all these ad*6 .DESTINY.vantages, it was naturally expected that hewould form an alliance worthy of himself andhis clan, all of whom identified themselves withtheir Chief, and consequently looked upon hismarriage as an event in which they had an undoubtedinterest. As it was impossible, however,that any one so great in himself could makea great marriage, his friends and followers, begreasonable people, merely expected that he wouldmake the best marriage possible.• Greater speculation could scarcely have beenexcited at the court of King Ahasuerus as to asuccessor to the rebellious Vashti, than that whichprevailed amongst the clan on the subject of formingk suitable alliance for their Chief. Each hadhis favourite and exalted fair, in one or other ofthe most illustrious Scottish families, on whom heconceived that Glenroy should place his affections.But vain are the schemes of man I Insteadof these glorious results, Glenroy did what manywiser men have done before him ; he feU in love,and made what wait called, a ^^ most unaccountablemarriage ;" for he married a merely prettygirl of neither family nor fortune, the orphanDESTINY. 7daughter of a poor hundredth cousin of his own.The fact was, Glenroy was too proud to considerit a matter of much importance whom he married :he could derive no consequence from his wife ;his wife must owe aU her dignity to him. Thiswas a blow to the clan, which all the youth,beauty, and sweetness of the lady could notreconcile them to ; and it was not till the birthof an heir, that they recovered their spirits. Butthen bonfires blazed — bagpipes played — spartanswaved — whisky flowed — all, in short, was doneto welcome to this vain world an heir to its vanities.Alas ! how short-sighted are sometimeseven second-sighted mortals !At the end of two years a daughter was born,but fax otherwise was her birth commemoratedA lifeless mother — a widowed £Euler — a funeralprocession— tears, regrets, lamentations, andwoe — these were the symbols that marked herentrance into life, and cast a gloom upon herinfant days. The child was christened Edith,after its mother. And so ended Glenroy's firstattempt at connubial happiness.8 DESTINY.CHAPTER II.Glenroy mourned the loss of his wife asmuch as it was in his' nature to do; but he wasnot the man either to live with a breaking heart,or to die of a broken one. In due time, therefore,it occurred to him, that, great as his lossappeared to be, it was nevertheless one whichmight be repaired. But, too proud and indolentto take any measures for the accomplishment ofhis design, he left it entirely to time, chance, orcircumstances, to carry it into effect ; and thesedid seem to conspire to bring it to pass. Duringan occasional visit to London, he more than oncehappened to find himself in parties where he wasso much in the background, that but for thenotice of the Lady Elizabeth Waldegrave, he'would have passed almost unobserved. Greatas Glenroy was, he therefore found he was capableof being still greater : yet greatness byDESTINY. 9means of a wife — a woman — and that wife anEnglish woman ! — this was a startling thought tothe proud Chief. But his stay in town was protracted: he continued to meet the Lady Elizabeth,who was so very affable and agreeable —such an enthusiastic admirer of tartan, and Highlandbonnets, and Highland scenery, that Glen-roywas captivated; and he even came to theconclusion that he would not be the worse forbeing connected with some of the highest familiesin the kingdom. Then although LadyElizabeth was somewhat passee, she was still ashowy-looking woman, quite suitable to him inpoint of years, and more likely to make a goodstaid stepmother than a younger wife would havebeen. To be sure, she was not very bright;but Glenroy hated clever women, they were allso managing and manoeuvring : in short, from anadmirer, the Chief became a suitor, and thoughthimself a lucky man when he was the acceptedlover. Had Glenroy been better acquainted withthe character and circumstances of the lady, he.would not have been quite so much elated withhis good fortune.a210 DESTINY.Lady Elizabeth Waldegrave was sister to theMarquis of Heywood, and widow of the HonourableEdward Waldegrave, a fashionable spendthrift,who had closed a brief career of folly,leaving his widow and infant daughter to thecharity of relations. It may be supposed, then,that Lady Elizabeth's circumstances were anythingbut affluent. She was, in fact, struggling tokeep her place in society upon a small annuityfrom her father-in-law. Lord Waldegrave, who,having had to pay largely for the extravaganceof his son, was little inclined to be liberal tohis widow and child. Glenroy's proposals, therefore,came in good time ; and the union beingof course warmly approved of by the lady'sfamily and connexions, no obstacle stood in theway ; so that, as soon as the lawyers and millinershad done their parts, the marriage wascelebrated with the utmost eclat On the oneside, there was a special licence, the presenceof a prince of the blood, the benediction of anarchbishop, with peers and peeresses, lace andpearls, a magnificent saloon, an elegant dejeuner,a line of splendid equipages, &c. SuchDESTINY.was the scene in St James' Square ; while atthe Glenroy Anne, the event was celebratedby a numerous meeting of the tenantry and vassalsof the Chief, with ^^ barbaric pomp ;" a roastedox, and half a score sheep, barrels of ale andbowls of whisky, long speeches, loud shouting,toasting, cheering, bonfires, bagpipes, and theHighland fling.Much as Glenroy loved pomp and retinue, hewas somewhat startled at the magnitude of hislady's bridal train. In addition to his own travellingcarriage and servants, there followed MissWaldegrave's equipage, containing that younglady, about five years of age, her French governessand English sub-governess, and attended byher own maid, and the Lady Elizabeth's footmen.Glenroy thought less might have served her ;but it was too soon, or rather too late, to say so ;and Lady Elizabeth expatiated largely upon thegoodness of old Lord Waldegrave, in. allowingher to take his favourite son's only child to Scotlandwith her. The Chief tried to feel sufficientlygrateful for ike favour conferred upon him inthis addition to his family ; but, in spite of Destiny.self, he felt something like shame at this importationto Glenroy. The arrival of the new marriedpair was celebrated with great rejoicing.Lady Elizabeth was dressed in the clan-tartan,wore a Highland bonnet, looked well, made aspeech, and was at once pronounced to be a mostcharming woman.But scarcely were the rejoicing over, beforeGlenroy began to suspect that he had not drawnthe capital prize in the marriage-lottery; andthese his first faint misgivings began to assumea less questionable shape, as the features of thelady's post-nuptial character became to be morefully developed. At length they boldly resolvedthemselves into tastes, habits, and pursuits of themost decided dissimilarity from her husband's.How it happened that this discovery hadnot been made before marriage instead of after,was one of those mysteries which, though ofonion occurrence, have never yet been fullycleared up to the satisfaction of single-mindedpeople. Whence it is that two persons whoseem to have been born only to hate each other,'would, under any circumstances, ever fancy thatDESTINY. Idthey actually love each other, is a phenomenonwhich even philosophers may have encounteredbut which they certainly have not yet explained.No two human beings born and bred in a civil*Used country, could be more different than theChief and his lady ; and as both were independent,and both had arrived at years of discretion,it seemed but natural that they should remainas fate seemed to place them — perfect antipodes.The lady had been accustomed to a gayLondon life, and she had also Heed abroad.She had seen much of the world, and the worldhad seen much of her. She had been admiredfor her talents, her manners, her music, hertaste, her dress; and although the admirationhad long been on the wane, the craving stillcontinued. She was, in fact, when without heradventitious aids, a mere showy, superficial,weak woman, with a fretful temper, irritablenerves, and a constitution tending ta rheumatism,which she imputed entirely to the climateof Scotland.In direct opposition to all this, Glenroy detestedLondon ; despised every part of the globe14 DESTINY.save Scotland; hated all music except that ofthe bagpipe ; had little enjoyment in any societybut that of his Mends and followers ; and whenhe spoke of the world, meant only his own countyand clan. He had also become subject to attacksof the gout, which he ascribed to hisvisits to London, and therefore vowed he neverwould set foot in it again.Although Glenroy saw much good companyat his hospitable mansion, yet it was only duringa short period of the year; for the Highlandsmay be said to open for the season as the King'sTheatre shuts ; and, thanks to grouse and deer,the one has become almost as fashionable a placeof amusement as the other. During this season,therefore, Lady Elizabeth lived pretty much inher own element; but when that was over, along and dreary interval ensued : not that thehouse ever emptied of visitors, be the season orweather what they might, but the company wasnot suited to her taste, for it must be ownedGlenroy was not nice in the choice of his associates.Although his vanity was gratified withoccasionally entertaining the best in the land,DESTINY. 15still the same principle, together with his loveof ease, made him prefer in general being whatis called the king of his company.Amongst sundry of his adherents, whose personsand manners were particularly obnoxious to theLady Elizabeth, the most offensive was the Lairdof Benbowie, friend and clansman of the Chief's,who, from having been all his life in the habitof paying long and frequent visits at the castle,had gradually become domesticated there, to theinfinite annoyance of its mistress. The Lairdof Benbowie was an elderly man, of the mostordinary exterior, possessing no very distinguishingtraits, except a pair of voluminous eyebrows,very round shoulders, a wig that looked asif it had been made of spun yam, an unvaryingsnuff-coloured coat, and a series of the most frightedwaistcoats that ever were seen. Benbowie'smental characteristics were much upon a parwith his personal peculiarities. He was made upof stupidities. He was sleepy-headed and absentshe chewed tobacco, snored in presence, slobberedwhen he ate, walked up and down with a pair.of creaking shoes, and drummed upon the table16 DESTINY.with a snuffy hand. Nay, more ; with that sameobnoxious snuffy hand he actually dared to patthe head or shoulder of the elegant, refined, MissWaldegrave, as often as she came within hisreach. But all these things were mere leatherand prunella to his Chief, whose feelings andperceptions were by no means so refined as hislady's. Benbowie was the very apple of his eye,for he was devoted to him. He never contradictedhim, or rather he invariably coincided witEhim. He rode with him, or walked with him,or sailed with him, or sat still with him. Heplayed at backgammon with him, and when therewas no one else, did well enough to be beatenat billiards. Yet no one could call Benbowie ahanger-on ; for he had a good estate, and a prettyplace of his own, both of which he neglected forthe sake of living with his friend ; and althoughhe was not profuse of his own money, yet, to dohim justice, he was equally sparing of his Chief 'suWhat pleasure or profit Glenroy could findin Benbowie's company, no one could discover.But so it was, and Glenroy could have betterspared a better man ; although, if pressed for aDESTINY. 17reason of his preference, he could only have resolvedit into that unanswerable argument, ^^ JeI'aime parceque c'est lui," &c. Lady Elizabethhad at once attempted to expel Benbowie fromthe house ; but she might as well have attemptedto move one of his own brown mountains* Ben-bowiewas invulnerable in his stupidity and obtuseness,and nothing less than the united effortsof the fairy and the genie, who lifted up PrinceCamaralzaman, and carried him a thousandleagues without waking him, could have madeBenbowie dream of leaving a house where habithad completely domesticated him, and where hisinstinct made him feel comfortable and happy.Some one has well said, ^^ lorsque ne pent^teindre une lumiere, on seen laisse ^^clairer;"but Lady Elizabeth did not adopt this wisemaxim. She could not extinguish Benbowie'slight, faint and dark as it was, neither would shepermit it to shine even in its native dim eclipse.The consequence was, that poor Benbowie, whoseemed to have been born without a single sparkof fire in his composition, became a sort ofsmouldering brand in the fiunily of his friend.18 DESTINY.As neither the Chief nor his lady were youngenough to be moulded anew, or wise enough tomake the most of what each mutually thought abad bargain, it may be supposed their lives didnot glide away like that of Parnell's Hermit,in one clear unruffled stream, but rather resembledthe course of their own mountain torrents,which chafe, foam, murmur, and take then ownway.DESTINY. 19CHAPTER III.Time rolled on, but did nothing to smooth theasperities of Glenroy and his lady. Pride wasthe ruling passion of both ; and unhappily therewas no mutual object on which they might concentratethis predominant principle. The LadyElizabeth added no branches to the family tree ;and thus the unjust and overweening partialityof each parent for their own separate offspringcontinued to grow with their growth, andstrengthen with their strength.Such was the state of the Chief's family whenhe received a visit from his brother-in-law, SirAngus Malcolm, with his only son, a spoiledhandsome boy about the same age as his cousinNorman. Sir Angus was a widower, and had beenrecently appointed to a high command in India,whither he was to proceed when he should have20 DESTINY.found a situation for his son, suited to the anxietiesof a fond parent. But that was a matter ofdifficulty, as indeed it must be to any one topart with his choicest treasure, and commit itto untried love and alien tenderness. Why didhe leave it ? For wealth — that which tempts somany to " leave each thing beloved most dearly."Sir Angus had a fine estate, but it wasloaded with debt. Time, self-denial, and management,might have retrieved it ; but to waiton the one, and submit to the other, was not inthe nature of an impetuous, open-hearted, openhandedHighlander ; and he preferred the easiertask of retrieving his fortune by methods morecongenial to him in a foreign land. His onlycare was to secure a safe and happy asylum forhis child ; and as, besides being allied to Glen-royby marriage, he was also his nearest kinsmanby blood, he flattered himself the Chief wouldtake charge of his son, and educate him with hisown. His only doubt was with regard to LadyElizabeth, of whom he had not heard the mostfavourable reports ; but he was a sanguine, good-natured,undiscerning man, and his little mis-destiny.21giving were quickly dispelled by the affectionateand gracious reception he met with. Glenroywas more than hospitably kind; and his lady, wonby the admiration expressed for her darling, andthe beautiful presents bestowed upon her, acteda most amiable and delightful part Glenroy atonce anticipated the subject uppermost in thebreast of the parent, by inviting him to leavehis boy with him during his absence ; and in afew minutes all was settled, to the mutual satisfactionof both parties. Lady Elizabeth wasflattered by seeing that it was to her the fatherlooked for care and protection to his son ; andher vanity was gratified at becoming the patronessof the young heir to an ancient title andnoble fortune. But, above all, her favour wassecured by the predilection evinced by the youngReginald towards Morinda. Upon being askedby his father which of his two cousins he wouldchoose for his wife, he declared instantly in savourof Morinda, as being by far the prettiest ; he thenfollowed up the avowal of his admiration withan offer to marry her, which was no less promptlyfreed to on the lady's part, especially when she22 DESTINY.heard of the gold, and diamonds, and pearls thatwere awaiting her.The little Florinda was indeed an uncommonlypretty child, with a skin of dazzlingwhiteness, a profusion of golden ringlets, largeblue eyes, a sylph-like figure, and an air of distinction,which, although not always the accompanimentof high birth, is rarely to be seenexcept among the true patrician orders. She wasalso of a gay, sportive disposition, and winningmanners; thus her natural endowments and earlyacquirements, rendered her a perfect epitome offeminine grace and beauty. Edith, on the contrary,possessed no uncommon attractions for thesuperficial observer. Her features were soft anddelicate, her countenance mild and thoughtful,and her manners more grave than is usual ather age ; for no fond mother's heart had everpillowed her infant head, no tender mother'shand had wiped away her childish tears, and evena father's arms were seldom open to her, for Norman'splace was there. Disregarded or checkedin the natural expression of her feelings, shegradually learnt to repress them within her ownDESTINY. 28breast ; and while, to careless observers, the feelingsthemselves seemed wanting, the roots hadonly struck the deeper into the heart, while theshoots were thus carelessly trodden down.Edith was too much accustomed to see Florindapreferred to her, to feel any of the envyand heart-burnings of an offended rival, butmeekly yielded up the prize. Lady Elizabethwas silly enough to feel gratified at this childishfancy, and continued so kind and caressing toher little son-in-law (as she styled him) duringthe week his father remained, that he departedwith a mind relieved from all doubts and fears asto the situation in which he had left his son andheir.24 DESTINY,CHAPTER IV.For a little time all went on smoothly in theyouthful circle of Glenroy; but, unhappily, inconstancyis known in childhood as well as in manhood,and Reginald began to discover that even thebeautiful Florinda had her &ult8. She was verygreedy, and was too much petted, and wantedevery thing her own way ; and as he had beenaccustomed to be no less despotic, many a childishsquabble ensued. At length, not having thefear of damages for breach of promise of marriagebefore his eyes, he in a transport of indignationone day declared that he had quite changedhis mind ; that she was not to be called hiswife any more, for that he was going to takeEdith; she was much better tempered, wouldpart with any of her playthings to him, and nevercried when she was contradicted; and, at anyDESTINY. 25rate, brown hair and pale cheeks were muchprettier than yellow hair and pink ones; inshort, ^^ for any other reason why," his affectionswere transferred. Lady Elizabeth was weakenough to resent this affront, and to enter intoall the childish feuds that followed, aggravatedas they often were by nursery maids, to whoma spoiled unruly boy is always a subject of torment,and, of course, of blame.The consequence was, her fondness for Reginald,which had always beei\ of a very precariousnature, now turned into downright aversion; while he, unused to control at home, andencouraged by Glenroy in all his freaks, sether authority completely at defiance. Even Ben*bowie, his tobacco, his snore, his shoes, andhis waistcoats, almost all ceased to be objectsof animosity, compared with this new annoyance.At length matters came to a climax, andthreatened to add one more to the many proofthat great events do often spring ft'om trivialcauses.One day, when the two boys and Edith wereVOL. I. B26 DESTINY.engaged in some play, in which Florinda wasdeemed incompetent to join, to get rid of herimportunities Reginald lent her his watch, theparting gift of his father; receiving many assurancesin return, that she would take the greatestcare of it These promises, however, were soonforgotten; the watch was opened, examined,wound up, and broken. Sublunary revenge isalways the first impulse of the childish heart;and Reginald, in his rage, shook Florinda withallhis might, slapped her on the cheek, and evenleft; the print of his nails on her arm. Her shriekssoon brought Lady Elizabeth to the spot, whenshe found her darling almost convulsed withterror and indignation st this rude assault Theextreme fairness and delicacy of her skin renderedthe slightest touch at all times perceptible,and on tide present occasion showed the offencein glowing colours, and told a tale of outragethat raised all the mother in Lady Elizabeth'sbreast In vain did Norman and Edith attemptto palliate the offence by detailing the provocationsand declaring that Reginald had not meantto hurt her. They were sure he had only justDestiny. 27given her a slap for breaking hifi watch* LadyElizabeth would listen to nothing but the sobsand exclamations of her darling ; till at lengthshe worked herself up to assert, and of course tobelieve, that her child had been seriously hurt,and would have been killed, had not she cometo her rescue ; the whole was wound up withthe soothing assurance to her angel, that thesavage should be sent fn»H the house that veryday.^^ But this house is not yours," retorted Reginaldwith equal warmth; ^^ it is my uncle'shouse, and I am to stay here till my papa comeshome, and then I shall make him send thatwicked nMmkey to prison for breaking my watduThe little wretch ! I hate and despise her fortelling lies, — yes, you shall go to prison, andbe fed on bread and water, you little lying yel*low-haired wasp !" And he shook his hand ather with renewed vehemence.^ This is ^^t all endurance," cried LadyElizabeth, with violence: ^^ begone, all of you I"And in the recklessness of h^ anger she pushed£with, who had been upon her knees caressDestiny.ing and soothing Horinda, as she lay in hermamma's lap. Edith fell, and struck her templeagainst the corner of the chair, but she utteredaio cry,There !" cried Reginald, as he flew to helpher up ; " see what you hav done to Edith,and how good she is ! But Betty M^Iyor saysyou are very bad to Edith, and don't love her,because she is not your child ; but / love her,and she is to be my wife, and she shall be allcovered with gold and diamonds that my papa isto bring me. Yes, that you shall, Edith ! Butshe shall have nothing but dirty old rags to wear,and good enough, too; for Betty M^Ivor saysher skin is just like cream cheese, and her hairlike a lint tap."A. fresh burst of screams and tears from thefair Florinda made Lady Elizabeth hastily withdrawwith her from the scene of action. In thetumult of exasperated and exaggerated feeling,she hastened to Glenroy ; and, denouncing Reginaldas the destroyer of her child, demandedthat both he and Betty M^Ivor should be sentfrom the house. A scornful and peremptoryDESTINY. 29negative was of course returned. The ladypersisted, as she commonly did; and rising infar passion at the contemptuous indifference hercomplaints met with, she at last declared herdetermination of leaving the house, and takingher child along with her, unless her demand wascomplied with. This threat being treated withanger and derision, led to a scene of altercationand mutual recrimination. When peopleare ready primed for quarrelling, a very littlematter will serve the purpose, just as a singlespark applied to a train of gunpowder will dothe business of an earthquake. So it was withGienroy and his lady. It had been with them for many a day ; and now, fromless to more, from bad to worse, it ended in athreatened separation. The lady declared shewould go, and the Chief would not ask her tostay. Glenroy would have been the last manto have turned his wife and her child from hishouse, however obnoxious they might have been,and he felt rather annoyed at the thoughts ofsuch a thing being said ; but he was too proudto betray his feelings, or to make any confessDESTINY.sion : he merely contented himself with remarkingto Benbowie, that if her ladyship chose to go,she might go ; she was welcome to go or stay forhim.Very right, Glenroy ; on my consciencethat's very right," responded Benbowie ; *' but ifshe goes, I wish you may not have to aliment her."The acrimonious feelings of the parents couldnot fail to keep alive the resentment of the children.A spirit of absolute hatred towards eachother seemed to bum in the young hearts ofReginald and Florinda; and they never niet,without mutual provocation being given andtaken in full measure. In vain the gentle Edithstrove to reconcile them ; no sooner was an oldoffence patched up, than a new one broke out;and the only thing they both agreed in was inliking her.It was at this crisis, that an afflicting dispensationin the Waldegrave family accelerated theseparation between the Chief and his lady* Atthe time of their marriage. Lord Waldegravehad two sons, then in the prime of life ; butnearly about the time that the eldest was kill-destiny.31•ed by a £dl from hk horse, the youngest diedof the yellow fever in the West Indies Thusthe young Morinda became at once presumptiveheir to her grandfather, who, broken-heartedand paralytic, was not likely to stand long in theway of the succession; and as the tithe andestates descended in the female line, she mightnow be considered as future baroness of Wade*grave. With such prospects before her. LadyElizabeth felt as if there were degradation inher remaining longer under tie roof of a coarseoverbearing Highlander ; and shetherefore signified her intention of immediatelyremoving her daughter to England, in order to benear her aged grandfather. She' yielded so four,indeed, as to say, that, provided Glenroy wouldsend the boys to school, and engage to spendeight or nine months of the year in or near London,she would have no objections to pass theother three or four in the Highlands. But anindignant refusal being returned, arrangementswere immediately made for a final separation.The approaching departure of the mother anddaughter caused universal satisfaction through*82 Resting.out the house, wych had long been divided mtt;9iro parties, as fierce as the Montagues and capulet.Glenroy's adherents did not of courselike his lady, and his servants had long looked^fdth fiery indignation on the importance attachedto Miss Waldegrave, and the airs of superiorityassumed by that young lady's suite ; whilethe governesses and ladies' maids hailed withtransport their emancipation from a long dullwinter at Glenroy, as the contrasted gaieties ofLondon rose to their minds-eye. Glenroy'sown sensations were of a mixed nature ; he feltthat his lady's absence would be an inexpressiverelief; but there was something of woundedpride which alloyed the pleasure of the parting.£with shed many tears at the thoughts of losingFlorinda, to whom she was really attached ; forher warm and affectionate heart was ready to loveevery thing that did not repel her by harshnessor indifference; and Florinda loved Edith asmuch as a spoiled child can ever love any thingbeyond self.** Do not cry, Edith," said the little futurebaroness, with a patronizing air ; ^^ for when IDESTINY. 33halve a house of my own in London, I shall makea point of having you to stay with me ; indeedI shal ; but I will not invite you nor you** tothe boys.** K you did, we should not go," retortedReginald ; ^^ we are too glad to get rid of uglylint«tops, to follow them to dirty, smoky London."** How happy I am to leave this ugly dullplace," exclaimed the indignant Florinda ; *^ andJenkins says, it is quite inconceivable )how wehave been able to exist here so long; only,dear Edith, I am very sorry to leave you ; butI hope I shall never see Glenroy Castle again!"** And we hope we shall never see you hereagain," retorted Reginald, as Florinda skippedpast hin to the carriage, from which, with anair of insolent triumph, she smiled and wavedher little white hands.Edith was the only one of the family whogrieved at the separation which had taken place.Her warm, tender heart had fondly attacheditself to Florinda; and her only consolation atparting had been Florinda's promise of writingb2S4 DESTINY.her a letter whenever she got to London. PoorEdith had watched from day to day for this letter— her j^rst letter ; and all may remember theanticipations of their first letter — anticipationsfilly realized by the actual receipt of it. Whata new world broke upon us with the breaking ofthe first seal ! What glorious visions unfoldedthemselves as we for the first time unfolded aletter to ourselves, containing perhaps some fewwords of JiiU text! Who ever received a firstletter, that did not spell and con it fifty timesover — who did not lay it under their pillow atnight, and fall asleep, longing for morning thatwas to give the treasure again to their eyes ? Butthese were joys only pictured to Edith's imagination,as, each day, she rose in fresh hopes thatthat was the day her letter would arrive. Thusdupe of tomorrow," days passed away, till atlength poor Edith's expectations died the naturaldeath of " hope deferred."DSSTimr. 85CHAPTER V.The lady's departure was the signal for agathering of the clan, who, as upon all occasionseither of condolence or congratulation, sidled notto rally round their Chief in full force. EvenBenbowie, although in general obtuse as a hedgehog,seemed to feel this as an epoch to be commemorated;and he therefore ordered a newwaistcoat ten times more hideous than any of itspredecessors. His characteristics also began toexpand more freely, and as if they owned somegenial influence. He slept more, and snoredlouder, than ever ; he inhaled his soup with aninspiration that might hare sucked in a fleet ;his wig grew more small and wiry; and whenhis feet were not creaking up and* down theroom, they were to be foimd reposing on thebars of his neighbour's chair. Halcyon days99 Destiny.ensued; Glenroy was himself again ; and anever-ending still beginning, course of revekywas kept up, till the castle more resembled apetty court than a private dwelling.A tutor had been provided for the boys bySir Angus before leaving Britain, and to hisare they had been committed. He was anJpOi^Ushman, a first-rate scholar, a man of ele^glMUt, refined manners, fond of study, yet skilledia lighted accomplishments, somewhat epicurein his taste and habits, and altogether such a onelis was calculated to form the perfect gentlemanand nothing more.At first Glenroy grumbled a good deal toBenbowie, at what he called the insufferable airsof the fine English dominie ; but as they didnot interfere much with his own ways, he wastoo indolent to resent them ; and at last hebecame gradually accustomed to bear with MrJellies, as the most consummate puppy he hadever known.A governess was talked of for Edith ; butthat was such a secondary consideration, thatGlenroy could not be troubled to make anyDE8TINT. 39exertion to procure one. So, in the meantime,Ae received lesson from Mr Ellis, in the solidbranches cl education, along with the boers;while the more feminine accomplishments weresupposed to be communicated through the me*dim of a sort of half-and-half gentlewoman, thewidow of one of Glenroy's factors, and herselfthe fag-end of his clan, being a cousin not manydegrees removed from the Chief himself. MmMacauley was now an elderly woman in years,but in nothing else. She was plain, but pleadsing in her looks : she had a little thick activefigure ; a broad, clear, brown face ; and two ^fthe happiest, merriest, little black eyes that everlighted up a head. She had an agreeable voice ;but her accent and pronunciation were provincial, «and some of her phrases were altogether peculiarto herself, which rather gave a zest to herconversation.But Mrs Macauley's great charms with didand young were her unconquerable good-humourand her increasing good spirits. She was one ofthose happily-constituted beings, who look as ifthey could '^ extract sunbeams from cucumbers,"38 DESTINY.and who seem to have been born sans nerves,sans spleen, sans bile, sans every thing of anirritable or acrimonious nature. But with allthese wants, there was no want of a heart — ^agood, stout, sound, warm heart — which wouldcheerfully have given itself and its last drop forthe honour and glory of the race of Glenroy.She had also just as much religion as an irreligiousman could tolerate ; for her religion wasa compound of the simplest articles of belief,and certain superstitious notions of second-sight,visions, dreams, and so forth, which sometimesafforded amusement, or, at any rate, alwaysserved for ridicule. As for her accomplishments,they were many and various ; and being mostlyself-acquired, they possessed a sort of originality,which, in some degree, compensated for otherdeficiencies. She was a perfect adept in thenow much-despised art of needle-work; and,besides the more vulgar arts of hemming, running,stitching, playing, baiting, &c. she had ahand forTent work, raised work, laid work, frost-work, net work.Most curious pearls, and rare Italian cat work.DESTINY. 99Fin* liBm-<titehy fiaay-ttiteb, new-stitch, and ehaki-slitch,Braye bred-stitch, fisher* stitch, Irish-stitch, and queen-stitch,The Spanish-stitch, rosemary-stitch, herring-hone, and The smarting whip-stitch, back-stitch, and crost-stitch'* *Not satisfied with these her supreme excellences,Mrs Macaulay also acquired to the knowledgeof nnisic and painting. She had a goodear, a tolerable voice, and a great collection oiold Scottish songs, which she sung to herself invery blitheness of heart *Her performances in drawing were no lesslimited ; as all the efforts of her genius had beenconcentrated in one single view of Glenroy Castle,which, after much toil and trouble, she hadaccomplished to her own satisfaction, and to whichshe had faithfully adhered for upwards of fortyyears. From this parent view had descended aninnumerable progeny of various shapes and sizes,but not of aspect ; as all, to a leaf, were impressedwith the self-same features. These, mountedin the several forms of letter-cases, pocket-books.• *« The Needle."40 DESTINY.watch-papers, &c. were most liberally dispensedby her to the friends of the family, including'every one who had ever set foot in the castle.Mrs Macauley's vanity was so inoffensiveand she contributed so largely to the amusement4>f every one, that her company was in gritrequest, and by none more than by the Chiefliitnself. In proof of this, besides many otheracts of liberality towards her, he had not onlyfitted up for her a cottage in the vicinity of thecastle, but had likewise assigned her an apartmentthere ; from which, however, in Lady Elizabeth'stime, she had been wholly banished, butinwhich she was now become a fixture. Thischamber was the favourite rendezvous of the children,who delighted in beating upon her oMspinner, and in being allowed to daub paper,cBrty their fingers, and look at cloth-dogs, ,tinsel-grottos, filigree figures,birds, made of real dyed feathers, and all therest of Mrs Macauley's monstrosities ; while she,her good-humoured face beaming with pleasure,was no less happy in the belief that she was renderingthe most essential benefit to her benefit*DESTINY. 41tor, ia thus imparting her accompaniments tohis childrenGlenroy, to be sure, scouted the idea of herteaching them any thing but her own brogue,and took great delight in ridiculing her accomplishmentseven to herself; but then, as he saidto Benbowie, Mary Macauley, although a greatidiot, was a kind-hearted, well-meaning body,apt was fond and careful of the children ; and ifthey learned little good from her, they wouldlearn as little evil, for she was a simple, honestcreature as ever breathed : to which the usualaffirmative, or rather confirmation, was returned.That's very true, Glenroy; on my consciencethere's a great deal of good sense in that.Molly Macaidey is a very decent girl, and costsnothing."Such was the preceptress of the Chief'sdaughter, and in the genial warmth of her sociallove and sympathy, Edith's young heart expandedas a flower to the sun.It is a trite remark, that the most importantpart of our education is given by ourselves. IfEdith was not so regularly and well-instructed42 DESTINY.as she might have been, she escaped the stillmore dangerous error of having her mind overworkedand overloaded with premature knowledge: and how many a mind has been workedperhaps to the weakening of those very powerswhich it was the aim of the teacher to strengthenand expand ! In the moral, as in the physical constitution,Nature is the best guide ; and Naturespoke wisely even by the lips of Mrs Macauley,when she said, ^' childer will be childer let us doas we will; we cannot put grey heads upongreen shoulders !"DESTINY. 48CHAPTER VI.Scarcely had Glenroy begun to enjoy hisemancipation from one species of domestic ty-«umy, when he found himself groaning underanother of avery different description — that of theminister of the parish ; and if the Chief and hislady could have agreed even in their antipathiesMr M^Dow might have had the merit of reconcilingthem. But Glenroy had not even theluxury of openly complaining of this torment;for, like his former one, it was one of his ownproviding, placed there not merely with his consent,but by his own free will. Mr M'Dow wasthe man of his own choice ; the chosen of manycandidates. The church having become vacantby the death of the former minister, muchcanvassing and competition had of course ensued;and at least twenty ** licensed graduates"44 DESTINY.had presented themselves, each with testimonialsand credentials enough to have entitled them toa bishopric.Put of the two whose recommendations caresred most weight, the one was the present pastor,the Reverend Duncan M'Dow, and the otherwas of the evangelical side ; a party whom Glen-roy,although professing Christianity, held inthe utmost abhorrence. Not that he knew' verywell what it was they did profess ; he only giiesi^ed it was something he did not practise. Hehad a vague, confused apprehension, that natievangelical pastor was a sort of compound of aPopish priest, a stifle-necked Presbyterian, asour-fitted Covenanter, a lank-haired Seceder,a meddling Jesuit, a foul-tongued John Knox,a what not, that had evil in its composition.No reasonable person surely can doubt thatthere have been, and still are, many bright ornamentsof the church, amongst both parties c^fChristians; and it is much to be lamented, whenprejudice runs high on either side, and a man isapplauded or defamed, not according to his practice,but his profession. As little may it beDESTINY. 45questioned, that in their respective congregationsthe wheat and the tares grow promiscuouslyeven to this day. But this was not theview Glenroy took of the subject ; and he wasloud against all high-fliers, new-lights, gospellers,bigots, zealots, enthusiasts, saints, and soforth-beinga moderate man, he, like all moderatepeople, was most violently opposed to the admissionof any person of that description within theprecincts of the parish. As the other heritors werefew in number, the patronage in this instancewas conceded to him ; and his choice fell upon thepresent minister, who had been twenty yearstutor in the fiunily of the Laird of Kindlesand who never had been branded with any ofthese appellations, but bore the character of beingan easy, good-humoured, sensible, moderate man,who troubled nobody, but minded his own affairs.This last qualification he certainly possessed, asGlenroy soon found to his cost.The Reverend Duncan M^Dow was a large,loud-spoken, splay-footed man, whose chief characteristicswere his bad preaching, his love of46 DESTINY.eating, his rapacity for augmentations) (or, as hetermed it, fermentations,) and a want of tact inall the instances of life, which would have drivenLord Chesterfield frantic. His hands and feetwere in every body's way : the former, indeed,like huge grappling irons, seized upon everythingthey could possibly lay hold of; while the latterwere commonly to be seen sprawling at an immeasurabledistance from his body, and projectinginto the very middle of the room, like twoprodigious moles, or bastions. He dealt much instale jokes and bad puns ; he had an immensehorse-laugh, which nothing ever restrained, andan enormous appetite, which nothing seemed todamp, and which he took care always to supplywith the best things at table. He used a greatquantity ^ snuff, and was for ever handing abouthis mull, an ugly cow's horn, with a foul dingycairngorm set in silver on the top. To sum 19Us personal enormities, when he spoke he hada practice of always advancing his £bu as closeas possible to the person he was addressing.Although a strong-bodied, sturdy man, he wasextremely careful of his health; and even in aDESTINY. 47fine summer's day was tx be seen in a hugewoolly great-coat that reached to his heels, trottingaloi^ on a stout dun pony, just high enoughto keep its master's feet off the ground.Such were the outward man and beast: theinward man was very much of the same stamp.Mr M'Dow's principal object in this world wasself, and his constant and habitual thoughts hadnaturally operated on his outward manners tosuch a degree as to blunt all the nicer perceptionsof human nature, and render him in verytruth, his own microcosm. He was no dissembler;for a selfish dissembler is aware, that in order toplease, one must appear to think of others, andforget self. This fictitious politeness he hadneither the tact to acquire, nor the cunning tofeign; consequently he was devoid of all themeans of pleasing. Not that we mean to recommenddissimulation, or to insinuate that Mr M^-Dow would in reality have been a better manhad he been able and willing to form himself onthe model of the Chesterfield school. He wouldmerely have been less offensive in the ordinaryintercourse of life, and would have sinned less48 Destiny.against the common observances of society. Bathad he been earnest in his callii^y had he soughtto have his mind enlightened by the knowledgeof those divine truths vrhich he professed toteach, their unction would have softened andrefined even the ruggedness of his nature, andhave rendered him an object of respect, insteadof a subject of ridicule.From the moment he was ^^ ordained" ministerof the gospel, Mr M^Dow had done nothingbut make demands for augmentation of stipend,enlargement of glebe, additions to the mansenew offices, and so on. Now there was no skyin which his money could go that was so unsatisfactoryto Glenroy, as when it was claimed as amatter of right, more especially by the clergy,whom he looked upon as the worst species ofland-tax. Besides, like all idle, indolent people,,he had an utter abhorrence of every thing thatoccasioned trouble, or was a bore and Mr DuncanM^Dow was a bore that beset him on all sides.He was a stumbling-block in his path, a thorn inhis side, a weed that had taken root in the veryheart of his estate, and which it was impossibleDESTINY. 49for him to extirpate. True, he was not molestedwith spiritual admonitions, plans for buildingchurches, subscriptions for establishing schools,or schemes for employing the industrious, orpeering the indigent, or reclaiming the wickedr but then he was haunted with estimates foretdai^ng the manse, and repairing the bam, orhints for rebuilding both house and offices ; orhe was beset with a copy of the new locality, oranextract of the last decreet, or a notice of asecond summons for augmentation, or an interlocutorof the Teind Court, in favour of someother minister ; one or other, if not all of whichmissiles, Mr M^Dow bore as constantly abouthis person as a highwayman does his pistols.But what provoked Glenroy even more than allthis, was the utter impossibility of overawingthe minister, or keeping him at a proper distance;for Mr M'Dow possessed that sort of callous good-nature,which rendered him quite invulnerableto all rebuffs : as well might a needle have beenapplied to the skin of a rhinoceros, as a gibe orataunt to the feelings of the minister; theywere all received as good jokes, which onlyVOL. I. c50 DESTINY.called forth roars of laughter in return. Besides,the impression was so completely implanted inhis brain, of Glenroy's extreme predilection forhim, from having appointed him his pastor inspite of all opposition, that any thing he now saidor did, could not possibly remove it. In a word,Henry the Second and Thomas a Becket werea joke to Glenroy and Mr Duncan M*DoW,DESTINY. 51CHAPTER VILGlenroy's property was too princely in extentto admit of any very near neighbours who couldvie with him in state and consequence. Yet twoof his nearest kinsmen had dwellings within ashort distance of him; or rather the distancewas reckoned short in a country where stormyfaiths and pathless mountains oppose no suchobstacles to social intercourse as are enjoined bythe flimsy forms of fashion and etiquette.All that Glenroy's eye looked upon of hill andglen, lake and forest, were his own; with theexception of one single feature in the landscape,and that the fairest in aU the goodly scene. Thiswas a beautiful richly-wooded promontory, whichstretched far into the bosom of the estuary thatalmost siUTOunded it, and gave it the appearanceof a sylvan isle. It had once formed part of the62 DESTINY.Glenroy estate, and had even been the originalseat of the family, as was indicated by somegrey, ivy-grown walls wluch crowned the summitof one of its green knolls. But by one ofthe many mutations land is subject to, it hadbeen severed from the greater part of the property,and had passed to a younger branch ofthe family, by whom it had for generationsbeen possessed. This younger branch had nowdwindled away to one " sear and yellow leaf**a rich and childless old man, who lead lately succeededby the death of a nephew, whose firstact, upon coming of age, had bee to repair andfurnish such part of the old castle as could berendered habitable for the shooting season. Hissuccessor was not personally known in the country,as he had left it at an early age to push hisfortune in a remote provincial town in England,and had only visited it once since. Glenroy hadlong looked with a wistful eye towards this property,which, indeed, was the very crown jewel otthe fondly, and for which he would gladly haveexchanged many thousand acres of muir andmaintain : but hitherto he had coveted in vail.Bestir. 53AU his overtures had been rejected : for, to tell^ truth, Glenroy had every thing but moneyto offer for it; and money, unfortunately, is theonly thing that ever induces pec^le to part withtheir lands. But now he seemed in a £sur wayto gain possession of it, not by conquest, asthe law terms purchase, but by gift, or inheritance,as he said he was the nearest heir to thechildless old man who waa now the proprietor.Even if it had been otherwise, it was of littleconsequence, as the property was not entailed,and it was but natural to suppose he would leaveit to him as the rightful owner and the head of thefamily ; especially as he could have nobody elseto leave it to, having quarrelled with all of thedan with whom he had ever come into contact.At a more respectful distance from the proudturrets of Glenroy stood the humble dwellingof his cousin. Captain Malcolm, a half-pay officerin delicate health, the possessor of a paternal£Arm, and the £stiver of eight children* In earlyUse he had made a love massage with a lady ofgood family and great beauty, but no fortune.This step had of course displeased the friends54 DESTINY.(so called) on both sides, and the young pairhad been left to struggle through life as theybest could — and a hard struggle it had been.But, as has been truly said, ^^ unfitness of mindsmore than of circumstances, is what in generalniiars the marriage ilion; where these are suited,means of contentment and happiness are withinreach." And, in iMs instance, so it had proved.Mrs Malcolm, though highly born and delicatelybred, had followed her husband through all thechanges of a soldier's life, had shared his hairships and privations with cheerfulness, and badnow refused with him to a bleak Highland firm,with that contentment which was ready to findgood in every thing. If their claims had beenstrictly investigated, it would probably have beenfound that Captain Malcolm was still more nearlyrelated to the Inch Orran branch of the familythan the Chief himself; but his chance of thesuccession was such a hopeless one, that he neverhad allowed himself to indulge the slightest expectation.In his first outset in life, he haddisobliged Mungo Malcolm, the present proprietor,by refusing to be received into his office.DESTINY. 55and bred to his profession — that of a scrivener.One offence was quite sufficient to make anenemy for life of Mungo Malcolm ; but whenthis act of disobedience was followed up by ^rash and imprudent marriage, assurance was madedoubly sure: the door was completely closedand barred against him, and it seemed as if littleless than a miracle could ever open it again.When this family first came to the neighbourhood,Glenroy had shewn them considerablekindness and attention, in an ostentatious patronizingway ; and they had received his favours aspeople willing to be obliged, because they feltthat in similar circumstances they would havebeen happy in obliging others. But at the saidetime, the Chief's pompous civilities were metwith a simple courtesy, which, while it showedthey were not insensible to them, yet denotedminds of too elevated a cast to be overwhelmedby condescension, or oppressed by trivial favours.This, however, was what Glenroy could not understand,and did not like. He was more lavishthan generous ; he gave freely, but he loved to56 DESTINY.•brandish his favours, and always looked fqr janimmediate return in gratitude or adulation.The calm manner and moderate expressionsof Captain Malcolm, were therefore ill calculatedto feed the cravings of his vanity. Boast ashemight, his boastings never called forth anybursts of admiration or applause from his poorkinsman ; nor did all the display of his wealthand state appear to excite the slightest envy, oreven astonishment, in his breast Yet therewas nothing sour or cynical in this plainness;nothing that betrayed a contempt for what hecould not attain. On the contrary, his mannerswere mild and pleasing to all who could valuesimplicity and sincerity ; and he was ever readyto commend and admire when he could do soconsistently with truth.There is, perhaps, nothing more baffling topride, than when it meets with contentment inahumble station ; it is then like the wind wastingits strength where there is nothing to oppose it,or the waves spending their foam upon thesmooth printless sand. In like manner, thelofty bearing and arrogant pretensions of theDestiny. 57detain met neither with encouragement noropposition in the quiet but independent satisfiestion of his poor cousins.Pride is easily instilled even into generousnatures ; and the Glenroy children were not slowin learning how greatly they were thought superiorto the young Donald Begs, as the Chiefcontemptuously nicknamed his kinsman's family.This knowledge, however, availed them little inpractice ; for the young Malcolm, though gay,good-humoured, and obliging, were free fromthat serve spirit which denotes the mercenarydependent, and in their childish intercoursepreserved an ease and equality as remote fromfalse shame as from vulgar forwardness. Educatedby pious and enlightened parents, theiryoimg minds were imbued with that most elevatingof all principles, the genuine spirit ofChristianity ; and by it they were early taughtto distinguish between those things which theWorld despises, and those thin which are inthemselves despicable. Though poor, they thereforeattached no degrading ideas to poverty,nor affixed undue importance to wealth. Theirc256 Destiny.minds were kept free from sordid passions andvulgar prejudices, while all the nobler qualitiesof their nature were strengthened and improvedby the constant exercise of the mind's best attributes.Love, charity, contentment, fortitude,temperance, and self-denial — these were the treasuresthe parents sought to lay up in the heartsit)f their children ; and if they did not alwaysitoceeed in raising these plants of heaveiBlygrowt]^in that strange and wayward soil, the humanheart, the very attempt produced a wholesomeuifiuence in displacing pride, prejudice, andselfishness, those bitter roots of envy, hatred,and malice.> There was something so sweet and attractivein Mrs Malcolm, and so pleasing in the wholefamily, that Edith was never so happy as whenallowed to spend some days at Lochdhu; butshe would have been ashamed to acknowledgehow much she loved them all, for she was accustomedto hear them spoken of in a slighting andsomewhat contemptuous manner. Thus is many9. pure and generous feeling stifled in the youngheart by the withering breath of ridicule.DESTINY* 50CHAPTER VIII.It was at this time that the new Laird ofInch Oman was expected to take possession e£his inheritance, and nothing else was talked ofthroughout the district, while many and variouswere the rumours afloat concerning him. Theonly point they all agreed in was, that he was avery particular man — which is the next thing tobeing called a Hydra* But particular men, andparticular women, too, well deserve a chapter tothemselves, which they shall perhi^ have atanother time ; but this one must be devoted to theparticularities of Inch Orran. Of that '^ partibuslar man'' then, it was generally reported, that hewas of a very capricious bad temper; or, accordingto the nursery phrase, that he was very apttoiJiave the black dog on his back. When thathappened, it was said he was in the practice60 DESTINY.of sitting in profound silence all the tina theftlasted, with a red night-cap on his head; whichred night-cap he would not have lifted fiptr theking himself, till the black dog had taken hisdeparture, and then it was hung up on its ownparticular peg, till the return of the said buckdog. Another edition was, that he always allowedhis beard to grow with the growth, andstrengthen with the strength of the fit; till atlength, in a malting mood, he had again recourset0 the razor, and came forth with a neW'^-mowochin ready to salute all the world. Others saidthat Inch Orran hung out no dead-lights on theapproach of a storm, nor hoisted any signals bywhich the enemy could be warned of their danger.His black dog, it was said, was seldom offhis back, and went and came just as it happened,without Saying, by your leave. That he had 9,black dog, nobody doubted; and that he wasiDrOSt thoroughly disagreeable, was never disputed.Whether he had a wife, was not so certain :some said they had seen her; others had nevereven heard of her; a third reported her dead;and a fourth, in confinement There was alsoDESTINY. 61much speculation as to how he would come,when he would arrive, where he would reside,whether he would entertain the county, &c.?Olenroy Ind written a pressing invitation to Itskinsman to take up his abode for the presentWfUi him ; but a very brief dry refusal had beenreturned, which had hired the Chieftain's blood,till he recollected that he was a particular man :and even a great man must give way to a particularman, inasmuch as the one is sometimes apoor man, and the other is always a rich man.Glenroy's next step was to have scouts stationedto give him the very earliest intelligence of InchOrran's arrival; and no sooner was that hathbounced, than he ordered his barge to be manned,and, accompanied by Benbowie, he embarkedon the smooth surface of a summer's seatowelcome the old Laird to the seat of his fore-others.It is sometimes difficult to believe suitall things are in their right places in this roundw<Hrld. Certainly Olenroy and Benbowie didnot seem in character with the scenery, as theywere borne along on the bosom of the blue waters,which reflected, as in a mirror, the varied62 JDiSSTINT.beauties lliat skirted their shores; the 'greyrocks, the graceful pendant birch, the. grassyknolls, the gushing streamlet, the fern-clad glens,tee lofty mountains glowing with heather,, savehere and there where patches of tender greenrelieved the rich monotony of colour ^> whilesabove all,the gorgeous sphereLit up the Tales, flowers, mountains, leaves, add streaiOs^ ^With a diviner day — the spirit of bright beams."To the eye of taste and the feeling heartythere would have been rapture in every beam oflight and breath of heaven, on such a day andamid such scenes. But Glenroy and Benbowiecared for none of these things ; though the woodsand waters, hills and dales, suggested ideas tothem, such as they were, as they sailed along,and they were pleased holding parley in theirown way. And '* as imagination bodies forththe fcprm of things," so the two friends " turnedthem to shapes," and gave to ^^ airy nothings alocal habitation and a name." Glenroy andBenbowie then, although they could not be saidto find ^^ sermons in stones, tongues in the trees,DESTINY. 63or Books in the ninny brooks," yet found muchprofitable matter of discourse in the Various objectsctf nature that presented themselves. Thecrystal depths of the limpid waters over whichthe sun was shedding his noonday effulgence)suggested to their minds images of herrings, &t,fresh, or salted, with their accompaniments cfcasks, nets, and busses ; the mountains in theirstem glory, with their lights and shadows, andlonely recesses, to them showed forth heath-burning,sheep-walks, black-faced wethers, andwool. The rosewood, tender and harmoniousin its colouring, free and graceful in its growth,was, in their language, ^^ hags and stools'' ofprice and promise; and as they touched theshore of Inch Orran, they broke into no idle rapturesabout the water plants, the fern, the wildflowers,the tall fox-glove, the grey rocks andbright mossy stones, half hid beneath the broad*leafed coltsfoot, that formed the rich and variegatedforeground ; for they were casting searchinglooks for " black tang" and " yellow tang,"and " bell wrack" and " jagged wrack,' andsuch other ingredients as enter into the compostDESTINY.gition of that valuable commodity called ke^Such were the speculations which cam m6i^home to the business and bosoms of the friendsso grovelling and sordid are the results of hum^mpride and selfishness.Although the ruins of Inch Orran Castle hMan imposing effect when viewed from a distance&e respect they excited was considerably diiniidied on a nearer survey. They stood anti thesummit, and close to the edge of a romantic eminence,which rose abruptly from the water, andgave them an air of grandeur, to which they couldnot have otherwise aspired. The building hadbeen originally in the form of a square, with acourt in the centre ; but two sides of it were bowmere shapeless weather-stained masses of stone,which time was every day crumbling into morepicturesque forms, and mantling with ivy andwall-flowers, thus " making beautiful what elsewere bleak and bare ;" while such parts of thebudding as had fallen down were overgrownwith creeping plants and briars, that gave it anappearance of intricacy, and thus heightened theinterest wych the mouldering and dilapidatedDESTINY. 65remains of a human dwelling never ail to excite.One side of the square, that next the water, hadbeen repaired, and now formed the dwelling-house;but it was so sombre, and so perfectly inharmony with the rest of the building, that itgave no offence, for it conveyed no impressionof any modem usurper having invaded the precinctso£ the departed: it rather seemed asif soooae of its former inmates still lingeredthere amid the wreck of former ages. Glenroyknocked at the door ; but it was some time erehis summons was answered. At length a verycorpulent, red-fetched, sour-looking serving-manspeared, and, after a little seeming hesitationin his own mind, acknowledged that he believedhis master was at home ; then with a slow, tod->cling, reluctant gait, he led the way to the apartmentwhere sat the Lord of the Castle.66 Destiny.CHAPTER IX.It was a spacious room, panelled with oak,and handsomely furnished in the modem antiqueStyle. Three windows looked upon the loch,and one at the end of the apartment confrontedan ivy-mantled tower, which admitted few ofday's garish beams, at any time, much less atpresent, when there stood stationed there thehuge person of Mr Duncan M'Dow.On the entrance of the Chief, he instantlyhastened towards him, with his grappling-ironsextended ; and before Glenroy knew where hewas, Benbowie and he were actually led forwardin a triumphant manner, and presented by theminister to the master of the house.I am amazingly proud," said he, in hisloudest and most emphatic manner, " that it hasfallen to my lot to introduce my respected friendDESTINY. 67and patrons Glenroy, to you, Inch Orran, andlikewise my very worthy friend, Benbowie ; thisis really a treat !"Glenroy certainly had been struck dumb, elsehe never could have borne this in silence ; buthe began to rally his forces, although he refrainedfrom breaking out before his kinsman. He thereforemerely bit his lip, and cast a look at MrDuncan, which, if looks could have killed, wouldcertainly have laid the pastor senseless at his feetHe then turned to Inch Orran, who had risen toreceive him from before a table, on which laysome law books, ledgers, bundles of papers, andparchments.Inch Orran was a little meagre sickly-lookingman, with a sharp, bitter ace, a pair of fiery, vindictiveeyes, and a mouth all puckered up, as if tokeep in the many cutting things which otherwisewould have got out. And indeed it must beowned that but few escaped, in comparison of themultitude that lodged within ; for he was one ofthose gifted individuals who have ^^ un grand talentpour le silence." Neither red cap nor blackdog were visible, but, on the contrary, the marks68 Destiny.of the razor were still visible on his chin and hewelcomed his visitors with something that approachedto bare civility. However, people maybethankful when they meet with even bare civilityfrom a particular man, and Glenroy was not one tobe daunted even by bare civility ; so he shook hiskinsman heartily by the hand,, and expressed hipleasure at seeing him in a very cordial mannes*^^ You are welcome to the Highlands InchQnan,'' said he warmly ; ^^ and I hope you willlike us well enough to remain amongst u&"./' Sir, I thank you," was the reply^witbafuUStop.When did you arrive, Inch Orran ?"^ On Tuesday evening, at a quarter past six,sir," in a loud, sharp, cracked voice." I wish I could have prevailed upon you totake up your quarters at Glenroy," said theChief ; " I think I may venture to say, youwould have found yourself comfortable there."There, sir, you must allow me to judge Formyself," was the reply.Here Mr M'Dow thought was a fit opportunityfor him to strike in.DESTINY. 69I assure you. Inch Orran," said he, " howeverlittle Glenroy may think of this house incomparison of his omni, yet I can only say, Iwould be very well pleased if I had a room halfdie size of this in the manse."** You are very moderate, sir," returned InchOrran, with a bitter sneer, which was quitethrown away upon Mr M'Dow, who went on —*^ This house has been wonderfully well repairedand improved; it's really a most commodious,comfortable dwelling, and most handsomelyfurnished : but in general it's my opinion a manshould not think of adding to, or repairing an oldhouse. A man will never make his place abawbee by repairing : for instance, there's theestimate of the addition and repairs for themanse and offices, that I was mentioning to youwhen my worthy and respected patronage in.My house is really a poor affair ; my byre's inamost dreadful state, and my stable's not &great deal better; — sand by the by,'^ as if recollectinghimself, ^^ I'm not sure but I slipped theestimate into my pocket before I came away."Diving into an enormous pouch, like a sack, he70 DESTINY.drew forth a large bundle of papers, which heturned over, as if to ascertain their identity,although every letter was as familiar to him ashis own fingers.Aye, here it is — estimate of the necessaryrepairs for the manse, offices, &c. of Auchter-truckle. You can take a glance at it any timeyou are at leisure. Inch Orran ;" upon which helaid it on the .table, and making another dive,fished up his snuff-mull, which, shaking andpatting, he offered to Inch Orran, who in thesame dry, caustic manner, said,** Sir, snuffing is a practice which I despiseand abominate."Hoot toot, Inch Orran, you must not saythat," cried the undaunted Mr M*Dow, with agreat roar of laughter ; " here's my excellentfriend, Benbowie, has no objections to a snuffany more than myself." Here, Benbowie and heexchanged boxes* " And, by the by, that putsme in mind of a hong mote I read in the EdinburghCaledonian Mercury of the 29tli ultimo,that I was very much taken with : I thought itreally very good : I really had a good laugh atDESTINY. 71it — ^hach, hack, hach, ho. Two snuffers happenedto meet one day, at the Cross, I think it was —Says the one to the other, as they exchangedtheir mulls, just as we have been doing, — saysthe one to the other,• A friend's a good thing at a pinch.'* Yes,* says the other, * but is it not stillbetter for friends to be laying out their moneythis way, at scent per scent?' "Here a tremendous volley of laughter brokeforth, peal upon peal, roar upon roar, while herubbed his hands, rocked upon his chair, andthrew his body about in all directions, in perfectecstasy. " Cent per cent, Benbowie, would soonbuild the manse and mend my byre !" Andthis witticism was followed by another roar, inwhich no one joined except Benbowie, whodid not know at any time what he laughed at.But Mr M'Dow and his mull were not doneyet " Though you are no snuffer. Inch Or-ran,you may perhaps admire the setting ofmy mull ; it's a topers on the top, a Highlandcairngoreum, an uncommon large finesone*. It was given to me in a present by72 DESTINY.my excellent frond, KinduUie, on Ate ooemtonef way leaving his £unity; It was a very gftA^lying token of bis regard for me, and-ef themanner in wUeh he was satisfied I had pexfbnnedmy duty in educating of his seven S(»is. OrHighland mulls and caimgoreums are all thefashion now, Inch Orran."^^ I am no lapidary, sir," said Inch Outran,without deigning even to cast his eyes upon itThat's just my own case, Inch Orr !"quoth the undaunted minister. ^' I know verylittle about these things myself; I have ahmyshad other things to mind, and I have nearer givenmuch attention to your fashionable gimcracks.'^It's a pity, sir !" said Inch Orran, in thatsignificant tone which would have conveyed themost cutting sarcasm to every ear but that ofDuncan M'Dow.Glenroy all this time was fuming to himselfat the laconic dryness of his host on the onehand, and the facetious familiarity his ministeron the other; and indeed a more discordantparty scarcely ever met together in friendlysemblance ; and it seemed in vain t0 expect anyDESTINY. 73thing pleasant from such a compoan(L ,Glenroy thought of the fiunily seat, and thefilkjr thousand pounds, and he made another to be agreeable.^ You hare been a great stranger in Scotland,Inch Qrran ; it must be a long while since youhate visited your own country ?'**» Forty years, sir, and upwards."Forty years ! That is a long time ; whatwonderful changes you must see !'*^^ I do see a change, sir; but that is notwonderful."*the impertinent old cur !" thought Glenroy;what does he mean by snarling at my words ?'And he sat in sullen silence, while the old mankept his scrutinizing eyes fastened upon him withthat terrific expression which eyes sometimes-have,of being not only eyes, but ears.Forty years is a long time," said Benbowie ;on my conscience, it is a very long time."If there were any ladies present, Benbowie,you and I, who are bachelors, would not be verykeen, maybe, of kenning any thing about fortyyears," said Mr M^Dow, with a sly wink and aVOL. I. D74 DESTINY.loud laugh. Tien paused, in hopes of beingrallied on the subject of his celibacy, but in vain ;so he went on*— ^^ Many's the gibe I get frommy excellent friend Kindullie, about not havingprovided a dow for my nest yet — sho, hoch, ho ! —But I tell him I must first get my dookit beforeI think of providing a dow for it. Don't youthink Fm right, there, Inch Orran?' with athundering peal of laughter.« Sir ? "O, it's entirely a joke, on both sides — youunderstand it, Glenroy ? I must get my addition,if not an entire new manse and offices,before I can ask a lady to come and presidethere. I can give you no Mrs M*Dow till yougive me my drawing-room and my byre, at allevents. Don't you think that's but reasonable,Inch Orran ?"Really, Mr M'Dow, this is not a time tointroduce your private affairs," said the Chief,haughtily.I beg your pardon, Glenroy ; but I reallymust differ from you there. Only consider,here's a meeting of my three principal heritors !DESTINY. 75Who knows when I may have such anotheropportunity, though, I am sure, I trust we mayhave many pleasant meetings for all that. But,however, since I have the pleasure of seeing myprincipal heritors convened, I think ther (an beno harm in just taking a slight glance at mySummons of Augmentation, wych. with theinterim locality, I happen to have by mere chanceabout me." And, plunging his arm into theother bottomless gulf of a pocket, out came ahuge bunch of papers, from which even Ben*bowie instinctively drew away his chair, " Yousee it is no great bulk ; you'll soon glance overit There's first the Summons — that's it, No. I.Summons, at the instance of the Rev. DuncanM^Dow, minister of Auchterbruckle, for an augmentationof stipend, &c. Then there's theinterlocutor of the Court, with the interimlocality and decreet ; for you see, although myallocation is upon the tends of ^"I hope you have brought Mrs Malcolmwith you. Inch Orran ?" said Glenroy, makinga desperate attempt to get the better of thetends.76 DESTINY.Certainly, sir," was the laconic reply.*' I trust I shall have the pleasure of payingmy respects to her, then, if convenient ?"Do you wish to see my wife, sir ?" demandedInch jordan, in no very sweet accent.^^ If quite convenient and agreeable, I shouldbe happy to welcome your lady to the Highlands."Inch. Orran rung the bell, which was answeredby the fat serving-man. ^^ Be so good, Simon,"said he, in a voice like a lamb, ^' as desire Mrsmalcolm to come here."She is dressing, I believe," said Simon.Send her here when she is ready, Simon."And Simon, with a bang of the door, withdrew.;j-'.'DESTINY. 77CHAPTER X.In a few minutes the door opened, and thelady entered. She was arrayed in a bright ambersilk gown, a full dress cap, decorated withscarlet ribbons, and even more than the usualnumber of bows that tied nothing, and ends thatevidently had no ends to answer, save that ofswelling the milliner's bill. She had a mean,vacant countenance, and a pair of most unhandy-lookinghands crossed before her, clothed inbright purple gloves, with long empty finger-ends,dangling in all directions. All artistsadmit, that there is as much character displayedin hands as in heads, and Mrs Malcolm's handswere perfectly characteristic; they proclaimedat once that they could do nothing; that theywere utterly helpless, and morally, not physicallyimbecile.78 DESTINY.inch Orran seemed instinctively aware of herapproach, for without looking the way she was,he merely said, " Mrs Malcolm, gentlemen ;"and Mrs Malcolm advancing in an awkward,trailing manner, made sundry low curtseys toher guests, and extending her empty finger-eiids,(which were eagerly caught at by Mr M'Dowi)she, in a peaking, monotonous voice, ^pire^edher pleasure at sight of them.Why Mr Malcolm had married Mrs Mal&dliil,was one of those mysteries which had baffled all> < ■ 'conjecture, for she had neither beauty, money,connexions, talents, accomplishments, nor cotssense. Not that she was ugly, for shewould have looked very well in a toy-shop window.She had pink cheeks, blue eyes, and aset of neat yellow curls ranged round her brow.She was much younger than her husband, andlooked still more juvenile than she really Was,for not all the contempt and obloquy that hadbeen poured upon her for upwards of twenty• ' ■' *years had ever made her change either countenanceor colour ; in fact, she had neither passions,feelings, nerves — scarcely sensations. She seem-destiny,79ed precisely one of those whom Nature haddestined to ^^ suckle fools and chronicle smallbeer;" but fate had denied her the fools, andInch Orran had debarred her from all interferenceeven with the small beer ; for such was hiscontempt for the se:. in general, and for his ownportion of it in particular, that he deemed awoman quite incompetent to regulate a household*His domestic concerns were thereforeconducted ostensibly by himself, but virtuallyby his set senring-maa, who was his foster-another,and had been his factotum long before hemarried. Even his dress, to the most minutearticle, was all of Simon's providing. Simonalone knew to a hair the cut and colour of hiswig, the pattern of his pocket-handkerchiefs, thtexture of his shirts and neckcloths, the preciselatitude and longitude of his flannel waistcoats,i.'r.with various other particulars incident to a particularman. Now, the chief occupation of MtbMalcolm's life was trailing from shop to shop, insearch of any thing or nothing, and she wouldhave liked to have the dressing of Mr Malcolmfor the pleasure of buying bargains for him. ^e90 Destiny.had therefore attempted to wrest this privilegej0Bt of Simon's hands, but in vain ; she hMl piecedup a pennyworth of a wig, which she fiaid:f^ looked remarkably neat on the head'* bitwhich Simon tamed up his nose at, and hismaster threw into the fire. She had haggled till^riie was hoarse about a dozen of cotton pcH^I-handkerchiefs, which, after all, Simon pronouncedt» be perfectly useless, as they were of the dift-ni(Hid pattern, and his master would not blowhis nose with any thing but a spot. Hepiin^Movements upon flannel jackets had very nearlycmised a formal separation, and from that tfan^her active energies not being permitted to exertthemselves either upon her household stairsor her husband's wardrobe, had centered entirelyin her own person. She lived in a perpetual,weal:, impotent bustle about nothing, spent hermoney in buying hoards of useless clothes, andher time in looking at them, folding and unfoldingthem, airing them, locking them up protectingthem from the moths in summer, andmildew in winter, and so on. To crown thewhole, she set up for being a sensible woman,DfiSTiKT* 81Kfni tallied xnaudlm nonsense by the ywtd; forsbe ivasone of those who would adc if the seaproduced com, lather than hold her tongue*Here it may be remarked, that it requires a greatteal of mind to be silent at the right time adplace. True, there are some few gifted* indivi-diiiJs, whose conversation flows like a continuedrtr««n, fertilizing all around, enriching otherwithout impoverishing themselves ; but how differentfrom the idle chatter of empty headswhose only sounds are caused by their own hollowness.^^ Two things there are, indicative ofa weak mind," says Saadi, the Persian sage^ to be silent when it is. proper to speak, and toweak when it is proper to be silent." Suchwas the helpmate of Inch Orran.^^ I am happy to see you, gentlemen'' saidshe, in Lier little tiresome croaking voice ; ^ indeedI'm thankful to see any body, for this msuch a lonely out-of-the-way poe* I adjustsaying this momii^, what an improvement atown would be on the water side ; it would be Hgreat ornament, and of great use in making astir, and giving employment to poor people, andd282 DE8TINT.very convenient too. Fm sui^ris^ it hammerstruck any body to set such a thiii^ a-goingwhen teres such a want of employment for thepoor**«* Rome was not built in a day, you know,ma'^un," said the facetious Mr M^Dow, with oneof his loud laughs; « but if you will use yourinfluence with Inch Orran, and prevail uponhim t» begins there's no saying where it maycnd" ^flW)dier peal-^^ and I hope the kirk andthe manse will not be forgot, Inch Orran."Still less the stipend, sir'* said Inch Orran,with one of his vicious sneers.I'll answer for it the stipend will no getleave to be forgot," returned the incorrigibleMr M'Dow, with one of his loudest roars ; " youmay trust the minister for keeping you in mindof that." i'* I believe I may, sir."And let it be a good one at the first. InchOrran, that he may not have sadi a battle tofight for his augmentation as I have had. Ireally think the Teind Court has taken an entirewrong view of the subject there, or theyDESTINY. 83would are given me the decreet at onccin^You'll no go along with me there, Glenroy/'But Glencoe disdained to reply, so the Utileold man said ^^ It was the saying, sir, of one. ofthe wisest judges who ever sat upon the Scottishbench, that a poor clergy made a pure clergy-a mam which deserves to be enliven mletters of gold on every manse in Stand." '^' Deed, then, I can tell you, Inch Orran, thegold would be very soon pike off," returned MrM^Dow, with redoubled bursts of laughter. ^^ Nana,you must keep the gold for your fine EnglishEpiscopalian palaces, where it's no so scarceas it's among us'' and Mr M^Dow perfectlyrevelled in the delight of this jeu d* esprit MrsMalcolm now struck in. ^^ I'm quite tormentedwith these midges. I don't think they'll leavethe skin upon me. I wish they would bite you,Mr Malcolm."Perhaps, sir, you would wish some refreshment,"said Inch Orran, addressing Glenroy, inavoice louder and shriller than that with whichPunch denounces Polly. The Chief, who wasstill under the influence of a late and luxurious84 Destiny.breakfast declined ; but upon the same offer. >(ifoffer it could be called) being put to Benbonde,be was so little in the habit of refusing any^diii^except to give money, and besides had such awilling appetite, that he at once greedUyassented.Mr M^Dow rubbed his hands, drew out hispocket-handkerchief, placed his hands upon hisknees, and began snuffing the air, as though Malready caught the scent of some savoury mss.,. The bell was faintly rung by Indi Organsbut some minutes elapsed, and no one answered).That's always the way with that Simon''said Mrs Malcolm ; ^^ I'm sure I wish we had awell-behaved, clever, active boy, for''But a bitter look, and a sh — sh, from her lord,stopped her tongue, while a fierce tingle of thebell brought forth Simon.'^ Refreshments, if you please, Simon," saidhis master, in a softer tone and manner than hehad yet evinced.Refreshments, sir?" repeated Simon puttinghis hand to his forehead, with an air ofgreat perplexity.^* I think some warm broth would be the bestDESTINY. 8Sfthing in such a want day'' said Mrs Malcolm ;'^ for, when people are warm, they should nevtake any thing cold — it's very dangerous — I hadan aunt once"'^ Something cold, Simon," said his mastersdecidedly.^' Cold, sir ?' repeated Simon ; then, seem-^11^ to recollect himself, he withdrew.Then ensued a great deal of heart trampingto and fro, and a mighty clattering of plates,knives and forks, which was music to the ears ofBenbowie and Mr M^Dow.At length entered Simon, and with mvukseeming exertion, began to rub down a table(although there was neither sped nor spot upcmit) in the most ostentatious manner, puffing andblowing all the while, as though he had been inthe tread-mill'^ Take care of the carpet, Simon," said itemistress ; but Simon seemed as though he heardher not He then unfolded and ciff^blly laida table-cloth with mathematical precision, retiringa few paces to judge of its general effects86 DESTINY.and then returning to adjust what his eye pronouncedto be amiss. **< I think the doth shoidd be rather nunre thisway, Simon," said his mistress, drawings it towardsher, with an air of great importance.Tut," muttered Simon, as he jerked it inthe contrary direction.Once more he withdrew, and another pauseensued, during which Glenroy made anotherattempt to draw his host into conversation.*^ This is a beautiful situation of yours. InchOrran," said he, — " I really know nothingfiner."It is a very dmraJfe property, sir," returnedthe old man, with marked emphasis.You have one of the noblest views in Scotlandfrom these windows," said the Chief, proudly,as he looked on his own princely domain,It may be, sir ; but I have other things tolook tp than fine views on this neglected property,"replied Inch Orran.That's precisely my own case. Inch Orran,"said Mr M'Dow. " One person has been saying,when they came to the manse, ^ O what a beau-destiny.87tifiil situation, Mr M^Dow !* Another says, * Oh,such ^ grand view, Mr M^Dow!' Another cries,^ I really think you beat glen roy himself, in yourprospects Mr M'Dow.' That may all be, saysI ; but the best prospects I have in view are acomfortable manse, an addition to the glebe, andthe decreet for my augmentation. Ho, hochehoch, ho."Neither Glenroy nor Inch Orran took thesmallest notice of this sally; and the formercontinued to address the latter.I have the advantage of you in one respectInch Orran ; for diis place of yours forms oneof the finest features in the view from my windows ; though, without vanity, Imay say Glenroy is also a very fine object fromyours,"'' Probably, sir, you may have more pleasurein the view of my property than I have in contemplatingyours."Glenroy felt his cheek flush at this palpablehit ; but just then the door was thrown wideopen, and Simon appeared with his arms at fullstretch, bearing a tray, which he deposited on a9S J^ESTIVY*$td€htable9 and then proceeded to arrange.intents with the same bustling importance \y\- At the top of the table was placed the wis^t^oib of a tongue, and vi&^vis the almost }m^blade-bone of a shoulder of mutton ; on oi^.sidir»a thin slice of bread was confronted with a fewpotatoes; at the confers were a jug of <whe}i^and another of water ; a decanter containing a£bw glasses of port, and a bottle of cuiraiit. wftCiQ,Mde and bout, and tasting, as currant wine sometimesdoes, of brown sugar, blue papers yellows<»p, cork, candle, twine, and vinegar. , .,.i- The two expectants had felt their appetitesconsiderably damped at sight of the cheer prossvide for them; they, however, seated themselves,though with rueful faces. To do themjustice, neither of them were nice, but they bothloved a savoury mess, something to make a slopwith ; somedung to eat with their knives-thatthey ought to eat with their forks. But, alas !here was no room for such a display ; for, thoughMr M^Dow, as the younger and strong man,contrived both to cut and chew the inflexibleremains of the tongue, poor Benbowie was com-DESTINY. ^pretty baffled in the attempt; and all lie coulddo was to nimble dowii a bit of bread, and spilllink£ a glass of wine on the table-cloth, after whichke-declared he had had enough— quite enough,on his conscience. While the master of therebels drank to the health of his guests verygraciously in a glass of green whey.h ^ I shall let the old miser see what good livingis f thought Glenroy, as he began a pompousand pressing invitation to his kinsman to 8pei>da few days with him, accompanied by ostentatiousoffers of barge, pinnace, carriages, horsesservant &c. — ^^ It is my intention to spend aootqple of days with you, sir, before I leave thecountry," replied InchOrran; '^ and, if agreeableto you, when I can make it convenient to myself,I shall not fsdl to apprise you."TUswas more than Glenroy had expected, or^ei^haps wished for, now that he had experiencedthe nature of the man; but, of course, he waitall pleasure, gratification, and so forth. A hopewas then expressed that Mrs Malcolm wouldjmn the party.90 DESTINY.iiiMost certainly, sir," replied Inch Orran.keep no separate establishment for my wife'*^ I'm sure I shall be very happy to go* saidshe ; ^^ for I'll be thankful to go any where thisis such a dull place. Only, if the ladies here dressmuch to go out to dinner,. I'm sure I don't knowwhat I shall do, Mr Malcolm, for a cap fo r .» . .■■ "But^a — " sh — sh," and a wave of his hand firjomher hudbandji stopped her mouth, and the visitorstook leave. .<;As they traversed the long passage, they descriedSimon at the other extremity, waddlingalong with a foaming tankard in one hand, aafKda long-necked bottle in the other ; and, at thesame time, the nostrils of Benbowie and MrM*Dow were assailed with the smell of somevery gusty viands, towards which Mr Simonseemed to have been steering his course.The half-open door of a housekeeper's room,from whence issued the fragrance, induced themboth to thrust in their heads ; and there stooddisclosed a table neatly laid for two, with asmoking tureen of hodge-podge, and a magnificentjowl of salmon. At this sight the twoDESTINY. 91stood as if entranced, with open mouths andoutstretched necks ; but it was of short duration ;for direct a quick foot — an invisible hand — andthe door was shut with an angry slap.*• On my conscience ! but I would rather betheman than the master' said Benbowie, witha grunt of dissatisfaction, as he followed his friendto th barge.** At least, I woidd rather take pot4uck withhim," said Mr M^Dow, with a faint attempt ata laugh, as, with a discomfited air, he betookhim^sdf to his Amailye, (as he had christened hispony, in honour of the Lady Kindlier) andtrotted away in quest of better cheer.92 DESTINY,CHAPTER XLGlenroy returned home much dissatisfiedwith his visit. He had been provoked at thedry impertinence of the old man, disgusted withthe tiresome weakness of his wife, and incensedbeyond measure at the innumerable offences ofMr M*Dow. Neither was his ill-humour appeased,when, at the end of a week, he received thefollowing dispatch, written in the plainest, andsquarest, and most inflexible of hands.Mr Mungo Malcolm presents his complimentsto Mr Norman Malcolm of Glenroy, andif still convenient for him to receive a visit, MrMungo Malcolm will, in pursuance of his originalintention, wait upon him on Wednesdaynext, the 20th ult., in the course of the afternoon,and purposes to be his guest till the followingSaturday forenoon, when he positively takesDESTINY. 93leave. Mr M. Malcolm will be accompaniedby his wife and male servant."Glenroy chafed like a boar at being thus addressedas Mr Norman Malcolm, and scouted thewhole style of the billet ; but it is much to bewished that the world in general, and many veryworthy people in particular, would follow theexample of Mr Mungo Malcolm, in thus preciselymarking the limits of their intended stay.All householders, whatever they may pretend,must at some period or other have groaned underthe indefinable misery of an undefined length ofvisit, and every family must have felt the wantof a chronometer, for ascertaining the respectiveideas of both parties, as to the reasonable latitudeand longitude of a visit. In good old times, Scotlandhad its regular standard measure for visiting,as it had for its oatmeal and potatoes. A rest day,a, dress day, and a press day, were the appointedmeasure of a visitor's days. The first was conseparated to repose, after the fatigues of the journey,whether there had been a journey or not ;the second was allotted to showing off the full-dresssuit, prepared perhaps for the occasion;94 DESTINY.and the third was delicately appropriated to thepressing solicitations of the host and always conferredas an act of bounty over and above. Thusboth parties were pleased the presser and thepressed; the presser at having conquered, thepressed at having conceded ; and thus they parted,happy to part, happy to meet, and haj^y topart again.But since this barrier has been broken downby modem innovation, visiting has no longerany limits, except such as exist in the minds ofthe respective parties ; and, accordingly, " there'sthe respect" that makes cautious people pausebefore bringing upon themselves a visit. Avisit ! how vaguift — ^how undefined — ^how dark^how immeasurable — how obscure-'^how unfathomable— how mysterious— is a visit ! A visitmay be meant for a day, or a week, or a month ;and it may be taken for a winter, or a summer,or a year ! A visit may be the cement of friendship,or it may be the bane of domestic happiness! A visit may be like an angel's coming,brief and rare, or it may be like a woundedcrocodile, drawing its slow length along.DESTINY. 95But none of these evils could befall the hostof Mr Miingo Malcolm, for the day, and hour,and minute of his departure were always settled,as upon this occasion, long before his arrival.Glenroy anticipated any thing but pleasure fromthis visit, but he comforted himself by consideringit as a compliment, and the next thing tobeing declared heir to Inch Orran. He thereforeresolved to pay all honour to his guest, andto win his heart by the good cheer and gaietyhe would provide for him.The appointed day arrived — ^a raw, bleak,chill, unhappy-looking day ; not stormy enoughto be grand, but just rough enough to be disagreeable.The hills were covered with mist,the sky with clouds, the sea with foam, anddoubts were entertained whether the old manwould venture forth on such a day, when, in themidst c£ mist, and clouds, and rain, and foam, alittle black dripping boat was descried rowingalong, which being run ashore, out stepped InchOrran, his aspect completely harmonizing withthat of nature. Next was dragged forth MrsMalcolm, a mass of cloaks and shawls. Next96 DESTINY.followed Simon, with a small bundle under hisarm, his person snugly ensconced beneath a highumbrella, which he affected to hold carefully overhis lady, but of which she got only the droppings.The Laird and his lady were welcomed byGlenroy with every demonstration of courtesyand good-will. They were received by him inhis great hall, decorated with banners, and broadsswords, and dirks, and claymores, and targets,and deers' heads, and warlike trophies of everydescription, amidst which a consequential full-limitedpiper paced to and fro. Altogether, theeffect was grand and imposing, but it was quitelost upon the guests. Inch Orran, if he noticedat all, noticed only to hate such trumpery,and his lady did not know a dirk from a deer'shorn. Glenroy's attempts at striking them withawe on their first entrance, were therefore allin vain ; it was to no purpose that he pointedout the stately banner of one chief, and thesingular dirk of another, and related anecdotespertaining to each.Inch Orran's horrid listening eyes were bentstraight upon him, but he never opened his lipsDESTINY. 97unless to utter a monosyllable. But still moreenraging was his lady's commotion, upon discoveringthat she had lost one of her gloves ; itwas a new glove, a pink glove, a French glove,a habit glove ; it was the fellow of the glove shehad on ; she must have left it in the boat, or itmust have fallen into the sea, or she must havedropped it on the road, or Simon must have seenit, or it must be in Mr Malcolm's pocket, for itcould not be lost, and it was not about her; andshe shook herself round and round in testimonythereof. These her surmises and lamentationswere uttered in a low, slow, monotonous tone toBenbowie and Mrs Macauley, as with a dementiaair she looked all round about, and not seeingher pink glove, she saw nothing else. Mrs Macauleyand Benbowie bestirred themselves withalltheir might in search of the stray glove, forit was a case that came home to both theirbosoms ; they had each lost gloves at differentperiods of their lives, they therefore knew whatit was to lose a glove. They entered into thenature of the loss ; they did not idly sympathizein it, they exerted themselves to seek for it,VOL. I. E98 DESTINY.they wondered for it, they lamented for it, theypoked about for it in all improbable as well asimpossible places ; in short, all the energies oftheir heads, hearts, and hands, were put in motionfor the recovery of the glove, but in vain. ,Simon was next summoned, and he ended thematter at once by boldly declaring, that he hadseen the glove drop into the water as his ladywas coming out of the boat, and that just as hewas trying to recover it, a monstrous wave hadswept it away, and he could see no more of it.I'm sure I never know whether to believeSimon or not," said the lady to Mrs Macauley ;" for I think he'll say any thing just to savehimself trouble." *A rich repast, under the head of luncheon,was now served up ; but this Inch Orran refusedpoint blank even to approach, and, upon beingpressed by his host to partake, in a manner thatsavoured more of hospitality, than of free will leftIt will doubtless be a relief to the compassionate readerto learn, that the glove was all this while in Mrs Malcolm'sown pocket.DESTINY. 99to his guest, he said in his most peremptory manner,^^ Sir, I make it a rule to dine but once a-day."This was uttered in a tone not to be disputed ; buthe added, in a somewhat softer key, ^^ but I request,sir, May be no restraint on your usual practices'*and motioning his host towards the table,he betook himself to a &r-ofF comer of the room,the most remote and inaccessible, where he beganto read a newspaper, and Glenroy, already boilingat his dogged impertinence, left him to chewthe cud of his own reflections, while he did thehonours of the banquet100 DESTINY.CHAPTER NilThe party were scarcely seated, when youngNorman came bounding into the apartment in allthe exuberance of unchecked animal spirits^just letloose fix)m the restraints of the school-room, andevidently master of his own actions everywhereelse. He was a handsome sprightly boy, with ahaughty careless air, that showed he was alreadyaware of his own importance. He eyed InchOrran for a moment, with a look that seemed tosay, " Who are you ?" as he brushed past himto the table, followed by a large greyhound.^^ Go and shake hands with that gentleman,Norman," said his father; " that is Inch Orran."But Norman heard as though he heard himnot.I am 50 hungry, papa," said he, casting awandering glance from dish to *dish all over theDESTINY. 101table ; ^^ I hope you have got something goodfor me — O do make haste, pray — No, no, I won'thave a mutton-chop," drawing away his platequickly as Mrs Macauley was preparing to helphim ; then, as suddenly retracting, " Yes, youmay give me one for Fingal — Here Rn, Fin, mypretty fellow, here is a mutton-chop for you —now eat it like a gentleman, and don't greasethe carpet."^^ Norman, did you hear me desire you to goand shake hands with our friend Inch Orran ?"said Glenroy, in a more authoritative tone.Yes, papa, I will presently, but "• " Go then, sir, when I desire you," cried theChief, in rising displeasure.** Yes, papa — Ah ! ham-pile, that is so good !"and he jumped and shook his hands in ecstasy.^^ Now, do give me some, papa, there is nothingI love so much."Unless you do as I desire you, sir, deuce abit of any thing you shall taste to-day," criedGlenroy, angrily; his authority over hia sonalways requiring to be backed by a threat, or abribe, or an oath ; sometimes by all three.102Destiny.Well, then, remember yon promised mesome ham-pie, papa ;" and, slowly approachingInch Orran, with his head riveted to the table,and his eye upon the dish, he extended his handto him ; but it met nth no corresponding more,ment on the part of Inch Orran, whose handsremained firmly closed before him. Nowisedisconcerted, however, his young kinsman madea sort of snatch at his hand, and then, satisfiedhe had done his part, skipped away back to enjoythe reward of his obedience. Glenroy tout aglance at the old man in the comer, but he didnot like his look. His lips were drawn in tillthey were invisible ; his cheeks were distendedlike bolus's bags, and his eyes glared like a catinthe dark. His lady was all this while seatedbetween Benbowie and Mrs Macauley, and enjoyingherself to her heart's content in conversingwith them.What's become of Reginald and Edithto-day ?* enquired Glenroy, and at that momentthe sound of young voices in the hall seemed toanswer the question. Fingal pricked up his ears,and wagged his tail, while his master sprung upDESTINY. 103and bounded away, followed by bis favourite,wbo almost jumped over Inch Orran, in hiseagerness to gain the door.^< What are these children about ?" demandedGlenroy angry, as the uproar increased.** You must come in — you shall come in —don't let him go — hold him fast," resoundedthrough the hall, and presently entered a youthfulgroup, consisting of the three children of diehouse, all hanging round a fine manly-lookingboy, dripping wet, and evidently of a differentstock from his more dainty-looking companions*^^ There is Ronald, papa," whispered Edith,as she ran up to her father.Well, and what of that ?" answered he inadissatisfied tone. ^^ Do you see no greaterstrangers than him here, that you should bemaking all this noise ?"Edith blushed, and turned to Mrs Malcolm ;then, but with still more timidity, went to InchOrran, who, relaxing from his sternness, tookthe little hand that was held out to him, andeven bestowed a pat on the head, as if to make104 DESTINY.Up for the rebuff she had met with from hereither. Meanwhile the two boys had compelledtheir guest to approach to the table, quite unconsciousof the haughty looks with which Glen-royregarded him.^* Now you are our prisoner," cried Norman ;*^ so sit down, and you shall have something toeat, though you deserve to be fed on bread andwater, for attempting to escape. — Here, Fin, athim, if he offers to stir without my leave."*' How your dirty shoes have stained mytowers," said Reginald pettishly, as he rubbedtome spots of mud from his white trowsers ; « Iwish I hadn't gone near you ; and I am so hot,"putting his fingers through his hair ; and throwinghimself at full length upon two chairs, hebegan to fan himself with a napkin.*^ So, Master Ronald, what has brought youhere this bad day ?" enquired the Chieftain, in novery encouraging accent.The boy coloured, as if he felt the rudenessof the enquiry; then answered, " I came toreturn Norman's fishing-rod."DESTINY. 106Plioo— there could be no hoary in tfaai»"said the Chief, stUl more coldly.^^ I had promised to bring it to-day," saidRonald.^^ Pshaw, what signified that," said Nonnancarelessly ; " you needn't have got yourself wetfor a promise, if that was all."^^ I would rather have to swim for my lifethan break my word," said Ronald warmly.The two boys burst into a fit of laughing* ,^^ On my conscience, but there's a great difference,"said Benbowie, with a look of alaroBu^^ Come, come, let us have no more nonsense '/said Glenroy impatiently ; ^^ and if you're ferany thing to eat, boys, make haste, for everybody'sdone."Ronald declined the ungracious invitationand WHS retiring, when he was again seized byhis two friends.^^ O, you know, you are our prisoner ; so youneedn't attempt to get away. You trust stay,and you shall eat. So sit down."^^ Must and shall?* repeated Ronald, with asmile; while his open countenance and fine106 BfiSTIKY.intrepid air showed that he yielded more fromgood-humour than from false shame or fear ; forhe wore.« upon his forehead clearThe freedom of a mountaineer ;A face with gladness overspreadAnd looks by human kindness bred*"Altogether there was an air of noble, artlesssttttplieity about the boy extremely prepossessking, and rendered still more striking when contentedwith the more artificial elegance of hiscompanions, and the saucy capricious airs • cfsuperiority which marked the children of confluence.'■" Now, although you are a prisoner," saidNorman, " I shall allow you to choose for yourself.What will you have ? Here is a ham-piewhich I can recommend. — Papa, I told Barclaythat I thought he had put rather too many trufflesand morels in the last, and not enough ofeggs ; and, by the by, plover's eggs are muchthe best. — If you like venison, Ronald, here is aImsh, which is by far the best way of eatingvenison, at least in my opinion."DESTINY. 107,<' I'll take a mutton-chop," said Ronald, helpinghimself to what was next him.A mutton-chop ! horrible ! that's Fingal'sdish ; but he wouldn't eat them now, for theyare almost cold"It is very good," said Ronald, eating witha hearty appetite*Perhaps you choose a cold potatoes too,"said Reginald, contemptuously holding one up.Warm ones are better," said Ronald, takinga potatoes ; " but I don't care — it doesn't signify."^^ No ; to be sure, if people have no taste itdoes not signify," said Norman, piqued at theindifference of his guest, and bent upon showinghis power and consequence, especially beforesuch queer-looking people, as Inch Orran andhis lady.<^ You are quite wet, Ronald," said Edith sofasshe put her hand on his arm. Then whisperedto her father, <* Fray, papa, give Ronald a glassof wine."<' Here's a glass of wine for you," said Glen*roy, pouring it out ungraciously, and as if be108 DESTINY.wished to end the scene ; but Ronald declinedtaking it.^^ Do take it, dear Ronald," said Edith.^^ We shall mike him take it," said the youngheir, whose hospitality was of the most peremptorynature.*^ If I was to take it for any body, it wouldbe for Edith," said Ronald ; ^^ but I don't chooseany wine, thank you."<^ Come, drink it off, and go away and amuse *yourselves somewhere else," cried Glenroy, in avery bad humour.Ronald instantly rose, but was again seizedby his two tormentors.O you shall not stir till you have drank itto the last drop."And Norman, taking the glass of wine, wouldhave forced it to. his lips ; but he shook him off.« Nothing will make me drink wine," said he,firmly.'* Oh, you are a Turk, a Mussulman ! — aTurk, a Turk !" shouted the two boys in derision.<^ He is an obstinate dog," said Glenroy ; ^^ let.'H.DESTINY. 109lum alone." Ronald's colour rose, but he saidnothing.What is the reason you refuse to drink,my boy?" demanded Inch Orran, emergingfrom his comer, where he had been an attentivespectator of all that had passed. Ronald melhis sharp inquisitive glance with the clear ingenuousexpression of his fall blue eye ; but hewas silent for a moment, then said,^^ Because my feather wishes me not to drinkwine."« And why ?"Ronald cast down his eyes.O, I know the reason now," whispered thetwo boys, nodding to each other with halfnsup*pressed smiles, then whispering, ^^ if s becausethey're so poor."Ronald instantly shook off his embarrassmentand looking up, said, '^ He can't afford to giveus wine at home."** On my conscience, and that's the very reasonyou should get leave to take it when you canget it elsewhere," said Benbowie.Well, well, we have had enough of this,"110 Destinycried Glenroy, impatiently; " go away, anddivert yourselves elsewhere, children. — Goodmorning, Mr Ronald."And Ronald, in spite of the forcible attemptsof his friends to detain him, shook them off with:dise, and darted away in the midst of a heavy,rain.That's the son of Jack Malcolm of Lochdhu?'said Inch Orran, fixing his inquisitorial eyes fill.upon Glenroy, who felt that an apology was duefor this ill-timed meeting with the son of theman he detested, and he replied, " Yes. Fmsorry this should have happened, Inch Orran —but the father is a tacksman of mine-^I couldn'tbe off letting him hare a farm that joined to hillown bit of property, and that boy has got a sortoi footing here through the children ; they'resad of companions near their own age."How many children has Jack Malcolm ?"asked the old man, abruptly.About a dozen, I believe," said Glenroy,contemptuously.And that is his eldest son ?"*^ Yes ; and if he had been mine, and I hadDestiny. Illbeen in his father's situation, he shouldn't havebeen idling away his time at home. I gave themmy advice, which was to send that boy to somecheap public school in England, where he wouldlearn something of the world, which U the thingfor a boy that has his way to make in it Butthey wouldn't hear of it ; said they would ratherlive upon bread and water than send any childof theirs to a great school. However, they are-notjust at that, for they can at least give themkail and porridge ;" with a laugh of derision. >A spark shot from the corner of Inch Orran'seye, as he turned abruptly away, muttering somethingbetween his teeth. The rain fell withoutintermission for the rest of the day, which see^iH*ed of endless duration to both parties, and Glen*roy was at last obliged to have recourse to MrsMacauley's much despised musical powers tawile away the time.112 DESTINY.CHAPTER XiiThe following day cleared up, and there wasa bright sun, and a sweet blowing wind, andevery thing looked gay, and every body pleasedexcept Inch Orran, who minded neither sun norwind, and was alike insensible to the charms ofnature and the influence of weather.Glenroy had invited a large party, that is hehad summoned all who were within call to dohonour to his kinsman's visits and the house(which indeed was seldom empty) had continuedto fill during the whole morning with invitedguests, as also with chance droppers-in of variousdescriptions. The Chief felt as if there wassafety &om his kinsman's ill-humour in the multitudethat surrounded him; his courage rose,his spirits revived, and he was himself again.But it was a transitory calm. The dinner hourDESTINY. 113was drawing near,, the guests were all assembled,when suddenly, borne on the breeze, camethe distant neighing of a steed. Glenroy startedand turned red ; another and another loud, andlong, and shrill, and joyful burst; it was thewell-known happy neigh of Amailye, announcingthe approach of Mr Duncan M^Dow ! Hadthe castle possessed a drawbridge, it certainlywould have been raised on the instant, but asthere were neither javelin-men nor moat tooppose him, the minister rode boldly on, arrayedas usual in his large woolly great-coat and redworsted comforter.Mrs Malcolm caught the sotigh of his namesand thereupon thought proper to address Glen-roy.<^ Is that the Mr M^Dow that was so good asto call one day at Inch Orran ? what an uncommonpleasant, sensible, well-informed man he is !I was really very much pleased with him ; he'sso polite and well-bred, and has so much to say ;he seems a very superior man ; it must be a greatadvantage to have such a man for a clergymanand I'm sure you have great credit in your114 DESTINY.choice, for there's really something so very —ahem — ^a — so imcommonly — sl — a — ;S0 much ofthe gentleman about him'Glenroy disdained to reply.*■■ • Here the announcement of Mr M*Dow put astop to the remarks, and presently his heavyfoot announced itself. Although there was alarge assemblage of ladies and gentlemen present,Mr M^Dow, as usual, made a point of grapplingwith each individually, right and left, hereand there, cross hands and down backs, in themost indefatigable manner. Then fastening up(mhis host, he burst out with one of his itvaHt courierroars of laughter.** Well, Glenroy, there's one thing, I'm sure,you'll not say of me, as was said of a poor friendof mine, who was thought rather neglectful ofhis parish in the visiting way, and something toometaphysical in his discourses &om his pulpit —it was really very ready said — sho, hoch, how —that he was a most wonderful man, for he wasinvisible six days in the week, and incomprehensibleon the seventh; very clever, ratherDESTINY. 115severe, to be sure, but ic was really just thetruth — ^how, how, ho, hoeh.**Glenroy was not like Hamlet He could haveused daggers, but he could not speak them. Hedid not excel in repartee at any time, for whenprovoked, he was instantly in a passion ; and nptdaring to give scope to it in the present instance,all he could do was to dart a furious glance atthe intruder, and turn on his heel. But heel ortoe, it was all one to the minister, who wasquite insensible to all rebuffs, especially as hemet with a warm reception from such of theparty, as, being more remote and inaccessible intheir dwellings, and having nothing to say asto the augmentation, were not favoured with somuch of his company in their ovm houses.And as one person of easy manners — ^no matterhow vulgar — sis always acceptable to theguests, whatever he may be to the host, MrM^Dow's bad jokes and hearty laugh were verypalatable to some of the party, who found themmuch more relishing than the overbearing pompof Glenroy, or the morose silence of Inch Orran.Mr M^Dowj therefore, was very soon riding on.119 DESTINY.the rigging of his own good spirits ; and pealupon peal, roar upon roar, followed in quicksuccession, and raised many an echo from thelower orders of the company. His staying todinner w^a a matter of course. In the first fluidof his gratified feelings, at having got the man ofhis choice, a moderate man, an honest fellow,and also pleased \^dth the convivial habits, andjolly manners which he saw would be no restrainton his own, Glenroy had in a rash moment givenhim a general invitation to his house, which theminister had not been slack in availing himselfof, particularly if there was any thing going onthat promised better cheer, or more amusementthan common. As surely, therefore, as Glenroyhad any new arrivals of consequence, or a larger,or more ceremonious party than usual, or anextraordinary influx of company, or any strangersof great distinction, he might depend uponMr M'Dow's dropping in. It was quite wonderfulhow and where he acquired such speedyand certain intelligence; for in a remote andthinly-peopled country, where dwellings werefew and far between, it could neither be by see-destiny.117ing, or hearing, or smelling. But so it was ; nowild Indian could have tracked his prey withgreater certainty and finesse than Mr M*Dowdid a good dinner; indeed, nothing could surpassthe accuracy and success with which hefollowed the trail of a jolly party, or what hetermed " an innocent recreation."Glenroy having surmounted the first shock ofhis appearance, though still boiling with wrathagainst him, resolved to make it pl that hiscompany was not expected at dinner, and thereforesaid, in his stateliest manner, " You are toolate for luncheon, Mr M'Dow ; but if you wishfor any refreshment, I shall order some to theeating-room for you."You are really extremely kind and considerate,Glenroy," replied his guest, with muchhearty warmth of manner ; " but it is quite unnecessaryin you to put yourself to that trouble,as I had a snack at your friend Captain Malcolm's; and indeed I was pressed to stay stillthere, which I would have done, if I had notpreviously intended mysdf the honour of takingmy poduek with you, as you were so very polite118 • DESTINY.as to assure me of being always welcome ; a piece .of kindness and hospitality which I am sure Ishall never forget'*That's just as it should be," remarked aLaird who had three ferries between him andMr M'Dow. " There ought always to be anopen door to the minister."^^ It's B pleasant thing to see the heritors andministers on a friendly footing," said another,whose tends were valued and exhausted.In that respect, I have really reason to beproud," said Mr M'Dow, rapping his mull withan air of modest importance ; " for ever sincemy induction, I have met with uncommon attentionand hospitality, not only from my respectedpatron here, but likewise from the very gentlemenwho thought proper to oppose the presentation.There's Captain Malcolm, for instance,he was very keen against me ; more so, indeed,than what many men in my situation would haveoverlooked. But he's a little of the highflyer :the very — shem — the unco gude — ^hoch, hoch,how ! one o' your gospellers, in short ; what oneof my worthy brethren calls your saimts-^hoch,DESTINY. 119hoch, ho ! but I believe he is a well-meaningman for all that, so I made a point of showinghim that I bore no ill-will against him, and thatI had no objections whatever to be on a friendlyfooting with him," with another long self-suffix* 'cent pinch of snuff.He's a very honest man. Captain Malcolm,"said a good-natured bluff laird ; ^^ and has as finea family as I ever saw, and as well brought up,too. There's not a prettier girl in all the shirethan Lucy Malcolm ; and he'll be a lucky manthat gets her for his wife."Mr M'Dow now addressed Inch Orran, — " Iwas just saying, sir, that I had the pleasurethis forenoon of paying my respects to a veryworthy gentleman, a clansman, and, I believe, arelation of yours — Captain John Malcolm." Aslight, stiff bend from Inch Orran was the onlyreply ; but Mr M'Dow went on. — " My principalobject in calling on him to-day was, that Iwished particularly to see a set of farm-officeswhich I heard he had lately built, and also someimprovements which he had made upon hishouse; and I thought I might pick up some120 DESTINY.useful hints from them, to lay before my excellentpatron here, especially in respect of abyre. There's nothing in my remembrancethat there's been greater improvements in than inbyres. However, I must say I was disappointed;he has made ho addition of any signification tothe house ; and the offices are really upon a verymoderate scale — every much 80 extremely moderate,indeed''<^ I understood, sir, moderation had been afavourite virtue of yours," said Inch Organsdryly.Ay — eyes — to be sure, in some things— indeedin most things, I may say, moderation is thesafest course. Moderation will never lead a manfar wrong, Inch Orran."Yes, sir, it leads a man far wrong, if it keepshim from doing his duty," returned Inch OrgansThere I quite agree with you. Inch Orranthere can be no doubt of that. But, in respectof the offices — it's really my unprejudiced opinionsthat when a man has his hand in the moxtar tub, a little money, more or less, is ill saved,when the question is between a good, handsomeDestiny. 121complete building, and a poor, paltry, insignificantthing. I used the freedom to say somethingof that sort to the Captain himself, but he onlylaughed and shook his head, and said he had eightstrong reasons against extravagance — pointingto his children. — Ay, to be sure, there's noarguing against such £Btcts as these, Captain, saysI; they're the next thing to the Ten Commandments— hoch, hoch, hodat! — how ho !"Here, strong in ccmsetous freedom, Mr M^Dowroared and laughed, rapped upon hj^nraU, drewin about a quarter of a pound of snuff, and displayedall the extent of a Juliet handkerchief.At diner thugs were, if possible, stSl one.The manse and the byre, to be sure, were fop*got, while he revelled amidst a profession of fishyfled, fowl, and game, of every description, withthe ardour of a man who, with adl the inclination,had not the means of faring sumptuously everyday*The rest of the party ate, drank, talkedand £spouted in the usual manner, all save IiicliOrran, who ate little, drank none, and preserveda profound silence, except v/imi now and thenprovoked to utter some sharp and biting sarcasm.VOL. I. F123 Destiny.'-■iiif ".i*-Ml' MsiCHAPTER XIV.•i . : • 'M-' ;There is something very appalling in liittsilence that precedes a storm. At such a tinethe imagination and the conscience are left tothe full and undisturbed exercise of their powers*]and however vague and undefined may be theoperations) they nevertheless continue to oppressus with that deadliest of all fears — ^^ the fear ofsomething yet to come''It wag probably this instinctive dread whichhad made Glenroy hitherto shun every approachto a t^te-art^te with his silent guest ; but as thehour of his departure drew near, he began tomuster his courage, and to consider that it wasdue to himself to come to some sort of understanding with the old man, as to the strangebearing he had held ever since his arrival. ItDfiSTlNT. f2Swas impossible he could have met with any realground of offence, for every thing had been doneto grace his visit, and gains good-will; but somethingmight have occurred which he was not awareof, or there might have been some imaginaryfailure that had given umbrage, and a few wordsof explanation might set all to rights. For thispurpose, therefore, Glenroy sought a private interviewwith his guest, the morning of his departuresand began in the usual terms, by expressinghis regret at the prospect of losing him so soon,mingled with gentle upbraiding at the shortnessof his stay, hopes of his speedy return, and ofbeing favoured with a longer visit. Then InchOrran spoke, and he said very deliberately^^ Sir, this is my first visit, and it will be mylast."This was coming to the point with a vengeance*Glenroy was startled, but drawing hintself up he said, ^^ I flatter myself, Inch OnraOfyou have found nothing wanting on my part tomake your stay here pleasant ?"^^ Have I made any complaint, sir ?'' was thetrue Scottish answer.134 Destiny.*< I should be sorry if' you, or any mttn^ had "any thing to complain c£ in my house'' Y^Ediedthe Chieftain, proudly. ■ ».Inch Oran nailed, that is, he UACurled^hiBlite pure-mouth for the first time since ' hisarrived ; but it was a scomfol ill-omened sniile^M I^-^I'm at a loss to understand you, iMckQrran — 'pon my soul I am. I am used to spedmy mind to every man, and I expect every mante*do the same to me'' said Glenroy, waxingwarm.^^ I have no objection to speak my mind toyou, sir'' said Inch Orran, with a horrid gleamof his little vindictive eye ; " but are you quitesure you have none to hear it ?'I don't know why I should," returned theChief, affecting great coolness, to conceal ^abhorrence which all men, women, and childrenfeel at that awful and portentous threat, whetherfrom friend or foe, of speaking their mind. Itis then ^^ conscience makes cowards of us all," asit did of Glenroy, who, in spite of the high opinionhe had of himself, felt an instinctive dreadat the idea of Inch Orran speaking his mindDESTINY. 125either to him or cf him. And indeed speakingthe mind is generally understood to mean neithermore nor less, than that the speaker means to bemost thoroughly disagreeable and abusive.There wbs» however, no escaping Inch Orran'smind, or rather matter, as he looked exactly likea tiger cat who sad got his claw stuck hard andest in his prey, and was in no hurry to dispatchit.<^ Then, sir, on what particular point is it thatyou wish me to speak my mind ?" demanded hewith the firmness of a rock. This was much tck>precise for Glenroy, who would rather hare kepti& vague generals than have been brought toparticular points, and who, moreover, had expectedthe questions to be all on his side, theanswers on the other. -I — don't ikink — sin — a — I, in short, I —d^oi't think you seem to have been pleased withsomething or another. Inch Orran ?* said Glen*roy, with some awkward hesitation^^ X don't say that I hav sir." >Then, sir, I wish you would have the goodnessto say wliatit is soli complain of; have you1^ Destiny.met with any thing to offend you in me or anyof my £Emily ?' demanded the Chief, strong' iiiconscious importance*Inch Orran was silent for a moment, dvsBanswered in the most decided manner, ^^ I sive,ftsir.*^ Tm sorry to hear it. Inch Orran ; very sorryindeed that you or any body else should hltfi^met with any thing unpleasant in my house dt*ihMd consider yourself as having been ill usedby me or any oifmy family'*>' ** Sir, you^mistake me; I never said I b^been ill used."• " I beg pardon; but I certainly understoodyou to say so. Inch Organs'*** Then, sir, you misunderstood me'*I'm happy to hear it. Inch Orran ; for Iassure you I should have been .very sorry if anymisunderstanding had taken place between us ;for there are few men for whom I entertain ahigher respect than I do for you."^^ Excuse me, sir, there is a misunderstanding."Sir," said the Qiief, ** I am really at a loss4)E8TIKT, 1427to understand you. If I have £Edged in anyattentions *^<' No want of attention, sir' in a tone as mu«^as to say, ^^ rather too much of it.^'^^ Has there been any thing in any o£ thecompany to offend you, Inch Orran ?*y ^ ^' Much !" pronounced in a most emphaticBanner ; then, after a little pause, <^ every thing,and in all of them, sir."^^ Indeed ! upon my soul, sir, you are ill ^please ! You have met with some of the firstgentlemen in the aunty, I can tell you^wfaat*ever you may think'* . . ./*Again his mouth was contemptuously purled,while the Chief took a turn up and down. theroom to cool himself; he then stopped, andhaving gulped down his anger, said, <^ Come,come. Inch Orran, I see how it is; yoq. areasober man yourself and you have .been alittle scandalized at seeing some of my Meofhtake their glass so freely; but every country thisits own customs, you know, and I did'nt disposeyou expected to find a company of hermits inthe Highlands of Scotland."128 nSSTINT.<^ Sir, if by hermits you mean anelMnrites citholy hypocrites, I despise them as mxtck as youdo ; but I was met primed to witness suchexcesses in eating* and drinking''*< Successes ! thaf s a very strong expression! I leave always been used to keep a fiiUtale, and to make my friends welcome to it;people must Eve according to their station ; mystyle of living is perhaps different from what youhave been accustomed to'•* Very different, ar," quincy interrupted theodd man ; ^^ my life, sir, has been a life of labourof frugality, of abstinence. Yattr Kfe, sir, isone continued, idle, extravagant, intemperateSOfiS.''Any thing else, sir ?* demanded Glenroy,boiHng with indignation.« There £. something else, sir."♦* Then you had better go on, sir ; much bettersay all you have to say; you have abbacyfound cult with the company I keep, and theStyle I live in**^ Sir, you mistake ; I find no front, I onlyspeak my mind'*Destiny. 129c< Call it what you please, sir ; you object tomy friends and my table."^ Excuse me again, sir. I object to neither*I have sat at the one, and associated with theoder, though they were both highly offensive tome.^' And I can tell you, sir, your behaviour h9Sben no less (tensive to me and my friends. Byheaven, there is not another man on the &ce,ofthe earth I would have suffered to stay in myhouse, and sit at my table for three days withoutopening his lips. Sir, let me tell you such behaviouris more like that of a spy than any thingelse." And Glenroy's passion was now at itsheififht.^< Exactly, sir'' said his antagonist, pursingup his mouth with an air of sovereign contempt.*' I came to your house not as a babbler andwineobibber ; but as a note and observer, and Ihave accomplished my purpose."By a violent effort Glenroy regained his temper,and, seeing all was at hazard, he restive tohumour the old man, and let him go his way inpeace ; he therefore said with a laugh, ^^ Well,f2#eK) Inch Omni) yoi^e hardly dear febiy-byi»5 considering that we were met io «elebraik»yiHir arrival, and drink to the Laid ofilsohOnrait. Perhaps we did»6zeeeda.tittlel«st<inglit(but^'since that's all, we shaH part good>£tmiib»I hope** »•^i^ «< No, rip, it is not alL" . neu-minu^'^* What else offended you sir?.- The boyshive been rather noisy perhaps $ but york .instarhdy» will be boys." ^ .;.\ 0/'<< N<^ii9y and disagreeable all boys .aie,'^.im^pried Inaki Orran ; ^ but epicures and plq)pij«kitt boys are not Sir your son is an epicwii^iand I look upon an epicure as little better. dentt^^cbunkard* I have known drunkards, sir, thatis, men who what you call liked their glass (de*gained as they were to a level with the brutes,)who still retained some manly feelings; but Inever knew an epicure who cared for any o^thii^<m the face ofthe earth, but his own inside?Glenroy had stood the attack upon himself)his friends, and his table, with wonderful eqiia-idsMtyf but this invective against his som andheir, the very apple of his eye, was too muchfiMrfiiiitJ ^d^ uttering an oath) Jbe stali:^ 9WfVtb^ib^' irinAow. But there lay fill disclosed theseat of Isioh Orran — the finally fieatt-^nitt^ yfmf^liable tower its green islands, italioble WQ9ft%tSi reflected on the besom loi die dear waters. :<!<< There's the respect" that made him.{Mm9e$and after a severe straggle he jieoQ^iex^i lum*self, and said, ^^ Fm sorry Indi Oniaw youshould have taken up such a prejudice agauQitNorman; for, although I sait, tliere.ti9^ii(9(i4finer or more manly boy in the country ib|ai< heifj'i hand as for his eating, if he is a little niil^aUi owing to that English dominie mtu^ bydb^e, heats all for gormandizing that ever I mfAtdtib* Idea good mind to give him his dismisstibia very day'' n m .?.{(>«^ As to ^t, sir, you may take yourJmvnlime, for it is now too late, f^onorism ia^a friednever cures. Your son, but, is aiK:ti{>i0Qzi^and «n' epicure he will remain, in qpiteicfyoiirHere Gfenroyr could scarcely <Tetein ifremseizing the old man by the nape of«tlie^lMB^tt winding him out at the window which stood138 DESTINY.ml umtmgly c^peii. While he stood uciesoliitehovT'to. tests his fury and contempt, Indi Qr«»raa proceeded: >< ^^ 'Now, sir I bave spoken my mind'tor you,and I have done it with deliberation* Lavespent nearly three days, sir, under your roof,' inthe midst, I may say, of a human kogtfty, findthe purpose of studying your son, and thereoutof my < observations is, that he is an epicure.How me, sir** as Glenroy was about to interprethim; <^>I am aware, sir, that yim loek-fiu*-ward to your son succeeding to my estate^Sir,\ h%g, I mayn't be interrupted-the expectationis perfectly natural, and in your situation I shouldprobably have done the same. The wish to regainthe inheritance of your foreseen. k d»uttUameafole ; I find no £Exult with' it'*Glenroy brightened up a little, and began tobreathe more easily.^V But, sir, I think it right and proper to undeceiveyou. Your son will never inherited footof my land, or a fishing of ^my money."'. Glenroy was absolutely dumb with rage andastonishment; the old man therefore proceeded:^« But, sir, you have another clSUt^ yAoi t^though of the wrong sex, promises fear. She isa quiet, inoffensive, temperate creatures which isall that can be expected of a female. My intentiontherefore, is, to settle the property upon herand her heirs-male'^^ This is a most extraordinary proceedingsecied Glenroy, interruptions him, as he suddenlyrecovered from the shock he had sustained';^^ iq>on my soul, I don't know what I am abotiitIt is a proposal so wholly unexpected so veryunnatural and improper, to pass by the boy fornoi reason whateTer,-^I» sir-*«I can't > possiblyagree to such a thing."And he walked hastily up and down in starti^tadon, while the old man sat looking as demaveas a cat. '^ ISr^" continued he, ^^ I don't desireyou of your son, or your son of any thing he hasany right to ; so neither you moor he hare* anybusiness to say buff or sty in the matter* < Myintention, sir, is to mend the breeds «wdiioh hasdegenerated, and is stiUdegeneiating.'^.u. ><Bursting with half-restrained rage Gremio\134 Destiny*uttered some unintelligible ejaculations andallowed his kinsman to go on* <■ i^< Sir, the one to mend a degenerate breed ishe who speaks the truth, who keeps his "word,who honours his parents, who is no^gormandizev, "who minds neither wind nor weather, sid whohas been born and bred in wholesome poverty.Such a one is the lad I saw scorned aft browbeatat your table ; and provided he, ' RonaldMalcolm, will, at a proper age, consent to takeyour maister to wife, and she has sense enoughto accede to the proposal, the property call besettled upon their heirs-male; on the otherhand, should he refuse"But here an oath burst from Glenroy's lipslike a thunderbolt, and the flood-gates «f Imlong-repressed fury were opened — loud andfierce was the torrent that broke loose ; but tikeold man sat and bore it all with the most perfectcomposure, and even seemed as if he enjoyedthe storm he had raised*At that moment a servant entered to say, thatthe boat was ready, and the tide answered. InchOrran rose.Destiny. 135^^ Time and tide will no man bide, Glenroy.I have now spoken my mind to you, and I shallleave you to deliberate on my proposal."^^ I would rather see any daughter of mine inher co£Bn, than the wife of any beggarly tacksson' cried Glenroy, in a perfect foam.^^ I have other views for my daughter, and I willdispose of her as I think proper."^* Quite right, sir, if you can."^^ Sir, I both can and trtVZ."'^ You are a lucky man, sir, it seems. I haveno more to say."^^ Sir, I have something to say to you. Tinabehaviour of yours is not to be borne !"<' That is unfortunate, sir, for I am no dilel-Must. I wish you good morning," was the coolreply ; so, disregarding all remonstrance, InchOran walked off, and was joined by his ladyand Simon.136 destiny;CHAPTER XV.IOpposition was a tiling Glenroy was Uttl<^accustomed to at any time; but to be tl^usbearded and got the better of in bison housin the very heart of his friends, guests, adcountrymen, was an indignity he <^uld not awaywith : for a time he gave full play to his passions,and like a very dragon of (dd, breathedape and fiery all around* But as what is violentis never lasting, he soon cooled down to hisusual temperature, and being of a sanguine disposition,he even began to look upon what hadpassed as a sort of bad joke, or ill-natured whimof the old man's, which would go no farther, andwould not be followed by any bad consequences.The calm, however, was of short duration. Thefirst intelligence he heard was, that RonaldMalcolm had been invited to Inch Orran, andDESTINY. 137was actually living there in high favour with hiskinsman*This went so far beyond Glenroy's worst anticipations,that he disdained to be in a passionabout it He was perfectly cool and composedas every body might see, only his colour wasconsiderably higher than usual ; and though hehummed a soi, it was much out of tune, andwhen he laughed very heartily, nobody knewvery well what it was at. In short, he had allthe gaiety and indifference which people commonlyhave, when very much agitated and dis<»composed. It was only by fits and starts thatany thing like ill-temper showed itself; butupon his son, as usual, choosing the richestdishes at table, he was, for the first time in hislife, checked with an angry exclamation and aaooili, followed with, '' And I'll be hailed if I'Usuffer any epicures in my house. I hate anepicure, and you shall not be an epicure, sir.You shall live upon porridge and mutton, as Idid, or, by Jove ! you shall starve."This threat was of course null and void the verynext day, when the young Chief waft to be seen188 D£STIK¥.as usual, picking his way amongst the intricaciesof the luxurious board. But that day hadbrought new matter to light, which made iik iib>»necessary for Glenroy either to sing out <^ timidor laugh out of time, or contradict his son, or doany thing put of the common course of natureIt was reported that Ronald Malcolm, so ^£Eurfrom having been, invited to Inch Orran, hadbeen sent there by his father to try to bribingabout a reconciliation; that instead of that liehad met with a very bad reception, and beeneven turned from the house late <me stonynight when he had lost himself amongst thehills, and had been glad to take refuge in theshieling of Duncan Macrae, the hind on ,from whom the deponent had his informnation.Glenroy was not a malignant man, but differentpassions often lead to the same result. Hewas a proud and a selfish man; but his pridewas called family-pride, and his selfishness, naturalaffection; and both these much-admiredqualities operated precisely as envy and Malicewould have done.DESTINY. }89His pride had been galled, and his self-lovewounded, at the thoughts of his poor despisedkinsman's son being preferred to his ; and nowhis heart unconsciously exulted in the downfallof his hopes, and he felt ready to patronise andbefriend him in any way, except that of becominglaird of Inch Orran. Flushed within owngenerous feelings, he resolved to pay a visit tothe family at X^chdhu, and offer him his adviceandaasistance in the disposal of Ronald. PerhiqnBa lille curiosity to hear true account of Ronald'svisit to Inch Orran, mingled with the motivesfor he had heard so many various statements asto what had passed between the old man and hisyofmg kinsman, that he was at a loss what tobelieve. In one particular, however, they allagreed, and that was the main point, that a violentquarrel had taken place ; but whether Ronaldhad left the house in dudgeon, or been toned'from it in disgrace, had not been clearly aso^r^gained.' Whichever it was, it mattered little loGlenroy, the result would be the same) and therestoration of his son would, follow, as a matterof course ; he therefore flattered himsdf ibatlNit140 DESTINY.was simply the desire to arrive at Aeixutb wUdrli at the bottom of his curiosity. According)one fine summers day, he set forth on his ride.Lochdhu was as n^ly as any Highland placecan be; bnt there was a wild grandeur in itsdark mountains, and roaring streams, and tracksheaths, aBd a varying interest in the lightand shadows of its stony faith, which-atoned£Heir :die want of more florid beauties. Thffl!^^ wasper£eiet neatness, and even some embellishmentsaround the house ; but the shrubs were yet intheir infancy, and the flowers were not so luxurianta. in brighter climes, and beneath morecostly culture.As the Chief drew near, he descried Gaptaband Mrs Malcolm, with their children, on thelittle lawn before the house, which was strewnwith coils of new-mown hay. Mrs Malcdba,though no longer young, still bore a hair andyouthful aspect, and seemed like the elder sisterof the sweet Madonna-looking girl, the senior ofthe £unily^ who sat by her side. Captain Malcolmhad been a very handsome man, but thehardships of war and varieties of climate hadDESTINY. 141impaired his looks as well as health What helead been was now pictured in young Ronald*—*' By his ingenuous beauty, by the gleamOf his fide eyes, by his capacious brow,By all the graces with which nature's handHad bounteously array 'd him."The younger children looked healthful and brightas opening bud and blossoms*Mrs Malcolm and her daughters were seatedwith a book and their work* Captain Malcolmand the iHgger boys were turning over the hastand the little ones were frolicking aboutBut Glenroy saw no beauty in this familypicture on which his eye could long dwell ; forhe despised women, and never was amused withany children but his own. The first brief salisnations over, he therefore walked apart, with hishoot, expatiating upon hay-mowing, making,reading, &c and describing the magnificentmanner in which these operations were performedon his model of a firm. He then enteredupon the subject uppermost in his miad» by enquiringof Captain Malcohft if he had seen IntikOmm since his amain the country. Simplenegative was all the reply.14S Distant.>< Your son would tell you he had met him«lrmy house," said Glencoe, with some hesitationRonald was then ignorant who he was { butI suspect he was indebted to your good officesupon that occasion." i ' aGlenroy coloured, and stammered out some-^*thing in the way of denial. ^ j.^j;^^ I am very sensible of your kind intentions'!said Captain Malcolm, " although—" . : ;^^ Not at all, not at all," interrupted Glenroy,hurriedly. " I did not — that is to say, I-rrl-You did all you could, 1 believe, Glenroy,?said his kinsman ; ^^ but all would not do."I assure you — you give me more credit^tt-than I am at all— entitled to," said the Chieftain,in increasing confusion.No, no," cried Captain Malcolm. « Thefisict speaks for itself; it could only have been toyour friendly offices Ronald owed his invitation,for no sooner had Inch Orran returned from hisvisit to you, than he sent for him to his house."And he went of course ?" enquired Glenroy,eager to pass over any more undue compliments>^ Yes, he did ; his mother and I saw no rea-destiny.14Sson figaiiist it ; on the contrary we were bothin hopes it might lead the way to a reconciliation,and I trust we were actuated by somethingbetter than. mere worldly motives in wishing it,though, no doubt, these had their influence too;but whether as Christians or as mere self-interestedparents, we certainly did most earnestlydesire it : it has, however, been otherwise appointed,and we are satisfied'It was reported," said Glenroy, " that yourson had been taken into high favour ; was therethen no foundation for that ?'He was well received and kindly treated**said Captain Malcolm ; " but "But it didn't last ?' cried Glenroy, withsomething of triumph in his tone ; ^^ I could havetold him that, for between ourselves, the man'sas mad as a March hare. But how came Ronaldto quarrel with him, for at one time he seemedto have got into his good graces ?'^* Thanks to you for that, Glenroy," said CaptainMalcolm, ^^ and he might perhaps have beenthere still if he had not preferred his parents toa fortune It was such a strange unnatural DESTINY,psal the old man made him, that I can onlyaccount for it on the plea of insanity : he keptRonald for three days, shewed him all his property,told him of all his wealth, and thenoffered to adopt him, to make him his heir, andsettle his whole fortune upon him, on conditionof his renouncing all intercourse with his ownfiunily !"^^ Ay, that* s just of a piece with his threateningto disinherit Roman, for asking for theback of a moorfowl one day at dinner — the man'scertainly mad ! — And what did your son. say tothat rFew boys, I believe, would have been baseand sordid enough to have yielded to the temptation,but some of them might have listened toitmore calmly ; instead of which Ronald, whosetemper and feelings are warm, was so indignantthat he instantly left the house, and set out towalk twenty miles in a dark stormy night."He should have come to me," cried Glen-roy,warmly ; " my house was all in the way, andI would have made him welcome at any hour ofdie night ; for, I assure you, I approve highlyDESTINY. 145of his behaviour ; he did just what he ought tohave done ; it gives me a very good opinion ofyour son, it does indeed, very good !"This was uttered with great emphasis, and asif his encomium would be the making of Ronald'sfortune.We have indeed reason to thank God thathe is deserving of our affection," said CaptainMalcolm, with emotion.Yes, he seems really a promising boy, andhe acted in that matter just as he ought to havedone ; to be sure, it would have been very badif he had done otherwise. — And, by the by, whatare you going to make of him ? Is it not fulltime you were thinking of that ?'*^ I have had many an anxious thought onthat subject," said Captain Malcolm, with asigh.Aye, to be sure, it's no joke setting out alad in the world, now every profession is sooverstocked; but its time Ronald should learnsomething."^* I trust he has learnt something, and is everydaylearning more," said his father.VOL. I. G146 DESTINY.O, I have no doubt you have done all youcould for him' said the Chief, slightingly ; <^ bulwe all know there are few gentlemen fit toeducate their sons."** Yet I believe it is from their parents thatchildren receive by far the most important partof their education"* replied Captain Malcolm.The deuce you do ! then I for one canassure you, I take no sort of charge of my son-seducation. I pay four hundred a-year, which Ithink a pretty fair allowance for a dominie, andI should think it rather hard after that if I wasexpected to educate him myself !"Captain Malcolm smiled, perhaps at the ostentationwith which this was uttered, then replied'^ Yet his habits and opinions will be much moreinfluenced by you than by his tutor, and theseare what I consider as the most important partsof education."** I>o you so ? then education must be a veryeasy matter with you it seems ; if that were all.See Mrs Barbauld's admirable Essay on EducationIDESTINY. 147I might have saved my four hundred a-year —Habits and opinions ! I really never happened tahear of hoes* habits and opinions. I should liketo know what sort of things their habits andopinions are !"Captain Malcolm was' quite accustomed tohear his Chief talk ^^ high nonsense" loud, arrogant,overbearing nonsense, the most insufferableof all the varieties of nonsense, and he had theikerit of always answering him as calmly asthough he had been conversing with Plato himself.'^ The actions of each day and hour are whatform the habits," hei replied, ^^ and the taste andaffections are what influence the opinions ; bothcombined, are what insensibly form the character.Ronald is deficient in many things, but I trusthe has imbibed good principles. I am sure hepossesses kindly affections ; he is not wanting insolid learning, and his habits are those of a hardyHighland boy, who minds neither wind norweather, hunger nor thirst, and who can climbthe rock, swim the water, and sleep among theheather."146 DESTINY.O, I have no doubt you have done all youcould for him' said the Chief, slightingly ; <^ butwe all know there are few gentlemen fit toeducate their sons."'^ Yet I believe it is from their parents thatchildren receive by far the most important partof their educations replied Captain Malcolm.The deuce you do ! then I for one canassure you, I take no sort of charge of my son'seducation. I pay four hundred a-year, which Ithink a pretty fair allowance for a dominie, andI should think it rather hard after that if I wasexpected to educate him myself !"Captain Malcolm smiled, perhaps at the ostentationwith which this was uttered, then replied'^ Yet his habits and opinions will be much moreinfluenced by you than by his tutor, and theseare what I consider as the most important partsof education."f << I>o you so ? then education must be a veryeasy matter with you it seems i if that were all.See Mrs Barbauld's admirable Essay on Education.destiny: 147I might have saved my four hundred a-year —Habits and opinions ! I really never happened U>hear of boyd' habits and opinions. I should liketo know what sort of things heir habits andopinions are !"Captain Malcolm was' quite accustomed tohear his Chief talk <^ high nonsense," loud, arrogant,overbearing nonsense, the most insufferableof all the varieties of nonsense, and he had theinherit of always answering him as calmly asthough he had been conversing with Plato himself.^^ The actions of each day and hour are whatform the habits'' ho. replied, ^^ and the taste andaffections are what influence the opinions ; bothcombined, are what insensibly form the character.Ronald is deficient in many things, but I trusthe has imbibed good principles. I am sure hepossesses kindly affections ; he is not wanting insolid learning, and his habits are those of a hardyHighland boy, who minds neither wind norweather, hunger nor thirst, and who can climbthe rock, swim the waters and sleep among theheather."148 DESTINY. ^'^ My good sir, any herd's son in the countrycan do all that," said Glenroy, contemptuously :** But that's nothing to the purpose ; we weretalking of your son's education, which is quite adifferent thing. There's my own boy ! althoughI say it, I don't believe there's a boy in thekingdom farther advanced in his education thanhe is."Those who can afford to purchase instructionfor their children are in the right to do it,"said Captain Malcolm, mildly; ^^ for a liberaleducation is a great advantage ; but those whocannot, ought to be satisfied with giving theirchildren a virtuous and a useful one. Youand I, Glenroy, are differently circum s danced ;wealth educates your son, but poverty must trainmine, and the best education a poor man cangive his son, is to make him know and feelbetimes that he is the son of a poor man."That s all very true," said Glenroy ; " butwhat are you to make of him ? What would youthink of making a preacher of him ? I could beof some use to you there ; I have a good deal ofDestiny. 149patronage of tny own, ai well as something tosay in other quarters."^^ I thank you, but Ronald's bent does not liethat way, and no motive of worldly interest \dlleven prompt me to urge any son of mine to enteron so sacred a vocation. Ronald has decided forthe sea**** A very good sensible choice*' cried theChief, "just the very thing for him, and thesooner he goes the better ; ^ learn young learnfisdr,' is, you know, a good old saying."He will go, I expect, next year," said CaptainMalcolm. " A cousin of his mother's, CaptainStanley, a worthy man, and gallant oiffi(^er,has offered Ronald a birth in his ship."Ah ! that's very well, but you ought to sendhim in the meantime to a public school ; it's agreat advantage for a boy who has his way topush in the world, to have had some trainingbefore he begins, and he'll learn more of theworld in one year at a seat public school thanhe will do all his life at home."I am no friend to a premature knowledgeof the world ; it comes soon enough to most of150 Destiny.US. i greatly prefer the safety which residesfrom good principles and virtuous habits, to thatpurchased by an early knowledge of vice* *^* Most of our great men, however, have beeneducated at public schools," continued Glenroy.'^ That is an opinion which has been completelyrefuted'* * said Captain Malcolm ; *^ andeven were it otherwise, I should prefer havingmy son a good man, rather than a great one'O ay, thaf s fine romantic taUdng,** saidGlenroy, contemptuously, ^^ but if s a great dialtoo fine for me; I have no notion of your romanticschemes."Then we are agreed," said Captain Malcolm,with a smile, ^^ for I too, think the pMnerand simpler the system of* education, especiallyfor the children of a poor man, so much the better; however, I thank you from my heart forthe interest you take in Ronald; if you knewhim better, I flatter myself you would not findhim so deficient as you suppose. He has his faults,See Edinburgh Review.DESTINY. 151but he has many a hard lesson yet to learn beforethe system of moral discipline will be completed.I trust God will order all for the best, and whenthe time comes, to His care I will with confidencecommit his future destiny*Well, I hope it may answer, for Ronald'sa good boy, and I shall always be ready to assisthim ;" and with a shake of the hand to his kinsman,and a hurried adieu to the rest of thefamily, Glenroy returned home, satisfied that hehad nothing to fear from Ronald's rivalship.152 DESTINY.CHAPTER XVLThe good-natured Laird's recommendationLucy Malcolm had not been thrown away uponMr M^Dow, and from that time he had been veryfrequent in his visits at Lochdhu, much moreso indeed than was at all agreeable to any memberof the family, for between his mind andtheirs there was a gulf which seemed impassable.But, never dreaming that he could presume tocast his eyes upon their fair sweet Lucy, theparents ascribed his frequent visitations to bettermotives, and flattered themselves, that faintly astheir own light shone, it might yet prove themeans of enlightening the still more darkenedsteps of Mr M'Dow. He seemed to them to bekind-hearted, and well-meaning in his own coarseway; at least so Captain and Mrs Malcolmconstrued the many attentions he was now in theDESTINY. 153i. thabit of paying them, together with the Softenedtones of his conversation at tones, and the anxietyhe evinced to make himself useful and agreeableto the yoimg people. At one time he wotddamble over on the back of Amailye, his hugepockets filled to the brim with nuts from his ownpremises, ** most imcommonly sweet and delee-chuzj" which he would take out in urge handfuls,and deposit on the ladies' work-table ; anothertime he would arrive, laden on each sidewith apples from his garden, '< imcommonlyhigh-flavoured and jisey ;" on another occasionhe appeared with a basketftd of small fresh-watertrouts, which he had caught himself, and whichhe said would be ^' most uncommon delicatepicking," but he hoped Miss Lucy would takecare of the bones. But the consummation of allwas, when he entered with his shooting-bag overbis shoulder, containing a brace of ^* most beautifulyoung termagants," * trophies of his prowesson the moors. It often fell to Lucar's lot toPtarmigans.g2146 DESTINY.^< O, I have no doubt you have done all youcould for him' said the Chief, slightingly ; << butwe all know there are few gentlemen fit toeducate their sons."'^ Yet I believe it is from their parents thatchildren receive by far the most important portof their education"* replied Captain Malcolm.The deuce you do ! then I for one canassure you, I take no sort of charge of my son'seducation. I pay four hundred a-year, which Ithink a pretty fair allowance for a dominie, andI should think it rather hard after that if I wasexpected to educate him myself !"Captain Malcolm smiled, perhaps at the ostentationwith which this was uttered, then repliedYet his habits and opinions will be much moreinfluenced by you than by his tutor, and theseare what I consider as the most important partsof education."*^ I>o you so ? then education must be a veryeasy matter with you it seems ; if that were all.See Mrs Barbauld's admirable Essay on Education.DESTINY. 147I might have saved my four hundred a-year —Habits and opinions ! I really never happened tohear of boy' habits and opinions. I should liketo know what sort of things their habits and(pinions are !"Captain Malcolm was' quite accustomed tohear his Chief talk ^< high nonsense' loud, arrogant,overbearing nonsense, the most insufferableef all the varieties of nonsense, and he had theinherit of always answering him as calmly asthough he had been conversing with Plato himself.^^ The actions of each day and hour are whatform the habits'' hei replied, ^^ and the taste andaffections are what influence the opinions ; bothcombined, are what insensibly form the character.Ronald is deficient in many things, but I trusthe has imbibed good principles. I am sure hepossesses kindly affections ; he is not wanting insolid learning, and his habits are those of a hardyHighland boy, who minds neither wind norweather, hunger nor thirst, and who can climbthe rock, swim the water and sleep among theheather."148 DESTINY. ^My good sir, any herd's son in the countrycan do all that," said Glenroy, contemptuously :** But that's nothing to the purpose ; we weretalking of your son's education, which is quite adifferent thing. There's my own boy ! althoughI say it, I don't believe there's a boy in thekingdom farther advanced in his education thanhe is."Those who can afford to purchase instructionfor their children are in the right to do it,"said Captain Malcolm, mildly; ^^ for a liberaleducation is a great advantage ; but those whocannot, ought to be satisfied with giving theirchildren a virtuous and a useful one. Youand I, Glenroy, are differently circumstanced ;wealth educates your son, but poverty must trainmine, and the best education a poor man cangive his son, is to make him know and feelbetimes that he is the son of a poor man."That's all very true," said Glenroy ; " butwhat are you to make of him ? What would youthink of making a preacher of him ? I could beof some use to you there ; I have a good deal ofpatronage of tny own, ai well as something tosay in other quarters."<^ I thank you, but Ronald's bent does not liethat way, and no motive of worldly interest Milleven prompt me to urge any son of mine to enteron so sacred a vocation. Ronald has decided forthe sea***^ A very good sensible choice*' cried theChief, "just the very thing for him, and thsooner he goes the better ; ^ learn young learnfeir,' is, you know, a good old saying."He will go, I expect, next year," said CaptainMalcolm. " A cousin of his mother's. CaptainStanley, a worthy man, and gallant oifi(^er,has offered Ronald a birth in his ship."Ah ? that's very well, but you ought to sendhim in the meantime to a public school ; it's agreat advantage for a boy who has his way topush in the world, to have had some trainingbefore he begins, and he'll learn more of theworld in one year at a great public school thanhe will do all his life at home."I am no friend to a premature knowledgeof the world ; it comes soon enough to most of150 DESTINY.US. 1 greatly prefer the safety which residesfrom good principles and virtuous habits, to tlmtpurchased by an early knowledge of vice*'^* Most of our great men, however, have beeneducated at public schools'' continued Glenroy.'* That is an opinion which has been completelyrefuted'* * said Captain Malcolm ; *^ andeven were it otherwise, I should prefer havingmy son a good man, rather than a great one**** O ay, that* s fine romantic talking," saidGlenroy, contemptuously, ^^ but if s a great dealtoo fine for me; I have no notion of your romanticschemes."Then we are agreed," said Captain Malcolm,with a smile, " for I too, think the plainerand simpler the system of education, especiallyfor the children of a poor man, so much the better; however, I thank you from my heart forthe interest you take in Ronald; if you knewhim better, I flatter myself you would not findhim so deficient as you suppose. He has his faults,See Edinburgh Review.DESTINY. 15}but he has many a hard lesson yet to learn beforethe system of moral discipline will be completed.I trust God will order all for the best, and whenthe time comes, to His care I will with confidencecommit his future destiny*Well, I hope it may answer, for Ronald'sa good boy, and I shall always be ready to assistMm ;" and with a shake of the hand to his kinsman,and a hurried adieu to the rest of thefamily, Glenroy returned home, satisfied that hehad nothing to fear from Ronald's rivalship* .152 DESTINY.CHAPTER XVI.The good-natured Laird's recommendationof Lucy Malcolm had not been thrown away uponMr M^Dow, and from that time he had been veryfrequent in his visits at Lochdhu, much moreso indeed than was at all agreeable to any memberof the family, for between his mind andtheirs there was a gulf which seemed impassable.But, never dreaming that he could presume tocast his eyes upon their fair sweet Lucy, theparents ascribed his frequent visitations to bettermotives, and flattered themselves, that faintly astheir own light shone, it might yet prove themeans of enlightening the still more darkenedsteps of Mr M'Dow. He seemed to them to bekind-hearted, and well-meaning in his own coarseway; at least so Captain and Mrs Malcolmconstrued the many attentions he was now in theDESTINY. ^i^habit of paying them, together with the Bofteiiedtones of his conversation at tones, and the anxietyhe evinced to make himself useful and agreeableto the young people. At one time he wDtddamble over on the back of Amailye, his hingepockets filled to the brim with nuts from his diipremises, " most imcommonly sweet and delee^chez," which he would take out in urge handfuls,and deposit on the ladies' work-table ; wa-othertime he would arrive, laden on each si^iewith apples from his garden, « uncommonlyhigh-flavoured and jisey ;" on another occasionhe appeared with a basketftd of small fresh-watttrouts, which he had caught himself, and whichesaid would be ^^ most uncommon delicatepicking," but he hoped Miss Lucy would takecare of the bones. But the consummation of allwas, when he entered with his shooting-bag overbis shoulder, containing a brace of ^* most beautifulyoung termagant," • trophies of his prowesson the moors. It often fell to Lucar's lot to♦ Ptarmigans.g2154 Destiny.receive these testimonies of the minister's good*wills which she did with her usual sweetness ofaimer ; and though few things could be moreoffensive to her tian the company of Mr M^Dow»she. yet behaved towards him with that politeendurance which, to one of his gross ken, wasequal to the most flattering encouragement.<V There are some uncommon fine prospectsabout the manse, Miss Lucy'' said he, as hefound her one day sketching the view from theparlour window ; ^^ I think you would make afine hand of them."*' The views in your neighbourhood are, indeed,very beautiful," said Lucy ; " and I havelong wished to take a few sketches there, if itwere not too presumptuous in me to attempt it."« Oh, Miss Lucy !" exclaimed Mr M'Dow,how can you say that ? But I'm really happythat you admire the situation of the manse."Every body must admire it," said Lucy ;^^ it is quite charming."I'm delighted to hear you think so," criedMr M'Dow ; " for it's rather a remote, secludedsituation, though, to be sure, the prospect's muchDESTINY. 155more animated than it was, nor that the t^tekbii-boat comes our way regularly twice a-we^k,'i^liMtouches at the village, which is not above d gunshotfrom the manse. She's an amazing convenience,besides making a most interestingobject in the view ; for instance, I get my teaand sugar brought to my very door by her fop amere trifle. I can even get a loaf of bread fromGlasgow within four-and-twenty hours after itfkont of the oven, for a penny or so additional,which is no consideration to me, in comparisonof the comfort of the thing— if s uncommon finebread too."A pause ensued, for the minister's communicationscalled for no reply ; and Lucy busiedherself with her drawing. Mr M*Dow resumed.*' Eh, Miss Lucy, if I might but hope for thehonour of seeing you at the manse some day,you would really make me very proud."I should be sorry if a visit from me were tohave that effect," said Lucy, smiling ; " but certainlyI shall be very happy, some day whenpapa and I are taking a ride, to bring my sketch• »» ■', «156 DESTINY.bowl to Auchteibmckle) and carry .off, il I cfm^some of ito beauties."Before the minister libertine to utter his raptures.Captain Malcolm entered the room ; and,after the usual preliminaries, Mr M^Dow began.^^ I have just been admiring Miss Lucy's painting,"pointing to her pencilnsketch ; ^^ I'm nogreat cafmyshtire, indeed; but it strikes me asbeing uncommonly well executed !"'* And, in return, I have been praising MrM^DoVs fine views, papa," said she; " andhave even been bold enough to talk of attemptingto sketch some of them."'' I assure you, sir, I am very mundi flatteredwith Miss Lucy's approbation of my prospects ;and I was just requesting, as a most particularfavour, that she would do me the honour someday to come over with you, and take a look of• my premises. There's not much to be seen, tobe sure, just now about the manse; but theprospects all round are much admired, and whenI get my decreet, things will be made moredecent about the doors than they are at present."You little know what you are about, whendestiny; . 157ypu invite such a noted sketcher as Locylxivisit you," said Captain Malcolm, with a nnik"^<^ she is such an enthusiast, and you have so greata variety of jane views in your neighbourhood)that, I warn you, you will find it difficult to getrid of her again."** rU take my chance of that. Captain'* witha prodigious roar of delight; " I'll take mychance of that ; and now, Captain, will you notjust do me the favour to fix a day \di<pn MissLucy and you will ride over, and take a look ofmy premises ?'We had better take our chance of a fineday," said Lucy, who privately thrust theminister's absence was not the worst that couldbefit them.I beg your pardon. Miss Lucy ; but reallythe disappointment would be dreadful, if I wadto miss the honour of a visit from the Captainand you — perfectly dreadful ! And it miffkt happen,for I have occasion to be a good deal fromhome ; in fact, I consider it as a principal partof my duty to visit a good deal, and to be on thebest footing with the heritors of my parish. It's158 DESTINY*a discreditable thing when the minister and thegentry are no just at one ; and wherever I havebeen, I have always made a point of keeping thevery best company."^^ A clergyman, who fedthfiilly discharges hisduty, must see great varieties of company," saidCaptain Malcolm ; '^ and ought neither to considerhimself as elevated by the notice of thehigher orders, or debased by mingling occasionallywith the lowest and poorest of hisflock."There I perfectly agree with you, Captain,"replied Mr M^Dow, with much hearty warmth ;these are precisely my own sentiments on thesubject. From the honourable nature of myoffice, I have always looked upon myself as upona footing — if not rather shoopayreor to gentlemenof larger fortune, and who may, perhaps,make a greater dash in the world than I do ; and,on the other hand, I never refuse, when properlycalled upon, to attend to the poorest man orwoman in the parish,"This was uttered with a modest air of self-destiny.159approbation, and concluded with a long self-complacentpinch of snuff.** There is, indeed, a reverence due to theclergy as a body'' said Captain Malcolm ; ^^ andin a Christian country they are always sure ofmeeting with it; but that is a feeling whichoperates very slightly upon the minds of thecommunity; and, unless ministers can claimindividually the respect due to superior pietyand excellence, I fear collectively it is of littleavail."*' You're perfectly right, Captain. I agreewith you entirely. Every clergyman is calledupon to keep up the dignity of his station, andto cut a respectable figure in the world. Itdoesn't do for a man to let himself down toomuch."« In my opinion, a clergyman, who is in theway of his duty, never can let himself down," .said Captain Malcolm ; ^^ for he must be endeavouringto raise the minds of those around himto the highest standard of moral excellence."That s really not an easy matter, Captain,"said Mr M'Dow ; " for the common people are160 DESTINY.a bad set. But here comes Mrs Malcolm ; Ihope I'll get her on my side to fix a day for thevisit to the manse."And herewith Mrs Malcolm was assailed withentreaties to use her influence for that puisse,or, as the minister elegantly expressed it, ^^ justto nail the business at once." Mrs Malcolm waspleased at the thought of a little excursion forLucy ; so she seconded the minister's proposal,and, to his great delight, a day was fixed whenCaptain Malcolm and his daughter were to paya pining visit at the manse of Auchterbruckle. .,Destiny. 161CHAPTER XVII.Glenroy's anger against Inch Orran hadmuch abated, since he had ascertained what hecalled ** the defeat of the Donald Begs**After all. Inch Orran is not a bad body,"he would say to Benbowie ; " he knows whathe's about, and will not be easily taken in, orI'm much mistaken* I begin to think I wasrather short with him when he was here, thoughthe wretch was most confoundedly provokingtoo ! But he's an old man, and a particular man,and he has such an idiot of a wife ! I reallybelieve, after all, he meant nothing."** On my conscience I believe so," respondedBenbowie. " Nothing — nothing-nothing ataU."Still this nothing had left an awkwardness,which Glenroy did not know very well how toget over. Something ought to be done to prove162 DESTINY.there was nothing ; but what that something' washe could not tell. After what had passed, hecould not possibly renew the overtures in poison;still less could he send Benbowie as hisambassador. Had Inch Orran been like anybodyelse, he might have felt his pulse with ahaunch of venison ; but that most likely wouldcmly lead to fresh hostilities ; so difficult is it temanage people who have no weak side, or ratherno favourite sense to gratify.Inch Orran had a weak side, indeed, but thatwas rather his strong point; for the love ofmoney was his prevailing passion ; and, of allbesetting sins, that is perhaps the most difficultgratify. Harpagon, to be sure, had his F^o-sine ; but in general the difficulty of administeringto the pure love of gold must be greater thanthat of pampering any other evil propensity.Glenroy was, however, relieved from his embarrassment,by received the following dispatchfrom his kinsman.'* Mr Mungo Malcolm, of Inch Orran, presentscompliments to Mr Norman Malcolm, pfGlenroy, and requests the favour of his companylyESTINY. 168and that of his friend, Mr Lachlan Malcolm, ofBenbowie, at his house, on the afternoon ofWednesday the 24th instant, to remain till theforenoon of Saturday the 27th instant. Mr M«Malcolm begs to intimate, that he can also accommodateMr N. Malcolm's body servant."An invitation to Inch Orran was what Glen-royhad not looked for ; and though the mannerin. which it was couched was highly offensiveyet that was passed over with a slight oath ortwo. The visit itself, indeed, would be an act<tf the severest penance, both to mind and bodyBl-humour, impertinence, and starvation, to beendured for three days — even Glenroy's stoutheart quailed to think of ! But to refuse, wouldbe at once to renounce all hopes and expectations.It yeas a golden opportunity for bringingmatters to the point. It was evident Inch Or-ranwas making up in his own way. It wouldbe madness to refuse to meet him — go he must,even in the face of the blade-bone of mutton !Benbowie at first made a faint resistance, as evenhis dull fancy pictured to itself the <* flesh-pots"of Glenroy, in mournful contrast with the bare164 BB8TIKT.bones of Inch Qmm ; but be was so lite in thehabit tii opposing his Chief, that he soon succumbed.So, after much consideration, the followinganswer was dispatched : —<< Glenroy returns kind compliments to InchOrran, and assures him he will allow no engagesments to stand in the way of hn accepting hisfriendly invitation for Wednesday the 24th.; andwill, if possible, make such arrangements as mayenable him to remain till the 27th vnik his worthykinsman. Benbowie begs his best respects,and will do himself the honour of waiting uponInch Orran, at the same time."Well, for my part," said Mrs Macaulay,when she heard the invitation discussed, << I cannotsay I like it. Three people invited, and forthree days. There's something — I cannot tellwhat — sin such an invitation !"*^ You are a complete goose, Molly Macauley,and if you had just as much sense as would stickon the point of one of your own needles, younever would open your mouth," was the Chiefscourteous reply.Well, Glenroy, you know it is not so muchaDESTINY. 165sense that I set up for having as just a sort ofa something else, I cannot tell what it is, thatmakes me see things that people a great dealwiser and sensible than I am do not see,"" You pretend to the secondnsight, do you?"^^ O, no, Meed I am not so savoured asthat; but, if you would be guided by me, Glen-roy,you would not go to that cankered body'shouse." '^^ I suppose you think there will be a boar's*^head served up, as a signal to dispatch Benbowieand me, with knives, and perhaps forks ?"^^ No, Glenroy, I have more sense than tothink that Inch Orran would behave in such away as that; but I don't like people being soperrin in paying back their entertainments.You see there was himself, and his wife, andlemon, his servant, all came here on a Wednes->day afternoon, and staid till the Saturday forenoon; and then he asks you and Benbowie, andyour servant, just to do the same thing ; and isnot that saying, I'll give you neither less normore than what you gave me ?"P, you're a soothsayer-^a diviner, are you ?166 DESTINY.You can tell what s passing in people's minds !But I would advise you, Mrs Mary Macauley, tostick to your needles and thread; for you knowno more of mankind than one of your ownworsted monsters." < i ,■' " Well, well, Glenroy, I know you're, a greatdeal wiser than me ; but we'll see who's rightsfor all that."Wednesday the 24th arrived, and looked mostauspicious. The Chief and his Mend havingmade a hearty luncheon, and sighed to think itwas the last plentiful meal they should beholdfor three days, embarked with a favourable gale,and were in due time safely landed at InchOrran.If Glenroy had any misgivings in his ownmind as to the sincerity of the reconciliation, theywere soon dispelled by. the courteous receptionhe met with. No symptom of displeasure aprfeared either in the looks or manners of his host ;on the contrary, he was studiously polite, andeven accosted him with a smile, or somethingintended for such, though of so suspicious acharacter, that it would have made any one elseDESTINY, 167instinctively bethink them of the canny old 'Scottish motto, — " Touch not the cat but aglove." However, Glenroy was not the man tobe daunted by a smile, so he returned it in fullmeasure, and a most cordial greeting tool place*Inch Orran even enquired, in a mild and courteousmanner; after the health of young Norman,which Glenroy considered as the next thing todeclaring him his heir.^* I have had three gentlemen residing withme for some days," said Inch Orran, addressingthe Chief, " whom it was my wish that you shouldsee here. One is my law-agent, or man ofbusiness, Mr Medium; another is my factor,Mr M^Farlane ; and the third is Mr Crowfoot,an eminent land-surveyor. Their business withme has been of an important nature, and hasproved highly satisfactory in its results. It wasconcluded this morning ; but the gentlemen 'remain with me tiU tomorrow, in order to celebratethe termination of our labours, and also toafford you, sir, an ' opportunity of acquiring anyinformation you think proper on the subject."This went &x beyond Glenroy's most santosDESTIKT.^guide. antieipadoius. In act) what did allamount to, but that having had hk estates itahned^hia renWoll proved, and his settlement mado^^enow took this method of declaring him his hmMiIn onion decay, therefore, he could do 00'less than wave all appearance of enriosit^.^HSinterference on the subject, which he ^d^ JmiI?in a manner that plainly showed what was |)flM«?ing in his mind. At this Inch Orran'f mtitithiwas curled up in a most suspicious maimer; and.one better acquainted with the characters JhS)^mit would have felt rather dislxustfi|liof Ihiat.sv^matural sweetness and openness, after whittlehad passed; and to those who knew him,, theft^' faire seemly pleasance" woidd have beenany thug but an ^^ augur of good purpose." Itwas one of Inch Orran's^peculiarities, thatcherever his Hand had settled into a fixed hatreds ^e(mlempt for an individual, &om that time hismanner towards him was marked by the jaaoslrscrupulous attention tother ordinary rules of poise?.ness ^ not with any design to deceive, for hede^fseised all^uplicity and double-^ealmg^but froma o^ti^ mei^ffiaiBi^ dei%htr asia to IbalMiWithDSSTiNrr.' lao*which « it gev&y uNiTokai the victim Ae isBat Olenroy was too superficial himself to beal all wwuKB of the depths profbiind of odors.£b eodUi not see beneath the surface, andlriieRtlu^ was smeodi, he judg all was Sionnd; kcr-tiMrelere: drew the most' flattering cofncltuioiiir£ram his kinsman's belumoinr, and without pretendingto the secDnd*sight, he already beheld,by antidpKtfon^ the long-coveted poverty inhis peasesskoi — the leumly honours agi fixedin Ae fiunily seat, and a clear five thousandpes annum added to his rent*FoU.\ They werenow. joined by the men oi business, who were'each introduced with marked emphasis to Okn-*roy.^ Next followed Mrs Malcolm, << in out*ward. show elaborated an' as sensible and ecB-fling as usuidt.^ The dinner hour arrived, and,to the agreeable surprise of Glenroy and hisfriends) they sat down t» a most plentiful andeseeBent reqpaslr socii as would not have <tts^gmcedevea' the Chef s own board, while winchof ti best qoaKty were liberally dispensed.lie nieet perfect good^lmttowrpirevailediK GknVOL. I. H\7Q iWBSTiNy.Toy's fascinates passed without comment ; andeven Mrs Malcolm's sottish escaped with impii<«*mty.The agent and actor were silent, iron-boimdlinking persons ; but Mr Crowfoot, the surveyor,whose more active habits had probably given agreater freedom to his tongue, discoursed largelyupon the survey he had made of Inch Orran, itspertinents and pericles, the prodigious rise inthe rent when the leases should fall, which^ouldhappen in a year or two ; then, if there shouldprove to be a seam of coal, of which Mr Crowfootwas very sanguine, there was no sayingwhat might be the value of the property ; andso on.Whatever the value may prove," said InchOrran, mildly, ^^ one thing is certain, sir, that itwill prove of more benefit to my heir than everit can to me."Glenroy's face flushed with the consciousnessthat he was the man ; and he expected thenext thing would be the proclaiming of him ; butthough he could have decreed, and even assistedattheap9theosisofInchOrran,he was not preparedDestiny Ilito make a speech upon the occasion ; for, fondas he was of talking, he was not gifted witheloquence. He, however, showed by his mannerthat he took the hint to himself — his spirits Dose<r-^Inch Orran's smiles redoubled ; and, strangeto say, the day passed pleasantly, and the eveningclosed peacefully !.•-. .1■-t-.f,VI >■> ' i?..,'.<•-•'•' i'll ''*17? BpftTii^y.'•■•, • r»■•< ■CHAPTER XVm..» ' • ■ .'.'*/!:T. ./fAccording to Mrs Macauley's theory thingsleaked still worse the following day, when tbe^ ^s^yed in rapid succession, the self-same pafrtjr}f^ had, been convened by Glenroy, wh^ }xefiji ^e honours of his house to Inch QrrapfT^^e were lairds of every description-r^|9pd7llfiti^d .and ill-natured ht and lean, taU,aja4sheet) red and blue, rich and poor, soiQe w^ti^iwi|^^ ont some without Nor was Mr Mf I>,p;wwmtmg^ though he protested that nothing ||)|tfrp^ect for his worthy heritors would hive brpijg^th^ there that day, as he had just received themelancholy accounts of the death of his ^te^c|j||]^ Dr M^Fee's youngest child, amost^^UM^rmqiji jitout infant, named, after himself ^M^Opw|i((ffFe^• It had died of the cutting of jk bai:^pff^ ve?^ sud^xdy ; a severe stroke. lapf^ }^DfiSTINT* 4?6poor sister and life worthy ddetSfi^, Under tlie^e^tsreiiihstaEBceiEs Mr M*D6w Aot^kt props tobe rather in a pensive taooi, iSskfCtgh^ as he ownedto « touch of the i4ieHibiatism ^^ up <m^ side''of Miss head, and testified an immense sWeOedjaw, it was at least doubtful whether hii^ spiritswere most affected by his own cheek, or &ecAfiBltfrophe of little M^Dow M^Fee.Sb it was, he was less obnoxious tlmn HS^iacid uttered no banff inches woi^y of 'h^S&^ir^rded. If Glenroy had been sin^ril^ wffliIii dkn^ Hie j^i^ree^dilig day, he was ic^»ifbtin<Md^'tlklltjiahquet, round which die tGA^y #^iS^mAhlei. It had evident been gdt ujp by^Wa^tfeW; rf the first eminetiee. The wi v^Mtt^^ti!iid the table that Inch Oran hbA bt^htidhJk Jill the way from Glasgow— iEdihburgfc^L^dtin— Paris, to dress the dinner. Be' eataei^^i^ttky, ^e diner Was evidently dfeiSWediyikd^^iifediti kind, iftnd all testified the Wot^e of ^c^jaiiff ^t tof woman* Certainly not ^rS^W^i<i)(dlM'fi^ web, betW^e^U ber trvhi finery itiiiMt'&[thl^'tlifanery refined ijuke bewildered, arid,4ifc&Mr MWaWf is mtM sflOTt tibtti iisuld/ 6hch174 I>£STINY«of the party as could not be accommodated withinthe walls of Inch Organs found lodgings, some atthe sector's, some at the Clachan, and some inthe hay-loft ; but all returned to the charge thefollowing day, like giants refreshed. Even MrM^Dow's cheek had fidlen, and Mrs Malcolm'stongue was unloosed.Every body who has made one of a party in^ large house in the country, must have observedhow great a portion of time is consumed in whatis politely called the pleasures of the table ; andupon this occasion the prevailing poultice wasduly observed. The host, indeed, continued hisown abstemious mode as usual ; but he be^^dhis rules might be no restraint upon the company,and that they would, in all things pertainingto good cheer, take their Chief as theirexample.Tie intervals between tie meals were filledup in the usual manner, by sauntering out of.doors, walking up and down the rooms, playingat billiards, reading newspapers, discussing politics,canvassing county meetings, &c.^^ Here's a most entertaining game'' said MrsDESTINY. 176Malcolm, drawing forth a large sheet of pasteboard,on which was displayed the royal gameof the goose ; ^^ if s a thing I brought with meinmy trunk ; for I thought it would be a fineamusement for Mr Malcolm and me in the cou)>-txy, when we had nothing to do ; but I can't gethim to play at it, if I would do ever so." *Most men find it enough to have played thefool with a wife, without having to play the goosewith her next," said Inch Orran, with one of hisbitter smiles.A burst of laughter from the unmarried partof the company testified their approbation of thissentimentsThat's really very severe, Inch Orran,"said Mr M'Dow, coming forward as the championof the ladies ; " very severe, indeed, uponthe fair sex, and Fm sure most extremely misappliedin your own case, with such a lady asyours," bowing to Mrs Malcolm, who sat quiteu^l^lOved with her goose spread out before her.A man may learn a useful lesson even froma goose, sir, if he can take a hint in tine," sdJtoch Orran sarcastically.176 i»|8ipjjBnr.I , .A well ao4 A pri^oujore jporBtfy iHsoai Jtikiliyto be sure," Bald Mr M^Dow, siirTajdpg ayedetail wg^ the; goose ; ^ but I hope tiiiei^ .nobodyjiere that, will ever Jiare occasion to take. fulfilplants ; for my own part, I don't think lilaoi 4|iwy danger either of the one or the odioi^f Mmif my decreet should go against ma— bob, 1hk^»^^bpT ? . I-^^ These, sir, are emblematic, I presilm^<f^Tr\i|b and Reflection," said Inch Qrran;i^^tkeone is said to lie in the bottom of a wellytfuaditfaeOther, I believe, is offcen found at last iiHMiiil titofirs of a prison* I know few men who m$,f. :obtprofit by such hints ;" and a small fiery ^qMoeksbi^ &om the comer of his eye at Glenroy, onYkQ^ it fell harmless, so intrenched owns 1^4i|^e firm belief that all was doing and sa^jrfangin honour of himself. Not Human, wbe^ beseemedto be at the pinnacle of his wishes, feltmore secure than Glenroy.^ The third day arrived which was to wind <ii|>the Inch Orran festivities, and nothing remainedbut that the guests should now take their departure.The usual stir had begun amongst them,hm Wbo m^ tli« first to TOiGv^y «• 1 4m ii^rry'fote i«lf tb hmk hap this parfj;^; fer f e^Kfiilb ti^dOi d6l^^]>e^ I n^ttfr^ in fie wbcl^ coiirgidF4^r ttb, sptet two pieaMitifei' days ; and 1 tmistore I spect the sentiments cff the wfaol8 pai «^ I teste ywi, Hir* *replied Infer CMfiai,with Md&e of his little honibie sno^^ ; '* hvtt ^ifiddle sir these reyellitigis iH dee t» dh^ CKkff.Hodvit ii«^ bluest for fan, I should hee knW^^Ittteed ytSM m tf different stye ; bnt he has gft^me « UiSBta, which I hope I shall ttBt ^6&ti ibf^f^trsmt t tete only been iiaehxtging th S^Vt t^jmnatfeA t^ him by hid splendid hdspt^ii^towardlsme/* ^ '^^!i ^tettpoy' wsw not pr^pdfcid fat this ^til(^%m;and his face glowed, atiid his whose perish 'i/&S^tendril wi(3i the prcytid triumph of hurting" themia 0f prae this publicly awltidkl lid 1^)but wrhilii he wi preparing a MStsM^ replf^ Mr178 IHBGTINY^.M^Dow, as usual, broke forti with a tremendoushach, bach, ho ! - 'f' Well, Inch Orran, for my part I can OBljrsay, that I hope from my heart this innocentrivalflbip between my two worthy patrons maylong continue to subsist ; and I dare say I nayanswer for all present as I do for myself, that,IjBbe the Swiss troops, we shall always be teady>to lend our assistance to either side, and senboth to the best of our power for the time being* —hoe, hoch, hoch, hoch, ho !''A clamour of mirth succeeded, which dropped'Inch Orran's reply, as, with one of his bitterestlooks, he said, " Sir, your services are not likelyto be required by me in a hurry," Then, as the.roar still continued, he muttered, " I would atany time rather sit down to table with two devilsthan with twenty angels."The guests had severally departed— all saveGlenroy, who still lingered in hopes that InchOrran would now come to the point, and disclosethe deeds that had been done ; but InchOrran's lips seemed now as if hermetically sealed,and he heard all Glenroy's hints and innuendo170does in profound silence. At length the ChJ^fsaw it was time to take leave ; and as he did so,*he expressed a hope of soon seeing his kind hostat his house.Never, sir !" was the reply, with a look andan emphasis that made even Benbowie start.The Chief was confounded ; but he was nowoutside the door, which was already closed upofihim.** He is a very particular man," said Glenroy.On my conscience, it would not do for everybodyto be so particular," said Benbowie.If s just his manner," said Glenroy ; " Unconvincedhe means nothing."And his echo answered, " Nothing''180 BssTimr.V. V.)iTv '. I s ■\ ,■CHAPTER Xix*J..'V The day admired for die Wng-pienumdl viteto the Manse, and a most propitious one itnwtby of the lovely segues on which itTim &iher and daughter set out early on theirexeursioiBt and after a ride ci about fiY^mUesloon themselves in the environs of the Manse.these were of the grandest and most r^^iapticdescription ; there were lofty heatfareoi^j^ed.tiuouatains, softened by gently swelling gicc^n.{Jl^ls, diversified and enriched by patches of, natalrosewood, which completely supplied theplaise of trees ; here and there were openings^tothe bold rocky shore, with its grey dii9^,aiidbroken £segments mingling in peaceful stywith the dark blue waters that curled aroundtbeoQL Far as the eye could reach the sei w^studded with ides and islets, some gleamingDssTiinr. 1€1through misty showers, some glancing in thefill blaze of sunshine. In short, nothing couldbe more varied, animated, and picturesque, yetbeautifully tranquil and secluded, than the sceneswhich presented themselves, at every step seenunder different aspects. Lucy was enchanted,but the enchantment fled on reproaching dieManse* It was a thin tenement, built of roughgspisy stone of the usual pattern, a window 4meaefa side of the door, and three above. At imede was the garden, with cabbages and marigoldsgrowing peU-snell, and in the rear was thesef/>iKf condemned offices, partly thatched ttftdpartly slated. There were no attempts at n^itt*ness in the approach to the house, wUkdi' Irasmerely a rough jog-trot road, flanked e» ^ai^gode by a dyke. Presently Mr M^Dow wasaileen hurrying to the door to nseet his guests,aid! there, as they alighted, he wal teaiy toreceive them with open hands. • « mJ'Great was the joy expressed at this honour,'k» Mr M^Dow led the way to the interior of hismansion, which was just such as might have beenexpected finwi its outward aq>ect. Tlwrewasa182 nssrnnr.narrow stone passage, with a door on each sidesand there was a perpendicular wooden stair, andthat was all that was to be seen at the first coopd!4BiU But if little was revealed to the eye, thesecrets of the house were yielded with less coyreserve to the other senses ; for there was to beheard the sound of a jack, now beginning withthat low slow nioumfiil whine, which jacks eisensibility are sure to have ; then gradually risingto a louder and more grating pitch, till at lengthone mighty crash, succeeded, as all mighty crashesare, by a momentary silence. Then comes thewinding up, which, contrary to all the rules ofthe draxna, is, in fact, only a new beginning, andso on, ad infinitum, till the deed is done. Withallthese progressive sounds was mingled thesharp, shrill, loud voice and Gaelic accented in a house, PU supposejbVL^re the mistress of, to have your kitchenfilled with all the clam-jamphray of the eountr)!^drunken soldiers randy beggars, ill-tonguedtinklers, and so on — ^how it would do, I say, for ayoung lady of your delicacy and refinement goingdown to order your dinner, to find the very scum6( the earth sitting, perhaps, on your kitchen*dresser ?*That is, indeed, a climate to be avoided*'said Captain Malcolm, laughing; ^^ and Pmafraid, Lucy, you must admit, that, charming lisyour favourite picture is, it is one which, in thesedays, it would not do to copy too closely. Wemay please ourselves by such representations ofprimitive manners | but I fear they no longerexist, except in the poet's page, or your imagination.Steam-boats and stage-coaches havenow brought each village and hamlet in closecontact with some great town, even with Londonitself; and the evils the poet so beautifully predictedare, I fear, coming on apace. I doubt weshould now in vain seek from the Land's End toDESTINY. 1^9Jobn-o'-Groat's House for a * sweet Auburnrose ' best riches' are ^ ignorance of wealth*'But I see Lucy won't give up her love for beggars,for all we can say."Lucy smiled, as she replied — " Mr M*Do\^'srepresentation of Christian charity is certainlyvery different from the poet's ; but I am stillinclined to side with him, and to think that«much may be made of human nature, even inits worst state, by kindness, as Mrs Fry hastestified ; and so I believe good Mr Stuart hasoften found it. The lines that follow are stillmore descriptive of him. Pray, papa, readthem ;" and Captain Malcolm went on :-^-'^ Thus to relieve the wretched was his pride,And even his failings lean'd to virtue's side;But in his duty prompt at every call,He watch'd, aid wept, and felt, and prayed for all ;And as a bird each fond endearment tries,To tempt its new-fledged offspring to the skies.He tried each art, reproved each dull delay,Allured to brighter worlds, and led the way*'Allow me, in the meantime, to lead theway to something more substantial, Miss Lucy,"cried Mr M'Dow, seizing her hand, as Jess put300 DysTimr.hm head in at the door; and haying given agjjare with her eyes, and wide opened her mouth,emitting a sort of guttural sounds importing that** aw's ready' galloped down stairs again, ashad and fast as she could. , »<< Give me leave, Miss Lucy — but the stair'srather narrow for two— you know the way;torn to the left hand of my trance.* Ifs veryeasy for these poets to preach ; but it's not soeasy always for us preachers to practise — ^hocb,ho !"This sentiment uttered, a grace was hurriedover; and the company seated themselves attable, which was literally covered with did]ke%all close huddled together. In the middle wasa tureen of leek soup, alias cocky-leeks, withprunes ; at one end, a large dish of innumerablesmall clammy fresh-water trouts ; at the other,two enormous fat ducks, stuffed to the throatwith onions, and decorated with onion ringsround their legs and pinions. At the comersTrance— in England a deep swoon ; in Scotland, a narrowpassage.destiny. 201were minced collops and tripe, confronted vnAa dish of lai old pease, drowned (for iSkejcould not swim) in butter; next, a mess ofmashed potatoes, scored and restored with themarks of the kitchen-knife — a weapon which isto be found in all kitchens, varying in lengthfran one to three feet ; and in uncivilized handsused indiscriminately to cut meat, fish, fowlonions, bread, and butter. Saucers full of ill-colouredpickles filled up the interstices.I ordered merely a slight refreshment''said Mr M*Dow, surveying his banquet withgleam complacency ; ^^ I think it preferable to amore solid mail in this weather. Of all goodScotch dishes, in my opinion, there's none equalto cocky-leeks ; as a friend of mine said, it's bothnectar and ambrosia. You'll find that uncom-<only good. Miss Lucy, if you'll just try it ;for it's made by a receipt of my mother's, andshe was always famous for cocky-leeks; theprunes are a great improvement; they give 8great delicacy to the flavour; my leeks are notcome to. their full strength yet; but they areextremely sweet; you may help me to a fewi2202 DESTINY,more of the broth, Capimn, and don't spare Ae^'leeks. I never see cocky-leeks, without tkiid^ing^ of the honest man who found a snail ink :Tak ye that snack, my man says he, * forlt)0king sae like a plum-day ;' hach, hach, ho ! *There's a roasted hare coming to reMove tk^fish, and I believe you see your refreshment;there's merely a few trifles coming." ' *Lucy had accepted one of Mr Dud's littlemuddy trouts, as the least objectionable articleof the repast ; and while Mr M^Dow's mouthwas stuffed with prunes and leeks, silence ensuedBut having dispatched a second plateful, iaifdtaken a bumper of wine, he began again, '^ Ican answer for the ducks. Miss Lucy, if you'lldo me the favour to try them — A clean knifeand fork, Jess, to Mr Dugald to cut them — Iprefer ducks to a goose ; a goose is an inconvenientsort of bird, for it's rather large for oneperson, and it's not big enough for two. Butmy stars, Jess ! what is the meaning of this ?The ducks are perfectly raw !" in an accent ofutter despair. " What is the meaning of it ?You must take it to the brander, and get it doneDestiny. 2Q3as fast as you can. How came Espy to go so 6^.wrong, I wonder !" ,. ^Jess here emitted some of her guttural $ound.which, being translated, amounted to this, thatthe jack had run down, and £ppy couldn't g^^it $et going again. , ^That's most ridiculous !" exclaimed JVt^M*Dow, indignantly ; " when I was at the painsto show her myself how to manage her. She'sthe Auchnagoil jack, which I bought, and ftmost famous goer. But you see how it is, MiLucy ; you must make allowance for a bachelor'shouse — there's a roasted hare coming. — Jessietake away the fish, and bring the hare to me,"The hare was herewith introduced, and flung,rather than placed, before her master. " Oh,this is quite intolerable ! There's really no bearingthis ! The hare's burnt to a perfect stick !The whole rise is out of its body !"Your cook's not a good hare-dresser, that'sall that can be said," quoth Mr Dugald.Very well said — extremely good," said MrM'Dow, trying to laugh off his indignation;and, after all, I believe it's only a little Destiny.ih^recL* Do me the fkyoar to lay a morsel ofit Miss Lucy, with a little jelly, JesSy putdown the jelly. Oh, have you nothing but a^ptgf to put it in?" demanded he, in a mostwrathful accent, as Jess chipped down a largenative jelly-pot upon the table. ** Where's thehandsome cut crystal jelly-dish I bought at theAnchnagoil roup ?"^ ' Jess's ace turned very red, and a downcastlook of conscious guilt told that the <^ handsome-cut crystal jelly-dish" was no more.This is really most provoking ! — But ifyou'll not taste the hare. Miss Lucy, will you domethe kindness to try the pinched collops ? oramorsel of tripe ? It's a sweet, simple dish —a great favourite of my mother's-^— both you andthe Captain are really poor eaters, so you andI, Mr Dugald, must just keep each other incountenance."And another pause ensued, till at last an• Scorched.-f ^^S — ^^ England, an animal ; in Scotland, a piece ofcrockeryDEBTiinr. 205order was given to take every thing away, ^ Andbring the few trifles — but wUI you niab» lessnoise? there's no hearing ourselves speak foryou ;" but Jess rattled away, nevertheless, tillshe vanished, leaving the door wide open. Afew minutes elapsed before she re-appeared,with the greasy apparition of Espy at her back,standing on the threshold with her hands fuiNow, take the pigeon-pie to Mr Dugald ;bring the pudding' to me; put the puffs andcheesecakes at the sides, and the cream in themiddle. Fm sorry Fve no jellies and law■magis for Miss Lucy. If you won't taste thepie, do me the favour to take a bit of this odin';it's quite a simple pudding', made brook arecipe of my mother's."Lucy accepted a bit of the *^ simple pudding,"which, as its name implied, was a sort of mawkishsquash, flavoured with peat-reek whisky.^^ I'm afraid the pudding's not to your taste.Miss Lucy ; you're making no hand of it ; willyou try a jam puff? I'm sure you'll find themgood, they come from Glasgow, sent by mygood mother; I must really taste them, if it20d DESTINY.ilrere only out of respect to her. Oh MissLucy, will you not halve a puff with me ?'The minister and his friend having now ateand drank copiously of all that was upon thetable, Captain Malcolm said, <^ My daughter hisnot yet accomplished the object of her visit here,.and we must soon be returning home, so youhave no time to lose, my dear," to Lucy, whoskirted up from table like a bird from its cage,^^ if indeed it is not lost already," he added, asLucy and he walked to the window* The brightblue sky had now changed to one of misty whitesness, showers were seen drifting along over thescattered isles, and even while they spoke, asudden gust of wind and rain came sweepingalong, and all the beauteous scenery was in aninstant blotted from the sight.Captain Malcolm was not a person to be disconcertedby trifles ; but on the present occasionhe could not refrain from expressing his regret,as he every moment felt an increasing repugnanceto the company of Mr M'Dow and hisfriend, and still more on Lucy's account thanhis own; it seemed like contamination for sodestiny. 207fair and pure a creature to be seated betweentwo such coarse barbarians. Mr M'Dow affectedto sympathize in the disappointment ; but itwas evident he was exulting in the delay.Shower after shower followed in such quicksuccession, that Lucy found the object of her visitcompletely defeated. At length the clouds rolledaway, but the day was too far advanced to admitof farther tarriance; and besides, both the fatherand daughter were impatient to extricate themselvesfrom the overpowering hospitalities of MrM^Dow.*^ I hope you will have many opportunities oftaking drawings here' said he, with a significanttenderness of look and manner, as he assistedLucy to mount her pony ; ^^ and when the manseis hurled, and I get my new offices, the viewwill be much improved."Lucy bowed as she hastily took the bridleinto her own hands, and gladly turned her suckon the manse and the minister.908 DMTiinr.CHAPTER XXI.The showers had passed away; the rainewas '^ smiling on the faded storm ;" the fragpftmtair was mild ; the herds and flocks were croppingdie dewy grass ; the declining son shot ^ a slaiitand mellow radiance ;" and all things seemedimbued with new life and beauty. CaptainMalcolm and his daughter proceeded for somtime in silence ; each felt the beauty and theharmony of nature, and as they slowly paced,side by side, amongst the windings of the greenhills, they needed not words to utter the feelingsof their hearts. Captain Malcolm was the firstto speak.You are unusually meditative, Lucy** saidher father. " What is engaging your thoughtsso much ?*I have been thinking, papa," said Lucy,rousing herself from her reverie, ^^ what a sweetthing silence is."^^ That is to say, you admire silence, as LaBuyers did solitude ?"** Oh, certainly, silence is sweeter whenshared with another who can understand itsbeauty. But after such a day — such a coarseunpleasant day as we have spent, even solitarysilence would be sweet and gratefuL Had MrM^Dow given us some nice clean well-boiledpotatoes and milk, and have allowed us to walkabout and enjoy the beautiful scenery, howmuch more pleasantly and profitably the daywould have been spent !"^^ Mr M^Dow is, indeed, a coarse specimen ofa coarse propensity," said Captain Malcolm,^^ and has fallen into a common error, that ofseeking to raise himself by appearances ; as ifthese could exalt the character, especially of aminister of the gospel ; of one who is ^ as pooryet making many rich, as having nothing, andyet possessing all things.' "^^ One is always pleased with the humble areof a cottage," said Lucy ; ^< and I am sure most210 DESTINY.people would feel additional respect for the simsj^city of a clergyman's, or indeed any one'sstyle of living, when proportioned to theirmeans."^^ Certainly," said Captain Malcolm ; ^^ povertyin itself is never despicable or ridiculous,except to vulgar or thoughtless minds. It isonly when it carries pretension along with it,that we feel privileged to laugh at so preposterousa union. We are also apt to be moredisgusted with a coarse gourmand than with arefined epicure, though there certainly is notmore moral or intellectual superiority evinced inthe love of turtle and venison, or evenfricandeauand banquets, than in cocky-leeks and ducks."'^ Oh, how much I lament having lost thisday !" sighed Lucy, as she stopped her pony toadmire a lovely peep between the hills.^* I fear your lost day is not to be understoodin the same sense as the Emperor's was," saidher father. " I suspect it is only your lostsketches you lament."Lucy smiled as she acknowledged the feet.<* But surely, papa," she added, " you mustDESTINY. 211allow it was rather harcl^ instead of roamingamongst rocks and glens, and filling my portersfemme with sketches, to be shut up all day withMr M'Dow ! Indeed, papa, his company isany thing but agreeable."^^ I am aware of that, my dear, but, as a clergyman,I wish to show him aU the respect inmy power. His sacred office I consider theJ«lpo,^. i» which . H™ b«:^ »„ h.engaged, and the most difficult, when one considerswhat various states of mind a faithfulpastor must be called upon to minister to."^^ But you surely cannot call him a faithfulpastor, papa ? I cannot possibly conceive anyoneconsulting him about spiritual matters, oreven asking him for a prayer — I am sure I couldnot."** I never heard you so severe upon any one,Lucy. When you have lived longer in theworld, you will find there are worse charactersin the church than Mr M^Dow, though,happily, there are also others whose genius,learning, and piety, shed a lustre over the agein which they live. Mr M'Dow is not an ixBSTunr.mont man, otherwise I would not have gone tovisit hint''*' The most offensive part of his character Ithink," said Lucy, ^^ next to his love of eatingis his constant jocularity; not that I should Hkea morose austere pastor, who would look uponall gaiety as sin, but I should like to see one,as Cowper says, * serious in a serious cause.' ''^^ I agree with you," said her father, ^^ thatwhen a clergyman views in its true light theimportance and the responsibility of the officehe has undertaken ; an office which, as an oldwater says, is * a weight under which angels'shoulders might shrink,' his great object will beto get men to think seriously, not to laugh lightly;though wit being a natural talent, like every,other, it may be turned to good account."Ah ! there is old Sandy !" exclaimed Lucy,as a sudden turn of the road gave to view an oldgrey-haired shepherd on the hill-side, baskingin the rays of the evening sun, with his bookand his dog. " How finely he is in keepingwith the landscape ! I wish we were nearer, tohave a little conversation with him, for I findDestiny. 213tM)th pleasure and improvement in conversingwith him ; he is simple and artless, but not vulgar,for he knows his Bible, and that trulymaketh wise the simple.' "He is indeed a very favourable specimen ofhumble life," said Captain Malcolm ; " for Ihave always found that where common educationis built on solid religious principles, it neverfails to elevate the mind, and give that contentedand independent spirit, which is a nation's trueststrength and safety."^^ How perfectly he realizes Grahame's pictureof a Sabbath evening shepherd," said Lucystill gazing on the picturesque figure of her oldfavourite : —Behold the man !The grandsire and the saint ; his silvery locksBeam in the parting raj ; before him liesUpon the smooth-cropt sward, the open book,His comfort, stay, and ever new delight."^^ And there is a setting sun," said CaptainMalcolm, as they emerged from the glen, andthe blazing luminary burst upon their sight:214 DESTINY.ft** That would defy all painting, for, as Wordsworthsays,-** Such beauty varying in the lightOf living nature, cannot be portrayedBy words, nor by the pencil's silent skill ;But is the property of him aloneWho hath beheld it, noted it with care,And in his mind recorded it with love !**Oh, papa, do let us alight here for a fewminutes to feast our eyes with this lovely sunsets''cried Lucy, when they had gained the svaormit of a hill, which gave to view all the gloriesof the scene — the sun, with all his retinue offlaming clouds, sinking to rest in the bosom ofthe waters.Captain Malcolm loved to encourage in hischildren a taste for the beauties of nature ; apleasure so cheap, so pure, and so elevating, andhe readily assented to his daughter's request.Seating themselves on a grassy spot by the sideof a wild mountain brook, they gazed <^ witheyes intent on the refulgent spectacle." Atlength Lucy said, " How perfectly Barton hasDESTINY. 215realized such an evening as this, with all itsaccompanying feelings, in that sweet poem ofhis, ^ Morning and Evening ;' every verse seemsto me a perfect picture in itself, and a picture,too, that excites such pure and holy thoughts !"And her soft blue eyes shone with an expressionof love and adoration, as she contemplatedthe glories of the heavens, and recalled thebeautiful imagery of the poet.It is a comparison he draws between therising and the setting sun, is it not ?" said CaptainMalcolm ; " my memory for these thingsis not so good as it was, Lucy ; but I dare sayyou can repeat it to me word for word, and thisis just the time and place for hearing it" Lucy,in a sweetly modulated voice and simple manner,then recited the last stanzas of BernardBarton's " Morning and Evening :" —*' *Tis when day's parting light,Dazzling no more the sight,Its chastening glory to the eye is granting.That ' thoughts too deep for tears,*Unearthly hopes and fears,And voiceless feelings, in the heart are panting.216 DESTINY.** While that the western skyDelights the gazing eye,With thrilling beauty, touching and endearing ;What still of earth is fair,Borrows its beauty there,Though every borrowed charm is disappearing.** Ere yet those charms grow dim.Creation's vesper hymn.Grateful and lovely, is from earth ascending ;Till, with that song of pndse,The hearts of those who gazeWith solemn feelings of delight are Mending.** Then from those portals brightA farewell gleam of lightBreaks with unearthly glory on the vision ;And through the folding doorsThe eye of thought exploresSeraphic forms and fantasies elysian.*' These pass like thought away !Yet may their hallow'd swayRest on the heart, — as dew-drops round adorningThe drooping silent flowers,Feed them through nights dark hours,And keep them fresh and living till the morning.Thus should the sunset hour.With soul-absorbing power.Nurse by its glories the immortal spirit ;And plume its wings of flightTo realms of cloudless light,Regions its God hath form'd it to inherit..4DESTINY. 21 7'* Fair, bright, and sweet is Moan !When daylight, newly born.In all its beauty is to sense appealing ;Yet Eve to me is fraughtWith more unearthly thought.And purer touches of immortal feeling /'*The shades of evening began to gather around,but the gloom was still enlivened by streaks ofsunshine on the mountain tops ; the silence andsolitude that reigned, and the stupendous objectsthat surrounded them, filled the hearts of thefather and daughter with solemn thoughts, andas they journeyed slowly home, they felt thiswas indeed the time for " unearthly thought"and " immortal feeling."VOL. I.218 Destiny.CHAPTER XxiiLittle more was heard of Inch Orran for someweeks. He had gone upon a voyage of discoveryto two of the Isles where the principal partof his property was situated, and was activelyemployed in detecting abuses, redressing grievances,making surveys, getting estimates, quarrellingwith his neighbours, discarding his factor,threatening his vassals, and so forth, and all inthe face of the worst and stormiest weather thatever was seen, even on a western island. Atthe end of some weeks, he returned to InchOrran, and Glenroy and he soon after met at acounty meeting. The Chief, as well as everyonepresent, was immediately struck with thechange that had taken place in the old man'sappearance since his first arrival in the country ;DESTINY. 219in fact, he more resembled a livid skeleton thanaliving man.I am glad to see you safely returned to us.Inch Orran," said Glenroy, accosting him withmuch cordiality. ^' I'm afraid you have had butafatiguing expedition ?"« Sir," returned his kinsman, " I desire to beexcused from being either congratulated or interrogated."And with a slight wave of his hand he turnedaway.Glenroy could scarcely keep from stranglinghim for his insolence ; but he saw death in theold man's face already, and he refrained. Soswallowing the indignity, even although put inopen court, he consoled his wounded pride byanticipating the rich reward that soon awaitedhis forbearance. Indeed, to all human appearance,the time was not far distant when teepossessor of the long-coveted lands would becalled on to relinquish them. It was evident hewas then labouring under severe indisposition,though, when some one remarked to him thathe appeared to have caught cold, he denied the320 Bestir.fact with much asperity. Then, as if to givethe lie to the offensive insinuation, he mountedhis horse, and rode home ten miles in a pourof rain, without greatcoat or umbrella. Thefollowing day he was still worse ; but, nevertheless,being in one of his invincible fits of illhumour and obstinacy, he chose to stand out forsix hours in wind and rain, seeing his potatoeslifted, carted, and measured, that he might takehis measures accordingly.The cold, bad as it was, might perhaps haveended like other colds, had it been treated in agentlemanly way ; but it was not Inch Orran'smode to treat any thing gently, or give place toany of the beggarly elements of human nature.He had likewise an utter contempt for doctors,without having a well-grounded faith in anythingelse, unless it were in that phantom calledNature, which was the only thing (Simon excepted)that had any control over him. ToNature then he, in the first place, committedhimself; but the cold grew worse and worse, inthe most natural way possible. He then submittedhimself to Simon, who boldly undertookDESTINY. 221the cure; but Simon had only two recipes inthe world, the one was ale saps,* the other wasAtholl brose,\In spite of nature and Simon, and saps andbrose, Inch Orran's case became desperate, andthen a doctor was called, but came in vain. Anotherwas summoned, but with no better success.Glenroy was most attentive, but to no purpose.The patient grew gradually worse and worse,till at the end of a few weeks, all solicitude wasvain, for Inch Orran ceased to breathe.Mrs Malcolm behaved " as well as could beexpected" on this trying occasion. She said itwas just to be expected, for Mr Malcolm wasan old man, and a very particular man, and itwas no wonder he died, for he never minded aword she said; and with Mrs Macauley to sitby and assent to all her propositions, and listento her complaints of Simon, and concert withher about her mourning, and talk over the cere-porridgemade with ale.f A composition of honey and whisky.222 Destiny.menials of the funeral, Mrs Malcolm was soonwonderfully well."It is a tormenting law which exists in Scotland,of keeping the will of the deceased a deadsecret until after the interment— especially aswills are things so capricious in their nature asto defy die speculation of the living, and baffle alltheir attempts at anticipation. During that dreadinternal, how are the hearts of lee nearest of kinof a childless miser, or a wealthy old bachelor, or asaving elderly spinster, agitated with lee emotionsof hope and fear ! Doubts resolving themselvesinto certainties, and certainty fading away intodoubt, as their omissions of duty, and commissionsof offence, rise successively to view. In thepresent instance, the only parties who seemedprivileged to entertain either hopes or fears,doubts or certainties, were Glenroy and CaptainMalcolm, as the nearest relatives of the deceased,and both standing much in the same degree ofpropinquity. But the latter waved his pretensionsin favour of the Chief, who therefore tookupon himself the arrangement of the funeral,and also bore the whole burden of the fortnight'sDESTINY. 023suspense which intervened between the deathand burial. Having seen the last remains ofInch Orran safely deposited in the &mily vault,Glenroy returned to the mansion of the departedto unseal the repositories, and cause them to renderup their secrets. The search was soon ended.The first thing that presented itself was InchOrran's settlement, or general disposition, newand neat, formally drawn up, and regularlysigned and attested in the most business-likemanner possible. But as the reading of a settlementis a tax too heavy to impose upon any savethose who are to profit by it, it will be sufficientto extract the kernel from the voluminous husk,in which, for wise purposes, the law has thoughtproper to encase it, but which it is not everyone'sjaws that can penetrate. Suffice it thereforeto say, that the settlement set forth, in the usualstrain, for good causes and considerations, giving,granting, assigning, and disponing all houses,lands, heritages, debts, movables, goods andchattels, writs and evident, &c. &c. &e. to ChristopherBlanche, Isaac Snipes, and Mark Lippeattorneys and scriveners, in trust, for DESTINY.hoof of Ronald Malcolm, eldest son of CaptainJohn Malcolm of Lochdhu, and his. heirs andassignees, the proceeds during the life of thesaid Ronald Malcolm, until he shall have attainedthe age of twenty-six years, to be investedin the three per cent consols, there to accumulate.Not a farthing of the money was tobe touched under any pretence; and the saidRonald Malcolm was not to be alienated orsubsisted therefrom, but to be considered as havingno right whatever in the premises, until heshould have attained the aforesaid age. Failingthe said Ronald Malcolm, his heirs, &c. thewhole was to go to his father, without restrictionof any kind. A small jointure to Mrs Malcolm,five hundred pounds to each of the trustees,a legacy of a thousand pounds, and anannuity of thirty, to Simon Small, for his faithfulservices, were the sole bequests contained in thisinconsistent and capricious " disposition."Glenroy was too much confounded at first tobe able to be in a passion ; it was only when hehad collected his senses that his energies wereroused, and he was able to articulate, with hisDESTINY. 225face in a flame, and his eyes flashing fire andfury, " Ronald Malcolm ! Oh certainly, a veryproper person — every — I — shem — I wish you joy,sir," to Captain Malcolm, stamping his foot ashespoke. " Your son is very welcome !" in avoice of thunder — " perfect welcome for me !"and, with a muttered oath, the Chief took anabrupt leave of the party of mourners; and,tearing off his crape and weepers, threw theminto the loch, and returned home.226 DESTINY.CHAPTER XxiiAlthough every body declared they leadexpected a most extraordinary settlement fromInch Orran, still this hi surpassed the anticipationseven of the most experienced, and affordedan ample field fpr animadversion to alL Yetperverse, unjust, and capricious wills, are thingsof such common occurrence, the only surprise is,that people should still continue to be surprisedat them. Surprised, however, every one was,and none more so than the family at Lochdhu,who were perhaps the only people of the namewho had not dreamt of either hardship or legacy.Neither Captain nor Mrs Malcolm werepeople to be much elated with any portion ofmere worldly prosperity, and this successionof their son's was not such as to call forth anyvery exuberant demonstrations of joy. It couldDESTINY. 227be of no immediate advantage to themselves ortheir children ; for, situated as they were, with anarrow income and a large family, necessarilyenduring many privations, a single year's rentof the estate would have been more beneficialto them now, than the accumulated treasclfMof a long minority might prove hereafter. Butabove all, they dreaded the effect this seducingprospect might have upon the mind of their son,with wealth and consequence thus placed beforehim, as the goal at which he must ultimatelyarrive, without any exertions of his own. Convincedas they were that the moral part of ournature is best developed amidst struggles anddifficulties in the outset of life, they dreaded thevarious temptations to ease and pleasure whichwould beset his path. Yet, in spite of thesesobering reflections, they hailed with gratitudethe prospect that was still afar off, even thoughit neither gilded the present, nor cast any delusiveglare on the future.As for the young heir, he felt much as anyother generous, warm-hearted boy would havedone upon such an occasion, and many were the228 DESTINY.romantic schemes which passed through his mind,and burst from his lips, in the first ardour of youthfulemotion. Great was his disappointment atfinding he could not, till the appointed time,dispossess himself of a farthing of his nominalwealth, and his heart revolted at the injusticethat had been committed against his parents.He loved his mother with that deep and earnestlove which a mother's virtues only can excite inthe hearts of her children ; and, contrasting thepoverty and privations she endured with thecomforts and luxuries he witnessed elsewhere, hewas indignant at the barriers that were opposedto the gratification of his wishes.Bent upon discovering some means by whichhis future wealth might be turned to the immediatebenefit of his family, Ronald's mind becamerestless and dissatisfied ; and his thoughts, occupiedwith vain wishes and impracticable projects,wandered far from the daily occupations he waswont to pursue with ardour and alacrity. Yethis was the restlessness of a noble mind, aimingat good which he could not realize.He was beginning, as usual, one day with,DESTINY. 229Oh, how I wish !" when his father gentlystopped him.My dear Ronald," said he, " I was in hopesyour good sense would, before now, have suggestedto you what a dangerous habit you areacquiring of constantly wishing."Dangerous, papa !" repeated Ronald; "howcan that possibly be ?"I consider it very dangerous," replied hisfather, mildly; "and so will you, I am verysure, when you come to reflect upon it It ispositive waste of time, and thought, and contentment.Wishing has been called the hectic of afool. K it is not the proof of a dissatisfied mind,(which, in your case, I trust it is not,) it inevitablyleads to it; for wishing is not very fourfrom murmuring. It is not to inculcate an improvidenthabit, but a contented mind, that wearecharged to take no thought of tomorrow."But in my situation, it is scarcely possibleto avoid wishing," said Ronald.*^ You surely do not mean to say it is scarcelypossible for you to avoid indulging in an idleand foolish habit ?" said his father, mildly. " We280 DESTINY.have indeed little controul over circumstances —these are regulated by a higher power ; but asiBilional and reflecting beings, we are accountablefor the exercise of our faculties."But my wishes are not so much for myselfas for others," said Ronald, reddening a little atthe reproof.I am aware of that, my boy, for yours isnot the sordid spirit that would merely seek itsown gratification ; but, nevertheless, you can dous no good by indulging those vain wishes ofyours — perhaps, eventually, you could do usnone had you the power of gratifying them, asit is very certain we know not the things thatare best for us, and were our wishes granted, itmight often be to our ruin. One thing you maybeassured of, your mother and I would rathersee you poor, if possessed of a grateful heartand contented mind, than master of millions witha restless and dissatisfied spirit. I forget whatphilosopher it is who says, ^ It is better to beborn with a cheerful temper than heir to tenthousand a-year.' For my part, I think its valueis incalculable, when it springs from the rightDESTINY. 281source — ^Mth and love. Such, I am sure, I havefound it in your mother. You know but littleof the privations she suffered in marrying me;but never have I even heard her utter a wishfor any mere temporal benefit. Her wishes,Ronald, have been prayers, and we flatteredourselves we should, by the blessing of God, beenabled to make our children rich in contentment,if in nothing else. You will not thendisappoint us, Ronald ?"Ronald could not answer, but his feelingswere depicted on his open countenance, as hewring his father's hand in silent emotion. Fromhenceforth he sought to stifle his murmurs amidthe sober realities of practical duties, kept inwholesome exercise throughout the daily walksof life.But Ronald seemed destined only to feel thedisquiet of riches without partaking of their enjoyments.The news of his succession had spread fie*and wide throughout the district ; but the particularswere (as all particulars are) very variouslyand imperfectly stated, and of course much errorand exaggeration prevailed, particularly amongst232 DESTINY.the lower orders of the more remote vassals andtenants. The consequence was, the young herwas assailed, from all quarters, with petitions for,and remonstrances against this, that, and theother evil, while a hoard of grievances, that hadlain slumbering for many a year, were now.brought to light, and laid before him, in thesure and certain expectation of being all speedilyredressed. Wives came from afar to speak forthe renewing of their husbands' leases; and motherswalked many a weary mile to get a wordof the young Laird about the enlarging of theirsons' crofts ; and widows crossed many a roughferry, and climbed many a long hill, to petitionfor a cow's grass, or to claim favour, in right oftheir husbands or their fathers having lost anarm or a leg, serving under a Captain AngusMalcolm (some tenth cousin of the last Laird)in the American war. In vain did Ronald protestto these poor people that he possessed nomore power than they did themselves. He washeard with sorrowful incredulity, or renewedentreaties, that if he could not help them him-destiny.233self, he woiild speak a word for them to thosewho could. But Ronald had already found ofwhat stuff Messrs Blanche, Snipes, and Lippewere made, and that it was in vain to attemptto seek favour at their hands. Faithful to thetrust confided in them, that of turning every thingto money, they had already commenced their operationsin the most systematic manner, and weredeaf as adders to all appeals that came merelyrecommended by mercy or liberality. But itwas in vain Ronald sought to convince the malcontents.It is at all times difficult to convincethe poor, that those they deem rich and powerful,cannot relieve them, if they choose; but,with the lower class of the Highlanders, it isnext to an impossibility to make them comprehendhow their superiors should not have thepower to redress every grievance, and supplyevery want, as promptly as it is made known.Many was the slow reluctant step Ronaldsaw at length turn away from him, as if still lingeringin the expectation of being recalled ; andmany was the groan, and the sigh, and the shake234 DESTINY. 'of the head, and the shrug of the shoulder, andthe discontented " weel-a-weel !" he received,in answer to his protestations. Such was theyoung heir's initiation to his inheritance.DESTINY. 235CHAPTER XXIV.But Ronald's cares, had they been weighedin a balance, would have been found light asfeathers, compared to Glenroy's wrath. Noteven the pains of the gout, which ensued, coulddrive the disappointment from his mind. Thereare people — alas, for those who know them ! —who have never done with a subject, especiallyif it is of a disagreeable nature. " They feedupon disquiet" themselves, and force others topartake of the same sorry fare.Such was Glenroy's practice ; and upon thisoccasion his colloquial powers had received animpetus which seemed likely to keep them goingto the last. It was a still-beginning, never-endingtheme ; — morning, noon, and night, hespoke of the injury he had sustained, as thoughhe lead been robbed, and his son murdered; till.296 DESTINY.by dint of hearing the same thing so constantlyrepeated, he at length talked himself, and allaround him, into the firm belief that he had beencheated and circumvented in the most shamefulmanner by the Lochdhu family ; and as his headwas none of the clearest, or his reasoning powersof the strongest, the proofs, for or against, wereall mixed up in one solid mass of invectiveIt is not the value of the property that Icare about," he would repeat, at least ten timesa-day, to his all-enduring friends, Benbowie andMrs Macauley, as they sat by his gouty chair,the one with his tobacco-box, the other with herwork-basket, shaping-scissors, and spectacles.But I hate the dirty underhand way thesepeople have gone about the business; I wascompletely thrown off my guard by them ; butI never knew one of these canting dogs thatwasn't a complete hypocrite."On my conscience that's very true, Glen-roy"said Benbowie.I'm as sure as I am of my own existence,"continued the Chief, " that there was a regularlaid down plan, from the moment of the oldDESTINY* 2»^7man^s arrival in the country. You may remem-^ber he had hardly entered this house when thatRonald — that young saint — was at his heels; sentto play the spy, and show off before him. Thefather knew better than to face the old dragonhimself, and so he set his son to dodge him andfawn upon him ; he had his lesson, and knewwhat he was about the day he came here. I sawthrough them even then."On my conscience, I really believe so,"said Benbowie.^^ I have no doubt it was these incendiariesthat were at the bottom of that insane proposalthe old scrivener made me about Edith ; but iwould rather a thousand times have seen her inher grave, than the wife of any beggarly tacksman'sson, — and to cut out her brother too !"Well, now is not that very curious !" saidMrs Macauley; " are not these just the verywords that I heard Mr Reginald using the t'otherday ?• ^ Edith,' says he, * I would rather see youkilled a thousand times, than that you should havedisgraced yourself by marrying the tacksman'sson.' — ' Oh, Reginald,' said she, * you know that238 • DESTINY.could not be, for I am engaged to be married toyou, and so I would not marry Ronald even ifhe were a king "^^ You'll really make these children as greatfools as you are yourself' cried Glenroy, impatiently.^^ How can you put such nonsense intotheir heads !"Me, Glenroy ! 'deed, I never put any thinginto their heads. I woidd be very sorry ; so farfrom that, when the boys said that you hatedRonald, for he was a bad boy, I said to them.Well, childer, your papa may say what he pleases,and you ought to mind every thing he says, whenit is good and fit to be remembered ; and whenhe happens to say what is maybe not just soright, then you must be sure to forget it."I really don't believe there is such anotherfool. as yourself in existence," cried Glenroy;and I only wish you had this gout of mine inyour tongue, to silence it."Well, I'm sure I wish I had, if it wouldtake it out of your toe, Glenroy ; but wait tillyou hear. — ^ Oh,' says Norman, * I shall takecare never to forget that he cheated me out ofDESTINY. 239«an estate.' — ^ Nor I,' says Reginald, ^ that hehad the impudence to want to marry Edith ; apretty husband indeed for Edith, a poor tacksman'sson !*— Chiltern, says I, I fear you readyour Bible to little purpose, or you would notspeak evil of your neighbour, or be so scornfulof any body for being more humbly born thanyourselves ; for we are such curious creatures,we cannot tell what may happen to us. Youought to remember how Joseph, that was soldfor a slave, came to be a ruler over his proudbrethren ; and was not there King David, thegreatest of all the kings of the earth, — what washe but a poor shepherd boy ? But it pleased Godto make him a great king, and if it please Providenceto appoint that Ronald should live tobecome a great man, who knows but he may bemarried to Miss Edith "Providence ! — appoint ! — what is it youmean, Mrs Macauley ; do you know what it isyou are saying ?" cried Glenroy, furiously.'Deed I do, Glenroy, and I'm sure so doyou, that it is Providence that appoints ourlot "240 DESTINY.Providence !-^ appoint !' — lot! — do youmean to make my children predestination ?"cried Glenroy, passionately. " I thought youhad been merely a simpleton, but I see you'vea most mischievous creature, and I cannot sufferyou in my family, if you sport such doctrines asthese,"Well, Glenroy, if you think so, I cannothelp it ;" and poor Mrs Macauley's heart rose atthe thoughts of having to choose between herChief and her conscience.But I don't believe you know yourself whatit is you mean," cried he, somewhat mollified atsight of her distress.'Deed, then, but I. know very well, Glen-roy."Then I say you are a very dangerous andmischievous woman," cried Glenroy, enragedthat she would not take advantage of the loopholehe had opened for her escape.Well, maybe I am, Glenroy," was thehumble reply ; ^' but I'm very sure I do notmean it."You are really not fit to associate with eitherDESTINY. 241men or children' cried the Chief, striking hiscrutch on the floor as he spoke.Well ; may be not'* was said in a verydejected tone; ^^ but you may say what youplease of me, Glenroy, for there's no harm inthat ; but I do not like to hear you casting outwithProvidence."Who's casting out, as you call it, with Providence,you old goose ?" »Well, I really thought you was affronted atmy saying that we did not get every thing ourown way in this HRprld, but that Providenceappoints our lot for us."^^ Then I tell you again, Mrs Macauley, thatI will not suffer such doctrines in my &mily ;I'm for none of your predestinarian notions here.I suppose you'll have my servants cutting mythroat, and saying it was appointed. I — I — it'sreally a most infamous doctrine."'' Oh ! Glenroy, that is not the Christiannotion of the thing at all ; if s only poor ignorantheathen craaters, or them who do not take painsto read their Bible, who can misuse it that way ;for how can we think we are appointed to doVOL. I. L242 DESTINY.mischief to one another, when does not He tellusthat we are to love our neighbour as ourselves ?'Deed, if an angel were to tell me the contrary,• I would not believe it"You really — you know nothing about thematter, and I desire I may hear no more suchdoctrines ; there's no knowing where it wouldend."^^ 'Deed, then, I think it would just end haour being of contented minds, and learning toynSk humbly \dth God, casting all our care uponHim who caret for u&" «^^ Oh, you are setting up for a saint too ! butI'm for no saints id this house, remember."Well, you know if you wish me to go myway, I cannot help it ; it is my duty to go."Here tears streamed down Mrs Macauley'scheeks.Yes, yes, you're ready to go, and leave meatthe very time when you might be of someuse ; you might at least have the discretion tostay till I have got somebody to take your place ;but do as you please."Oh, Glenroy, how can you think it wouldDESTINY. 243please me to leave you and your children !** criedpoor Mrs Macauley, quite overcome.** Well, stay where you are," cried Glenroy,somewhat softened; ^^ only don't go and fillthe children's heads with these pernicious doctrinesof yours' Mrs Macauley's face fell atthe conclusion of this sentence.I must speak the truth to them, Glenroy,"said she, with a sigh, ^^ whatever may come ofit ; and I think we are such curious craaters,and know so little, that we cannot tell what mayhappen to us. It may be God's will to raise usup, or to cast us downeAre you at it again," interrupted Glenroy,furiously ; " when I tell you, Mrs Macauley, Iwill not suffer these doctrines in my family ?^** Well, Glenroy, I am sorry it should be mylot to displease you, for I owe you a great dealof kindness, and I would lay down the hair ofmy head for you and your childer, but I cannoteve up my principles."'* Who's meddling with your principles?"demanded Glenroy, again softened at sight ofher distress.244 Resting.<^ Well, I thought it was not like you to doit; you who have such good principles of yourown."*' It's my opinion* said Glenroy, " you knownothing about principles, I don't believe youknow what they are ; are they flesh and blood,or are they skin and bone ?'Oh ! Glenroy, I wonder to hear you, whohave so much good sense, speak that way, when .you know what respectable things principles are,and what poor craaters we would be withoutthem. No, Glenroy, when I die, I will leavethose things behind me ; but I expect to carrymy principles along with me, for no doubt theywill be of use to me in the next world."That's very true," said Benbowie, wakingout of a doze ; ^^ on my conscience, we shouldkeep all we can."I don't believe there's a man on earth butmyself that could put up with two such idiots,"muttered Glenroy.Oh ! 'deed, we have all our appointed trials,Glenroy," said Mrs Macauley, looking in hisface with the most perfect good-nature andDESTINY. 245sympathy ; " but we have all a great deal to bethankful for, too, and myself most of all, for^ man proposes but God disposes,' and so Hehas disposed you to be a good and kind friendto me, Glenroy."You speak a great deal of nonsense," saidthe Chief, whose wrath, having had its fullswing, now evaporated ; " but I don't believeyou know what you say, and I daresay youmean well ; and there's the children calling you."And he graciously extended his hand, whichreceived a kindly pressure from the placable MrsMacauley.O, Glenroy !" cried she, while tears of joytwinkled in her eyes ; ^^is it not a great blessingthat you have not cast out with me, and that,from no power in me to hinder you ? — Well, mydears, I'm coming," as another call from thechildren made her hasten to join them in a littleexcursion.246 DESTINY.CHAPTER XXV.If it is difficult to impress truth upon theminds of children, it must be owned there isnothing so easy as to instil prejudice. Lieeffect produced by these and similar invectives,which the young Glenroys were in the dailyhabit of hearing, may therefore be easily imagined.The Lochdhu family became graduallyassociated in their minds with every thing thatwas base and treacherous ; while Ronald, in particular,was the object of a sort of undefined illwill to the two boys, who had already learnt toape the Chieftain's tone and adopt his sentiments.Even the gentle, timid, loving Edith was insensiblyborne along in the stream. She was stilltoo young to comprehend the nature of the case,or to conceive how pride, prejudice, and envymay distort the fairest and simplest statement.DESTINY. 247Neither could so monstrous a supposition everenter into her young imagination, as that her papacould be in the wrong. She could thereforeonly grieve in silence that her once dear friendsshould have been so wicked ,as to have told liesand cheated, and that Ronald, dear Ronald ! —who had given her a white owl, and was training *a starling for her — should have been such a badboy as to rob Norman, and to want to have herfor his wife, when he was only a poor tacksman'sson, and she was the daughter of the Chief.Such was the taint already communicated bypride and prejudice to the young and simpleheart, by nature ^' rich in love aiiid sweet humanity."With all Glenroy's violence and fascinating,he nevertheless did not proceed to open hostilitieswith the Lochdhu family. When they met,which was but seldom, he even felt his spirit sorebuked beneath the mild and unassuming, yetopen and fearless aspect of Captain Malcolm,that his blustering subsided into a dead calm, ormerely showed itself in a still haughtier deport*ment His kinsman was at no loss to guess that248 DESTINY.this accession of dignity in his manner was occasionedby anger and disappointment, and he wasaware how unavailing argument or expostulationwould be against prejudice so unreasonable andinveterate. He also knew, that offended prideis only to be propitiated by the humiliation ofthe object of offence. To attempt, therefore, toconciliate the Chief, on the footing of equality,he perceived would only exasperate him themore ; and as there was nothing on his part whichcalled for concession, he deemed it the wisestplan to allow matters to take their course, withouteither seeking or avoiding an explanation.Although Captain and Mrs Malcolm were notso Utopian as to attempt to bring up their childrenin utter ignorance of the wickedness of theworld in general, still less ^eie they given topoint out particular living instances of it, as theyfound quite enough on record to serve theirpurpose, without applying the scalpel to thecharacters of all their acquaintances. Glenroy'sbehaviour, therefore, called forth no animadversionsfrom them in presence of their family.They knew that reason, and the improvementDESTINY. 249of the understanding, nay religion itself, areoften* insufficient to destroy prejudices imbibedin early life, and that children cannot possiblydiscriminate or comprehend the vast variety ofshades which are to be found in the same character.With them every thing, and everybody,is either good or bad, and, of course, eitherloved or hated, with all the ardour of unregulatedminds. They were, therefore, unwilling to impresstheir young hearts with feelings of enmityand aversion against one, who, with all his pride,vanity, and littleness of mind, nevertheless possessedclaims upon their forbearance and goodwill.Some childish disorder which showed itself inthe family, soon afforded a plausible excuse forthe continued estrangement, and Captain Malcolmtrusted, that by the time that was over, theChieftain's disappointment would be somewhatmollified. And so it gradually was, in somedegree, although, for want of* something betteror worse to say, he had got into the habit ofregularly abusing the whole family at least fivetimes a-day, unless otherwise engaged.l2Sadi VIS the state of mSunmhen (jmpbaaMakofan received a letter from Cqiddn Shirley,oAcrii^ to take Ronald on board his «vn Testythe Brilliant thai under orders for North Amtfie. The commander and the Toyi^ wereboth unexceptionable ; hot Captain and MiaMaleofan, who had never been Tery demooa ofAir son's entering on a sea-fiurii^ life — a lifeof such hardship and danger — were now decidedlyaverse to it, when, by the diane €i ds^cnmstaaces^ a profession had beginner a verysecondary consideration. But in Tain iSkejendeavoured to combat this indicating. Ronaldhad conceived that strange and unaccountablepredilection for the sea, which, like all extraordinarypropensities, when once it has taken possessionof the mind, is not to be expelled byany thing short of dear-bought experience. Hesaid, indeed, that he would give it up' ratherthan distress his father and mother; but he saidit with sorrow, and the disappointment hung soheavily on his spirits, that his parents thoughtit wrong to oppose so decided a predilection,and the point was yielded. They gave theirDESTINY. 251consent, not without hope that a single voyagewould do more to cure him of his naval ardoursthan all that could be urged against it Preparationswere therefore immediately made forhis departure ; but he said, before he went away,he must go to Glenroy to give Edith her starling,and to take leave of them all. They hadbeen very shy of late. He did not know whatwas the matter, but he would go and see them,and make it up whatever it was. And full of kindfeelings, Ronald set forthAt a little distance from the house he met thetwo boys and Edith at play upon the lawii« andhis heart bounded at sight of them. He accostedthem with all his wonted gladness and franknessof manner, but the boys reddened and looked ateach other, while Edith cast down her eyes andlooked sorry. If children are sometimes slow tospeak the truth, they are commonly quick tpshow it in their behaviour. The tongue seemsin childhood the only member which can yield aready assent to falsehood. The kindling or downcasteye — the blushing cheek— the constrainedair — all speak the feelings of the^beart, and 'tis252 Destiny.long ere the ingenuous mind is tutored to regulateand control them.The young party met Ronald's salutation withcold averted looks, unlike the familiarity of theirusual manners.^^ You look as if you did not know me'' saidRonald, with some surprise, as his friendly greetingmet with no return ; ^^ although it is a longwhile since we have met, surely you cannot haveforgotten me ?"G, no ! — ewe have nok forgot you," saidMaster Norman, scornfully.*^ Then, why don't you speak to me, and shakehands with me ?"No answer was returned.And why do none of you come to Lochdhu ?You need have no fears of the measles now, forthe little ones have been quite well for morethan a month ; and "^^ It isn't for that," said Reginald, haughtily;^^ but it's of no use to ask any questions, wedon't choose to answer them, and thaf s enough.So, good-morning to you."^^ No !" cried Ronald, in some agitation.DESTINY. 253I won't go till you have told me why you arenot Mends with me. Jem sure I never did anyof you any ill ?'*You have, though* reiterated Norman,«passionately ; ^' and papa says we are never tospeak "<^ Hush, Norman !'' said Edith, putting herhand on his Ups, and whispering softly, « Youknow papa told us we were not to repeat anythinghe said; and I'm sure he would not beangry if we were to bid Ronald good-by."^^ I wish you would tell me what it is I havedone, that has made you quarrel with me ; forI'm sure I don't know," said Ronald, in vaintrying to recall any offence he had committed.^^ We shall perhaps make you know someday," said Norman.^^ The sooner the better," said Ronald, boldly ;for I am going away."Where are you going?'« To sea." 'And what have you got in your hand ?"«« It is Edith's starling," said Ronald, displayinghis captive.254 DESTINY.Curiosity got the better of pride. Edith utteredan exclamation of pleasure, and the boysdrew near, with looks of eager expectation.^^ Can it speak, Ronald ?" cried she, Jn aflutter of delight, and quite forgetting her reserve.Ronald answered by opening the littlecage he held in his hand, when the bird flew Outand perched upon his wrist, jabbering something,which he said was ^^ Forget me not !'' butwhich rather puzzled the uninitiated, and certainlywas not so plain as the ^^ Can't get out," ofSterne's sentimental starling.Such as it was, it was a novelty, and oon-^sequently hailed with eagerness by the younggroup, who, one and all, for the moment forgottheir animosity.Give it to me — make it come to me — let mehave it," cried all three at once, eagerly extendingtheir hands to it.'^ You are frightening it," cried Ronald,raising his arm to save the starling from its assailants.Well, but I won't frighten it," cried theDESTINY 255two boys, i^ain attempting to get hold of it.Give it to me — give it to me !"No, no, I won't give it to either of you. Itis Edith's bird, and I will give it to nobody buther."*< If it is Edith's bird, why don't you give itto her ?' cried Reginald** Well, stand away both of you," said Ronald,*^ for it is frightened. It is rather wild yetto strangers;, but see how it stays with Edith !"Now, Edith, give it to me !" cried Reginald,darting forward to seize it; but Ronald,hastily stretching out his arm to ward him off,the shock threw him back, and his head strikingagainst the branch of a tree, he fell, and theblood sprung from his nostrils.Edith screamed, while Norman sought tostanch the blood with his handkerchief, andRonald flew away for some water, which hebrought in his cap.^^ I am very sorry for this, Reginald," said he,as he returned breathless with haste. ^^ Here issome water— drink a little of it — it will do yougood."256 DESTINY.Bnt Ronald pushed away his hand with in-dignatioT^^^ I'm sure I didn't intend to hurt you, Reginald,"said he, earnestly ; ^^ I was only trying tosave the starling from you."^^ You had no business to keep it from me,"said Reginald, passionately. ^^ You had givenit to Edith, and she had promised it to me, andyou ought to have been very proud of our touchingyour bird, or any thing belonging to you."** Proud !" repeated Ronald.Yes, very proud," added Norman; " butwe shall not demean ourselves any more, so youmay take away your ugly stupid starling. Edithis not to take it."^' Edith is not to be dictated to," said Ronaldwarmly ; ^^ she is to do as she likes, and I knowvery well that she would like to have the starling.Would you not, Edith ?"Edith, I shall never speak to you if you takehis bird," cried Reginald ; " so take your choice."Edith, with tears in her eyes, looked imploringlyat her tyrants, and then at the starling.You are not to take his bird, I tell you,DESTINY. 257Edith," cried Norman, in a passion. ^^ It willtell lies, and cheat"What do you mean ?" cried Ronald, kindling.^^ Do you mean to say I tell lies, andcheat ? Whoever says so is a liar, and if eitherof you were as strong as I am, you durst notsay so ; but you know I won't fight with a lessboy than myself."K you hadn't given me this cowardly blow,"said Reginald, ^^ I should have fought you onthe spot, and so I will yet some day."I did not intend to strike you," said Ronald." I told you I was sorry for it I didn'tcome here to fight you: I came to be friendswith you all, and to shake hands with you beforeI go away; but if you are determined not to doit,I can't help it"The boys looked a little ashamed, and walkedsullenly on, while Edith lingered, and cast manya loving look to her starling.I shall carry home the bird for you, Edith,"said Ronald, '^ and give it to you there, andMrs Macauley will take care of it for you; atleast, you will part friends with me, won't you?"258 DE8TINT.and Edith, with downcast eyes, uttered aaffirmative. The party walked on in silencetill they reached the castle, when Ronald said,^^ Here is your starling, Edith; take it, and letus be friends before I go'*Edith looked with soft earnest eyes, as if shelonged to be reconciled, and her hand was extended,when Reginald interposed.'^ You must choose, then, between him andme," said he, passionately. *^ I shall neverspeak to you if you are friends with him."If Edith had followed the dictates of her heart,she would most probably hare chosen the unvarying,kind, generous, protecting friendshipof Ronald, to the somewhat capricious, and oftentyrannical, preference of Reginald; but, too timidand gentle to dare to have a will of her own,she trembled at the thoughts of even betrayingher good-will towards him, for fear of the displeasureit would draw down upon her. Thusearly is " the fear of man a snare" for the youngheart.^^ I cannot take it, Ronald," said she, burstinginto tears ; and all three walked into the house.DESTINY. 259and shut the door in Ronald's face. Ronald feltboth anger and sorrow at such unkind behaviour,and, deeply mortified at Edith's joining againstUm, in a paroxysm of disappointment he tossedup the starling in the air. ** There," cried he,<* you may go ; since Edith won't have you, noone else shall;" and in bitterness of heart, heretraced his way to his own kindly homeIt may be supposed what a sight and a storythis was for Glenroy; his children all dabbledover with blood — the noble blood of his nephewshed by the plebeian hand of the tacksman's son—his own blood boiled to think of it ! Direwere the anathemas uttered against the perpetratorof this outrage ; and, though not naturallya sanguinary man, yet, had the power of formerdays been in his own hands, there is no sayingin what manner he might have thought properto avenge this indignity. Most likely in theRob. Roy strain —** And to his sword he would have said.Do thou my sovereign will enact ^• « • • •Judge thou of law and fact."260 DESTINY.Bnt after Reginald's ace had been washed withVinegar, and his dress changed, there appearedno injury to redress. The traces of it did not,however, pass so easily from Glenroy's mind ;he was never weary of detailing and denouncingthe exaggerated statement of Ronald'senmities, tiU his name became a by-word andreproach throughout the &mily.Destiny. 261CHAPTER XXVI.But Ronald was soon to be beyond the reachof Glenroy's contumely for the day and hour ofhis departure had amyed. The parting hour !that hour, which, even in all its bitterness, wewould yet fondly prolong, and when past, wouldmany times gladly— oh ! how gladly recall !There is something peculiarly affecting in thefirst separation that takes place in a £Emily, which,amidst many difficulties and privations, has everpreserved in its own bosom the elements ofhappiness— of sweet domestic happiness ; thoseprecious elements, which, once scattered, are soseldom, if ever, united again !*< My home of youth ! oh, if indeed to partWith the 80ul*8 loved one be a mournful thing,When we go forth in buoyancy of heart.And bearing all the glories of the spring262 Destiny.For life to breathe on — is it less to meetWhen these are faded ? who shall call it sweet ?Even though love's mingling tears may haply bringBalm as they fall, too well their heavy showersTeach us how much is lost of all that once was ourselves; search as we will, let us ransack eastand west, earth and sea, for their peculiar treasures; it is not these, even in their fullest attainment,that bring joy to the heart, which canonly find its happiness in the exercise of its beastaffections; and which, when it survives these,lives but to sigh over its withered hopes, itsburied love. Alas ! if in the long and drearyinterval of separation, it were foreseen whatgriefs were to be borne, what ties were to besevered, what hearts were to be seared or broken ;who of woman born could bear the sight andlive ? But 'tis in mercy these things are hiddenfrom our eyes !No foreboding of evil greater than the presentfilled the hearts of the sorrowing family, whowere now assembled to part with him who wasFelicia Hemans.DESTINY* 263the loved one of all ; for his parents' hearts werestrong in faith in that Almighty Power, inthe shadow of whose wings there is safety forall who put their trust in Him, They knewthat it was not in ah arm of flesh to save, whenthe decree had gone forth to smite ; for they hadseen — ^as who has not ? — the child of a thousandcares, the hope of some noble house, the heir ofsome mighty name — the only, the all, the idolizedone — whose pillow had been a mother'sheart, 'whose safeguard a father's arms, smitteneven when pressed to their hearts, and tornfrom their unavailing grasp by the stem handof Death ; — while the wet sea-boy, whose cradlehad been the waves, who had been buffeted bythe stormy winds, and tossed on the ragingbillows, with none to watch over him, none tocare for him, had been upheld and preserved byHim whose ^^ way is in the sea," and whosepath is in the great-waters," and in whose^^ hands are the issues of life and of death"It was this heavenly confidence which gavefortitude to the other, and resignation to the264 ' DESTINY.mother, 88 they blessed again and again theobject of their love and their prayers, and gazedupon the treasured features, dimmed as theywere by their parting tears. Years might passaway before they should behold them again, butthe remembrance of them, they felt would neverpass away till the last hours of life.But different from the calm and holy sorrowof the parents, are the feelings of the ypxmgand imaginative upon these solemn occasions.Amidst their grief there is still a spirit of joywithin their, and their heart beat high withfond anticipations of a world their &ncy haspictured so fair, and which is fraught to themwith all, with more than all the world ever gaveor has to give.And what though there be error and exaggerationin their romantic dreams? And whatthough dangers and disappointments are sure toquell their towering hopes of youthful enthusiasm? The delusion springs from a lofty source,from which all that is great in thought, andnoble in action, has its rise ; from those aspiresIDESTINY, 265tons after a higher destiny than that of mereevery day existence, which seem inherent inminds of noble stamp, and** Speak their high descent and glorious end**Such were the feelings of young Ronald, as thepictured joys of a sailor's life dwelt upon hisimagination, and braced his heart to leave allthose beloved most dearly. The stately ship —the swelling sails — the dashing waves — the fresheningbreeze — the unknown lands — the excitement— the perils — the renown — over all thesehis ardent spirit had cast a charm which helonged to realize. Yet when the time came,still he lingered amidst the encircling arms andthe linked hands, and the fond tones, and thetears, and the kisses and mutual promises, not toforget. But last and longest did he remainlocked in his mother's arms, that mother soloved — so adored — must he then leave her ?It was a mighty effort to break away from allhe had ever known and loved — the tenderparents — the happy playmates — the dear familiarfaces, and scenes which had stamped theVOL. I. M*2M Dsmmr.sint imprenons on his heart lEs very dog —hk fidthfol Bran — how his long moamfbl howlrung in his ear as the boat put off from land,and he was left! For the moment, Ronald'sbright prospects all melted away beneath thewarm gush of tender affection, as he thought,(< Why have I left them ? I might have staid,and now, perhaps, I may never see them more !''But the day was one to chase all sadness fromthe heart ; the blue waters glittered in sunshine ;a summer breeze filled the sails of the littleboat, which skimmed along like a thing of li£e^and other and £Edrer scenes soon met Ronald'seye, than those of his mountain home and nativeshores.DESTINY. 267CHAPTER XXVII.By the succession of his son, and his owneventual inheritance, Captain Malcolm was nowin a different situation from what he had hithertobeen, as the proprietor of a small farm, and ih^tenant of his profit Chief. But although hemet with all that deference and attention whicheverwaits upon worldly prosperity, there wasno alteration in his simple habits and demeanour,to the surprise of those selfish, sordid spirits,who look upon wealth as the summum bonum ofhuman felicity. Whether Mr M'Dow was ofthe number, we do not pretend to say ; but atthis time the following letter arrived from him :My dear Sir,'^ The preparations for the departure of yourson, and the consequent bustle and confusion208 DESTINY.which such an event unavoidably creates in afieanily, prevented my having the honour of communicatingwith you sooner upon a subject of anextremely delicate and most interesting nature.From the various small attentions I have forsome time past been in the practice of payingto your eldest daughter, Miss Lucy, I have nodoubt you will be pretty fully prepared for theoommunicadbn I am about to make to you, look*itkg upon this mode of proceeding as by fiaor themost honourable and manly on such an occasion.From the first period of my entering onthe ministry, it was my firm determination toembrace the earliest opportunity of entering intothe married state, not only as being most con-^ducive to my own comfort and respectability,but as what the world would naturally expectfrom me, when placed in independent circumstances,and in an elevated station in society.I was very soon captivated with the modesty,good temper, beauty, and accomplishments ofyour daughter; but the difficulties which I foundmyself involved in, in consequence of having toraise a summons for augmentation, together withDestiny. 269the uncertainty as to the final result of my reclaimingpetition, made me at once resolve toact as became a man of honour and integrity,by refraining from paying my addresses imtilsuch time as I should have obtained a final decreetI have now the pleasure of informingyou, that by last night's post I received theagreeable intelligence that the Court has foundme entitled to my augmentation, and also decernfor a small addition to the manse, and thoroughrepairs to my offices, which, although not whatI by any means think myself entitled to, yet,upon the whole, will make things pretty decentThat being the case, there no longer remainsany necessity for my concealing the attachmentI have for a considerable time entertained foryour daughter, and for soliciting her hand inmarriage. From what I have observed, I thinkI have every reason to flatter myself with afavourable response from her, although, in justiceto myself, I must again assure you, that Ihave made no direct appeal to her affections,but such as you have been privy to. With regardto my family connexions and private DESTINY.tune) I beg leave to subjoin the following statementfor the satisfaction of yourself and MrsMalcolm.^ My father, as is well known, was for upwardsof forty years schoolmaster on the mortificationof Fireside, and although the emoluments werenot at that time what they are now, still theywere such as enabled him to live like a gentleman,and to cut a good figure in the world. Ineed scarcely add, that he was a man of a mosthighly respectable character, and of uncommonlearning liabilities, in £eut, quite a superior man;he was nearly related to the great M*Dow ofM^Dow. At the same time he set no great valueupon these things himself, and for my own partI am no genealogist either, and have never givenmyself any trouble to prove the antiquity of myfamily. With respect to my fortune, I havenot been much in the way of amassing wealth,but what I have is vested in the three per centconsols, and amounts to something upwards of£200. I have likewise two substantial top flatsin the Galloway, Glasgow, one of which mymother life rents ; the other I let off for £16 perDESTINY. 271annum. I am £ar from expecting, my dear sir,that, with your numerous &mily, you should beable to afford splendid fortunes to your children ;at the same time, as your prospects, my dear sir,are very materially improved, I have no doubtyou will at once see the propriety of doing allthat lies m your power to enable your daughterto cut a good figure in the world as my wife. Butas it is well known that money has never beenthe principal object with me, I think I maysafely trust to your own good sense and liberality,and gentlemanly conduct, for a suitableand genteel portion with your daughter. On mypart, I am willing to make such settlements asmay be deemed just and reasonable on my wife,who, in addition, will, in the event of survivingme, be entitled to £30 per annum from theWidows' Scheme.* I beg the favour of an acknowledgmentof this per bearer, and I hope Imay be permitted the honour of waiting on theladies in the course of tomorrow forenoon ; inIn English, a matrimonial design; In Scotch, a pecuniarycompensation.272 Bestir.the meantime I request you will do me the favourto deliver my respectful compliments to them,with my most special devoirs to Miss Lucy, andwith the utmost regard,I*toi, my dear Sir, .^ m .Your most faithful humble servant, ^ 'Dun, M*Dow* >^< P. S. For your farther satisfaction, Idnnkitproper to hand you over a sight of the testimonialsof my character, which, in justice to mywtdf, I thought it necessary to procure at thetime when I was applying for the presentation*D. wb:'The ^* Testimonials" were, as usual, such asmight have entitled the testified to the honoursof an apotheosis, and the eulogy uttered byMark Antony over the dead body of JuliusCaesar, would have sounded tame and cold incomparison of the panegyrics lavished on MrM*Dow to his own face. From a voluminousmass of evidence, the following may serve as aslight specimen.DESTINY. 273My dear Sir,^* It is with the most unfeigned satisfaction Jtake up my pen to bear my public testimony ttworth such as yours, enriched and adorned as itis with abilities of the first order — polished andrefined by all that learning can bestow. Fromthe early period at which our friendship commenced,few, I flatter myself, can boast of amace intimate acquaintance with you than myself;but such is the retiring modesty of yoiivnature, that I fear, were I to express the highsense I entertain of your merit, I might woiiniithat delicacy which is so prominent a feature inyour character. I shall therefore merely affirm,that your talents I consider as of the very highestorder ; your learning and .erudition are deepsand profound; while your scholasticresearches have ever been conducted on titobroad basis of Christian moderation and pendentmanly liberality. Your doctrines I look upon < asof the most sound practical description, calculatedto superinduce the. clearest and most comesprehensile system of Christian morals, to wliigbm2274 DESTINY.your own character and conduct afford an aptillustration. As a preacher, your language isnervous, copious, and highly rhetorical; youraction in the pulpit free, easy, and graceful. Asacompanion, your colloquial powers are of noordinary description, while the dignity of yourmanners, combined with the suavity of youraddress, render your company universally soughtafter in the very first society. In short, to sumlip the whole, I know no man more likely thanyourself to adorn the gospel, both by your preceptand example. With the utmost esteemand respect,I am, dear Sir,*^ Most faithfully and sincerely yours*'Frederick M'Craw,Professor of Belles Lettres.But Lucy was not dazzled either by the Testimonials,or the Decreet, or the Augmentation,or the flats in the Galloway, or the Widows'Scheme ; and, to Mr M^DoVs astonishment andindignation, a polite, though peremptory refusalwas returned to his modest proposals.DESTINY. 275CHAPTER XXVIII.Lise seemed to be now holding its most eventenor both at the castle and the farm, for bothshowed so little variety beyond the most commoncasualties, that for some time not a singleoccurrence in either family would have servedto adorn a tale, scarcely even to point a moraLThe Chie although his rancour was. graduallyabating, still preserved a stately distance towardshis kinsman ; and as their habits and pursuitswere quite opposite, they seldom came incontact with each other. Glenroy, in spite q{the downfall of his hopes, still pursued his courseof revelry and reckless profusion, while CaptainMalcolm, dazzled by the glare of futurewealth and consequence, continued his formersimple, frugal mode of life ; his chief aim being276 DESTINY.to render bis children happy, virtuous, and independentBut the blank Ronald had left in the domesticcirce remained a dreary chasm for many a dubday and long night; for Ronald had been tikebeloved of all, and all missed him, from the eldestto the youngest. The accounts that had hithertobeen received, both of and from him, had beenhighly satisfactory. His captain and he weremutually pleased with each other, and the yoimgsailor's naval ardour had suffered no divinationduring the time the ship had remained at theMore, after he had joined. But soon after that,its destination had been changed, and instead ofbeing dispatched, as was originally intended, ona six weeks voyage to a healthy climate, it hadbeen ordered to cruize in distant seas, and inanother hemisphere. This was a disappointmentto Captain and Mrs Malcolm, and an aggravationto the anxiety they naturally experiencedon their boy's account — an anxiety which, evenunder the influence of pious trust, could not hjl tobe felt by fond parents for a son of such promise.Their .hearts were indeed occasionally cheeredDESTINY. 277by letters from both Ronald and his captain,when they happened to hail a ship in their progress,and the contents were always of a gratifyingnature. Captain Stanley was delightedwith Ronald, and Ronald was delighted with thesea, and said he would not exchange his hammockfor all Inch Orran. All he wanted wasto witness a battle and a storm, and when hehad seen these, he should be satisfied. <^ Heavenforbids wishes should be soon gratified !''said hismother, as she read the young enthusiast's letter;but it seemed as if Heaven, in its mysteriousdecrees, had otherwise ordained.Many months passed after this, without edtbetletters or tidings, and the anxiety of the parentsbecame gradually more intense. Winter daysand stormy nights, and summer suns rolled on,and still all was silence. To the watchfulnessof expectation now succeeded the feverishnessof apprehension, and then came that awful stillness,the oppressive weight of time which wehave loaded with our own dread presentiments.When all nature seems to be wrapt in silenceand in gloom — when every object appears to pro278 DESTINY.daim the down&Il of our hopes — when the gayestscenes only move ns to tears — when the gladdesttones only sound as the death-knell of our happiness.Oh ! many were the midnight prayersbreathed from a sleepless pillow wet with a mother'stears, and duly were the streaming eyesand supplicating hands raised to Heaven, while** Thy will be done !" yet trembled on the lip.In vain the anguished parents strove to hidefrom each other the dismal forebodings whichfilled their souls. The averted look, the stifledsigh, the listless step, the sudden start, the vacantyet searching eye, all betrayed the secret ofthose hearts which for the first time were closedagainst each other. At length the bolt fell, andby one stroke these hearts were laid bare. Theship had foundered, and every soul on board hadperished ! A plank, on which were a few lettersof her name, and a shattered boat, had beenpicked up, and all was told. In the ocean depthsall had gone down, and many a wave since thenhad dashed over the trackless spot where lay theyoung, the brave, the loved — their tale a secretDESTINY. 279till that day when the seas shall give up theirdead.Oh ! were her tale of sorrow know'Twere something to the breaking heart.The pang of doubt would then lee gone.And Fancy's endless dreams depart.It may not be !— there is no rayBy which her doom we may expire ;We only know she sail'd away.And never was seen, nor heard of more !»Ah ! who can tell the anguish of a parent'sheart sorrowing for the loss of their child ? Heonly to whom all hearts are open, and who,remembering we are clay, forbids not thosefond and mournful recollections with which wtinvest the perished form of the object of ourlove. Alas ! how does our startled fancy recoilfrom the first dread thought, and seek to cheatitself, by conjuring up, and enthroning anew,that image in our hearts which our reason sternlytells us is no more. No more ! the being alllife, and motion, and strength, and beauty,whom we have so lately held to our breasts —whose voice even now sounds as sweetest musicin our ear — sin whose eyes we were wont to read280 DESTINY.•as in a book — whose vacant seat still standsbefore us — whose thousand mementos lie scatteredaround us — is that being indeed gonefrom the £Bute of this bright earth for ever ?Still — still would we seek the living among thedead ! In vain does human sympathy seek topour its oil on the dark and troubled waters ofaffliction. 'Tis a hand divine can alone stemthe torrent which overflows our soul:r-'tis a voicefrom heaven alone that can speak peace to our.stricken hearts, when it tells us the dust we fioloved on earth, whether it be scattered o'er aliatrackless desert, or be buried in the dark andfathomless abysses of the ocean, He will againbuild up in immortal beauty, and restore to thatdivine inheritance, where there is no more sorrowor death. Oh, blessed are they, who, evenin the anguish of their spirits, can bring theirfainting hearts to His footstool, and there, nthmeek submission, say, " Not my will, but thinebe done." With such, " weeping may endurefor a night, but joy cometh in the morning."DESTINY. 281CHAPTER the affliction of the bereaved family, itwould have been no small comfort to them tohave been visited occasionally by a faithful andspiritual-minded pastor, one who could havesoothed their downcast spirits, and have strength 'ened their religious faith, and have recalled to *their startled minds those cheering promises,which, in the first moments of anguish, are soapt, even by the best, to be forgotten, or butfaintly remembered. But it was not in the houseof mourning that Mr M^DoVs presence was ^wont to shine. He called indeed, but he sawonly Captain Malcolm — ^^ Sorrow is a sacredthing," not to be subjected to the commoneye, and Mrs Malcolm and Lucy felt as thoughthe presence of Mr M^Dow would only have382 DESTINY.profited the memory of the departed, and harrowedup the feelings of the living. Sorrowhad indeed sunk deep into the soul of the benefitmother. Ronald had been unconsciously theidol of her affections, and in the anguish of losinghim, she felt that he had been the dearest to her,of all her children. She bowed, indeed, withmeek submission to the will of Heaven, but theelasticity of her mind seemed gone. All was calmand resigned, but it was the calm of deep sufferingi the resignation of a silenced heart. Oftenin the dead of night there seemed to break uponher startled ear the sound of the raging sea, andthe tempestuous winds, and the cry — the piercingcry, of her drowning boy ; and then to wake tosilence and sad conviction that all was not adream ! But prayer would again bring downits holy calm to tha troubled mind, and the piousmourner would meekly confess that it was goodfor her to be thus brought, even by the hand ofsorrow, to the throne of grace. It was at thistime that a visit from the good Mr Stuart cameto cheer and invigorate her drooping spirit.He was a man whose whole appearance andDESTINY. 283deportment were so emblematic of the sanctityof his character, that even a child would havefelt that there was a holy man. He was of a palethoughtful cast of countenance, but his thoughtswere evidently such as savoured more of heavenlythings than low-born cares, for its expressionwas at once elevated and benign. HeBore his great commission in his look'*and the sense of that sacred trust gave a certaindignified humility to the apostolic simplicity ofhis demeanour.It is difficult to describe a piety so consistentin all its parts, and so unvarying in its practice,which sheds a living fiction over the wholecharacter, whose influence is deeply felt in thedaily intercourse of life, but whose results donot dazzle by any sudden or powerful impression.Human life, indeed, is composed of such anunceasing succession of minute occurrences, andhumble duties, and undignified occupations, thatit would seem tedious and trivial to narrate thecourse of even a good man's one well spent day ;but, as some one has well observed, it is fidelity384 DESTINY*in the aggregate of these little things that formsthe true solidity and greatness of the Christiancharacter* Even so it was with the venerablepastor of AuchnagoiL Grandeur, worldly grandeur,would have heard with a disdainful smilethe simple annals of his obscure life ; but howmuch of moral grandeur was there in the self-immolationof his Christian course ; a course atonce humble and sublime ! He was indeed a<' living sermon" of the truths he taught, and. toinculcate these truths by precept and example,was the sole aim of his consecrated office* Tosuccour the distressed, to minister to the sick, tahelp the poor, to comfort the mourner, to cheerthe penitent, to reclaim the wanderer — for thishe laboured in the far-extended district wUdihis parish contained ; for this he visited the diitant village and the lonely hut, seeking out eachindividual of his widely-scattered flock ; for thishe braved the winter's flood and summer's heat;for this he crossed many a rough and tempestuousferry, and climbed many a rugged and drearymountain, and traversed many an unfrequentedglen*DESTINY. 285'' Et would not grace one spark of pride allow,Or cry, * Stand off, I'm holier far than thou !' '*For he was no wild enthusiast, nor narrow-mindedsectarian, nor hot-headed zealot; buthe was a man, plain, artless, and simple in deedand word : his highest gifts meekness, temperance,patience, faith, and love, and the highestwords wherein he taught them were words fromthe Book of God.But though Mr Stuart's character was thus fairand consistent in the eyes of others, in his ownestimation how differently did he view it ! " Unworthyand unprofitable servant that I am," hewould exclaim to himself, ^^ how mixed are allmy motives ! How selfish are my best intentions! How polluted my purest affections ! Howdeficient are my best works ! But thou hast toldthe weary troubled soul to come unto thee, andthou wilt give it peace :" peace, how differentand how superior to the outward satisfaction ofthe vain, self-satisfied, worldly mind !Such are the feelings of the true Christian.His warfare is within, and in proportion as he286 DE8TINT.is enabled by the eye of sith to discern theholiness and purity of God, so shall he alsoperceive the guilt and frailty of his own imperfectnature*He spoke, and his words came like balm tothe wounded hearts of the sorrowing parents,for they came fraught with cheering promises,and glorious hopes, of eternal life* He hadethem turn their thoughts from the contemplationof that on which, at such a time, our thoughts,alas ! are too prone to dwell, even the materialpart of that immortal being once so precious inour sight.He had known Ronald, and he knew the goodseed that had been sown in his young heart, andfelt convinced that in the hour of peril thatwould not have failed him.I am far from saying that you ought not toweep for him you have lost," said the good pastor,while his own eyes were moistened with sorrow.Such a state, even if attainable, would be ferfrom desirable ; it would defeat the purpose forwhich God hath been pleased to bestow upon us6iDestiny. 287warm and kindly affections. We know thatafflictions are sent not as punishments, but asmessengers of love to lead us unto Him."I feel it is so," said Mrs Malcolm, meekly ;but still, my rebellious heart '^ She stopped,but struggling to overcome her emotion,added, ^^ Alas ! I often think, had my boy butdied in my arms, I could have yielded him upwith less reluctance to the will of God. I feelas if I could then have said with greater sinceritythan I fear I do now, ^ The Lord gave,and the Lord hath taken away ; blessed be thename of the Lord.' "<^ That is a natural feeling," said Mr Stuart ;^^ the horrors of death always come aggravatedto our minds, when accompanied, as in this case,with any thing of suddenness or mystery; wearethen apt to imagine it more dreadful thanany reality, forgetting that ^ the Lord is mightierthan the noise of many waters, yea, than thewaves of the sea.' True, ' the silver cord isloosened, and the golden bowl is broken,' andthe dust has returned to the dust, but the spirit288 Destiny.thas also returned to Grot who gave it. Whatmatters it then how we enter on the valley ofthe shadow of death, when we know we are topass through it by the light of those Divine footstepswhich have trod it before us ? They stillremain, and will remain till time shall be nomore, to guide us to our heavenly home, wherethis < corruptible shall put on incorruption, andthis mortal shall be clothed with immortality ;'where we shall enter on ^ glory such as eye hathnot seen, nor ear heard, and which it hath notentered into the heart of man to conceive.' "With such glorious prospects of perfect andendless felicity at the end of the Christian course,"said Captain Malcolm, ^< it indeed matters littlewhether we enter upon them by lingering decay,or by a stroke of the sword, or.the shock ofa wave ; whichever it is, we must believe that itis the means our Heavenly Father deemed thebest ; and in that belief let us humbly acquiesce."^^ And in that simple act of acquiescence weshall feel a sure and certain rest for our souls,"said Mr Stuart. Time, it has been truly said,indeed obliterates sorrow from the worldlyDestine 289heart, and leaves it no better than it found it ;but Religion beautifies and sanctifies afflictionin the heart of the Christian, and causes it evento bring forth new and more abundant graces ;the fountain of bitter water may yet become thewell of living water springing up to everlastinglife."*< Feeling and acknowledging as I do thetruth of these things," said Mrs Malcolm, *' howweak, how sinful it seems to allow my soul tobe thus cast down ! I know the conditions onwhich every blessing is bestowed — that we mustone day part with it — sand I believe that Godknows best when that parting should be ; andyet," she added, while the tears flowed silentlydown her cheek, " my son ! my son !"** Do not judge yourself thus strictly," saidthe good pastor ; '^ you do not mourn as thosewho have no hope ; the spirit is willing tobelieve all things, though the flesh is weak toendure them. You believe that God gives inlove, believe that he also takes in love, and yourheart will not be troubled beyond measure ; for^ light is sown for the righteous, and gladnessVOL. I. N290 DxsTimr.for the upright in heart f be of good coumg^then, for Grot's promise is not made in vain i^ they who sow in tears shall reap in joy "Such, though imperfectly detailed, was thetenor of the £dutiful minister's conversation withthe afflicted, parents ; and he left them soothedby his visit, and cheered by the promise ofrepeating it as often as his wanderings broughthim near their dwelling.Perhaps the first pleasurable emotions of anoutward kind, to which the bereaved heart isawakened, are to be found in the deep and simpleenjoyment of the beauties of nature. Andwhere to the reflective mind and cultivated tasteare not these beauties to be found? Even onthe barren mountain and the dreary moor, onthe ever flowing waters, and the ever-changingclouds,** No plot so narrow, be but Nature there,No waste so vacant, but may well employEach faculty of sense, and keep the heartAwake to love and beauty !"To those whose eyes and hearts have long beenclosed, whether by sickness or sorrow, but areDESTINY. 291again opened to the soothing influence and gentleharmony of nature,** The meanest floweret of the vale,The simplest note that swells the gale,The common earth, the air, the skies**are indeed to them " as opening paradise," andinsensibly they " feel that they are happier thanthey know."-292 DESTINY.CHAPTER XXX.While the mansion of Lochdhu was thusdarkened by the shadow of death, we may turnto the habitation of Glenroy, which was baskingin the full blaze of prosperity. Ronald's mournfulfate, however, had not failed to excite its dueshare of sorrow and of sympathy. Even theChief's animosity had been greatly softened,and the two boys remembered with shame andcompunction their unkind treatment of him attheir last meeting; while Edith shed many atear of remorse and regret over the memory ofthe loved companion of her childhood. She wasagain permitted to renew her intimacy with thefamily at Inch Orran, and her affectionate heartfeltas though its only reparation could be in devotingherself to the consolation of the mourners.Years rolled on, and the young people eitherDESTINY* 293gradually outgrew their childish faults, or exchangedthem — as is often the case — for othersless obvious to common perception; but so itwas, the spoiled, forward, petulant boys, werenow transformed into handsome, spirited, pleasingyouths the pride and delight of the Chieftain— the admired and applauded of all his friendsand followers. Not that Norman possessed anydistinguishing traits of excellence in himself, forhe inherited much of his father's character, alongwith his features. He was proud, overbearing,and selfish, but he was handsome, light-hearted,active, and brave, which, with his figure andfortune, were requisites sufficient to ensure hispopularity as a future Chief. Had it beenpossible for him to have been eclipsed in hisfather's eyes or house, he certainly would havebeen so, by his cousin Reginald, who was a perfectmodel of manly beauty, and seemed in hisperson to have realized all that Grecian sculpturehad imagined of faultless form and feature.The materials of his mind and character seemedalso of a richer and nobler stamp than Norman's.He had good feelings, great sensibility, an DESTINY.dent, romantic imagination, and a high-spiritedscorn of every thing mean and base ; and al-^though he was at the same time headstrong, self-willed,and impetuous, the slave of impulse, andthe sport of passion, yet, as his impulse oftenled him to what was good, and his passion was amere gust, these in early life showed scarcely asdefects, but seemed merely the natural exuberanceof youthful blood and unchecked spirits.The seeds of many good qualities had beensown in him by nature, but not much had beendone by education to bring them to maturity ;the tares had been suffered to grow up with thewheat, and both were now so completely blendedtogether, that it would have required no commonskill and pains to have distinguished andseparated them. The attempt, however, hadnot been made, and which should predominate,would depend upon the circumstances in whichhe might be placed, and the temptations to whichhe might be exposed. Hitherto, nothing hadoccurred to call forth any of the latent feelingsof the heart, or proclaim the master-passion ofthe soul, for his life had merely been that of anDESTINY. 29^ .indulged and pampered boy, who had neverknown a trial, or had a wish ungratified. Sobright and sunny an existence, then, couldscarcely ail to produce a pleasing influence on^e naturally good temper and high spirits, ajBthe soil will be richest in gay flowers where theharrow has never entered. But,ccnot only by the warmthAnd soothing sunshine of delightful things,Do minds grow up and flourish."Alas ! who has ever beheld the endowmentsof nature, and the advantages of fortune, realizein the happiness of their possessor, the splendidvisions they seemed destined to fulfil ?Mr Ellis had frequently urged on Glenroylie propriety of sending the young men tofinish their studies at an English University;but his remonstrances were always answered bya quotation from Dr Johnson, the only one theChief had ever burdened his memory with, that^^ an English education could only tame a HighlandChieftain into insignificance." — ^< And,I .296 nESTivY.air, my son shall not be tamed into insignificance9i any of your English Universities'Mr Ellis was therefore obliged t» give up thepoint ; and having written on die subject to SirAngus, he only waited to receive his instructionsas. to the future plans to be adopted for thecompleting of Ronald's education bdTore hetook leave of his pupils, and relinquished whatwas now a mere nominal office — that of theirpreceptor.Glenroy liked his daughter as well as he couldlike any thing incapable of holding or transmittingthe chieftainship, yet still she was rather aninsignificant person in his estimation. He was,however, pleased to hear on all hands, that Edithwas reckoned the prettiest girl in the county,and that Reginald and she had already formedan attachment to each other; as that was atonce securing a good establishment for her, andsaving himself all trouble as to her future disposal.Although it has been said, the love whichgrows by degrees is more nearly allied to friendshipthan to passion, nevertheless the attachmentof the cousins seemed to form an exceptionDESTINY. 297to this general rule, for their love had continuedto grow with their growth, and strengthen withtheir strength.As the attachment was sanctioned by bothsides of the house, the course of their love, con-rtray to that of all other loves, seemed destinedto run in a very smooth channel, and it wasalready settled that the marriage should takeplace upon Reginald's attaining the age of twen-ty-one. No envious cloud, therefore, marredthe brightness of their horizon ; they stood onthe threshold of life," and all life's fairestprospects lay spread out before them.A too strict similarity of character, is perhapsnot favourable either to love or friendship, andthe difference of dispositions in the young loversseemed only such as would give greater charm totheir attachment. Reginald was all fire and impetuosity,while Edith was all gentleness andtimidity. With her father and brother, shefound little congeniality of mind, or interchangeof sentiment, for their characters were cast in adifferent mould from hers ; but there was muchof a kindred nature in the more romantic andn2208 Destiny.imaginative mind of her cousin and she lovedhim with her whole hearty as the only beingwith whom she could hold unreserredcominii*non. Possessed of deep sensibility, and dwellingwith the object of her earliest affection amidscenes of grandeur and beauty, calculated to callforth and nourish all that was romantic andtender in her nature, it was not surprising thatEdith should yield to the dominion of an artlessaffection, unsullied by the tarnish of the world,and live in a creation of her own* Outwardlycalm and serene, all the powers of her mindwere concentrated in those feelings, which, hiddenfrom the common eye, had entwined themselveswith every fibre of her heart, and choked eachplant of humble, wholesome, influence.Her mind, though sensitive and feminine, wasnaturally strong, but it was relaxed and enfeebled,from the constant habit of looking to Reginaldas the ruler and arbiter of her verythoughts. The materials of excellence and happinesshad been largely bestowed upon her, butshe was ignorant of their value, and confidedthem wholly to the keeping of another. It wasDestiny* 299to Reginald she looked for her daily portion ofhappiness ; it was in his heart she anchored hertrust, and there sought her abiding place of restand refuge.900 DX8TIKT.CHAPTER XxxiOne of the many gifts Mrs Macauley hadreceived from nature, was her fEteulty of dreaming,which she piqued herself upon in no smalldegree; and although it never had been productiveof any good either to herself or others,yet she nevertheless entertained the utmostrespect and veneration for this endowment, andplaced the most perfect reliance on her ownoracles.Glenroy, of course, affected to treat her dreamsand visions as he did herself, with great contempt,but secretly he had rather a relish forthem, especially as Mrs Macauley was not apublic dreamer; her dreams always related tohis house and family, and there was therefore asort of importance annexed to the idea of havinghis own peculiar dreamer in his household. Itwas a piece of state almost equal to that of keep-destiny.901ing a dwarf, or a fool, or a henchman, or a piper,or any other of those prerogatives of grandeur.The natural contempt, however, which is feltin this enlightened age for old wives' dreams, andeven for young women's fables, together with theprofound respect we entertain for the understandingof our readers, withholds us from relating,upon this occasion, the cabalistic narrative withwhich Mrs Macauley one morning regaled thebreakfast table; suffice it to say, it was all adream should, or could be. It was grand, confused,dark, incoherent, contradictory, senseless,and sublime ; and in spite of the ludicrous tonesand gestures of the narrator, it produced moreor less an impression upon the minds of heraudience. From the cloud of her misty imaginationvarious distinct images emerged. Therewas a large raven with a wedding ring in itsmouth — there was a troubled sea, and a dovewith a bleeding breast — there was a shroud,two coffins, and a grave, and there was the minister,Mr M'Dow, all dressed in white, standingin the kirk with Miss Edith, who was all dressedin black, and somebody else, with such a mist902 Destiny.upon them she could not make out who it was,&c. &C. &c.A few days after this memorable dream, therearrived accounts of the death of Sir Angus Malcolm.He had died of the fever of the country,just as he was on the point of embarking forBritain. He had had sufficient warning of hisdanger, however, to admit of his making arrangementsas to the management of his affairs, andthe disposal of his $on. Sir Angus seemed tohave felt that Reginald had been left too long toGlenroy's superintendence, for he directed thathe should, as soon as possible, be entered at oneof the English universities, under the superintendenceof Mr Ellis. After spending two yearsat college, he was to set out on a tour to thecontinent, accompanied by Mr Ellis, to remainabroad until he came of age. He was then toreturn home and celebrate the event among hisown people, in a manner befitting the heir ofan ancient house and noble property. A sanctionwas given to his marriage with Edith, and ahope expressed that he would then settle for lifein his own country.DESTINY, 303** O, what a mercer it is I had the good senseto tell my dream before this came to pass P'whispered Mrs Macauley to Benbowie ; " forif I had not told it, nobody would have believedme now. Oh ! what wonderful creatures we are !the great black raven ! I cannot forget it ! Littledid I think that was Sir Angus, poor man ! andthe wedding ring that he had in his mouth too !was just to show like, that he was coming over tomarry his son to Miss Edith."On my conscience, he was a very luckyman, to have cleared his estate before he died !"responded Benbowie.Reginald showed much warmth of feeling onthe occasion of his loss ; but from the length ofthe separation that had taken place between thefather and son, it was not to be expected that hissorrow should be lasting; and in due time hewas comforted.Glenroy had now arrived at the period of lifewhen any change in the domestic arrangementis dreaded as the severest of evils, and the moreso, as the gout had now become so frequent inits attacks, as to render him more than ever deemDcsmrr.pendent on Aim Mir society. It nybe MtffpotedSa Aoga&'^ injunction did not aceticwith his jnrimationii, and he as nnnl Tented hisdiipknBiire in sqwstrophisii^ Bmbovie.» Finish his studies! finish his fiddkstidBS !/ never finished my studies — I never was al anyof their English universities. I should be gladto know what my scm cool learn at an Englishuniversity ! Ronald may go if he chooses, butI'll be hanged if I'll allow N<Hman to accompanyhim. He dial not be tamed into insignificanceif I can help it. It is a fine preparationfor a Highland Chief to be cocked up in <me oftheir musty colleges with a pack ^ priests anddominies, and sailing about their plaintive inablade gown and a trencher skull-cap !"*' Very true," responded Benbowie, ** on myconscience, if s all very true — a philabeg wouldset him better."^< A fine thing, to be sure, for a Highlandchief to hare B. A. tacked to his name !"^' On my conscience, a man need not go sofax to learn to cry B A !" said Benbowie.^^ And then the scheme of sending him to theDESTINY. 905continent is, if possible, still worse," continuedGlenroy. " What can he learn there, but todance and speak gibberish, or to be runningafter old bridges and broken statues, when heought to be building new bridges, and entertainingthe gentlemen of the county ? Statues !a pack of rubbish. I would not let one of themwithin my door."On my conscience, I think you're quiteright, Glenroy. I would not give a three-year-oldstot for any stucco babies that ever weremade."Such was the style of colloquy held by thesetwo worthy gentlemen ; and had Reginald beeninclined to disregard his father's dying injunctions,plausible pretexts would not have beenwanting for him to have at least postponed thefulfilling of them. But Reginald was eager toenter upon the course pointed out to him, andMr Ellis lost no time in taking the necessarysteps for getting him entered at Oxford, whitherhe was to accompany him. Nothing could induceGlenroy to part with Norman ; and as Normanattached no great ideas of pleasure to a306 DESTINY.Student's life, he was easily prevailed upon torelinquish it, and to remain at home his ownmaster, so called, though still more the masterof all around him.Edith beheld with meek and silent sorrow thetime approach for the departure of Reginald:to be separated from him for more than a fewdays was an evil she had never contemplated;and now weeks and months were to drag theirslow course along, while Reginald and she wereto dwell apart. Oh ! what a solitude would hersbe ! the dreariest, the saddest of all solitudes, thesolitude of the heart.Reginald's sorrow at parting with Edith, itmight be supposed, was pretty much swallowedup in the anticipated novelty and variety thatawaited him ; and he strove to comfort and erassure her, as he talked cheerfully of the shortnessof the time of his probation. Three yearswere nothing ; besides, he should certainly makea point of seeing her often again before he leftEngland ; and at any rate, he should write to herconstantly, every day, that she might never forasingle day forget him. He would then rites307rate his own vows of eternal love and constancy,and call upon Edith to repeat the same, whileeach favourite haunt was visited and hallowed intheir imaginations by the pensive thought, thatit would be long ere they should again revisitthem together. Thus the intervening days glidedaway with the rapidity of a stream, and thusfeeling stamped the value of ages upon theduration of moments. Then swiftly came theparting hour !«that hour,When love first feels its own overwhelming power."This, Edith, is a ring of betrothment," saidReginald, as he placed one upon her finger.Remember, there it must remain till I exchangeit for a bridal one. Edith, do you promise?"and he held her hand locked in his, while Edithtried to smile an affirmative through her partingtears.Again and again the farewell was spoken:£sain and again Edith was pressed to his heart,and now he was gone, and she was left alone.906 DESTINY.CHAPTER XXXII.By degrees the loss of Reginald's society wasalmost atoned for to Edith, by the new enjoymentof corresponding with him. It was a different,a more abstracted, and concentrated feeling,but scarcely a less delightful one than thatwhich she used to enjoy in his presence. True,he was no longer with her; but then, whatthough the image itself was gone ? The impressionremained almost as vivid as the reality, andshe had his ring, his picture, his letters : thosemute, but eloquent pledges of his faith — thealmost daily assurances of his love — the oft-repeatedvows — the fond anticipations of theirfuture happiness. Deep and earnest in her love,but timid and reserved in her manners, herheart expatiated more freely upon paper thanDESTINY. 309ever it had done in the daily intercourse of herwhole life, so that she was ready to exclaim —O, Fortune,. . . thou canst not divideOur bodies so, but that our hearts are tied, 'And we can love by letters still, and gifts,And thoughts, and dreams."Thus was her mind kept in a state of constantexcitement, more inimical to its repose thanthe presence even of the object of her affection.Imagination left to itself had awakened in herthat extreme sensibility so destructive to happiness,which, in seeming to give us " a sweetexistence in another's being," is only fixing morefirmly its barbed arrow in the heart.So passed days, weeks, and months ; and whenthe college vacations permitted, Reginald revisitedwith delight his early home. Absence, sofarfrom abating the attachment of the youthfullovers, seemed if possible to have augmented it,and the lapse of time had only added new attractionsto each, in the eyes of the other.But now a longer period of absence was tointervene, and seas were to divide them. The310 DESTINY.time for Reginald's visit to the continent hadarrived, and painful was the parting of the lovers.Yet the sanguine spirit of Reginald impartedcomfort to Edith, as he fondly reminded her thattwo out of the three years of their probation wereover, and that this parting should be the last.Many was the fond and impassioned lettershe received from Reginald, and many were thetender and confiding ones she wrote in reply.At length his letters became less frequent, butthat was not surprising, considering .that he wasconstantly moving from one place to another ; andthen when they did come, they were as affectionateas ever. He still reminded Edith of theirengagement — she still assured her that time andabsence only rendered her dearer to him, andthat he longed impatiently for the time when hewas to return to her to part no more. But afterreceiving one of those letters, breathing all that afond lover could say to the idol of his heai't, a longpause ensued; and then, when the next came,Edith thought — but it must be fancy— that thestyle was changed. It was short, too ; but hepleaded a headach — perhaps he was ill, and con-destiny.311ceased it from her, and many an anxious day andsleepless night she passed, till another arrived — itwas still shorter, but he was just setting out uponan excursion, and had not time to write more thanamere line, to assure dear Edith he was well.Other long and dreary chasms ensued, and werebut faintly attempted to be filled up by meagreletters, full of little else than apologies for theirrarity, and promises of writing oftener and longerones. But the same excuses continued — onetime the heat was so excessive he could scarcelyhold the pen — then he was interrupted by afriend, or he was just returned from a fatiguingexcursion, or he was setting out upon a pleasuretour — or the time was now drawing near whenhe should be returning to Scotland, and thereforeit was unnecessary to say much more at present.So absorbed was Edith in anxiety about Reginald,that she was quite unconscious of the attentions,or rather intentions, of another lover, inthe person of the young Lord Alloy, who, frompartaking occasionally of Glenroy's hospitalities,had now become a more frequent visitor, and,having no small opinion of himself, he concludedhe had only to pay his addresses to have them812 DESTINY.instantly accepted. Edith's ideas of love weremuch too romantic to enable her to construe theflimsy gallantry of a modem fine gentleman intoany thing like a serious passion, and her surpriseat his lordship's hasty and self-assured proposalscould only be surpassed by his amazement at therejection of his suit. It was one that, in othercircumstances, Glenroy would have been gratifiedwith, but as Edith was engaged to Reginald,he could only have the satisfaction of chucklingover it in private, or throwing out innuendoes inpublic.Thus wore away time ; but still Reginald camenot, and his birth-day, the day of his coming ofage, which his father had recommended him tocelebrate at home among his own people — thatday which he himself had so fondly anticipated,and which Edith had looked forward to, with nocommon interest — that day passed unnoticed,unheeded on his part, and on hers only recordedas a day of disappointment and gloom.Glenroy chafed and fumed at this disrespectfuldelay. Norman, still more sanguine and impatientin the self-assumed anticipations of hiscousin's return, had scarcely been restrained moreDESTINY. 313than once from setting out to meet him. MrsMacauley dreamed and wondered in vain. Neitherdreams nor wondering could solve themystery. Edith sighed and feared, she knewnot what, for her heart was too simple and guilelessto harbour suspicion. She had heard andread of such a thing as inconstancy, but to associateit with the idea of Reginald never enteredher imagination, or if it did, it was instantly dismissed.She had only to recall the remembranceof past days — to look at his picture — sto meet thegaze of those fond eyes — sto read his letters fraughtwith vows of everlasting love — and all her doubtsfled as by the touch of a talisman. Thus imaginationstill held sway over her, while time, as itmoved slowly along,Deposited upon the silent shoreOf memory, images and precious thoughts,"which it was the delight of her solitary hours totreasure up in the inmost recesses of her heart.She knew not — who in early life does know ?— ^that such treasuring up of the frail records of humanlove, prove but as landmarks to note wherethe tide of passion and of sorrow hath been.VOL. !• o314 ' BESTIITK.CHAPTER XXXIII.Years had passed away since Ronald Malcolmhad left his native home, when, one bightsummer's day, a tall and smibumt youth, coarselyand scantily clad, but with something wildand noble in his air and aspect, stood on theshores of Lochdhu, and for a moment surveyedits dark mountains and roaring waters, with thelook of one to whom they bore no onioninterest.That youth was Ronald, and many a sad sighthis young eyes had looked upon, since last he leftthe spot where he now stood, and many " astrange and moving accident*' burned within him,to relate to the dear ones he had left. He hadto tell of the wonders of the raging sea and theangry heavens, which had shivered the statelyship, and sink so many " high hearts and brave"DESTINY. 815beneath the devouring billows. He had to tellof his own escape, with others of the gallant crew,and of the hunger, the thirst, the cold, the heat,the hardships, and privations they had endured,and under which many of those brave spirits hadsunk. He had to tell of the survivors reachingthe coast of Africa, only to become captives tothe wild and lawless natives, by whom they weredriven as slaves to the interior of those wild, desert,and unexplored regions, where his companions,one by one, fell victims to the severity of theirlot. But his youth and dauntless spirit, his habitsof endurance and activity, the flexibility andsweetness of his temper, had, under the blessingof a superintending Providence, enabled him tobear the heavy load assigned him, and had evengained him favour in the eyes of his barbarouscaptors* How many a summer's day and winter'snight would it take, to tell of all that he had seen,and thought and felt and suffered, and done,during his dreary captivity ! and how, even in thedepths of his desolation,, he had ever cherishedthat trust divine which a mother's lips had earlybreathed into his infant soul ! Then came his316 DESTINY.escape, with all its dangers and privations, hiswanderings by land, his perils by sea — all these,and much more, had Ronald to tell — but all wasforgotten in the tumult of his feelings as he stoodonce more on his native shore, and looked on hisfather's house, and recalled the dear familiarscenes of his childhood.Memory flew over the intervening years, and^ faded from his mind save the loved ones,whose looks and tones had sometimes hauntedhis very heart to agony, as fancy pictured thejoys of home to the £Eut-distant captive. Andnow in a few minutes he should behold themagain ; already he seemed to feel their kisses onhis lip — their tears of gladness on his cheek —their arms enfolding him — once more he waspressed to a mother's beating heart ! All thesethoughts rushed through the yoimg adventurer'smind, as he gazed for a moment on the well-rememberedfeatures of his mountain home.These were unchanged, for their stern andmassive outline was unchangeable; but some *thing of a still wilder, a more desolate andmournful cast, seemed to dwell upon them, forDESTINY. 317all was silent and voiceless. Ronald stayed notto conjecture or to fear, but in an instant he wasat the house — this father's house ! He had crossedthe threshold of his once-happy home, but stillthere was none to meet him — none to welcomehim. Every thing was displaced and in disorder,and he sought in several of the rooms beforehe discovered an old purblind woman, whoseemed the sole inhabitant of the house he hadleft so full of life and joy, and youth andbeauty.In this ancient crone he recognized an oldpensioner of his mover's, rare Zed for herfidelity and attachment to the family, than forthe sweetness of her temper or the urbanity ofher manners. In a voice choking with agitation,he enquired for Captain Malcolm, for the£Emily; but he had to repeat the question threetimes before he could obtain an answer; for,though not positively deaf, her ear was slow tocatch a strange accent, and Ronald's voice andaccent were both so totally changed, that hisown mother could scarcely have recognized318 DESTINY.them. At length, in a sharp Highland tone,he received the satisfactory reply of, —^ Captain Malcolm ? — aye ! what should hebebat in his ain hoofs?"** Butt this was his honse,^' said Ronald verifying*at this information, scanty as it was*^^ Aye, and wha says it's no Us hoofs, noo ?but it's no his dweBing^hooss, if youmean that ;he's ower great a man to dwell here noo^-taye^that he is!"The truth now flashed upon Ronald and,with a pang he said, ^^ What t— *he bow lives atInch Qrran, I suppose ?"To be sure — what else should he live ?But, sit down, sit down. You maun be strangerhere, it seems, frae the Low Country ? Maybe,a friend o* the family ?"*^ Thank you; but first tell me, is CsqfxtaiLnMalcolm well, and my j and all of them,are they all well ?" And Ronald's lips quiveredas he put the question.^* Oo, surely, surely — they're all well. Whatshould ail them ?"Nothing, nothing. And my ^" Ro-destiny.319bald's heart fluttered as lie thought of his mother ;and he could not find voice to name the namedearest to his heart.The old woman went on. ^^ No, no there'snodding aib them noo — ^ey've gotten aw thingthey can want. Och aye, God be praised ! theyare very prosperous noo, an' very happy."^ They have met with some good fortunethen, it seems ?" said Ronald, trying to apeakwith composure.<^ Och aye I Meed an' they have done thirtyand well they deserve it Not but what theypaid for it, too, poor craaters! aye, that theydid. God knows, their fine fortune cost themSide hearts at the time; but that's .past-~«n^noo, what should they be but pleased an' happy ?"Ronald's heart heaved, and he was silent a fewmoments, then said, ^ But they have . beenafflicted-they have suffered ?"♦* Odin ! need they were that-they were poredistrest, poor people ! at the drooping o' their boy^ fine boys a pretty boy he was — ^^Och aye !"Here old Nanny groaned, and wiped her eyeswith the corner of her apron.920 DESTINY.** But you say they are happy now — theyhave forgotten him?' said Ronald, with emotion.Oh ! surely, surely — God be thanked, he'sforgotten noo, an' if s time — deed is it— ochHye ! And we little know what's for our goodin this world; for it was God's merciful providence,after all, that the boy was ta'en, or theytell me they would have been but a puir needful'family, the day-deed would they !"A strange pang shot through Ronald's heart.** What a vile unfeeling creature," thought he,*^ to talk in such a manner !" and he was aboutto leave the house, when old Nanny resumed, —Och aye ! Providence was really kind inthat particular, for the drooping' o' the boy, poorthing, (that ever I should say't !) has been thesavin' o' that whole family, 'deed has it ! Andweel they deserve it, for they're a worthy well-coin'family ; and Inch Orran himself is a goodman,and does a deal o' good, that he does ; andhe is a real blessing' to the country — that he is !'*But he might have been a blessing to thecountry although his son had not been drown-«ed," said Ronald.DESTINY. 321No, no— they tell me not. That if the boy-hadlived, he would have keepit his other poorman a' his days ; and wou'dna that have been asin and a shame ? No that it wad hae been thepoor boy's fault, poor thing, but the fault o' themthat would have made him keep his father's headbelow the water ;Och ! it was God's providenceto tak the boy out of his worthy father's way ;and noo a' thing's as it should be, and he hasgotten his ain, honest man ; and long, long, mayhe enjoy it !'*And you say they are all quite well, • - andhappy ?" said Ronald, his heart swelling, inspite of the contempt he tried to feel for theunfeeling narrator.Aye, aye ! they are that. Happy they are,and happy may they be ; and should they behappy when there's gain to be a grand marriageamang them ? Miss Lucy, thaf s her thaf s theeldest o' the family, ista she gain to get ahusband, and a braw one, too — ^no less than theyoung. Laird of Dunross ? No. but what MissLucy is well worthy of him and the best in theland — aye, by my troth she is ; but she wadnao2922 MsamsY.hae gotten Idm ivantin' the tother ; for tke auldLord's omer fond o' the aller to let hs scm take(tocheriesB Ibsb. Odi aye shame till hm I —•Waami poor Ming Lucy marat bnkeib^eartedbecause he wonldna let his son get her iwlien liewas tke poor man's daughter? And the Ottptainvouldna let him take her wanting' his facereveil; and the poor yomig creatures were jmtbeside themselves, Hke ; and so the young* manwent into the army, and has been in the Indies,but noo he's come back ; and these so ha{^)y,and the Captain-^^thafs Inch Omuih— is to giveher five thousand gold guineas on her weddingthey tell me, forbye this hoofs that they •coming' to dwell in ; and him painting' it all fromtop to bottom, and making' every thing so genteelfor them ; and all comes o' the droeoin' o'the bonny laddie ! Och aye !"Many little circumstances that had taken placebefore he left home, here darted into Ronald'smind, in confirmation of old Nanny's words.Young Dunross and Lucy had been lovers eventhen, and want of fortune on her part had beenthe cmly obstacle to their union; and now thatDESTINY. 323removed and he bad returned only to blasttheir happiness !^^ But what if he has not been drowned — whatif he should yet return?" said he, with agitation.^^ Oeh, sorrow bit he'll ever return noon poorbairn; and it would na for him to come backin the body noo — 'deed, an' he wad be but ablack sight— r-noy no that it would not — he's beenowre laing dead to some back noo — deed hashe och aye ! he's dead and gone an' it wouldna do to bring Mm back again-ao, no; waeI was when I heard o' the poor thing's drooping',but I was ignorant then* I did not know batit was God's providence to set up the &amUylike by that sam means and make them allso comfortable, and genteel, andhaj^y, o«haye !"^^ And my mother ?" said Ronald, windy, ashecovered his eyes with his hand, while hiswhole frame thrilled with emotion.<' The mother F**' said Nanny, oatohiof thesound imperfectly. ^^ Aye, his motber-«^tbat'fthe le^y^herse]^ fott'U mean? look, God only324 DESTINY.knows the mother's sorrow och aye ! But sheaquiet craater, and she knew whose hand it wasthat was upon her, aye, that she did, and so shedemeaned herself like a good Christian as sheis; but they tell me she has never had her aindolour since'Tears forced their way through Ronald's fingers;he started up, and was hurrying away,when Nanny interposed, rather unwilling to partso soon with a visitor from whom she had as yetextracted no information in return, and visitorsto Nanny were few and far between.And what's taking you away, my lad, insuch a hurry ? canna you sit toon a wee andrest you, and tak a drap this warm day ?"The day is fer spent, and I have a longiralk before me," said Ronald*Aye ? maybe ye'll be going to Inch Orran ?I'm taking you'll be a friend o' our yotmglaird's ? that's Mr Angus — for I guess by yourtongue you're a gentle."** Is he at home ?" asked Ronald, waving thequestion and the compliment.<^ I'm thinking' so that he's at home .the noo ;Destine 325but he goes away for months and months at atime to one o' their places in the low country,where young gentlemen go to learn every thingthey're no schools — they're universals — orsomething like that ; you'll ken what I mean ;for he's very bookish, and they tell me he willbe a great man yet, since his father can givehim such a grand education ; but he's no such afine, roving, spirit craater as the 'tother poorboy was — what a craater that was ! Nothingfeared him, and he was so good-natured and sokind to every body, och aye ! he would * haverun a mile to flit a sow,' as they say. But, nodoubt, he has got his reward noo, though wecannot see it ; for if he can but see what a greatblessing' his death has been to his faamUy, I'msure he'll no begrudge it, wherever he be,"Surely his family would be happier to havehim back again ?" said Ronald, after a pause.Troth then, and to tell the truth, I'm nosure o' that — ^no but what they were very fondof him, and thought much of him when they hadhim ; but now you know, like good Christians)their minds are made up to want him, and maybe926 .mBsmnr.they could na want other things 8o well-<-odino. No) it would never do for him to come .beckin the body, for they tell me if he was to coiaealive again, the money would be all ta'en fromIndi Orran; and would net that be very hard noo,when he's doing so much good with it ? forbyekeeping' such a genteel hoofs, is na he galen tobuild a grand new one, and does na the teddyride in her own coach noo, and is na he aettin'out'his childer so well in the world, and himselfupon a feotin' wi' the best in the land ? aye, andthe good that he's coin' is no to be told. Nobut what he's ower keen o' what they ca' improvements.— Och, sorrow tak some o' the improvements! They'll no leave a bunch o' heatherin the country; but nae toot, he's coin'good, for aw that. Och ! hunters and blundersare blessing' the day that made Inch Orran a richman — deed are they — but for that, mony's thepoor craater that would hae been trailing' owre thesaut sea wi' their wives and their childer, awa&^aw their kith and kin, and toiling' their heartsout in a far-off land, if it had not pleased God togive Inch Organ the hand and the heart to helpDESTINY. 327them — och aye, he's the one that will neverdrive the poor man off his land, as long as thewater runs and the heather grows — och, he's ablessed man, and blessed he will be, and the poorlad's death was a great blessing—och aye, 'deedwast."Ronald's heart was brimming high ; he abruptlywished old Nanny good day, and quitted thehouse.&2S DESTINY.CHAPTER XXXIV.The young wanderer proceeded on his way,but his mind was a chaos of contending emotions,for there are hearts of so generous a nature, asto be more keenly alive to the sufferings of othersthan to their own.This then is my welcome !" said he to himself,in bitterness of spirit ; " already forgotten,or rather remembered only as a riddance ; andmy return, it seems, instead of bringing joy, willonly be felt as a misfortune — ^my very death tobe the cause of rejoicing to hundreds ! — sandthe — the to be all so happy, while I "Tears burst from his eyes as he thought how hisheart had pined for the dear ones he had left —And my mother ! my mother ! can she toohave forgotten me ?'DESTINY. 329And on the bare supposition, he threw himselfon the ground in an agony of grief, mortification,and disappointment, while a thousand wildthoughts rushed through his mind.*' And am I so selfish then as to wish to causesorrow to those I love ? and can I not bear tosee them happy at my expense ? But I will seethem, I will satisfy myself that they are happy,and then — they shall remain so— were it at theprice of my heart's blood !"Starting up, he pursued his course towardsInch Orran. As he came within the extensivebounds which he knew pertained to it, he everywhereread a confirmation of old Nanny's words,in the improvements he beheld. The glens,were more thickly peopled, and with more com-portable-looking dwellings; mountains, whichhad once frowned in heather, were now smilingin verdure; dreary moors were now coveredwith young plantations ; a neat church andschool-house stood where a wilderness had formerlyspread; all denoted that the stream ofwealth was indeed flowing in the channel ofbeneficence, *and every where spreading its richesSaO Destinyover the land. He entered several of the cottageand all told the same tale — a. Jutppy avoiddHTHriiig pewmtry had been redeemed fitompoverty and exile, and even while. Ms own homewas fondly remembered, and his sad iGMie Iwien^ed, i'll his death was regarded as a blessing. ,.^^ And all this I am. some only to false"thought Bald) as he surveyed the goodly ^ce^that atretdbied. around him. '^ I some. xady^.j)^bring poverty, and sorrow, and exile, ^ all tj^ieae.poor people, and to my own home I — Qh l^h^is worst of all) even there I can bring ao Joy !*mBut haf^en what will, they shall not havet^^iiaeto mourn that I still live — ^if they are h^py, if.they are indeed happy, to them I will still bedead ^" And dashing the. tears from his eye,he hastened on his way. ,Years had passed away, and with Ihem^ thebitterness, though not the remembrance, of sof-^row.; for Ronald's name was still pronouncedwith emotion in his £Eunily dree, and the hiaskhe had left still remained a dreary diam to theeyetand the ear, accustomed to the animation ofhis presence, to his generous affections, to hiaDESTINY. 331kindly accents, to his bright smiles, to has ^^ sweetlaughter, and wild song, and footstep free," andto all the charms and the treasures of hia tqnenhing ttind. But there is no imginsh, howeversevere, that time, and religion, and reflectionwill not gradually soften into a resignation soentire, as to the casual observer to appear almostlike forgetfulness. And times there are— ^bewho could bear the constant woe and live ? —When even the mother forgets the child overwhose grave she has shed so many a bitter tear,and whose image, though shrouded from theonion eye. still Les Inmed in the depths ofher own heart.It was evening when Itoudd reached InchC^ntm, and the setting sun was shedding its lastglories on the scene. His heart was keenly aliveto outward impressions, and dnU must the soulhave been dicit could have gazed unmoved im sucha spectacle. But how douay sweet to him, whohad been the 8hipwrecked*ea.lKTr, the captive inafiu* distant land, the slave beneath a burning sky,die wayworn houseless wanderer, — sto stand uponIs native land, and look im such an earth, anddd2 DESTINY.such a heaven ! The sun seemed as if meltingaway beneath its own bright effulgence. Themountains gleamed with ever-changing hues ofgold, and crimson, and purple ; each tufted isle,and rock, and tree, shone in the ^^ rich sadness"of eve's last splendour. Not a breath ruffledBthe surfeit of the water ; not a sound broke thestillness of the air, save the distant bleating ofthe sheep, and the soft rippling of the waves asthey crept gently along the shore, or broke withfiEont effort upon the bare fantastic roots of somestately beech, whose stem rose like a mast ofgold from the bosom of the waters. But not allthe pomp and glory of the scene could arrest thegaze of him whose eyes were fixed on the wallsthat contained the treasures of his heart, thefirst, the only objects of his young affections !He hastily drew near, then stopped, as if torestrain himself from rushing at once into theirsight, and casting himself into their arms. Andthen the one cruel thought came like ice uponhis heart, to chill the warm gush of nature,I come to bring them aU to poverty ! Oh,if they have ceased to think of me — ^if I am for*DESTINY. 333gotten — ^if my place is filled — would that I haddied rather than that I should live to see themrue the day of my return ! But they shall not.I will dig, toil, starve, but they shall be happy !"He now stood amidst the ruins of Inch Orran,but the hand of taste had been there since hehad visited them. A still greater portion of theold walls had fallen ; but the rubbish had beenremoved, and the large openings gave light,and air, and cheerfulness to the dwelling-house,which was half hid by the jessamines and honeysucklesand roses that clustered around itswindows. Ronald, with throbbing heart, leantagainst a part of the ancient tower, where oncehad been a window, but which was now merelyan opening curtained with ivy. His heart beatas though it would have burst from his bosom.At one moment he had yielded to the passionateimpulse to make himself known; but, long inuredto habits of self-command, by a mightyeffort he subdued the yearning* of nature, andrepressed the feelings which strove for mastery.I will wait — I will wait," he said to himself,^^^e every fibre quivered to agony, and he334 DESTINY.gnawed his lip as if to enforce its silence. Oppositeto where he stood was the &niily sitting->room, and from the spot he could plainly discernall that was passing within. Butt wasscMnetimeere he could dispel the gathering mists from hiseyes, so as to enable him to single out each dearone numbered in his heart. Ah !'' There are no looks like those which dwellOn long remembered things !**His eye was first attracted to his whither, who satnearest to him reading, but his back was towardshim, and he could only perceive that his figurewas thinner, and his hair greyer, than when hehad parted from him. At one end of the roomLucy was seated at a piano, but it seemed as ifmerely an excuse for the lovers to be a littleapart, for young Dunross leant on the back ofher chair, and her sweet face was turned to himin conversation, while now and then she carelesslytouched* a few notes of the instrument.A tea-table was in the middle of the room, atwhich a lovely girl, whom Ronald recognized ashis sister Flora, was presiding with the youngerDESTINY. 335part of the family, who were gaily chatting andlaughing together.Over all these, Ronald's eyes wandered insearch of his mother, till they riveted themselvesupon that cherished image. She sat apart at awindow which looked out upon the lake and thesetting sun ; her pale brow and still lovely profilepencilled against the deep flush of the eveningsky. Her air betokened " the careless stillnessof a thinking mind." One hand hung listlesslyon the shoulder of a little boy, her youngestborn, the image of her long-lost Ronald,who, with head of curling gold, stood by herside, feeding with bits of bread Ronald's fondly-cherisheddog.O how pensive was the look with which shegazed on the still water, and the silent beauty ofthe skies ! It might be that her thoughts werethen of sad but holy import ; that they were ofhim who had found a grave in the deep sea, ahome in the mansions of those glorious heavens :of him whose place at hearth and board still tothe mother's eye stood vacant. Scarcely couldRonald restrain himself as his heart heaved^:336 D£STIKT.almost to i^ny, and the large tear drops pushedfrom his eyes, and he thought what rapture itwould be to fell on his mother's neck and weep !^* No-oh no ! she has not forgotten me ; Iam sure she has not Even now, perhaps she isthinking of me !'' and in a second he would harebeen in her arms* But at that moment hismother turned towards her little boy : a brightsweet smile lighted up her face at something heIliad said, and she looked and spoke fondly tohim, as she parted the air curls from his sunnybrow.Presently the young party of tea-drinkersstarted up, and flew towards her as if with somepetition. They spoke with eager childish gesticulation.They hung upon her with looks ofloving entreaty, and one lite feir girl, climbingupon the back of her chair, laughingly threwher arms round her neck, and kissed her. Lucy,recalled from her aberrations, struck up a livelyair ; the tea-table was pushed aside, and all werein motion for a dance.Yes, yes, they are happy, and I am forgotten!" exclaimed Ronald, in a burst of pas-destiny.337senate emotion, as he rushed from his hiding ^place, and fled far from Inch Orran, and all heloved.END OF VOLUME FIRST,edinburgh :printed bt ballamtynb and company,Paul's wore, canonqate.