DESTINY."Why, who cries out on pride,That can therein tax any private party ?*' Who can come in and say that I mean her,When such a one as she, such is her neighbour ?Why, then, my taxing, like a wild goose, fliesUnclaimed of any."Shakspeare.DESTINY;OR,THE CHIEF'S DAUGHTER.BT THE AUTHOR OFMARRIAGE," and " THE INHERITANCE."What's in a name ?" — Shakspeare.IN THREE VOLUMES.VOL. II.EDINBURGH :PRINTED FOR ROBERT C Dell, EDINBURGH ;AND WHITTAKER AND CO., LONDON.1831.EDINBURGH :Printed BY BALLANTYMX AVD Co , PAVL*8W01IK« CAXONGATE.DESTINY.Vol. II.DESTINY.CHAPTER I.Thus Ronald came, saw, and was gone — unseen,unknown. Who can tell what a day maybring forth — what a moment may annihilate!Ere the sun complete its diurnal course, whatclouds of events pass and repass o'er the surfaceof Time's dial ! Surely man differs little fromthe atoms which sport in the sunbeam, and wellmay his life be compared to the vigour thatpasseth away — ^to the shadow which pocketthe eye — ^to the dream that scarlet by nightHe is born, and grows up like the grass, andlike the grass he withers before it is noon, orsus before the scythe in all its pride and 1H^/.Ij^^DESTINY.8 DESTINY.head ; his cistern was broken, and he sought notthe fountain from whence he might draw livingwaters to revive his soul. He was laden' withgrief, and ^^the darkness of age came like themist of the desert'' In vain did Edith struggleagainst her own sorrow, in attempts to mitigatethe grief of her wretched father. In vain histwo faithful adh^ts sought, in their own way,to turn his mind,&ic>m the gloomy object on whichit dwelt in a sort of pahicHStruck stupor — " Oneis not, and all seem to have departed."%\DESTINY. 9CHAPTER ILAnd where was Reginald that he was notwith the mourners to mingle his tears withtheirs, and by his presence to cheer and supportthem in the hour of sorrow? Alas, Edith couldnot answer ; for although he had been written,to, on the first alarm of Norman's illness, no answerhad been received, and many weeks hadpassed since she had heard from him. Thusthe fever of anxiety was now added to the enduranceof anguish, and the tears that fell forher brother were rendered doubly bitter by theneglect of her lover. Yet still, not even to herselfwould she acknowledge that she distrustedhim; it was impossible that Reginald coidd befalse, and that single word was the sheet-anchorof her soul : to that she clung with fearful tenacity,and worlds could not have wrested it froma210 DESTINY.her. True, it was equally impossible to accountfor Reginald's conduct ; but ihat^ she felt assured,would one day be fully explained. She would not,she said, she could not, an instant doubt it ; butunconsciously, the poison of distrust was creepingslowly and silently into her heart, and corrodingher very life-spring. To add to her suffering,Glenroy, having surmounted the first shock ofhis son's death, now became impatient for Reginald'sreturn ; and, as if eager to turn his thoughtsto another channel, he talked unceasingly of him,and all that was to^be donner and by him ; forReginald was now the heir, not only of hishonours, but of his whole estates, as all wereentitled. The natural impatience of his temperwas ideo aggravated by his personal infirmities ;gout, and indolence, and high living, and mentalaffliction combined, had all done the work,and more than the work of time ; for time alonewould not have made him the old and brokendown man he now was. To add to hxs disquiet,he had no proper object for his irritation to workupon at that particular time, for Benbowie wasat all times too passive to serve his purpose, andDESTINY. 11Mrs Macauley had gone for a few days to pay amanage visit to a tiieee of Mr Maoauley's^ whohad lately matted) and settled in dbe neighbourhood.At least a dozen times array he would BtkEdith if dire was no news of Reginald yet, andthen he would ring the bell, and order the servantsto go to the ferry, or to die tatian, and seeif there were any signs of him; and he wouldcall the housekeeper to know if Sir Reginald'srooms were ready yet, for that he expected himhome that day ; then, as he dozed and noddedin his arm-chair, he would'^suddenly start upWill, << Was not Reginald to have been homebefore now, and what's keeping him then ? Andwhere's Molly Macauley, that she's not in theway?" (From die first hour of her departure,that had been the constant demand.) Or, worstof all, he would turn to Edith with a dreamybewildered look, and say, ^< Aye, aye, if s i|rellyou're to be married to Reginald — Very well,it will be all his own. But videre is he ? Whenare you to make out the marriage ? You'll surelybe married soon now, my dear, will you not?"At length-^O agitation unspeakable-£ditfa12 DESTINY.received a letter in the well-known handwritingof her lover. It bore a foreign postmark, andthe black seal denoted that the intelligence ofNorman's dead had reached him. Edith's handtrembled, and the tear-drops swelled in her eyes.«* He knows all," she thought, " and yet hecomes not to us ! He can calmly write. Perhapsit is to tell us that he, is not coming. Ah,how cold seems written condolence at such atime !" and she remained for some moments passive,under the mute agony of apprehension.At length she^iDpened the letter, and herdoubts were dispelled. It was brief and agitated,of spirit. He had only just learnt the sad tidingsof Norman's death, and the expressions of hisgrief were frantic and fill of self-upbraiding, thathe had not set off on the first accounts of hiscousin's illness. He said he never could forgivehimself for having been absent at such a time ;but he was just setting off for Britain, and wouldbe at Glenroy almost as soon as his letter. Asentence had been begin, *^ And if you still loveme as I — " But his pen had been drawn throughBestir. 18it, and he abruptly added, ^< Would to HeavenI had never left you !" Altogether, it was evidently.written under all the incoherence of diemost passionate and unsubdued emotion*Such as it was, it was welcome, O how wel*borne, to Edith ; and its tone of excitation sectariesto her the surest pledge that the warmth ofhis affection continued unabated. ** And if Istill love him'' she repeated, as she decipheredthe half-obliterated letters — ^^ Ah, how couldhe then doubt me ? And what can he mean bywhat follows, would that he hktd never left me ?'In vain Edith read over and over again thestrange expression. She could make no moreof it at the last than at the first; so she concludedthat Reginald himself knew not what hewas writing in the anguish of his heart, for theloss of one who had been to him as his verybrother, heightened too, it seemed, by the bitterestself-reproach at his own absence.The intelligence of Sir Reginald's expectedarrival gave a fresh stimulus to Glenroy's impatience,and he strove, poor man, in the bustlewhich he himself created, to drown the still14 msnsr.small voice of secret woe, which yet spoke daggersto his souLSo passed several succeeding dajrs in the feverishexcitement of hope deferred* It was timeevening of the fourth day of watehii^ and disappointment,when Edith, having left Glenroy andBenbowie dozing over their bote in the diningroom,sat alone in the drawing-rooms with hereyes fixed on the waters which she expected tobear the truant to her heart. Assuredly he wouldcross at the ferry. It would shorten the timeand distance so aide, instead of travelling thetedious and hilly road with tired horses, at the€^ of a long and dreary stage. It was the wayhe used to take even in boisterous weather, whenabsent only for a day, and many a time i^e hadfMt&y chid the impatience which urged him to trustthe sleiKler boat aid stormy sea* Now the eveningwas Mr and sweety and her &ther's pinnacehad been stationed at the ferry to receivehim ; but Edith sighed as she saw its white sails,gilded by the setting sun, still slipping idly inthe evening breeze. AU at once she heard thesound of a carriage advancing. Her heart beatDESTINY. 15as it drew nearer and nearer ; and as it sweptround the entrance, her eye caught a glimpse c£an open travelling carriage, containing one gentleman,something — yet so unlike to Reginald !A single glance had sufficed to show that he waspale, that he leant back in the carriage with anair of languor, and eyes half closed. Could thisbethe gay, blooming, impetuous Reginald? Butina few seconds all doubts were removed, as thedoor was thrown open, and Sir Reginald Malecold was announced. What a tide id mingledemotions rushed o'er Edith's heart as she rose toreceive him to whom she had plaited her £Edithand love, but who now came thus late to daimthem,— him from whom, on that very spot whereshe now stood, she had parted ! — and oh, howdifferently did they now meet!And one was gone, the playfellow of theirchildhood, the companion of their youth, thebrother — the friend ! Pale and motionless, Edithstood in silent emotion — ^in the tumult of herown feelings unconscious of the still more apparentagitation of Reginald, as he advanced, thentook her hand, and pressed it to his lips. It was16 I>£STINY«the hand on which he himself had placed thering of betrothment. He started, and suddenlydropping it, walked with hurried steps to the endof the room; then as quickly returning, heclasped Edith in his arms, and tenderly kissedher cheek, but while he did so tears burst fromhis eyes. The hearts of both were too fullfor utterance — a. spell seemed upon their lips,and they remained in deep and silent emotion.Yet an unconcerned spectator would have remarked,that Sir Reginald's embarrassment wasequal to his emotion, and that something morethan sorrow struggled in his bosom and choakedhis utterance. But Edith was too much underthe influence of powerful feeling herself to be anice observer of what was passing in the mindof another. Her tears continued to flow, fromthe mingled tide of grief and joy which swelledher heart.A long pause ensued. At length Sir Reginald,as if by a violent effort, spoke.^ I have been delayed by illness," said he.The tone and accent, though beautifully modulated,were languid and mournful, and they sound-destiny.17ed so strange, that Edith could scarcely haverecognised in them the gay familiar tones whichstill dwelt in fond memory's ear. Still it wasReginald that spoke, and these few simple wordsat once dispelled all the vague doubts which hadarisen from his unaccountable delay.You have been ill !" she exclaimed ; " andI did not know it — and you have hastened to useven before you are recovered !*'<< But it is too late' said he bitterly.No — ^no — dear Reginald, do not say so— westill need your sympathy." Her voice faultered,and i^ain her tears felL A sigh, almost a groan, ^broke from Sir Reginald's heart. He rose andtraversed the apartment, then resumed his seat,and leaning his head on a table, tears forced theirway through the fingers which shaded his brow.But again he roused himself, and strove to speakcalmly and firmly, while he enquired — " Howis Glenroy?'You will find him changed, much changed'*replied Edith, striving to subdue her emotionalso ; ^< but the sight of you will, I am sure, dohim good. Ah, Reginald, you are now his only18 DESTINY.hope." — She stopped, for her firmness was forsakingher.And you, Edith — and you** gasped he, asheagain buried his £sice in his hands, and hiswhole frame shook with emotion'-^^^ what am Ito you?"Edith was silent. Reginald heavily raised hishead, but his enquiring gaze met only the deepblush and the downcast eye of love revealed,though not avowed. Then, in a tone of forcedcomposure, he said —<^ Edith, should you have known me again ?Am not I changed?" he added, attempting tosmile, whUe he grew very pale.** We are all changed," said she, sadly, " forwe have all known affliction since we parted—but you have been ill in health, and you concealedit from me ! while I — ah, Reginald, hadyou bill guessed what"** I have been ill," interrupted he, hurriedly ;•* but that is past, — at least the worst. But yousay Glenray is much altered ? Had I not bettergo to him ? The sooner the meeting is over thebetter."Destiny. 19<^ Perhaps so," said Edith, ^^ if you feel ablefor it. But you are fatigued — shad you not betterrest and'*No — ^nothing — I wish it over," said he, impatiently." I will do any thing— every thingfor you both," he added, with emotion.<^ I am sure you will," said Edith, with simpleearnestness, *^ and if you wish to comfort us,you will yourself be comforted. Now go, dearReginald !" She extended her hand — he took it,pressed it in his with a sigh, then slowly quittedthe apartment.20 DESTINY.CHAPTER III.Edith remained motionless and bewildered— ^^her heart sank, she knew not why — ^^hertears flowed, she could not tell for what. Reginaldwas returned) ought she not to be happy?But was it ^her own — ^her long-loved, ^her lovingReginald she had beheld? Oh, surely he waschanged. Others nought think him improved,but no change could improve that image sodeeply impressed upon her heart. Edith lovedtoo profoundly to admire.A long time elapsed ere she heard her father'sslow and shuffling step crossing the hall to thedrawing room, which he entered leaning on, orrather clinging to Reginald, as if afraid he wouldagain desert him. The traces of agitation werestill visible in his face, for his grief for the lossof his son had been all awakened at sight of hisDESTINY, 21nephew, that son's once inseparable playfellowand companion, now come to fill his place, andsucceed to all that should have been his. Butthe first burst of sorrow was over, and he againtalked in his usual rambling, desultory way, ofthe worldly objects to which his soul still cleaved^his estates, his rents, his woods, his cattle, hisimprovements — every thing, in short, whichcould still minister to his pride.^^ Glenroy has lost none of his hospitality sinceI left him," said Reginald, addressing Edith, ashepassed, supporting her father to his seat;*^ and I daresay you can guess how unavailingremonstrance is at those times."^^ He has only been making up for my romishsion, then," replied she, ^< as I forgot to askwhether you had dined — perhaps," she added,with a slight blush, ^* that is because I had neverbefore had occasion to treat you as a stranger."^^ Treat him as a stranger !" exclaimed Glen-roy,angrily; " I'll have no strangers here. Inever desire to see the face of a stranger withinmy door — remember that, Edith; and to treat22 Destiny.Reins as a stranger ! my own nephew-themm that you're to" — —O, papa" interrupted Edidi, hastily** I begyour pardon, but you have quite misunderstoodme. I did not mean — I"-^** No matter whether I've misunderstood youor not," cried Glenroy ; " I say, once for all,1j^ Reginald's not to be treated as a strangerin this house — she's to do as he pleases — Rememberthat, Reginald — you're to do exactly as youplease* I'm getting old now, Reginald, andI've lost him that" — —Here grief for a moment got Ae better of hisanger, and he groaned in tire bitterness of hisheart.** My cousin does herself injustice," said Reginald,trying to soothe the weak and irritatedfeelings of the old man-^<< She received me withmore kindness than I deserved," and he sighedas be said it.How could that be?' cried Glenroy, impatiently; ** and to treat you as a stranger, too !And what would become of me, if it was not foryou, Reginald, and of her too? Remember,Destiny. 23B^inald) you're just as much master here as ifas ever my own poor boy was." Here anothermomentary gush of sorrow checked him, butquickly mastering it, he called — ^^ Ring the bellBenbowie — she's grown as deaf 's a post Ringit again-eve it another tug — what the plagueare these lazy dogs about ?'Then when the summons was answered bythe butler and deputy, bearing tea and coffee,^^ It wasn't that I rung for, but you all make oneerrand answer for two, if there should be a dozenof you. There, Boyd, remember I desire you,and all of you, to treat Sir Reginald with thegreatest respect, and to obey him the same asmyself! You bear me ? And desire Mrs Patti-sonto give us a supper like a dinner, and that;quickly. — Now don't you interfere, Reginald,"as his nephew was about to remonstrate, ^^ I'mmaster here, and I'll do as I please ; and it is mypleasure that you should be well treated, and doas you please — remember that, Edit — AndBoyd, let all the servants have as much drink asthey choose to-night, to drink Sir Reginald's»24 DESTINY.health and welcome home. Where's that idiotMolly Macaulay that she's not in the way?"^^ I have missed my kindhearted, good-naetured old friend," said Sir Reginald. ^' I hopeshe is not far off?"But before Edith had time to answer, Glen-roy,with the rambling garrulity of an infirmmind, had started another subject. " You wouldsee, Reginald, that my tenants had got the principalpremiums from the Highland Society thisyear. McLaren, that's he that has the farmof Kildrunnach, you know, up Glendochart, thesame land M^Taggart had a lease of before yourtune ; he got no fewer than three premiums-onewas for the draining of the Dhu Moss — youremember the Dhu Moss, Reginald, up beyondthe Roebuck Park ? Many a time you've shota roebuck there, and the very last time Normanwas out, he shot three with his own hand.He had become the very best shot in the countrieshe had ; but there was not his latchfor any thing — ^^nothing — ^^nothing." Here anothertide of fond recollection for a momentstopped the current of poor Glenlby's words ;DESTINY. 25but he quickly rallied, and resumed, — " Youwould observe the plantation on the SkirridaleHill, as you came along, Reginald ? That s allnew, and I'll venture to say, you never saw afiner plantation; and, by the by, Reginald,there's been some thinning of the wood sinceyou were here, and I must cut some more —they're too thick, too thick a great deaL I'llgive you a good portion with Edith, out of thethinning of the Glenhaussen Wood, and youshall mark the trees yourself, Reginald; we'llride up tomorrow and look at them if you'llput me in mind.— Benbowie, ring the belL— Doyou hear, Boyd ? — you'll send one of the mendirectly to the stables, to desire M^Nab to havemy horse ready for me to ride tomorrow. I'lllet him know at what hour — and he's to godirectly. And stay, do you hear, Boyd ? — she'sto bring the black mare for Sir Reginald — theblack mare," repeated he, as the servant leftthe room — ^^ that was Norman's, and the handsomestcreature I ever saw. M*Nab tells meLord Allonby would give any money for her,but I'll not jpkrt with her; for what's money toVOL. II. B20 DESTINY.me, now that he's gone ? But it's yours, now,Refined ; you shall have anything that belongedto him — ^^you shall — ^^you shall, Reginald. Aye,Lord AUonby wanted to have her, so M^Nabtold me; thais he, you know, that courtedEdith, when ''Oh, papa P* exclaimed Edith, in a deprecatingtone, and blushing deeply, as Reginaldturned upon her a look of surprise, which fixedinto a piercing gaze of most earnest scrutiny.It's no secret, Fm sure," cried Glenroy,angrily ; " and if it was, I'll have no secrets here,for the conceited puppy thought he might haveher for the asking, I believe. But, upon myhonour, Reginald, I would rather you had her,than any man living. I would, upon my soul !What's Lord AUonby, or any lord amongstthem, to me ? The king can make a lord anyday, but I defy him to make the Chief of Glen-roy; and that's what you'll be, Reginald, whenTm gone — ^and you're more to me than all thelords in the creation, now that I've no son of myown," grasping his nephew's hand in strong.emotion. ^^ And Edith shall retours as soonDESTINY. 27as we can get every thing settled ; and, in themean time, we'll take a ride tomorrow and seethetrees marked ; and, Edith, is there no wordof that Molly Macauley, yet ?"In this sort of bald, disjointed chat the eveningwore heavily away, without the lovers havingan opportunity of conversing for an instantapart ; for Glenroy would not suffer Reginald tostir from his side, and seemed even loath to losesight of him when they separated for the night.28 DESTINY.CHAPTER IV.Hitherto Edith had felt chilled and disappointed.Reginald, it was true, had been soengrossed by her father, that it had not been inhis power to devote himself to her, but he hadnot even looked as if he wished it His air hadbeen sad and abstracted, and only once had sheseen his eye kindle with its wonted fire, andthat was at the mention of Lord Allonby as herlover. The report had gone abroad (thoughwithout foundation) that he was an accepted one,and it might have reached Reginald, and henceall the mystery : he had been piqued, angry,jealous ; and her father's words had merely conveyedthe impression that she had rejected him asasuitor. But could Reginald then have believedher capable, even in thought, of breaking herplighted faith, and renouncing her^rst, her onlyDESTINY. 29love ? And would he have yielded her up to a rivalwithout a word ? Yes, generous and high-mindedas he was, he would have disdained to remonstrate,but, O, — show he must have despised her ! AndEdith's cheek burned even at the thought. Thenthe strange expressions in his letter — ^his unaccountabledelay in returning — ^his agitation at• meeting-lus abstracted and gloomy air-wereall these to be referred to the same source ? Yespartly to that, and partly to the mournful circumstancesunder which they had met — the lossof Norman — the infirmities of her fitter, bothin mind and body, must have shocked one whohad so much cause to love him as Reginald had.And thus Edith strove to soothe her woundedfeelings, and bar her breast against the admissionof doubts worse than death. But all thesereflections did not enable her to meet her loverwith that easy, artless confidence of mannerwhich had formerly rendered their intercourse sodelightful. When they met at the breakfast-table,there was mutual embarrassment. Reginaldseemed less sad, indeed, than on the precedingevening ; but still there was none of that30 DESTINY.gaiety, and playfulness of manner, which hadbeen so often wont to call up the smiles on hercheek. His manners were all elegance andsuavity, but they lacked the affectionate warmthof former days, and though his countenance wasmore than ever expressive of the fire and sensibilityof his mind, still no bright or tender glancerepeated the oft-told tale of fond, happy, youthfulaffection, — " the kind sweet smile of old."The conversation, or rather talk, was carriedon by Glenroy in the same strain of mingledpride vanity, lamentation, and tautology. Therewas all the detail of the premiums, and the DhuMoss, and the account of the new plantationsgreatly enlarged, and the anticipation of thethinning, with the purpose for which they wereto be applied ; and then came the black mare,and Lord Allonby ; and, at the mention of hisname, Reginald, who had been sunk in a reverie,suddenly started, and again cast on Editha look which seemed as if it would have piercedinto her soul, and again the blood mounted toher temples at the suspicion it implied.I hope, Edith you will be of our party toDESTINY. 31Glenhaussen ?" said he, gaily. ^^ What a charmingmorning this is !"^^ I have been little in the practice of ridingfor some time," replied she ; ^^ and am becomesuch a timid horsewoman that I fear I shouldonly be an encumbrance''" Where is it we're going, Reginald ?' criedGlenroy. <^ O, aye ! to look at the Glenhaufr*sen woods. But what would take her there ?Riding's not the thing for a lady* Lord Allonby,thaf s he thaf wants the black mare thaf Iwas talking about, (he courted Edith, too !) thatbelonged to my Norman — as if I would partwith it to any man breathing but yourself, Reginald; and thaf s not parting with it neither,for I hope you and I will never part, Reginald.You shall be as much master here as I am; andwhen you're married to Edit h What haveyou dropped, Reginald ? Edith, will you mindwhat you're about, and not set the table in aswim? And — and — why is that idiot, MollyMacauley, not here to make the tea dislike ?And we were speaking about ridings what32 DESTINY.was it ? For I don't know what I am about ;not that if s your fault, Reginald ; but Edith, youreally have not ben yourself since that puppy,Lord Allonby, put nonsense in your head."Poor Edith was aghast at this accusation,accustomed as she was to the capricious garrulityof her &ther's temper. But the set was,Glenroy, by one of the inexplicable contradictionsof nature, even while indulging his spleenin chiding and censuring his daughter, sought,at the same time, to give her consequence in theeyes of his nephew, by perpetually adverting tothe noble and wealthy suitor who had courtedher alliance. Reginald seemed to feel for hercon&sio% for taldng her hand, he said, with alook of almost fond entreaty, ^^ Come now, Edith,don't refuse my first request; do go with us ?"« I will," said Edith, softly—" if you reallywish it"}^ Can you doubt it ?" replied Reginald in thesame tone.But Glenroy seemed so bent on monopolizinghis nephew's company and conversation, as toDESTINY. 33grudge even a portion of it to his daughter, forhe said peevishly, ^^ If s not a woman's businesswe're going about ; we're going to look at theGlenhaussen woods — Are we not, "SLegmaid?Then what can she know about the thinning ofwoods-H»he knows enough when she knows she'sto have them £or her tocher, and not a bad <meeither, Reginald; Mcintosh tells me seven diott-sand pounds worth will never, be missed-sandas many more as you like. But I'll be hanged,if I would have given a single stick to thatlord of yours, Edith. What cared I for him, andwhat was he to me ? — a bit lowland lord, thathas hardly a hill in ail the Highlands now. But,Edith, dear, do as you like, and you shall havethe first thousand of the cuttings to buy yourwedding trumpery, and you'll get that fool, MollyMacauley, to help you. — What the plague's comeover the creature ?"Reginald said nothing, but his countenance wasovercast, and when Edith rose from the breakfasttable, he neither repeated his request, nor remindedher of her promise ; but as she was leaving theb234 BfiSTINY*room, she heard him say with quickness, ^^ Therecan be no hurry as to marking the trees, Glenroy ;and if " But here, Glenroy, with hisusual impatience of contradiction, broke in — ^^Nohurry ! but I tell you there is a hurry, Reginald;and if it had not been for Norman's death, whichI shall never get the better of" Here a passionateburst of grief concluded the sentence,and Edith only learnt how the discussion hadended, when ^n hour afterwards she saw herfitter and lover ride off without her.That Reginald was piqued and jealous, shethought was now certain, for how could she otherwiseaccount for such capricious inequalities?From the moment of his arrival, her mind hadbeen in too great a tremor to admit of her markingaccurately the sudden changes of his manner —if she had, she would have drawn a very differentinference. Edith's feelings were all too pureand devoted to allow her enjoying any womanishtriumph at this supposed discovery; on the contrary,her gentle guileless heart was pained at thethought that she was the cause of uneasiness toDESTINY, 35Reginald. A few words from her lips, she wassure would instantly remove it, and she thereforeresolved to take the first opportunity of comingto an explanation with him, and of undeceivinghim as to her fancied predilection for another.36 Destiny.CHAPTER V.But it seemed as if Reginald avoided all opportunitiesof being alone with her. When heretiu-ned from his ride, he withdrew to his ownapartment on the plea of having letters to write ;and when he appeared at dinner, his air was stillmore melancholy and abstracted than it had yetbeen. Two or three chance visitors who hadarrived, rendered the conversation rather moregeneral, and by their county news divertedGlenroy's attention from being quite so exclusivelydirected to his nephew, though every subjectthat was started still bore some referenceto him — to the Dhu Moss, the planting of Skirri-dale Hill, the thinning of the Glenhaussen woods,the Highland Society, the black mare, Norman,and Lord Allonby.Stint* S7Edith flattered herself when she left the diningroom,that Reginald would Boon follow her; sheknew he disliked, sitting long at table, and theparty was not one to be upon any ceremony with :her father had a habit of remaining long afterdinner, and as he became drowsy and confused, itwould be an easy matter for Reginald to makehis escape from him. But she waited in vain —Reginald came not; but soon she caught aglimpse of him from the window, as he dollycrossed the lawn, and disappeared in .the woodsthat skirted it on one side. Edith could notrestrain her tears at this new proof of Reginald'sestrangement from her. <^ Oh, cruel that he is !"thought she, ^^ thus to torture himself and me —could he act thus, if he loved pie as I love him ?No, no ; surely he would seek an explanation,and end this mystery ; and yet it is I who maybeunjust. This snored mystery may be nothingmore than grief and self-reproach, and he isunwilling to give me pain by communicating hisfeelings. Ah, did he but know how sweet itwould be to me to share in his every sorrow, hewould not thus withhold them from me !"38 pESTINY.Thus did Edith mournfully commune withherself till the evening was far advanced, whenshe was roused by the sound of an arrival, andin a few minutes Mrs Macauley's jocund tonesSaluted her ear, and presently she entered, allbustle, calling, " So he's come — where is he ?*^let me see him;" then suddenly stopping, — *butbless my heart, my dear !" she exclaimed, as shesurveyed Edith with a look of surprise, " whatis the matter with you ? Is not your papa wellandyour true love come home ; and what makeyou look as if you had been crying, then ?'Oh, Macky, how can you ask ?" said Edith,mournfully, "considering *^** Well, my dear, I know what you mean, andit's very true, and I consider every thing, andyou know very well yourself, what a sore heartit gave me when it happened But you have senseto know, my dear, there's a time for every thing,and this is not the time for you to be crying forthem that's gone, when you ought rather to berejoicing at them that's come back. 'Deed Ithink so P'I am sure your return will rejoice us all.DESTINY. 39Macky," said Edith affectionately ; ^^ papa hasmissed you rery much."^^ 'Deed, and I thought he would do that, forhe has always been so kind to me, — and I thoughtsometimes when I was away, oh, thinks I tomyself, I wonder what Glenroy will do for somebodyto be angry with, — ^for Benbowie's grownso deaf, poor creature, it's not worth his while tobe angry at him, — and you're so gentle, that itwould not do for him to be angry with you; butI'm sure he has a good right to be angry at meconsidering how kind he has always been to me."Tien uttering an exclamation of joy as Sir Reginaldentered the room, she flew towards himand precipitated herself round his neck, utteringexpressions of joy and delight, which were returnedon his part with all the hearty warmth andardour of his more refined welcome.^^ And now," said she releasing him from herembrace, and holding him at arm's length, ^^ letme look at you — swell, I declare you are tentimes handsomer than ever you were, and youhold yourself up so well, you might pass for a40 DESTINY.prince ; and I would know that smile of yoursamong a thousand. O, I hope my eyes willserve. me to take your picture some day: — deedI Qsomot help looking at you, for yon are like,and yet you are not like what you was ; you havemot just the bonny bloom on ^your cheek that ^youhad when you went away. What do you think,Miss Edith, dear ?'<' I think Reginald is changed," said Edith,with a low sigh.sall things diane, you know'' said Reginald,assuming an air of gaiety ; ^^ it was not tobe expected that I alone, of all created things,scold remain unchangeable, and return preciselythe same individual I was a year ago ieven you yourself, dear Macky, are somewhatchanged— you are become still move embonpoint,still more youthful, and merry, and kind-hearted."^VNow, are you not Muttering me. Sir .Reginald?for though I like to be praised, I do notwant, to be flattered."** You did not use to think me a flatterer,Macky?" said Sir Reginald, with a smile.DESTINY. 41'^ 'Deed, then, I don't think you are one now,my dear, for you always spoke the truth whenyou was a boy, and it is not likely you wouldchange now, when you have got more sense andgood principles. Now you need not colour up,Sis Reginald, for I'm not flattering you — I'm onlyjust saying what I think ; but, O my dears, whata happy meeting you would have ! except, to besure, that there was a reason for its not being sohappy as it should have been; and indeed itwcmld be a shame to us if we were to be as happyand merry all at once," — and tears twinkled in hersunny eyes as she spoke. ** But then, as I wastelling Miss Edith, when I found her with the tearson her cheek, the time is gone by now, and weshould not accustom ourselves to be melancholy,for it is a very bad habit; but once the distress isover, we should just wipe our eyes, and thankGod for his mercies ; and Fm sure I do it withallmy heart," wiping her own eyes as she said itI wish I had your philosophy, Macky,"said Sir Reginald, with a sigh.>^ Now, what for should you wish for any thing42 DESTINY*belonging to me?' said Mrs Macauley, ntha strong mark of interrogation, from which therewas no escape.Don't be afraid," said Reginald, evading thequestion, " I would not rob you of it, even if Iwould — it sits so well upon you — you make sucha good use of it."Now, as sure as any thing, you are flatteringme. Sir Reginald ! But I want to know what useyou could have for what you please to call myphilosophy — though, 'deed, to tell the truth, Ido not know very well what philosophy is ; butif you mean my contentment, I'm sure you con-notwant that, when you have every thing tomake you so contented and happy; you yourselfso handsome, and with such a grand fortune,and a beautiful place, and an old family, and atitle, and your own true love there, that"— —« True," exclaimed Reginald, abruptly—what, a charming evening this is-have younot been out, Edith ?"No," replied, she, in a tone of forced composure," but I should like to take a stroll now."destiny. \ 43Then I hope you will allow me to attendyou," said Reginald, colouring, and evidentlyembarrassed.^^ Certainly," said Edith, in the same tone,and rising to prepare for her walk.^^ But, my dears, have you had tea and coffee 1^cried Mrs Macauley.I beg your pardon," said Edith, " I hadforgot," and she rang the bell.^^ I own myself too much of a Frenchman todispense with my coffee," said Sir Reginald,seemingly relieved by the delay, while Edith leftthe room for her shawl.'* I really think that sweet creature's lookingvery ill," said Mrs Macauley, ip a low voice, toSir Reginald, after dismissing Boyd, and hissatellite. ^' I thought the sight of you wouldhave brought back the roses to her cheeks, and thesmiles to her pretty mouth ; but I think she looksalmost as pale and mournful as she did before youcame, and that's very extraordinary, is it not?*^^ She certainly is much banged," said SirReginald, \^th a sigh. ^44 DESTINY.Aye, well, but for all that, I'll wager youhave not seen the like of her among all the fineFrench and foreign ladies you have seen — tellme truly, have you ?"Edith certainly was very pretty' repliedSir Reginald, in a tone that betrayed emotion.Well, my dear, but don't you be frightenedfor all that, and she'll soon be as pretty as evershe was ; for she has a very good constitution,although maybe she does not look so stout assome of your great big fat people; and youknow it is natural for her to be. looking not sowell, considering what distress she has suffered ;and then, you know, she was so anxious aboutyou, and so wearying for you to come home — — ^^In spite of Lord Allonby ?" said Sir Reginald,with a forced laugh.** O, so you have heard about that already !But it would not be from Miss Edith herself, forshe does not like the way Glenroy speaks aboutthat at all."Sir Reginald remained silent for a few moments,as if struggling with his emotion; thenDESTINY. 45sipping his coffee, he said, with affected carelessness— ^^ Ladies seldom dislike having their conquestsknown, and my cousin has no cause to beashamed of hers.^^^ *Deed, I think not, for Lord Allonby is avery fine, handsome man, though he has no clan ;he has a very good fortune too, they tell me,though it is but in the low country, which makesGlenroy look down upon him so much ; many aone would not be so particular in these things asheis. Not that it was for that he refused him forMiss Malcolm, but you know she was as good asmarried to you."^< Edith liked him,- did she not ?" said Reginald,hurriedly.<* 'Deed, I don't know whether she did ornot," replied the innocent, unsuspecting MrsMacauley ; ^^ but you may ask her yourself," asthe door opened, and Edith entered.^^ Pshaw — nonsense," cried Reginald, crimsoning,while he tried to prevent Mrs Macauleyfrom proceeding.But if it is dangerous playing with edge took.46 DESTINY.it is no less so, to tamper with simplicity, so MrsMacauley went on. " Well, if it is nonsense,where's lie harm of it, for 1 declare I can't seeit ?" Then addressing Edith, " We were justspeaking about you, my dear, and Sir Reginaldwas asking m^ if I knew how you liked Lord«AUonby ; 'deed, I said I did not know, but hemight ask yourself**Sir Reginald and Edith were standing almostopposite to each other; a slight blush and anexpression of wounded feeling were upon hercountenance, while strong agitation was depictedupon his, and if any one so graceful couldpossibly have looked awkward, he must havedone so at that moment.'' J£ Sir Reginald wishes to know, he has onlyto ask myself," said Edith, calmly ; and turningaway, she seated herself at one of the farthestoflF windows, while he remained standing, as ifstill dawdling over his coffee, but with a flushedcheek and downcast eye.Well," cried Mrs. Macauley, " I know verywell you are both wishing me, as Glenroy,DESTINY. 47honest man, sometimes says, sticking on thepoint of one of my own needles, just now whenyon have so much to say to one another ; sonow that I've had my dish of tea, Til just goand make myself a little dislike before Glenroycomes in, or he'll be noticing my cap, as sureas death, for you see how it is crushed with mybonnet."I — I — thought — were you not proposinga walk?' said Sir Reginald, trying to detainher.'Deed then. Sir Reginald, I have a greatdeal too much sense to think of troubling twotender young lovers with my company, but I'msure it is very discreet in you to ask me. Now,go your ways, my dears— and let me see youwalking arm in arm, so lovingly as you used todo— swell, I dare say I'm almost as happy as youare yourselves !"And away trotted Mrs Macauley singing, withthe tears still upon her cheek.A pause of some minutes ensued ; at lengthyReginald approached Edith, and in a voice which48 DESTINY.vainly strove to appear calm, said, " I thoughtyou had been going to walk, Edith ?*Edith made no answer, her heart seemed toofall ; but she turned upon him a look so soft andtearful, that Reginald involuntarily caught herhand, but as suddenly dropt it as he again encounteredthe ring his own had placed there,while the flush on his cheek turned to an almostashy paleness.At sight of his agitation, Edith mastered hers,and though her voice was almost inarticulatefrom her emotion, she said, ^^ Reginald, what isit you seek to know ?"Reginald made no answer, and his agitationincreased. Then again taking her hand, he almostcrushed it in his, while, in a low suffocated voice,he murmured, — " How I can best make-youhappy !" A thrill of joy ran through Edith'sheart at the words; for, blinded by her tears,she did not perceive the mute anguish of herlover's features, and for a few minutes both remainedsilent But she was already happy, forher hand was locked in Reginald's, and she feltDestine 49assured that the time was newcome whenall wouldbe cleared up. But at that moment Glenroyand his party came thronging into the room, andas he shuffled along, supported by a friend onone hand, and a stick in the other, he called, —Sir Reginald, you're here, and I did notknow it ! What made you leave me ? But that'salways the way, now ! Have not you plenty oftime to be courting, without leaving me alonethis way? But, now that Ms gone, nobodycomes near me," as his friends paced him carefullyin a sofiu "And where's Molly Macauley?"She will be here presently, papa," saidEdith, trying to soothe him. " She is returned,and is merely making herself a little snuurt foryou."What do I care for her ?" cried Glenroy,peevishly; " Or what do I care for any woman? Reginald, come here and sit down besideme. Reginald, you're more to me than all therest of the world put together ; and you mustnever leave me. . She shall be married to youas soon as you"Your coffee waits, papa," said Edith, layingVOL. II. C50 DESTINY.her hand softly on his, as if to stop the currentof his discourse.Well, let it wait. Set it down, Boyd ; andand — Reginald, Til tell you what Til do*You know the Skirridale woods, the — theGlenhaussen woods? M^Nab tells me I maycut ten thousand pounds worth tomorrow, if Ichoose; and — and"Well, my dear uncle, we shall talk aboutthat tomorrow," said Reginald, impatiently; "butsome of us were projecting a walk, the eveningis so fine." And he looked to some of the companyas though he expected to be seconded.A walk !" cried Glenroy, contemptuously.** Who but silly women would think of walkingat this time of night ? Edith may go, if she likesbut I cannot part with you, Reginald, and, Auch-gruel, you may go with her," — to a bashful,shining, red-faced laird, with large white ears, anda smooth powdered head, who awkwardly mumbledout his acquiescence, which Edith waived,while Reginald made another effort, but in vain,to disengage himself from his uncle's grasp.Stay you still, Reginald," cried he, holdingDESTINY. 51him £last ; ^^ and — and you shall have the blackmare tomorrow. She's the greatest beauty —there's not her match in the country. I couldlay a thousand guineas her match is not to befound in Scotland. That Lord — What do youcall him, Edith ? he that had the impudence topropose to me for her, and he would haye taken»you, too !"** There comes Mrs Macauley, papa," saidEdith, as that worthy entered, and with all herspeed made up to her beloved Chief.O, Glenroy, how happy I am to see you !"exclaimed she, seizing both his hands ; ^^ And Ihope you are happy to see me, too ?' regardinghim with an expression of unmingled delightWhat should make me happy to see you ?*demanded Glenroy, with a stare of astonishment" the woman that I see every day of my life ;that I've seen every day these forty years ?'Well, but Glenroy, for aU that, you havenot seen me for well on to a week."A week ! Where have you been ? I nevermissed you !"O ! Glenroy, I was told then you had missed«€52 DESTINY.me very much," said poor Molly, in a tone ofdisappointment.Miss you P* repeated Glenroy. " I — Pvesomebody else that I miss. Reginald, you knowwho it is I miss ; and you are to me now, whathe was when I had him. — Old Molly Macauley,where have you been ? Can you not settle yourselfat home, but you must be going about morningon people that you've no business with ? Youshould stay away altogether, since you're so fondof it." Then, pushing away his cup, " Thatcoffee's not drinkable ; ring the bell for the tea-things; and, Mrs Macauley, you'll make tea forme,for that woman Nation can no more maketea than she can shoe a horse. And sit downhere at my hand, for I know you like to scuttlewith the tea-things, Molly ; and, Reginald,you'll stay wjj^ere you are emi the other side —there's room for us all."An thus, with a debilitated mind and despotictemper, Glenroy maintained an ascendency oversXi around him, and rendered them subservienttp his will. Thus another insupportable eveningwas consumed ; but Reginald's words had takenDESTINY. 53a load from Edith's heart, and she felt assuredthat another sun would not set, without seeingthem restored to their former happy state ofmutual confidence.54 DESTINY.CHAPTER VLWith this hope she repaired to the breakfasttable the following morning ; but Reginald wasthe last to join the party, and when he did, hehad the appearance of one who had passed asleepless night. He looked pale and thoughtful,and did no justice to the good cheer Glenroyand Mrs Macauley heaped upon him with unsparinghand.What's the reason there's nothing at thetable Reginald can eat, Edith ?" demanded Glen-roy,sternly.There is only too great a variety of goodthings," said Reginald, trying to deprecate theCheers unjust displeasure. " I have been littleaccustomed to see such substantial breakfasts forsome time."> ^^ Substantial !" repeated Glenroy, still moreDESTINY. 55indignantly ; " it's no breakfast at alL — Why isthere no herring, Edith ? — Ring the bell, Ben-bowie— that woman Nation's good for nothing.We never have a proper meal, now that yourbrother's gone. He looked better after thesethings. He would not have set you down to sucha breakfast. — Boyd, what's the reason there'sno herring at table? I never saw a breakfastwithout herring — Not in season yet ? Don't tellme any such nonsense ; I desire they may bein season to-morrow and that there may beplenty of herring on the table after this. — Andno game, is that not in season too ? A prettylike breakfast for hungry men ! Not in season !not in fiddlestick; everything must have itsseason now ! in my day there were no seasons'Reginald said nothing, but looked as if annoyedand oppressed by his uncle's overbearinghospitality.Well, Glenroy," said Mrs Macauley, " formy part I think this might satisfy a dozen ofhungry men, and a score that are not hungry.But maybe Sir Reginald does not think so muchof our Holland breakfasts, now that he has seen56 Destiny.80 much of the world. I have heard that inmme strange countries they eat pine-apples, andgrapes, and peaches to their breakfasts."And why have we not pine-apples, andpeaches, and grapes here, Edith ?'' cried Glen-roy.^^ What is the use of my having all thesethings, if they are not produced at proper occasions? But you give yourself no sort of troubleto please your cousin now. But ring the bell,and I'll send to the hothouses for some of thosethings. — Now, Reginald, you need not say aword. — Boyd, you'll desire Nicol to have everykind of fruit for breakfast after this. And brii^some grapes directly; and I desire there maybefresh herring every morning. Is it becausethat puppy — that Lord Allonby, turned up hisnose at herring, that we never see them now ?And he had the impudence to want Norman'sblack mare ! as if I would have parted with thatto any man breathing but yourself, Reginald.She is yours now, and we shall take a ride time will you be ready to go ?'Reginald looked embarrassed, and as if wishingto decline, without having an apology ready.DESTINY. 57Perhaps you would prefer a walk' saidEdith, sofdy ; then blushed as if she thought shesaid too much.A walk !" repeated Glenroy, scornfully ;women are never happy but when they arewalking. / can hardly walk a step now for thatconfounded gout ; but I'll take a ride with you,Reginald, and we'll go to see the Dhu Moss,thaf s what M^Kinnon has drained forty acresof, and got a premium from the Highland Society.^you — ^you remember the Dhu Moss,Reginald?'Reginald coloured as he said, " I am afraid Ishall be a dull companion for either a walk orride, I have got so much of a headach thismorning."A headach!" repeated Glenroy, in alarm;how is that ? But I very often have a headachmyself, Reginald. But I'll tell you what,we'll not go out to-day — we'll just sit quietlyhere, and talk over some things that I want tospeak to you about, and"Excuse me, Glenroy," interrupted Sir Re-c258 DESTINY.reginald, impatiently; " but I am still more indisposedfor business this morning. I suppose'he added, trpng to force a smile, *^ I had takentoo much of your champagne yesterday."As he spoke, Edith passed into the drawing-room,and Mrs Macauley rose to follow ; butfirst going round to Sir Reginald, she laid her^ hand upon his arm, and whispered, " My dearSir Reginald, take my word for it, the best curefor both your head and your heart will be to takea little walk with your own true love. I doubtthere's something not right between you, forshe's away with the tear in her ee — 'deed is she,and it makes me wae to see her."What is it you are whispering about, MollyMacauley ?" cried Glenroy, angrily ; " can younot speak out ?"'Deed, Glenroy, I was just saying that youought not to hinder two tender young sweetheartsfrom taking a walk together. Think howmuch they must have to say to one another aftersuch a long separation."You are really a most officious goose, MrsMacauley," cried the Chief. ' " What can theyDESTINY. 59have to say to one another, that they may notsay before my face as well as behind my back,all the times of the day, if they like? Whohinders them from saying what they please ? — I'msure, Reginald, I've told you, you are as muchmaster here as I am myself. You may say anddo exactly what you please, for you're now theman thaf s to come after me " Here hisvoice sunk at the thought of his lost son.I am very sensible of your kindness, Glen-roy,"said Sir Reginald, shaking .his uncle'shand, as he rose from table ; ^' and I wish I couldmake a better return for it," he added, with emotion.^^ In the meantime, I shall try to get ridof my headach, and be ready to attend you on ashort ride before dinner." And he hastily leftthe room, as if to avoid all further discussion.He entered the drawing-room, where Edithand Mrs Macauley were, but the latter immediatelyvanished, singing —*' The laye that I hae homoTherewith 1*11 be content,The saut teas shall be frozenBefore that I repent./til)nEsrrxv.Ii;* r: I ii v,;i I iirrcrJ :.i : t:i- lay I ii»^-,i l.-:.-h tir lawlaiids o' hollandllif iwinnl mv lure and me."Liii \v;i«» arraiiirini: lier drawiiifif material:i:';ir:ri»ry tn n»|»yinir a (IraT^iiiir which lay*m •••n- :.• r, and which she had already begun.•• I tiiiji.f |uTluijK to ice ashamed of your*■ • :-,' ni |MK»r atrciiijits/' sitid she, as Rogimkl.-•ft. .i .i» f hi* (iijfh'nc >hc had lu'ifun ; " hut," lie! .1 •:. JHikin;: on him with thcckarjuidimioceiit\|Ti H^ion III' her soft eyes **I do not irish to.! :.• any thinif from you, Reginald, howeverI .lirsJi.i if niiifht he."•• \ ou have no csiusc," replied he, bendingm; rr rh.' (Iniui/iiT, ibid wmiiig to examine it very./•i/ifir«'/v.•• 7;. pitt. who Lave ktely been seeing somany Hm'pictum in Italy, itmustbeapenanceIk' I'M to loi)k at my poor scratches; hutI .| «-t evrti wish you to praise them. Isioa/d,Uuk you were cither laughing at me, or deeei-unir nw. if vote M so.".Sir K.Vfi,dd stood with Lise7«stfflfc«i«BDESTINY. 61the drawing, but his thoughts were evidentlymore profound; at last, he said, in a voice ofdeep emotion, — ^* It woidd be difficult to laughat you, Edith ; and. Heaven knows ! I have nowish to deceive you !"^^ I am sure you have not !" said Edith, withtenderness of tone and manner. ^^ But, dearReginald, are you not deceiving yourself?" Andshe blushed to crimson, as though she thoughtshe had said too much.Reginald made no reply, but shaded his acewith the drawing he still held in his hand. Aftera pause, raising his head, he said, in a voice thatvainly struggled at composure, — " I will notattempt to misunderstand you, Edith. Youwould tell me — that you *' He stopped, asif suffocating with emotion.« Yes, Reginald'* said Edith, tenderly, « Iwould tell you how much you have wrongedyourself and me, if you ever supposed I, for aninstant, coidd forget — Ah, Reginald, do you thinkI should have continued to wear this ring, if I hadceased to ^" love you, she would have added,but the words died on her lips, and she bent her62 Destiny.head to hide the blush which glowed even toher brow.Reginald took the hand she had half extendedto him, and pressed it in silence to his lips, butsome minutes elapsed ere he spoke ; then, in adeep and faltering voice, he said, — " I believeyou, Edith ; my doubts are now ended. Say,when will you become mine ?"Edith started; for the accents in which thisfond interrogatory was put, were any thing butthose of hope and joy. She looked on her lover,and his face, even his lips were pale, and hisfeatures were contracted as if in agony.What is this ?" exclaimed she wildly. " Youare ill, Reginald ! Oh, tell me why do I see youthus rI am ill, Edith," said he, faintly attemptingto smile ; " but do not be alarmed — it is a merespasm, to which I am occasionally liable ; but itis past for the present, let us think no more ofit." And, assuming an air of gaiety, he soughtto quiet Edith's fears, and remove her suspicions,if she had any, as to the nature of his emotion.Edith was, of course, strenuous for medicalDESTINY* 63vice : but Reginald assured her it was merelythe effects of the malaria he had had, when atRome, and consequently a disorder not understoodby the physicians of this country. " Buttime, and your good management, will perhapsenable me to get the better of it," he added, withdifficulty suppressing a sigh, " if you are notafraid to undertake the cure."^^ You had the malaria then, and concealedit from me ?" said Edith, reproachfully. " Ah,Reginald, if you had known what your silencecost me ! but it was your tenderness for me madeyou conceal it from me ; and you were ill whileI was unjustly blaming you, perhaps ^"No, no," cried Reginald, in agitation ; " Iought — But — oh, Edith, had I flown to you atthe first, it might not then have been too late ;I should not have been the wretch I am !"Dear Reginald, do not reproach yourself so ,bitterly, you could not foresee how fatally ourdear Norman's illness was to terminate."Fatally indeed !" re-echoed Reginald, as heleant his head on the table, and buried his facein his hands*64 DESTINY.*^ Had you been here you could have donenothing for my poor brother," said Edith ; " hewould not even have known you ; and you seeyou are not too late to be a comfort to us."Reginald looked up, and spoke more calmly,as he said, ^^ You were always gentle and forgiving,Edith ; but you know not the depth ofmy self-reproach," he added, with renewed agitations" Edith, you see me broken in spirits,oppressed with remorse — the victim of a hostess^-malady," gasped he, striking his bosom ; " yet,if I can but make you happy — I can bear it all —Edith, a brighter, happier destiny might beyours — but if you will unite yourself with me —let it be quickly — let there be no idle delay —there has been too much already."A painful surmise now darted into Edith'smind ; she had heard of the baleful effects of thepestilential fever at Rome, in even affecting themind of the sufferer long after the cause hadapparently ceased ; and trembling at the dreadsuspicion, she knew not how to reply.Speak, Edith," he cried, impatiently, " doyou repent ?"^ Destiny. 65Edith cast her streaming eyes upon him witha look of tenderness and affection while sheslowly and distinctly uttered, " Never !"^^ Enough !" cried Reginald, as he pressedhis quivering lip to her hand ; then, after a shortpause, he said with calmness, ^^ And now, Edith,I again entreat that there may be no triflingdelays on your part; on mine every thing shallbe done to accelerate matters ; for that purposeI must now leave you for a time. I must go toDunshiera; there must be much for me to dothere, and the more, that I have now to prepareit, for its sature mistress'' His voice now fel-^tered a little, and he stopped, but soon went on.^' I have too long neglected it, but I must nowlive there for a part of the year if I can. I amaware of the opposition this will meet with fromGlenroy ; but much as I owe him, and desirousas I am, by every means in my power, to dischargemy debt of gratitude, still I cannot devotemyself wholly to him."<^ It would be too much to expect," saidEdith, with a sigh ; <^ and yet, my poor &ther !how shall I leave him in his present state of66 DESTINY.mind ? and still worse, how will he bear yourabsence — you who are now every thing tohim?'Yes," cried Reginald, again relapsing intoagitation ; " my father's mistaken tenderness formehas placed me in a cruel situation. I haveincurred a load of gratitude to Glenroy, whichcrushes me to the earth ; his house hitherto hasbeen my home — but Edith — I cannot — I willnot continue to drag out a useless existencehere."Glenroy's voice was at that moment heard loudlycalling " Reginald," and presently he cameslowly shuffling into the room, talking to himselfas he was wont to do. At sight of Reginald andEdith, he exclaimed, " What's the meaning ofthis, Edith, you taking up your cousin's timethis way ? I have been wanting you, Reginald,about something of more importance than anythingshe can have to say to you. Here's a letterfrom M'Gillivray, that's he that has the farmof Invercardnish — the sheep-fern, you know,that Mcintosh had, and made such a hand of,and ''DESTINY. 67I beg your pardon, Glenroy," interruptedReginald, hurriedly ; << but I can scarcely attendto that business at present — I — I — find I mustgo to Dunshiera."Go to Dunshiera !" repeated Glenroy, inastonishment ; " what would take you to Dun-shebain such a hurry ?"^^ I ought to have been there long ere now,Glenroy," said Reginald; " I know I am muchwanted, and more especially now'' he added,with a forced gaiety, ^' that Edith has just consentedto be mine, as soon as the arrangementscan be made for her reception there."Consented to be a fiddlestick !" cried Glen-roy,angrily. ^^ Is that you, Edith, that's puttingsuch nonsense in your cousin's head ?" But Edithhad made her escape as her father entered, to bespared the scene she feared would ensue. " Arrangementsfor her reception ! what reception,and what arrangements can she want ? Haven'tyou this house to live in, and as much room aswould hold a dozen of you ? and are not you justas much master here as I am, Reginald? andwhat would take you to a house of your own,68 DESTINY.then ? Consent ! — reception ! — arrangement ! —What the plague ! — ^there's, no hurry in yourmarrying, Reginald ; you must wait till we getthe woods thinned, at all events; and — ^andwhatever you want from your own house, you cansend for it here ; and bring your servants, andyour horses, and all here ; and — and — but youmust not leave me, Reginald," grasping hisnephew's hand in his.• ^^ Only for a few days," said Reginald.Only for a few days !" repeated Glenroy ;and what am I to do without you for a singleday ? Fll tell you what, Reginald, if you'll waittill this confounded gout's out of my toe, Fll gowith you myself, (if you must go,) and we cantfdte Edith and Molly Macauley with us, if youlee, and I'll stay with you as long as you please ;I will, upon my honour."Reginald certainly showed no symptoms ofdelight at this proposal, though he strove to uttersome general expressions about happiness, gratitude,pleasure, and so forth.^^ But my house and establishment cannot bein order to receive guests; only consider, myititDESTINY. 69dear uncle, that I have scarcely been there formore than a day at a time, since I left it a merechild."And whafs to have put it out of order then,when there's been nobody living in it ? Comenow, Reginald, don't be obstinate, stay where^you are, and do exactly as ^you like — ^you are completelyyour own master here, Reginald, as muckas if you were in your own house ; but I can'tpart with you, now that my own poor lad's gone.So stay where you are, and you shall have everything^you can desire — ^you shall have his blackmare, Reginald, that — that — Lord — what do youcall him, had the impudence to think I wouldsell to him."Reginald saw it was in vain to attempt to useargument with Glenroy ; he, therefore, concededso far as to give up his intention of setting offthe following morning, and even allowed him toremain in the belief, that he never should leavehim for a single day. Of course, the poor Chiefbecame ten times more tiresome and exactingthan ever, under this accession of gratified affection; and though Reginald submitted with the70 DESTINY.V best grace he could, it was obvious lie was writhingunder the weariness and torment of beingthe engrossing object of a blind, despotic, doatingattachment. Although politely attentive toEdith, in as far as he was permitted to attend toany thing but Glenroy and his never-failingthemes, nothing particular occurred to call forthany marked demonstrations of the nature of hisfeelings towards her, Edith sometimes thoughthe looked sadder tian any thing she had everseen ; but that she imputed to the poignancy ofhis feelings regarding Norman. Though sheloved him the more for this proof of his sensibility,she trusted that time, and her tendernesstogether, ^v^ould gradually diminish his sorrowand self-reproach.DESTINY. 71CHAPTER VILDo you remember your courting days, Ben-bowie?' said Mrs Maeauley one day to theworthy Laird, as he sat, with a see of solemnstupidity, chewing his quidSurely, surely," cried Benbowie, starting atthe question, as some faint reminiscences of arejected suit wandered through his brain.Because I don't know how it Is, Benbowie —maybe the fashion's changed in that too, likeevery thing else, and that it's not genteel forpeople to look as happy as they used to do ; but,as sure as death, if I was Miss Edith, I wouldnot be pleased to see my sweetheart look so dullas he does sometimes, — she has not the canty facemy good Mr Maeauley had when we were goingto be married — the laugh and the joke were neverout of his mouth ; and, I daresay, you yourself.72 DESTINY.Benbowie, was merrier when you were thinkingof matrimony than you are now ?"True, true ; it's a serious matter — it is, uponmy conscience,"O now, Benbowie, that's not what I meanataU/'Benbowie's eyes grew rounder, but he madeno attempt to come to an understanding.What is there serious," continued Mrs Macauley,'^ in two handsome, rich, accomplished,sensible, well-born, well-principled, young creaturesgoing to be married? I declare I thinkthey ought both to be ready to jump out of theirskins for joy."On my conscience it's very true, so theyhight," responded Benbowie ; " and it will costnothing — her money will not go out of thefamily."O, who cares for the money, Benbowie ?that's not the thing at all — it's true love I wasthinking of, and that's a far better thing. I'msure my Mr Macauley and I were as poor as twochurch mice when we were married, and for allthat, we were as merry as two fireside crickets.DESTINY. 73Oh ! how I wish I saw Sir Reginald look uponhis own true love with that heartsome smile thathe had before he left her !*'^^ He's a fine young mans said Benbowie ;"he is — she is — she is a very fine young man,Mrs Macauley, and he has a very fine property —on my conscience he has'"Well, well, Benbowie; but I don't thinkyou understand me, — I would rather see hissmiles than his gold just now," raising her voice,as though the obtuseness lay in the physical, notthe intellectual part of her auditor. But Ben-bowieonly looked still more bewildered.Oh, Benbowie, I wish I could make youunderstand what it is I mean ! and then I couldknow whether it is my own fancy, or whetherit is the real truth, that — (for you know it wouldnot do for me to give a whish of that, either toGlenroy or Miss Edith, for fear of distressingthem, and there is nobody else I would like tosay it to, ) — but I would give all I have, to be quitesure that Sir Reginald is as happy as he oughtto be !"Vol. II. D74 DBsiTiinr,^ Ribs own estate is now quite free'* said Ben-bote,trying to look wise, " and he is next heirof entail to Glenroy/'** O, the stupid body P' thought Mrs Macauley,how shall I ever get him to understand the differencebetween lore and land ? but maybe,after all, I am just putting nonsense in Ins head,and that it is just as Miss Edith thinks^^Htoi^owfor him thaf s gone, thaf makes her own tfcte lovelook so mournful sometimes. How do I knowwhat is in his heart ? and then, when he ladiesMiss Edith looking at him, how he brightensup, and smiles, and jokes, in his own way, as heused to do. But then, again, I do not like tohear young people sigh — it is not natural, whateverthey may say of lovers' sighing, for I knowmy good Mr Macauley sighed none, for as happyas we were !"Such were the pros and eons with which MrsMacauley strove to solve the mystery of SirReginald's dejection; but the result of all herspeculations only amounted to this, that Sir Reginaldand Mr Macauley had been quite differsDestiny 75went lovers. But it was not Mrs Macauley's natureto stop there. Having made nothing of Ben-bowie,she next began to wonder whether observed any thing. One day that shefound herself alone with him, she began to soundher way. Seating herself beside her Chief, ashesat in his easy-chair, she wiped her spectacles,.put them .carefully on her nose, and beganto ply her needle, while she said, ^^ Well, Glen-roy,are not we all very happy at having got SirReginald back again ?'^' What earthly difference can his coming orgoing make to you, Molly Macauley? — Yoiirenot going to be married to him ?*. was the peevishreply.<^ 'Deed I am.not ; but surely, Glenroy, I maybevery happy, though I am not going to be married?"^^ I know no business you have to think anythingabout happiness. If you had my gout inyou, you would not be so happy, I can tell you."'Deed, and I believe that's true, Glenroy ;but though I am very sorry that you have it,76 Resting.yet ought I not to be thankful too that I hare itnot?'^^ Well, d(Hi't torment me with your thanksand your this, and your that — Where's Reginald?"** Vm sure I cannot tell, Glenroy. I hope hemay be taking a little walk with his own true loveand that it will do him good; for as I was nowsaying, I do not think him quite — just — that's tosay, I think — but maybe I'm wrong — that he'sa little doff just now."^^ Doff! what doyoumean by doff? Wish,if you will chatter, you would learn to speakintelligibly. What do you mean by doff ?»Just dull, Glenroy ; as if he was not * '<^ Was not what ?^ demanded the Chief, stillmore angrily.Was not — deed I don't know how to expressmyself to please you, Glenroy; but I think heis not just so — just in such good spirits as I haveseen him."^' Good spirits !" repeated Glenroy, burstingforth in all his majesty — ^^ Good spirits ! 'ponmy soul, you're the most unfeeling — ^hegh — goodDESTINY, 77spirits too ! and yon Mrs Macauley, that pretendto — but I never knew one of you women thatwere better than another. There's not one of^you knows what feeling is — ^you think of nothingbut your own idle amusements. Where's thatgirl gadding to now, and keeping Reginaldfrom me-good spirits ! good spirits in thishouse, after what I've lost ! if you must have goodspirits, Mrs Macauley, you must go somewhereelse for them, for there's to be no good spiritshere, — Good spirits ! I really believe you, MollyMaeaidey, have just as much feeling as one ofyour own needles," stamping his stick upon thefloor.Well, well, Glenroy, do not be so angry,for you know very well how bad my own spiritswere at the proper time ; — and — but you knowthere is a time for every thing, Glenroy. Nowthat it is past, I want every body to be happy,looking to Miss Edith's marriages'<^ And what's Miss Edith's marriage to me, incomparison of the loss of my boy ? And if she'sto take away Reginald from me in this manner,what good will her marriage do to me ? Can'taft DESTINY.you go and see where he is ? I want to speak tohim about that tack of M*Kinnon's. — Will you^0 ?' he exclaimed, with redoubled impatience,as Mrs Macauley carefully folded up her work,and then trotted off, not daring to dispute thecommands of her despotic Chief.** Well, there's no making any thing of thought she. "I wish I could find outfrom Sir Reginald himself what ails him, that Imight try to do him some good*Entering the library, she found the object totheranxiety seated with a book in his hand wiwhich his eyes were fixed, but with the air t>fone whose thoughts are afar off. He either didnot observe, or took ^o notice pf her entrance ;but stepping up^to him, she accosted him, << So,Sir Reginald, you are here all by yourself, whenI figged you gallantry your own true love'*** K you are in search of Edith, you will fittedher, I believe, in the drawing-room, with somevisitors," said Sir Reginald coldly, and withoutlooking up.Mrs Macauley stood irresolute for a few seconds,then looking him full in the fieee, sheDESTINY. ^9Bait, in a strong tone of interrogation, ^' Oh,my dear, I hope you are not angry T*i.,^^ Not angry," replied Sir Reginald, forcing9 smile, ^^ only a little bored."^^ O, well, if that be all, that's nothing to signify; maybe you'll be so good as tell me whatit is that bores you, for I hope it is not me?'with the same interrogatory accent.Sir Reginald made no reply but by a slightgesture of impatience. <^ Well I cannot thinkwhat I could say that did not please you mydear; I only said I thought you would havebeen taken up with your own true love, and I'msure that could not anger you."., ^^ Surely, Mrs Macauley," said Reginald,speaking very quickly and impatiently, ^^ youBave lived long enough to know, what everychild knows, that the best things become staleand tiresome by constant repetition."^^ My dear !" exclaimed Mrs Macauley, inan accent which testified she did not in the leastcomprehend the drift of this observation.. '* You and every body .else, I believe" said SbReginald, in the same impatient manner,, f ^ are80 Destiny.aware of the engagement between Edidi andme; the delay in fulfilling it is now on herpart," added he with increased agitation, << Inthe meantime, it is unpleasant to me, and mns^be painful to her, to have it made the perpetualtheme of conversation, and for ever alluded toin the broadest manner, not only before strangers,but before the very grooms and footmen'<^ And so thaf s the story, is it !" exclaimedMrs Macauley, in astonishment. ^< Well, howcould I ever have g^eteed that when my goodMr Macauley liked so well to be joked abouthis marriage, and to have every body comingand rubbing shoulders with him ! But I'm gladto think, that when you was looking so dull, itwas only because you was not pleas ; and nowthat I know what it is that angers you, I willnever let on any thing about Miss Edith andyou, and maybe if s genteeler no t ■ * * Herea furious peal from Glenrojr's bell recalled MrsMacauley to a sense of her duty. << Oh, and Iforgot ! there's Glenroy sitting in his' dressing-roomwaiting for you all this time, and here'sthat worthy man Mr M^Dow coming," as theDESnKY. 81door opened, and the head of Mr M^Dow protrudeditself, quickly followed by his whole person.Sir Reginald, scarcely able to conceal howmuch he was annoyed, was hastily passing himwith a slight bow, and a sort of murmured apology,but he might as easily have attempted toescape from the arms of a man-trap after havingtouched the £Vital spring*<^ How do you do. Sir Reginald ?' with a violentshake of the hand* ^^ I rejoice to see youback again — better late than never, hoch, ho ; —but I can't say you've brou^t any Italian beefupon you. I doubt you've been rather ailing;but I've no doubt the air of the Highlands, andthe sight of a certain four lady, will set you all torights again." Sir Reginald vat his lip, andmade no reply. Mr M'Dow went on — " I'mafraid you must think I've been rather deficientin my duty, in not having waited upon youbefore now ; but the fact is, I've suffered a greatdeal from the toothache this summer, and at lastI was obliged to get my tooth taken out. Amost dreadful thing it is the pulling of a tooth,and mine was an uncommon strong one 1 'Pond2\9i Destiny;iAf'worif I tBdtq^Iit at first my hewitt vrt^ bftIftilfireTer) I was much amused with an anecdotef&^den^ told Hie — ^for I went aU tke way lofflafi^ow to get it taken out in the best mim**litlr-^thotigh bad's the best, hoch, hoeh^ *kb IBirth' as I was gi(rfng to tell yon, the dentist^^^MrBUtiti really made me almost laugh ; thotigb^^liifl'the truth, I was very much down in the mbiMiiatt^lSie time — hocfa, hoch, ho ! — A gentleman' (hetirdtild not tell me his name, but he's a jixstii^eldfsit peace) had come to him to get a tooth tUtteVViit^ but after Mr Bain had him fairly "id' theblii£r,<there he sat with.his lips screwed tog^eA^rlike a vice : *^ Be so good, sir, as open ymikidtouth a little'' say Mr Bain, <^and allowedj^tet to put in my finger to feel your tooth' ^^^^ <« Na, na," says the Justice, " I'll no do stat,'^6a'll bite me ! — ^hach, hach, hach, ho !" Ev^£Sr Reginald's features relaxed, for a moment,lirto a smile, at the overwhelming, vulgar jocularityof Mr M^Dow, while he made anotherattempt to extricate himself from his grasp, but-in vain.'' *< Excuse my detaining you for one moment,;DESTINY, QfiSir Reginald," said he, grasping him still morefirmly ; ^^ but I think it proper to let you knowthat I shall have occasion to be absent again veryshortly for a few days — ^if s upon a most agreesable occasion, to be sure — ^no less thanamarriage^t's to take place in our family — ^my ni,Miss Alex M^Fee — that's the eldest daughterof my sister, Mrs Dr M^Fee — sis ou the pointof marriage with a very fine young man just eftup in business in London, Mr Andrew Pollock ;it's been a long attachment, like some others thatKnow, Sir Reginald — ^hach, hach, ho I but themeans were wanting, — however, now they thinkthey'll be able to do— and so the marriage is fixedto take place this day se'ennight, and nothing willsatisfy them but that Must perform the cerem<Hiy;but then, on the other hand, I consider my oldengagement to you as paramount to every thingelse of the same nature, so I wish to ascertainthat the one may not interfere with the other,for that would really place me in a most awkwarddilemma."Reginald's face had gradually been crim^oniiigduring Mr M^Dow^s speeds and with 9 mighty84 DESTINY.bend of the head lie merely said, ^^ I beg, sir, Imay not stand in the way of any of your engagements;"then quickly extricating himself fromhim, he left the room.^ Aye," ezdaimed Mr M^Dow, in a tone ofamazement, ^^ I don't know very well what tomake of that ! I suspect the Baronet's not oyerand above well pleased at my not having waitedupon him sooner. I'm sure I'm at a loss how toact, for it will be a dreadful disappointment to'Ley, poor thing ! if I should fail her ; and yetI would be ve^ loath to disoblige Sir Reginaldand my excellent 'patron, Glenroy, to say nothingof the disappointment to myself."Oh, Mr JM^Dow," said Mrs Macauley,*' that's not the thing at all — things are not justcome to that yet; but whafs made Sir Reginaldnot just so well pleased is, that he does not liketo be joked about his marriage — she says if s notgenteel,"« Oh, thaf s it, is it ?" cried Mr M^Dow, in atone of surprise. ^^ Aye, aye ! I had no notion ofthat giving any offence ! and yet I don't thinkI said any thing that could be taken amiss ; forDESTINY. 85I'm sure the allusions that I made were of themost delicate nature. But there's a fashion inthese things, if s one that I don't think I'll everbe tempted to follow ; — though there's no saying,for as my worthy mother says there's nothingso catching as fashion ; and as I live much infashionable society now, perhaps I may just growneebor-like, and become a fashionable myself —hach, hach, ho !"<^ Well, for my part," said Mrs Macauley, ^^ Ihope I may never turn into a fashionable ; for, Ithink, one had better be merry and happy, eventhough it should not be the fashion, than bemournful and genteel, as Sir Reginald is grown.Do you know, Mr M^Dow," in a confidentialwhisper, ^^ I did not just like his look sometimesI was beginning to think — I don't know what !"O, you're quite wrong there, my good lady,"said Mr M'Dow, with a selfHSuffident air, takinga pinch of snuff as he q>oke, ^^ quite wrong — it'smere fashionable apathy, nothing else; I'vealways kept free from it myself for I can't sayI admire it, but it's creeping in. There are someyoung ladies in this country that I could mention,86 DESTINY.that I've known give themselves great ahrg ofapathy."By the by, Mr M*Dow, have you seen theyoung Lady Dross, pretty Miss Lucy Malcolm,since her marriage ?" said Mrs Macauley, quiteunaware of Mr M^Dow's susceptibility on thatscore.O yes," returned he, with an air of contemptuousindifference ; ^' she has got well married,which was more than I thought she would,for she was very high set, and rather gave herselfairs above herself at one time ; but as Becometo spend the day with my worthy friendGlenroy, and it's getting near dinner-time, I suspectI must be going to clean myself a littlebefore dinner." And away he stalked to thechamber, which, from frequent occupation, hadnow become, in a manner, his own property.Glenroy's gout confined him to his own apartmentfor the rest of the day, but Sir Reginaldtook his place and did the honours with so muchgrace and spirit, and exerted himself so effectually,that it must have been a more accurateDESTINY. 87observer than any that were present who coushave discerned the force he was putting uponhimself.88 DESTINY.CHAPTER VIII-oneof the many acts of penance the Chiefthought fit to impose upon his family, was thatof rea^ng the newspapers to them every comingduring a long protracted breakfast,And labour dire it was, and weary woe**for quick ears to keep pace with his tedious utterance,and intermingled comments, although herarely condescended to read the fashionable intelligence,so called. One morning he chanced tostumble on the following paragraph:— " Wehave to congratulate the noble youth of Britainon the arrival of the beautiful and fascinatingBaroness Waldegrave at her mansion, St James'sSquare, after an absence of several years on theContinent Her ladyship is accompanied by hermother, the Lady Elizabeth Malcolm." HereDESTINY. 89Glenroy made a full stop, as if he had come suddenlyupon some unlooked-for and unwelcomeobject; then muttered — " Ay, thais my prettylady, and that other — that's the what-do-you-callher — the bit white-iced lassie that she had herewithher — the creature you never could bear,Reginald?" Reginald's head was at that momentresting on his hand, which shaded his &ce, buthe had the air of being too deeply engaged by aletter which lay open before him, to hear himselftitus called upon, at least he made no answer.<^You mean, Florinda, papa," said Edith —<^ O, how I should like to see her again !"** I never desire to see the &ce of her," criedGlenroy, ** an upsetting, spoilt brat What wasit you used to call her, Reginald? the skim-milkcheese, wasn't it?"But Reginald still looked upon his letter, andwas silent.^^ Is that a cess letter that you've got, Reginald? I've got one too, and so has Benbowie.^ —If s from Mcintosh, is it not ?'"I^— I — beg your pardon," said Reginald,loddng up, and speaking very fast — " yes, I supsDESTINY.pose— I believe — ^I think — yes — I mean Mcintoshis the name."cc Aye, I thought so, it will just be the same asmy own, and I'm not at all satisfied as to the collectingof the cess. I think there's grelut mismanagement— and ^^ .1 icc O, you have not read the whole paragraph,papa," cried Edith, glancing at the paper whiskGlenroy had laid down. ^^ It adds, ^ the yiffmgBaroness is said to be the Venus of Apellesrefaltrzed, and combines with the beauty and d^Ueacyof tiie^ English air, the softness and grace lollItalian, with the gaiety and brilliancy of. theFrench. We may therefore anticipate the: 4ehtwhich will attend so rare and perfect a comlnil^li<m, when it bursts on an astonished woprULl'Did you never happen to meet with. Floridawhen you were abroad, Reginald?" enquiciodEdith, as she still scanned the paper.cc Yes," answered Reginald, hesitatingly ; thenturned to Glenroy, and resumed the subject ofthe cess.^* And I hope you made up your old quarrel,and were friends?" said Mrs Macaulay* >tTe^4^DESTINY. 91But Reginald was too much engrossed withhis subject to hear the question. Edith tookiidTBntage of the first pause to say, ^^ How cameyou never to mention her to us Reginald?'- ^* Mention an old tobacco pipe I" cried Glen-rey,angrily, " What was there to mention ? - 1ducis Reginald had more sense than to troublehis head about such an insignificant creaturejllil that-^-a spoilt, troublesome monkeys that therewas no living in a house with'''^^ O, but Glenroy^ you must not speak thatway of her now, that you hear she has turned outso wells said Mrs Macauley, always charitablein her judgements, and credulous in her belief;*^ and I daresay Sir Reginald will give her a verygood character now — I'll wager any thing theywould make it all up — am I not right. Sir Regis?'^' Lady Waldegrave was much admired," saidReginald, in a cold constrained manner*^^ What a cautious answer, and how unlikeyou, Reginald," said Edith with a smile ; <^ butdonU^expect to get off so easily; I must have aholland particular description of her: — f<Nr,ini^le92 DESTINY.of 70115 I always loved Florinda. I scarcelytliiiik she met with justice from you."^^ Perhaps not," replied Sir Reginald, in thesame abrupt, laconic manner.<< Well then, you will make it up now bygiving us a &ithful4*epresentation of her, or, asdear Macky says, by giving a good character ofher."^^ What the plague does it signify whetherher character's good or bad ?" cried Glenroy, inmie of lus transports ; ^^ the character of the manthat's to be collector of our cess is of more consequence,I think, than the character of an idledancing county like that — a creature that yourbrother — Here, Sir Reginald, comeback; 'ponysoul, this is insuperable ! you women, with yourchatter, you've driven him away from the table !I really wish you would learn to hold yourtongues when you see we're engaged in business.— Reginald ! — aye, there he's off, and he'saway out without his hat ! You women reallyare — shem" •And Glenroy was obliged to break off, forwant of words to express his indignation.DESTINY. 93<< Well then, as sure as death, Glenroy," respondedMrs Macauley, ^^ I think we behaveourselves very well, and speak very little, considering.I'm sure I could speak a great dealmore than I do, if it was not for fear of angeringyou ; and I'm sure Miss Edith speaks less thanany body. But wasn't it natural for her to berather inquisitive about the little creature sheused to be so fond of? 'Deed I think it was;for how was she to think that Sir Reginald andshe had not made it up, the spiteful thing thatshe must be ? for I know it would note hisfiuilt,he is so good-natured, and generous, and forgivingto his enemies*"But Benbowie, having found some knotty pointin his cess letter, was now applying to'his Chiefto solve it for him ; and thus Glenroy's wrathwas for the moment appeased, and his attentionexcited, and the abuses of the cess seemed toa£Ebrd them what is called subject-matter forsome hours to come. When Reginald joinedEdith in the drawing-room, he looked ill anddejected; and, in answer to her timid and gentleenquiries, he admitted that he bad had a slight94 DESTINYspasmodic attack during breakfast, but that itwas nearly over for the present** I flattered myself," said he, ^^ they had leftme, as I have been less subject to them of late ;but one is commonly the prelude to others. Nowdon't be alarmed," he added, with a faint smile,^^ although you see me what you ladies wouldcall somewhat nervous, occasionally — in time, Itrust, I shall get the better of it," and he sighedas he said it.^^ I fear your feelings are too acute for yourpeace, Reginald," said Edith, mournfully, asshe. gently laid her hand on his arm. Reginaldlooked on that hand for a moment, with a strangecontraction of brow, and something like a recoil ;then suddenly changing, he took it in his, andsaid, in a voice that Tered with emotion —^^ When once this hand is fairly mine, I shallbe better, much calmer, I am sure I shall."You know it will ere long be yours," ssddEdith, and her colour deepened while she added,with simple earnestness, ^^ and in the meantime,you cannot doubt that my best affections — thatmy heart itself, is wholly — solely yours."DESTINY. . 95« O that I were worthy of it, Edith," said heina melancholy accent; ^^ and yet," he added,with notion, ^^ if you could but read mine,you would there see that its first desire is foryour happiness."** Yes, I am sure — I feel — it is !" said Edith ;^^ but the way to make me happy, is to be happyyourself."^< Well then, let us now settle something,Edith," said he, rapidly ; '^ I shall go to Dim-shebasoon ; but since it is your desire, I shallmake no alteration upon it. The credit of theimprovements shall be yours. Glenroy expectshis lawyers in a few days, who will arrange allmatters of business, and then — and then, Edith,"added he, with a strong gasp, ^^ you will surelyput it out of the power of fate to divide us ?'Edith sighed, even as she smiled an assent ; forthe time ale had fixed for her marriage was theexpiry of her mourning for her brother.or.96 DESTINY.CHAPTER IX.Although Glenroy's gout was mach on thededuce) it still confined him to his couch for thegreater part of the day, during which either his beUor his voice was to be heard resounding, indicativeof the restlessness and impatience of its master.The following morning, as the fiEonily sat atbreakfast, a peal was heard from the bell, whichsurpassed all the peals that had yet been rung,followed by another, and another, in such quidsuccession, that only a flash of lightning couldpossibly have had time to answer the summons.« I think I hear Glenroy's bell," said Ben-bowie,holding up his ear, and looking wise.^^ 'Deed, Benbowie, we may all hear that atthe deafest side of our heads," said Mrs Macauley,<< as sure as death, he'll ring down the)house."Destiny. 97<< Something more than common has surelydisturbed him," said Edith, rising, when, at thatmoment, the Chiefs valet entered to say thatGlenroy wished to see Sir Reginald immediately.^^ Something about a new lease, or an oldbridge, or some such parish matter," said Reginald,carelessly, and he rose, and was saunteringout of the room, humming an air to himself; then looking back, as he saw Benbowiegroping in the direction of his plate, he called,May I beg, Edith, that you will not allowBenbowie to mistake my cup for his own ?'Edith sat patiently i waiting Reginald's returnfor a considerable time ; but still he came not,and all was silent'^ Oh, this is really not fair in Glenroy tokeep Sir Reginald from his breakfast," saidMrs Macauley.^^ Is Sir Reginald not coming back to histea?' enquired Benbowie, with a face of solicitude,for it was one of his peculiarities to castasheep's eye at other people's viands, evenwhen surrounded by a profusion of untouchedVOL. Uk E98 DESTINY.dainties* So, baulked in his dea^n^ike betookhimself and his newspapers t» his own contentMrs Macauley was too tnisy and' active toindulge long over the pleasures of the table andshe likewise trotted away, weary of wonderingwhat '■ was keeping Sir Reginald.At length Reginald returned, but his featuresstill bore the marks of recent agitation ; andalthough he had a perfect composure of manner,either real or affected, yet his hand trembled asheraised the cup to his lips.^^ I have had another of those foolish spasoos^"said he, ^< occasioned, I think, by the heat ofGienroy^s room, though he would fain persuademe it is flying gout, and we have consequentlyhad a long and interesting discussion on goutand malaria. He tells me my father had it inhis constitution, which I never knew. ; But Ibeg pardon, Edith, you are waiting for me. O,by the by, Glenroy has had a letter from—from Lady Elizabeth; a letter offering to payhim ar visit here, which has of course digitatedind annoyed him."^' An offer of a visit from Lady Elizabeth !"DESTINY. 99exclaimed Edith ; '^ that is indeed very strange,after so long a reparation. Don't yoa think so ?"« Rather?' replied Reginald.*^ How does papa take it ?"^^ I can scarcely telL He seems both for andagainst it. He is, you may believe, very to receive the visit, and yet still moreunwilling to define it. He begged me to mentionit to you, and talk it over''^^ What can have prompted such an offer atthis time ?" said Edith, still rapt in amazementReginald was silent.^^ Does she assign no reason for so strange aproceeding?" enquired Edith. Reginald hesitatedfor a moment; then, with a deepeningcolour, replied, /' Sympathy is the motive assigned.She.wii^es to condole personally withyour father and you in your affliction ;" and besighed deeply.*' Ah, how very kind !" said Edith ; " muchmore so than I should have expected rfirovniLadyElizabeth, either fire my own ]BecoUeotion,.Qfher, or from any thing I have ever. heard o£ Ji^r.Perhaps lie is <nujeh.change€|».'an<]^ if-lt is soplOO DESTINY.papa and she may yet live happily together,and then, you know," she added, with a risingcolour, " he could better spare you when "O, impossible ; they are so totally different,and Lady Elizabeth is such an invalid, so con-instantlycomplaining — their habits are so dissimilar— so — ^in short, their ever living togetheris out of the question ; she only proposes remainingfor a week or two."^^ At least there can be no harm in trying theexperiment for a week or two; that will soonpass away, whether pleasantly or not But doesshe say nothing of Florinda? Won't she cometoo?''* I suppose — I believe — of course*— here,Fido," to his dog, as he placed a saucer on thefloor, with some milk and water, and bent down,as if deeply interested in the common actionof Fido's lapping his breakfast.*' Oh, how delighted I am !" exclaimed Eklith,her eyes sparkling with animation. <^ I cannottell you, Reginald, how much I have longed tosee her again, my recollection of her is so vivid !I am sure I sbsJl love her, she was such anI]ffi6TIKY. ][01ei^i^ing creature ; and you remember how oftenI used to make up your little quarrels together ?I am resolved to make you both good friends forevermore."Reginald made no immediate reply, for he wasstill occupied with his dog At length he said,in a cold constrained manner, but without raisinghis head, — <^ Excuse me, Edith; but weview this matter quite differently. I have alreadyadvised Glenroy to decline the visit."^^ Ah, Reginald! how could you be so unkind?" exclaimed Edith in a tone of reproach.^^ Because I thought it my duty," he replied,almost sternly.^^ But you may have mistaken it, dear Reginald,"said Edith, gently. Reginald was silent.And will papa, then, not receive them ?" enquiredshe, with a sigh.^' I cannot tell. He was much perplexed, andasked my advice, which I gave him although itwas not pleasant for me to be the umpire in sucha matter."^^ Tell me, Reginald, is it your dislike to1^destiny;Florida thitt makes you so averse to feteiirki^the visit?* .Sir Reginald did hot immediately reply ; whenhe did, he said, very coldly, — ** I never said 1disliked her**« No— but I suspect you do*' said EdS^,looking at him with a soft smile ; ^^ and I longto reconcile you**** You had better not try** said Reginaldsternly ; then added, in a voice of repressed emotion,— " This visit can be productive of no pleasure— they are so different — they are both sounlimited to this place**But, for a short time, it matters little," saidEdith.Even for a short time, I am sure the visitwill annoy ycTur father, they will bring such asuite along with them. Lady Elizabeth has hertravelling physician — and — and — there is a Frenchlady — a friend ^But there is plenty of ro<mi, and we are accustomedto receive every body. How unkind,then, it would be to refuse such Hear connexions !DESTINY. 103^ii^9 come, dear Reginald, do persuade papato accept the visit.":^^Thali might be the test ofimy. obedience, butaq^ its my We," said he, bitterly. While heftpoke, Glenroy's bell had been sounding a larum,ibid npwl;it servant entered in all haste, to say,(C^nroy wished to know what was detainingMiss Malcdm, and to desire she would bringthe letter immediately.O,. by the by !" exclaimed Sir Reginald,in some confusion, ^^ I had almost forgot Glenscharged me to show you the letter, and torequest of you to answer it-Ajod he drewfcii^h a letter and laid it before Edith. Shetook it from its envelope, and at the first glanceexclaimed — ^ Florinda Waldegrave ! I thoughtthe leer had been from Lady Elizabeth."^^ 'Tis much the same thing, is it not," saidReginald? " whether I write a. letter, or youdo it for me? The letter is virtually LadyElizabeth's."^* What a pretty, elegant, little hand shewrites" exclaimed Edith, as, stout farthercomment, she began to read, as follows : —104 J^JESTIl^Y.«My DEAR Sir, : . ,Atinamma's request, and in accordance withmy own feelings, I beg leave to express lo y#uthe deep sympathy we feel on the moanifiilevent which has taken place in your family . Theearly recollection of your kindness to me, and thetender affection I always cherished for you, andmy dear brother and sister, (for such I ever considereddiem,) remain indelibly impressed uponmy heart ; and I wish nothing more earnestthan to be allowed an opportunity of proving toyou how sincerely I participate in your affliction.Mamma is equally desirous of convincing yon,that, however circumstances may have unfortunatelyseparated her for so long a period fromyou, she has ever retained a lively interest inyour welfare, and that of all dearest to you.Should it not, therefore, be deemed an intrusionon your grief, we shall have much pleasure inbeing allowed to join your domestic circle, andpass a week or two with you quietly at. Glen-roy;when it will be our most earnest study toendeavour to mitigate your sorrow, by every©isthnr. 165means in our power. Mamma unites with minevery heartfelt wish for your health and returninghappiness. And, with kindest love tomy dear sister Edith, I have the honour to be,my dear Sir,<* Your very sincere and obliged servantand daughter,Florida Waldegrave.*^ Pes. Mamma entreats you will not put yourselfto the slightest inconvenience on her account;for, although somewhat delicate, she isnot at all particular as to her accommodation ;and as for me, you may put me in the turret,with which you used to threaten me when I wasa naughty troublesome little girl."<' It is a very kind letter," said Edith, with aagh, as she finished it. ** And yet " Shestopped.Here another message from Glenroy admittedof no farther delay, and Edith was hastening tosatisfy his impatience, when Reginald stopped^ hereE 2166 i]iss¥r^Y.*< Dc not allow rthy-Aing I have said te* prejudiceyou against Lady Waldegrave," said he,iii Station; ** I ought not to have given anopinion — I — do not let me thbik I have injuredhier in your estimation, Edith."No, no," cried Edith, hastily, as a perfectvolley of bell-ringing caused her to fly.Are you to be all day writing that letter,Edith ? is it not done yet ?" were the queriesthat greeted her on her entrance.I beg your pardon, papa ; but I have nothad time."Not had time ! you've had time to writeleast a dozen of letters — sites really intolerable ;what's the use of you women learning to writeat all ? you should all keep to your needles andthread, like that idiot, Molly Macauley, and nottorment people with your trash of letters thisway. Have you not written the one I desiredyou yet ?"** It is not five minutes, papa, since Reginaldshowed me the one you had received from LadyWaldegrave."^^ That's not the letter I am speaking about ;DESTINY. 107it's the one I desired you to write in answer tothat."^^ I understand you, papa; but I really havenot had time since."^^ I tell you, the letter might have been halfwayto London by this time."^^ My dear papa, you know the post does notleave this, till the evening."^^ That's nothing to the purpose ; your businesswas to write the letter when I desiredyou."I will write it directly, papa, if you will beso good as tell me what I am to say."^^ How often am I to tell you what to say ? Itold you already, or at least I told Reginald)which is the same thing."^^ Reginald said you did not seem inclined toreceive the visit."^^ How can I be inclined to receive a visit,lying in my bed here ? Ifs a most senseless andunfeeling proposal."^ <' It must be kindly meant," said Edith, gently; ^^ and, dear papas sympathy ought alwaysto be kindly taken."10$ Destiny./ ^^ Syi]a|>at)iy ! what good will all ike sj^ndpatbyin the world do to me ! it will not bring backhim that I've lost,"A pause of some minutes ensued.You may be quite well before Lady EHza^beth comes, papa," said Edith ; *< and if not,you will at least have shown your hospitality aikigood-will ; but yet, if the thought of it is sounpleasant to you, to be sure the visit had betterhe refused, than that you should suffer,"You don't know what you're speakingabout ! If I'm well, and if I'm not well ! howcan I tell whether I'm to be well or ill ? I wishboth these ladies of quality had my gout in their£angers and toes, to settle diem, and keep themfrom disturbing me in this manner. And there'sReginald, he has got the gout too, or I'm mistaken; his father had it when he was not mucholder than he is now ; but if he could get it tofix in his foot, there would be no fear of him,^^—But what's the reason you have not written thatletter, Edith ?". " I will write it now, papa, if you will onlytell me what you wish." ,1>BSTIKY. IM^^ How can I tell yoa what I wish ? Can'tyou ask Reginald) and he'll tell you what Iwish."« Reginald and I don't quite agree about it,papa."^< Reginald and you don't agree ! And do youreally pretend to disagree with the man you'reto be married to ? and before you're married tohim I I never heard of such a tiling in my life,as people not agreeing before they were married'^— not agree with the man that's to come afterme!"<^ Reginald and I are very good friends, papa,and we shall be quite agreed when we knowyour wishes on this subject ; but he is of opinionthat it would be better to decline the visit ; andI ''He's quite right — much better — what theplague brings them here now? After stayingaway so long, they'd better have staid altogether.The mother not particular ! — there'snot a more troublesome, particular woman in thekingdom than she is !"'< Then I shall write and say the state of your110 Bestir.health presents you receiving their kindly meantVisit at this time, or something to that purpose,papa ?" said Edith, and she was leaving theroom.<« The state of the fiddlestick !" cried Gle»-roy, peevishly ; " I wish you would not be insuch a hurry — what's the matter with my health ?You women are always so impatient and so readywith your pens ! what is there in the state of imyhealth to keep people from coming to the house ?^you speak as if I had the plague ! I've had ^touch of the gout in my toe, which is now almofi^tgone, and Tm better than I've been for months,and how can I tell people they're not to cometo my house ? It's a thing I never did in my life,and I'm not going to begin now ; I wonder howyou could propose such a thing, Edith, td refuseto admit a woman of rank, and my own wifetoo, within my door, and for two or three days ;and her taking such a journey, poor thing ! onpurpose, and all for my poor boy ! if s a piece ofrespect to him, and it says a great deal for her,and she shall be welcome to the best xi my housefor his sake."DESTINY. IllHere poor Glenroy began to weep, and Edith,distressed and perplexed, after soothing him aswell as she could by turning his thoughts to anotherchannel, left him to have again recourse toReginald for advice and assistance. But Reginaldhad set off to join a shooting party, and hadleft word he should not return till late in the evening.Edith had, therefore, to write the letterwithout farther communing. Upon showing itto her father, he of course scolded and protestedagainst it, and swore he would not receive anysuch visitors ; but, at the same time, desired theletter might be sent off, accepting the visit.iiI^EStll^Y.-■.M-?^^-if ■ I. .-; 1 1 ■■ .• . .\>■' ' ;iCHAPTER X.i-iMrs Macaulay's astonishment on beingmade acquainted with this revolution (or ratherrestoration) was excessive.** Well, Glenroy,** cried die, as she repairto his sitting-room, brimful of the subject, ^< I'ssure we may well say, wonders will never cease !As sure as death, I could hardly believe MissEdith when she told me ! To think of your ladycoming back to you of her own accord, afterstaying so long away from you. Of all the wonderfulthings Fve met with, and I have met witha good many in my day, this is the most extraordinary."I see nothing in the least extraordinary inthe matter*' said Glenroy, with dignified composure.^O, that must be because you are so wise,Destiny. 118Glenroy ; for I have heard that very wise peopleare never surprised at any thing, which I thinkvery extraordinary, considering what curiouscreatures we are, and what wonderful things wemeet with both by day and by night It wasbut just the night before last I had such a curiousdream; — but I'm not going to tell it to you,Glenroy," — as she saw a volley ready to burstforth — ^^ though I must always think it veryuncommon that I should have dreamed such adream at the very time your' lady was comingback to you* Tm sure I hope she will, behaveherself now."Behave herself !" repeated Glenroy, wrathfully; ^^ I wish, Mrs Macauley, you would learnto behave yourself, and not give your tonguesuch a license."Well, what did I say was wrong there,Glenroy ? for 'deed I do not think she behavedso discreetly as she might have done to you;but now that she has seen her fault, to be sure weshould not speak about what's past; and I daresayshe will make you a good, and an obedient,and a well-behaved wife in all times to come ;114 Destinyfor (mice she somewhere, I doiibt if she'll be forgang away again. 'Deed, I wondered at herleaving yon when she dii"<^ And what right had you to wonder anythingabout it, Mrs Macaulay ? And wher wasthe wonder of her going to look after her daughter'sfortune at the time she did? She acted tikea sensible, prudent woman; and now that j^has secured that, and got the girl properly educated,the first thing she does is to show herrespect for me by bringing her back to me : butI daresay, one reasoiki et hec leaving this WM^that the child might not be corrupted by you.You would have been a fit person to have educateda peeress, to be sure ! You've made a firehand of Edith, to be sure."O fie, Glenroy," cried Mrs Macauley,kindling a tittle at these aspersions, ^^ I wonderto hear you ! 'Deed, I don't think it sets youto speak in that disparaging way of your owndaughter, and her so sweet, and pretty, and genteel,and so much admired ; and I wonder youshould set up the other one, considering whata tittle spoilt, impudent monkey she was, andDestiny. Is'deed I don't beUereshe's^ much better yet; foryou see Sir Reginald has never said a goodword of her, and I really think he cannot bearthe name of her'<^ You're an old goose, Molly Macauley, anddon't know what you are speaking about. Iasked Reginald if he had any fault to find withher, and he said none in the world ; and he saidas much as that they had been upon a goodenough footing when they met ; and I know itwas only his fear of their disturbing me thatmade him unwilling to admit them here, for hethinks more of me than any of you, I know thatand he's everything to me now — so take youcare, Mrs Macaxdey, that you behave yourselfproperly."*^ O, Glenroy, as if ever I could behave myselfimproperly to anybody, especially to yourlady and your step-daughter. I'm sure I shallput my best foot foremost to please them. AndI^ just thinking what little marks ot my requestI can contrive for them, that will be somethingout of the common." After much deliberationsshe at last decided upon what she deemed a meet116 DESTINY.mid i^pr^nriate offence for Glenroy^s ladyv-^inike form of a visiting cards-case with a view of^ The Castle" on one side,, and on the othersfull length representation of the Chief in theHighland dress ; while Lady Waldegrave wad tobe made happy with a gown, laboured incoloured silks, with what the artist called a rat*king pattern, of heather and thistles of her owncontriving. Benbowie,^ who had only one modeof testifying emotions either of grief or jogr^ordered a new waistcoat for half moumii^, whio]ieven Mrs Macauley declared was ugly enough*' to is^ean a bairn."Edith waited impatiently for Reginald's return,but instead of himself she received a noteby the gamekeeper who had attended him, tosay that he had been prevailed upon to take anight's quarters, and spend a day or two withhis old friend Dross, at Lochdhu, and that ashewas now so £eu* on his way to Dunshiera, hewould probably visit it before his return; hetherefore desired his servant and horses mightjoin him the following morning, and beggedEdidi would write him a line to say how GlenIXESTIKT. 117roy was, &c, AH this was quite natural, andyet £with felt a little mortified that Reginaldshould voluntarily absent himself from her evenfor a few days — it might be chiefly on her accountindeed, as it was probably a mere excuse to g^ito Dunshiera with a view to prepare it for herreception, and she was angry with herself forthe momentary chagrin she had given way to*She wrote him a few lines in reply, and told himwhat answer had been returned to Lady Wade*grave's letter, by her father's desire — then addeda hope that he would not be long absent, and arequest that he would do nothing to Dunshieraon her account.There was of course a violent storm fromGlenroy, when he heard of his nephew's departsture ; but, upon the whole, he bore it better thancould have been expected. The act was, therewas always some one subject that reigned paramountin his mind, and f<Mr the present that was theapproaching visit of his Lady. It was somethingto excite him — ^to confuse him — to keep him intalk, and make him femcy himself in a butteras th letter was scarcely gone before he hsifgiuk1 18 DESTINY,to watch for the arrival of his expected guests.But he soon t>egaii to weary of expected andpreparation— not even steam itself would havekept pace with his impatieiice-^how much. lessthe tardy movements of even the fleetest of posthorses, and the best paid of post-boys, When theydepend upon the movements of fine ladies ! iHedid not indeed pretend to say that he anticipatedany pleasure from the arrival of his guests^^^on the contrary, he loudly declared that tk^reought to be an act of Parliament to preventwomen from travelling, and that he only wishedhis visitors would come that they might go awayagain.I really wish this visit was over," he wouldexclaim twenty times a day. " Whycan'tttkeycome and have done with it? do they think I'mgoing to sit lip this wd,y, day after day, w^tiqgfor them? Haven't had time"— to Edith, ^«WMdo you call time? I know I have had time torepent that ever I listened to sUch a manlikeproposal. What his it they mean tof do tafierthey come here? Are they to take up with Bowieand Molly Macauley? for I can tell them,DESTINY. 119they're mueli mistaken if they think Pm to gallantthem about. They're coming to your marriage,are they? But they'll surely have thediscretion to write before they come."Edith assured him they would, as she hadrequired of Lady Waldegrave to let her knowwhen they might expect them.^ And what's the reason Reginald's not comeback? What am I to do if he does not come intimeto receive them ? I really wish, Edith, youwould write, and ask what's keeping him, and tellhim .that he must come directly. It's a prettysituation I'm landed in, with two strange womencoming that I know nothing about. What doI. know about your Lady Waldegrave ? she's^nothing to me ; and — and my own boy gone !"At length a sudden and alarming attack ofgout in the stomach put a stop to Glenroy'sgarrulous debating. All was confusion and dismay— expresses were sent off for medical assist-made;and Edith wrote a hurried line to I&Reginald, informing him of her father's situation.'Skua had heard from him from Dunshiera, whoseliesaid he had found so. much to. do, that i^120 DESTINY.time of his return was uncertain ; but the intelligenceof his uncle's danger, she was sure, wouldbring him instantly to Glenroy ; and so it preyed,for he lost not a moment in answering thesummons ; but before either he or the Doctorarrived, the disorder had taken a favourable turnthe gout had resumed its station in the feet.Unis the danger was past for the time, and Glen-roywas himself again, and every thing and everybodyresumed their former station and occupation.Reginald alone seemed restless and uneasy— abrupt in his answers, and unequal in hisspirits ; but whenever he caught Edith's eye, heinstantly rallied, recovered his self-possession,and began to talk to her ef Dunshiera, of all hewas doing and had to do for her comfort andaccommodation, and would then urge the necessitythere was for returning there, having numerouswork-people waiting his orders. But as themention pf such a purpose always threw Glen-royinto an absolute paroxysm, and made himgout all over, he at length agreed to remainwhere he was, until his uncle's health shouldtye more firmly re-established.DESTINY. 121** You surely do not think of receiving LadyElizabeth now?' said he to Edith, one day whenshe was expressing her expectation of a letterfrom Lady Waldegrave.No, I scarcely expect them now," said she,^' as I wrote to Florinda when papa was takenill ; but if they had set out, of course she couldnot have received my letter. However, I musthear from her soon, as she will at all events writeto apprize me of the day of their arrival, if theyare really coming."^' If they should come," said Reginald, in atone of affected composure, " I shall take advantageof your having such good company, to returnto Dunshiera for a few days. Glenroy will probablybe quite well by that time, and I am anxiousto forward the operations."Surely, Reginald, you will not think ofleaving us at such a time V said Edith ; <' howvery unkind — I may almost say rude, it wouldseem to Lady Elizabeth and Florinda."That is a very secondary consideration,"replied he ; ^^ seems signifies little to me in comparisonof should* I ought to return to Dun-vol.II. r122 DESTINY*sheba at that time," lie added, endeavouring toretain the same artificial tone. ^^ Nay, more,Edith, why might not you accompany me?Why," he continued, with more visible agitation,^^ may we not make out our marriagequietly at least, if not privately, now, beforethese people come ?' .Surely you are not serious, Reginald," criedEdith, in amazement.Perfectly so," returned he, quickly.I can scarcely believe you," said she; " whatcan your motive be for so strange a proposal ?*In the first place," said he, " I feel that Ihave been long enough exhibited as your lover.In the next, we should avoid the intolerableeclat which always attends on these things. And,lastly," he added, with a sort of mocking air,since your father is going to be reunited tohis lady love, 'tis to be supposed he will be toohappy to be dependent upon other society, andconsequently he could more easily spare us. —What have I said to offend you, Edith?' hecontinued quickly, as she remained silent, andthe tears swelled in her eyes.DESTINY. 123Much," said she, with emotion ; " and yetI am sure you did not mean to hurt me, Reginald,"she added, tenderly.*^ If you are hurt, the fault must be your own,not mine," said Reginald, coldly.Edith's tears fell, but she made no reply.Reginald proceeded, in the manner of one whohad worked himself up to be angry, — " Sincemy return, two months ago, I have never ceasedimportuning you to fulfil your engagement. Ihave repeatedly besought you to become mine,publicly or privately, I cared not which, butthere has always been some frivolous pretext oranother for delay ; yes, even the colour of yourgown has been made the excuse," he cried, withrising vehemence, " as if such weak, superstitiousfancies could have swayed you, had youreally, truly loved."Unkind, unjust that you are !" said Edith,choked with her tears.No, the unkindness, the injustice is yours,"cried he, still more passionately. " Heaven iswitness, that I would have fulfilled our contractlong before now. You must do me the justice.i124 DESTINY*to own, that the moment I was assured youraffection for me was unchanged, I would havemade you mine ; you need not blame me, then,if your behaviour leads me at least to doubt thereality of that affection."Edith was too much overcome to reply. Shewas accustomed to the querulous fault-findingof her father ; and from that and other evils shehad been wont to find a refuge in the tendernessof Reginald ; but this burst of displeasure wastoo much for her, and she wept in meek andsent anguish, while he paced the room with theair of one who would rather be still more exasperatedthan mollified. 'At that moment Benbowie entered the roomand was making up to Sir Reginald with anopen letter, and beginning something about commissionersof supply, when, hastily brushing pasthim with an air of reckless hauteur, he quittedthe apartment At the same time, the dressingbell sounded, and Edith retired to her chamber,to compose herself as she best could, for meetingher angry and unreasonable lover at dinner.DESTINY. 125CHAPTER XI.Sir Reginald did not make his appearancein the drawing-room, and it was not till the partywere all seated that he entered the dining-room,and then his looks and manner still betokened amind ill at ease. He was silent and absent, inattentiveto the company, and almost rude topoor Mrs Macauley, when she attempted to coaxhim into a better humour, by her simple and somewhatill-timed allusions.Edith felt unequal to bear a part in the conversation.It was all she could do to retain thetears that rose in her eyes, as she now and thenencountered Sir Reginald's glance, which, if itdid not speak positive displeasure, at least evinceda sort of impatient dissatisfaction. The desserthad been just placed on the table when Boydentered with a &ce of importance, and announced126 DESTINY.that two travelling carriages had just enteredthe avenue ; and while he yet spoke, the soundof approaching horses and wheels confirmed thefact ; in another second, they swept round anddrew up.Can this be Lady Elizabeth?" exclaimedEdith, rising from the table in some agitation,while Sir Reginald, shading his face with onehand, poured out several successive bumpers ofchampagne, and drank them off unnoticed in thegeneral confusion that prevailed.*Deed and it can be nobody else," cried MrsMacauley, who had hastened to the window;<^ there's the two ladies in a barouche, and awell loaded one too, and a gentleman — ^no, he'sonly a servant — behind ; and there's two verysmart-looking ladies' maids, I'm thinking, in theother carriage ; and oh what a sight of imperials,and trunks, and boxes ! if s a mercy Glenroy doesnot see them. But I declare I don't think if sLady Elizabeth, after all, or else she's grownyounger and handsomer than ever she was."Sir Reginald, will you go and receive LadyElizabeth ?" cried Edith i then struck with theDESTINY. 127change in his countenance, she exclaimed '^ Butyou are ill !"« No— no— nothing," he cried, starting up,his pale cheek and downcast eye suddenly flashingand sparkling with false fire, while thesweetest and most melodious of voices was nowheard in the hall, as if speaking to her dog, andpresently Lady Waldegrave was announced.Edith flew to the door to receive her, but shestarted in surprise at the beauty, the surpassingbeauty and brilliancy of the figure that met herview, and gracefully opened her arms to receiveher embrace.For some moments, Edith's emotion renderedher unconscious of every thing but that her oncefondly-loved Florinda was restored to her. But,at the same time, the remembrance of her lostbrother mingled with the tide of feeling, andrendered her unable to articulate the commonexpressions of welcome.<* You are very kind, dear Edith," said LadyWaldegrave, as she raised her head and shookback the beautiful ringlets which shaded herface. " I scarcely deserve to be so well receivesDESTINY.vet, considering how I have broken in uponyour family party. I am afraid I have disturbedyou."** O ! do not think of apologies at such atime' said Edith, again tenderly embracing her,and gazing with looks of fond admiration throughher tears. *^ Dearest Florinda ! how welcomeyou are to Glenroy !"^^ I assure you I cannot be more welcomethan I am delighted to return," replied LadyWaldegrave, within earnestness of manner whichleft no doubt of her sincerity.Edith did not immediately answer, for herattention wa^i attracted to Sir Reginald, whowas standing with his back to them, talking andlaughing strangely loud with the other lady,when Lady Waldegrave called to her, —<< Madame Latour, allow me to present you toMiss Malcolm." Then observing Edith's lookof surprise, she exclaimed, — " Ah ! did I forgetto mention Madame Latour to you ? She wasmy governess, and is now my friend — she is avery charming, accomplished person, and excelsin speaking broken English."DESTINY. 120Madame Latour, thus called upon, salutedEdith with all the ease and grace of her country,while Sir Reginald, for the first time recognizingLady Waldegrave, made a slight constrainedbow, and then turned abruptly away. Edith wasshocked at the rudeness of such a reception.Lady Waldegrave blushed, and said in a lowvoice, but sufficiently loud for him to overhear, —^^ I scarcely expected to find Sir ReginaldMalcolm at Glenroy."Such avowed marks of hostility at the veryoutset, and from persons of such high breedingand refinement, struck Edith with surprise andconsternation. She knew not what to reply, andin some confusion said, — " I — ^we— expected tosee Lady Elizabeth; and I hope nothing hasoccurred"■^^ O ! mamma will be here," said Lady Landgrave; ^^ but her carriage is heavier than mine,and I flatter myself," added she, with sweetness,^^ my impatience was also greater than even hers,to reach Glenroy and its loved ones," gentlypressing Edith's hand as she spoke. <^ But I a<Breally shocked at having deranged your littlef2130 DESTINY.party' as Mrs Macauley and Benbowie re-fliaixied in all the awkwardness of suspense, notlowing whether to sit or stand.^^ I daresay your ladyship will not rememberme' said Mrs Macauley, on coming forward.My dear Mrs Macauley," said Lady Landgrave,affectionately embracing her — " how canyou suppose I ever could forget you ? Indeed,** I never do forget those I love," she said, withmuch earnestness. ^^ And you used to be sokind to me when I was a little, naughty, mischievouscreature !"'Deed, then, my lady, and you was that,"replied the simple Macky ; ^^ but I'm sure oneneed only look at you to see that you are notthat now." 'Lady Waldegrave laughed, and there was melodyeven in her laugh. " Aid, Benbowie, Ihope I see you well ?" extending the tip of herfinger to him. " But where is Glenroy ?' lookinground, as she missed him for the first time.Edith explained that he was confined to his ownapartment with a fit of the gout.How sorry I am !" said Lady Waldegrave,DESTINY. 131in a tone beautifully modulated to pity ; then, inamoment, changing it to one of delight, sheexclaimed, " Come, dear Fido !" as Sir Reginald'sdog entered the room, and flew to herwith demonstrations of joy.How kindly Fido welcomes me," said she,as she fondled it. ^^ He has not forgot me— dearFido !'' she repeated, as she continued to load itwith caresses, unmindful of the jealousy testifiedby her own favourite.Sir Reginald made no reply, but, with aheightened colour, called the dog to himself, and,striking it, sternly bade it be quiet Edith wasstill more confounded by Reginald's behaviour ;that he who was so uniformly polite and well-bred,should behave with rudeness to any woman,but more especially to one so lovely and fascinating,was quite incomprehensible. His dog, too,of which he had hitherto evinced a care andtenderness that seemed almost ridiculous, to lifthis hand against it, for no other reason as it seemed,than because it had caressed Lady Landgrave!Surely this was carrying antipathy toits utmost bounds ! Rousing herself from these132 DESTINY*reflections, however, she said, ^^ I need scarcelyask if you have dined ; I can only apologize forthe uncomfortable meal I fear you will i^owhave."Were I to answer you myself, I should sayI had dined," replied Lady Waldegrave. " AsI really don't mind dinner so much as manypeople do, and we had some not very bad muttonchops at the last stage — only they did taste a littleof seats and whisky," she added, laughing. '' Butif you ask Madame Latour, she will tell you shehas not dined since she left London."Get dinner immediately ^for Lady — ^forMadame Latour," cried Sir Reginald, hastily, toa servant who happened to be in the room ; thencolouring at his own impetuosity, he turned toEdith and said, '' I beg pardon, Miss Malcolm,for presuming to anticipate your orders, — it istime Glenroy should resume his place, since I amalready usurping his authority."O no," said Edith, gently, " papa would bepleased to see you performing the duties of hisproxy, by showing hospitality (which, you know.DESTINY. 133is all we poor Highlanders have to show) to thosekind friends who have come so far to see us."I think I might be prevailed upon to eatsome of these Alpine strawberries' said LadyWaldegrave, as she seated herself at table. Aslight bend of the head was the only reply SirReginald vouchsafed as he helped the strawberries,without once looking towards his beautifulguest.Glenroy's bell had been sounding vehementlyat intervals for some time, and a message nowcame, desiring to see Sir Reginald, or Miss Malcolm,directly.Sir Reginald instantly started up as if glad ofthe summons, and merely saying to Edith, ^^ Iwill save you the trouble," hastily quitted theroom.*' Howextremement Saar Ragenall est change,"exclaimed Madame Latour, addressing ferment;ce ne que Sombre de lui-meme ! how he ispale et nome, what you call painseeve. MissMaulcomb, you most be sensible of an extraordinairechangement of Saar Ragenall ?'Edith's attention had been so engrossed byt% «•134 DESTINY.Florinda, that she had little to bestow uponMadame Latour ; but, thus called upon, she consideredher more attentively, and the impressionmade, was not of a pleasing kind. Madame Latour,though rather past her prime, was still ashowy, handsome brunette, with quick blackeyes, good white teeth, a well got up complexion,and an air of the most thorough self-possession.** Sir Reginald has not been very well of late,"said Edith, casting down her eyes to avoid the,piercing stare which accompanied the interrogation.Ah ! I am much unquiet for him," resumedMadame, with a shake of the head, ^^ he was sijoli, si charmant, vat you call pleasant — LadyWaldegrave, n'etes vous pas frappe — struck withde change ?"I have scarcely yet had time to observe SirReginald's looks," replied Lady Waldegrave,carelessly, ^^ but I thought you and he seemedvery merry together."O, we talk — nous rions — ^laaffe for one moment,mais done il est si maigre-vat you callsm." ^DESTINY, 136Meanwhile a repast from the debris of the dinnerhad been quickly got up at the other end ofthe room, and no sooner was it arranged thanMadame Latour started up with great alacrityand repaired to it. Lady Waldegrave declinedpartaking of it, saying, she preferred dining onthe dessert. Benbowie, whose appetite was ofa most hospitable nature, instinctively stalkedaway, and took his place by her, as if intendingto do the honours of the banquet, whichindeed he did, if devouring every thing withinhis reach was deemed an exemplary mark ofhospitality.^^ Cette grosse est excellente, excellente,"saidMadame Latour, after she had helped herself tothe back and breast of a moorfowl, leaving thelegs and pinions for Benbowie, who, like pantingTime, toiled after her in vain. She flewlike a butterfly or bee, from dish to dish, extractingthe very heart and soul from each as sheskimmed along, while at the same time she keptcalling for every species of sauce and condimentthat ever had been heard of, which she contrivedto mix with the most admirable dexterity.136 DESTINY.<^ Madame Latour est une peu gourmande'said Lady Waldegrave, addressing Edith, ^^ butotherwise she is the best creature in the world;80 perfectly good hearted, and so devoted to me.I am sure you will like her."Edith could not violate sincerity so far as tosay she thought she should, for she already feltwhat she rarely did, a strong prepossession againstthis " best creature in the world;" so she changedthe subject by making a sort of apology forReginald's protracted absence — " But papa is sofond of him," she said, " that he finds it verydifficult to get away from him." Then with anair of hesitation, she added, ^^ Sir Reginald andyou met abroad, I believe ?"Yes, we met occasionally," replied her ladyship,slightly colouring — " What very prettychina this is — Dresden, I am sure," examiningher plate with great attention ; " after all, thereis nothing so pretty as flowers upon china."Edith assented, and then timidly added, ^^ MadameLatour seems much struck with the changein Reginald's appearance ?"*^ He does look rather ^*^^e," said Lady Walden137grave, as she drew another plate towards her;*^ what a charming group — these carnations areperfect !"<^ The loss of my dear brother' said Edithwith emotion, ^^ has affected Reginald very deeply."<* Ah, true," replied Lady Waldegrave, puttingon a very soft melancholy look.^^ That, and the remains of malaria which hehad at Rome, will account to you for the presentdepressed state of his spirits''Oh, perfectly," said Lady Waldegraveibiting her lip as if to repress a smile which lurkedround her beautiful mouth, and shone in her largeblue eyes.Madame Latour's devotion meanwhile hadbeen dedicated exclusively to her dinner andhaving done due honour to it, she was now onher way to the dessert, when Lady Waldegraverose, saying, " Pray, dear Edith, let us go tothe drawing-room ; the smell of two dinners israther too much for those who have not partakenof either." Putting her arm within Edith's, shethengracefullysaunteredoutof the room, stopping138 DESTINY, ^occasionally to remark upon some of the pictureswhich she did in the style of one who was perfectmistress of the theory of painting. They weresoon followed by the rest of the party, with theexception of Sir Reginald.An air of languid discontent was now insensiblystealing over Lady Waldegrave, in spite ofMadame Latour's efforts to amuse by her brokenEnglish, when again the sound of wheels washeard. Presently a heavy-laden travelling coachdrew up, from the windows of which dogs' headswere seen protruding in all directions.*^ There comes mamma and her tiresome dogs !"exclaimed Lady Waldegrave, in a tone of chagrin.At that moment the hall resounded with thesharp shrill treble of three lap-dogs, which wasquickly accompanied by a deep running bassfrom the various dogs of the household, and thencaught up by the imprisoned yells of the moreremote inmates of the kennel, " in notes by distancemade more sweet."Ah, I am happy to see Reginald has goneto receive Lady Elizabeth," said Edith, as hisvoice was heard in the hall giving orders to theDESTINY. 139servants ; and then flying down the steps, he presentedhis arm to Lady Elizabeth, as she alighted,and appeared to welcome her with the semblanceof the greatest cordiality,How differently he met Lady Waldegrave !"thought Edith, then hastened forward to receiveher stepmother.140 DESTINY.CHAPTER XII.rLady Elizabeth was now a thin, weak, cross,old-looking woman, dressed in the extreme ofyouthfulness, with an unnatural profusion offlaxen ringlets dangling round withered, hollow,rouged cheeks. She but just touched Edith'shand, and laid her face to hers, then passed ontoher daughter, and putting her arms round her,kissed her with a sort of hysterical emphasis;then, in a peevish, querulous tone, exclaimed,You may thank heaven, child, you see mesafe and tolerably well ! What a frightful roadfor me to travel ! How could you leave me, myJove ? I have been excessively alarmed — thosedreadful precipices, and that shocking water !"Quite charming, mamma," said Lady Landgrave." It seemed as if Scott's beautiful descriptionof the Trosachs had started into life ;" andDESTINY. 141in a low tone, bnt with perfect modulation ofvoice and manner, she repeated some of thoseglowing lines.Nonsense, my dear," exclaimed Lady Elizabeth; " it is a frightful, a dangerous road, and itwas very improper of you, my love, to leave mycarriage so far behind."^^ I beg pardon, mamma ; but it did not appearto me there was the slightest danger," said herdaughter.My dear love, don't say so," cried her ladyship,impatiently ; " I never in my life travelledso dangerous a road. If I had had the slightestrecollection of it, I never should have attemptedit, even to gratify you, my sweetest — those tremendousrocks on one hand, and the lake on theother — shocking ! I had forgot it entirely, elseI certainly never should have dreamt of such athing as coming here."Don't you feel fatigued, mamma?' enquiredLady Waldegrave.Certainly, my love,' excessively fatigued,and my nerves shaken beyond expression ; andthose dear dogs ! Bijou was really quite ill. I'm1^ DESTINY.surprised Glenroy can suffer such a road — itought not to be permitted. If I had been travellingin the dark, or if my horses had takenfright-or a thousand things might have happened."^^ Don't you think mamma midst be muchfatigued, Dr Price ?" said Lady Waldegrave,turning to a sickly-looking, elderly man, in ablack wig, green stout, white trowsers, palehands, and a ring.<* Unquestionably," replied the doctor, in aslow, hesitating manner ; ^< her ladyship has beenmuch agitated, and consequently must be considerablyexhausted. If her ladyship is to dinenow, I would recommend half an hour's reposeafter dinner, either upon a couch or easy chairwhichever she gives the preference to ; or if thereis to be any delay in the preparing of her ladyship'srepast, then I would advise the rest, to betakenprevious to partaking of it.""'Edith took the hint, and ringing the bell,ordered a third dinner to be prepared as soon aspossible for her very considerate guests. Then,having procured some refreshments in the mean-destiny*143time, she offered to conduct Lady Elizabeth toher apartment. With a languid air she acceptedEdith's aim, but as she was leaving the roomturned round and called —Florinda, my darling, you must come too.— •And, Dr Price, you will give Rosalie her directionsabout the drops, and do see that the dogsget their dinners, for they are almost famishedpoor loves. — Do, Florinda, love, come with me.I assure you I have been excessively alarmed ; itis all your doing, my dear — that road was reallyquite frightful — I shall never forget my alarm."Here Lady Waldegrave swept her fingers overa harp which stood near, and thus contrived toevade the proposal.Lady Elizabeth, after another ineffectual attemptto attract her daughter's attention, sufferedEdith to lead her from the room; but it waswith difficulty she managed to shuffle along, inshoes evidently much too small for her feet.*' Lady Waldegrave is a charming creature,is she not?" said she, stopping in the middleof the hall, and leaning her whole weight onEdith.144 DESTINY.<< Oh, beautiful !" exclaimed Edith ; << I couldnot have imagined any thing so fiiuldess, and atthe same time so captivating."Ah ! very true — ^her manners are very good.J have bestowed great pains upon her ; she is,perhaps, if any thing — but it is scarcely perceptible— a single degree too much embonpoint ; atleast she may be, unless she is upon her guard.I was a perfect whipping-post at her age ; andeven now I don't think I am larger than she is.It is a great matter to preserve the figure ; nothingmakes people look so soon old, as allowingthemselves to grow fat, and get out of shape. Mo-linda'sfigure, to be sure, is perfection,— rather,if any thing, too tall perhaps ; she is taller thanI am, otherwise, as Monsieur Perpignan said,we might very well pass for twins prettythought, was it not ?'Edith could scarcely restrain a smile as shelooked at the old wrinkled scarecrow, who soughtto assimilate herself with her young and bloomingdaughter. ^Her ladyship went on — " She has been prodigiouslyadmired and rec/iercAe wherever we went;DESTINY. 145but I don't intend that she should marry yet, forin fact, Lady Waldegrave has nothing to gain Kymarriage — duke myself, she may lose, but she canscarcely better herself; it is very well for desJUlessans dots to be eager about a settlement, butwith my daughter's rank, beauty, fashion, andfortune, what is she to look for ? And if shewere to marry now, she would have a daughterat her heels while she herself was quite a youngwoman. I married a great deal too soon, andyou see the consequence ! I may be a grandmotherin the very prime of life ! Shocking andfoolish !"They had now reached the door of her ladyship'sapartment, and, upon entering the dressingroom, the floor was covered with imperials, wells,trunks, boxes, sacs de nuit and packages of everydescription, which her maid and footman werebusily employed in putting to rights.Do, Rosalie, contrive to get my thingsunpacked and arranged as quickly as possible,"cried Lady Elizabeth, impatiently, and lookinground the room ; " Pray ask the housekeeper toletme have a chaise longue, I rather prefer it to aVOL. II. G146 DESTINY.sofa ; and bring up my dog-baskets and cushions ;let me have a larger table, and have that commodecarried away. I shall not have room to turn abouthere." Then addressing her footman, " And,Rousseau, look to my guitar, and have it broughthere with my music books and porte-feuille ; Ibrought my guitar and Rossini's last opera, as Ithought it would amuse Glenroy to have a littlegood music ; but I am sorry to hear from SirReginald, that he is so unwell. I shall make apoint of Dr Price seeing him*; he is the bestcreature in the world ; dresses so well ; he is soskilful and gentlemanly, and is never out of theway. I have the most perfect confidence in him.It is very importunate for him, poor man, that hehas such wretched health himself. Had it beenotherwise indeed, he must have been devoted tothe public, and I should not have had the goodfortune to attach him to my establishment; andI am in hopes change of scene, and travelling,may do him good. — How very tedious you are,Rosalie — do get my things ready, that I maybegin to dress."I beg pardon," said Edith ; « but I thinkDESTINY. 147Dr Price recommended yom* taking a little restbefore dinner; and as we are quite a fBunilyparty, I hope you won add to your fatigue bydressing."*^ O, Dr Price does not at all understand thatsort of thing," replied her ladyship ; " he isexcellent in his way, but — I shall put on a blackgown to-day, Rosalie — Florida and I agreedto wear black at first, as a sort of proper c<«i^aliment, you know," glancing at Edith's deepmourning — " otherwise I never do wear black,it is so unpleasant, and puts such shoeingthoughts in one's head ; but we won't talkof it — it makes me quite ill to think of suchthings !" Then, as Rosalie announced that herladyship's toilette was ready, she gently pressedthe tip of Edith's fingers, and said, " Now, mydear, I shall join you in half an hour." AndEdith gladly availed herself of the hint to withdraw.Wearied and sickened at the frivolity,heartlessness, and egotism, already so filly developedin her stepmother's conversation, Edithbitterly repented having been accessory to bringingher to the house.148 Destiny<^ Reginald was right' thought she ; '< papawill never be able to bear this." And shetrembled to think of the shock that would ensuewhen two such antipodes came in contact.It was therefore with fear she returned intoher £aether's presence, whom she found alreadyiq>prised of the extent of the party, Benbowiehaving twice counted diem over to him on hisfingers, and thus demonstrated to him that therewas ah individual to each, thumbs included.Edith had, of course, to bear a storm of reproachind invective for having brought such a crew tothe house, interspersed with threats of turningthe Doctor and Frenchwoman, with their attendants,out of it ; and of not seeing the &ce ofone of them as long as they staid.DESTINT. 149CHAPTER XiiIn the drawing-room Edith found only LadyWaldegrave and her friend. The former wasreclining languidly on a sofa, and MadameLatour was seated oh a low stool by her, discoursingwith much energy in her native language.^^ Soyez sure qu'il est passionnement amoureux,"exclaimed she vehemently, as Edith entered; then, on perceiving her, she called, ^^ venezici. Mile. Malcomb — dites moi, croyez vous qu'ilsoit possible damer cette dame ? n'est elle pasaffireuse — ^wat you call ogle ?" And making agrimace, she put her hands before her eyes.Lady Waldegrave slightly blushed, and smiledas, half rising from her reclining attitude, sheextended her hand to Edith, and said, ^^ You have150 DESTINY.been sadly bored, I fear, dear Edith; but wemust not allow mamma to monopolize you thus."Here was something so sweet and fascinatingin Lady Waldegrave's every tone, and look, andmovement that Edith, won by the charm, seatedherself by her, and soon forgot her momentarydissatisfaction with Lady Elizabeth and MadameLatour.How vivid my remembrance is of^^ou," saidthe coaxingly to Edith; ^' and how like a dreamit seems, to find myself again here, where everythingawakens some childish recollection ; mostois them to my own shame, indeed, when I thinkwhat a little saucy chit I was. And by the by,how very unkind and ungrateful you must havethought me, in never having written to you.But, indeed, you cannot conceive how much Ihave been under the control of guardians andgovernesses for the last twelve years. — thankHeaven, I am now pretty much emancipatedfrom bondage; but, I do assure you, it is a verytiresome thing to be trained up to be a personOf consequence ; and I often thought with envyti the delightful liberty you enjoyed of ram-destiny.151being amongst your Highland hills and forestswith the boys, while I was condemned to lessonsfrom morning till night* My only relaxationwas a ,walk in the Park with my governessesor a Still more tiresome drive with mamma. Butyou have forgiven me, dearest Edith, have younot ?' and she put her arm roimd Edith's neck,and laid her head on her shoulder, and lookedin her face with the most winning expression.'^ I have nothing to forgive — I am sure I nevershall have any thing to forgive you," said Edith,with fond affection.Non, non, c'est un ange, un perfect ange!"exclaimed Madame Latour, putting her handkerchiefto her eyes. ^' Mais, Ladi Waldegrave,ne faites vous pas toilette ce soir ?*' enquired she,as she rose from the lowly seat, and glanced atherself in an opposite mirror.^^ No, I am too lazy; will you excuse me,Edith, if I remain en d^shabiUS ?"^' Ah, crest le privilege de la jeunesse et de la.beauty, de se passer d'omemens ; mais lorsqu'4>nest un peu passe, ma belle," — Madame sighedaffectedly. ^^ Ainsi je vais sonner pour ma152 Destiny.femme de chambre' And to Edith's great relief,Madame Latour retired to her toilette.Apropos of dress** said Lady Waldegrave,^^ I hope you admire cameos, Edith, because Ihave brought you some, and I shall be sorry ifyou don't happen to like them — I am very impatientto show them to you, so I shall send forthem now;" and, in spite of Edith's remonstrances,she rang the bell for her maid, and inafew minutes the box was brought, and an exquisiteset of cameos, of the most perfect designand execution, were presented to Edith, whosenative good taste enabled her at once to appreciatethe beauty and value of the gift.^^ How my heart overflows with affection andkind wishes !" said Lady Waldegrave. " I nowfeel so forcibly the truth of that beautiful sentimentof Madame de Steel's, ,^ II y a en nous unsuperflu dame, qu'il est doux de consacrer a cequi est beau, quand ce qui est bien, est accomplishthat I can flatter myself with having accomplishedthe good," added she, with a smile, '^ lebeau is so much more to my taste than k bien**If to give pleasure is to do good, you haveDestiny. ISdsucceeded in one instance," said Edith, as shecontinued admiring the various beauties of Motteclassic gems ; '^ but I am afraid there is too muchof le beau here, to admit of much of le Mm**Lady Waldegrave was silent for a few minutesthen, with a sigh, said, << Whether I shall evei^do good is doubtful, but it is certain that I hovealready been the cause of much mischief. I cannottell you how much I lament the unfortunatemisunderstanding that took place between Lad;^Elizabeth and Glenroy • It grieves me more thankI can express, to think that I should have beeii*the cause, the unintentional one indeed, bf theftsseparation!"<< Do not distress yourself on that account,dear Florinda," said Edith, tenderly, ^ for ili*deed Lady Elizabeth and papa seefii so different,I do not think they ever could davis livedhappily together*<^ You are very kind and considerate to sac]^so," replied Lady Waldegrave, pressing herhand, ^ but we cannot tell what habit might'«have done. I must therefore always look upon'g2Y54 DESTINY.«itf^Helf as ike cause of dus, I fear, irreparableYou blame yourself unjustly," said Edith,earnestly. ^^ Young as I was at die time, fromDirliat I remember, I should suppose you hadwittily been one of many causes of disagreement"^' "^ Perhaps so ; but still I feel as a guilty thing.di, how glad I should be if I could see themfairly reconciled P***.To tell you the truth, I have often, esse*daddy of late, felt the same wish," said Edith,^fji at slight degree of confusion; <^ lout now Ii^^^I fe — ^I do not think it will be practicable,iJii^y are so different."** Of thktyou'must be a better judge than I,"replied Lady Waldegrave, " as my impressionof Glenroy is probably very imperfect. I onlyremember him a very tall, fine-looking man, witha loud voice, and an authoritative manner, of'#h{ch I was a little afraid ; but perhaps circumstancesmay have softened these."Eighth shook her head. " Papa is very kindheartedand affectionate," said she, ^^ but he likesDESTINY. 155to have his own way, and Lady Elizabeth has,of course, been so long independent of control"Ah, true'* interrupted Lady Waldegrave;^^ Mamma is not easily managed, and she is excessivelyfond of what is called a gay life, andtherefore, I fear, we must be satisfied with amere temporary reconciliation, without attemptinga more solid union. It is unfortunate, forwhen I marry, mamma would be more respectableliving with her husband than she will beby herself; and when you marry, . which, ofcourse, you will also do— now don't blush, Edithlove — I am not going to talk of lovers ; I shall ,find out in good time whether you have anyaffaires du coBWy so pray don't make me yourconfidante — ^'tis the office in the world I havethe greatest dread of."Edith laughed and promised, and the conversationwas ended by the entrance of Sir Reginaldand Dr Price, looking like two peoplewhom chance, not choice, had thrown together.Sir Reginald drew near, as if about to addressLady Waldegrave, then stopped and turned tothe table where the cameos were, and taking156 DESTINY.up one of the bracelets, commended die beautyof it*They are indeed perfect," said Edith ; " eachcameo is a picture in itself, and I should havethought myself rich with any one of them ; butLady Waldegrave insists upon my acceptingthe whole set."Sir Reginald said nothing, but hastily putdown the bracelet, and, joining Dr Price at oneof the windows, immediately began to talk politicswith him. Edith coloured with shame atthis proof o[ her later's rudeness and dislike toLady Waldegrave. " And yet," she thought'< how is it possible to hate any thing so beautifuland captivating ? What can be the cause ofthis coldness which he seems to feel for everythingconnected with a creature so lovely andengaging ?"How did you like my picture, Edith ?' enquiredLady Waldegrave. <^ Should you haveknown me by it ?"Edith looked at her with die air of one whois at a loss to comprehend the meaning of aquestion.Your picture ?^' relied she ; " I never sawDESTINY. 137any picture of you, except the little daub doneby Mrs Macauley, which, bad as it is, has alwayshung iQ my dressing-room. You don't meanthat?"No — the picture I sent you from Florence.Whom did I send it by ?' as if trying to recollect;I certainly did send it — How provoking that Ishould not be able to tell by whom ! There werea number of English there; but perhaps SirReginald Malcolm might, if he chose, assist mymemory."Sir Reginald took no notice, but continuedtalking with much energy with Dr Price onthe affairs of Europe. Edith called to him —<^ Sir Reginald ! — Sir Reginald, I wish you outcomeand assist Lady Waldegrave and me in ourattempts to recover a picture she gave in chargeto some one at Florence for me, but which Ihave never received."<' Even if I guessed at die offender," said Sit'Reginald, in a low voice, " Lady Waldegravesurely would not have the cruelty to have hisname exposed to the indignation which his conductmerits."158 DESTINY.Reginald was behind Edith, who did not seehis ice as he spoke ; but he was opposite to LadyWaldegrave, who blushed deeply, while somethinglike a smile was upon her Up.*^ Is it Morinda or I, whose indignation youthink would be so excessive ?' asked Edith.^^ Both," he replied, as he turned quickly andrejoined Dr Price.<^ It must be from mere carelessness that ithas not been delivered'* said Lady Waldegrave;^^ but if it does not appear soon, you or I mustdraw up an advertisement for it, Edith. Seriously,it must be recovered, as a lock of myhair accompanied it, and it is not every one Ishould choose to be in possession of such things,valueless as they may be to the retainer."Sir Reginald and Dr Price were busily engagedlooking at an atlas; and the two friendscontinued to converse together, till Lady Elizabethmade, her appearance, dressed like fifteenfor a first ball.My dear Florinda !" she exclaimed, " whatdo I see ? not yet dressed ? How very uncomfortableit makes me to see any body in a morn-destiny.159ing gown in the evening — it is so very trying,an angel could not stand such a test. I doassure you, my dear, you look very ill."^^ Thank you, inamma,'' said Lady Landgrave,coolly ; and, taking up a footstool cover,with Mrs Macauley's needle still sticking in it,she began to work with an air of unconcern.^^ Too ridiculous !" cried Lady Elizabeth, witha shrug of her little bare shoulders ; ^^ you onlywant a brass thimble to make you quite complete.Lady Waldegrave. Why should youwish to look like a dowdy, my love ?' Then, inawhisper to Edith, ^^ She is a beautiful creature,to be sure ! what a profile I what a throat !what hands ! Madame d' Dumont used to say, sheshould have known her to be my daughter anywherefrom the hands alone — hands and feetyou know, are the great criterions of birth.Heavens, how she was admired at Paris I Sheis a little spoilt, perhaps, by the sensation shecaused."Here 'her ladyship's dinner was announced,and, as Edith rose to attend her, Lady Landgraveexclaimed, ^^ Poor dear Edith I this is really160 DESTINY.too much, to do the honours of three dinners inone day. How yoii must hate us all ! Cannotgood Mrs Macauley relieve you fix)m this duty ?I am sure mamma will excuse you."** Mrs Macauley and Benbowie are alwayswith papa in the evening"' said Edith; ^< bat,at any rate. Sir Reginald and I would wish towelcome Lady Elizabeth to Glenroy ourselves,and as you did not partake of the first dinner,perhaps you will join our party."No dinner ! My dear child," cried LadyElizabeth, " what do I hear ? How very foolish.How could Madame Latour suffer such a thing ?No wonder pott look pale-suite abattm. Comemy love, you shall dine with me: my dinner,you know, is a mere make-believe. Sir Reginald,you will take charge of Lady Waldegrave"—putting her own arm within Edith's. Sir Reginaldhastily recoiled at the proposal ; then quicklyrecovering himself, was advancing, when LadyWaldegmve said, with an air of coldness, « ikecase me, mamma — I have already dined, and Iprefer remaining here."But, my dear love, you will be alone —DESTINY. 161some one must stay with you. Not you," pressingEdith's arm. ^^ I have much to say to you.Perhaps Dr Price." But the doctor looked veryglum at the proposal ; and luckily at that momentMadame Latour appeared, which settled thepoint, and the party proceeded to the diningroom,leaving the two friends together. " Iwish particularly to talk to you, my dear," saidher ladyship, in a low voice, to Edith, as shewalked mincingly along. '^ There are manythings very interesting to both of us I have onmy mind at present. By the by, my dear, yourhair is not dressed quite dr-la-mode. It becomesyou very well, but still it is too simple for thepresent style — the simple is now quite exploded; and, indeed, I'm not sure that I like simplicity,though it does well enough now andthen, by way df a little variety. Florida forinstance, may simple now and then for a whimbut she may do any thing she chooses. You haveheard these pretty lines somebody made uponher?Tender or free, in smiles or sadness drest,The reigning humour ever suits her best.*»162 DESTINY.Then, as she seated herself at table, she repeated," Tender and free," &e. " Sir Reginald,do you remember who it was made theselines upon my daughter ?'« I beg pardon," said Sir Reginald ; " but Ibelieve the lines are to be found in Parthenopedelos."^ Excuse me, Sir Reginald," replied the lady,with an air of displeasure ; ^' but the lines weremade upon Lady Waldegrave, as any one mayperceive at once ; and, as Mr Benton very wellremarked to me, die ir^re a perfect picture ofher. Mr Benton repeats verses better thaiany body I know. — this soup is very good-ritis very good," — sending away her plate aftertaking two spoonfuls. *' I know you don't recommendsalmon to me, Dr Price, but that looksso particularly well, I will just taste it" Then,having taken a little of it, it was also sent off.Pray, send me a pat, Dr Price — ah, chickenpat, very well seasoned, though?' — puttingdown the knife and fork, after the first mouthful.** Yes, I will try ihefricandeaUi* and so on withgame, tarts, jellies, and dessert, in a mannerDESTINY. 163enough to have raised the ghost of Lycurgus orDr Gregory. No sooner had she finished than,(quickly rising, she. again linked herself to Edith*'^ Now, let us go to the library, or the saloon,or any where to be quiet, as I wish to havea little tete-astute with you, my dear. I haveso much to say to you; and, apropos, do youknow, I think Sir Reginald Malcolm excessivelydisagreeable ? How very rude, to contradict meabout these lines ! I know he is your cousin —but nobody minds cousins. To tell you thetruth, I never did like him — as a boy, you Iq^owyhe. was shocking ; he had very nearly killed mydaughter, as you may remember f he had beather in the most frightful manner; in hct, hadalmost actually strangled her. I certainly neverwould have forgiven it; and I did not approveof Florinda's having admitted him to her acquaintance.It began when she was absent fropime, with her aunt. Lady Escort, at Naples, elseI never would have permitted it."Lady Waldegrave and Sir Reginald do notappear to be very good friends yet," said £withinsome embarrassment*164 DESTINY.Why, no — I am not sure — she certainly wasadmired; and he, if rather handsome; don't youthink so ? But Horinda, though the sweetestcreature in the world, is a little capricious — thatbetween ourselves, though — ^and I blame MadameLatour entirely for whatever faults my daughtermay have. I don't quite like Madame Latour —she affects a style of dress which is absurd, andwears her petticoats so very short, to show herfoot — which, by the by — sis not well shaped*Such display is very bad taste, and quite defeatsthe object," glancing at herself in a. mirror withgreat complacency. " To tell you a secret, mydear — but this is quite in confidence — I halfsuspect her of a design upon Sir Reginald. Itis rather ridiculous, to be sure, for Madame Latouris by no means a young looking woman — ^inact, that is one great advantage we blondes haveover brunettes in general, we retain a youthfulappearance much longer. However, it is certainhe paid her great attention at Florence, and wasmuch more in my house than I thought eitherproper or agreeable."Reginald an admirer of Madame Latour \DESTINY. 165Edith could not believe her ears ; and yet withwhat vivacity he had met her ! How she sickenedat the thought — how degrading to Sir Reginald,to herself, to harbour it for a single moment !While these thoughts passed through her mind,Lady Elizabeth went on.^< Madame Latour is of a good emily, and sowas her husband — ^to be sure she is older thanSir Reginald ; but that is nothing-a few yearone way or other makes little difference, and hecertainly did admire her, and paid her greatattention; but, however, it may have been merelypour passer le temps**Could Reginald, her own betrothed, have condescendedto flirt, pour passer le temps with aMadame Latour? Oh, how Edith's pure anddevoted heart rose at the suggestion !<^ I should not be sorry to see Madame Latourwell disposed of," continued her ladyship ; " sheis rather de trop now ; indeed I had no intentionof keeping her so long, for in fact I merely engagedher for a year, as a sort of somethingbetween a governess and a companion for Florinda;you understand the sort of person. My166 DESTINY.own health was wretched at that time ; but uponthe whole she is objectionable — she talks somuch, and is so extremely gross in her eating,quite shocking, and dresses with so much pretension— ^and, in short, she is become so unpleasant,that I do assure you I shall not be sorry tolose her ; but of course this is all a secret, and I *don't wish to take any notice of it either to Florindaor Sir Reginald, just at present; but weshall see how they go on. Did you ever seeany thing so excessively rechercM as her style ofdress?"In this manner she continued to babble on forabout an hour, resisting all Edith's attempts toreturn to the drawing-room, from whence issuedthe most delightful sounds of music.Yes, Florinda does play and sing very well*'said she, in answer to Edith's remark ; << in fact,she would not have been my daughter had she notbeen possessed of all the requisites for a goodmusician ; but I think she has done enough now ;I don't approve of her singing too long at a time.Come, my dear, we shall return to the drawing-room.I have much to say to you, but we shallDESTINY. 167take another time, when we can have a littlequiet talk together."On entering the drawing-room, they foldLady Waldegrave seated at the harp, pouringforth the full tide of song in strains of perfectmelody. Her voice was rich, clear, and flexible,and she both played and sung with much tasteand execution.^^ Horinda possesses every personal requisitefor the harp," whispered Edith's tormentor, asshe still leant upon her, '^ quite a classic bust,the most perfect hands and arms, and the prettiestfoot in the world. How shocking to seewomen pawing the harp with great, illnshapedhands, or awkwardly showing their long waistsand clumsy feet ! Such things ought not to bepermitted; I have been obliged to leave offplaying the harp since my health became delicate,it requires more muscular exertion thanDr Price thinks good for me ; but you shall hearme on the guitar."Edith's attention was directed to Re^ald^who sat apart at a table, with an open book spreadbefore him, his head resting on his hand, which4^ jpfarinY.|j^e4 hi$,^yts. Madame JMom.^mtky; Urn^9rkiiig a purs^^wlidch was . every iioViWcyiben^pq^^ndfidf while she ii^d up her haiasd^^Ag^wlip her eyes, and sighed in ecstasy at paitiaiiitr^||EkpN»ige9 in the song. Dr Price was ceaid&ig'thenewspapers. Mrs Maeauley was sittingv4ntihih^ hands on her lap, lining to what sbe^did^pt understand. . i^*^Scarcely was the song ended, when Lady !lambethexclaimed impatiently, ^^ Now, mydear-lpt,.you have done quite enough for to-^dghlH^^4liu8t not suffer you t6 oyer-exert yo«d:s^£^^wiUi.reli^ve you now. — Dr Price, pray ring ebb^bflUior my guitar." >/ '^^i.V ^PU forget how late it is, mamma," saidJwr4^i|ght^,,.with an air of chagrin, ^ and thiil>«ve|tj|Pje.all Beginning to get tired, even of muacf''i^.^i^f. Nonsense, my love, tis not at all laterii«m^fy)ig^\ie is quite gone off. I feels if I ^vlll^^en lee ^ turn in a waltz," looking ,4owiuids1^ reginald, who now fixed his eyes al^eotiveljr^^n Im bowl ^^ Of course you walsh, Miss^^N|^-f^m ? copie let us take a jK)und t(^tlb[erj>. .^'^ Your ladyship must excuse me ; my spiritsinstit* larenot equal to danomg/' said Edidi; and Iteyes filled with tears as she though ^ Hug ufthe boasted sympathy I was led to expect in oursorrow I''^ 'Deed, and I think it would not be decentto be dancing," said Mm Macauley, in a lowvoice to Madame Latour, <^ considering the mis-»fortunes of the emily, and Glenroy himself laidup in hk bed, honest man !''^ Reginald saw that Edith was hurt QuittingMadame Latour, he hastily advanced to*wardsrher, and taking her hand, drew it withinhis arm, while he led her to an open windowsYou are ill — fatigued, I fear, dear Edith'said he, in a tone of compassion. At that momentLady Waldegrave rose, and called to hers^* Excuse me. Miss Malcolm, but I must wishyou good night ;'' she was then retiring, attendedby her friend, when Lady Elizabeth, folding herin her arms, kissed her forehead, *^ Good nightymy sweetest, you do look abattue; but a in the evening is too trying f<Mr an-angel— good night, my charmer ; and hereVOL. II. H170 jmgtnrr.yi>u have seen Morinda to her apartmei^'iuuiwe shall hare a lite soft music before supper'Sir Reginald opened the door for the iadieferto withdraw and as Lady Waldegrare passed,he made her a profound bow, which she noticedwith a dight and constrained bend of the head*Madame Latour whispered a few words to himin Italian then laughed gaily, and the door wasdosed. ^ Quelle grdoe dans son salut ! vat youcaH bow," said she, addressing Lady Wade*grave ; then turning to Edith, <^ Ah, Meess Mal-^comb, Votre iriie ^t charmant I il a fait tournerla tete fi toutes les femmes d'ltalie/'<^ 1% Reginald is not my brother," said Edith,with a blush•* Saar Reginaal n'est pas votre fr^e,^ yourbroder?' exclaimed Madame, in well-feignedastonishment; << Vraiment je e'en ai pas doug,veii I do see ses aimables petites attentions pourmous ; — mais que je suis ^tourdie ! I do rememberdat he talk of sometime his bonne petite cou^jue Ecossaise."DSai'I2l¥. .171iEdith's ebeekg glowed, and her heart rose ntthis insolence.^^'Que je suis bete to meestak," continuedMadame, as if in despair ; ^^ you me pardonnerez,ma chere Meess Maleomb ?"^^ Edith, I am sure, looks too good to resentany thing," saicj Lady Waldegrave, suddenlyrestored to good spirits, ^^ much less so harmlessa meestak," laughing, as she mimicked Madame'spronunciation; ^^ but your patience isheavily taxed, dear Edith-mamma has such aninveterate habit of sitting up half the night, thatit is quite distressing to think of your having tokeep her company."^^ How estrangement Ladi Elizabeth injureher stomach by so frequent eating," said MadameLatour, in a tone of virtuous indignation ;'^ et il est si malian de souper ! vat you callhealthy; den she will expose ses pauvres soldiers,ses paul's, and they die of de rheumatism."Edith embraced Lady Waldegrave, and,coldly saluting Madame Latour, returned to thedrawing-room, where she had to sit for an hour172 DESTINY.listening to insipid madrigals and rondos, afterwhich her ladyship, having peeked like a sparrowat every thing that was at table, at lengthretired, and the house pf Glenroy was oncemore at rest.> ■ ■■ ' •,Destiny, 173CHAPTER XIV.When Lady Waldegrave appeared at breakfastthe following morning, she looked still morebeautiful than she had done the preceding evening.Madame Latour was as usual by her side,but Lady Elizabeth never was visible in themorning. Dr Price was also there, as silent andsickly-looking as usual. Edith had planned alittle excursion by land and water, to show someof the beauties of Glenroy to her guests, and she.intended that Reginald should take the management; but her surprise and disappointment weregreat, when she learnt that he had set off earlyin the morning to shoot. Here was a fresh actof incivility and unkindness, and Edith vainlytried to falter out some excuse for him to LadyWaldegrave, who heard her in silence, while an174 DESTINY.air of languid dissection gradually stole overher lovely features.^^ Ah, le pauvre Saar Reginaal !'' exclaimedMadame Latour, in a tone of deep commiserationand heaving a sigh.<^ If you please, Madame, what do you meanby that?" enquired Mrs Macaidey, with herusual blunt simplicity.** Ah, que je le plains !" continued MadameLatour, as if not hearing Mrs Macauley.The cough did die trot of Amailye were nowIkeard resounding in the stillness of the wanttunny mmdnsj and presently i^ was descried^ *. id :.* j.«d » k„ ■»*.Im another second, the loud broad tones t)f MrM^Dow were heard interrogating the servant,and next entered the gentleman himi^M', hissoe *^ round as my Cither's shield'' every linesid lineament ixig with tidimiph and exultation,standing out in bold alto relievo. The customarysalutations were scarcely 4)veF, before it wasobvious that Mr M^Dow's exclamation wouldn^ be that oi lancet — -^ Let me not burst inignorance," but rather that of his father's ghost,Destiny* 175^ I could » tale unfold' It iras also evidentthat the secret with which he iras burdened ^^was of an agreeable nature as not all therespect with which he strove to address LadyWaldegrare, could master the inveterate hodiehoch, ho, which burst forth even on his intro*ductioii. Seating himself at table, he fiiced hiteyes on her with a stare of astonishment; andwhile he stuffed one side of his mouth to ittutmost extent, he discoursed at large with dieother, and accordingly began, ^^ Its most amazingto se how young people shoot up ! It seemsno time since your ladyship was a little faut-hairedmissed in a frock, with a doll in your arms, andnow you are quite a fiiU-grown lady ! If s reallywonderful to see the changes a few years briiig'to pass !"'^ I cannot apply that observation to you, MrM'Dow," said Lady Waldegrave, with a smile;'^ for, as far as my imperfect recollection servesme, you have undergone very little change during,those years*'Mr M^Dow bowed after his manner, then,with a hoch, body, ho, replied, ^ That's ptre"^» "!ht^*!.—-*^; . ' ^ ' •- •-■-^ i'i-win^>^cd, dies, jmd I drink ao too," aM MmMacaulay, filii her usual «mplictt]r;^if ip<|tt)Ina 41 ijirifei you ^FiMiId maybe like to slay %idreatjwme. But better late thanneFer. i^kn^lrUijidLbiit "viiat you'll get a wife yet, Mr M^DawJ^'^Qeid y<m ere any ^ioabts <ji that, Mis?MMtifley ?" sed Mr M^Dow, in a tone offiqaei ^fM was not aware that tsver I. had pn»«ofesM^Hbaoy."ojKW^ ^i^B) I declare from your &ce I tbodBiyfjfiijT^gcmgt^ get a wife now, Mr M^I>DWf yoi^Iffiki^ ««>0(Be and canty," said Mrs Mackay; v^7^5 0| you're a witch, Mrs Macauley 1 tj«si«i^uritc^'' repeated Mr M^Dow, with one »af ^iiis.ei^^beiattt roars. ^^ If you had listed a hmiditddOyears iso, you would have stood a fide ofaanoe ^bfrngbiumt!" . ;j:.,vi£^^ Q, as sure as death, then, that's just owingthat you are going to be married, Mr M^Do^^'e^daimed Mi Macaulay, in that aeeent o#|by*I ■ - •■MiAiipdse wkh^ dhmys attend tike^^KdcM^^of Hi wmnhge: ^ And wa it ifot ctev^t ti mat& fealift^mt? 'deed I think it was* 1 di0dlin|iI'm glad of it, for I think it will be a great kmpr^reiiMsit to yon, if she is a sensible, unprincipledwoman, which I hope she iflk^ ^^ •■-^^:^ Wdl, here's no keeping any thiagf kidyon ladies — yon really are most amazingly aMlet^at the saine time I'm not sensible of having oettMmisled myself in any shape — ^hoch, hoc, h6 P*<^ Ah, comme il fait chand T' exclaimed Midamn Latour ; *^ le pauvre Saar Regal !** i '^<^ By the bye, I was missing a certlsdn g^eiitfe^^mans " said Mr M^Dow^ with a significant gentedirected towards Edith ; ^^ but I hope he's notlaK:be iaag absent, as I'm anxious to come misunderstandingwith him regarding certain arrangementsthat shall be nameles8,-^^-a8 W^'^both bound for the same port, we must take ciff6-not to Tun foul of each other. He's had the.advantage of me at the starting ; but I isusptf0l^rii make the harbour before him — hoch, hddh,hO^gfoU ^^«^-meti^ph^iieal florida' iras of «6*b^-h2MDVSTIKT.iSfr^k and Hebrew to the whole party exceptEth and Mrs Macaiiley. The former colourira' and was silent; but the latter exclaimed,**^WelI, that's right of you, Mr M'Dow, justt6 teO the truth, and not to think shame aboutit; ' "What for should not people tell when theyai going to be married t and marriage such 'anhonourable state ! As sure as any thing, Pmile glad you're going to be settled at last.—i^enbowie, are not you happy that Mr M'Dow^sgoing to be married 7*"^^* Surely, surely** said Benbowie ; *has sheamy money r^ ^^y, as to that," said Mr M*Dow, with anair of great dignity, and conscious elevation ofabel, « I have never made fortune my principalobject ; I consider it beneath a man of honourand integrity to lay himself out for money; atthejsame time, I would not quarrel with it if itcame in my way — ^and upon this occasion, thelady's fortune is shootable; indeed, I may say,pretty handsome**Edith tried to utter some complimentary wordson the occasion, but found it very difficult toxncernrr. 179combine compliments with fiincentjr. Luckily.Mrs Macauley covered all deficiencies : <^ Andwhat may be the name of the lady, Mr M^DoW>if it 18 not a secretes^< Why, if it is, it will not be long one," returnedMr M^Dow, still very consequential<< indeed I strongly suspect the report had reached the country before myself, or I doubt if evenmy good friend Mrs Macauley, with all her witand shrewdness, would have taken me up fmdeeply* It's amazing how a report of that kindspreads ! It was for that reason I wished to loseno time in communicating the event myself U^my excellent friend and patron, for I onlyreturned home last night ; but before this timaitomorrow, I have no doubt it will be over thewhole country The lady's name is Miss Copeline Muckle of Glasgow."<' Well, I think it's a very honest-like n2|me,"said Mrs Macaidey. ^^ I had once a sister theycalled Colin, but she died, poor thing, of StAnthony's fire ; and Mr Macauley had a qousiift.that was married a second marriage to a MrMuckleho^ a very decent man. I wonder if1^ »¥»;^wnrfMjJ^bd^^J^i^ lie was H?.T^-rrf^, < j.«t^|,^;e. very, same r interrupted Mr WJ^ow*^.^j^^OJUe Muddehoee, of Portneuk, mi!|^ th^>;%Pfl^^>i (hy Diis first wife,) of the lady in qu^«;^^ttt9 at the time of. their fawkes deotil^'^^y l^^jped tixehode^ thinking theothfr a«]iiaref^^8|)]|ipiuible name, which, perhaps it isu^ TheBailie was a most highly respectable man, ^wdbl^fjtt^ daughters in good circumstances." \'. |^^VWell,i8 it sot curious to think that you and?^^^M^DosT, who have been. &o hong at^quaintr^^^f going" to be connected together by mai^rrilQj}(i^ Jinwihin^ are brought about ! And Iml^fi^^ Mudklehose once, when I wa ^in; GJasr^SpWj, about five-and-thirty years ago. Ih vvm1^ honest-like, weel fared inn, with it final,rosy colour. He ^as a''-^ — .^^^f*.Perhaps you may be-able to trace a familyinterrupted Mr M^Dqw» plnngixig^h^ Jiand .into one of his huge pockets, and draw,i^iorthr— not a decreet, or retaining fttiitimHiasjl^;da^ pf yore-^^but a small, o^ jead^apKi-.jizttisiti^ fft*"i*!*r^0i6M cade, trench, upoii* being opened,the full-blown chants of Miss Colin Muckle. ''^'liaOft no great judge of* painting, myself*'said t^ exulting lover, as he handed it rotund ;«*tit it strikes me as being niost beautifypiiiiited^^^eAtremely high finished. I can't iiI think the likeness altogether so available asit might have been. It Us painted by a vc^''^'y^iiSDig tum, who has just set up*' ' ' *'^It is unnecessary to be so minute as the a^dlii^was in depicting the charms of the original.Suffice it therefore to say, there was the liktiarbad drawing and distortion; — ^there was il lar^^^awry and vermillion cheek, and a dealer btii^irumber cm — a nose all on one side— roiind ^HL^^eye of different sizes — a simpering mdutli-^^range <rf hair-dresser curls sitting on' ehd-^wooded arm — a white gown— « yellow siMt-^blue cloud — and a coral necklace. ' ' '' 'jew and fount were the remarks passed uponMiss Muckle, as she made the round of the Uhl^fbu luckily Mr M^Dow's perceptions' were'lt^'obtuse^tOt enable him to feel any omissions. '^^t^hsidy of nurses to tetmn the compliment i&'ki&d,^f^ but I: doubt the painter did not sacoei^ ^ffitfSi911., well with me In fatal the clerical dress innot the most becoming in my opinion, for a xna,nIp.nit in; the gown and bands are rather stiff and)^Ty» and not so fashionable-looking as, oneepnld wish* However the lady was pl^sed^ind that waa enough''** propos of pictures," said Edith, to ladyWaldegrave, wishing to turn the conversation£t)m the loves of Mr M*Dow, " have you notget been able to recollect by whom you sentfor picture to ]me ?',X<ady Waldegrave coloured, and in slight con*fvudon answered, ^^ Yes — 'no-r*-not to a certainty.But I think I shall recover jt yet ; and if not''ale added, with mock gravity, <^ the loss will notbe irreparable* It is one^which, I daresay, MrsMacauley will be kind enough to replace. Won'tyou paint my picture again, dear Mrs Macauley ?'« 'Deed and I will that," cried Mrs Macauley,in a transport of delight. ^^ I have painted MissEdith's already, which I will show to you afterbreakfast; and I've been wanting Sir Reginaldto sit too for his picture; and then when I'vecette your Myslup, Tm sore I way be ^Bproud, for Fll Jive painted the three greaterbeatified that ever were seen !"^ Sir Reginald should make a weU-look^picture," said Mr M^Dow ; ^^ that* s still a goodUkenesB of him'' pointing to a picture of him' asaboy, that hung opposite, << though there's ttbCjust so much of the pickle in him now as therewas then ; he was really a wild little dog in theredays, as your ladyship may remember. Ydtiknow what a work he had with you at the firststhere was nothing like you; poor Miss Edithwas thought nothing of; you were his sweetheartsaid his wife, and I don't know all what, and Iwa to promise to marry him to you in my kirlr,whenever his papa came home ; then you analhe cast out about something or another, and Iremember him coming to me one day that Ichanced to be dining here, in a perfect passion.** * Mr M^Dow,' says he, • you're never tomarry me to Florinda ; I shall never speak toher as long as I live.'< O, but,' says I, * Mr Reginald, how canlfi> IMHPriKi;-'dHU h^iwktmymilaare proaiiaed to vmttf Wait'^'^'^ Mo malton for trait,' wars he, ^ Vmjkttiebtb{HdtM, Ftt never fiMtfrf lier as loi as I lire kmkiiVM"^ waaay Edith, and'^nobody else.' ^ j .tiM^.4 But if you're to change your miiid dniif,' says I, ^ I don't think I can rental to■■Iffy yon to any body i^iir#(i< O, you may depend upon it, Mr M^Dm^^'^Itt 'Never diane any more, for Edith -s verypaMyv ^ttid she does whatever I bid her.' K"^^ Most cafntalimd unanswerable reasons Ibr^claiming a wife says I, < and I've nothing monr^toTWy, only you must take care that you're alfijwft^Ae auld lore before ye tak on wi' the newv^>-Plan t' ver, dee's been no more changing and-italwell that ends well — ^hoch, hoch, hoof' v ^'With an exclamation at the heat of ti^eroqitt^tiiMiy Waldegrave abruptly rose, and takifiigAMadame Latour ann passed into the adjdiiiingi)apairtttmit. *-"^^>< I hope I have not said any thing that *li#r^lad^rdap or you could take amiss wUipei^ ^- ■ • ' :<;. }It /fMr^M^Dov^ fiuig Us gi^^^ goggVmg ejm mmjEdith, as she was also rising. << Jt tray 9ik<Mi,jokfrrtegether, jmd amongst £rieiid% i^ cbvntfthoK^V BO secrete is these tbiogs. But IGmgsMalcohn,'' in a still lower and more nrjFaterbwi IIsmff ^ I'm really disappointed at aot findingSic Reginald, especially as it seems my woitkjrs.friend Glenroy is not able to se me at presenteeforbids ebange that's going to take place in myowt situation, I'm afraid may inoonTemenQriSir Reginald and you. — I beg your pardflHtj.MttB«-Malcolm, but I'll not detain you a lno«mma^' JMowmg her and laying > a gri^^MMB^ufkip.her ann; ^^ but I find I must be at tbe^.j0Sffme the greater part of this week, and I als#^widi^ if possible, to preach on Sunday, thoughthere's a certain awkwardness in appearing. iil^fthaipidpit too, at such a time. And on MondayI j^d£xed to . return ' to Glasgow, to be at AaIdiiQMual.of my lady fsdr, who has not poutice^/ifixed the day ; but I'm in great hopes it villains.b^tiwe^n^ ani ^e 27tb, after which We must ^ofctmfwtimke a marriage jaunt, and wheen I ^staftn^*I shall be ready ix do to others as has been doneto injmelf— ^KiM^y hoch, Ium^Ii^ ho— At Ae $aneime, rather than disappoint Sir RegiQ«I4r I'^fooldt if possible endeavour to arrange xny owniiffiors, 80 as to be at whig service when required.I'm really disappointed at not seems hini5i£QBr|Ve so much to do preparing matter at. themanse, that if s not in my power to spend theday here, and I doubt if it will be possible forme,to ride over again befwe I go. I've a mason,a Wright, two pointers, a slater, and a sempstressall hard at work at present, besides havingsol my own. papers and books to shift out of theimrj^iBlf^lWj^^ however Itake you bound. Miss Malcolm, that you're notto steal a march upon me in my absence — ^hoch,hoch, ho rEdith would have promised much more to getrid of Mr M^Dow, and giving a hurried affirmative,she disengaged herself from him. Andafter going a little farther into the depths of theMuddy family with Mrs Macauley, he oncemore betook himself to Amailye, and trottedaway to superintend the adorning of the manse*Edith found Lady Waldegrav^ seated at an1)]^ widow, while the zealous Madame tstoxaWitt gettdy bedewing her with eau de Cologne*** Ah, et rihtin Monsieur Maketh !" explain*^ i^he, turning to Edith on her entrance, ^ h^talk so bosch, et sa voix est assommantd ! Cettechere Miladi a les nerfs si delicate, he has madlyher vat you call seek P'Florinda gave a languid smile, while she sais"The truth is, I have a headach this morning —iikt breakfast-room felt oppressively hot, and MrM*Dow is certainly very shocking. All thesecauses combined have made me very useless, $sonot to bore you with my megrims, I shale confinemyself to my dressing-room for th rest ofthe mornings' rising as she spoke*Edith in vain assured her the sight of hernever could be otherwise than pleasing, and begged,at least, that she might be allowed to attendupon her. It was evident that when LadyWaldegrave spoke of studying others, she meantonly to please herself and her pleasure was tdshut herself up in her own apartment, whereEdith left her reclining on a couch, with a tablebef^e her, covered with flowers, poetry, and1198 jjfestlirY.FmuxA novels, her lap-dog in her ariiis, '^dMiiflam^ Latour ever and anti ton^latig Hietblii|dei^ with ten de Cologne, time a softbr^^^fiNEHh the lake stirred now and then the* beautifulrfb^lets "iirhieh she had allowed to fall in ^beftfidte6rder about herfeee. ' '^sit was impossible that Edith should not de^p-ly^'feel the Strange capricious conduct oflifei*gtt^ts, and be also aware that a scene was iW-ti^)rifig on around her, the leaning of which ^hf^d^d not fathom. There was, on the one hatid^'j^^inald's coldness, Ind even dislike to likSj^Wlild^grave — his unwillingness to receive th^iti^8tt<5Ienroy— his anxiety to hurry on his raaitij^^bf^te their arrival — his rudely absenting himi^^ffi them. On the other, there was U VfeitfQfS^ed under circumstances certainly very ji^cii-Ite land a long journey undertaken for a pti^bs4iHiich seemed to hold no place in the mrindlsi^bfditfcier mother or daughter. The latter hed in-'idea declared her aim to be that of efibbiM^a reconciliation between Lady Elizabeth 'idaGlenroy ; but why, while she tlmslaid open herown mind to Edith, had she avoided all conti*d^^^ce i^ ye turn ? W^$ it— could it be possibletbs^jt Begins hed formed an attachment to JM[|9^di^jpae Xatpur^ ,or lie to bien — ^and that Florii^'aireal object was to accomplish a marriage betwefpo^Sir Ronald and. her favourite ? Edith's prideand delicacy alike revolted at such a supposition)roy she could not think so meanly of eitherhimself or him. The alienation between SirIl^nald and Florinda seemed mutual, and bothc^A, could she be desirous of bringing about fkupipn between two people — the one the olg^^o£ her dislike, the other the friend, it appeared0^^^^ :warmest affections ? — In vain Edith ^0199tQ navel the strange heap of contradiction illYi^iphshe felt her thoughts entangled. Never)ysfa^ one less fitted by nature and. by educatjLoifito thread the dark intricacies of the human h^aFjtr:life p^ of love and duty had ever been plaj^fjbefore her — she had trod it herself in sihgleqeii^of he^xt,. and she dreamt not (even when Ap,ilf^k^her love's dubious steps,) of the ti^e^u^tjeroiu quicksands that lay beneath* , , ^19Q ;>^£0TINX.iif M,CHAPTER XV.But it was not in the present state of tibieifiEonily that Edith could long indulge in vagusreflections. She was soon summoned to attached£aether in his study (so called), a room adjoinsu>g hia die»8ing.room, into which he had causedhimself to be wheeled in his gouty chair. X^,her surprise, she found he had discarded his dressking-gown and night-cap, and all the insignia ofthe gout, excepting the fleecy stockings^nd dothshoe. His countenance and manner were morethan usually calm and benign, and altogether thechange was no less agreeable than unexpected.^^ I am in hopes I've got the better of thvenemy at last," said he, pointing to his feet ; ^^ thepain's almost entirely gone to-day ; and I've beenthinking, that since that poor thing has takenthe trouble to come so far to see me, it would]>EdTlMT, 191be just as well to let her come here at once, andhave it over, and then she can go when she likelyyou know; but if I'm laid up again, she maythink herself obliged to wait, and there's noknowing when we may get rid of them ; and so,I think, Edith, the best thing will be for youjust to bring them in here — you can tell themthat Ftc still a touch of the gout. And, Edith,gh^ me that cloak to lay on my legs, these stockings make them look like posts-staya little, don't be in such a hurry. I wishfrom my soul it was over, — what the plaguebrought them here, and a doctor too ? Remember,I'm for none of their doctors — I'm neitherfor doctors nor ministers. And so M^Dow'i)going to get a wife ? — she must have a fine taste !IlieyougfatbiHlitobesenttothetreadmilL Andhot^s that old goose Molly Macauley behavingherself — and so on, till he had landed in dieDhu Moss, and the Skirridale woods, ReginaldNorman, and the black pony.Aware that Lady Elizabeth would ndt understand,much less ^^ minister to a mind diseased,*^her own being nearly in the same states Edith eras193 DESTINY.desirous, if possible, to prevent a meeting richtike was sure could produce nothing but irritationon both sides. She, therefore, Sought to turn hismind from the subject altogether, or, at least, toprevail upon him to postpone the interview tillnear the time of their departure ; but, with all theobstinacy and perverseness of imbecility. Glen*roy^s wishes strengthened, and his impatienceincreased, under opposition even in the mildestform, and Edith was obliged to yield the point,and depart on her embassy:On craving an-audience, she was admitted toLady Elizabeth's dre«nng-room, where she foundher ladyship in her robe de chambre, holcBi^ dlevieaSDr Price, Rousseau, and RosaMe, and leeanother Julius Caesar, dictating to all at once.Dr Price finds me pretty well this*mom-ing," said she, squeezing the tip of Edith's fingerson her entrance ; << and I have just beengiving him directions as to the sort of draughtI should like to have tory ; 'tis of great con-^^sequence to have these sort of things suited totoe's taste and constitution. By the by, per-vhaps Glenroy would like to have one of.DrDESTINY. 193Price's draughts, they are really very pleasant,something like lemonade, but not quite thatneither. — Dr Price, you will be so good as mixup a draught exactly the same as mine, andtake it to Glenroy, with my love. I am surehe will be pleased with this little mark of attentionfrom me." 'Edith trembled at the very thoughts of suchan embassy, and almost fancied she beheld theChief's crutch uplifted to smite Dr Price andhis potion to the ground ; in great trepidation,she therefore entreated that the kind intentionmight be at least postponed, and then deliveredthe message with which she had been chained,though in rather softer terms than she had receivedit.Having come expressly, as was supposed forthe purpose of seeing her husband, it was naturallyto be concluded, that her ladyship's mindwould be quite prepared* for the interview; insteadof which she fell into a childish flutter atthe first mention of it.<^ You have taken me quite by surprise, mydear ; I really feel quite overcome ; any sort ofVOL. II. I194 DESTINY.agitation is so dangerous for me in the presentstate of my nenres-rosalie, fetch Dr Pricebade immediately; you shall hear what he says;I am entirely guided by him. Rousseau, leavethe guitar for the present, take my music, andlock out — how my heart beats ! I do assure you,my dear, it will be a prodigious exertion for meto meet Glenroy, poor man, at present !"Edith was so utterly void of affectation herselfthat she could not comprehend its effectsiq>on others, and she therefore gave her ladyshipcredit for the reality of her tremors ; she beggedshe would take her own time, was sure her papawould wish to do what was most agreeable toher, and so on, till the return of Dr Price.The Doctor was a stupid, inoffensive man,who, for two hundred a-year, a luxurious home,and his travelling expenses, was contented totrot between his own room and Lady Elizabeth'sabout twenty times a-day, to compound littleharmless draughts and powders for her, and tohave his advice constantly asked, and nevertaken.The result of the consultation however wayDESTINY. 195that her ladyship heroically resolved to go through(as she termed it) with the part she had to perform.Dr Price was again dismissed, and Edididesired to wait until she should be dressed.Rosalie was then summoned, and Lady Eliaae^beth, in spite of her tremors, betaking herself tothe labours of the toilet, was soon so completelyengrossed by them, that the dreaded interviewseemed almost forgotten.*^ I always disliked black," said sbe, addressingEdith ; ^^ there's something so sombre about it,one never looks dressed ; otherwise I'm not snr^that it is actually unbecoming to me. It settoff a fair skin, but then it obliges one to use ksoupfon more rouge than I like. Apropos mfdear, one comfort is, that black sat shoes arethe most becoming things possible far tike feHall men think so. These are ma by Melf^note, and I think are perfects added lie, whileher maic^ with great exertion, was f<»reing diemon, ^ and fit rae admirably. Florin had gotmy foot. A model of it was taken for the Gatvery at Florence — In fact. Princess Pauline wasquite jealous of it. — My large gold ear-rings196 DESTINY.and bracelets, Rosalie — and — what shall I puton ney head ? a cap looks so particularly dowdyin black. My purple bat and feathers — Purple,my dear, you know, is a sort of mourning-^There, I think, that looks very well— the feathersthe least in the world more to the left side,and a ringlet or two pulled a little more dow.Now*' contemplating herself from head to footin 'the mirror, and jerking her head and shouldders, " my gloves and shawl, Rosalie. TJbwcomes the true test of taste," turning to Edith —** In feet, nobody that has not been abroad chput on a shawl." And at length, equipped likeone of the eUgarites in ** Les Modes de Parisber ladyship set forth leaning on Edith ; thensuddenly stopping, she exclaimed, ^' But I musthave my dogs, and I am sure Glenroy will bedelighted with them — Bijou is smh a love !"Here Edith was obliged to interpose, and,aware of her father's abhorrence of lap-dogs, withmuch difficulty succeeded in prevailing on herladyship to dispense with their attendance forthe presentDESTINY. 197On arriving at the door of the study there wasanother demur.<^ I hope it is not necessary that I should saymuch to Glenroy of the death of your poorbrother, my dear. Such a subject would quiteovercome me at present. I must try to rouse andamuse him a little, poor man — Don't you thinkso ? Another time I shall take my guitar, butperhaps it would be rather too much at first-indeedI don't feel equal to the exertion."Edith, with tears in her eyes, entreated shewould make no allusion to the death of her brother,but merely converse on general subjects ;and after a little more delay they entered intothe presence of the Chief. He made an attempt,with the help of his stick, to rise to receive hislady, who advanced, and with a very good grace,saluted him after her fashion ; then seating herselfby him, laid her hand on his arm.It's a long while since you and I met, Glen-roy,and I'm sorry to find you so great an invalid,though, 'pon my word, I think you look wonderfullywell, considering. You find the goutvery painful, I'm afraid. My poor brother. Destiny.vinhI^ ifl quite a Martyr to it. He really looksalmost as old as you do. In tact, lie h eonib-lately broken down ; and, do you know, I aminicbafiaidliision, ]>rdLanviUe,fi^^ symptomsof it already, which is very alarming'. Heif a etManxaag young man, not actually handsome,but extremely distinffu6 in his appearancetad manners. He is a great fitraurite of mine,attd quite le chert des dames. He is so very feasibleand attentive — quite enable ; but he beer*tully is delicate, and I know my poor brotheris at times wretched about him* An only son!Ckmoeive how dreadful if he were to lose him f 'Here Glenroy burst out, ^ And why shouldhe not lose an only son as well as his neighbours?I know what it is to have lost an only sonMy Norman was taken from me whether I wouldor not ; and — and " He could not go on.^< Ah, true !" said his lady, in a tone of connmoderation; <^ that was very sad. But we wonttalk of these things, Glenroy ; they are too mundifor us. You must not allow yourself to get hipped— You ought to come to town for a littlein the season. We are to have Pasta next win-resting.199ter, and I have already secured an excellent box.Her Medea is quite perfect I am sure youwould be enchanted with it. Her despair atthe loss of her children was absolutely too much.I Assure you I was quite overcome."Edith saw a storm ready to burst fnrthy eodhastily interposed.^ You have got a more pleasant sight to showpapa, in Lady Waldegrave. I am sure Londoncontains nothing more beautifuL"** Very true, very true," said her ladyship,with a nod of approbation. << Florinda is petriede frames, and she will cause a prodigious sensationin the world. In fact, wherever Ae hasappeared, you can form no idea of the admiralion she has excited. She has of course alreadyhad many splendid offers — at least what wouldhave been splendid for any one else — but Florlinda is too young to marry yet Early marriagesare foolish things, you know, Glenroy."A sort of growl was here ejaculated by Glen-roy." And late ones worse," he muttered tohimself.The weather is so fine, I hope you will soon200 • DESTINY.1)48 able to get out, papa'' said Edith. Then<*lBto&lg'to Lady Elizabeth, " Perhaps you will'^Vke 'a drive tory in papa's low phaeton ?',>4 ^^f No,' thank yt)U, my deAr; I seldom go out'^inllien I am ih the country; and besides, while I^^'&ere,' I wiiik to devote as much of my time"ciel possible to Glenroy; that, together with my^%tteMr and musics will fill up my mornings ens*Well. Apropos, I must bring my gtdtar next time.'-^I^haire been practising that charming little rofinance to sing to you, Glenroy, * Vous me quittezpour oiler d la ^fofre*— -I think you will like it."** Pm for no guitars, nor any thing of the kind,"interrupted Glenroy, impatiently. " I take verylittle pleasure now even in my own piper, thoughhe's the best in the country, and has carried offthe Highland Society's prize three times at thecompetition. And he was his foster brotiiertoo."Here Glenroy's. voice faltered, and allowed hislady to strike in.Ah, well, we wont say any more about that^we shall talk a little about my daughter."Your daughter ! what's your daughter tome?" cried Glenroy, peevishly.DESTINY. 201There's np relationship j9^rtaiply,",(5«uwij?i<erlady^P^ ^qndoseendmgly,. ^ but qircuq[^<;9Af|^you. k^pw^Jb^ye formed a, sort of coiuiegdp%iQj|dX,i^oul4 baye brought her with jx^e ju^t/iiow to^l^^ie:,h^t tp you, but she has got a little 9^. affffffTfiine this morning; she has beeom^jrajjbfr.select to them of late, and I should be reiey,^Qasy if I hadn't the most perfect reliance pi^r Price. You must i^low me to present .pr^fricp ito you, Glenroy ; I am sure you wi^iij^ehim ; he is quite a superior person. I assure yqu« I <K)n8ider my life perfectly safe in his hands J' ., ,f* Fll have none of your doctors," cried^Gilen-roy ; ^ I desire never to see the face of a doctorr— a set of ignorant, upsetting What did time'doctors do for— for — for my Norman ?" . ,,(>< Ah, we wont say any thing about that GI^-toy ! Let us talk of something else. You^i^venever been abroad, I believe. Do you kno?9f,)^Ireally think you would find great pleasure, pimaking a little excursion through France :andItaly. You needn't stay long in one place youknow; and I think moving about might be ofservice to you ; and, by the by, I can recoilaflnd time best creature in the world as a courierSos yo«9 quite a treasure — a Greeks and speaksttx different languages* My nephew. Lord Glanville,certainly benefited very meek by change#£ climate. I assure you I was quite uneasyabout bka when he first joined us at Paris ; foryea know an only son one is always anxiousabout; and bis poor jGEUher quite doats upon him ;Indeed he is deserving of it, for he is a mostnpedor young maui and I have a real regard forMbl Besides, to let youittio a little fiunilysecretyhe is distractedly in lote with my daughter, andJ think she is attached to him* But I don't wishher to marry yet She earn at any time form aBrilliant alliance* In hctf with florida's rank,beauty, fortune, talents, she may unquestionablybe considered the first match in the kingdom."^^ The first match in the kingdom !" exclaimedGlenroy, in a transport of rage; ^^ what makesher the first match in the kingdom ? A woman —a poor insignificant woman, to be the first matchin the kingdom \ The first match in the kingdomis the man who will come after me, and thatman's Reginald Malcolm ! And if my son hadDESTINT. 203been alive, he would have been the first matchin the kingdom ! A woman to be the first matchin the kingdom !" and Glenroy actually swelledout with passion.To this burst his lady gave a little weak angry ,affected laugh, then said, <^ You certainly fiorgitt,Glenroy, who my daughter is? Lady Landgraveis a peeress in her own right, an d ■- ^ *<< A snuff of tobacco in her own right 1 Pr^ifyrights, to be sure — ^I wonder what right she hasto be the first match in the kingdom ! What areyour peers and peeresses to me ? creatures madeby a word of a mouth or a scratch of a pea !The king could make a peeress of a tulip-shaw,if he chose — she could make Molly Macauley apeeress, if he pleased, tomorrow; but I defy allthe kings on the £eu of the earth to make theChief of Glenroy !''<^ Certainly the king cannot make a savage''retorted the lady, quivering with indignation,and rising as she spoke ; but Glenroy despised hertoo ;aiuch even to hear what she said, but keptmuttering and murmuring to himself, ^ The firstmatch in the kingdom 1 A woman— izi^ woman,204 .DESTINY.to be the first mateli in the kingdom ! Who everheard of a woman being a chief? A woman'sjust as capable of being a chief as — «k8 this stickstamping his own with an air of defiance on thecarpet* >^ Reginald Malcolm my heir and siie-*cesser,, is the first match in the kingdom eitherof man or woman P'Edith had made many ineffectual attempts tointerpose her still small voice between the Leicensed parties, but in vain ; neither of them wouldlisten to a word she had to say ; and all she coulddo was to follow Lady Elizabeth, as she totteredout of the room, her flounces and feathers vibratingand her whole dress seeming as though itwere a party in her exasperated facings. Shedeclared her determination of instantly leavingthe house — She had been treated with the greatestdisrespect — her daughter most improperlyspoken of — It was impossible to remain anothernight under the same roof — go she would — shemust see Dr Price and Rousseau immediately.Edith strove to soothe her, as she best could,but in vain ; till at length, with tears in her eyes,she alluded to the shook her Other's mind hadDESTINY. 205received by the loss of her bnytber, and ft^lhiglydeplored the little aberrations of iiiemory>hehtidbeen subject to ever since liiat sad event ' •^^ O ! now Z understand," said her ladyshipsbrightening up all at once. — ^* I understandstapping her forehead significantly with het'fttrefinger. " Poor man ! but I ought to have budd:made aware of that circumstance before. It wasquite wrong to conceal it from mes-Poor mail tI am quite sorry for him; at the same ^tiM)^nothing can excuse the very improper mantiei^in which he spoke of my daughter. Sir lUgi^bald Malcolm to be compared to her ! — too ridiculous! — A person of no consequence whateverand an uncommonly disagreeable man. He, thefirst match in the kingdom ! Hoy ha, ha-^oor>man. I — but I must see Dr Price directly, thave been excessively agitated and alarmed*And Dr Price being summoned, Edith widu^drew, and returned to her father. She foundhim still boiling over, like a huge cauldron ; andshe was immediately assailed with a torrent ofinvective against his lady. Upon attempting to806 DESTINY.Plain away the offence, it was immediatelytuned against herselfI always knew you were a weak creature,"sid he, addressing her vn& an inflamed visage.^^ How could you be any thing else, brought upby that idiot, Molly Macauley-though, to giveHer her due, she's a King Solomon, comparedto that other woman. What could you meanby bringing a woman thaf s not in her senses,to molest me ? — ^A woman that's mad ! Andyou're very Unde better, to bring her to me inthe state of health that I'm in. — She's enoughto make any man mad ! I shall quit my houseif I'm to be tormented in this manner. Herdaughter the first man in the kingdom !"Match papa. She only meant as ^"Now, hold you your tongue, and don't contradictme. Man and match is all one. I knowwhat she said, and what she meant Her daughter,forsooth ! — What's her daughter ? Reginaldnever could bear her. He showed his sense,and I should never have let them enter my door,considering how they behaved to him. AndWhere's Reginald ? — And — and send MollyDESTINY. 207Macauley and Benbowie. Are they away tothe shooting too, that I'm left alone all day ?'Edith gladly consigned the Chief to the handsof his two &ithfiil adherents, to whom he hadthe luxury of relating his injuries at full length ;more fortunate in that respect than his lady, whofound less willing and sympathising auditors inher daughter and Madame Latour*208 Destiny.m.„., , .CHAPTEBXVI.^ .eva n'"'-:>■•■■•'•■■ ■•■■.f ,dt. Sift Rj^GijrAJiD returned from sboo^uig^.^d<m entering the dining-room before dinii^^J^found only Madame Latour, Mrs Maeanl^y^^^Price, and two or three chace gu^ts.of jgio»zip<te, who kept apart with Benbowie^ I^adyElizabeth was commonly the last to appear, aji^d.J^th was sitting with Lady Waldegrave-shol. chose to remain in her own apartment, o^ theJ plea of continued indisposition."I wonder what all you young people axemade of now-a-days,'' said Mrs Macaiiley, lookingwith eyes of affectionate compassion on SirReginald) who certainly had nothing of the fee^d joyous air of the sportsman, but looked lai;^-guide and dispirited. " You are all so tender npw,so different from what young people were in myday, when we were so stout and hearty ! There'sDESTINY. ' 209Lady Waldegrave been shut up in her room thewhole of this fine sunny day, not well; there'syou ^*I hope — there is nothing ^' stammeredSir Reginald to' Madame Latour.^^ Ah, oxdi* said Madame Latour, with a deepsigh, and a shake of her head* ^^ Ladi Landgraveest un pen malade depicts ce matin ; c'est sasensibility extreme f ah ! si elle avoit la tranquillityde Mademoiselle Malcomb, votre soeur'and Madame Latour heaved another sigh.Reginald was silent for a few moments, lis ifmastering his agitation, then said, in a earn tone<' I trust Lady Waldegrave's indisposition is notof a serious nature. Probably it is occasionedby the uncommon heat, which has been almosttoo much for me. Miss Malcolm is not my sister,"he added, in a less firm voice.<^ Ah, que je suis bete ! how I do meestak !Assortment elle ne vous ressemble nullement,elle est si calme ! si tranquille ! What you callenseepede^— n'est ce pas ?*Reginald coloured, and was silent; but MrsMacauley had caught at the word insipid as shinesDestiny.low eclipsed with Edith, and she exclaimed ^< In-«pid ! You're not surely meanings to tail MissEdith indpid? or I'm thinking you don't knowthe meaning of the irord, Madame. Insipid, youknow, means wersh and wersh means insipid ;and I can tell you she's any thing but wershthough she's so sweet and gentle'^^ Ah, pardon, Madame Macalioi si — ^if I dospeak of Mademoiselle Malcomb vat hal notproper — c'est une personne tres aimable. MissMalcomb ; et quoique sa beaut ne soit pas Afblouissante, si parfaite que celia de Ladi Waldendie est tik» bien — rat you call prettywelL"** Pretty well !" repeated Mrs Aiibcauley, kindlingup at this fresh insult ^^ Pretty well ! didI ever hear the like of that ?" Then softeningdown as quickly as she blazed up, ** But thoughPm thinking you're no just so ignorant of ourlanguage as you would make us trow, yet I seeyou cannot express yourself properly, or younever would speak in such a way of Miss Edith,and so I should not be angry with you. Prettywell ! I cannot think enough of it ! Pretty wellAssist. 211means just well enough; and to cal GleDJxrfsdaughter just wdl enough !"Madame Latour either did not, or affectednot, to understand Mrs Macauley better lilianMrs Macauley understood her ; but seeing herdispleased) pretended to conciliate her. •^^ Pardonnez moi, chere Madame Macklin, assortmentvous not understand — ^if you think mecapable to say de tings of Meess Malcomb pourirons offenser; c'est une personne de beaucoupde meiite dans son genre ; elle n'a pas les gracesni r^dat de Ladi Waldegrare, ni son air dis-lingua,ni sa sensibility extreme."I don't very well know what you're' saying,Madame,"8aidMrsMacauky,rather impatiently,^ for I'm no great French scholar; but I cantell you, though Miss Edith does not give herselfany grand airs, she's as ladylike in her quietgenteel way, as any lady in the land ; and thoughdie may not be so showy and catching-like, foraU that, hers is the face nobody could everweary o^ if s so good, and so sweet, and so sensible,and so loving too. Fve (rien thought howshe answered to a verse of one of our Sooth5212 DESTINY.songs — m let you hear it, and see if if s notlike Miss Edith." And she repeated slowlyand distinctly, the most beautiful perhaps of allBurns's beautiful verses : ^^ As in the boflom o* the streamTime moonbeam dwells at dewy even,So trembling, pare was tender loveWithin the breast o* bonny Jean**^^ Ah! quel amour transi !" said MadameLatour, with a shudder, as she turned to SirReginald. At that moment, Lady Elizabethand Edith entered, and the conversation of coursedroptAll traces of the matrimonial fracas had entirelydisappeared from Lady Elizabeth's aspect,for the variety of her frivolous pursuits seldomallowed her mind to dwell long on one subject.Satisfied that she had amply fulfilled her duty bythe visit of condolence to her husband, she wasnow decked out in pink and silver, and smiles,and short petticoats, and white shoes.^^ Florida has not been quite well this morning,Dr Price, and I think she is rather out ofspirits; 'tis dull for her, you know, to be in theDESTINY. 213country ; hxmefver, she has promised to joke nsin ike eyemt^, otherwise I must make a pointof her seeing you, Dr Price. Iwishleonklliav^lead her picture as I found her just now-sin mylife I never beheld any thing so perfect ! Shewas sitting at a table, her cheek resting on herhand — ^you know ^her attitude — ^her hair fallingover her shoulders —* Tender or free, in smiles or sadness drest, ^The reigning humour ever suits her best.* ***Deed, then, I think, begging yourlady^ship's pardon, the fewer humours people have somuch the better'' observed Mrs Macauley.^* II n'y a rien de plus ennuyeux que les personnesqui n'ont qu'un seul ton — N'est il pasvrai ?" said Madame Latour.Sir Reginald looked as if he understood theinnuendo, and he answered in French : ^* Thehuman mind has often been compared to amti-sical instrument; perhaps most minds may becapable of giving a variety of tones, but it is notevery one who has the power of calling themforth'*<< Ah, oui, mais le jeu ne vaut pas la diandelle,214 DESTINY*to what you call draw out cette espece de par-soon; les gens resents ressemblent, a raoitayes, a cet instrument de votre pays le bag-peep,wldch it take such a force to sound f and lierglance was directed to Edith, who sat sear,reading*^ The analogy is not just," rested ^ Reginald,gravely ; ^^ there are minds like the organ,of great power and melody when skilfully calledforth ; but it is not every hand that can touchthe right chords, or every ear that can appreciatetheir excellence." And he sighed as hesaid it.^^ Ah, oui, c'est vat I do say — ii fact de lasympathie dans le gout; sans sympathie Panene pent etre d'aceord, et sans harmonise le &xmtne vaut rien."Sir Reginald turned abruptly from MadameLatour to Edith, and, as if he felt that he owedher some reparation for the innuendos that hadso evidently been levelled against her, he devotedhimself to her until they ware summonedto dinner.On leaving the dining-room, Edith was £auiHtsoedi^KKDi by Lady Elizabeth, who again i^pro-DESTINT. 915printed her to her own particular use, as anauditor.<^ You will go to Florinda, Madame Latour,and, with my We, tell her I desire to see her inthe drawing-room by and by. — you, my dear**to Edith, ^^ will accompany me to my dressing*room, where we shall be quiet, as I must harea little talk with you. I hare much to say, andI shall not hare much time, as, of course, wecannot remain long here. And, by the by, Ihave never properly introduced you to my darlings.I am obliged to keep them in my dressing-roomfor fear of your large dogs; and that wasone of the things I wanted to say to yon — yonreally must have those creatures shut up. Youmust know, I got Amor and Amoretta finom CardinalCaccia-Piatti, an uncommonly fascinatingfine-looking person. He paid me great attentionwhen I was at Rome. — I dare say you findthis room rather warm, but I am obliged to havea large fire os account of my dogs — they feelthe cold of this climate dreadfully. Dr Pricewas of opinion, that Amoretta*s last attack wasdecidedly rheumatic. . Unluckily her dog-baskethas a widow, and I teak Ae eM air hadile DESTINY.Streamed in upon her, so I was obliged to haveit closed up, which makes it dull, and I dealtfhiiiik she has ever liked it since. If it were notfor my eider down.qmlt, I don't know ImnktIshould have kept them alive. — That Cardinalreally was a delightful person ; he thought mypronunciation of the language quite pei&et.When you go, you must make a point of gettingintroduced to him. I think Glenroy warlikehim." So flowed on the babbling streamof her ladyship's eloquence ; and even Edith'spatience, great as it was, was nearly exhaustedbefore it could be brought to a cessation, orshe could prevail on her to return to the Anm^ing-ropm. On entering the apartment, EdiAibeheld Lady Waldegrave and Madame Latourseated on a sopha, and Sir Reginald leaningover the back of it A blush was on Florinda*scheek ; but traces of deep emotion were visibleon Reginald's features, as he bent his head towardsher, and. spoke in a low voice. MadameLatour was, or affected to be, engrossed by fido,whom she was fondling with true French vivacity.A strange indefinable something, she couldnot tell wjMLt, struck Edith at the sight . <VThisDESTINY. 817odious Madame Latour," thought she. It wayhowever, a mere sudden sensation, unattendedby any train of reflections, for as Lady Elizabethadtaoeed, Reginald hastily broke off finom LadyWatdegrare, and, turning abruptly round, joinedte reflijl of the gentlemen, who were standing a^sotee distance.How charmingly you look, my love !" Lady Elisabeth, quitting her hold ofEdith for a moment, to embrace her daughter.•* Aod what a very pretty dress f that is MadameDelacour, I am sure ; how I wish I had seenit, and I should have ordered one the same — showextremely becoming !» )eth an air of chagrin.Then in a peevish tone, " But you ought to'havemore flowers in your hair, my dear child; onlylook at the size of my head which you know isfar from being <mtreP<^ You forget I have had a headach this morning,mammas' said Lady Waldegrave, evidentlyannoyed ; '^ consequently my head is itt able tobear much**Absurd, my dear P' in a peevish voice; " whoeverheard of a headach, or any thing else beingVOL. II.' K218 - DESTINY.an excuse for being ill dressed? If yon chooseto say it is your fancy to dress so and so, I danunderstand that, and it may pass ; but I do assurepott it is very bad taste to make any thing of thatsort a matter of necessity. You must expect tobe pitied if you do ; and when once a personcomes to be pitied, there is an end of her consequencefor ever."Then pray, mamma, suffer me to hide mydiminished head quietly in this comer," saidLady Waldegrave, trying to laugh away her*mother's absurdity.*^ Ah, vous et moi, miladi,*' said Madame Latour,with an air of mock humility, " devons nouscontenter de porter des fleurs sur la tete ; maisquant a Ladi Waldegrave, les fleurs naissent sousses pas. Et, apropos, Saar Reginaal, est ce quevoice fleur favorite croit dans cette triste cob-tree?vat you call Forget mCvnOt?' But SirReginald was by this time deeply absorbed in abook, and made no answer. " Voyons done cequi vous occupe," cried Madame Latour, play-follydrawing the book from before him ; " dela peesie !" and she ran over the Knew, as ifDESTINY. 219-g<Hiig to read them aloud ; then handing the bookto Lady Waldegrare, "Lizez donc,ehere miladi,'votre voix charmante embellish meme ces verses''Lady Waldegrave took the book without answeringglanced her eye over the page, andas she closed it, exclaimed, ^^ Ah, there wan,love!"The play was Count Basil — the lines which 'had drawn forth the remark, were those touchingand beautiful ones, uttered as he gazes on Victoriafor the last time —To be so near thee, and for ever parted !For ever lost ! what art thou now to me ?Shall the departed gaze on thee again ?Shall I glide past thee in the midnight hoar,Whilst thou perceives it not, and think*at» perhaps,*Ti but the mournful breeze that passes by ?'*Sir Reginald's eyes had been fixed on floridaintently as she read ; then, suddenly starting,he said, in a hurried manner, ^< Edith, won'tyou give us some music ?'<< Do you remember, Edith, you promised tosing me one of your Scotch songs ?* said Lady -Waldegrave, gaily* " Pray let me have one of ^'your oldest of old ballads ; and an't lose tones'*2fi0 .Destiny.she added in a whisper, << while mamma is busytalking to that very civil attentive gentleman,-who looks as if he would listen for half a century"^^ Edith arose, and, as she turned toward thepiano, abe saw and was stick with the ezpresaonof Reginald's countenance ; his eyes were fixedon the spot where Lady Waldegrave and MadameLatour were seated, while i^e passed him unnoticed— unheeded. A strange pang shot throughher heart; her eyes filled with tears; she couldnot define the nature of her feelings ; she wouldhave shrunk from the attempt, even had it beenin her power, as she would have done from thepoint of a dagger. She began to busy herself inturning over the music, as if seeking for something,though she knew not what, till her agitationsubsided; and having selected that mostbeautiful of all Scottish airs, Gilders, she beganto sing a verse of the old ballad* She possessedfrom nature a melodious voice, a fine ear, andan intuitive refinement of taste — gifts, which, ifthey did not constitute her a first-rate musician,rendered her at least a very touching and delight-destiny.221fill one. But on the present occasion, Edith'spowers seemed all to have foiled ^her — ^her voicewas weak and tremulous, her ear was unconsciousof sound, and all her perceptions were of a mixedand painful nature. Aware of her failure, sherose from the instrument, arid faltering out aHexcuse, begged some one else \f ould take herplace. Lady Waldegrave attempted some faintcommendations, then rose, and was led by SirReginald to the harp.Poor Edith's failure was only rendered moreconspicuous by Florinda's display. She was inImplant voice, and, with perfect self-possessionsplayed and sang several beautiful Italian andFrench airs, in the manner of a perfectly welltaught and highly-finished musician. Lady Wal-dravewas much too well bred to practise any ofthe little, commonplace, paltry airs of coquetry :at the same time, it might be discovered by adiscerning eye, that admiration was the aim andscope of all her actions — ^tiie stimulus to all herpowers. Noticing could appear more natural andgraceful titian her movements and attitudes, nothingmore simple and unstudied titian her varied222 DESTINY.modes of charming. But as La Buyers sacyfh^^^ Combien d'art pour rentrer dans la nature !''{ Symptoms of impatience were now visible inthe countenance of Lady Elizabeth, and Rousseauand the guitar were summoned, which seemed thesignal for her daughter to retire from the fidid.With an exclamation at the heat of the room and.the beauty of the night, she rose and passed intothe small drawing-room. A few minutes elapsedwithout any one following**^ Ladi Waldegrave a laisse ses gants," saidMadame Latour, looking to ISr Reginald, as sheField them up. Reginald extended his hand totake them, then turned hastily away, and addressedsome remark to the person next him.** I will take Florinda her gloves," tend Edith,with an elasticity of spirit she did not stop toanalyze, and could not easily have accounted for ;and, without noticing Madame Latour's look ofdispleasure, she seized the gloves, and followedLady Waldegrave. The glow of excitementWhich had so lately lighted up her beautiful face,had fled, and the same expression of languid dis-destiny.223satisfaction was visible which Edith had formerlyobserved.I fear you have fatigued yourself by singingtoo much," said Edith. And she proceeded topraise her musical powers with all the ardour ofgenerous and sincere admiration* Lady Landgraveappeared but little gratified with the commendations,for she received them slightly, andher thoughts seemed wandering while Edithspoke.I fear you are unwell, dear Florinda," saidEdith, at a loss to account for the coldness andabstraction of one who but a few minutes beforehad been all animation and brilliancyOh, no, not ill," replied Lady Waldegrave,in the accent of one who felt rather annoyedthan soothed by the enquiry.Then surely you can have nothing to vexor disquiet you," said Edith softly. " Ah, Floridaif you have, would that you thought meworthy to share your confidence !"You would be shocked were I to tell you thecause of my vapeurs^*^ said Lady Waldegrave,with affected solemnity; ^^ how shall I own to youS24 Destiny.tkftt I am a Ktde whimsical ; and a little — thevery least grain in the world— capricious?'Edith felt hurt at the taunting manner in whichdie was treated, and remained silent.** I see. you are shocked, Edith, love, at suchjBiAacknowle(%ment; most people would as soonconfess that they lie and, steal, as that theylure in the least degree capricious ; but for mypart, I have none of that virtuous abhorrence toa little caprice — it certainly renders the chanter—or at least the manners, more piquant —syr example, I am tired of singing sentimentalsongs aU the evening, and that you will call beingcapricious,' and I now wish to amuse myself bytalking nonsense ; but I fear you are too wise totalk nonsense, Edith ?"Not on proper subjects," answered Edith,gravely, " but **** My dear Edith ! for heaven's sake, don'tuse such an old governess phrase, as ^ proper subjects!' But, indeed, I am not aware we wereupon any important subject in particular, — werewe, Edith ?'<^ You had not thought it so, else you wouldDEstmv. 5!i6notliave asked the question'' replied Edith coldly,but gently,*^ Ah, I am the most forgetful creature in theworld-especially when there is such a moonssuch a lovely moon, to gaze Upon ! Come, let usenjoy its beams, and escape the tinkle of man*mass guitar out of doors." There was an old*fashioned glass door which opened upon a sortof terrace walk, and she stept out. Edith andshe took two or three turns backwards and forwards,admiring the beauty of the night, whileMorinda occasionally warbled a few notes, orrepeated a line or two of Petrarch; then halfpettishly exclaimed, ^^ Eb,ye you nothing to sayon the charms of moonlight, Edith ?'Edith, roused from the reverie into which shehad £ellen, replied, ^^ Nothing of my own, but Icould be eloquent in the words of Ossian, onlyI suspect you could not enter into my enthusiasmfor our mountain bard. Do you rememberthe exquisite opening of Thalia ?« ■ 'How beautiful is night !A dewy freshness fills the silent air ; 'No mist obscures, nor cloud, nor spwik, nor stain.Breaks the serene of heaven ;k2Jt26 DESTINY.In fiilUolrb'd fiery yoadcr moon divineRolls through the dark blue depths V "f • ^V Sunk a description is quite illustrative of thenight," said Florinda, carelessly, ^^ but it is toocold and abstracted for me — and so is the nightitself, to speak the truth. It wants the charmof an Italian moonlight — the rich, warm, glowing,indescribable charm which there pervadesthe atmosphere, and fills the heart — as some one,madame de Steel, I believe, has well said, therery perfume of the flowers in Italy producesiCMnething of melody on the senses, and, to useher own words, ' vous ^prouvez un bien-être siparried, un si grand amitii de la nature pour vousque rien n'alt^ les sensations agr^bles qu'ellevous cause This is what she says of Naples-—dear, dear, loved Naples P' exclaimed she, fervently,as at that moment they were joined leyMadame Latour and Sir Reginald*I cannot join in your eulogium on Italy,"said Edith, ^^as it is still a sealed book to me.But here are those who will, I have no doubt.Were you, Reginald, as much enamoured ofNaples as Florinda seems to be ?'DESTINY.IS27** Quite," he replied, in an emphatic tone,And, like her, do you, too, look with somethingof disdain on the loveliest of our Highlandni^ts ?"<< Not with disdain ; but with moreof admirationthan love."I thought you had loved your own country,Reginald," said Edith, pensively.^^ I have a great respect for it," replied he ;^^ love, perhaps, is peculiar to Italy," he added,with a sigh.Ah, oui," cried Madame Latour, admirers,respecter, c'est smit chose,— aimer, adorer, e'enest une autre ! par exemple, j'ai un profond respectpour vos hautes montagnes, et pour vossombres lacs-*-vat you call locks ; pour vos fortsde pins — vat you call seers — et que qnelqtiespersonnes appellent ^ le deuil de YkXh^-^-^t enverite il y a trop de deuil dans vos tableaux 41ssont tristes; j'aime comme Saar Reginaal le climata la fois passionne et riant, tel que celui d^la belle Italic."'^ And I," said Edith, ^^ however much I mightadmire, and even enjoy, the air skies, and theflowers, and the melody, and the odours of Italy,2^ DESTINY.am sure I should ever love the clouds and themountains, the firs and the heather, of my ownnative land ; to me the very hooting of theseowls has a charm, as associated in my mind withell that I love, or ever loved."She stopped, and blushed at her own warmth.<^ Ah, ma chere !" exclaimed Madame Latour,gently pressing her arm, and looking in her &cewith a smile, '^ croyez moi, c'est de Tahiti, nonde Clamour, que rous avez prove ; le hibou estEmblem de la sagesse, jamais on ne Tassociaavec Tumours**Edith coloured deeply — she tried to laugh,but she could not succeed, for a sigh from SirReginald smote her heart. He walked slowly ,away, then returned with the air of one who isirresolute whether to go or stay. Madame Latournow complained of ^^ a frisson,'^ and, shivering,hurried into the house. Florinda, Reginald, andEdith, remained some time longer, but the twoformer showed no inclination to converse ; and,after some fruitless attempts on Edith's part,they all followed Madame Latour's example, andsoon after separated for the night.DESTINY. 22&CHAPTER EvilThe next day was Sunday — day of rest to thepoor and the toil-worn-of weariness to the richand the idle. Ah ! little do they enter into thefeelings of many who look forward to this dayas the day when even the " wicked cease fromtroubling, and the weary are at rest'* as the dayblessed and hallowed, to those on whom rests, inits full force, the primeval command, ^^ Six daysshalt thou labour ;" and which makes the Sabbathlovely in the sight** Of blessed angels, pitying human cares ;*'as the day when heavenly truths are proclaimedalike to all, from the prince to the beggar ; fromthe man of grey hairs standing on the thresholdof the grave, to the young who have lately enteredthe arena of this life — ^there, in the houseof God, ^^ the rich and the poor meet together ;**290 Destiny.end there they are reminded of those impressivetruths, so humbling to the haughty, so elevatingto the lowly — *^ that the Lord is the maker ofthem all' and that one day they shall stand beforehis judgmentHseat, without respect of persons,to ^' receive the reward of the deeds done in thebody." On that day, how many a sorrowingheart can more freely pour forth its grief to thatgracious ear which is ever open to the cry of theafflicted !—-" on every sea,Which Eorvipe's navies plough — yes, in all landsFrom polo to pole, or civilized, or rude,People there are to whom the Sabbath mornDawns, shedding dews into their drooping hearts**The religious observances at Glenroy wereentirely of a negative character; there was neithermusic or billiards on Sunday. Such of thefamily as chose went to church, and such as choseremained at home. Mrs Macauley, except whenGlenroy prevented her, was a regular attenderof church, as she said even Mr M^Dow's preachingwas better than none ; and Edith generally'went to the afternoon service, which was per-DESTINT. 283formed in what Mr M^Dow called English themorning service being in Gale, for the benefitof the aborigines of the country. On this ,the party having lingered over a late breakfast,were now severally settled at their occurturns. Lady Elizabeth and Dr Price were playingat spilickins ; Lady Waldegrave was drawing; Madame Latour was sitting by her, alternatelystringing small pearls, and laughing overa French play ; Edith was reading Milton ; SirReginald held a newspaper in his hand. Suchwas the position of the party, when Captain andMrs Malcolm of Inch Orran, and their daughter,were announced. Edith hastened to meet themwith her usual simple kindness of manner,heightened by the affection she ever returnedfor them, and then introduced them to her guests.Lady Elisabeth eyed them as if she had beenshort-sighted, and, having bowed an acknowledgment,resumed her game. Florinda's mannerswere what is called charming (in a superficialway) when she those to show off; and shewas all grace, ease, and suavity MadameLatour loved company o£ any kind, and shefi32 DESTINY.dosed her book, and went on stringing herpearls. There was something in the calmnessand mildness of Mrs Malcolm's manner peculiarlydignified and unaffected. She appeared whollyforgetful (self) and strong in the native, elegantsimplicity of a mind, which diffused itself overher whole bearing and deportment, —** Qui etolt de tost temps et de toutes modes**Of all the modifications of manner which areto be met with in society, perhaps the mostgenerally pleasing is simplicity, even as thatwater is the purest which has no taste, that airthe freshest which has no odour. Such was theimpression which Mrs Malcolm's manner generallyproduced on all whose hearts were still aliveto the charms of nature, as even the most sophisttreated unconsciously feel subdued beneath thebland influence of native goodness. Since theloss'of her son, Mrs Malcolm's manner had everretained a still more pensive, chastened cast,than had formerly characterized it ; and her palebrow, " tender and gravely sweet," still worea look of days gone by." This was the firstDESTINY. 233time she had seen Sir Reginald since his return,and for a moment the tide of sad recollectionrushed over her heart as she thought, ^^ such asheis, might my Ronald now have been !" Butsoon the emotion died away beneath the habitualresignation of her soul ; the cloud passed fromher mild brow and pale cheek, as she regained -her usual serenity.Mrs Malcolm was neither a bigot nor 9 zealot,but she could not avoid seeing how the day, sosacred in her estimation, Was disregarded anddegraded by those whom she was now among ;and her eye rested more in sorrow than in angerdn the frivolous occupations they were engagedin.^< It is so long since I have seen you, MrsMalcolm," said Edith, surveying her with looksof gladness, " that I scarcely know where tobegin with my enquiries'**' It is indeed a long while since we have metj^said Mrs Malcolm ; ^< but though I seldom gofrom home now, yet, had I known of the arrivalof Lady Elizabeth Malcolm, and Lady Landgrave,I should have taken an earlier opportunity234 DESTINY.of waiting upon them ; — not this day certainly,for I came for a different purpose ; I could notthink of passing your door, without asking youto accompany us to your church. There is noservice in our own to-day ; and our good friend,Mr Stewart, is to officiate in the absence ofMr M^Dow."I shall go with much pleasure," said Edith j^' and perhaps others in company may also jointhe party."Certainly," said Lady Waldegrave, withone of her most winning looks ; ^' I shall be toohappy to be allowed to accompany you."Going, to church !" cried Lady Elizabeth?who, being tired of spilickins, here joined the;Conversation ; "very proper — I approve ofgoing to church— I think it quite right, absolutelynecessary, for the sake of example to the lowerorders of the people."If it is proper for the lower orders," saidMrs Malcolm,. gently, " it must be equally sofor the higher."By no means," replied Lady Elizabeth,DESTINY. 285warmly, " it is quite a different thing ; it i» verywell known, that in this country the cotnnumpeople do require to go to church ; it is differentabroad, though even there they attend mass veryregularly ; but then, you know, that is soon aver,and they have a thousand innocent ways of themselves and spending the day, which thepeople here have no idea of. They have operate)and theatres, and dancing, and all s<»rts of prettyharmless amusements''^^ It is many years since I waa on the conti*rents'' said Mrs Malcolm, in the same gentlemanner, ^^ and therefore I am, perhaps, scarcelyentitled to speak of the customs that prevailthere now ; but at that time, I confess, my feelkings were hurt at witnessing what appeared tomethe profanation of a day associated in mymind with all that is solent and sacred."Of course, on going from our own country,we carry our prejudices along with us," said SirReginald, ^' and we are scandalized at seeingour neighbours with happy £eu:es^ on a day whenwe have always been accustomed to measure296 DESTINY.our piety by the length and solemnity of ourown*'^ Ah, excellent I excellent !'' exclaimed MadameLatour ; ^^ que ce mot ^ solemn' me faitfrksonner 1"w I*— mrhy, yes, I don't think it is a good thingto be too solemn' observed Lady Elizabeth,with the air of a Solon ; <^ it defeats the objectsand — and — ^in short, I don't think it answers**^^ I am sorry I should have used a word whichhas so many unpleasing ideas attached to ' it**said Mrs Malcolm, sweetly; ^< but, in my mind,solemnity is not necessarily associated with gloomor melancholy. There is a solemn stillness in theair of the Sabbath, which Conveys to me ideasof the most pleasurable kind. It seems to combineaU the tamquilUty and repose of the nightwith the light and gladness of the day."** Mais pourquoi you formed dans cette contrtoute demonstration de joie ?" enquired MadameLatour.<< I know nd demonstrations of rational joythat are forbidden," replied Mrs Malcolm ; <^ theDESTINY. 287mere excess of animal spirits certainly does notharmonize with the day given for nobler pmwponies* But there may be, and I am sure there is,much quiet, heartfelt, homefelt, happiness on thatday. I know no more pleasurable sight, thanthat of our own poor people in their clean dresses,with cheerful though sedate faces, assemblingtogether to hear the glad tidings, which tell themof peace, and hope, and love**^^ Mais la danse et la musique, par exemple,vous les regardez comme des p^ch^s mortels—chfiz nous, elles sont les demonstrations de notrejoie; de notre reconnaissance, de notre amourde Dieu," and Madame Latour raised her eyesin a pretended ecstasy of devotion.Where such feelings are truly produced,and bring forth corresponding fruits, we shouldcertainly be cautious how we condemn themeans," replied Captain Malcolm; <^ as someonehas well said, ^ virtuous action is all the realworth of intelligent being;' but in this land wehave no reason to expect that music and dancingshould lead to the knowledge of God, and288 DESTINY.the practice of piety. Even splendid rites have'been found both useless and pernicious, in alludingthe mind away from the doctrines and preceptsof the Gospel, which are addressed to theheart and the understanding, not the senses."<^ Surely every one must allow, nothing canbe more effectual in kindling devotional feelingthan fine music," said Sir Reginald.Undoubtedly," replied Captain Malcolm,« fine music is the very luxury of devotion ; butit js one that is far beyond the reach of the massof the people. Where could our poor Highlandersprocure fine music ?' .<* You forget die bagpipe, and its accompanimentthe whisky bottle," said Sir Reginald, sarcastically.^^ The fiddle and the vin du pays may bemore refined modes of enjoyment," said CaptainMalcolm; ^^but refinement of taste does notnecessarily imply corresponding improvement inmorals. I have not, indeed, lived long enoughin a Catholic country to be altogether a fair judgeof the practical effects of the Romish religion onDESTINY. 239the morals 6f the people ; but of one thing I amvery sure, that the sincere followers of that religionenjoy much less liberty, spiritual and temporal,than we do. Were we to reckon up thenumber of holidays, saints' days, fists, vigils,penances, prayers, &c. &c. — from one year's endto &e other, I suspect it would be found that amuch larger portion of time is devoted to relies:pious observances amongst Catholics than Protestants.Were we, therefore, to annul, or evencurtail, our one day in seven, little or nothingwould remain to remind us o^fthe tie subsistingbetween God and his creatures."♦* That is very good," exclaimed Lady Elizabeth.<^ Penances are, to be sure, shocking thingsand we Protestants ought, as Mr Maloofansays, to oppose them by every means in ourpower-*^-and we ought also to set a good exampleto the lower orders. I shall go to church herselfto-day," — with an air of dignified virtue — " andif you will allow me, I will take a seat in yourcarriages to Captain Malcolm, whom she hadjust discovered to be a very fine4eokiiig, gentlemanlyman; and being a great enthusiast in;240 DESTINT.beauty, his looks were at ojace a passport to hexgood graces.The offer was, of course, accepted. The firstcarriage drove off, while the other for Floridaand Edith was getting ready. Edith had beenhurt at the slighting way in which Reginald.had spoken of the religious observances of theircountry ; for although she herself entered butlittle into the true spirit of Christianity, she,nevertheless, possessed that reverence for itsinstitutions and symbols, which, with many,'passes for religion itself.When the carriage drove up. Sir Reginaldwas on the hall-steps ready to hand Lady Landgraveand Edith in. Madame Latour, being aCatholic, of course did not accompany them,** I flattered myself you would have escortedFlorinda and me to church, Reginald," saidEdith, reproachfully.^* You forget that I am half a Catholic'' saidhe, smiling.Edith gave an unconscious look of affrightfrom him to Madame Latour, who was standingalso on the steps. Reginald seemed to read what3:DESTINY. 241was passing' in her mind, and the Careless, scorn*fill smile he gave in return, at once reassuredher; while he added, ^* That is according to thenotions of Presbyterians. But, however, if youare not afraid, after what has passed, to admit8U<^h a reprobate within the walls of your lankyI shall join you there, Edith. I shall take the cutacross Benvarloch, and be there as soon as you''Is it possible, then, to walk to church ?'*enquired Lady Waldegrave.^ Quite possible for Highlanders, such asReginald and I," answered Edith ; " but quiteimpossible, I should imagine, for you, Horinda."** What a stimulus that word * impossible ' is,"said Lady Waldegrave, " especially when oneknows it is quite possible, as I am resolved toprove. How I love to overcome possible impossibilities! Come, if I should fag by the way,some of your good Highland ferries will, I amsure, take pity on me, and bring me a pair ofgolden patterns, or some such aid as will enableme to climb with perfect ease to the very pinnacleof your mountain tops." And, in spite of allremonstrance, her ladyship persisted in walking.VOL. II. L2^ DESTINY.The carriage was, therefore, dismissed empty,and the party set outSir Reginald, as a matter of course, offered anarm to each of his companions ; but Lady Landgravecoldly declined, and he did not repeat theoffer. There was something so whimsical andcapricious in Florinda's behaviour, that Edithcould not £Bithom it. She had volunteered, eveninsisted upon taking a long walk with a personfrom whom she yet would not accept the mostcommon act of civility ! What could be themeaning of such mutual, unvarying coldness, andeven dislike ?Lady Waldegrave might have read what waspassing in Edith's mind, on her artless yet eloquentcountenance ; but Lady Waldegrave wasone of those who are too much engrossed by selfto pay much attention to the thoughts and feelingsof others, aimless when exacting a tribute ofadmiration or adulation. For a considerablepart of the way, the road lay through the beautifuland extensive pleasure-grounds, where ever-changinglandscapes of wild Alpine scenery,rocks and woods, knolls and dells, blue lake andDESTINY. Stridingriver, alternately mingled with the softerfeatures of culture and ornament —<(The pomp of groves, and garniture of fields,"presenting a constant succession of grand andlively pictures. But soon, to the rich, picturesque,and ornamented scenery of the home domain,succeeded the purple moor with its grey stones,the dreary glen, the rugged mountain, and therude torrent. The day was close, and warm,and sunless ; an unvarying grey atmosphere surroundedthem, and seemed to shed a ^^ brownerhorror" over the lone valley and the gloomymountain. There were none of those magicaleffects of light and shade to enliven the' dullbosom of the one, or irradiate the dark brow ofthe other ; and, as has been truly said, sunshinealone fills with beauty the land of mountains,and imparts to every feature a grandeur and agrace, which sinks into insipidity the riches andthe beauty of the fairest champaign.It seemed as if the gloom of nature had communicateditself to the spirits of those who nowtraversed the solitary scenes, themselves almost244 Destiny.as silent Lady Waldegrave was pensive andabstracted. Sir Reginald was almost whollysilent, as if absorbed in some strong concentratedfeeling. Edith was surprised and mortifiedat time indifference, and even inattention, withwhich Rotunda regarded the sublime sceneryaround them. As they climbed the steep sideof the mountain, they sometimes stopped to recoverbreath ; and on one occasion, as they lookeddown from the almost dizzy height on whichthey stood, to the dreary glen below, Edith,pointing to a wretched and almost imperceptiblehovel, with its peat-stack and its potatoes patch,said, ^^ Look there, Florinda, — that is a humandwelling; and, do you know, I am so piqued atthe indifference with which you regard our magnificentBenvarloch, that I could almost wishyou were a dweller there for a season, that youmight learn to look up to it with proper respectand awe. But I daresay the bare idea of such athing has answered my purpose, and made youtremble already !"** By no means," replied Lady Waldegrave,calmly ; <^ mournful and isolated as that dwellingDESTINT. 245appears, I can conceive circumstances in whichit might be the abode of happiness and delight."'^ Under what strange circumstances couldthat possibly be, Florinda?" enquired Edith,smiling at the idea of the delicate, refined, luxurious,fastidious Lady Waldegrave deeming itpossible to exist in such a place, under any circumstances.Lady Waldegrave smiled too, butit was with something of scorn, as she answered,in a low voice, but sufficiently loud for Reginald(who stood a little apart) to he — " Lovemight transform even that wretched hut into abower of Paradise."<^ And transform the seats and heather intoamaranths and roses ?' said Edith, laughing.Yes — Love has wrought greater miraclesthan that," replied Florinda, pensively.Not true love," said Edith, in a low voice,and blushing as she spoke ; ^^ there can be noillusion there."It is evident you have never loved," returnedLady Waldegrave ; " if the love was pure,and fervent, and sincere — ^if, in short, it was love,there would be no illusion in the matter;" and246 Bestir.Ae repeated, with mueli grace and beauty, theselines from Garcilazo de la Vega.Por ti el sUmcio de la selma ambrose.For tl la etquiridad 7 apartmentsJhL solitary monte me agradaba.***Sake Stopped, then said, <^ What follows is sobeautiful, I must repeat it'' and with a sigh, sheresumed :*' For ti la verde herba el fresco vient£1 banco lirio, 7 colorado rosaY dolce primate descant.A7 ! quanto me enganaba !A7 quam different eraT quam de ora manerLo que, en tu falao echo se escondier j"*f*Edith's feelings were so delicate, and her man*• (( Through thee, the silence of the shaded glen.Through thee, the horror of the lonely mountainPleased me no less than the resort of men,The breeze, the summer wood, and lucid fountain."f " The purple rose, white lily of the lake.Were sweet for thy sweet sake !For thee the fragrant primrose dropt with dewWas wished when first it blew !Ah, how completely was I in all thisMyself deceiving ! Oh the different partThat thou wert acting,The traitor in thy heart !**Destiny. 247news so simple, that the impassioned, yet sophisticatedstyle of Lady Waldegrave's sentiments,brought forward too so unneeessarily,.struck heras something strange, and she thought to herself)Surely she has never loved, or she could notthus proclaim it 1" She stole a glance at Reginaldto see whether his feelings accorded with hers,but he had turned abruptly away, as she imagined,in scorn.After standing a few minutes in silence. LadyWaldegrave said, " I find I must rest before Ican proceed. Here is a charming banc de gazcn^^as she seated herself on one of the few greenspots the mountain side, covered as it was withrock and heather, afforded.We must not rest long, or else we shall betoo late for church'' said Edith.Why, to own the truth," said Lady Landgrave,languidly, ^^ I fear I must relinquish theattempt of getting to church ; I am so £Eitigued»I feel quite unable to proceed any further ; tauntme as you will, Edith, I am at your mersey."** I won't be so cruel as to exult over yourdefeat," said Edith, smiling ; ^^ but you must{^8 DESTINY.«Qow me ymb to remind you, that I predictedmeat has come to pass, without even pretendingto the second sight And now, what is to bedone? — Come, Begin, let us hold a councilof war."^^ I am a bad counsellor," said he, coldly, andwithout lifting his eyes from the ground.^< Then, if I am to be commander-in-chiei^ Ithink the best thing I can do is to dispatch youfor my pony, to take Florinda home."** O no, no, not for the world," cried Florinda ;^ I should die of fright were I to attempt todescend this .dreadful mountain on horseback."*^ But my pony is so safe and sure-footed, andbesides, Reginald would lead it down the hill foryou, as he has often done for me."^^ Pray, don't ask me to do any thing so hazardous,"said Lady Waldegrave, pettishly.Then we must all sit quietly here till youare sufficiently rested to return hcMue," saidEdith ; ^^ at least my head can suggest no brighterexpedient."But it makes me quite wretched to thinkthat I should be the means of keeping you fromchurch. I know you are very desirous of bangthere ; I heard you say so to Mrs Malcolm** 'I should certainly have liked very well tobe at church," said Edith ; ^< but the disappointmentis nothing ; don't think of it."^^ But indeed I must. I cannot bear that youfiiiould lose any pleasure upon my account ; ratherthan detect you, I will try, if possible, to makeit out, confute qui covte^^ And she attempted torise, but Edith would not allow it, and insistsed that she should not stir till perfectly recovered.^^ But how shall I manage with mamma?'resumed Lady Waldegrave. " She will be *omiserable and so fluttered if I don't appear, thatshe will make quite a scinde at church."If Lady Waldegrave will honour me willher commands," said Sir Reginald, in a constrainedtone of civility, ** I shall be happy to bethebearer of them."«« O ! that will do," cried Edith. « Reginaldwill go to church, and account for your absenceto Lady Elizabeth ; and we can return at Ourleisure, when you feel disposed to move."<< And leave us here in tibds frightful solitude;l2250 Destiny.by otinelves !^ exclaimed Florinda. ** Surely,Edidi, you cannot be serious ?'I am indeed** said Edith, laughing. " Unlessthe mountains were to &11 upon us, I see noother danger to apprehend. I should not mindbeing here quite alone'** O, shocking !" exclaimed Florinda, shuddering; " then what a coward you must think me P'Then, what is to be done?" said Edith.There is no human being near us, to send ineither direction."'* I must try to make it out myself, then, itseems," said* Florinda, with a languid oppressedair; and then she attempted to rise, but sunkback, as if quite unable ; and, in a faint voice,Indeed, I feel it impossible, without a longrest; and yet I cannot rest, when I think ofthe state of nervous excitement mamma will bethrown into, when she misses me."There is another proposal I would make,"said Edith, in a hesitating tone. " But" -But what ?" enquired Lady Waldegrave.Edith still hesitated, as she thought of themutual coldness, and even aversion, her compass2$1nions manifested towards each other ; then iaa low voice, and with a little confusion, she said,cI would offer to go to church myself, only Ithought, perhaps, you would dislike being leftwith only Reginald."Lady Waldegrave coloured, and a gleam ofpleasure shot from her eyes as she cast themdown. ^^ Dear Edith, since you are so kind, sovery kind," said she, pressing her hand with animation,then relapsing into her former languidtone—" This is no time for ceremony, and Ishall not much mind it. To be sure, if it couldhive been otherwise arranged, it .would havebeen better ; but I believe that is the only practicablescheme. Even the presence of an enemyI should feel a protection in this region of horror."An enemy, Florinda ! — Ah, for shame.You surely do not consider Reginald as such ?"asked Edith, in a low voice.Lady Waldegrave made no reply.Howl wish I sw you friends — such friends,"added Edith, blushing, turning her cheek to whia-2tS 0B8T1NY.per m Florida's ear, ^^ — as a Outer ought tobe with — a brother."The caress which accompanied this avowal wasnot returned; but Edith's own confusion renderedher unconscious of Florinda's, and, hastilyrising, she called, ^^ Sir Reginald, I am goingto walk to church, and Lady Waldegrave trustsherself to ^your protection — ^you will see her safehome,"She had expected a remonstrance from herlover as to her undertaking the walk alone — suppositionshowever, was made, but an expressionof deep emotion crossed his features as hestammered out a few inaudible words of aequi*essence. A vague, undefinable sensation passedthrough Edith's heart — the feeling had neithername nor substance — it was a mere shapelessshadow that fell upon her imagination, and shehastened to dispel it. Yet she lingered, sheknew not why, ere she took her departure, perhapsin the hope that Reginald would yet interfereto prevent her. But he did not ; he followedher a few steps, as if he would have recalled her ;DESTINY. 2fi8then turned abruptly round, and leaning againsta piece of projecting rock, with his head restingon his arm, remained in deep though silent agitation.854 Distant.CHAPTER XVIII.Florinda !" at length he exclaimed, in avoice of emotion ; but Lady Waldegrave madeno reply.Florinda !" he repeated, in a tone of deeperRotation ; but still Lady Waldegrave remainedimmovableFlorinda !" he cried, still more passionately,will you not hear me ? answer me ?'For a few moments Lady Waldegrave seemedas if struggling with her feelings, then said,There was a time when I would have answered,when I did answer, to that call from you — thattime is past."And you now hate— despise me ?* cried he.Florinda was silent.«■Destiny. 25dYou think me false— faithless !" he exclaimed,with increasing vehemence ; " I know — Iknow you do."Lady Waldegrave made no answer, and therewas another pause.Tell me, only tell me, that you acquit meof cold-blooded perfidy ; that you do not thinkme the base, heartless villain" his agitationchoked his utterance.I know not what to think," said Lady Landgrave,haughtily ; " but I feel I degrade myselfin thus allowing you an opportunity of utteringsuch language ; nor would I have done so, butthat it was necessary, ere I leave this, I shouldsee you alone. You have refused the explanationI sought by Madame Latour, with regardto the picture I committed to your charge ; youwill not) you dare not as a gentleman, refuse torestore it to me when I demand it myself."Sir Reginald replied by opening his collar,and discovering the picture suspended round hisneck. " Never while I live will I part from it,"he cried ; " it is my all of happiness 1"<* This is too humiliating !" said Florinda,256 DESTINY.indignantly, and rising as if to move away; butbe seized her hand, and caused her to be seated.'* Wretched and undone as I am," he cried,*^ hateful as I am to myself, still, to be odious inyour eyes, is misery greater than I can bear. O,florida, could you but know the struggles ofmy heart — the sickening mixture of hopelessnessand hope ! — Could you conceive the thousancti part of the anguish I have endured, thatI still endure, and for you !"A slight wave of the head, and a curl of thelip, indicated Lady Waldegrave's incredulity.** ^you do not — ^you dare not doubt my truth,Florinda !'' cried he, starting from the groundwhere he had cast himself*Have I not cause ?'No, no; I have deceived myself-r-I havedeceived another — but I have never deceivedyou. Nay, hear me, Florinda, hear me !"To what purpose ? We are now mere acquaintances; henceforth let us be still less. Letus be strangers."Yet you once loved me — at least you sufferedme to indulge that hope ; but 'tis better thatDESTINY. ^67it should not be so. Tell me, only tell me, thatyou never loved me ; say, then, Horihda, oh, inmercy say, list you love me no longer ! that youhate, abhor me \** and he gasped as he spoke ; hisbrow was contracted as in agony, and his eyesseemed as if they would start from their sockets.A fiiint blush rose to Lady Waldegrave'scheek as she replied, ^^ You judge of my feelingsby your own, it seems. Mine change not soeasily."Oh, Florinda, dearest, most beloved !" andhe pressed her hand to his lips, to his heart, andboth were silent for some moments ; when, suddenlydropping it, he wildly exclaimed, « Whydo you suffer me to touch that hand, Florinda ?it never can be mine now — never ! Florinda" —and he spoke in a tone of deep, but suppressedagony — ." Florinda, I will not conceal it, you aredearer to me than life itself. I never did love,I never can love, another as I love you — ^to madness,to distraction; and yet — and yet" — and thecold drops hung round his brow — ** I am on theeve of marriage with another !"Uttering an exclamation. Lady WaldegraveS56 Destiny*would have risen from her seat, but, starting up,he withheld her.^^ Not till you have heard all. Hear me, inmercy hear me, Florinda — by Heaven you shall {*->I will not suffer you to believe me a monsterof perfidy !" — Then softening — " Florida obmy knees I implore you to hear me ! Erring*-t-guilty as I may be, you shall acquit me at leadof premeditated deception. I have acted rashlywildly, madly, but not basely !"Lady Waldegrave's only reply was turningher head haughtily away. <Do you then refuse to hear me ?* askedReginald, in a voice of forced composure.To what purpose should I hear you ? I havealready heard too much — I have heard myselfinsulted."- " Insulted !^-oh, Florinda, you whom I adore,worship"And have deceived* interrupted LadyWaldegrave, emphatically.<* Florinda, you must, you shall hear me I"cried he firmly, seizing both her hands in his.^' You shall hear all, and then condemn me if youDssTimr. SS9yriiln A thousand times I have attempted towrite to you — ^to lay open my whole heart to you-—to throw myself on your pity — ^to implore youto fly from me — ^to forget me — but in vain; wherecaul I find words to express the agonies of mysoul ! agonies which have made it easier for meto feign hatred than to assume indifference towardsyou." — He paused, as if to regain composure,but, in a hurried, agitated manner, resumed.^^ I need not tell you, that from the first momentI beheld you at Naples, I loved you — thatyou well know. From that time I lived but inyour sight — I saw only you — heard only you ;for weeks I lived in a dream — a delirium ; everythingwas forgotten, or, if remembered, rememberedonly with indifference or disgust. Andyet — sat that very time, when my whole soul wasyours — I confess — with shame and misery unspeakableI confess — ^my faith was plighted toanother ! — Bear with me, Florinda, but for a fewshort minutes, and cru shall hear all — It wasdone in the weakness and ignorance of boyhood.I had mistaken friendship, relationship, affect1200 tfEffnunt.tion, for love — There was my misfortune — nayevime, if you will."No," cried Florinda, while her cheek glowedwith a deeper carnation — " that was not yotbroffence — Had you stopped there — bus ^To dare to love you — ^to tell you titan I lovedyou — eyes, I allow that was presumption — frenzyfettered as I was ; but at least you will do medie justice to acknowledge that the avowal Ofmy love was forced from me by circumstances—and that even tien, when I poured out the feelingsof my heart before you, I did not concealfrom you that an obstacle then stood in the wayof my happiness — I could not bear to name it toyou ; but it was one I scattered myself I shouldbe able to remove. I trusted that time andabsence would have wrought the same change inher that had taken place in me, and that the taskwould be an easy one, to break the ties we soprematurely formed. It has not proved so — sheloves me still — still ! Ah ! do not scorn her affection,Florinda; it is, I am sure, such as she isherself, tender and sincere. But even laid itbeen less so, even were it far otherwise, from theDB8TUIY* Q61situation in which I am now placed, to retreaton my part would be infamy. By the death ofher brother, I am now unhappily heir to theprincely inheritance of her &ther. All that hehas must be mine. I owe him much — He haabeen a father to me through life. To renouncethis reliance would be worse than death to Mmit would be eternal disgrace tome that is theonly price I cannot — mil not — pay for you. Iwould have sacrificed myself a thousand times,rather than have met you again as we have nowtaaet — and then to part for ever !"^< And she for whom you make this sacrificeaccepts it. She values it, perhaps, the more f(Hrwhat it costs ?" said Florinda, idly.No — oh no ; she is ignorant of all."So blind ! yet you think she loves you ?'^^ I am sure she does."Lady Waldegrave moved her head incredulously,and a slight senile of scorn wreathed herUp.^^ You doubt, Florinda !" excluded Reginald,anxiously regarding her She was silent.^< Tell me," cried he, still more earnestly.2B2 DESTINY,have you any reason to believe — to suspect —that Edith" He stopped in extreme perturbation.^f Loves you as a brother, a friend, as a companion,a playfellow, a cousin; in all these reartons I do believe you are loved."For a moment, whether from vanity .or surprise,Sir Reginald looked almost displeased;but in another instant his eyes sparkled withrenewed firesU it should be so I" he exclaimed, eagerly.Aid yet — and yet — from her own lips I hadthe avowal — timid and sensitive as she is, shegave me the spontaneous assurance of her love.Ah, Florinda, even she dared to say more thanever you have said !"Unjust ! ungenerous !" said Lady Landgrave,crimsoning as she cast her eyes on theground.Florinda, dearest, forgive me ! But were itas you suppose, you might yet be mine !" Andagain he pressed her hand to his Ups, and a longsilence Ensued; each seemed as though theyfeared to break the spell which blinded theirDESTINY. Sedhearts and senses to the self-delusions, whichall unregulated minds, and selfish spirits, sopassionately love to indulge.Suddenly a dark shadow fell upon them, and,looking up, they perceived (with what feelingsmay be imagined) the huge person of Mr M^-Dow actually bending over them, with outstretchedneck, and eyes and mouth open to theirutmost extent, Amailye hanging by the bridleon his arm. Sir Reginald's eyes flashed fire,and he cast a glance at the intruder, which, foramoment, caused even his obtuse nature toquail, and he instinctively retreated a few steps,while he said, affecting great delicacy of speech,^^ I hope I have not been guilty of any intrusion; if I hadn't met Miss Edith, who told mewhat has happened, I would really have takenthis for a courting-scene, hoch, hoch, ho !" Then,losing his bodily fears, he advanced, and seatinghimself almost close to Lady Waldegrave, hetook off his hat, pulled his pocket-handkerchiefout of it, and began to wipe his forehead, whileAmailye cropped the sweet mountain herbage.Florinda instantly rose, and with her cheeks264 DSSTIHT.in a glow, said — ^ I am now sufficiently repliedSr Reginald, to be able to retom;" and with aslight bend of the head to Mr M'Dow, she walker*ed away*Reginald, conscience-stricken and rialiniiisn,ed, not daring to offer her Us aim, accompaniedher in silence. Bnt they had not proceededmany steps before Mr M'Dow was thunderingafter them, and pushing forward, said, as heextended one of his great elbows, (Amailyehanging on the other,) <^ WlU your ladyddp domethe your to take my arm ?'In an instant Reginald came round from theother side, with looks of lightning, and placinghimself between Florinda and the enormouselbow, drew her arm within his, and in a voiceof stifled fiery, said, ^' We shall only impedeyour progress, sir ; had you not better mountyour horse, and proceed ?"^^ I thank you, sir," returned the impregnableM^Dow ; " but Fm in no particular hurry."^* I beg pardon, sir ; but I should hare supposedyou were," said Sir Reginald, still risingDESTINY. 265m Ms bending indignation. *^ It i» rather unusual,18 it not, for clergymen in this country to betravelling during church service ?'It is so, certainly," returned Mr M*Dow,with perfect composure ; " you are quite right,it is certainly not quite orthodox. But thereare circumstances in my case which I thinkwould satisfy even the Presbytery, if the worstshould come to the worst, and I should be broughtbefore it at your instance, Sir Reginald — ^hoch,hoch, ho ! — But the fact is, that, although atthis moment I can't say I'm in no particularhurry, (as I go but a short distance to-day,) yetI must confess, I'm nevertheless in haste; forsince the truth must be told, I'm in no less thanwedding haste. My fair lady has done me thehonour to fix Wednesday, the twenty-ninth, forthe happy day, which is rather sooner than wasoriginally proposed, in consequence of the arrivalof Mr Eddie of Manchester, and his &-mile, to the marriage. Mr Eddie is the lady'smaternal uncle, and is to officiate as her fatherupon the occasion, so it would be a terrible businessif all was ready but the bridegroom — ^hoch,VOL. II. M206 DESTINY.ho ho ! — I was to have taken the steam-boat tomorrowmornings but healing last night that theboiler of the Aberdeen boat had burst, and rerjnear killed a passenger, I began to think thatthey were not very chancy, and that I would bebetter on the back of my pdwney than in theboiler of a steam-boat, hoch, hoch, ho j So I justkept incog, at the manse, and slipped away ata time when I thought there was little chance ofmeeting any body. I merely go as &r as myfriend Auhnahashnish's this afternoon, and thereI'll catch the coach as it passes 4x>-morrow, whichwill take me to Glasgow the same evening. Andnow, I hope, you'll allow. Sir Reginald, thatthis is an extreme case. Only conceive, if anymischance had come oyer the boat, and I in it,what a dreadful situation for the lady, what anawful predicament for a person of feeling andrefinement !"To this dread anticipation no answer was returned,and. the party proceeded; Mr M*Dowexpatiating on the advantages and disadvantagesof steam-boats, their cheapness and facility, theirdangers and disagreeableness .till Sir ReginaldDESTINY. 267impatiently interrupted him, by saying, " Thisroad, sir, is ill calculated for so many persons ;I would recommend you to move forward."The road is a little narrow to be sure," returnedMr M^Dow, ^^ but I can fall back a stepor two, and at the same time enjoy the advantagesof the good company I have been so fortunateas to fall in with ; besides its rather steepfor my beast, who's not just so sure-footed as shehas been, and so I prefer walking; not that Tmjust so encumbered as the poor Highland postman,who said he could not get on, because hewas sair tangled with a horse ! — hoch, ho, ho !"but the hills only echoed Mr M'Dow's laugh,as he met with no interruption from either ofhis companions. Sir Reginald was chafing infiery silence, and Lady Waldegrave's bonnetconcealed her face. But-still bent on makinghimself agreeable, he pushed close up to LadyWaldegrave, again offering his arm. *yourladyship appears much fatigued, had you notbetter accept additional help ?' A cold andhaughty bow was the only answer vouchsafed.Nothing daunted, Mr M*Dow went on — *^ We968 DESTINY.haye not here the conveniences that you have inforeign parts** he continued ; " Pm told theycarry the ladies over the mountains in sedan-chairs,and that puts me in mind of what happenedto a countrywoman of ours, Sir Reginald, when hefirst went to Edinburgh. He had been invited toa fine party, and he thought he would treat himselfwith a chair for gentility's sake. But, lo andbehold ! the chair wanted the bottom ; the chairmenwere in a hurry, and away they trotted, ripone street and down another, the poor gentleman'sbody in the chair, and his feet racing awaythrough the dirt ; quo' he, an 'twere for thehonour o' the thing, 'troth I wad hae preferredplain walking — hoch, hoch, ho !" In this mannerMr M*Dow went on, beguiling, as he thought,the weariness of the way to his companions,whose silence he attributed solely to fatigue.There was no shaking oS the minister. Asithere was a near cut to Auchnahashnish throughGlenroy grounds, he kept in close contact tillwithin a short distance of the Castle, when, withmany regrets aendapologies at not being able topay his respects to his worthy patron, he madeDESTINY. 269his parting speech " Well, St Reginald, Ihope you'll soon give me an opportunity of doingas. I am going to be done by ; and no doubt, mylady, I shall have the pleasure of seeing youofficiating as best maid on the occasion." Thenmounting his Amailye, he rode ojBT.Intolerable as his presence had been, his absencewas scarcely less supportable in the presentstate of the parties, and his departure wasfollowed by a silence. It was not till they hadalmost reached the house that Reginald wasimpelled to break it, when, in an agitated voiceand manner, he said, '^ Florida, I have stillmuch to say — ^you must hear me — ^you must domejustice — I cannot live under the sense ofyour displeasure — of your contempt," he added,as she withdrew her arm from his, saying, coldly,^< Excuse me ; I am too much fatigued to resumea subject, which had perhaps better never havebeen revived."^^ I am sick of life !" he exclaimed, passionately.^' Do not then, drive me to desperation !Promise me, at least, that you will again hearme!"270 DESTINY.Perhaps — another time — not now," saidLady Waldegrave, as they entered the house ;and she hastily quitted him, aware that she hadleft him in a state of mind which would notallow Mm to rest till he was again at her feet.DESTINY. 271CHAPTER XIX.Lady Elizabeth's natural anxieties mightpossibly have been suppressed at the opera, butwere not to be restrained at church. And afterhaving for some time disturbed the devotions ofthe congregation by her fidgeting and whispering,she at length left; the church, accompaniedby Edith, who was obliged to order the carriageand return home eth her. On arriving there,*they learnt that the object of all this solicitude*had gone to her own apartment much'faitigued,and thither her ladyship repaired, while Edithobeyed a summons to her &ther. She found theChief seated in his gouty chair, wiA no verybenign aspect: Benbowie slumbering besidehim, and Mrs Maeauley fronting them with aserious-looking book in her hand.This is a pretty way Pm treated'' was hissalutation to Edith. <^ I've sent at least ten times2Z2 BE6I1NT.this last hour for Reginald or you, and it seemsit's only now you think it worth while to come !I don't believe there's one of my own houndsthat's neglected in the manner I am. Where'syour cousin ? Where's Reginald ? I ash, whereis he?" Edith (who had seen her &ther justbefore going to church) hastened to expelmatters, but the explanation was received withhigh disdain.You've been all very ill employed in wanderingafter preachers, and leaving jne here withno other company than these two creatures,"pointing to Benbowie and Mrs Macauley; ^<theone squirting tobacco in my &ce all day, theother leaving me with her impertinent trash ofsermons."O now, Glenroy ! how can you speak thatway, when you know the only sermon I've readto you to-day is that beautiful discourse on meeknessby" — —'^ And what the plague have I to do with discourseson meekness ?'^ stamping with his crutchas he spoke.^* That s true — every true, on my conscience,"said Benbowie) roused by the stroke ^of the cratch.'meekness'' rejoined Glenroy; '^ hake. apretty like thing, to be sure, for a HighlandChief; he would cut a pretty figure with meeknessindeed! Meekness — meekness? — meanness!"<^ Ah, Glenroy, for all that, I wish I saw yonclothed in meekness !" sighed Mra.Macauley.'< Clothed in meekness ! pretty like dodui^indeed for a Highland Chief!" cried Glenroiy5furiously.^^ 'Deed then, Glenroy, I'm thinking, after auHighland Chiefs are but human craaturs,'^ saidMrs Macauley, looking as if the idea had for thefirst time entered her mind.^^ You really — there's no bearing this ! I desire,Molly Macauley, you'll take that methodisetical-looking book out of my sight this moment,and never let me see or hear of it again* Thesepuritanical books are enough ta drive a man outof his senses. I hate meekness ! by Jove, if Ihad not the patience of Job, I would not submitto this ! Benbowie, ring the bell — bring it louder.It's very hard that I can't get a word of my ownnephew in my own house."Benbowie, now roused from his skinner) fol*m2274 • Destiny.lowed Mrs Jilaeaiiley and ber volmne of' sermonsout of the room, as Reginald entered.*Edith awestruck with the paleness and dejectionof^is countenance, on which the recent traces ofagitation were still visible ; and a wild namelessfear i^;ain darted through her mind.>< Come. away, H^pboiald,^' .cried iGleHroy,extending his hand to him, ^* conway, if s longsince I've seen you; but, I )mow, it's not yourfault, it's these foolish women that take youiiqp-t-but you should not mind they Beginidd. Andwhen's that English set going :sway, Edith —what's keeping them hare «U this time ? If theyexpect to see any more of me they're muchmistaken, I can tell them. My foot shall notcrossly own room door till Pto seen their backsturned ; but let them go or stay, don't 3MN1 troubleycHir head about them, Reginald. I see you'requite done out, dancing attendance mi then ; butI must put a stop to that, and the best way to doiti8,to get you married to Judith, and then youcan give all your time and attention to me.Where wte you-going, Edith ? come back thismoment — going away at the very time Ism settlingyour marriage, you silly thing !"Destiny. 275-Editb^ with her see in a gl<nir^:9topp6d irresolute; but, in her KKmiosion^ saw not fheincrea-idng rudeness ^md lost of agony, whisk stole overBeghukld's features.<^ You know Fm to hare the woods tf^msedfor her portion, and Ffl rider liiere'someda^ntrithyou mys^,'^^Reginidd, and you shall^have mtthe blad:<^BUttre. - It* was a good one thi^iLordwhatNkHyoUi^>ciAll»him^ having the impudence toask me ^ palftrwith thatfinare. Nonnan^« mare ! -he would have had edith' too; but I everwould, give her t<^ any man living' but yourself,Reginald. Butthk is the 426th of the monthsis it iM>t? Writ, let it be in the courso'iofthe' next monde, ^and that gives thine enoo^ toget all he trumpery, and to invite the eountftoit. The sooner the better-sand (rien, Reginaldwe'll part no more,"-^with a fervent ahidLe ofthe hand. • Much-more of the same sort followed,while Sir Reginald, wkh a sidkttad an achingheart, articulated seme indistinct words, wlucb,however, passed very well with Glenroy. Atlength ^e was - liberated by the 'Brand of thedressing bell.276 msarivr.slate and tardily the parly atoned in Gibetowing-room. Edith naturally tinned diepossibility of a tete-astute with her loyer, afterwhat had passed in her hearing about the marriage;and his as may be supposed, was not moredesirous of meeting with ime the very sight ofwhom spoke daggers to Diis conscience.Dinner had been announced some time beforeLady Elizabeth made her appearance, which sheat last did in her morning dress, and with visiblemarks of business and bustle in her department.^' Excuse me, my dear child'' said she toEdith, '^ for coming to dinner en dishabille; butsince I saw you, I have been so hurried I reallyscarcely know .what I am about. Florinda —(who, by the by, begs that you will excuseher appearing at dinner, as she still feels ratherabaUUf from the wretched walk she had; butDr Price assures me a little rest is all that is•necessary,) has had an express from the Duchessof Porchester, who it seems is come with theDuke to his shooting-box, entreating us to gotoher immediately. Florinda begged I wouldshow her note to you, that you may see howDESTINY. , 277impossible it is to refuses There are no secretsin it; I shall read it aloud:* My dear Lady Waldegravb^^< ' I have this instant learnt yon are at GkfA'*roy consequently not more than thirty-six miki^£«mu8,which,acc<»dii^ftoHighlandgeog«phy,k about the same distance as between Piccadillyand St James's. Judge, then, of my impatienceto have you here. Do oblige me, and comeimmediately; I have a rery particular reason forwishing you to be here before the 27th. I cannotexpress how much you will gratify me by coming.We have a perfect host of your adorers here, andnow that they are tired of shooting grouse, Ifeftrthey will take to shooting themselves, unless youcome to us ; and then, perhaps, they will onlyshoot one another. I know you will come, dearestdear Lady Waldegrave, and oblige your affectionatefriend,* Charlotte Porchester.<^ ^ As horses are not quite so plenty as heatherin tills charming country, the Duke b^ me tosay he will send his to meet you at the (I can't78 DESTINY.iptU'die 'war) ferry opposite Glenroy, windand weather serving,* tomorrow, as they surelywill, to oblige you and me, and half a dozen dyingswains and desperate inamoratas. This will saveyon about a thousand miles nuM*e or less. Ofboone when I say emi, I inside. Lady Elizabethand 'Aflame Latour, and aU^near and dear toyou. I enclose a billet to Sir Reginald, althoughI suppose, if report speaks truth, I need scarcityhope he will leave' Us Jtancee^^^nt ivy shouldnot she some too ? Tell Miss Malcolm thid^wiAallfaorts of proper ipeecheaimihe occasion.' ^^ Ah ha, Sir Reginald ( thereby hangs a talewhich we must have someday,'^ cried Lady ]^*«lambeth, forgetting, in theeKhil^raticm of herspirits, all previous antipathies felt and expressed.^ Thales just as it should be," gracing from himto Edith ; << but I understand'' nodding her head,^^ I shall keep your secret, though you scarcelydeserve it, for having kept it so well yourselves,ha, ha, ha ! — But in the meantime, it is very sad,'addressing Edith with an air of childish delightquite at variance with her words, ^ to be obligedto leave you so soon, when we were all 4S0 happyDESTINY. 279and comfortable; but those things. are imavoicUable* Florinda really never has been in splitssince we came here, and my own health suffereda good deal In short, I think we shall all bethebetter of a change. At the same time, Ithink I did right in coming here* I feel morecomfortable at having seen poor Olenroy, and Iflatter myself I haye done him a little good. Isandal I could to raise his spirits, poor man, andI think I succeeded I and, apropos, I believe Imost endeavour to see Jim .again before I go,just to bid him good bye. We must hope however,to meet in town by and by. I think Ihave half persuaded Olenroy ^ bring you therenext winter ; indeed I am sure lie wills but perhapsyeu wills with us toKinmore — why shouldnotyou,inydear? You will be muckle better ofalitlle.gaiety*^you are too much moped heresApropos, Sir Reginald, I hope Florinda sent youthe :note. that came entered for you from theDuchess?'Sir Reginald merely bait his head in acknowledgmentsas he advanced, and' offered Us. armto conduct her ladyship to dinner, while4she continuedchattering all the way along.280. Destiny.They were seated before Madame Latourjoined them, and when she did, her spirits seemedBO less excited than Lady Elizabeth's, at the prospectof exchanging Glenroy for Gilmore ; leadboth were so talkative during dinner, that thsilence of the rest of the company was as mucihamatter of necessity as of choice. Lady Elizabethtalked of the anticipated pleasures of ICinmor^of the charming Duchess, and her brother, IbidWarrington, who was dying for love of Florinda,and for whom she thought Florinda had a sort pfa nuance of preference ; and she appealed to SixReginald who sat pale and frowning, as ifscarcely able to endure the nonsense she uttered*^^ Tm sure, Miss Edith, you may be thankfulyou are not a great heiress," said the simplemindedMrs Macauley ; ^^ for you may be sureyou will be married for true love, and for nothingelse,"^^ O ! unquestionably," cried Lady Elizabeth ;^^ my daughter's rank and fortune, together withher beauty and talents, render her, beyond comparison,the most rechercM person in the world.She win be sadly teazed, poor love ! amongstDESTINY, 281such a croMrd of adorers, as the Duchess callsdiem' Sir Reginald here rose and rang the bellviolently ; then, when the summons was answered,seemed at a loss what to ask for. Edithgazed on him with surprise and fear, and again astrange wild suspicion flashed upon her as sheencountered the malignant smile of MadameLatour. ^^ And now let us arrange somethingabout our journey tomorrow. We must startearly — by twelve, if possible. That won't betoo early for me, Dr Price ? You will arrangeevery shinar for me, as usual, you know. AndSir Reginald. I hope we s J have your company; or, if you would prefer it, perhaps Ho-lindawill give you a seat in her carriage ; Don'tyou think so, Madame Latour ?'But Sir Reginald had caught Edith's eye fixedupon him with an expression of the most intenseanxiety; and before Madame Latour could reply,he made a strong effort at regaining hiscomposure ; and, with the tone and manner ofsuppressed agitation, he hastily said, — " I regretI cannot have that honour, I am otherwise engaged."And as be spoke, he became very pale.282 Destiny.^< Ah, engaged !" cried her ladyship, who,when in good humour, iras always in high spirits.^< That is a rery significant word, and we mustfind out the meaning of it. Come; my dear,"taking Edith's arm, ^* you can perhaps tell methe nature of Sir Reginald's ei^ag^nent ? —What a very pretty blush," she whispered, asthey were leaving the !room. ^^ Madame LatOur,don't you think Edith blushes uncommonlywell ?'<< mais oui," replied Madame Latour; ^^jevaudois que Miss Malcomb, put donner un peude ses belles couleurs au pauvre Sir Reginaal,il est si pale I U a Fair, vat you call unapee."<^ By the by, now that you mentioait, I thinkhe does look a lite paler and things, and moregrave than he used to do," said Lady Elizabeth ;^ but I have observed that some men do look rathergrave when they are going to be-married."<^ Sir Reginaal married !" exclaimed MadameLatour, in real or affected astonishment, — '^ c'estne pas possible ! II me semble mouran^^mou-rant de chagrin-*-de desespoir — de non—non ! je ne le crois pas, Meess Maloomb^ assure-destiny.283ment ce n'est pas vrai — vous ne le croyez pas ?"And Madame Latour fixed her eyes on Edith,who, trembling' as she was with emotion, despisedher too much to betray it.Come, come," cried Lady Elizabeth, " wehare said quite enough on that subject ;" thenputting her arm within Edith's, and drawing heralittle aside — ^^VYes, 'tis as I hinted before, shecertainly had a design in that quarter — show veryabsurd, poor woman, that she cannot concealher disappointment ! — How any one can admireher eyes ! . and do you observe how frightfullyher head is dressed to-day ? And now, my dear,come to my dressing-room, and let me hear allabout this marriage of yours, that you have keptsuch a profound secret."Oa entering the dressing-room, such a tumultuousgreeting took place between the dogsand their mistress, . that Edith was spared theembarrassment of a reply.*' We shall be quiet here," continued Lady .Elizabeth, throwing herself into a chaise hnffue,while the dogs continued to bark and coughout their welcome, << quiet is absolutely necesseDESTINY.say to me in my delicate state of health. Youwill find a seat somewhere, my dear," eastingher eyes around on the various chairs, whichwere covered with dresses, hats, and caps. ^^ Ro-sale,"she called to her maid in the inner apartment,^* Otez ces bursts et ce manteau, et advancesune chaise, pour mademoiselle. — Now, my dear,never mind her, she don't understand a word ofEnglish ; but apropos, (ring the bell first, I musti^eak to Rousseau, about putting new strings tomy guitar before we go,) well, and so you weretelling me — I forget how it was you and SirReginald first became acquainted — is not that aknock at the door ? How tiresome ! See who itis, my dear. — Oh ! Dr Price, is that you — comein — I must beg you will see the housekeeperyourself about the refreshments we shall requirein the carriage ; you know how little I eat, butI find variety absolutely necessary for me ; infajctj my dear, the stomach requires to be amusedas well as the mind" turning to Edith, ^^ andthat is a secret worth knowing." But the secretwas lost on Edith, who had taken the opportunityof Doctor Price's entrance, to make herexit.DESTINT. ScCHAPTER XX.Without a general knowledge of humannature, the particular study of an individual isof little use in enabling us to draw accurateconclusions as to the effect events may produceon the mind ; for, as some one has truly said,there is nothing so inconsistent as consistency.Edith thought she knew her father sufficiently,to be certain he would rejoice at hearing of theapproaching departure of his lady, and she thereforehastened to his apartment to communicatethe pleasing intelligence ; but, to her utter surprise,it was received with every symptom ofdissatisfaction and displeasure.Going away, tomorrow !" he repeated, atleast half-a-dozen times; ^^ that is the mostextraordinary thing I ever met with in the whole286 DESTINY.course of my life ! I can scarcely say I haveseen far, the mother, yet ; and the other one'the daughter, I've never once set eyes upon;and I don't so much as know yet what broughtthem here at all — What's taking them away insuch a hurry ? The duchess of nonsense ! whatdo I care for the Duchess of Porchester ? — theydid not come here to visit her, but to see me ;and if s quite inconceivable to me what's takingthem away, I can't make it out, there's somethingI don't understand in it — ^there's somethingnot right — there's something quite wrong ! Theymust have been ill used since they came to thehouse, or they would not be leaving it so soon.How has that simpleton, Molly Macauley, beenbehaving herself? that creature really has notthe sense of a sparrow — to go away, too, at thevery time of your marriage. — Ring the bell — Ishall have this cleared up — they shall not leavethis house till I know the reason of such behaviour.— What's keeping that fellow, Duncan ?ring again. I want him to help me to dress, forI'm coming to the drawing-room — I must knowthe meaning of this — So go away now, and don'tDESTINY. 287let me hear any of your nonsense — I shall go,"stamping his crutch, ^^ if I should go on thecrown of my head."And Edith, knowing how vain expostulationwas, withdrew, trembling at the thoughts of anotherscene between the Chief and his lady, andanticipating an abrupt disclosure of her approachingmarriage. She next sought Florinda ;but she was denied admittance to her, on dieplea of her ladyship's headach being so bad shewas unable to see any one save Madame Latour,who was, as usual, closeted with her. She thenrepaired to Lady Elizabeth, to acquaint herwith what had passed with her &ther, and totry, if possible, to prevail upon her to gratifyhim, if he should be very pressing with them toremain a little longer at Glenroy. But herladyship was busy directing and superintendingthe movements of her attendants, in packing thevariety of litter which still lay scattered around,such as dresses, jewels, music, writing and drawingimplements, French novels, drugs, &c. &c.She therefore scarcely listened to her, and only288 DESTINY.answered the invitation she gave in her father'sname for. a longer stay, by a quick and peremptoryrefusal, or a slight acquiescence as to meetinghim in the drawing-room. Vexed and perplexed,poor Edith knew not where to turn —there was no one near to whom she could speakof the untoward aspect of affairs, still less towhom she could imply for advice and assistance.To Reginald, who had once used to be her confidanteand counsellor, she now felt an unaccountablereluctance to have recourse : an invisiblebut impassable barrier seemed to have beenraised between them — but by whom she couldnot tell; it was something she felt, but couldneither describe nor comprehend. Such was thetenor of her thoughts as she sat alone in the ,her head resting on her hand, and thetears unconsciously dropping from her eyes, whenthe door opened, and the object of her meditationsentered, with an air of dejection and gloom.He gazed on her for some moments, but saidnothing. Edith could not speak, but her tearsfell faster. Reginald sighed, but it was a sighthat breathed more of discontent and displeasureDESTINY. 289*than of sympathy or sorrow. He remained forsome time as if struggling with his emotion;then$ in an agitated voice, he said, ^* Edith, youappear to be unhappy ?'Edith struggled against her feelings, and witha melancholy smile replied, " Only sorrowful."And why sorrowful?' demanded Sir Reginald.^^ After what has passed, I did not expect— I flattered myself — I — if there is anycausessighed, and, in spite of her efforts torestrain them, tears continued to drop from hereyes.For Heaven's sake, Edith, tell me, I conjureyou, as you value my peace, as you valueyour own — tell me the cause of your tears, ofyour sorrow ?"I cannot tell," said Edith, with emotion ; " Iscarcely know myself; but strange, vague, undefined,but very painful feelings, take possessionof me."You did not use to be fencifiil or vapourish,"said Reginald, looking earnestly at her.Nor am I now," said Edith, more firmly ;vox. 11. N290 DESTINY.bat—" she stopped, and her voice quivered^^ we speak a strange language to each othernaw) Reginald — it was not thus we were wontto talk in former times."<< And whose felt is that, Edith?' he askedahmpdy, as he stooped to caress his dog to hidehis confusion.Not mine," replied she faintly.Sir Reginald raised his head, but his eyeswere still fixed on his dog, while he said in aquick, hurried manner, " Yet, after what passedto-day, a few hours ago, in your fiither^s presence,it seems somewhat strange that I shouldfind you thus apparently wretched."^< Ah, Reginald ! you did not use to speak thushardly to me," said Edith reproachfully, as shestrove to dispel her tears.I did not use to see you look as if you weregoing to be sacrificed," he replied, with increasingharshness of manner.You know it is not so," said Edith, tenderly,and she blushed as she said it.Reginald made no reply. Edith gatheredcourage, and went on — " But were I to judgeDESTINY. 291thus of you, what might I not think ? what oughtI not to think ?'Reginald's colour rose, and for a few secondshe seemed as if at a loss how to reply ; he thensaid, ^^ Of course, I might have expected thataccusation would be answered by recrimination ;had I complained of your spirits being too high,you would to a certainty have replied, that 'twasbecause mine were so boisterous; 'tis the way,not with all, but with a great part of your sex,Edith."Edith's heart swelled at. this taunt, but shemade an effort to repress her feelings, and withtolerable calmness said, <^ If I am the foolish,unreasonable creature you represent me tQ be,you cannot wish" — ^her voice sidled ^her, but sheadded, in a faltering accent, ^^ We had betterpart."This was the very point to which her faithlesslover had, unconsciously to himself, been aimingto bring her, that the odium of the quarrel mightrest upon her ; but though blinded by selfishpassion, he was not so lost to every generousfeeling as not to be smote with a sense of hi. owninjustice and cruelty. Passion and conscience292 DESTINY,struggled in his breast, and, averse to yieldentirely to either, he sought to compromisebetween them.<^ Edith'' he said with emotion, <^ your happinessis dear to me as my own ; if it is to beattained by my relinquishing my right to youraffections — Edith, is it so ? — Speak to me, Iimplore you." And he grasped her hand, andgazed intensely on her face, on which deepblushes and deathly paleness alternately succeededeach other.** Tell me*' cried Reginald, with increasingvehemence, ** what it is you wish — what youwould have me do ? and you shall be gratified,even at the expense of my own happiness ; moreI cannot say." And he dropt the hand he held.I have no wish, Reginald," . said Edith,faintly, " but to see you such as you were informerhappy days."That can never be," interrupted he, impatiently." I have told you I am changed. Ihave known suffering, and anguish-^d 1can never be as I have been. K that is a crimein your eyes, then I am most culpable."JIo, Reginald, you wrong me," cried Edith,DESTINY. 299in tender emotion. " Perhaps I wrong you tyet strange doubts will arise in spite of all — '<misgivings of — I know not what, Reginald ; Iwould fain tell you what I sometimes think-^what I fear — but the dread of hurting you'* — >. — tShe stopped in extreme agitation, without dawring to raise her eyes to Reginald, who remainedsilent, and evidently not less embarrassed thatherself. The wished-for, yet dreaded eclaircisse*ment seemed now on the point of taking place,,and he feared alike to aid or impede it. Edithalone should be the destroyer of her own happiness.She might wrest from him the secret ofhis heart ; she might tear aside the veil in whichhe had sought to shroud the image he adored ;she might rush into the sanctuary of his inmostthoughts, after he had warned her that there wasa point at which she must stop. But never — no,never — should his lips breathe that name to her.,Never should his be the hand to rend away herdelusion. Where, then, was the injustice heshould be guilty of ? Who, then, could dare tosay he had wronged her? — Such was the sophistrywith which the slave of passion strove to silenceS94 DESTINY.the mall still roioe of conscience, while he hungin agOBflsiiig suspense on the word that shouldnext issue from Edith's lips, as that w)ii(^ wasto seal both their dooms ; but the stroke was yetaverted. Both were roused from this state ofnrnte, but faigh^wrought feeling, by the bustlewhich invariably attended' Glenroy's approach,and presently the Chief entered, leaning on hisservant, and shuffling along with great difficulty,attended by Mrs Macauley and Benbowie* Inthe agitation of her spirits, Edith felt unable tostand the scrutiny even of such common observersas these, and she was hastily retreating,wl^n recalled, in an authoritative voice, by Glen-roy,who never could bear to see any body leavethe room while he was in itWhat's the meaning of this ?' cried he inhis loudest key ; ^^ going out of the room justat the moment I'm coming into it? Is that aproper behaviour? I really think you ought tobe ashamed of yourself, Edith. Is that the wayyou welcome your old father to the use of hisfeet?"O, papa !" said Edith, taking his hand, " howcan you doubt"DESTINY. 295'< How can I doubt? What am I to doubt?'interrupted Glenroy, peevishly. ^^ I'm for noneof your doubts — ^I hate doubts. I desire I maynere see or hear of doubts for I despise tikam./ never doubt — I never did doubt — and neverwill doubt, for I hate all doubtful characters. Socome you here, Reginald and sit by me, for Iknow there's nothing doubtful about you all's(sen and above-board with you. — Now MnMacauley, I desire you to bold your tongue ibrthe rest of this evening ; haven't I been heavedwith it the whole of this day, and do you thinkI'm going to submit to be preached to by youany; longer? I'll do no such thing," stamfHBghis stick.<^ Well but, Glenroy, as sure as death I'mnot speaking."^< Not speaking ! you never give over speaking— your tongue never lies 1 but I'm for nospeaking at present ; so hold your tongue, andorder the coffee, and go and see what s keepingLady Elizabeth and the rest of them — I'm waitingfor them — I don't understand it. I mustknow whafs the meaning of this; for I'Unot2d6 DESTINY.suffer either my own character. or the characterof my houses to be aspersed — however, I shallhave it all cleared up before this night is oyer,and unless they choose to stay to your manage^* I beg — I — I entreat, Glenroy — I/* stammeredReginald, violently agitated.<* Ay, ay, I understand what you would say**interrupted Glenroy, ** and you shall haye everything your own way, Reginald; you know you'reas much master here as I am, and more too, forVm grown a perfect cipher in my own housenow — I've no more authority than if it didn'tbelong to me. But there's one thing I'm determinedupon, and that is, that there shall be noitiore of this shilly-shallying by these silly Women,but that you shall have your own Way,Reginald, and be married before you're a montholder, so don't say another word about it — ^therehas been a great deal too much talking already.I rieyer knew any good come of talking — I daresayif s just that creature Molly Macaulay longtongue that has put every thing wrong — shereally ought to haye her mouth stitched up !"DESTINY. ^7CHAPTER XXLMeanwhile Mrs Macauley, anxious to doher part, was labouring away to keep the peacebetween Glenroy and his lady. As the firstobject in her life was the favour of the Chief, soshe could not conceive that it was a thing to belightly esteemed by any body else, much less byhis own wedded wife. She therefore gladlyavailed herself of the errand she had been dispatchedupon, to apprize Lady Elizabeth, at thesame time, how greatly Glenroy was distressedat the thoughts of her departure. A piece ofinformation which she had no doubt would atonce annihilate the whole scheme, and settle heratGlenroy for as long a time as it should be herlord's pleasure that she should remain. But allMrs Macauley's eloquence failed in producingany effect on her ladyship's feelings.Oh, my lady !" said she, " you must notn2298 DESTINY.vpesk to Glenroy of going away, for 'deed he'sso hospitable, and so used to be humoured, andto get every thing his own way, (and thaf s nomore than what he ought to 'get,) that if he'scrossed by your ladyship, he'll be neither to holdnor to bind, good man that he is !"^* You don't mean to say, I am in the powerof a madman, and that I can't get away ?" saidher ladyship, in some alarm.^^Oh no ! no at all; there will nothing happento you, if you'll just be so good as let Glenroytake his own way, and be discreet to him— andif he shall say, black's white, if your ladyshipwould just please to say the same — and then,may be if you would be so good as to offer tostay to please him, he would then be ready toletyou go."It is excessively troublesome," said her ladyship; ^^ really quite childish in Glenroy."^* 'Deed, and it's a very odd fancy thaf s comeon him," said the simple Mrs Macauley ; ^^ andmay be he is now and then just a littleton whatyou would call not just so clever and sensible asheused to be ; but then, you know, that makesB£STIKY«^ 209it all the eager for your ladyship tQ agree witibCertainly," said her ladyship, ^* when a manis fairly in his dotage, he must be treated like achild ; and I shall make a point of seeing briganddoing all J possibly caiji to soothe and gratifyhim, without giving way to his whims." Andwith this laudable purpose in viewy her ladyshipat length descended to the drawing-room.But in the interval, Glenroy had got a newlight on the subject; for Reginald, upoja beingmade acquainted with the cause of his disturb*once, had given a decided opinion in favour ofthe ladies being allowed to take their departure ;and the point was settled by hLsi saying — and hetried to say it coolly and steadily— that if theyremained, he should take the opportunity ofOlenroy having such agreeable company withluun, to pass a few days at Dunshiera*'^ Well, tien, let them go," cried the Chief,and at that moment his lady entered, fully preparedto be pressed to stay. They met withmutual embarrassment, for the fear of losingReginald by any indiscreet word restrainedGlenroy from what he called speaking his mind ;300 DESTINY.and his lady, somewhat intimidated by Mrs Maoaudley's representations, was no less guarded onher part The salutations were therefore verywell performed on both sides; and there waseven considerable politeness evinced in the passingbut guarded remarks that were made byeach. Glenroy enquired after Lady Landgrave,and received in reply a very rational andmoderate apology for her non-appearance, on theplea of being over fatigued by going to churchan excuse admirably adapted to conciliate theCheers favour.But I hope, now you are so much recovered,Glenroy, I shall have an opportunity of presentingmy daughter to you some day very soon,"said her ladyship, bent on conciliating him at thetrifling expense of truth; nothing in reality beingfarther from her wishes and intentions than thatany such opportunity should be afforded.*^ Why I thought — didn't somebody tell mej'ou were going to leave us ?' said Glenroy, withsome embarrassment.Why, we there talking about it," repliedthe lady, with the ease of one accustomed to tellDESTINY. 301white lies ; ** but since you are unwilling to partwith us" — : —Oh no ! not at all," interrupted Glenroy,confusedly; ^^ that's to say, I think people shouldalways take their own way. I never interferewith any body's plans — never. I let every bodydo as they like."On my conscience, I never knew that before!" said Benbowie, with a look of stupefiedamazement ; " but it's very true — every true."*^ You are very kind, Glenroy," said his lady ;** you know, the only plan I had in view bycoming here was to have the pleasure of seeingyou, and spending some time with you; and Iassure you, this visit has been a very great gratificationto me. I am quite charmed to see youlook so well, and to find you so comfortable."** You've seen much of my looks and comfort,or else not," muttered Glenroy, the pent-upstorm ready to take any direction.Not so much, to be sure, as I could havewished," said the lady, in a tender tone ; " butquite enough to satisfy me that you are wellandhappy, Glenroy."802 DESfJKY.I^^ Well and happy !" repeated the Chief, indignantly,^^ do yon tell me I am well, when Imean hardly put my foot to the ground with gout ?and happy, when Fve lost the finest youngloan that ever was born ? Well and happy { —well and happy, to be sure T'^^ Ah, to be sure, these are things that can'tbe helped, Glenroy, and so we must bear themas well as we can ! But you have a charminghouse ; this is a noble^apartm^nt, and I do assureyou I have been very comfortable, and I thinkmy appetite, upon the whole, has improved whileI have been here. Dr Price thinks so too*'** I know nothing about Dr Price ; I don'tdesire to know any thing about any of yourdoctors ; I know / have no appetite— army appetite'scompletely gone !"Ah ! but it will return again, Glenroy. Youought to amuse your stomach ; in fact, the stomachrequires to be amused as well as the mind.1 hope you will enjoy your own good dinners asmuch as some of your guests have done. I doassure you, you keep an excellent table."To be sure I do," said Glenroy, scornfully.DESTINY. 803^^ The soups and fish are excellent, which isnot always the case in Scotland' continued thelady.^^ Every thing is excellent at my table' saidthe Chief, proudly.^^ Excuse me there, Glenroy, I cannot gosuite so far ; for to own the truth, I do not thinkthe vol au vents at all the thing."Vol au vents P* exclaimed Glenroy; " doyou think I trouble my head about such trash ?'^ Excuse me," said her ladyship, with an airof offended dignity, **^butl consider everythingrelating to a table as of consequence, and vol auvents are by no means so insignificant as"^^ They're so insignificant that I don't care ifthe whole race were swept into the sea. Fol auvents ! — Let me hear no more of such trumperyon my table, Edith, remember that ; I'm for noneof your beggarly French, or your pock-puddingEnglish dishes, made of nobody knows what.Vol au vents ! the very scum of the earth !"« O, my lady, if you please, you must justhumour him," whispered ISHxB Macauley; andher ladyship contented herself with a shrug ofher shoulders, and a look of contempt.304 DESTINY.Madame Latour here entered the room, andwas presented to Glenroy by his lady ; and nosooner was that introduction over than Dr Pricemade his appearance, and the same ceremonyhad to be performed with him. This gave time{qt Glenroy's blaze to go down; and scarcelywere the ordinary salutations over, whew forgettingthe restraint laid upon him, he turned to hislady, and said — " K you choose to stay a littlelonger, I shall show you what a true Highlandfeast is, on their wedding-day," pointing to Reginaldand Edith ; ^^ of course you all know thatjny nephew and successor. Sir Reginald, is to bemarried to my daughter Edith immediately."Ah ! so I have just discovered," cried herladyship, gaily.Just discovered !" repeated Glenroy, contemptuously; " where were your eyes that youdid not see it long ago ? — But, Edith, what s themeaning of this ? and why have you been makinga mystery of your marriage ? It's most extraordinary— I don't understand it, for my part — ^amarriage that you've both reason to be proudof !"DESTINY. 305Edith's confusion was too great to allow herto notice the anguish depicted on Reginald'sfeatures, as the piercing gaze of Madame Latourwas fixed upon him.A very suitable match," said Lady Elizabeth; " very suitable indeed ; but, I think, Florindawill be a good deal surprised — Don't youthink so, Madame Latour ?"With marked emphasis, Madame Latour replied," Vraiment oui !"Surprised !" repeated Glenroy ; " what isthere to surprise any body in that ? I think itwould have been very extraordinary if it had beenany thtag else. Surprised — hem ! they mustbe easily surprised !"Why, you must own, Glenroy, it is surprisingthe secret should have been so well kept,that none of us suspected it before to-day."Not suspect what's been known to everyman, woman, and child about the place for theseten years at least? They've been sweetheartsever since they were the height of that table.Wasn't it on that account she refused that Englishlord — what do you call him ? with his thirty306 DESTINY.thoosuid a-year, and that wanted his black mare ?How Mig is it once your courtship began, Reginald?— Thereby first day, I believe, that Edithand you were brought together, was it not ?'^^ N09 no, Glenroy," said his lady, attemptingto be fictions ; ^^ you forget that Morinda washis first love — Was it not so, Sir Reginald ? Butshe was coy, or cruel, or — how was it'*Reginald attempted to laugh, but it was aghastly smile.** Well," resumed the lady, " we shall nottalk of these things. I am sure Florinda will bedelighted when she hears of what is to happen.Edith and I had a long confab in my dressing-roomon the subject, and now I am quite aufaitof the whole business ; but if s a pity we had notknown it sooner — ^we might hare managed tohave been present at the celebration — possiblyFlorinda might even have officiated as bride's-maid; but it is too late now."What's too late ?" demanded Glenroy.^^ Oh ! nothing, nothing, papa" cried £with,hastily.What make it too late ?" said the Qiief,DESTINY. 307addressing his lady ; " it's the most sensible proposalI ever heard you make, —-just stay whereyou are till the marriage is over, and it will beafine ploy for your daughter ^ she may neverhave another opportunity of seeing a Highlandweddingagain,unle«.AecangetaHighlaxidmanfor herself; but she must let herself be seen ifshe expects to get a husband in this country."Lady Elizabeth trembled with indignation, anda little hysterical laugh rattled in her throat asshe repeated, " Lady Waldegrave expect to geta husband in the wilds of Scotland — he, he, he !"'' And why not ?" demanded Glenroy.^^ Good heavens, Glenroy I hpw can you talkso ? she who has the very flower of England ather feet!"Flowers of England ! bah ! — pretty likeflowers, or else not — trash — weeds — that a HighlandChief would tramp below his feet." AndGlenroy stamped with his stick, thus fitting as£ax as he could the action to the wordsIt is time — more than time, we were gone,"said the lady, rising with an air of outrageddignity.^^ Reginald,, Edith," cried Glenroy, no less308 DESTINY.incensed, and throwing off all restraint, ^^ holdboth of your tongues ! — Fm fit to speak formyself, and I trtff say this is the most extraordinarybehaviour ever I met with in the courseof my life ! I wish to know the meaning of it ?I wish to know what people mean by coming tomy house, and then leaving it as if they weren'tpleased with the treatment they had met with ;if there has been any offence given or taken, Ican only say I am ignorant of it. It has notbeen with my knowledge, and I desire to knowwhat brought you here, and what's taking you.away ?"I have only to request, Glenroy," said hislady, still vibrating with anger, " that whenyou speak of Lady Waldegrave, it may be inmore respectful terms than those you have justused."Respectful terms !" thundered Glenroy;I'll speak of nobody in respectful terms ! respectfulterms ! I don't know the meaning ofthe phrase ! I respect no man nor woman either,if she was lady fifty times over. It's very likelythat I should respect tour daughter, when Inever did, and never will respect my own.DESTINY, 309though she's going to be the wife of the man onearth that's the most entitled to respect ! But Isuppose you're disappointed that you've not gothim for your daughter. I suspect that's what'staking you away in such a hurry — it looks verylike it."This is not to be endured !" cried Reginald,starting up; " allow me, Lady Elizabeth, toprotect you from further insult." And takingher arm within his, he led her from the room,his cheek flushed, and his whole air and deportmentexpressive of the utmost agitation. Atsight of this manifestation of Reginald's displeasure,Glenroy was instantly subdued, and Edithwas dispatched to try to bring them back ; butLady Elizabeth had retired to her own apartment,and refused to listen to any overtures ofpeace or reconciliation. Morinda and her friendremained invisible, and Reginald was no wheretobe found. Finding all her efforts to reunitethe jarring elements of the party were vain,Edith at last sought the privacy of her chamber,to ponder over the events of the day, whichweighed heavily on her spirits.31 Distant.CHAPTER XxiiThe following morning all was bustle and preparation,and nothing was to be seen but bootedlacqueys and bonneted Abigail hurrying to andfro, their hands and arms filled with the thousandforget-me-nots pertaining to travellers of distincttion. Lady Elizabeth (like many wiser people)had a great dislike to ferries, and at another timewould have been almost frantic at the thoughtof venturing so precious an argosy as the heiressof Waldegrave even on the smooth surface of asummer sea, for half an hour ; and indeed sbedid at first vow and protest she never would hearof such a thing. However, she at length yielded,upon finding there was no other way in whichthe journey could be accomplished so rapidly, aseven Glenroy's stables could not furnish the requisitenumber of horses, and there was no timeto procure them from the nearest post-hcmse.DESTINY. 311To allay her maternal solicitude, she madeReginald and Edith severally promise that theywould accompany Florinda across the ferry,she herself travelling to that point by land,where they were to meet, and proceed togetherto their destination. In the hurry and bustleof preparation, her ladyship appeared to haveforgot the fracas of the preceding evening, andit seemed to have had rather a salutary effecton Glenroy, as he declared to Mrs Macauley,whUe she poured out his coffee for him, that hefelt better than he had done for a long time,and that, if once the house were rid of them, heshould be quite well. Lady Waldegrave did notappear at breakfast, and Edith in vain soughtto find her alone, for the purpose of explainingto her, ad &r as she could, the situation in whichshe stood with Sir Reginald. After what hadpassed — after she had been thus publicly proclaimedby her father, as on the eve of hermarriage — she thought she owed it to herselfto say a few words to her on the subject, beforethey parted, perhaps for ever. It was also pos-due,too— but her heart trembled at the sug-312 DESTINY.gestion — that in so doing, she might discoverwhether there was any ground for the vague,blameless, shapeless fears which haunted herimagination. But Lady Waldegrave seemedcarefully to shun all approaches to confidence,by taking care to keep either Madame Latour,or her maid, in constant attendance upon her,to the very moment of her departure. Ediththought — but it might be fancy — that she lookeddisconcerted when she declared her intention ofaccompanying her across the ferry ; but beforethere was time for any thing to be said, she wassuddenly called away by an imperative messagefrom Glenroy. Upon hastening to him, shefound the whole of his anxiety was to knowwhen these people were going away, that hemight have a quiet house, and that Reginaldand she might be at leisure to make out theirmarriage. As soon as she could extricate herselffrom her father, Edith went to rejoin Florinda,who was * walking slowly down to the beach,leaning on Madame Latour, and followed by herattendants. Sir Reginald walked by them, buther head was averted from him, and he had anDESTINY. 313air of haughty mortification, as though his attentionshad been rejected.^^ I hope, dear Edith, you won't think it necessaryto take this voyage with me par complainsaid Florinda, in answer to a remark ofEdith's, that she feared an approaching shower.^^ You don't suppose I mind a shower on myown account ?' said Edith. " It was only onyours, for you are not used to such buffeting ofwind and weather as I am."^^ There is no occasion for your running anyrisks, however," said Reginald, hastily. '^ I shallsee Lady Waldegrave safe to .Gilmore."I beg I may not interfere with either SirReginald Malcolm's duties or pleasures," saidLady Waldegrave, coldly.Edith was confounded ; her heart swelled asshe thought, — ^^ He leaves me after all, and atwhat a time i" But she walked on in silence tillthey reached the boat.^^ I have ordered my horses to meet me at theferry," said Reginald, addressing her in the samehurried manner ; ^^ and I shall probably returntomorrow."VOL. II. o314 DESTINY,Edith's cheek flushed to crimson; but shecaught Madame Latour's malicious eyes directedto her with a sort of triumphant smile; and,making a violent effort to retain her composure,she said, ^^ Haying promised Lady Elizabeth thatI should make a point of accompanying X^yWaldegrave across the ferry, I feel bound to performmy promise."^* But you will have no one to return withyou," said Reginald, evidently dissatisfied at thisarrangement. Edith made no reply, for shecould not speak ; but she stepped into the boat,while Sir Reginald, having handed in LadyWaldegrave and Madame Latour, leaped inand placed himself between them.It was one of those bright breezy mornings,when the sun, careering amid an ocean of whiteflickering clouds, seems to smile as he beholdsthem driven hither and thither on the wings ofthe wind, now casting their broad shadows on themountain side, now viewing their own fair fantasticshapes in the depths of the clear waters.For a while, the boat skimmed rapidly along ;but the clouds seemed to hurry still faster andDESTINY, 315faster, their soft fleecy forms gradually turning toone dense expanse of livid grey. The seafowlwere seen fluttering before the impending storm.At length the distant roar of the thunder was heardreverberating amongst the mountains, while thewind, which had suddenly fallen, as suddenly roseto stormy gusts, accompanied with driving sheetsof rain.You will get wet, I fear," said Sir Reginald,as he drew a boat-cloak round Lady Landgrave,and wrapt her in it, with the manner ofone whom anxiety rendered careless of commonforms. Edith felt a pang at this action, triflingas it was; but Reginald seemed unconsciousalike of her presence or of Madame Latour'shysterical screams, for as the blast now ravedwith the furyof mountain storm, that lady's criesfor self-preservation increased in proportion. Tothose unaccustomed to the sudden and violentsqualls which sweep over the mountain faiths,and give to them all the sublimity of power anddanger, this was an appalling storm. The darknessof night hung around, but the raging waterswere white with foam, and the little boat,316 DESTINY.now tossed to the clouds on the crest of somefoaming billow, was as quickly precipitated intothe yawning guli^ which seemed opening to receiveit. Edith had witnessed similar scenes,and was too well accustomed to the capriciousnature of inland navigation to be as much alarmedas her more inexperienced companions. Stillthere was enough of the perilous to excite feelingsof awe, which would have raised her heart inprayer to Him who rules the tempest, and stillsthe wave. But, alas ! one was there who stoodeven between her and heaven. Her eyes werefixed on Reginald, but Reginald's sought nothers — they were bent on Lady Waldegrave,with an expression of the most intense anxiety,and as she sat pale and trembling, uttering brokenexclamations of alarm, he strove to sootheher by vehement assurances of safety and protection.But at length, as if overcome with terror,she closed her eyes, and sunk back, to allappearance lifeless. Then the long-repressedfeelings of her lover's heart burst forth ; and, forgettingevery thing but that his adored Morindalay dying — deed — before him, he threw his armsDESTINY. 317around her, called wildly upon her in brokenaccents of the most impassioned tenderness torevive, and be his — ^his life — ^his love ! and heplaced her head on his shoulder, and him overher as though his own life were at issue — againand again reiterating his vows of love, his fondentreaties.And where was the neglected, the forgottenEdith ? As if transfixed with agony, she remainedcalm and motionless ; her eyes distendedher pale lips apart ^ she sat horror-stricken —speechless — ^and beheld each fond care that oughtto have been hers, lavished upon another. Athousand racks could not have inflicted the torturesshe endured. A whole life of sufferinghad been concentrated into one moment, butthat moment would cast a blight over her wholeexistence !In a short time, however, the wind subsided,the rain ceased, the roar of the angry waters diedaway, and the sun once more began to strugglethrough the mass of black clouds which still encompassedhim. The boat had been driven fromits course towards the point of Inch Organs and318 DESTINY.the crew, anticipating another squall, deemed itadvisable to land The progress of the littlevessel had been anxiously watched from the house,and its hospitable inmates had hastened to thebeach to welcome and assist the dripping passengers.Reginald, still reckless of all but his ownselfish, soul-absorbing interests, bore Morinda inhis arms to shore ; but it Was in silence, for hisfeelings were now suppressed when too late.When Edith was consigned by Captain Malcolmto the cordial embrace of his wife, she foldeda mere living statue to her bosom — ^no soundpassed her Kps — ^no expression spoke in her eyeall was the silence and vacancy of palsiedfeelings— of stupefaction of heart. When conveyedto an apartment, Mrs Malcolm in vainhad recourse to the usual remedies, or soughtgently to soothe her scared spirits to the salutaryrelief of tears. Edith seemed like a bird whichhad escaped some deadly peril, only to sink downstunned and exhausted, to pant its life away.DESTINY. ^19CHAPTER XXIII.It was not until he had seen Lady Waldengrave restored to consciousness, that Reginaldawoke from the delirium into which his selfish,headstrong passion had thrown him. He startedas from a dream ; but at the same time he wasconscious that it was a dream in which he hadlaid bare the inmost recesses of his heart — thathe had given to the winds that secret which hdhad sworn should never pass his lips— and that inthe very ear of plighted love he had proclaimedthe apostacy of his affection. His cheek burnedwith remorse and shame, even while — slave topassion ! — ^his heart bounded with delight as onewho had flung his fetters far from him. Thebarrier was now broken down, which had separatedhim from his idol ; accident had now discoveredto Edith that be loved another — she never320 DESTINY.would have told her so ; he never would haverenounced her, but she might — she would — snowrenounce him — she might be happy toK^ — ^anda tumult of wild contradictory feelings swelledin his heart as conscience and passion struggledfor mastery. He waited with the most intenseinterest to hear how Edith bore the shock hewell knew she must have sustained by this abrupt,disclosure of his infidelity ; and ncM; even thewitchery of Florinda's charms, as she appearedin renovated beauty, could so wholly engrosshim, but that both eye and ear were frequentlyturned from her. to catch some tidings of Edith—dear Edith ! What would he not give to beassured she was happy — ^as happy as be should bewhen satisfied that he had not been the destroyerof her happiness I Unable any longer to endurethe workings of his own mind, he sent to requestthat Mrs Malcolm would see him, if but for asingle moment.Meanwhile, Mrs Malcolm was keeping watchby the couch of poor Edith. In the bustle thathad prevailed at the landing of the little party,Reginald's behaviour had passed unnoticed ; andDESTINY. 321thus Edith's state of mind was inexplicable to onewho had known her long, and had seen her incircumstances of at least equal danger, evince theutmost strength of mind and self-possession. Shehad seen Lady Waldegrave for a few minutes,and had expressed to her, her surprise and Alarmat Edith's aberration of mind ; but though sheappeared shocked, she had hastily waved thefiub*sect, saying, she herself had been wholly insensibleto what had passed. As for Madame Latour,she was still too hysterical to be spoken with ;nor, indeed, had it been otherwise, could she havethrown any light upon the subject beyond herown conjectures, as she and the attendants had allbeen too much agitated and absorbed in personalalarms to have eyes or ears for any thing buttheir own danger. Aware of the impetuosity ofSir Reginald's feelings, Mrs Malcolm was unwillingto excite them by a hasty disclosure ofEdith's alarming condition. She had, thereforequietly despatched a message for the nearestmedical assistance, trusting that, in the meantime,silence and repose would gradually restoreher mind to its right tone. But her gentle careso2322 DESTINY.yhad hitherto been vain, her hapless charge continuedin the same state of mute, rigid suffering ;her breast heaving as if with some forbiddenwoe ; her eyes fearfully open, as though theygazed on some vision of affright.On receiving Sir Reginald's message, however,Mrs Malcolm thought it best to complywith his request She found hun in an adjoiningapartment, pacing to and fro, in all the restlessnessof excitement and suspense. It was socompletely a part of that lady's character tospeak the truth, at all times, and in all circum->'stances, that it never occurred to her to dissemble,or give it any false glosses to serve atemporary purpose ; but she always spoke it witha sympathy and tenderness which usually disturned it of its bitterest sting. But it was notfrom the fiery unregulated mind of Sir Reginald,that any truth, however gently told which reproachedhis conscience and opposed his wishes,could meet with a submissive reception. Cautiousand considerate as Mrs Malcolm had beenin her communications, he was stung to the soulby self-reproach, sid gave way to the mostr)ESTiNir. 323vehement expressions of anguish and despairHe had been, he said, the destroyer of onewho was dear to him as his own life. He calledHeaven to witness there was no sacrifice he wasnot ready to make for her happiness ; — she hadsuffered much for her sake — he would suffer allany thing— every thing, to see her restored —he would see her himself — she would explainevery thing. — His happiness was in her hands-^he never could know peace until he saw herwell and happy — and, for the moment, he wassincere. But Mrs Malcolm feared little for thepassionate overflows of that grief, excessive asit was, which could thus vent itself in outwardmanifestations. It was the silence of poor Edith'sovercharged heart which alarmed her; but shestrove, by mild and gentle words, to soothe SirReginald into composure, and at last succeededin restoring him to a comparative degree ofcalmness.The surgeon soon after arrived, but as he possessedno more than onion penetration, andin the course of his practice was little accustomedto minister to minds diseased, he saw nothing324 DESTINY.more than a mere nervous panic in the case. Haying,therefore, administered an <^iate, and remainedtill it took effect, he recommended thepatient to be kept perfectly quiet, and said, hehad no doubt but that he should, find all wellwhen he returned the following day. This wasa load off Reginald's heart, and his buoyantspirit soon rose in proportion to its previousdepression. Edith, he was sure, would soon surmountthe shock she had sustained by his abruptdisclosure; her sentiments would change, andall would yet be welL On hearing so favourablea report. Lady Waldegrave prepared forsetting off to join her mother ; for, although messengershad been dispatched both to her andGlenroy, to acquaint them with the safety ofthe party, it was not to be supposed she wouldrest satisfied with that, or that any other assurance,short of actually seeing her daughter,would quiet her natural fears.Florinda said, she would have preferred remainingwhere she was, but that she knew LadyElizabeth would not proceed without her, andthat she could not bear the thought of bringingDESTINY. 825SO large a party, at such a time, to a house wherequiet was enjoined. This seemed only what 'was considerate and reasonable, and Mr andMrs Malcolm forbore to urge the invitationwhich their hospitality, rather than their inclination,had led them to make. They thereforefollowed that admirable precept, — " Welcomethe coming, speed the parting guest'' and orderedtheir horses to be got ready to carrythe travellers forward on their journey.<^ Although it is only a few miles from thisto the ferry," said Captain Malcolm, addressingLady Waldegrave ; " yet as the road, in someplaces, borders rather too much on the sublime,I hope you will allow me, faute de mieux, toescort you so far, that I may consign you intoLady Elizabeth's hands, past all peril by landas well as by water, I trust."Before Morinda could reply, Reginald hastilyinterposed, and said, — ^^ Pardon me. CaptainMalcolm; but I undertook the office of conductingLady Waldegrave to her friends, andtherefore consider myself bound to see her safeunder Lady Elizabeth's care."826 DcsTiNr.*^ It was an important trust that was committedto you, I admit ; but may you not delegateyour authority to another, and appoint me yourproxy?' said Captain Malcolm, who supposedSir Reginald must be doing the greatest violenceto his feelings in quitting Edith at such a time,even for a few hours. " What do you say,Lady Waldegrave— don't you think a staid oldHighlander may be as safe an escort as a hot-brainedyoung lover, who *'^^ I have already said," cried Reginald, with aheightened colour, and in great embarrassment,that I must see Lady Waldegrave to the ferrymyself. The distance is short, and I shall findmy own horses there, or, most likely, I shall takethe boat in returning. At all events, I shall beback here certainly within a few hours ; and inthat time " He stopt, in emotion.^^ And in that time," said Captain Malcolm,kindly, " our dear charge will, I trust, have arefreshing sleep ; and that on your return youwill find her perfectly restored. I give youcredit. Sir Reginald, in thus sacrificing yourown feelings to your sense of duty."DESTINY. 3*27Reginald turned hastily away. Florinda slightlyblushed, while she answered, That she hopedSir Reginald would not think it necessaryto make any sacrifice on her account; and shepronounced the word with emphasis.At that moment the carriage was announced,and Madame Latour, having composed her spirits,changed her dress, repaired her charms, andpartaken plentifully of some refreshments, nowmade her appearance. Mrs Malcolm, who hadbeen with Edith, also entered to receive theadieus of the guests. She was struck at firstwith hearing of Sir Reginald's intention of accompanyingthe party so far on their way ; but,like her husband, she gave him credit for hissense of duty thus prevailing over his dearerinterests, especially when she read the struggleof his mind depicted on his countenance. Nordid this evince any want of common penetrationwho can look back upon events in their ownlife, without acknowledging that there were timeswhen they could not discern those things £ace tdface, which, viewed retrospectively, showed clearas noonday ?Ses * DESTINY.CHAPTER XXIV.Edith slept, but her sleep was short, and sheawoke from it slowly and heavily; her headconfused; her heart oppressed with a dreamysense of ills too dreadful to be endured ; a stunningsense of misery, occasionally roused to an-^guise, as long cherished thoughts of happinessstruggled with new and agonizing feelings ofmisery. At leng^ she put aside the curtainand gazed around with a bewildered and enquiringlook. Mrs Malcolm, who had been sitting*anxiously watching her, now approached, andin a tender, yet cheerful tone, accosted her ; butEdith at first only replied by a look of alarm andamazement, then, in a hurried manner, asked,« Where am I ?"With me, my love ; and you have beenasleep'*DESTINY. 329«Then I have dreamt !" she cried, quickly ;then, wildly clasping her hands, ^^ And, oh !what a dream it was ! I would not tell it to anyone— ^no, not for worlds !"'** Try not to think of it either," said MrsMalcolm, soothingly; " but close your eyes,and pray to God, Edith, love."And yet, if it was a dream," interruptedEdith, " why am I here ? and where is ^"And her eyes wandered round the room, then,sinking back on her pillow, she sighed, and said,But it does not signify, since you say it wasonly a dream."She remained silent for some minutes, andMrs Malcolm hoped she had again fallen asleep ;but quickly raising herself in bed, she said, in ahurried tone, " I must get up— that dreamhaunts me here — it is upon my pillow — it is inmy head— it is upon my heart— I must get awayfrom it."** Dearest Edith, you shall do as you please,"said her kind, considerate friend ; ** but will younot oblige me by remaining in bed for a littlelonger, and I will sit by you ?"330 DestinyBut if it were a dream, why — why do I seenobody else — where are they ?* she demanded,in a tone of forced, unnatural calmness.Those you love best are all safe and well."** love !" exclaimed she, " how should youknow ? — No one knows how / love — she knowsit not himself'' And her breast heaved withstrong emotion.<^ Yes, dear Edith, there is one who knowsyou love him, but perhaps you know not howmuch he loves you, and how wretched he isabout you."About me /" shrieked Edith ; " oh, no— no-—not about me," and her whole frame shookconvulsively.^^ Yes, dearest, even about you, and about noone else ; but there is some misunderstanding" —Do you think me mad ?" cried Edith, quicklyinterrupting her ; " if you do, you are much,very much mistaken." Then shaking her headmournfully, " But if you knew what I know — ifyou had seen what I saw — if you felt what I feelbut nobody shall ever know, it shall all beburied with me, and there will be an end of it'*DESTINY. 331Mrs Malcolm saw that her feelings had sustainedsome rude shock, somehow connectedwith Reginald, and she feared to name him iiithe present excited state of her mind ; she thereforetried another chord — a chord which, rightlytouched, can never fsdl to vibrate in the feelingheart.Yes, my love, when it is God's will we shallall die and be buried, and there will indeedbe an end of our earthly sorrows ; but, I trust,he will spare you to us yet a while — ^for whatwould become of your father, your old repairedfather, Edith, if he should lose you, hisonly child ?"Edith's heart heaved high, and, for a few moments,she struggled violently with her feelings ;at last nature prevailed — she burst into a passionateflood of tears, and, throwing her armsround her friend's neck, wept long in silentanguish.Mrs Malcolm made no attempt to check thegenial current of feeling ; for she knew that thegrief which can feel even despair, is never so832 DESTINY.dangerous as that which benumbs the spirits, andbereaves it even of the sense of feeling ; andfragile as is the mould of the human heart, 'tisone which may be bruised, but is rarely brokenby the first rude shock it sustains. CHi, the depthof that agony which some may feel and live ! Oh,the world of woe which may lie in the smallcompass of one solitary heart I Who can declare*^ all which may be borne, and never told ?"It was not by confiding the secret of her sorrowthat Edith felt she could lessen the burdenof it. No human voice could speak comfort toher soul — ^no lilian hand could wipe away hertears — ^no human thought could fathmmLthe depthof her anguish — ^no word of hers, therefore,should ever declare the wrongs she had endured.All she wished was to die ; and as she laid herhead on her pillow, it was with the look of onewho desired never to raise it again.Although the sense of this suffering lay deeperthan she could discern, Mrs Malcolm deemed itunwise to endeavour too hastily to penetrate toit,and she rather sought gradually to lead Edithto the disclosure of it herself. A long intervalDESTINY. 333passed, during which Edith remained whollyabsorbed in the anguish of her own spirit.'^ Is there no way in which a fond and faithfulfriend can help you, dearest Edith?" said herfriend, gently.^^ None !" answered Edith, in a voice so sadand a tone so deep as seemed to bar all attemptsat gaining her confidence.Not even by sharing your sorrow, my love ?"You cannot !" returned Edith, in the samedespairing accentBut there is one who may — one to whomyou are still dears-one who has suffered muchon your account** She stopped, for she sawEdith's pale features convulsed with agony.^^ Edith, dearest ! is there nothing I ccm dofor you ?" cried her friend, as her own tears fellon the cold trembling hand she held in hers.^^ Nothing !" said Edith, in the deep tone ofhopeless misery, as she turned away.^^ Yet, dearest, together we may thank Godthat your senses are restored to you ; togetherwe may pray that He will lighten this load ofanguish from your heart ; together we may ask334 DESTINY.of Him, that his peace may cain your troubledspirit."It cannot be," murmured Edith, in a lowsuffocated voice.Mrs Malcolm was shocked, but she said, in asoothing tone, " Strive against such unworthy,such unholy thoughts, Edith; and though youwill not confide your grief to me, remember itis known to Him, who, doubtless for some wisepurpose, has appointed this trial, whatever it is.Believe, dear Edith, only believe, that you arein the hands of a tender Father, an AlmightyProtector, who can turn even our sorrows intoblessings. I do not ask you not to weep, but Ipray you may not yield to despair."Edith made no reply, but she stiffened herhand to be held in those of her friend, while theywere raised in supplication for her; and graduallyher features relaxed into a softer expressionof anguish. The convulsive leavings of herbreast subsided, her tears again flowed freely, andher judicious friend, tenderly embracing her,left her for a little, as "she hoped, to the reposeof exhausted nature.DESTINY. 335CHAPTER XXV.It is a common remark that few things exercisea more baneful and despotic influence onthe mind and feelings than an irregular or misplacedattachment ; and Sir Reginald formed noexception to this general rule. Shrinking fromthe contemplation of the torture he had inflictedon the true and tender heart which had so longand devotedly been his, he sought to stifle thesense of her wrongs in the charms of LadyWaldegrave's society. It. would have beenagony to his selfish, fiery spirit, to have waitedand watched the slow progress of her recoveryfrom the wound his own hand had inflicted ; for,to " suffer and be still," is perhaps one of thehardest, lessons the proud heart of man can stoopto learn. He therefore strove by more active336 DESTINY*exertion to banish the distracting thoughts thatfilled his mind, and sought a temporary refuge. .from the upbraiding of his conscience in the,,flattering unction that he was doing his duty'seven while deserting the victim of his perfidy;,for the author of her ruin. All this may appe^^inconsistent with a nature hitherto representedas amiable and generous. But there is a virtues,and a generosity, whose roots are in selfishness,and which when brought to the test will ever,bear its worthless fruits. Neither can consistency, .dwell in that heart, whose only law is impulse.,whose only stimulant is self-gratification*The presence of Madame Latour was somerestraint upon the passionate overflow of hisfeelings. Much as he longed to lay open hiswhole heart to Florinda, he naturally shrunk =from displaying it to any other eye than that^f love. Enough, however, passed on bothsides, to satisfy themselves that they were mutuallybeloved, and for the present that consciousnesssufficed. On reaching their destined:tion, they found Lady Elizabeth in all the fidgetinessof anxiety and impatience, and a foolishDESTINY. 387scene <rf weeping, chiding, exclaiming, caressesing, ensued. It required a strong effort for SirReginald to tear himself away at the very timewhen Florinda seemed more his own than evershe had been ; when his love for her burst thebarrier that had hitherto suppressed it, and withoutexplanation all had been explained, for allwas understood and forgiven. Fain woiild hehave lingered, and fetter still would he haveaccompanied her on her way, and guarded herfrom the host of rivals that would soon surroundher. But having consigned her to the care ofher mother, and i^een both depart under theguidance of the Duke's servants, he had notant, though anxious heart, he returned to InchOrran.Glenroy's impatience all this while knew nobounds. Captain Malcolm had gone in personto relieve his anxiety, and to inform him, withoutentering into particulars, that as Edith hadbeen so much alarmed, there was a necessity forher remaining quietly where she was for ,the(Present. The Chief acquiesced, when assuredVOL. II. p388 nssTiNT*there was no danger to be now reprehended?at the same time ezpresabg great cooteoaptiat such womanish weakness. It was, he ssjUiienough to provoke any man of common senseto see a woman giving herself such airs forapuff of wind; but it was all the feiult of thai;silly creature Molly Macaulay, who had made,a perfect fool of the girl; and then* as usuiJ^iiisanger was wreaked on that innocent yictinuCaptain Malcolm then took leave, with, rentersacted messages to Reginald to come to himimme^lately, as he could not live without him. Onhis return he met Sir Reginald, just landed andcommunicated to him his inde's wish — a markof his affection he could well havedispeiEised withinthe present situation of affairs — to. go to Glensas his future son-in-law, at the very timewhen he had virtually renounced his daughter,andto have his marriage made the perpetual theme,when he knew that, in all probability, iixat marriagenever would take place. It was tortureto think of it, and he involuntarily ezdaimed-r-'^ Impossible ! — I cannot move from this till Jknow'' — then, recollecting himself, he stofipedLDESTINY. SS9Captain Malcolm perceived his embarrassmentand dissatisfaction, which he imputed to adifferent cause, and he said, << His is indeedhurd work for you, Sir Reginald, to be faincalled upon to sacrifice your own wishes to asi^ise of duty, but you may now do it with aneasier mind. Miss Malcolm, though very low,it seems is now restored to herself, and I trustWtU soon be to you. In the meantime, quiet isstill necessary, and as you are not likely to promotethat in the present state of your feelings,I must therefore be so disinterested as to recommendyour returning to poor Glenroy."^ I cannon's said Reginald, impatiently.'< It is no very pleasant task I have taken uponmyself to press you to leave my house," said hisfriend, good humoured ; " but I know I neednot apologize to you for such a breach of hospitality."^ I am sensible of your good intentions," saidReginald, in a qiuck, impatient manner ; ^^ batyou will oblige me by allowing me to judge andact for myself on this occasion. I — in short"—he stopped as if.at a loss how to proceed, tiieii340 Destiny.added — ** But if my remaining here occasionsany inconvenience, I shall endeavour to findaccommodation for the night elsewhere."There was no contesting the point any longer.He remained, and the night was passed in a stateof gloomy restlessness by him— of sleepless anguishby Edith — griefs differing in. kind as indegree ; for even amid the reproaches of conscience,and the struggles of remorse, as gratitude,tenderness, and pity filed bis heart, stillthe idol, passion had erected, maintained itssway, and in his imagination shone forth feir andbeauteous, even amid the wreck it had made.But with Edith all was dimness and desolation.No star shed its light in her path — in her existencethere was no object which even hope couldfor an instant lime. Amid the darkness thatbrooded in her heart, heaven and earth, the presentand the future, were alike an undistinguishablechaos, and only one dreary hope was hers —the hope of despair. She felt it was impossibleshe could long exist under such a weight of woeas had overwhelmed her ; soon, very soon, sheshould pass away and be at rest. But she knewDESTINY. 341not the capacity of the human heart for sufferingshcvknew not those depths profound, wheresorrow, unseen, unsuspected, dwells throughmany a long life. '^ Nous ne connoisseur ?infinique par la douleur !" All the faith of herearly days-^-^ the cherished feelings of a lifetime— all the fond gatherings up of woman'slove and tenderness, which she had deemedwere treasured in her lover's heart, had beenrudely cast from him as slighted, pricelessthings ; and for an instant, her pale cheek glowedat the indignity. But bitter as these feelingswere, they were rendered still more so bythe thoughts of the disappointment and sorrowthat awaited her father. All his proud imaginationsto be thus cast down — his hopes laid inthe dust, where his own grey head would soonbe brought low by the hands which ought tohave smoothed the pillow of his old age ! Andyet it must be ! Nought remained for her butto sever the last feeble link of those ties which,entwined as they were with every feeling of herheart, hung only as a galling yoke on the breastof her false lover. With the courage of despair.Ms 9S$TIVY.abe drew £rom lier finger the ring of betroCb-ment — that ring whidii his faithless hand hadfaced there, with the vow of eternal constancy,and which, like a talisman, had ever guarded herheart against all fears and suspicions of his fidelity.Even this inanimate object, associated asit was with all the hopes and the joys of her life,it was anguish unspeakable to part with; herheart recoiled from the deed, and again andagain she relinquished the attempt. But then thethought, that Reginald might for an instant supposeshe still retained her claim upon his hand,even when convinced that his affections weregiven to another, that was not to be endured !She hastily folded and sealed the ring in a smallpacket ; and when Mrs Malcolm at an early hourentered her apartment, she put it into her hand,and, with forced composure, requested that shewould convey it to its destination.Mrs Malcolm was not deceived by this assumedfortitude — she saw it was the result of excitement,not of resignation ; it was easy to guessat the contents of the packet, and she said, ^^ ID^STIKT. 343ijrffl do any thmg-t-any thing for you, my love,that can be for your good, but — must this be ?^'^ It must," replied Edith, still retaining hercomposure*^ May there not be some mistake ivrhich amutual friend might assist you in clearing up?I^i^arest Edith, do not entirely cast away yourown happiness, and that of* others''Edith could not speak, and she buried her soeti her hands, while her heart heaved with strongemotion*JMbrsMalcolmtenderlyembiacedher. edith,"she said, '^ I have known and loved you £rom achild, both for your own sake, and that of ourdear Ronald, to whom you were dearer, if possible,than his own sisters. I cannot then besilent and see you thus ; if you will not confideto me the cause of your distress, will youallow me to hint to you what, I fear, has Happened?'Edith gasped for a few moments, as if f<Nrutterance, then, by a strong effort, said, ^ Weareparted, and for ever ! Oh, do not ask me344 BSttfinr.Mo re ^t ake that," pointing to t^i i^j <»^fftnereus take it from my sight !" ^^ ^'^^Mis Malcolm, too wide to pentet #1i^!^iIh§saw such extreme agitation ensures refrftin^from urging the topic any further; but riio^k^^aud diitreflBed as she was, ske i»tro¥e t6 soo£di into greater composure, and thto-^l^her, to seek Sir Reginald for the purpose "cfexecuting her commission. On viewing thpacket, he hastily tore it open, and at sight of theling turned pale ; tears sprung from his eyeai^^fhe struck his forehead with his hand, and atlength, unable to control the emotion he wasunwilling to grow, he rushed from the room*He sight of the ring had awakened a treat ttremembrances that had long slumbered in hiaheart The air image of Edith, tender, innocent,and true, rose to his mind's eye. Thatgentle, loving being — the playfellow of hischildhood — the companion of his youth — ^hisonce beloved— his betrothed— oh, had he wrongedher, and had she renounced him, without oneword of reproach !There are moments when even the masterpassion of the soul is overcome by stormy andsudden emotion. And so it was when this muteremembrancer of sweet and happy days remind*^ him, more eloquently than words could haredon of the vows he had broken, of the joys h^had blighted In the anguish of self-condemnationit was a relief to him to give utterance toUs feelings, by writing to Edith, and with hisusual impetuosity, he poured' them forth in astrain too agitated and contradictory to meet theeye of any but her to whom it was addressedWhile he reviled and denounced himself in thebitterest terms, he, at the same time, sought toextenuate and vindicate his conduct, and whilehe declared that her happiness was a thousandtimes more precious to him than his own hepleaded the overwhelming force of his passionfor another, as the excuse for his apostacy fromher. He returned her the ring — she besoughther to keep it, at least for the present ; he couldnot, he would not receive it from her now. Atime might come when it might cost them bothless to part; but now it must be with breakinghearts.p2346 Dssninr.Edith's emotuMiy at readix^^ the letter arasnot leas than that with which it had been written; bnt her part was taken with the *^ courageof a wounded heart." She answered it<^ The time has come when we most partr*-when we have parted, and for ever. No huxaaapower can ever again unite us — no separationcan be more complete than that which haa alreadytaken place. You cannot recall the pasl^ —do not then, I beseech you, by Tail remonstrance,seek still more to embitter the present.Yet, in one thing, you can gratify me, audit willbe my last request Go to my poor father, bearwith him, soothe him for my sake. From mehe shall never learn what has passed — she neednever hear it from any one else. And when Idie — Oh, Reginald — ^by the love you once boreme, do not desert my £either in the hour of affliction! be to him all, and more, than I could everhave been ! so shall my last prayer be for yourhappiness.« E- M."llESTIKY. 347How <^6ii, in the passionate longings of ablinded heart, and a wayward fancy, had Reginaldwished this time to come the time wb^nEdith, with her own hand, should set him free !And now that it had come, what were its fruits,bat bitter tears of sorrow and remorse ? Whatslavery coxdd ever hare been half so galling, asfreedom thus bestowed ? And so it must ever bein ^e accomplishment of all unjust and unhallowedwishes, unless when the heart is callous,and the conscience seared to all the soul's bestattributes. Again he wrote under the influenceof strongly excited feelings.<^ Oh, Edith, how your generous forbearancewrings my heart ! You say I cannot recall thepast — would to God I could, for I could bear allthings but the thoughts of having brought sorrowupon you — you who are still dear to me as myown soul. Talk not of dying, dearest Edith, forI swear I will not survive you ! With my ownhands I will end my hateful existence, ratherthan live as your destroyer ! And there is onewho will suffer little less than either of us, when948 QssTmy.she knows alL She is innocent, indeed she is,of all that has happened. The feiult is mine ;ah, do not wrong her, then, even in thought !Alas ! she knew not what a wretch she loved,I will obey you, most what it may — I will go toGbnroy, and for your sake, I will even fey thehypocrite before him ; only kt me have the satisfactionof serving you, and there is no sacrificeI am not ready to make. Edith, dearest Edith,if we may not be to eadb other what we havebeen, at least let me hope that we may one daymeet with other, phidias better, because lessmutable feelings, that those we once cherishedOh, let me conjure you then to regard yourself,if you would shew pity towards one whole lifeand happiness are wrapt in yours.« R. M."Edith made no reply, and Reginald returnedto Glenroy*DESTINY. 349j-lCHAPTER XX VLThe faithful Mrs Macauley lost no time inhastening to her beloved charge ; but she waspttnic-stmek with the change that had alreadytaken place on those cherished features. Edidi,indeed, looked a monument of living woe. TheOverwhelming past already told its tale of misery,«f a heart laid waste and desolate, of ^^ spiritsbroken, joys o'ercast," and eyes that seemed asthough they never more might smile.Mrs Macauley had seen in her day the effectsof sickness and of sorrow ; but here was somethingdiffering from aught she had ever beheld ;and she gazed with affright on the mournfulindications of a breaking heart* At length, shesaid, — " Ob ! my dear, and is not this very dreadful— what has come over you ? for, my darling, I350 DESTINY*never saw any thing in this world look like you.Oh ! what can it be ?'^^ You will soon know," said Edith, in a hard,unnatural tone, and, in her own mind, alludingto her death.*^ Well, the sooner the better, my lamb, thatwe may know what to do; for I declare I'mfrightened to look at you — you're not like thesame creature you was."^^ In the mean time, you will oblige me bytaking no notice — ^by saying nothing i^ut me,either to myself or to any body else," saidE<Uth, speaking slowly, and with difficulty.^^ Oh ! my darling, how can I say nodding,when I see you looking like something Icannot put a name upon ? For though your fameis as white as a ghost's, it has not the peace andrest that's in a ghost's face." And poor Mackylooked wistfully at her.<< It will soon have them, I hope," said Edith,with a smile of anguish. ^' I have been sick**-^ill — but it will soon be over."But how will it be over, my dear ?' lookinganxiously in Edith's face, with a bewildered air*DESTINY. 851Then, as the meaning flashed upon her, sheburst into a violent flood of tears. — " Oh ! mydarling," she cried, when at last she was able toarticulate ^^ you don't mean to say you aregoing to. leave us for a better world, and you soyoung and so happy in this same evil world —and I, that am so old !" And poor Macky'sfeelings again burst forth. While the tearsrolled down her cheeks, she went on, — " ButI'm waiting my time patiently; and ought notyou to do it, too ? And well you may, with somuch to make you pleased and contented."'^ I am contented," said Edith, with a feint,ghastly smile. ^^ Do not, then, distress yourselfon my account"<^ Not distress myself on your account, myheart's jewel ! And how can I not distress myself?But what does it signify what becomes ofme — though my old heart should breaks whatses that signify ? — But your poor papa, andyour own true love — what m^ become of them ?'Do not !" — gasped Edith, faintly, and wavingher hand.Oh ! my dear, would it not do your heartd52 DESTINY.good to hear how miserable he is about y<»u;s0miserable, that he is shut up in his own xo^m^and his very door locked, too ! except when heroes now and then to Glenroy; and then helooks — deed he looks not very chancy, as if hewas hardly himself. Fm frightened at you both''Then, with a sudden start of joy, she exclaimed*^^ But I think — I think I can guess what it is IHave not you cast out, my dear, is not thatall? Wil you not 'gree again? Aye, that youwill, or sorrow take me }"It was some minutes before Edith could com-maid herself sufficiently to speak; at length shesaid, and her features were almost convulsed ixk,her efforts to appear calm, — " I know your kindness— I feel it too ; but if you really love me-^ifyou would serve me in the only way you can doit,you will not torture me by"- Her voicesank, but she made an effort, and went on, — << bymentioning those names. — Do not— do not askme questions ! I cannot — I will not answer"^^ My darling, and then am I not to knowwhat it is that's the matter with you ?" criedDESTINY. 353p6o^ Mrs Macauley, her eyes twinkling withi^tbnisliment through her tears." You, nor no one else, can do me any good—it is impossible. I want nothing — I wish noting,tut to be undisturbed."** Oh, my dearest ! If you did but see yourselfin the glass, you would not venture to saythat ; for not a lit of your face but tells anothertale — as sure as death, it's the face of a brokenheJBirt." And again a flood of tears burst forth.^^ And will you not tell me who and what itIS that has done it," cried she, throwing herarms roimd Edith, ^^ when you know I couldgive my own heart thankfully, if it could bringjoy to yoilrs ? And will you not tell me, then,how Tm to do it*'Edith disengaged herself from her embrace,and, with the paleness of death on her face, butwith a calm and resolved air, said, — *^ Yes — lookupon me as one already dead — one whom nohuman power can restore to"-^ — happiness shewould have said, but her voice failed, and herlips shrunk from pronouncing the rest. " Thereis one way, and only one, in which you can serve354 DESTINT.me'' And she laid her hand <« Mrs Maeaukyas she spoke, — " Comfort my ifethei^— strive toreconcile him to'*^ To what, my darling?' cried Mrs Macauley,eagerly.To the will of God!" said Edith, in a low,deep voice ; and, wringing the hand of her poorold friend, she entered her dressing-room anddosed the door.There is a determined character of grief whichcarries a sacredness and an awe ahmg with it,and which silences all attempts at consolation.Such was Edith's, and such the effect it producedon the mind of poor Mrs Macauley, asslowly and reluctantly she relinquished the h(^of gaining the confidence, and removing theaffliction, of her beloved charge. She had toomuch innate delicacy to intrude further upon herprivacy. She saw the wound was too deep, forher unpractised hand to probe; but she stillhoped the one that had dealt the blow mightlikewise have the power to staunch the wound.She returned home to seek Sir Reginald, andprevailed ij^on him to see her alone for a fewDestiny. 3^minutes, in order to represent to him the situationof his betrothed. But her courage almostailed her when she saw the towering, the overwhelmingforce of mingled grief and passionwith which he received her sad and simple annunciation;and his vehement burst of sorrowwas as inexplicable to her as Edith's settleddespair.Oh, Sir R^inald,'* she cried, laying herhand on his arm to detain him, ^^ if you wouldnot be affronted at me, I would just say what Ithink, and then you would tell me if I'm wrong,and then we would get every thing put rightagain; for 'deed, if it is not done soon, thatsweet lamb will go her way to a better world.And oh, if you have only cast out in a commonway, what for cannot you 'gree again? Butsomehow*— I do not know how to say it, I thinkso much shame of evening' you to such a thing !But, I've taken it into my head that — 'deed, Inever liked that Frenchwoman — I thought shehad a very curious look with her eye — I did notlike it ; and I thought sometimes there was QJBSTINY.thing, I could not tell what, going on : and tothink how she used to take upon her to disparageMiss Edith, before your £axe too ! Andjaw I may just as well tell you at once, that Icannot help thinking it's she that has made allthis mischief between you and your own truelove!"Sir Reginald's only reply was to dash fromhim the hand which would have sought to detainhim ; and, rushing from her in agony of excitedfeeling, he sought to stifle the upbraiding of hisheart by again pouring it forth with all its incoherenciesand inconsistencies, to Edith, and supplicatingher again to forgive and forget thepast, even while his every word proclaimed thestruggle of his mind, as passion and pity alternatelyprevailed* He spoke of the tortures heendured by remaining at Glenroy, where everyobject reminded him of his lost happiness, andof the baseness of submitting to practise a deceptionagainst which his soul recoiled.V Edith felt all this as only an aggravation ofher wretchedness. Worlds now would not haveDESTINY, Sutempted ker to become the wife of him sheloved — ^for even in renouncing she still lovedhim. And there is perhaps no anguish moreacute, no struggle more severe, than when calledupon to despise and abjure the object of outonce — of our still tender affection. Yet, to theyouthful heart, there is a charm in extrememental suffering — a luxury of woe, which mistakesus reject with scorn all that could lessen oralleviate it. Were the burden less, we mightstrive even in our own strength, to cast it fromus; but when the spirit seems fairly crushedbeneath its overwhelming weight, it requires noeffort to support it ; and, paradoxical as it mayappear, we passively yield to what we at the sametime feel to be insupportable. 'Such is the effectcalamity produces on some minds, while othersare stimulated to seek relief from the gallingpressure, whose iron has entered their souls —• alas ! as if only to fester and corrode them. SoitWB8 with Reginald-inaction was intolerableto him ; in the feverish excitement of his mind,he again wrote to Edith ; but his letter was notanswered. He went to Inch Orran, and DESTINY.landed to see her — but she resisted his importunities.In a transport of mingled passions,which it would not have been easy to analyze,he left the house, but instead of returning' toGlenroy, be departed to Dunshiera.DES14HT. 359CHAPTER XxviSorrow is a sacred thing," but when carriedto excess, it is also a selfish thing. In the firstexcitement of feeling, Edith had felt for othersas well as for herself; and the thoughts of herfather's disappointment had added bitterness toher own* But now she heard he was ill — bedrid,with comparatively little emotion ; for toviolent sorrow had succeeded a sort of heartlessstupefaction, and her mind had sink into a stateof melancholy, which seemed to render her eitherinsensible or indifferent to every thing. Herswas become —A grief without a pang, void, dark, and drear,A stifled, drowsy, unimpassioned grief.Which finds no natural outlet or relief,In word, or sigh, or tear'*Pride now seemed the only feeling alive inthat heart where once had dwelt all the sweetest,360 DESTINY.softest emotions* And pride would sometimesgive an indignant throb, and light up her languideye and suffuse her pale cheek, and she wouldstruggle to cast off the load with which memoryweighed her spirit down. But hers was not aproud nature, and the fiednt effort was only succeededby deeper dejection. The buoyancy oflife and hope seemed fled ; yet there is in youtha tenacity of both, which rarely, if ever, relinquishesits hold of either. Unnoticed and unsuspectedby its possessor, the mind, even in itsdarkest state, is still languishing for light, stillputting forth new shoots, even though it maynot discern the object to which it may yet attachitself.Mrs Malcolm knew enough of human natureto be aware of this. Though gentle and unobtrusive,she was judicious and unremitting in herefforts to call forth the latent energies of the soul,and direct them to higher and more permanentsources of happiness. But all who have everstriven to stem or turn the current of afflictions,whose channel is in the very depths of the heart,well know how laborious, and apparently hope.DEsnsrT. 361'lefiNs^is the task wh^ino other fount is open toreceive them.Edith was naturally reserved in her ^UsposHkm ;and although, in the first anguish of her feelingsshe had betrayed, rather than divulged, thesecret of her heart to Mrs Malcolm, to no oneeke had she, or would she, breathe even a tii^of regret. She rarely, indeed, ever alluded tothe subject even to her friend ; still she felt ftwas soothing to her to be with <me who knewwhat was passing in her mind, even when themind itself was closed against all communication;The history of her whole life seemed as if allcompressed into that single event ; and there wasan indolent, melancholy pleasure in being withone who knew that history, and silently sympathizedin it* But she wished no one else to sharein that knowledge-^-participate in those feelingsshe was jealous almost of the appearance of it.While, on the other hand, if the happy, lightheartedgirls sought to win her to their occupationsand amusements, the sight of their gaiety,'contrasted with her own wretchedness, onlyserved to estrange her from them the more. TheVOL. II. 2862 Distant.only member of the fondly, besides Mrs Malcolm,in whose society she seemed to take the slightestpleasure, was the youngest boy ; in his beautyin the sweetness of his disposition, in his everylook and expression, he reminded her of herfavourite play fellow, the warm-hearted, generousRonald. She endured his presence whenall others seemed distasteful ; and Mrs Malcolmhoped that when the current of her affectionsshould once more begin to flow, her young favouritemight again become an object of interestto her. But she knew, for she had experienced,that for the afflictions of life there exists but onegenuine fountain of consolation — ^^the assuredbelief, that all our earthly sorrows, and our transitorysufferings, are ordained by unerring Wis-^dom and infinite Love. And where this beliefexists, the darts of anguish, however they maypierce, will never fix and rankle in the soul.Edith had religious feeling, but she had notreligious principle ; and thus, what might havebeen the medicine to check and mitigate thefever of her heart, had served rather as the alimentto feed and pamper its sickly sensibilities.Resting. 363With all this pertinacity of suffering, however,she refused nothing that was required of her ;but her compliances seemed those of a bodywithout a soul — all was calm, but all was joylessand hopeless as the slumber of the dead. ItWas from this state of rigid melancholy that MrsMalcolm was anxious to recover Edith. It waspossible the sight of her father might produce astrong impression ; but in her present state shefeared the effect of any violent perturbation ofthe spirits, and was desirous that she shouldremain under her own eye till her mind hadregained somewhat of its natural tone.As a gentle mode of experiment, she one dayproposed to her, to accompany her on a visit toa poor couple who had lately lost a daughter,their only child; and, from the character of thepeople, she was in hopes a salutary influencemight be imparted, even from their lowly shed.Edith agreed to the proposal, with the same vacant,preoccupied look with which she assented toevery thing that was suggested to her — a look,which told more plainly than words could havedone, that all scenes, whether of pin or plea364 Destiny.sore, were now alike to her. Their destinationwas to a cottage in a wild, seduced glen, orrather a hollow of the bleak and sterile mountainswhich surrounded it. Edith rememberedit well. It was the same she had pointed outto Florinda on their way to church. But howdifferent were her feelings then,£rom what theywere now ! Then, there was delight in everybreeze — joy in every sunbeam. Life needed nostimulants to give it a zest — all was excitement;the excitement of youthful sensation — the glowof a happy heart Now all was changed ; thesunbeam that had gilded the illusion was fled,and only the dark vapour remained ; now shewas ready to exclaim, with her own mountain-bard,^* The narrow house is pleasant to me,and the grey stone of the dead." As she gazedon the lonely cottage, Florinda's words recurredto her with a bitter pang, " Love mighttransform even that wretched hut into a bowerof paradise." ^^ Could she love him more than Idid?" thought she. ^^ Oh, no, no! she mightlove him differently, but she could not love himmore !" Mrs Malcolm marked with satisfactionDESTINY. 865the glow of animation, agonized as it was, whichcrossed her features as the whole scene camevividly to her mind. Any thing was better thanthe state of lifeless melancholy in which she hadso long been sunk, just as that pain is salutarywhich denotes returning animation.<^ You look with affright on that dreary dwelling,I perceive'' said Mrs Malcolm.^^ Yes," said Edith aloud, as she continued togaze with a sad and abstracted air, ^^ she saidtrue, to dwell there wild be paradise, comparedto — " And she sighed, as though her heart wasbreaking.<^ Do you believe there is such a thing asparadise on earth, Edith?" said her friend gently,seeking to turn her thoughts from the directionshe perceived they had taken.Once I did," said Edith, in the same thrillingtone of anguish.And even in that wretched hut?"Ay, any whereasAnd you have discovered the fallacy of yourexpectations?" Edith was silent.^^ You are not singular, my love," said herSes DESTINY.friend ; <^ we all set out in life with the hope dfcreating for ourselves a paradise on earth, and allysooner or later, live to mourn the Tain, the unhallowedexpectation." -" Not au** said Edith, bitterly.•^< AU — all — ^be assured, it is so ordained i andthose who have grasped at happiness, hare foundit either a shadow or a shroud. So it has eY€rbeen, and so it will ever be."** Are not you happy ?* enquired Edith, withsnore of interest than she had for a long whileevinced.Resigned — contented — grateful — these Ihope, I am," answered her friend; ** but happyI am not, according to my ideas of felicity."^* Yet you have every thing, while I" shestopped— choked with emotion.•* But every thing here below is imperfect,and in its nature fraught with anxiety and sorrow.And — shall I own my weakness — my sinfulness? — Even in the midst of the many blessingswith which you see me surrounded, still-stillmy heart yearns for my long-lost boy ! still ahaunting mystery seems to me to hang over hisDESTINY. 367fate. Still a they delusive voice whispers to meattimes that perhaps he still lives — Olives a captiveor a slave I Judge then, whether I can bewhat you would call happy ?"^^ But he was not your a//," said Edith, withagitation.^^Ah, Edith, is there any of us whose oicentres in one firadl perishable creature? HasGod given us affections, and feelings, and capacitiesof enjoyment to be all lavished exclusivelyon one object — and that object not himself ?''It may be sinful— but — but I cannot helpit," said Edith, in a despairing accent.^^ No, dearest, you cannot help it, but Godwill help you. Only be assured he loves youwith a love inconceivably beyond that which anycreature ever has felt, or ever can feel for you-Mmd your heart will no longer remain closedagainst the consolations he offers you. Ah IEdith, it was when the doors were shut that Hewho came to succour and to save, stood in themidst of his disciples ; and 'tis when the heart isclosed against all earthly consolation that divinelove still finds entrance."368 DESTINT.Edith's only answer was a sigh; and MrsMalcolm wisely forbore to press the subject fartherat present They therefore proceeded iiisilence till they reached the lonely hut It israrely that any thing of what sentimentalists callaninteresting nature, is to be met with amid thecoarse avocations of humble life ; yet the elementsof suffering and of feeling are the same inall ranks, and the short and simple annals of thepoor, sometimes contain much of Christian faithand moral beauty. They were met at the doorof the cottage by a middle-aged man, with grizzledhair, and a countenance which bore theimpress of deep and recent sorrow. Mrs Malcolmaccosted him in kindly accents, but a respectfulbow was the only answer he at first seemedable to return. She next enquired for his wifeand making a strong effort, as he drew hishand across his eyes, he said — and his nice seemedready to fail him as he spoke : — ^^ Nelly's nojust as she should be, my leddy; she's no justherself yet"^^ You don't mean, Duncan, that her mind hasbeen unsettled by her loss ?"•** O, no — ^no, my leddy — God be praised — no90 bad as that ! she aye knew the hand that ^^ftsdealing wi' her ; she never lost sight o^ that— ^His name be praised ! but step in, my leddy»and you'll see hortus she is, poor thing P'Mrs Malcolm and Edith entered the lonelydwelling, where sat the childless mother, with aBible on her knees. At sight of them she hastilyrose, and turning away, covered her face withher hands, and wept.You'll excuse her, my leddy/' said po<^Duncan, with emotion.^^ I ought to ask Nelly to excuse me for disturbingher perhaps too soon," said Mrs M|d*cold, gently.'^ Oh, my leddy !" was all Duncan could sayNelly turned round, and while with one hand shestrove to stem the tears as they flowed profuselyover her face— with the other, she wiped downthe seats for her guests, then tried to speak, butonly her lips moved. Then, as if disappointedat the failure, she again turned away, and gavefree course to her sorrow.^^ It's just because she has not seen you, my;tt370 nEsmnr*leddjr, once Ae was ta'en frae ii" said Demean,straggling to master his on feelings, whilethe workings of his features betrayed what it costhim.** But it's ower now," said Nelly, with a si^«^^ It was just a hearthstone, my leddy, thaispast and awa'/' And she turned round with* asad but composed air. There was not much ofexternal beauty in the aspects of this poor coupleto excite the feelings — but simple sorrow isalways touching — and even Edith felt interestedas she looked on the desolate pair, bereft of theirstay, and seemingly devoid of all those outwardsources of consolation, which, though they inreality minister little or no relief to the lonemourner, yet seem as if they ought to mitigatelie bitterness of affliction. But here were noneof the appliances of artificial refinement, eitherwithin doors or without. The brown heath, thedreary mountain, and the wild streamlet, werethe only objects that surrounded them. All elsewas silence and solitude.Have you had a visit from the minister yet ?"enquired Mrs Malcolm.DESTINY. 371** You'll mean Mr Stewart, my leddy? — Ay,oil ay, Meed we've had that, and muckle needwe had o' him, for we were sorely unwilling —oh 'deed were we — ^to gire her back to Him thatgave her to us," and Duncan's eyes moistenedwith tears as he spoke.^^ That is a natural feeling, Duncan," said MrsJVIalcolm, ^^ and mercifully it is not a forbiddenone — ^we may mourn the loss of those we love,only * not as those who have no hope.' "Ay, that's just it, my leddy ; for as theblessed King David said, in his distress, ^ I shallgoo him, but he shall not return to me.' That'sa grand promise, my leddy ; but oh, there's a sadthought too !"^^ It is so ; but the hope set before us is so fullof consolation, that it must strengthen our heartsto hear the mournful truth which nature willproclaim to us in the time of our affliction."Oh, is na that true, Nelly ?' said Duncan,trying to speak cheeringly to his wife.Nelly pointed to a tartan plaid or screen whichhung against the wall, and had belonged to herdaughter; and while tears trickled down her372 DESTINY.cheek, she bent her head, and said, *^ God's willbe done !"'< And His will is, Nelly," said Mis Malcolm,^^ that we should make Him the sure and steadfastanchor of our souls — that we should torn ourthoughts as much as possible from the grave,which holds merely the perishable body of thespirit we loved, to Him who dwelleth in lightand glory, and in whose presence that spirit, wemay hope, is now enjoying perfect and endlessfelicity. I, like you, have known what it is tolose a child, and still, often, too often, the melancholythought will rise, ^ he shall not return tome;' but Good has said, ^ I shall go to him.' Weknow that all things that bell us are ordainedof God, and will work together for the good ofour immortal souls, and we cannot tell — perhapsit is the very separation we so much mourn, thatmay be the appointed means of reuniting us again,^for ever, to the friend we loved — ^for where ourtreasure is, there will our heart be also''Do you hear that, Nelly ?" enquired Duncan,anxiously.^^ 'Deed, it may be so, and it's a blessedDESTINY. 373thought, ony wise," said Nelly, brightening upa little.^^ Ay, n^any are the blessings we hare to bethankful for, Nelly, though our ungrateful heartsrefuse to own them, when a part's taken awayfrom us," said Duncan. ^ We have His powerabove us and around us," added he, reverently,^^ and His word before us, and His spirit withinus ; and are na these great blessings for sinfulcreatures like us ?"^^ They are indeed, Duncan," said Mrs Malcolm; ^ and you have well chosen that betterpart which shall not be taken away from you.But, perhaps, it might be of service to Nelly,were you to leave your home for a while ; yoursis a lonely dwelling ; you have no friends nearto speak a word of comfort to you now and thenand the winter is approaching when you willfeel still more desolate. Donald M^Intyre'scottage is now ^npty, and you will find it morecomfortable than your own ; besides, you will benearer both to Inch Orran and your good minister,Mr Stewart."« They would be great comforts, to be sure,"374 Destiny.said Duncan ; *^ but ^ he stopped, and hiswife and he looked at each other; but theirlooks betokened no gladness at the pn^osaL" Oh, no— Ho, my leddy,'* said Nelly ; ** monythanks to you, and mony blessings be upon youfor a' you've done for us fire first to last ; butwe could be better ; we wadna be sae weelony where as we're here ; we need nae company,my leddy ; we're the best company to ane another,for we can speak o' our bairn, our bonnyJeanie, and we can see a' thing that she used tosee, and the braid sun, and the bonny moon,shining' upon us just as they used to do when shewas here — Oh, I dinna think they wad hae thesame look to me ony where els !"Mrs Malcolm forbore to urge the proposal, asthey both seemed to retain so strong a localattachment for the scenes, bleak and sterile asthey were, which had once been gladdened bythe presence of their child ; and the feeling is anatural one. to such as have felt that '' there isjoy in grief, when peace dwells in the breast ofthe sad;" and where the heart has laid downDESTINY. 375■ »what it most loved, there it is also desirous oflaying itself down.This is no bower of paradise, you perceive,"said Mrs Malcolm to Edith, as they quitted thecottage ; " but it is something better — it is theabode of Christian faith and hope."376 DssTimr.CHAPTER XXVIII.Edith's feelings had been touched by thescene she had witnessed, and on the way homeshe conversed upon it more freely, and withgreater interest than she had recently done uponany subjectWhen she returned to Inch Orran she foundthe following letter had arrived in her absence r** My Darling,I HOPE you will not be frightened, though'deed I am not very easy myself, for we are suchcurious creatures that we cannot tell what mayhappen — and may be it is better we should not,for * we know not what a day may bring forthOh ! if it would bring a good hearty fit of thegout into his feet, what a mercy that would be ;DESTINY. 377for I do not like its wander, wandering thisway up and down his whole body, and neverresting in one place. I mean your own papa,my dear, for he is really not what he should be ;and what frightens me most of all, he is so re->remarkably good-natured and easily pleased, notbut what he was always good and kind to me ;but it would melt a heart of stone to hear howgently he speaks now. — 'Deed I could not helpcrying this morning when he held out his handto me, and said, in such a soft voice, ^ Molly,'says he, ^ you are not a bad creature, after all.'* What makes you think that,. Glenroy ?' saidI ; for you knoi^ we are all bad creatures the bestof us. — ' Aye, you stick by me when they havedeserted me,' says he. — Was not that good ofhim ? But though I was so pleased, I was vexedtoo, that he should think any body could deserthim ; and so I took the liberty of saying, ^ CHi,Glenroy, you know I will stick to you with mydying breath, and so will every body that youplease to have about you.' And then he shook hishead, and said, ^ No, no, Molly, nobody thinks ofpleasing me now — they're both gone and left878 DESTINY.me, and the sooner I go the better — ^and Prenobody now but yon, Molly, and you'll be goingoff too some of these days.' And then he ram-ledand spoke, as if he thought I was goingoff — and poor Benbowie too ! I was really hurtat that, though I knew he did not intend it*When he wakens out of his sleep, he oftencabs for you, and another person too, and hethinks, good man, that you are gone away together; so how he will be pleased to see you byyourself I cannot tell, for I do not know — butI know it is children's duty to obey their parentswhich you always did, I'm sure, and take careof them when they are sick, and be kind tothem in their old age ; and may be it would comfortyou to think that you had been a comfortto him. And even if you should vex him bycoming, is not that better than to vex him bystaying away ? Surety, I think it is. I hopeyou understand this, and that I have made myselfplain to you ; but I cannot be very sure ofwhat I am saying, for I am not just so heartsomeas I used to be, and is not that extraordinary'when there's nobody but Benbowie and me toDESTINY. 379divert Glenroy, and hLqi in his bed so dull, goodman! but who knows but if you please to comeback, we will all come right again ; for I pray hemay be spared > to us yet, and that I may getmany a good scold from him, good and kind ashehas always been to me ! I hope you will bepleased with my letter, and. all that I have said,which is the truth, from, my darling,Your old and true friend,« M. Macauley."Edith shed tears on reading this homely effusion,the first she had shed for many weeks, andMrs Malcolm hailed them with pleasure, as theharbingers of renovated feelings which had toolong lain dormant in her heart It required aAeffort to resolve upon returning home to encounterthe heart-rending interrogatories which shewas aware must be awaiting her — which she feltit would be death to her father to answer truly,and which she yet knew not how she shouldevade. It was a trial from which she shrunk,but which she, nevertheless, now felt it her duty880 DESTINY*to undergo) and Mrs Malcolm confirmed her inthe resolution.<< It is assuredly your duty, my dear* said MrsMalcolm ; ^^ and when we are convinced of thatwe have only to commit the event to Cum Themotive only is ours — the consequences are His ;and His command is, that you forsake not your&ther when he is old and grey-headed. Ah,Edith, account it a privilege and a blessing tobe the comfort of your father's old age !'*That I can never be," said Edith. ** I cannever be otherwise in his eyes than the cause ofsorrow and disappointment" She stopped inemotion.<^ But even that very sorrow and disappointmentmay be the means of producing a salutaryinfluence on your fitter's mind. You may betheinstrument in the hand of God to work agood work ; not, indeed, as we would work inour weakness and ignorance, but according to'His wisdom and love ; for you yourself I have nofears — ^you are going to ^your duty, and will, Idoubt not, be enabled to fulfil it Go then.Destiny. 881dearest — do what you can and leave it to Grotto do as he wiUJ'Mrs Malcolm had too much sense not to knowthat when an exertion is to be made, we can doitmore effectually when left to ourselves, thanwhen another is at hand to whom we have beenaccustomed to cling for support and assistance ;and that more minds are rendered helpless fromthe mistaken and injudicious tenderness of friends,than by being left to their own resources andexertions. She, therefore, wisely forbore to offerher assistance at this time.Edith was now anxious and impatient to begone,even while her heart recoiled the thoughtsof her return. The preparation having beenquickly made, she took an agitated farewell ofInch Orran and its affectionate inmates, and erethe tumult of her spirit had subsided, she foimdherself once more within the dear domain ofGlenroy. But, ah ! how changed to her wasnow Glenroy ! Yet as its fondly pictured scenesagain met her eye, the visions of her early daysalso rose to view. For a brief moment, her heartcast off the burden of its woes ; and as memory982 DESTINY.gave back, in all their brightness, the happy-daysshe had spent amid those very scenes, thepast only seemed reality.But quickly the illusion vanished, and wassucceeded by bitter recollections and humiliating'thoughts. She had lately left that home, thebeloved, the betrothed of Reginald, and she nowreturned to it the slighted, forsaken daughter ofGlenroy.But even these feelings were suspended whenthe carriage drove up to the castle, and she behelddismay and alarm painted on the countessdances of the servants as they hurried to and iro.What has happened ?" she called faintly tothe housekeeper, who was stationed to receiveher.Don't be frightened, ma'am ; but Glenroyhas had, about an hour ago, a — a — a stroke ofthe palsy, ma'am, and has lost"Edith waited to hear no more ; with a wildexclamation, she rushed forward, regardless ofthe voice of the servant who sought to detain her,and in another minute was by the side of herfather's couch.DESTINY. 383CHAPTER XXIX,There lay Glenroy speechless, his featuresslightly distorted, but the expression calm* andapparently tranquil ; and on one side sat Ben-bowie,with a face of dull, sorrowful amazement ;and on the other was poor Mrs Macauley, tearsflowing profusely over her face, while she stroked,with childish fondness, the powerless handof her beloved Chief.Oh, my dear, this is no a sight for you !**cried she to Edith ; " *deed it's as much as myold, hard heart can do to stand it. But it's God'swill, and a punishment for my sins, and so I donot complain ;" and a torrent of tears gushedforth. ^Glenroy opened his eyes, and at sight of Edithsmiled complacently, then cast an enquiring lookaround, and vainly tried to articulate ; but hismeaning was sufficiently apparent.384 DESTINY.<< It's our own darling Miss Edith come back,"said Mrs Macauley, hastily brushing away hertears, and speaking fondly to him ; <^ and somebodyelse will come too, and then, please God,you'll be yourself again, Glenroy, and we'll allbe as happy as ever." Then in a low voice toEdith, *^ Cheer up, my darling, and do not letyour papa see your distress ; but try to put someheart in him, though I'm but a silly creaturemyself." As the tears again burst forth, —<^ 'Deed I think Benbowie has more sense anddiscretion than any of us, for he's just what liealways was."Why— oh why was I not told of this sooner?' cried Edith, in an agony of self-reproach,as she bent over her &ther's almost lifelessform.<< Oh, my dear, we could not tell you, for wedid not know what was to happen ourselves !Oh, what creatures we are ! We know not whata day may bring forth. I little thought yesterday,when I wrote my letter to you, of whatwas coming ; and when I sent it away this morning,I thought him better, and more like himselfDESTINY. 385than he had been for a long time, though, to besure, I had a very extraordinary dream"Then when did it happen ? Have you sentfor medical assistance?" cried Edith, distractedly.Oh, compose yourself, my dear !** cried thepoor weeping Macky. " Yes — eyes, the doctorhas been sent for, and so has — But I'm so confused,I hardly know what I'm about* Didyou ask when it happened — When was it, Ben-bowie?'^' It was just five-and-twenty minutes pasttwo — just," replied Benbowie.Ay*— and he was just sitting there in hischair, and I was chatting to him, and trying toplease him ; but I suppose I had said somethingthat had not pleased him; for he said in hisown way, says he, * Molly Macauley, you are astupid, old, ignorant* — and then he stopped; soI waited ^ lite to hear what more was coming,but no more said he. So says I, ^ Well, whatelse, Glef&roy, for you may cal me what youplease — I know very well what you mean by itifs all that that falls by,' but not a word.VOL. II. «386 Destiny.Well, I was winding a clue, and so I just wenton, and I forgot myself so £Eur as to be singing,and you know, Glenroy never could bear mysinging — and so when I remembered that, Istopped and begged his pardon — but then whenhe did not begin to scold me, I began to feelvery queer somehow — and so I looked at him— ras sure as death, there he was just as you seehim now — and oh, not a word, good or bad, hashe ever spoken since !" then a fresh flood oftears concluded poor Molly's narrative.^' My dear — dear papa ! what can I do foryou ?' cried Edith, throwing herself on herknees by the couch, and laying her face closeto his, as though she strove to read his wishesthere. Glenroy uttered some inarticulate sounds,and again rolled his eyes as if in search of someone.Edith felt the appeal with agony.Well, thaf s something," cried Mrs Macesaudley, joyfully ; " and I know who he's lookingfor — ay, that I do ; and if he had but hiswill, I really think he would come all right'Deed, I would not wonder if all this has hap-destiny.387opened, just because Le has not got his own waygood man that he is ; but I wager that he'llget it yet, and that I'll gire him an agreeablesurprise before if s long. So be as composed asyou can, my darling ; and now that you've seenyour papa, if you would please to go and restyourself, and take something, for oh, my dearIamb, you look very white and ilL"The doctor came, and did what he could, butto little purpose. Glenroy remained much thesame, and it was only at sight of Edith, or atthe sound of her voice, that any difference wasperceptible; but then he always revived, andmade an effort to express, by words or signs, ameaning which she but too well guessed.^^ Well, I really think an agreeable surprisewill have a great effect on Glenroy," said MrsMacauley ; ^^ I'm sure it always does me good ;but I doubt we cannot have it till tomorrowforenoon at the soonest, for iJiat slow creatureBenbowie has only sent away his letter half anhour ago."The letter, which was intended to producethis agreeable surprise, was from Benbowie to388 DESTINY.Sir Reginald, and even with its omissions andblunders, was the most correct and intelligibleBenbowie had ever penned.*< Dear Sir,^^ I HAVE the misfortune to acquaint you, thatGlenroy has this morning had a stroke of thepalsy, which deprived him of, and took place attwenty-five minutes past two p.m., when sittingin his own room. I think it my duty to acquaintyou with this stroke, that you may do what youthink proper ; no one here being authorized toact under this stroke for yon. With much grief,I am, dear sir, faithfully yours,Each. Malcolm."It found Sir Reginald at Dunshiera, where hestill remained, a prey to conflicting passions ; —at one moment ready to fly to Florinda, to claimher as his own, and, in so doing, ensure theirmutual happiness, beyond the power of fortune ;at the next, yielding to pity for Edith and Glen-roy; — then fired by pride, ais he thought how theworld would say he had broken his yom, andResting. 389deserted the poor portionless Edith fbr herwealthy, titled rival. Sadi was the state of hismind, when the intelligence (as he naturallyconcluded) of his uncle's death reached him, andfor the moment overwhelmed him with feelingsof the deepest sorrow and remorse. Havinglearned, however, from the servant, that Glenroy still lived, he lost no time in setting off, lateas was the hour when the express reached him,and having travelled during the night, he arrivedby sunrise the following morning. Anxiousto avoid disturbing the £atmily at so early anhour, he gained admittance as quietly as pos-tbible, and finding only one of the inferior servantsyet stirring, from whom he could obtainlittle information, he went directly and softly tothe sick chamber.Edith had taken some hours' rest, but hadrisen with the light of day to resume her stationby her father's side, and to relieve the faithfulMrs Macauley, who had watched there the livelongnight, and who now with difficulty consentedto retire to an adjoining apartment to take a littlerepose. She had dismissed the servants, also, whoS90 Distant.kad been in attendance,. and remained acme bythe tick bed. A dunk of an open shutter showeda seene widioat^ in striking contrast with thatwhich was passive within the dosed contains.There, all nature was uwMng into new existencebeneath the glories of the rising son, —here, life seemed passing away amid touts anddarkness. The natural train of moomfal, butsalutary reflections arose in her mind, as shegazed on the powerless form and pallid featuresci the proud lord Of all the goodly scene whichsmiled in vain around him. The spirit wbidistill lingered in Ae body—what was, what mightbe passive there ? Was it still grovelling amidscenes of low-bon cares, — was it even now<< steeped in forgetftilness,"—- or was it alreadyhovering on the confines of immortality, preparingto rend up its account of the deeds donein the body ? Oh, questions of deep and awfulimport ! ' At these droughts she sank on herknees, and poured forth her supplications in allthe fervour Of a feeling and a sonrowfid heart.In the intensity of her devotion, she heard notthe low taps twice repeated of some one askingDESTINY. 391admittance at the door, nor was aware that ithad been slowly and softly opened, and thatsome one was present, but shaded from view bythe folds of the curtains, till as she rose from herknees, she perceived that Reginald stood beforeher. At any other time, Edith would havebeen overpowered by so sudden and unexpecteda meeting ; but now her mind had been strengthenedand calmed by the pious exercises in whichshe had been engaged, and the solent circumstancesunder which they met by the deathbed,as she believed, of her father, banishedall lesser and more selfish considerations. Hercheek, 'tis true, was very pale, and a slight tremorshook her whole frame ; yet she betrayedlittle emotion, and merely bent her head inreturn to Sir Reginald's salutation, while he, inextreme agitation, addressed a few almost inarticulatewords of apology for the intrusion hehad been guilty of. But at the first sound ofhis voice, Glenroy opened his eyes with anexpression of pleasure, and the working of hisfeatures, and the heaving of his breast for a fewmoments, denoted the efforts he was making to392 DSgTIKT.express thesatis&cdon he felt. At lengthy withooe mighty gaq>, he emphatically articulated,^ Reginald T "* Thank heaven !" Edith wouldhave said, bat her utterance filled her. A thousandemotions mingled in her heart at hearingthis once-cherished name, so long banished fromher lips, from her ear, now suddenly operatingas a spell to arouse her £Euler from death to life ;she shuddered, — she became dizzy with conflictingfeelings ; after vainly struggling to masterthem, she fell senseless on the^floor. Reginaldcalled loudly for assistance, in his alarm for Edithentirely overlooking Glenroy, w^o continuedgasping and struggling for farther utterance.In an instant Mrs Macauley was in the room,and, all aghast at the spectacle that presented itself,she for the first time in her life stood transfixedin silent amazement — Edith, the image ofdeath, supported in the arms of Reginald, andGlenroy writhing in all the agonies of impotentirritability.Do come here," called Sir Reginald, beckoningto her to assist in bearing Edith to a sofa.Mem— Molly," stuttered Glenroy.DESTINY. 393<^ Oh !" exclaimed she, in rapture, ^^ what ajoyful sound I" She stood for a moment suspendedbetween the two. ^^ I declare I do notknow which hand of me to turn to, I'm so happy,and so sorry, and so — But oh, what a blessing tothink Glenroy has got his tongue again ! — Oh,what's this has come over her ? 'Deed, it hasbeen just this agreeable surprise. But see, shecoming to ; — Sir Reginald, hold up her head onyour arm — and— there's no fear but what all willcome right yet ;" and oflF trotted the well-meaningbut mistaken Mrs Macauley to the otherend of the chamber, to the side of her belovedChief. '• .When Edith opened her eyes she found herrself supported by Sir Reginald, and the sight ofthe pity and distress depicted on his countenanceinstantly recalled her to a sense of her situation.The blush of wounded pride quickly mantled hercheeks as she withdrew herself from his supportYou feel better now, do you not ?' enquired'Reginald anxiously. Edith's heart thrilled, asthe tenderness of the accent recalled the remembranceof former days. For a few minutes sher2894 DESTINY.remained silent, gradually regaining her ,till at length she was able to say,*< The sound of papa's voice had a strange effectupon me, and I fear my weakness must haveagitated him. Pray leave me ; I am now well''But Reginald still wavered.^^ Oh, Sir Reginald, will you come here ?'called 'Mis Macauley, while Glenroy vainlystrove to repel her officious cares, and to recallhis nephew. Glenroy's energies had been dormant,but not extinguished, and the sight ofReginald had awakened them 'from the lethargyinto which they had sunk. << Oh ! did not I tellyou*' cried she, all vibrating with joy, ** whatan erect an agreeable surprise would have uponpoor Glenroy ? 'Deed, I think it was very cleverin me to have found that out !^DESTINY. 395CHAPTER XXX.There was a new trial for Edith, and one shehad little anticipated. Glenroy, helpless, fatuous,and almost speechless, was more despoticthan ever, and was never satisfied unless whenReginald and she were before him. Enoi^hcould be gathered from his broken and imperfectexpressions to know, that the theme uppermostin his mind was their marriage, and thus thesituation of both parties was one of the mostpainful embarrassment. But for either of themto leave him was impossible, in the critical statehe was then in, when the slightest opposition tohis wishes would, in all probability, have beenattended with the most fatal consequences. Although,in obedience to her fitther^s commands,she gave him much of her company when Reginaldwas present, she carefully avoided all occa-/396 DESTINY.sons of being alone with the latter ; and whenthey met at meals, she strove as much as possibleto maintain the unvarying calm politenessof manner, which was merely due towards herfsUher's guest But dearly was the strugglemaintained, and many was the bitter tear shedin secret, when the chords of high-strained exertionwere for a moment relaxed.So passed several days, during which Glen-roymade such progress towards recovery, thathe was now able. to sit up, and even to converse,or rather talk, pretty much in his usualstrain, only his mind was still weaker, his ideasmore confused, and his temper more irritablethan ever. His idolatry for his heir, and his fondnessfor Edith, had also increased, so that hecould not endure either of them to be out of hissight ; fortunately he dozed and slept much duringthe day, when they of course were releasedfrom their thraldom, otherwise it would scarcelyhave been possible for them to have enduredthe torture of being associated together in Glen-roy'scompany. It were endless to detail theabsurdities and inconsistencies of a mind in itsDESTINY. 397.dotage. Sir Reginald at first bore them withcompassionate forbearance and kindness of manner; but his patience became exhausted, and henow frequently testified his weariness and irritationin a manner which wounded Edith to thequick.One day, when Sir Reginald and she were sittingby him, listening to, or at least hearing, oldstories of the cutting of the woods, the black pony,&c. &c., a servant entered, to say that Mr M'Dowand Mrs M'Dow were in the drawing-room.Edith turned pale. Sir Reginald uttered an exclamationof disgust, and Glenroy, catching thename, repeated " M'Dow — M'Dow. Ay, that'she, that's he — the — the what do you call it ? —the that — Edith, you know very well what Imean — the man that marries you — the, the mi-rsister ! And what for should he not come, andmarry you and Reginald just now ? — Tell MrIM'Pow," he called to the servant, " to comehere and bring the — the — the " But Edithheard no more for she hastily rose and quittedftthe room. But feeling there would be no safetyunder the same roof with Mr M'Dow, she hurtleGlide. It was a fitted wild, ro dd,Whitby uofli ksfii^ beat left pictor wnfli m itsflstonu slBley ksd etsi beat tLt hi— nit' ThwartofdbednUreBofdiefimnly. TkeiewAafifdebrook in wbidi diojr ni^kt wade or angle orfail their linjr boat) widioiit liflk of diwBii^;and dire were haieb lor nattiiig^ sid for bows and arrows ; and Ibcre werebrambles and shoes, and nuper-berries indistance, and stones for tables ; and, in shut,every thing to delight the heart of happy unsophisticatedddldhood. Here many a joyous dayEdith had passed with her young companions,Reginald, and Norman, and Ronald. In complimentto her predilection for this spot, Reginald,heslcfte he went abroad, had caused a rustic templeto be erected there, lined with varions-belongedmoss, and their initials entwined with stichquaint, devices, and in as ddlfol a manner, asDESTINY. 8d9tthe nature of the materials permitted. Here,too, the evening before they parted, he hadtaken Edith to view this trophy of his love,and dien they had each planted at the entrancea honeysuckle, and a wild rose. Duly werethese tended, and fondly were they watchedby her, during his long absence, and they hadgrown and flourished to their utmost luxuriance; but the sweetness of both was past for.the season, and they now only hung their longslender branches in mournful penury, whiletheir seared and yellow leaves lay scatteredaround, and the gay summer brook, now swelledby autumnal rains into a turbid stream, murmuredand gurgled hoarsely along. With sadand filtering steps Edith approached the spotfraughtwiUisonuuiyoverwlielimngrecoUectiomr-^-each bush, each stone, told its voiceless taleof perished life— of beauty turned to dust— oflove and hope changed to gall and wormwood.The very silence that surrounded her spokemore eloquently than words could have done, ofthe desolation of all things. She entered themossy bower, so long her favourite retreat, and400 Destiny.gave way to the melancholy that oppressed herAmid these scenes, it was almost a luxury toweep — it seemed as though, these mute witnessesof her early pleasures were now become thesympathetic depositaries of her maturer sorrows*Heedless of time, she remained sunk in mournfulabstraction, till roused by a dog rushing inand bounding upon her, with all the ardour ciattachment It was a favourite pointer of Reginald's,which she had petted almost to spoilingin his absence, and the faithful creature neverfooled, when at liberty, to fly to her, and lavishhis caresses on the gentle hand that had so oftenfed and fondled him. Soon after Reginald'svoice was heard calling loudly to the dog, andpresently he entered with his gun in his hand,in pursuit, as it appeared, of the runaway. Atsight of Edith he stopped, and colouring, said,*< I did not expect — I was not aware — I — ^* then,as if to cover his confusion, he brc^e into expressionsof anger against his dog, and advancedas if to strike him ; but the animal crouched closeto Edith.Pray do not hurt poor Bran," she said,DESTINY. 401stooping over him ta hide the tears which stillhung round her eyes.^^ He is become a mere useless, good for nothingcur'' said Reginald, giving him a shovewith his foot, and evidently bent upon keepingup his ill-humour ; ^^ 'tis provoking to see a gooddog so completely ruined— I shall certainly havehim shot**^ Edith's heart swelled at the harsh unfeelingmaimer in wych Reginald spoke ; but she triedto be calm, while she said, ^' I fear 'tis I who aminfault more than poor Bran — my fondness forhim" — she stopped.^^ Has been his ruin," said Reginald.There was something in the tone and mannerin which this was uttered, that struck Edith tothe heart. She could not speak ; but strugglingwith her feelings, she rose to leave the place,when, as if smitten with a sense of his unkindness,Reginald caught her hand.Forgive me," he said, " I did not mean topain you — but there are times when I know notwhat I say — what I mean."Edith could not speak, but she motioned to be402 Destiny.goDe. Reginald's agitation seemed little lessthan ber own ; but be still belt her hand, andseveral times attempted to speak, but emotionchoked his utterance. At last be said, ^^ Edith,this state of things is not to be endured — I wouldfinn speak to you — tell you of what I havesuffered since — No, Edith, you must hear me —dishonoured as I am in your eyes — cold andestranged as ypu are become — ^'tis but justiceyou should hear me."*^ I have nothing to hear," said Edith, faintly.Yes-you have to hear me exculpate myselffrom the very suspicion of cold-blooded perfidy.My crime — ^if crime it was — was an involuntaryone — so was the avowal of it. I would havedied a thousand deaths rather than have wrongedyou, Edith. Would to heaven," he exclaimed,wildly, ** would I had died, rather than havelived to suffer as I do !"Why recur to what has passed — to whatcannot be recalled ?" said Edith, with emotion.*^ Because I would yet recall much of whathas passed. Edith, I would yet ask you to forgive— ^to forget" — (He ^topped, and paused inDESTINY. 403extreme agitation, then proceeded) — ^^ to sufferme to expiate, by a life devoted to you, the—involuntary error into which I have fallen."The pride of woman — the pride of Glenroy,for a moment mantled Edith's pale cheek withft deep glow at this proposal, and she remainedsilent ; but it was plain her silence was not thatof doubt or timidity, but of deeply-woundedfeeling. Reginald's colour also rose. *^ If thereis more that you would have me do, and that Ieon do, speak, and it shall be done."^* You might have spared me this, had youknown me better," said Edith; " such professionsmust be painful to you — to me they aredegrading."** Degrading ! — ^if to forgive is degrading — "'^ I do forgive, with my whole heart," saidEdith, with emotion.And the proof?" demanded Reginald, bitterly.That I wish you all happiness," said Edith,in a faltering accent ; and, unable to restrain hertears, she was again moving away.Stay, Edith," cried Reginald ; " we must404 DESTINY.not — ^we shall not part thus. 'Till a mockery totalk of happiness to one so wretched as I. Myhappiness must ever be involved in yours — ^mystuffing is, perhaps, still greater than yours.Edkh, if you will yet concede in me, I again repeat— Heaven be my witness t — your happinessshall be the study of my future life. Say, then,that"<* Hear me, Reginald, once for all"' said Edith,in the calmness of deep-felt emotion. ^^ Thatmy happiness was once in your hands, I freelyacknowledge; but that time is past, never toreturn. There are feelings which never can berenewed. We never can be to each other whatwe have been. I never can — I never till beyours."A strange mingled sensation shot through Reginald'sveins at this declaration, delivered witha calm, solemn earnestness of manner, whichadmitted of no appeal. With an air of pride, hebent his head, and said, — ^' Since such is yourirrevocable determination, it is better we shouldpart; for I will no longer play the hypocrite.DESTINY. 405I cannot (continue to act the part of the favouredhover, after being thrice rejectedAnd my father !" exclaimed Edidi, in anguish.— " Ah ! Reginald, what will become ofhim, if you forsake him ?'♦* I appeal to yourself, Edith, to your owngood sense, to your right feeling, if, after whathas passed, it is to be expected that I shouldcontinue to drag out existence here ? By Heaven,I would rather work as a gdley-slave !"But you are all, and every thing to him,"said Edith, mournfully.So at least I might have been — so I mightbe still ; but you have decreed otherwise," saidReginald, with a sort of haughty humility. Edithfelt the cruel taunt, but she made no reply, onlyturned away to hide the tears which rose to hereyes. Reginald's tone softened, and he sighedas he said, — " Edith, 'tis best for both that weshould part — at least for the present. Heartsonce so dear — still so dear to each other-*-Edith^we are still too much, and yet not enough to eachother — ^if the time should ever come " Hestopped, for he would fain have added, " when406 DESTINY.we may be more ;" bat his lips refused to utterso else a supposition— ^^ should the time eversome, Edith he added with confusion, << whenyour present sentiments may change — ^" Edithcould not speak, bat she waved her head to repelsuch a supposition — ^^ At least you cannotprevent me from thinking it posting they may,"said Reginald.Edith's pale cheek glowed, while she said, —<^ No, Reginald — rest assured my sentimentsare unchangeable."^^ And mine also," thought Reginald, as hisheart throbbed at the bare idea that his lovefor Rotunda could ever change — could ever begiven to another, even though that other wereEklith. He stood silent for a few minutes, thensaid, hurriedly, — ^^ Then let us part ; I am nowon my way to Dunshiera* But, should Glenroybecome worse, you have only to send for me,and I shall return to you instantly. God blessyou, Edith !"A tear was in his eye as he held her hand inhis, and looked anxiously, fondly, upon her, asthough he waited her parting word. Edith'sDESTINY. 407«■breast heaved — ^her lips moved— but no soundpassed them. She felt her fortitude givuig way,but she made a strong effort, and said, with thecalmness of agony, — " May you be happy !"He wrung her hand in silence; and thusthey parted — under what different circumstancesagain to meet !END OF VOLUME SECOND.SOIWBVROH :PRINTED BY BALLANTYNK AND COMPANY,PAUL'S WORK, Canonists.