VOLUME III.JOURNAL AND REMARKS.1832—1836.CHARLES DARWIN, ESQ., Mea.SEC. Gear SOC. >' , ,k'!-^<^ (f.^-}'^ ^^-i^^?KNarrate I VESURVEYING VOYAGESOF HIS MAJESTY'S SHIPSADVENTURE AND BEAGLE,BETWEENTHE YEARS 1826 AND 1836,DESCRIBING THEIREXAMINATION OF THE SOUTHERN SHORESOF 'SOUTH AMERICA,ANDTHE BEAGLE'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION OF THE GLOBE.IN THREE VOLUMEVOL. IllaLONDON:HENRY Colour, GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.1839.\VtlITIVC, nrAlTORT House, TOXDO.X,PREFACE.I HAVE stated in the preface to the Zoology of theVoyage of the Beagle, that it was in consequence of awish expressed by Captain FitzRoy, of having somescientific person on board, accompanied by an offerfi'om him, of giving up part of his own accommodations,that I volunteered my services, which received,through the kindness of the hydrographer. CaptainBeaufort, the sanction of the Lords of the Admiralty.As I feel that the opportunities, which I enjoyed ofstudying the Natural History of the different countrieswe visited, have been wholly due to Captain Fitzroy,I hope I may here be permitted to expressmy gratitude to him ; and to add that, during the fiveyears we were together, I received from him the mostcordial friendship and steady assistance. Both toCaptain FitzRoy and to all the Officers of the Beagle,*I must likewise take this opportunity of returning my sincerethanks to Mr. Bynoe, the surgeon of the Beagle, for his very kindattention to me when I was ill at Valparaiso.viii PREFACE.I shall ever feel most thankful for the undeviatingkindness with which I was treated, during our longvoyage.The present volume contains in the form of ajournal, a sketch of those observations in Geology andNatural History, which I thought would possess somegeneral interest. As it was originally intended tohave preceded any more detailed account, and as itspublication has been unavoidably delayed, the briefnessand imperfection of several parts, I hope, willbe excused. I have given a list of those errata(partly caused by my absence from town when someof the sheets were in the press) which affect thesense ; and have added an Appendix, containing somadditional facts (especially on the theory of the transportationof erratic blocks) which I have accidentallymet with during the past year. I hope shortly topublish my geological observations ; the first Part ofwhich will be on the Volcanic Islands of the Atlanticand Pacific Oceans, and on Coral Formations ; andthe second Part will treat of South America. Severalnumbers of the Zoology of the Voyage of the Beagle,due to the disinterested zeal of several of our firstnaturalists, have already appeared. These workscould not have been undertaken, had it not been forthe liberality of the Lords Commissioners of HerMajesty's Treasury, who, through the representationof the Right Honourable the Chancellor of the Exchequer,have been pleased to grant a sum of onePREFACE. IXthousand pounds towards defraying part of the expensesof publication. I have repeated in this volumemy account of the habits of some of the birds andquadrupeds of South America, as I thought suchobservations might interest those readers who wouldnot, probably, consult the larger work. But I trustthat naturalists will remember, that mere sketches arehere given on several subjects, which will hereafter bemore fully entered on, or have already been so : — forinstance, the notices of the strange fossil quadrupedsof the eastern plains of South America are exceedinglyimperfect, whilst an admirable account of them byMr. Owen now forms the first part of the Zoology ofthe Voyage of the Beagle.I shall have the pleasure of acknowledging thegreat assistance I have received from several naturalists,in the course of this and the succeeding works ;bi^^t I must be here allowed to return my most sincerethanks to the Reverend Professor Henslow, who,when I was an under-graduate at Cambridge, was onechief means of giving me a taste for Natural History,who, during my absence, took charge of the collectionsI sent home, and by his correspondence directedmy endeavours, — and who, since my return, has constantlyrendered me every assistance which the kindestfriend could offer.C. D.VOL, III.CONTENTS.CHAPTER I.Porto Prayaa— Ribeira Grande— Dry and clear atmosphere— Effect of lavaon a calcareous beach— Habits of Aplysia and Octopus— St. Paul's rocksnon-volcanic— Incrustations and stalactites of phosphate of lime — Insectsfirst colonists — Fernando Noronha — Bahia — Extent of granite —Burnished rocks— Habits of Diodon — Pelagic conserve, infusoria —Causes of discoloured sea . . . . 1CHAPTER n.Rio de Janeiro — Excursion north of Cape Frio — Great evaporation —Slavery— Botofogo Bay — Terrestrial Planariae— Clouds on Corcovado—Heavy rain— Musical Hyla— Lampyris and its larvae— Elater, springingpowers— Blue haze— Noise of butterfly — Entomology— Ants — Wasp-killingspider — Parasitical spider — Artifices of Epeira — Gregariousspider— Spider with imperfect web. . . .21CHAPTER III.Monte Video— Maldonado— Excursion to R. Polanco— Lao and Bolas —Partridges — Geology — Absence of trees — Cervus campestris — Riverhog— Tucutuco— Molothrus, cuckoo-like habits of— Tyrant-flycatcherMocking-bird— Carrion hawks — Tubes formed by lightning — Housestruck . . . . , .44CHAPTER IV.Rio Negro — Estancias attacked by Indians — Salt lakes, geological positionof —Flamingoes— R. Negro to Colorado — Sacred tree— Patagonia hare—Indian families— General Rosas— Proceed to Bahia Blanc— Sanddunes— Negro lieutenant— Bahia Blanc— Ground incrusted with Glaubersalt — Punta Alta — Zorillo . . . 74CHAPTER V.Bahia Blanc — Geology — Extinct quadrupeds, four Edentata, horse,Ctenomys — Recent extinction of — Longevity of species — Large animalsdo not require luxuriant vegetation— Southern Africa— Siberian fossilsCatalogue of extinct quadrupeds of South America — Two species ofOstrich, habits of— Tinochorus — Oven-bird — Armadillo — Venomoussnake, toad, lizard — Liberation of animals — Habits of sea-pen — Indianwars and massacres— Arrow-head, antiquarian relic. . 95CONTENTS. XiCHAPTER VI.Set out for Buenos Ayres — Rio Sauce — Sierra Ventana — Transport ofpebbles — Third posta — Driving horses — Bolas — Partridges and foxes —Features of country — Long-legged plover — Teru-tero — Hailstorm —Natural enclosures in Sierra Tapalguen — Flesh of puma — Meat diet —Guardia del Monte — Effects of cattle on the vegetation — Cartoon —Buenos Ayres — coral where animals are slaughtered . . 124CHAPTER VII.Excursion to St. Fe— Thistle beds— Habits and range of Bizcacha— Littleowl — Saline streams — Level plains — Mastodon — St. Fe — Change inlandscape — Geology — Tooth of extinct horse — Range of fossil quadrupeds— Pampas full of remains — Effects of great droughts — Droughtsperiodical — Parana — Habits of Jaguar — Scissors-beak — Kingfisher,parrot, and scissors-tail — Revolution — Buenos Ayres — State of government142CHAPTER VIII.Monte Video — Excursion to Colonia del Sacramiento — Horses, swimmingValue of an Estancia — Cattle, how counted — Geology — Great thistle-beds— Rio Negro — Perforated pebbles — Shepherd dogs — Horses brokenin, Gauchos riding, feats with lazo — Toxodon — Armadillo-like giganticcovering — Great tail — Return to Monte Video — Character of inhabitants167CHAPTER IX.Rio Plata — Flocks of butterflies — Beetles alive in the sea — Aeronautspiders — Pelagic animals — Phosphorescence of sea — Port Desire —Spanish settlements — Zoology — Guanaco — Excursion to head of harbour— Indian grave — Port St. Julian — Geology of Patagonia, successiveterraces, transport of pebbles — Fossil gigantic llama — Types oforganization constant — Change in zoology of America — Causes of extinction183CHAPTER X.Santa Cruz — Expedition up river — Indians — Character of Patagonia —Basaltic platform — Immense streams of lava — Non-transport of blocksby river — Excavation of valley — Condor, range and habits — Cordillera— Erratic boulders of great size — Indian relics— Return to theship . . . . . .213CHAPTER XI.Tierra del Fuego, first arrival — Good Success Bay — Interview with savages— Scenery of the forests— Sir J. Banks's hill — Cape Horn — WigwamCove — Miserable condition of savages — Beagle channel — FuegiansPonsonby Sound — Equality of condition among the natives — Bifurcationof the Beagle channel — Glaciers — Return to ship • 227XU CONTENTS.CHAPTER XII.Falkland Islands— Excursion round island — Aspect — Cattle, horses, rabbit,wolf-like fox — Fire made of bones — Art in making fire — Manner ofhunting wild cattle — Geology, fossil shells — Valleys filled with greatfragments, scenes of violence — Penguin — Geese — Eggs of doris —Zoophytes, coralline phosphorescent — Compound animals . 245CHAPTER XIII.Strait of Magellan — Port Famine — Geology — Deep water in channels —Erratic boulders — Climate — Limit of fruit trees — Mean temperature —Luxuriant forests — Rigour of antarctic islands — Contrast with thenorth — Snow-line, great flexure of — Glaciers — Icebergs transport fragmentsof rock— Glaciers in low latitude — Absence of erratic blocks inintertropical regions — Glaciers and tropical vegetation — Comparisonwith northern hemisphere — Siberian animals in ice — Embedded incold mud — Edible fungus — Zoology — Fucus giganteus — Leave Tierradel Fuego . . . . , .263CHAPTER XIV.Valparaiso— Excursion to base of Andes — Structure of land — AscendBell of Quillota — Shattered masses of greenstone — Immense valleysMines— State of miners — Santiago — Hot baths of Cauquenes — Goldmines— Grinding mills— Perforated stones— Habits of puma— El turcoand tapacolo — Humming-birds 308CHAPTER XV.Chloe— General aspect — Boat excursion — Native Indians — Castro —Large leaves of Gunnera scabra— Tame fox— Ascend San Pedro—Honos Archipelago— Peninsula of Tres Montes— Granitic range-lowe'sHarbour— Wild potato— Forest— Formation of peat— Myopo-tames, otter and mice— Cheucau and barking-bird— Furnarius— Singularcharacter of ornithology — Petrels . . . 333CHAPTER XVI.San Carlos, Chloe— Osorno in eruption— Ride to Castro and Cacao—Impenetrable forests— Valdivia— Apple-trees— Ride to Llanos— Indians—Earthquake— Concepcion— Great earthquake— Effects of wave—Rocks fissured— Appearance of the former towns— Water in the bayblack and boiling— Direction of vibration— Stones displaced— Cause ofgreat waves— Permanent elevation of land— Great lake of fluid rockbeneath crust of the globe— Connexion of volcanic phenomena— Slowelevation of mountain chains, cause of earthquakes . , 356CONTENTS. XiiCHAPTER Xvi.Valparaiso— Passage of Andes by Portillo pass — Sagacity of mules —Mountain torrents — Mines, how discovered — Marine alluvium in valleys— Effect of snow on surface — Geology, fossil shells, double range,two periods of elevation — Red snow — Winds on the crest — Snow thawingin pinnacles — Dry and clear atmosphere — Electricity — Pampas —Zoology of opposite sides of Andes — Uniformity of Patagonia — LocustsGreat bugs — Mendoza — Uspallata — Silicified trees in vertical position— Indian ruins — Change of climate — Earthquake arching bed ofriver — Cumbre — Valparaiso. 382CHAPTER XVIII.Bell mountain — Miners — Great loads carried by the Apires — CoquimboEarthquake — Geology — Terraces — Excursion up valley — Road toGuasco — Desert country — Valley of Copiapopo — Rain and earthquakes,Meteorolites — Hydrophobia — Copiapopo — Excursion to Cordillera — Dryvalley — Cold gales of wind — Noises from a hill — Iquique, completedesert — Salt alluvium — Nitrate of soda — Lima — Unhealthy country —Ruins of Callao, overthrown by earthquake — Elevated shells on islandof San Lorenzo — Plain with embedded fragments of pottery . 416CHAPTER XIX.Galapagos Islands volcanic — Number of craters — Leafless bushes — Colonyat Charles Island — James Island — Salt-lake in crater — Character ofvegetation — Ornithology, curious finches — Great tortoises, habits of,paths to the wells — Marine lizard feeds on sea-weed — Terrestrial species,burrowing habits, herbivorous — Importance of reptiles in the Archipelago— Few and minute insects — American type of organization — Speciesconfined to certain islands — Tameness of birds — Falkland IslandsFear of man an acquired instinct. . , . 453CHAPTER XX.Tahiti — Aspect of —-vegetation on the slope of the mountains — View ofEimeo — Excursion in the interior — Profound ravines — Succession ofwaterfalls — Number of wild useful plants — Temperance of inhabitantsTheir moral state — Parliament convened — New Zealand — Bay ofislands — Hippahs — Absence all government — Excursion to WaiteMissionary establishment — English weeds now run wild — WaiomioFuneral service — Sail from New Zealand . . . 479CHAPTER XXI.Sydney — Prosperity of — Excursion to Bathurst — Aspect of woods — Partyof Natives — Gradual extinction of aborigines — Blue MountainsWeatherboard — View of a grand gulf-like valley — Sheep farm — Lion-ant— Bathurst, general civility of lower orders — State of society — VanVOL. III. CXIV CONTENTS.Diemen's Land — Hobart Town — Aborigines all banished MountWellington— King George's Sound— Cheerless aspect of countryBald Head, calcareous casts like branches of trees — Party of nativesLeave Australia . . . . .515CHAPTER Xxii.Keeling Island — Singular appearance of— Scanty Flora— Transport of seeds—Birds and insects— Ebbing and flowing springs— Coral formations resistingpower of ocean— Fields of dead coral— Stones transported byroots of trees— Great crab— Stinging corals— Structure of lagoon islandsEncircling and Barrier reefs — General proofs of subsidence in thePacific — Theory of lagoon islands caused by subsidence of the landPacific and Indian oceans divided into alternate areas of elevation andsubsidence — Points of eruption lie within the areas of elevation. 539CHAPTER XXIII.Mauritius, beautiful appearance of— Hindoo — Cape of Good Hope — St.Helena — Geology— History of changes in vegetation, probable causeof extinction of land-shells — Ascension— Green Hill— Curious incrustationsof calcareous matter on tidal rocks — Bahia — Brazil — Splendourof tropical scenery — Pernambuco— Singular reef — Azores — Supposedcrater — Hints to collectors — Retrospect of the most impressive parts ofthe voyage 570Addenda . . . . . .609Index.JOURNALOFCHARLES DARWIN, Mea.,NATURALIST TO THE BEAGLE.CHAPTER I.Porto Prayaa — Ribeira Grande — Dry and clear atmosphere — Effect oflava on calcareous beach — Habits of Aplysia and Octopus — St. Paul'srock non-volcanic — Incrustations and stalactites of phosphate of lime —Insects first colonists — Fernando Noronha — Bahia — Extent of graniteBurnished rocks — Habits of Diodon — Pelagic confervse, infusoria —Causes of discoloured sea.ST. Ago CAPE DE VERD ISLANDS.Jan. 16th, 1832. — The neighbourhood of Porto Prayaa,viewed from the sea, wears a desolate aspect. The volcanicfire of past ages, and the scorching heat of a tropical sun,have in most places rendered the soil sterile and unfit forvegetation. The country rises in successive steps of tableland,interspersed with some truncate conical hiUs, and thehorizon is bounded by an irregular chain of more loftymountains. The scene, as beheld through the hazy atmosphereof this climate, is one of great interest ; if,indeed, a person, fresh from the sea, and who has justwalked, for the first time, in a grove of cocoa-nut trees, canbe a judge of any thing but his own happiness. The islandwould generally be considered as very uninteresting ; but toany one accustomed only to an English landscape, the novelV'^L. III. B2 ST. Ago — CAPE DE VERD ISLANDS. Jan. 1832.prospect of an utterly sterile land possesses a grandeurwhich more vegetation might spoil. A single green leafcan scarcely be discovered over wide tracts of the lavaplains ; yet flocks of goats, together with a fcAV cows, contriveto exist. It rains very seldom, but during a shortportion of the year heavy torrents fall, and immediatelyafterwards a light vegetation springs out of every crevice.This soon withers ; and upon such naturally-formed hay theanimals hve. At the present time it has not rained for anentire year. The broad, flat-bottomed, valleys, many ofwhich serve during a few days only in the season as a watercourse,are clothed with thickets of leafless bushes. Fewliving creatures inhabit these valleys. The commonest birdis a kingfisher [Dacelo jagoetisis), which tamely sits on thebranches of the castor-oil plant, and thence darts on thegrasshoppers and hazards. It is brightly coloured, but not sobeautiful as the European species : in its flight, manners,and place of habitation, which is generally in the driestvalleys, there is also a wide difference.One day, two of the officers and myself rode to RibeiraGrande, a village a few miles to the eastward of Porto Prayaa.Until we reached the valley of St. Martin, the country presentedits usual dull brown appearance ; but there, a verysmall rib of water produces a most refreshing margin ofluxuriant vegetation. In the course of an hour we arrivedat Ribeira Grande, and were surprised at the sight of a largeruined fort and cathedral. The little town, before its harbourwas filled up, was the principal place in the island : it nowpresents a melancholy, but very picturesque appearance.Having procured a black Padre for a guide, and a Spaniard,who had served in the Peninsular war, as an interpreter, wevisited a collection of buildings, of which an ancient churchformed the principal part. It is here the governors andcaptain-generals of the islands have been buried. Some ofthe tombstones recorded dates of the sixteenth century.*The Cape de Verc> Islands were discovered in 1449.Jan. 1832. sT. sago — cape de verd islands. 3The heraldic ornaments were the only things in this retiredplace that reminded us of Em-ope. The church or chapelformed one side of a quadrangle, in the middle of which alarge clump of bananas were growing. On another side wasa hospital, containing about a dozen miserable-looking inmates.We returned to the " Venda " to eat our dinners. A considerablenumber of men, women, and children, all as blackas jet, were collected to watch us. Our companions wereextremely merry ; and every thing we said or did was followedby their hearty laughter. Before leaving the town Avevisited the cathedral. It does not appear so rich as thesmaller church, but boasts of a little organ, which sent forthmost singularly inharmonious cries. We presented the blackpriest with a few shillings, and the Spaniard, patting him onthe head, said, with much candour, he thought his colourmade no great difference. We then returned, as fast as theponies would go, to Porto Prayaa.Another day we rode to the village of St. Domingo, situatednear the centre of the island. On a small plain whichwe crossed, a few stunted acacias were growing ; their tops,by the action of the steady trade-wind, were bent in asingular manner — some of them even at a right angle to thetrunk. The direction of the branches was exactly Nee.by N., and S.W. by S. These natural vanes must indicatethe prevailing direction of the force of the trade wind. Thetravelling had made so little impression on the barren soil,that we here missed our track, and took that to Fences.This we dia not find out till we arrived there; and wewere afterwards very glad of our mistake. Fuentes is apretty village, With a small stream ; and every thing appearedto prosper well, excepting, indeed, that which oughtto do so most — its inhabitants. The black children, completelynaked, and looking very wretched, were carryingbundles of firewood haK as big as their own bodies.Near Fuentes we saw a large flock of guinea-fowl — probablyfifty or sixty in number. They were extremely wary,B 24^ ST. Ago — CAPE DE VERD ISLANDS. Jan. 1832.and could not be approached. They avoided us, like partridgeson a rainy day in September, running with theirheads cocked up ; and if pursued, they readily took to thewing.The scenery of St. Domingo possesses a beauty totallyunexpected, from the prevalent gloomy character of the restof the island. The village is situated at the bottom of avalley, bounded by lofty and jagged walls of stratified lava.The black rocks afford a most striking contrast with thebright green vegetation, which follows the banks of a Utilestream of clear water. It happened to be a grand feast-day,and the village was full of people. On our return we overtooka party of about twenty young black girls, dressed inmostexcellent taste ; their black skins and snow-white linenbeing set off by their coloured turbans and large shawls. Assoon as we approached near, they suddenly all turned round,and covering the path \^-ith their shawls, sung with greatenergy a wild song, beating time with their hands upon theirlegs. We threw them some winters, which were receivedwith screams of laughter, and we left them redoubling thenoise of their song.It has ahead been remarked, that the atmosphere isgenerally very hazy ; this appears chiefly due to an impalpabledust, which is constantly falling, even on vessels farout at sea. The dust is of a brown colour, and under theblowpipe easily fuses into a black enamel. It is produced,as I believe, from the wear and tear of volcanic rocks,and must come from the coast of Africa. One morningthe view was singularly clear ; the distant mountains beingprojected nth the sharpest outline, on a hea\7^ bank ofdark blue clouds. Judging from the appearance, and fromsimilar cases in England, I supposed that the air was saturatedwith moisture. The fact, however, turned out quitethe contrary. The hygrometer gave a difference of 29.6degrees, between the temperature of the air, and the pointat which dew was precipitated. This difference was nearlydouble that which I had observed on the previous mornings.Jan. 1832. geology. 5This unusual degree of atmospheric dryness was accompaniedby continual flashes of lightning. Is it not an uncommoncase, thus to find a remarkable degree of aerial transparencywith such a state of weather ?The geology of this island is the most interesting part ofits natural history. On entering the harbour, a perfectlyhorizontal white band, in the face of the sea cliff, may be seenrunning for some miles along the coast, and at the height ofabout forty-five feet above the water. Upon examination,this white stratum is found to consist of calcareous matter,with numerous shells embedded, such as now exist on theneighbouring coast. It rests on ancient volcanic rocks, and hasbeen covered by a stream of basalt, which must have enteredthe sea, when the white shelly bed was lying at the bottom.It is interesting to trace the changes, produced by the heat ofthe overlying lava, on the friable mass. For a thickness ofseveral inches it is converted, in some parts, into a firmstone, as hard as the best freestone ; and the earthy matter,originally mingled with the calcareous, has been separated intolittle spots, thus leaving the limestone white and pure. Inother parts a highly crystalline marble has been formed, andso perfect are the crystals of carbonate of lime, that they caneasily be measured by the reflecting goniometer. The changeis even more extraordinary, where the lime has been caughtup by the scoriaceous fragments of the lower surface of thestream ; for it is there converted into groups of beautifullyradiated fibres resembling arragonite. The beds of lava risein successive gently-sloping plains, towards the interior,whence the deluges of melted stone originally proceeded.Within historical times, no signs of volcanic activity have, Ibelieve, been manifested in any part of St. Jago. This stateof quiescence is, probably, owing to the neighbouring islandof Fog being frequently in eruption. Even the form of acrater can but rarely be discovered on the summits of any ofthe red cindery hills ; yet the more recent streams can be distinguishedon the coast, forming a line of cliff's of less height,but stretching out in advance of those belonging to an older6 ST. Ago — CAPE DE VERD ISLANDS. Jan. 1832.series : the height of the cliff thus affording a rude measureof the age.During our stay, I observed the habits of some marineanimals. A large Aplysia is very common. This sea-slug isabout five inches long ; and is of a dirty yellowish colour,veined with purple. At the anterior extremity, it has twopair of feelers ; the upper ones of which resemble in shape theears of a quadruped. On each side of the lower surface, orfoot, there is a broad membrane, which appears sometimesto act as a ventilator, in causing a current of water to flowover the dorsal branchiae. It feeds on delicate sea-weeds,which grow among the stones in muddy and shallow water ;and I found in its stomach several small pebbles, as in thegizzards of birds. This slug, when disturbed, emits a veryfine purplish-red fluid, which stains the water for the spaceof a foot around. Besides this means of defence, an acridsecretion, which is spread over its body, causes a sharp,stinging sensation, similar to that produced by the Physaha,or Portuguese man-of-war.I was much interested, on several occasions, by watchingthe habits of an Octopus or cuttle-fish. Although commonin the pools of water left by the retiring tide, these animalswere not easily caught. By means of their long arms andsuckers, they could drag their bodies into very narrow crevices; and when thus fixed, it required great force to removethem. At other times they darted tail first, with the rapidityof an arrow, from one side of the pool to the other, atthe same instant discolouring the water with a dark chestnut-brownink. These animals also escape detection by a veryextraordinary, chameleon like, power of changing their colour.They appear to vary the tints, according to the nature of theground over which they pass: when in deep water, theirgeneral shade was brownish purple, but when placed on theland, or in shallow water, this dark tint changed into one ofa yellowish green. The colour, examined more carefully,was a French gray, with numerous minute spots of brightyellow : the former of these varied in intensity ; the latterJan. 1832. habits of octopus. 7entirely disappeared and appeared again by turns. Thesechanges were effected in such a manner, that clouds, varyingin tint between a hyacinth red and a chestnut brown,* werecontinually passing over the body. Any part being subjectedto a slight shock of galvanism, became almost black :a similar effect, but in a less degree, was produced byscratching the skin with a needle. These clouds, or blushes,as they may be called, when examined under a glass, aredescribed as being produced by the alternate expansions andcontractions of minute vesicles, containing variously-colouredlluids.tThis cuttle-fish displayed its chameleon-like power bothduring the act of swimming and whilst remaining stationaryat the bottom. I was much amused by the various arts toescape detection used by one individual, which seemed fullyaware that I was watching it. Remaining for a time motionless,it would then stealthily advance an inch or two, like acat after a mouse ; sometimes changing its colour : it thusproceeded, till having gained a deeper part, it darted away,leaving a dusky train of ink to hide the hole into whichit had crawled.While looking for marine animals, with my head abouttwo feet above the rocky shore, I was more than oncesaluted by a jet of water, accompanied by a slight gratingnoise. At first I did not know what it was, but afterwards Ifound out that it was the cuttle-fish, which, though concealedin a hole, thus often led me to its discovery. That it possessesthe power of ejecting water there is no doubt, and itappeared to me certain that it could, moreover, take goodaim by directing the tube or siphon on the under side of itsbody. From the difficulty which these animals have in carryingtheir heads, they cannot crawl with ease when placedon the ground. I observed that one which I kept in thecabin was slightly phosphorescent in the dark.St. Paul's Rocks. — In crossing the Atlantic we hove to,So named according to Pat. Sykes's nomenclature.f See Encyclo. of Ant. and Physiol., article Cephalopoda.8 ST. Paul's rocks. Feb. 1832.during the morning of February 16th, close to the island ofSt. Paul. This cluster of rocks is situated in 0° 58' northlatitude, and 29° 15' west longitude. It is 540 miles distantfrom the coast of America, and 350 from the island of FernandoNoronha. The highest point is only fifty feet above thelevel of the sea, and the entire circumference is under three-quartersof a mile. This small point rises abruptly out ofthe depths of the ocean. Its mineralogical constitution isnot simple ; in some parts, the rock is of a cherty, in others,of a felspathic nature ; and in the latter case it contains thinveins of serpentine, mingled with calcareous matter.The circumstance of these rocks not being of volcanicorigin is of interest, because, with very few exceptions, theislands situated in the midst of the great oceans are thusconstituted. As the highest pinnacles of the great mountainranges probably once existed as islands distant from anycontinent, we are led to expect that they would frequentlyconsist of volcanic rocks. It becomes, therefore, a curiouspoint to speculate on the changes which many of the presentislands would undergo, during the lapse of the countlessages, which would be required to elevate them into snow-cladsummits. If we take the case of Ascension, or St.Helena, both of which have long existed in an extinct condition,we may feel assured, before so vast a period couldelapse, during the whole of which the surface would be exposedto constant wear and tear, that the mere nucleus orcore of the island would remain ; perhaps, every fragment ofcellular rock having been decomposed, a mass of some compactstone, as phonolite or greenstone, would crown our newChimborazo.The rocks of St. Paul appear from a distance of a brilliantlywhite colour. This is partly owing to the dung of avast multitude of seafowl, and partly to a coating of a glossywhite substance, which is intimately united to the surface ofthe rocks. This, when examined with a lens, is found toconsist of numerous exceedingly thin layers, its total thicknessbeing about the tenth of an inch. The surface is smoothFeb. 1832. st, Paul's rocks. 9and glossy, and has a pearly lustre ; it is considerably harderthan calcareous spar, although it can be scratched by a knife :under the blowpipe it decrepitates, slightly blackens, andemits a fetid odour. It consists of phosphate of lime, mingledwith some impurities; and its origin without doubt is dueto the action of the rain or spray on the bird's dung. I mayhere mention, that I found in some hollows in the lava rocksof Ascension considerable masses of the substance calledguano, which on the west coast of the intertropical parts ofSouth America occurs in great beds, some yards thick, onthe islets frequented by seafowl. According to the analysisof Fourcroy and Vauquelin, it consists of the rates, phosphates,and oxalates of lime, ammonia, and potash, togetherwith some other salts, and some fatty and earthy matter. Ibelieve there is no doubt of its being the richest manure whichhas ever been discovered. At Ascension, close to the guano,stalactitic or botryoidal masses of impure phosphate of limeadhered to the basalt. The basal part of these had an earthytexture, but the extremities were smooth and glossy, andsufficiently hard to scratch common glass. These stalactitesappeared to have shrunk, perhaps from the removal of somesoluble matter, in the act of consolidation ; and hence theyhad an irregular form. Similar stalactitic masses,* though Iam not aware that they have ever been noticed, are, I believe,by no means of uncommon occurrence.We only observed two kinds of birds — the booby and thenoddy. The former is a species of gannet, and the latter atern. Both are of a tame and stupid disposition, and are sounaccustomed to visitors, that I could have killed any numberof them with my geological hammer. The booby lays hereggs on the bare rock ; but the tern makes a very simple nestI may mention that I was shown, at Ascension, some very finestalactites, composed of sulphate of lime, which had been taken out of acavern. From their external appearance they would generally be mistakenfor the ordinary calcareous kind. It was interesting to observe, in a fracturedspecimen, the double cleavage intersecting with its even planes, theirregular layers of successive deposition.10 ST. Paul's rocks. Feb. 1832.with sea-weed. By the side of many of these nests a smallflying-fish was placed ; which, I suppose, had been broughtby the male bird for its partner. It was amusing to watchhow quickly a large and active crab grasps), which inhabitsthe crevices of the rock, stole the fish from the side of thenest, as soon as we had disturbed the birds. Not a singleplant, not even a lichen, grows on this island ; yet it is inhabitedby several insects and spiders. The following histcompletes, I believe, the terrestrial fauna : a species ofVerona and an acarus, which must have come here as parasiteson the birds ; a small brown moth, belonging to agenus that feeds on feathers ; a staphylinus ( Queens) and•a woodlouse from beneath the dung ; and lastly, numerousspiders, which I suppose prey on these small attendantson, and scavengers of the waterfowl. The often repeateddescription of the first colonists of the coral islets in theSouth Sea, is not, probably, quite correct : I fear it destroysthe poetry of the story to find, that these little Adle insectsshould thus take possession before the cocoa-nut tree andother noble plants have appeared.The smallest rock in the tropical seas, by giving a foundation,for the growth of innumerable kinds of sea-weed andcompound animals, supports likewise a large number of fish.The sharks and the seamen in the boats maintained a constantstruggle, who should secure the greater share of theprey caught by the lines. I have heard, that a rock near theBermudas, lying many miles out at sea, and covered by aconsiderable depth of water, was first discovered by the circumstanceof fish having been observed in the neighbourhood.Fernando Noronha, Feb. 20th. — As far as I wasenabled to observe, during the few hours we staid at thisplace, the constitution of the island is volcanic, but probablynot of a recent date. The most remarkable feature isa conical hill, about one thousand feet high, the upper partof which is exceedingly steep, and on one side overhangs itsbase. The rock is phonolite, and is divided into irregularFeb. 1832. FERNANDO Corona. 11columns. From the first impression, on viewing one ofthese isolated masses, one is inclined to believe, that thewhole has been suddenly pushed up in a semi-fluid state.At St. Helena, however, I ascertained that some pinnacles,of a nearly similar figure and constitution, had been formedby the injection of melted rock among the yielding strata ;which thus formed the model for these gigantic obelisks.The whole island is covered with wood ; but from the drynessof the climate there is no appearance of luxuriance. At someelevation great masses of the columnar rock, shaded bylaurels, and ornamented by a tree covered by fine pink flowerslike those of a foxglove, but without a single leaf, gave apleasing effect to the nearer parts of the scenery.Bahia, or San Salvador. Brazil, Feb. 29th.— Theday has past delightfully. Delight itself, however, is a weakterm to express the feelings of a naturahst who, for the firsttime, has been wandering by himself in a Brazilian forest.Among the multitude of striking objects, the general luxurianceof the vegetation bears away the victory. The eleganceof the grasses, the novelty of the parasitical plants, thebeauty of the flowers, the glossy green of the foliage, alltend to this end. A most paradoxical mixture of sound andsilence pervades the shady parts of the wood. The noisefrom the insects is so loud, that it may be heard even in avessel anchored several hundred yards from the shore ; yetwithin the recesses of the forest a universal silence appearsto reign. To a person fond of natural history, such a day asthis, brings with it a deeper pleasure than he ever can hopeagain to experience. After wandering about for some hours,I returned to the landing-place ; but, before reaching it, Iwas overtaken by a tropical storm. I tried to find shelterunder a tree which was so thick, that it would never havebeen penetrated by common English rain ; but here, in acouple of minutes, a little torrent flowed down the trunk.It is to this violence of the rain we must attribute the verdureat the bottom of the thickest woods : if the showerswere like those of a colder clime, the greater part would be12 BAHIA BRAZIL. Feb. 1832,absorbed or evaporated before it reached the ground. Iwill not at present attempt to describe the gaudy scenery ofthis noble bay, because, in our homeward voyage, we calledhere a second time, and I shall then have occasion to remarkon it.The geology of the surrounding country possesses littleinterest. Throughout the coast of Brazil, and certainly foraconsiderable space inland, from the Rio Plata to CapeSt. Roque, lat. 5° S., a distance of more than 2000 geographicalmiles, wherever solid rock occurs, it belongsto a granitic formation. The circumstance of this enormousarea being thus constituted of materials, which almostevery geologist believes to have been crystallized by theaction of heat under pressure, gives rise to many curiousreflections. Was this effect produced beneath the depthsof a profound ocean ? or did a covering of strata formerlyextend over it, which has since been removed ? Can webelieve that any power, acting for a time short of infinity,could have denuded the granite over so many thousandsquare leagues ?On a point not far from the city, where a rivulet enteredthe sea, I observed a fact connected with a subjectdiscussed by Humboldt.* At the cataracts of the greatrivers Orinoco, Nile, and Congo, the syenitic rocks arecoated by a black substance, appearing as if they had beenpolished with plumbago. The layer is of extreme thinness;and on analysis by Berzelius it was found to consist ofthe oxides of manganese and iron. In the Orinoco itoccurs on the rocks periodically washed by the floods, andin those parts alone, where the stream is rapid ; or, as theIndians say, " the rocks are black, where the waters arewhite." The coating is here of a rich brown instead ofa black colour, and seems to be composed of ferrugineousmatter alone. Hand specimens fail to give a just idea ofthese brown, burnished, stones which glitter in the sun's rays.Pers. Narr., vol. v., pt. i., p. 18.Feb. 1832. burnished rocks. 13They occur only within the limits of tidal action ; and as therivulet slowly trickles down, the surf must supply the polishingpower of the cataracts in the great rivers. In the samemanner, the rise and fall of the tide probably answers tothe periodical inundations ; and thus the same causes arepresent under apparently very different circumstances. Thereal origin, however, of these coatings of metallic oxides,which seem as if cemented to the rocks, is not understood ;and no reason, I believe, can be assigned for their thicknessremaining constant.One day I was amused by watching the habits of a Diodon,which was caught swimming near the shore. This fish is wellknown to possess the singular power of distending itself intoa nearly spherical form. After having been taken out of waterfor a short time, and then again immersed in it, a considerablequantity both of water and air was absorbed by the mouth,and perhaps likewise by the branchial apertures. This processis effected by two methods ; the air is swallowed, andis then forced into the cavity of the body, its return beingprevented by a muscular contraction which is externallyvisible; but the water, I observed, entered in a streamthrough the mouth, which was wide open and motionless :this latter action must, therefore, depend on suction. Theskin about the abdomen is much looser than that of theback; hence, during the inflation, the lower, surface becomesfar more distended than the upper ; and the fish, in consequence,floats with its back downwards. Cuvier doubtswhether the Diodon, in this position, is able to swim;but not only can it thus move forward in a straight line,but likewise it can turn round to either side. This lattermovement is effected solely by the aid of the pectoral fins ;the tail being collapsed, and not used. From the bodybeing buoyed up with so much air, the branchial openingswere out of water ; but a stream drawn in by the mouth,constantly flowed through them.The fish, having remained in this distended state for a14 BAHIA — BRAZIL. Feb. 1832.short time, generally expelled the air and water with considerableforce from the branchial apertures and mouth. Itcould emit, at will, a certain portion of the water ; and itappears, therefore, probable, that this fluid is taken in partlyfor the sake of regulating its specific gravity. This diodonpossessed several means of defence. It could give a severebite, and could eject water from its mouth to some distance,at the same time it made a curious noise by the movementof its jaws. By the inflation of its body, the papillae, withwhich the skin is covered, became erect and pointed. Butthe most curious circumstance was, that it emitted fromthe skin of its belly, when handled, a most beautiful carminered and fibrous secretion, which stained ivory and paperin so permanent a manner, that the tint is retained with allits brightness to the present day. I am quite ignorant ofthe nature and use of this secretion.March 18th. — We sailed from Bahia. A few days afterwards,when not far distant from the Abrolhos islets, myattention was called to a discoloured appearance in the sea.The whole surface of the water, as it appeared under a weaklens, seemed as if covered by chopped bits of hay, withtheir ends jagged. One of the larger particles measured .03of an inch in length, and .009 in breadth. Examined morecarefully, each is seen to consist of from twenty to sixtycylindrical filaments, which have perfectly rounded extremities,and are divided at regular intervals by transversesepta, containing a brownish-green flocculent matter. Thefilaments must be enveloped in some viscid fluid, for thebundles adhered together without actual contact. I do notknow to what family these bodies properly belong, but theyhave a close general resemblance in structure with the conserveswhich grow in every ditch. These simple vegetables,thus constituted for floating in the open ocean, must incertainplaces exist in countless numbers. The ship passedthrough several bands of them, one of which was about tenyards wide, and, judging from the mud-like colour of theMar. 1832. pelagic confer vie. 15water, at least two and a half miles long. In almost everylong voyage some account is given of these confervse. Theyappear especially common in the sea near Australia. OffCape Leeuwin, I found some very similar to those abovedescribed ; they differed chiefly in the bundles being rathersmaller, and being composed of fewer filaments. CaptainCook, in his third voyage, remarks, that the sailors gave tothis appearance the name of sea sawdust.I may here mention that during two days preceding ourarrival at the Keeling Islands in the Indian Ocean, I saw inmany parts masses of flocculent matter, of a brownish-greencolour, floating in the sea. They varied in size, from half totothree or four inches square ; and were quite irregular infigure. In an opake vessel they could barely be distinguished,but in a glass one they were clearly visible. Underthe microscope the flocculent matter was seen to consist of twokinds of conserve, between which I am quite ignorant whetherthere exists any connexion. Minute cylindrical bodies,conical at each extremity, are involved in vast numbers, inamass of fine threads. These threads have a diameter ofabout-3~oVo of an inch ; they possess an internal lining, andare divided at irregular and very wide intervals by transversesepta. Their length is so great, that I could never with certaintyascertain the form of the uninjured extremity ; theyare all curvilinear, and resemble in mass a handful of hair,coiled up and squeezed together. In the midst of thesethreads, and probably connected by some viscid fluid, theother kind, or the cylindrical transparent bodies, float ingreat numbers. These have their two extremities terminatedby cones, produced into the finest points : their diameter istolerably constant between .Os and .008 of an inch ; buttheir length varies considerably from .04 to .06, and evensometimes to .08. Near one extremity of the cylindricalpart, a green septum, formed of granular matter, and thickestin the middle, may generally be seen. This, I believe, isthe bottom of a most delicate, colourless sack, composed ofa pulpy substance, which lines the exterior case, but does16 ATLANTIC OCEAN. Mar. 1832.not extend within the extreme conical points. In some,small but perfect spheres of brownish granular matter suppliedthe place of the septa; and I observed the curiousprocess by which they were produced. The pulpy matter ofthe internal coating suddenly grouped itself into lines, someof which assumed a form radiating from a common centre ;it then continued, with an irregular and rapid movement, tocontract itself, so that, in the course of a second, the wholewas united into a perfect little sphere, which occupied theposition of the septum at one end of the now quitehollow case. The appearance was as if an elastic membrane,for instance a thin Indian-rubber ball, had beendistended with air, and then burst, in which case theedges would instantly shrink up and contract towards apoint. The formation of the granular sphere was hastenedby any accidental injury. I may add, that frequently apair of these bodies were attached to each other, as representedin the accompanying rude drawing, cone besidecone, at that end where the septum occurs. When floatinguninjured in the sea, the formation of the sphericalgemmules perhaps only takes place, when two of the plants(or rather animals, according to Bory St. Vincent) thusbecome attached, and married to each other. Nevertheless,I certainly witnessed this curious process in several individuals,when separate, and where there was no apparent causeof disturbance. In any case it does not seem probable, fromthe fixed structure of the septum, that the whole of thegranular matter is transferred from one to the other body, aswith the true Conjugates.I will here add a few other observations connected withthe discoloration of the sea from organic causes. On thecoast of Chile, a few leagues north of Concepcion, the Beagleone day passed through great bands of muddy water ; andMar. 1832. pelagic animalcula. 17again, a degree south of Valparaiso, the same appearance wasstill more extensive. Although we were nearly fifty milesfrom the coast, I at first attributed this circumstance to realstreams of muddy water brought down by the river Mayo.Mr. Sulivan, however, having drawn up some in a glass,thought he distinguished, by the aid of a lens, moving points.The water was slightly stained as if by red dust ; and afterleaving it for some time quiet, a cloud collected at the bottom.With a lens, of one-fourth of an inch focal distance, smallhyaline points could be seen darting about with great rapidity,and frequently exploding. Examined with a muchhigher power, their shape was found to be oval, and contractedby a ring round the middle, from which line curvedlittle setce proceeded on all sides ; and these were the organsof motion. One end of the body was narrower and morepointed than the other. According to the arrangement ofBory St. Vincent, they are animalcula, belonging to thefamily of Trichodes : it was, however, very difficult toexamine them with care, for almost the instant motionceased, even while crossing the field of vision, their bodiesburst. Sometimes both ends burst at once, sometimesonly one, and a quantity of coarse brownish granularmatter was ejected, which cohered very slightly. Thering with the setae sometimes retained its irritability for alittle while after the contents of the body had beenemptied, and continued a rigging, uneven motion. Theanimal an instant before bursting expanded to half againits natural size ; and the explosion took place about fifteenseconds after the rapid progressive motion had ceased : in afew cases it was preceded for a short interval by a rotatorymovement on the longer axis. About two minutes after anynumber were isolated in a drop of water, they thus perished.The animals move with the narrow apex forwards, by the aidof their vibratory ciliee, and generally by rapid starts. Theyare exceedingly minute, and quite invisible to the naked eye,only covering a space equal to the square of the thousandthof an inch. Their numbers were infinite ; for the smallestVOL III. c18 DISCOLOURED SEA. Mar. 1832.drop of Mater which I could remove contained very many.In one day we passed through two spaces of water thusstained, one of which alone must have extended over severalsquare miles. What incalculable numbers of these microscopicalanimals ! The colour of the water, as seen at somedistance, was like that of a river which has flowed through ared clay district ; but under the shade of the vessel's side, itwas quite as dark as chocolate. The hne where the red andblue water joined was distinctly defined. The weather forsome days previously had been calm, and the oceanabounded, to an unusual degree, with living creatures. InUUoa^s voyage an account is given of crossing, in nearly thesame latitude, some discoloured water, which was mistakenfor a shoal : no soundings were obtained, and I have nodoubt, from the description, that this little animalcule wasthe cause of the alarm.*In the sea around Tierra del Fuego, and at no great distancefrom the land, I have seen narrow lines of water of abright red colour, from the number of Crustacea, whichsomewhat resemble in form large prawns. The sealers callthem whale-food. Whether whales feed on them I do notknow ; but terns, cormorants, and immense herds of greatunwieldy seals, on some parts of the coast, derive their chiefsustenance from these swimming crabs. Seamen invariablyattribute the discoloration of the water to spawn 5 but Ifound this to be the case only on one occasion. At the distanceof several leagues from the Archipelago of the Galapagos,the ship sailed through three strips of a dark yell.Lesson (Voyage de la Coquille, vol. i., p. 255") mentions red wateroff Lima, apparently produced by the same cause. Person, the distinguishednaturalist, in the " Voyage Aux Terres Australes," gives no less thantwelve references to voyagers who have alluded to the discoloured watersof the sea (vol. ii., p. 239). It was his intention to have written anessay on the subject. To the references given by Person may be added,Humboldt's Pers. Narr., vol. vi., p. 804 ; Finder's Voyage, vol. i., p. 92 ;Labillardiere, vol. i., p. 287; Ulloa's Voyage ; Voyage of the Astrolabeand of the Coquille ; Captain King's Survey of Australia, &c.Mar. 1832. discoloured sea. 19lowish, or mud-like, water; these strips were some miles long,but only a few yards wide, and they were separated fromthe surrounding surface by a sinuous yet distinct margin.The colour was caused by little gelatinous balls, about the fifthof an inch in diameter, in which numerous minute sphericalovules were embedded : they were of two distinct kinds, onebeing of a reddish colour and of a diiferent shape from theother. I cannot form a conjecture as to what two kinds ofanimals these belonged. Captain Collect remarks, that thisappearance is very common among the Galapagos Islands,and that the direction of the bands indicates that of thecurrents ; in the described case, however, the line wascaused by the wind. The only other appearance which Ihave to notice, is a thin oily coat on the surface which displaysiridescent colours. I saw a considerable tract of theocean thus covered on the coast of Brazil ; the seamen attributedit to the putrefying carcass of some whale, which probablywas floating at no great distance. I do not heremention the minute gelatinous particles which are frequentlydispersed throughout the water, for they are not sufficientlyabundant to create any change of colour.There are two circumstances in the above accounts whichappear very remarkable : first, how do the various bodieswhich form the bands with defined edges keep together ? Inthe case of the prawn-like crabs, their movements were asinstantaneous as in a regiment of soldiers ; but this cannothappen from any thing like voluntary action with theovules, or the confervse, nor is it probable among the infusoria.Secondly, what causes the length and narrownessof the bands ? The appearance so much resembles thatwhich may be seen in every torrent, where the streamrecoils into long streaks, the froth collected in the eddies,that I must attribute the effect to a similar action eitherof the currents of the air, or sea. Under this suppositionwe must believe that the various organized bodiesare produced in certain favourable places, and are thenceremoved by the set of either wind or water. I confess,c 220 DISCOLOURED SEA. Mar. 1832,however, there is a very great difficulty in imagining anyonespot to be the birthplace of the millions of millions ofanimalcula and confervse : for whence come the germs atsuch points ? — the parent bodies having been distributed bythe winds and waves over the immense ocean. But on noother hypothesis can I understand their linear grouping.I may add that Scoresbyby remarks, that green water aboundingwith pelagic animals, is invariably found in a certainpart of the Arctic Sea.CHAPTER II.Rio de Janeiro — Excursion north of Cape Frio — Great evaporation —Slavery — Botofogo Bay — Terrestrial Planariae — Clouds on Corcovado —Heavy rain — Musical Hyla — Lampyris and its larvae — Elater, springingpowers — Blue haze — Noise of butterfly — Entomology — Ants — Wasp-killingspider — Parasitical spider — Artifices of Epeira — Gregariousspider — Spider with imperfect web.RIO DE JANEIRO.April 4th to July 5th, 1832.- A few days after ourarrival I became acquainted with an Englishman who wasgoing to visit his estate situated, rather more than ahundred miles from the capital, to the northward of CapeFrio. As I was quite unused to travelling, I gladly acceptedhis kind offer of allowing me to accompany him.April 8th. — Our party amounted to seven. The firststage was very interesting. The day was powerfully hot,and as we passed through the woods, every thing wasmotionless, excepting the large and brilliant butterflies,which lazily fluttered about. The vieAV seen when crossingthe hills behind Praia Grande was most beautiful; thecolours were intense, and the prevailing tint a dark blue ;the sky and the calm waters of the bay vied with eachother in splendour. After passing through some cultivatedcountry, we entered a forest, which in the grandeur of all itsparts could not be exceeded. We arrived by midday atIthaca ; this small village is situated on a plain, and roundthe central house are the huts of the negroes. These, fromtheir regular form and position, reminded me of the drawingsof the Hottentot habitations in Southern Africa. As themoon rose early, we determined to start the same evening forom* sleeping-place at the Lagoa Maria. As it was growing22 RIO DE JANEIRO. April, 1832.dark we passed under one of the massive, bare, and steephills of granite which are so common in this country Thisspot is notorious from having been, for a long time, theresidence of some runaway slaves, who, by cultivating alittle ground near the top, contrived to eke out a subsistence.At length they were discovered, and a party of soldiers beingsent, the whole were seized with the exception of one oldwoman, who sooner than again be led into slavery, dashedherself to pieces from the summit of the mountain. In aRoman matron this would have been called the noble love offreedom : in a poor negress it is mere brutal obstinacy. Wecontinued riding for some hours. For the few last miles theroad was intricate, and it passed through a desert waste ofmarshes and lagoons. The scene by the dimmed light ofthe moon was most desolate. A few fireflies flitted by us ;and the solitary snipe, as it rose, uttered its plaintive cry.The distant and sullen roar of the sea scarcely broke thestillness of the night.April 9th. — We left our miserable sleeping-place beforesunrise. The road passed through a narrow sandy plain,lying between the sea and the interior salt lagoons. Thenumber of beautiful fishing birds, such as egrets and cranes,and the succulent plants assuming most fantastical forms,gave to the scene an interest which it would not otherwisehave possessed. The few stunted trees were loaded with parasiticalplants, among which the beauty and delicious fragranceof some of the orchids were most to be admired. Asthe sun rose, the day became extremely hot, and the reflectionof the light and heat from the white sand was very distressing.We dined at Mandetiba ; the thermometer in theshade being 84°. The beautiful view of the distant woodedhills, reflected in the perfectly calm water of an extensivelagoon, quite refreshed us. As the venda* here was a verygood one, and I have the pleasant, but rare remembrance, ofan excellent dinner, I will be grateful and presently describeVenda, the Portuguese name for an inn.April, 1832. RIO de Janeiro. 23it, as the type of its class. These houses are often large, andare built of thick upright posts, with boughs interwoven, andafterwards plastered. They seldom have floors, and neverglazed windows ; but are generally pretty well roofed. Universallythe front part is open, forming a kind of verandah,in which tables and benches are placed. The bed-roomsjoin on each side, and here the passenger may sleep as comfortablyas he can, on a wooden platform, covered by a thinstraw mat. The venda stands in a courtyard, where thehorses are fed. On first arriving, it was our custom to unsaddlethe horses and give them their Indian corn ; then,with a low bow, to ask the senhor to do us the favourto give us something to eat. " Any thing you choose,sir," was his usual answer. For the few first times,vainly I thanked Providence for having guided us to sogood a man. The conversation proceeding, the case universallybecame deplorable. "Any fish can you do usthe favour of giving?" — "Oh! no, sir." — "Any soup?" —No, sir"— "Any bread—" Oh ! no, sir"— "Any driedmeat ?" — " Oh ! no, sir." If we were lucky, by waiting acouple of hours, we obtained fowls, rice, and farina. It notunfrequently happened, that we were obliged to kill, withstones, the poultry for our own supper. When thoroughlyexhausted by fatigue and hunger, we timorously hinted thatwe should be glad of our meal, the pompous, and (thoughtrue) most unsatisfactory answer was, " It will be ready whenit is ready." If we had dared to remonstrate any further, weshould have been told to proceed on our journey, as beingtoo impertinent. The hosts are most ungracious and disagreeablein their manners ; their houses and their personsare often filthily dirty ; the want of the accommodation offorks, knives, and spoons is common ; and I am sure nocottage or hovel in England could be found in a state soutterly destitute of every comfort. At Campos Novo, however,we fared sumptuously ; having rice and fowls, biscuit,wine, and spirits, for dinner; coffee in the evening, and fishwith coffee for breakfast. All this, with good food for the24 RIO DE JANEIRO. April, 1832.horses, only cost 2s. 6d. per head. Yet the host of thisvenda, being asked if he knew any thing of a whip which oneof the party had lost, gruffly answered, " How should I know ?why did you not take care of it ? — I suppose the dogs haveeat it."Leaving Mandetiba, we continued to pass through an intricatewilderness of lakes ; in some of which were fresh, inothers salt water shells. Of the former kind I found a Lineain great numbers in a lake, into which, the inhabitantsassured me, the sea annually, and sometimes oftener, entered,and made the water quite salt. I have no doubt many interestingfacts, in relation to marine and fresh water animals,might be observed in this chain of lagoons, which skirt thecoast of Brazil. M. Gay* has stated that he found in theneighbourhood of Rio, shells of the marine genera solenand mytilus, and fresh water ampullariee, living together inbrackish water. I also frequently observed in the lagoonnear the Botanic Garden, where the water is only a little lesssalt than in the sea, a species of hydrocephalus, very similar toa species common in the ditches of England : in the samelake the only shell belonged to a genus generally found inestuaries.Leaving the coast for a time, we again entered the forest.The trees were very lofty, and remarkable, compared to thoseof Europe, from the whiteness of their trunks. I see by mynote-book, "wonderful and beautiful, flowering parasites,"invariably struck me as the most novel object in these grandscenes. Travelling onwards we passed through tracts ofpasturage, much injured by the enormous conical ants nests,which were nearly twelve feet high. They gave to the plainexactly the appearance of the mud volcanoes at JoruUo, asfigured by Humboldt. We arrived at Engenhodo after itwas dark, having been ten hours on horseback. I neverceased, during the whole journey, to be surprised at theamount of labour which the horses were capable of enduring ;Annales des Sciences Naturelle for 1833.April, 1832. vampire bat. 25they appeared also to recover from any injury much soonerthan those of our English breed. The Vampire bat is often thecause of much trouble, by biting the horses on their withers.The injury is generally not so much owing to the loss ofblood, as to the inflammation which the pressure of thesaddle afterwards produces. The whole circumstance haslately been doubted in England ; I was therefore fortunatein being present when one* was actually caught on ahorse's back. We were bivouacking late one evening nearCoquimbo, in Chile, when my servant, noticing that one ofthe horses was very restive, went to see what was the matter,and fancying he could distinguish something, suddenly puthis hand on the beast's withers, and secured the vampire.In the morning, the spot, where the bite had been inflicted,was easily distinguished from being slightly swollen andbloody. The third day afterwards we rode the horse, withoutany ill effects. ^April 13th. — After three days' travelling we arrived atSocego, the estate of Senhor Manuel Figured, a relation ofone of our party. The house was simple, and, though like abarn in form, was well suited to the climate. In the sitting-roomgilded chairs and sofas were oddly contrasted with thewhitewashed walls, thatched roof, and windows withoutglass. The house, together with the granaries, the stables,and workshops for the blacks, who had been taught varioustrades, formed a rude kind of quadrangle ; in the centre ofwhich a large pile of coffee was drying. These buildingsstand on a little hill, overlooking the cultivated ground, andsurrounded on every side by a wall of dark green luxuriantforest. The chief produce of this part of the country iscoffee. Each tree is supposed to yield annually, on anaverage, two pounds ; but some give as much as eight.Mandioca or cassava is likewise cultivated in great quantity.Every part of this plant is useful : the leaves and stalks areThis bat belongs to the genus Edostoma of D'Orbigny, but is a newspecies.26 Rio DE JANEIRO. April, 1832.eaten by the horses, and the roots are ground into a pulp,which, when pressed dry and baked, forms the farina, theprincipal article of sustenance in the Brazils. It is a curious,though well-known fact, that the expressed juice of this-mostnutritious plant is highly poisonous. A few years agoa cow died at this Fazenda, in consequence of having drunksome of it. Senhor Figured told me that he had planted,the year before, one bag of feijao or beans, and three ofrice ; the former of which produced eighty, and the latterthree hundred and twenty fold. The pasturage supports afine stock of cattle, and the woods are so full of game, that adeer had been killed on each of the three previous days.This profusion of food showed itself at dinner, where, if thetables did not groan, the guests surely did : for each personis expected to eat of every dish. One day, having, as Ithought, nicely calculated so that nothing should go awayuntasted, to my utter dismay a roast turkey and a pig appearedin aU their substantial reality. During the meals, itwas the employment of a man to drive out of the roomsundry old hounds, and dozens of little black children,which crawled in together, at every opportunity. As long asthe idea of slavery could be banished, there was somethingexceedingly fascinating in this simple and patriarchal style ofliving : it was such a perfect retirement and independenceof the rest of the world. As soon as any stranger is seenarriving, a large bell is set tolling, and generally some smallcannon are fired. The event is thus announced to the rocksand woods, but to nothing else. One morning I walked outan hour before daylight to admire the solemn stillness of thescene ; at last, the silence was broken by the morning hymn,raised on high by the whole body of the blacks ; and inthis manner, their daily work is generally begun. On suchfazendas as these, I have no doubt the slaves pass happy andcontented lives. On Saturday and Sunday they work forthemselves, and in this fertile climate the labour of two daysis sufficient to support a man and his family for the wholeweek.April, 1832. RIO de Janeiro. 27April, 14th. — Leaving Socego, we rode to another estateon the Rio Mace, which was the last patch of cultivatedground in that direction. The estate was two and a haKsmiles long, and the owner had forgotten how many broad.Only a very small piece had been cleared, yet almost everyacre was capable of yielding all the various rich productionsof a tropical land. Considering the enormous area of Brazil,the proportion of cultivated ground can scarcely be consideredas any thing, compared to that which is left in thestate of nature : at some future age, how vast a population itwill support ! During the second day's journey we foundthe road so shut up, that it was necessary that a man shouldgo ahead with a sword to cut away the creepers. The forestabounded with beautiful objects ; among which the treeferns, though not large, were, from their bright green foliage,and the elegant curvature of their fronds, most worthy of admiration.In the evening it rained very heavily, and althoughthe thermometer stood at 65°, I felt very cold. As soon asthe rain ceased, it was curious to observe the extraordinaryevaporation which commenced over the whole extent of theforest. At the height of a hundred feet the hills were buriedin a dense white vapour, which rose like columns of smokefrom the most thickly-wooded parts, and especially from thevalleys. I observed this phenomenon on several occasions :I suppose it is owing to the large surface of foliage, previouslyheated by the sun's rays.While staying at this estate, I was very nearly being aneyewitness to one of those atrocious acts, which can onlytake place in a slave country. Owing to a quarrel and a lawsuit,the owner was on the point of taking all the women andchildren from the men, and selling them separately at thepublic auction at Rio. Interest, and not any feeling of compassion,prevented this act. Indeed, I do not believe theinhumanity of separating thirty families, who had lived togetherfor many years, even occurred to the person. Yet Iwill pledge myself, that in humanity and good feeling, he28 RIO DE JANEIRO. April, 1832.was superior to the common run of men. It may be saidthere exists no limit to the blindness of interest and selfishhabit. I may mention one very trifling anecdote, which atthe time struck me more forcibly than any story of cruelty.I was crossing a ferry with a negro, who was uncommonlystupid. In endeavouring to make him understand, I talkedloud, and made signs, in doing which I passed my hand nearhis face. He, I suppose, thought I was in a passion, andwas going to strike him ; for instantly, with a frightenedlook and half-shut eyes, he dropped his hands. I shall neverforget my feelings of surprise, disgust, and shame, at seeinga great powerful man afraid even to ward off a blow,directed, as he thought, at his face. This man had beentrained to a degradation lower than the slavery of the mosthelpless animal.April, 18tit. — In returning we spent two days at So-ego,and I employed them in collecting insects in theforest. The greater number of trees, although so lofty, arenot more than three or four feet in circumference. Thereare, of course, a few of much greater dimension. SenhorManuel, was then making a canoe seventy feet in lengthfrom a solid trunk, which had originally been 110 feet long, andof great thickness. The contrast of palm-trees, growing amidstthe common branching kinds, never fails to give the scene anintertropical character. Here the woods were ornamented bythe Cabbage Palm — one of the most beautiful of its family.With a stem so narrow that it might be clasped with thetwo hands, it waves its elegant head at the height of fortyor fifty feet above the ground. The woody creepers, themselvescovered by other creepers, were of great thickness :some which I measured were two feet in circumference.Many of the older trees presented a very curious appearancefrom the tresses of a liana depending from their boughs, andresembling bundles of hay. If the eye was turned fromthe world of foliage above, to the ground beneath, it wasattracted by the extreme elegance of the leaves of the fernsApril, 1832. Rio de Janeiro. 29and mimosa. The latter, in some parts, covered the surfacewith a brushwood only a few inches high. In walkingacross these thick beds, a broad track was marked by thechange of shade, produced by the drooping of their sensitivepetioles. It is easy to specify the individual objects ofadmiration ifi these grand scenes ; but it is not possibleto give an adequate idea of the higher feelings of wonder,astonishment, and devotion, which fill and elevate themind.April 19th. — Leaving Socego, during the two first days,we retraced our steps. It was very wearisome work, as theroad generally ran across a glaring hot sandy plain, not farfrom the coast. I noticed that each time the horse put itsfoot on the fine siliceous sand, a gentle chirping noise wasproduced. On the third day we took a different line, andpassed through the gay little village of Madre de Des.This is one of the principal lines of road in Brazil ; yet itwas in so bad a state, that no wheel vehicle, excepting theclumsy bullock-waggon, could pass along. In our wholejourney we did not cross a single bridge built of stone ; andthose made of logs of wood were frequently so much out ofrepair, that it was necessary to go on one side to avoid them.AU distances are inaccurately known. The road is oftenmarked by crosses, in the place of milestones, to signifywhere human blood has been spilled. On the evening ofthe 23 d we arrived at Rio, having finished our pleasantlittle excursion.During the remainder of my stay at Rio, I resided in acottage at Botofogo Bay. It was impossible to wish for anythingmore delightful than thus to spend some weeks in somagnificent a country. In England any person fond of naturalhistory enjoys in his walks a great advantage, by alwayshaving something to attract his attention ; but in these fertileclimates, teeming with life, the attractions are sonumerous, that he is scarcely able to walk at all.The few observations which I was enabled to make werealmost exclusively confined to the invertebrate animals. The30 BIO DE JANEIRO. May — June, 1832.existence of a division of the genus Linaria, which inhabitsthe dry land, interested me much. These animals are of sosimple a structure, that Cuvier has arranged them with theintestinal worms, though never found within the bodies ofother animals. Numerous species inhabit both salt andfresh water ; but those to which I allude were found beneathlogs of rotten wood, even in the drier parts of the forest.In general form they resemble little slugs, but are very muchnarrower in proportion. I met with one specimen no lessthan five inches long. The lower surface, by which theycrawl, is flat, the upper being convex : in this latter respectthe terrestrial species all differ from the depressed forms ofthe aquatic. Their structure is very simple. Near themiddle of the under surface, there are two small transverseslits, from the anterior one of which a funnel-shaped organ,or cup, can be protruded. This seems to act as themouth. It is soft, highly irritable, and capable of variousmovements ; when drawn within the body it is generallyfolded up like the bud of a plant. From the central positionof the orifice, the animal has its mouth in the middle of whatwould commonly be called its stomach ! For some timeafter the rest of the animal has become dead from the effectsof salt water, or other cause, this organ still retains its vitality.The body is soft and parenchymatous ; in the central part atransparent space, with lateral ramifications, appears to act asasystem of circulation. Minute, black, eye-like specks arescattered round the margin of the crawling surface, andmore abundantly close to the anterior extremity, which isconstantly used as a feeler. In a marine species, I extractedfrom the central parts of the body vast numbers oflittle spherical eggs ; they were .006 of an inch in diameter,and contained a central opake mass or yolk.The terrestrial Planariae, of which I have found no lessthan eight species, occur from within the tropic to lat. 47**south, and are common to South America, New Zealand,Van Diemen's Land, and Mauritius. Some of the speciesMay — June, 1832. terrestrial planari^e, 31are longitudinally striped with several bands of gay colours.At first sight there is a remarkable false analogy betweenthese animals and snails, although so widely separatedfrom each other in all essential points of organization.I suppose these Planariee feed on rotten wood, for theyare always found crawling on the under surface of olddecayed trees ; and some small specimens being kept withno other food, rapidly increased in size. Although gaily-colouredlittle animals, they dislike, and are very sensitiveto the light. Some specimens which I obtained atVan Diemen's Land, I kept alive for nearly two months.Having cut one of them transversely into two nearly equalparts, in the course of a fortnight both had the shape ofperfect animals. I had, however, so divided the body, thatone of the halves contained both the inferior orifices, and theother, in consequence, none. In the course of twenty-fivedays from the operation, the more perfect half could nothave been distinguished from any other specimen. Theother had increased much in size ; and towards its posteriorend, a clear space was formed in the parenchymatous mass,in which a rudimentary cup-shaped organ could clearly bedistinguished; on the under surface, however, no correspondingslit was yet open. If the increased heat of theweather, as we approached the equator, had not destroyedall the individuals, there can be no doubt that this last stepwould have completed its structure. Although so well-knownan experiment, it was interesting to watch the gradualproduction of every essential organ, out of the simple extremityof another animal. It is extremely difficult to preservethese Planariee ; immediately the cessation of lifeallows the ordinary laws of change to act, their entirebodies become soft and fluid, with a rapidity which I havenever seen equalled. A method of preservation that I foundanswered pretty well, was to dry the whole animal rapidlyon a thin plate of mica, for the body thus becomestransparent, and allows the internal structure to be seen.I first visited the forest in which these Planarise were32 RIO DE JANEIRO. May — June, 1832.found, in company wdth an old Portuguese priest who tookme out to hunt with him. The sport consisted in turninginto the cover a few dogs, and then patiently waiting to fireat any animal which might appear. We were accompaniedby the son of a neighbouring farmer — a good specimen of awild Brazilian youth. He was dressed in a tattered old shirtand trousers, and had his head uncovered : he carried anold-fashioned gun and a large knife. The habit of carryingthe knife is universal ; and in traversing a thick wood it isalmost necessary, on account of the creeping plants. Thefrequent occurrence of murder may be partly attributed tothis habit. The Brazilians are so dexterous with the knife,that they can throw it to some distance with precision, andwith sufficient force to cause a fatal wound. I have seen anumber of little boys practising this art as a game of play,and from their skill in hitting an upright stick, they promisedwell for more earnest attempts. My companion, theday before, had shot two large bearded monkeys. Theseanimals have prehensile tails, the extremity of which, evenafter death, can support the whole weight of the body. Oneof them thus remained fast to a branch, and it was necessaryto cut down a large tree to procure it. This was sooneffected, and down came tree and monkey with an awfulcrash. Our day's sport, besides the monkey, was confinedto sundry small green parrots and a few toucans. I profited,however, by my acquaintance with the Portuguesepadre, for on another occasion he gave me a fine specimenof the Yaguarundi cat.Every one has heard of the beauty of the scenery nearBotofogo. The house in which I lived was seated closebeneath the well-known mountain of the Corcovado. It hasbeen remarked, with much truth, that abruptly conical hillsare characteristic of the formation which Humboldt designatesas gneiss-granite. Nothing can be more striking thanthe effect of these huge rounded masses of naked rock risingout of the most luxuriant vegetation.I was often interested by watching the clouds, which.May — June, 1832. rio de Janeiro. 33rolling in from seaward, formed a bank just beneath thehighest point of the Corcovado. This mountain, like mostothers, when thus partly veiled, appeared to rise to a farprouder elevation than its real height of 2300 feet. Mr.Daniell has observed, in his meteorological essays, that acloud sometimes appears fixed on a mountain summit, whilethe wind continues to blow over it. The same phenomenonhere presented a slightly different appearance. In this casethe cloud was clearly seen to curl over, and rapidly pass bythe summit, and yet was neither diminished nor increasedin size. The sun was setting, and a gentle southerly breeze,striking against the southern side of the rock, mingled itscurrent with the colder air above ; and the vapour was thuscondensed : but as the light wreaths of cloud passed over theridge, and came within the influence of the warmer atmosphereof the northern sloping bank, they were immediatelyredissolved.The climate, during the months of May and June, orthe beginning of winter, was delightful. The mean temperature,from observations taken at nine o'clock, bothmorning and evening, was only 72°. It often rained heavily,but the drying southerly winds soon again rendered thewalks pleasant. One morning, in the course of six hours,1.6 inches of rain fell. As this storm passed over theforests, which surround the Corcovado, the sound producedby the drops pattering on the countless multitude of leaves,was very remarkable ; it could be heard at the distance ofa quarter of a mile, and was like the rushing of a great bodyof water. After the hotter days, it was delicious to sit quietlyin the garden and watch the evening pass into night. Nature,in these climes, chooses her vocalists from more humble performersthan in Europe. A small frog, of the genus Hyla,*sits on a blade of glass about an inch above the surface of theI had some difficulty in catching a specimen of this frog. The "eniisHyla has its toes terminated by small suckers ; and I found this animalcould crawl up a pane of glass, when placed absolutely perpendicular.VOL. III. D34 RIO DE JANEIRO. May — June, 1832.water, and sends forth a pleasing chirp. When several weretogether they sung in harmony on different notes. Variouscitadel and crickets, at the same time, kept up a ceaselessshrill cry, but which, softened by the distance, was not unpleasant.Every evening after dark this great concert commenced; and often have I sat listening to it, until my attentionhas been drawn away by some curious passing insect.At these times the fireflies are seen* flitting about fromhedge to hedge. All that I caught belonged to the family ofLampyridee, or glowworms, and the greater number wereLampyris occidentalis. I found that this insect emitted themost brilliant flashes when irritated : in the intervals the abdominalrings were obscured. The flash was almost co-instantaneousin the two rings, but it was first just perceptiblein the anterior one. The shining matter was fluid andvery adhesive : little spots, where the skin had been torn,continued bright with a slight scintillation, whilst the uninjuredparts were obscured. When the insect was decapitatedthe rings remained uninterruptedly bright, but not so brilliantas before : local irritation with a needle always increased thevividness of the light. The rings in one instance retainedtheir luminous property nearly twenty-four hours after thedeath of the insect. From these facts it would appear probable,that the animal has only the power of concealing orextinguishing the light for short intervals, and that at othertimes the display is involuntary. On the muddy and wetgravel-walks I found the larvae of this lampyris in great numbers: they resembled in general form the female of the Englishglowworm. These larvae possessed but feeble luminouspowers ; very differently from their parents, on the slightesttouch they feigned death, and ceased to shine ; nor did irritationexcite any fresh display. I kept several of them alive forOn a dark night the light could be seen at about two hundred pacesdistant. It is remarkable that in all the glowworms, shining eaters, andvarious marine animals, which I have observed (such as the Crustacea,medusae, nereidas, a coralline of the genus Clytia, and Pyrosoma), the lighthas been of a well-marked green colour.May — June, 1832. glowworms. 35some time : their tails are very singular organs, for they act,by a well-fitted contrivance, as suckers, or organs of attachment,and likewise as reservoirs for saliva, or some such fluid.I repeatedly fed them on raw meat ; and I invariably observed,that every now and then the extremity of the tail was appliedto the mouth, and a drop of fluid exuded on the meat, whichwas then in the act of being consumed. The tail, notwithstandingso much practice, does not seem to be able to findits way to the mouth ; at least the neck was always touchedfirst, and apparently as a guide.When we were at Bahia, an elater {Pyrophorus lumhwsiis,Illic.) seemed the most common luminous insect. Thelight in this case was also rendered more brilliant by irritation.I amused myself one day by observing the springingpowers of this insect, which have not,* as it appears to me,been properly described. The elater, when placed on itsback and preparing to spring, moved its head and thoraxbackwards, so that the pectoral spine was drawn out, andrested on the edge of its sheath. The same backward movementbeing continued, the spine, by the full action of themuscles, was bent like a spring ; and the insect at thismoment rested on the extremity of its head and elytra.The efibrt being suddenly relaxed, the head and thorax flewup, and, in consequence, the base of the elytra struck thesupporting surface with such force, that the insect by thereaction was jerked upwards to the height of one or twoinches. The projecting points of the thorax, and the sheathof the spine, served to steady the whole body during thespring. In the descriptions which I have read, sufficientstress does not appear to have been laid on the elasticity ofthe spine : so sudden a spring could not be the result ofsimple muscular contraction, without the aid of somemechanical contrivance.On several occasions I enjoyed some short but mostpleasant excursions in the neighbouring country. One dayKirby's Entomology, vol. ii., p. ;jl7.D 236 RIO DE JANEIRO. May — June, 1832.I went to the Botanic Garden, where many plants, wellknown for their great utility, might be seen growing.The leaves of the camphor, pepper, cinnamon, and clovetrees were delightfully aromatick ; and the bread fruit, thejack, and the mango, vied with each other in the magnificenceof their foliage. The landscape in the neighbourhoodof Bahia almost takes its character from the two latter trees.Before seeing them, I had no idea that any trees could castso black a shade on the ground. Both of them bear to theever green vegetation of these climates, the same kind of relationwhich laurels and hollies in England do to the lightergreen of the deciduous trees. It may be observed, that thehouses within the tropics are surrounded by the most beautifulforms of vegetation, because many of them are at thesame time most usefid to man. Who can doubt that thesequalities are united in the banana, the cocoa-nut, the manykinds of palm, the orange, and the bread-fruit tree ?During this day I was particularly struck with a remark ofHumboldt's, who often alludes to " the thin vapour which,without changing the transparency of the air, renders its tintsmore harmonious, softens its effects," &c. This is anappearance which I have never observed in the temperatezones. The atmosphere, seen through a short space of halfor three-quarters of a mile, was perfectly lucid, but at agreater distance all colours were blended into a most beautifulhaze, of a pale French gray, mingled with a little blue.The condition of the atmosphere between the morning andabout noon, when the effect was most evident, had undergonelittle change, excepting in its dryness. In the interval,the difference between the dew point and temperature hadincreased from 7°-5 to 17°.On another occasion I started early and walked to theGavin, or topsail mountain. The air was delightfully cooland fragrant; and the drops of dew still glittered on theleaves of the large liliaceous plants, which shaded the streamletsof clear water. Sitting down on a block of granite, itwas delightful to watch the various insects and birds as theyMay — June, 1832. rio de Janeiro. 37flew past. The humming-birds seem particularly fond ofsuch shady retired spots. Whenever I saw these littlecreatures buzzing round a flower, with their wings vibratingso rapidly as to be scarcely visible, I was reminded of thesphinx moths : their movements and habits are indeed, inmany respects, very similar.Following a pathway I entered a noble forest, and from aheight of five or six hundred feet, one of those splendid viewswas presented, which are so common on every side of Rio.At this elevation the landscape has attained its most brillianttint ; and every form, every shade, so completely surpasses inmagnificence all that the European has ever beheld in hisown country, that he knows not how to express his feelings.The general effect frequently recalled to my mind the gayestscenery of the Opera-house or the great theatres. I neverreturned from these excursions empty-handed. This day Ifound a specimen of a curious fungus, called Hymenophallus.Most people know the English Phallus, which in autumntaints the air with its odious smell : this, however, as the entomologistis aware, is to some of our beetles a delightfulfragrance. So was it here ; for a Strongly, attracted bythe odour, alighted on the fungus as I carried it in my hand.We here see in two distant countries a similar relation betweenplants and insects of the same families, though thespecies of both are different. When man is the agent inintroducing into a country a new species, this relation is oftenbroken : as one instance of this I may mention, that theleaves of the cabbages and lettuces, which in England affordfood to such a multitude of slugs and caterpillars, in thegardens near Rio are untouched.During our stay in Brazil I made a large collection of insects.A few general observations on the comparative importanceof the different orders, may be interesting to theEnglish entomologist. The large and brilliantly-colouredLepidoptera bespeak the zone they inhabit, far more plainlythan any other race of animals. I allude only to the butterflies ;for the moths, contrary to what might have been expectedfrom the rankness of the vegetation, certainly appeared in much38 RIO DE JANEIRO. May — June, 1832.fewer numbers than in our own temperate regions. I wasmuch surprised at the habits of Papilio verona. This butterflyis not uncommon, and generally frequents the orange-groves.Although a high flier, yet it very frequently alightson the trunks of trees. On these occasions its head is invariablyplaced downwards ; and its wings are expanded in ahorizontal plane, instead of being folded vertically, as is commonlythe case. This is the only butterfly which I have everseen that uses its legs for running. Not being aware of thisfact, the insect, more than once, as I cautiously approachedwith my forceps, shuffled on one side just as the instrumentwas on the point of closing, and thus escaped. But afar more singular fact, is the power which this species possessesof making a noise.* Several times when a pair, probablymale and female, were chasing each other in an irregularcourse, they passed within a few yards of me ; and Idistinctly heard a clicking noise, similar to that produced bya toothed wheel passing under a spring catches The noisewas continued at short intervals, and could be distinguishedat about twenty yards distance. I cannot form a conjecturehow it is produced ; but I am certain there is no error in theobservation.I was disappointed in the general aspect of the Cleopatra.The number of minute and obscurely-coloured beetles is exceedinglygreat.* The cabinets of Europe can, as yet, boastI find in LangsdorfF's travels (in the years 1803-7, p. 74), it issaid, that in the island of St. Catherine's, on the coast of Brazil, a butterflycalled Februa HofFmanseggi, makes a noise, when flying away, like arattle.f Mr. Waterhouse has had the kindness to examine this butterfly,but cannot discover any mechanism by which the noise is produced.I may mention, as a common instance of one day's (June 23d) collecting,when I was not attending particularly to the Cleopatra, that Icaught sixty-eight species of that order. Among these, there were onlytwo of the Carabidfe, four Brachelytra, fifteen Rhyncophora, and fourteenof the ChrysomelidEe. Thirty-seven species of Arachnoid, which I broughthome, will be sufficient to prove that I was not paying overmuch attentionto the generally favoured order of Cleopatra.May — June, 1832. entomology. 39only of the larger species from tropical climates. It is sufficientto disturb the composure of an entomologist's mind,to look forward to the future dimensions of a complete catalogue.The Carabidse appear in extremely few numberswithin the tropics. This is the more remarkable when comparedto the opposed case of the carnivorous mammalia, anorder which they certainly represent among insects. I wasstruck with this observation both on entering Brazil, andwhen I saw the elegant and active forms of the Harpalidce reappearingon the temperate plains of La Plata. Do the verynumerous Arachnoid and rapacious Hymenoptera supply theplace of these carnivorous beetles ? The carrion feeders andBrachelytra are very uncommon; on the other hand, theRhyncophora and Chrysomelidee, all of which depend onthe vegetable world for subsistence, are present in astonishingnumbers. I do not here refer to the number of differentspecies, but to that of the individual insects ; for on this itis that the most striking character in the entomology of differentcountries depends. The orders Orthoptera and Hemipteraare particularly numerous ; as likewise is the stingingdivision of the Hymenoptera ; the bees, perhaps, being excepted.A person, on first entering a tropical forest, isastonished at the labours of the ants: well-beaten pathsbranch off in every direction, on which an army of never-failingforagers may be seen, some going forth, and othersreturning, burdened with pieces of green leaf, often largerthan their own bodies.A small dark coloured species sometimes migrates incountless numbers. One day, at Bahia, my attention wasdrawn by observing many spiders, cockroaches, and otherinsects, and some lizards, rushing in the greatest agitationacross a bare piece of ground. A little way behind, everystalk and leaf was blackened by a small ant. The swarmhaving crossed the bare space, divided itself, and descendedan old wall. By this means many insects were fairly enclosed; and the efforts, which the poor little creatures madeto extricate themselves from such a death, were wonderful.40 RIO DE JANEIRO. May — June, 1832.When the ants came to the road they changed their course,and in narrow files reascended the wall. Having placed asmall stone, so as to intercept one of the lines, the wholebody attacked it, and then immediately retired. Shortlyafterwards another body came to the charge, and againhaving failed to make any impression, this line of marchwas entirely given up. By going an inch round, the filemight have avoided the stone, and this doubtless would havehappened, if it had been originally there : but having beenattacked, the lion-hearted little warriors scorned the idea ofyielding.Certain wasp-like insects, which construct in the comersof the verandah clay cells for their larvae, are very numerousin the neighbourhood of Rio. These cells they stuff full ofdead and dying spiders and caterpillars. I was much interestedone day by watching a deadly contest between a Pepsin sand a large spider of the genus Lycosa. The wasp made asudden dash at its prey, and then flew away : the spider wasevidently wounded, for trying to escape, it rolled down alittle slope, but had still strength sufficient to crawl into athick tuft of grass. The wasp soon returned, and seemedsurprised at not immediately finding its victim. It thencommenced as regular a hunt, as ever hound did after fox ;making short semicircular casts, and all the time rapidlyvibrating its wings and antennae. The spider, though wellconcealed, was soon discovered; and the wasp, evidentlystill afraid of its adversary's jaws, after much manoeuvring,inflicted two stings on the under side of its thorax. At lastscarefully examining with its antennae the now motionlessspider, it proceeded to drag away the body. But I stoppedboth tyrant and prey.*The number of spiders in proportion to other insects, isDon Felix Azara, vol. i., p. 175, mentioning a hymenopterous insect,probably of the same genus, says, he saw it dragging a dead spiderthrough tall grass, in a straight line to its nest, which was one hundredand sixty-three paces distant. He adds that the wasp, in order to findthe road, every now and then made " demi-tours d'environ trois palmes."May — June, 1832. arachnoid. 41here as compared to England very much increased ; perhapsmore so, than with any other division of the articulate animals.The variety of species among the centigrade, or jumpingspiders, appears almost infinite. The genus, or ratherfamily of Epeira, is here characterized by many singularforms ; some species have pointed coriaceous shells, othersenlarged and spiny tibiae. Every path in the forest isbarricaded with the strong yellow web of a species, belongingto the same division with the Epeira clavipes of Patricius,which was formerly said by Sloane to make, in the WestIndies, webs so strong as to catch birds. A small andpretty kind of spider, with very long anterior legs, and whichappears to belong to an undescribed genus, lives as a parasiteon almost every one of these webs. I suppose it is tooinsignificant to be noticed by the great Epeira, and is thereforeallowed to prey on the minute insects, which adheringto the lines, would otherwise be wasted. When frightened,this little spider either feigns death by extending its frontlegs, or suddenly drops from the web. A large Epeira of thesame division with Epeira tubercular and monica (with fleshyprominences on its abdomen) is extremely common, especiallyin dry situations. Its web, which is generally placedamong the great leaves of the common agave, is sometimesstrengthened near the centre by a pair or even four zigzagribbons, which connect two adjoining rays. When anylarge insect, as a grasshopper or wasp, is caught, the spider,by quickly giving it a revolving movement, and at the sametime emitting a band of threads from its spinners, soonenvelops its prey in a case like the cocoon of a silkworm.The spider now examines the powerless victim, and givesthe fatal bite on the hinder part of its thorax ; then retreating,it patiently waits till the poison has taken effect. Thevirulence of this poison may be judged of, from the factthat in half a minute I opened the mesh, and found alarge wasp quite lifeless. This Epeira always stands with itshead downwards near the centre of the web. When disturbed,it acts differently according to circumstances : if42 RIO DE JANEIRO. May — June, 1832.there is a thicket below, it suddenly falls down. I may remark,that I have distinctly seen the thread from the spinners,lengthened by the will of the animal while yet stationary,as preparatory to its fall. If the ground is clearbeneath, the Epeira seldom falls, but moves quickly througha central passage, from one to the other side. When stillfurther disturbed, it practices a most curious manoeuvre:standing in the middle, it violently jerks the web, which isattached to elastic twigs, tiU at last the whole acquires sucha rapid vibratory movement, that even the outline of thespider's body becomes indistinct.I will here just mention a gregarious Epeira found in greatnumbers near St. Fe Bajada, the capital of one of theprovinces of La Plata. The spiders were of a large size, andof a black colour, with ruby marks on their backs. Theywere nearly all of one dimension, and therefore could nothave been a few old individuals with their families. Thewebs were placed vertically, as is invariably the case wdththe genus Epeira : they were separated from each other bya space of about two feet, but were aU attached to certaincommon lines, which were of great length, and extended toall parts of the community. In this manner the tops ofsome large bushes were encompassed by the united nets.Azara* has described a gregarious spider in Paraguay, whichWalckenaer thinks must be a Theridion, but probably it isan Epeira, and perhaps even the same species as mine. Icannot, however, recollect seeing a central nest, as large as ahat, in which, during autumn when the spiders die, Azarasays the eggs are deposited. These gregarious habits in sotypical a genus as Epeira, present a singular case amonginsects, which are so bloodthirsty and solitary, that even thesexes attack each other.In a lofty valley of the Cordillera, near Mendoza, I foundanother spider with a singularly-formed web. Strong Unesradiated in a vertical plane from a common centre, whereAzara's Voyage, vol. i., p. 213.May — June, 1832. arachnoid. 43the insect had its station ; but only two of the rays wereconnected by a symmetrical mesh-work; so that the net,instead of being, as is generally the case, circular, consistedof a wedge-shaped segment. All the webs were similarlyconstructed.CHAPTER III.Monte Video — Maldonado — Excursion to R. Polanco — Lao and BolasPartridges — Geology — Absence of trees — Cervus campestris — Riverhog — Tucutuco — Molothrus, cuckoo-like habits — Tyrant-flycatcher —Mocking-bird — Carrion hawks — Tubes formed by lightning — Housestruck.MALDONADO.July 5th, 1832. — In the morning we got under way, andstood out of the splendid harbour of Rio de Janeiro. Inour passage to the Plata, we saw nothing particular, exceptingon one day a great shoal of porpoises, many hundredsin number. The whole sea was in places furrowed bythem ; and a most extraordinary spectacle was presented, ashundreds, proceeding together by jumps, in which theirwhole bodies were exposed, thus cut the water. When theship was running nine knots, these animals could cross andrecross the bows with the greatest ease, and then dash awayright ahead. As soon as we entered the estuary of the Plata,the weather was very unsettled. One dark night we weresurrounded by numerous seals and penguins, which madesuch strange noises, that the officer on watch reported hecould hear the cattle bellowing on shore. On a secondnight we witnessed a splendid scene of natural fireworks ;the mast-head and yard-arm ends shone with St. Elms'slight; and the form of the vane could almost be traced, as ifit had been rubbed with phosphorus. The sea was sohighly luminous, that the tracks of the penguins were markedby a fiery wake, and lastly, the darkness of the sky wasmomentarily illuminated by the most vivid lightning.When within the mouth of the river, I was interested byobserving how slowly the waters of the sea and river mixed.The latter, muddy and discoloured, from its less specificgravity, floated on the surface of the salt water. This was1832-3. MALDONADO. 45curiously exhibited in the wake of the vessel, where a lineof blue was seen mingling in little eddies, with the adjoiningfluid.July 26th. — We anchored at Monte Video. The Beaglewas employed in surveying the extreme southern and easterncoasts of America, south of the Plata, during the two succeedingyears. To prevent useless repetitions, I will extractthose parts of my journal which refer to the same districts,without always attending to the order in which we visitedthem.Maldonado is situated on the northern bank of the Plata,and not very far from the mouth of the estuary. It is amost quiet, forlorn, little to\^Ti ; built, as is universally thecase in these countries, with the streets running at rightangles to each other, and having in the middle a large plazaor square, which, from its size, renders the scantiness of thepopulation more evident and more unsociable. It possessesscarcely any trade ; the exports being confined to a few hidesand living cattle. The inhabitants are chiefly landowners,together with a few shopkeepers and the necessary tradesmen,such as blacksmiths and carpenters, who do nearly allthe business for a circuit of fifty miles round. The town isseparated from the river by a band of sand-hillocks, about amile broad : it is surrounded on all other sides, by an openslightly-undulating country, covered by one uniform layer offine green turf, on which countless herds of cattle, sheep, andhorses graze. There is very little land cultivated even closeto the town. A few hedges, made of cacti and agave, markout where some wheat or Indian corn has been planted.The features of the country are very similar along the wholenorthern bank of the Plata. The only difference is, that herethe granitic hills are rather more boldly pronounced. Thescenery is very uninteresting ; there is scarcely a house, anenclosed piece of ground, or even a tree, to give it an air ofcheerfulness. Yet, after being imprisoned for some time inaship, there is a charm in the unconfined feeling of walkingover boundless plains of turf. Moreover, if your view is46 MALDONADO. 1832-3.limited to a small space, many objects possess beauty. Someof the smaller birds are brilliantly coloured ; and the brightgreen sward, browsed short by the cattle, is ornamentedby dwarf flowers, among which a plant, looking like thedaisy, claimed the place of an old friend. What would aflorist say to whole tracts so thickly covered by the Verbenamelindres, as, even at a distance, to appear of the most gaudyscarlet ?I staid ten weeks at Maldonado, in which time a nearlyperfect collection of the animals, birds, and reptiles, wasprocured. Before making any observations respecting them,I will give an account of a little excursion I made as far as theriver Polanco, which is about seventy miles distant, in a northerlydirection. I may mention, as a proof how cheap everythingis in this country, that I paid only two doUars a day, oreight shillings, for two men, together with a troop of abouta dozen riding-horses. My companions were well armedwith pistols and sabres ; a precaution which I thought ratherunnecessary ; but the first piece of news we heard was, that,the day before, a traveller from Monte Video had been founddead on the road, with his throat cut. This happened closeto a cross, the record of a former murder.On the first night we slept at a retired little country-house; and there I soon found out, that I possessed two orthree articles, especially a pocket compass, which createdunbounded astonishment. In every house I was asked toshow the compass, and by its aid, together with a map, topoint out the direction of various places. It excited theliveliest admiration that I, a perfect stranger, should knowthe road (for direction and road are synonymous in this opencountry) to places where I had never been. At one housea young woman, who was iU in bed, sent to entreat me tocome and show her the compass. If their surprise was great,mine was greater, to find such ignorance among people whopossessed their thousands of cattle, and "estancias" of greatextent. It can only be accounted for by the circumstancethat this retired part of the country is seldom visited by1832-3. MALDONADO. 47foreigners. I was asked whether the earth or sun moved ;whether it was hotter or colder to the north ; where Spainwas, and many other such questions. The greater numberof the inhabitants had an indistinct idea that England, London,and North America, were different names for the sameplace ; but the better informed well knew that London andNorth America were separate countries close together, andthat England was a large town in London ! I carried withme some promethean matches, which I ignited by biting ; itwas thought so wonderful that a man should strike fire withhis teeth, that it was usual to collect the Avhole family to seeit : I was once offered a dollar for a single one. Washing:my face in the morning, caused much speculation at thevillage of Las Minas ; a superior tradesman closely cross-questionedme about so singular a practice ; and likewisewhy on board we wore our beards ; for he had heard frommy guide that we did so. He eyed me with much suspicion ;perhaps he had heard of ablutions in the Mahometan religion,and knowing me to be a heretick, probably he cameto the conclusion that all hereticks were Turks. It is thegeneral custom in this country to ask for a night's lodgingat the first convenient house. The astonishment at thecompass, and my other feats in jugglery, was to a certaindegree advantageous, as with that, and the long stories myguides told of my breaking stones, knowing venemous fromharmless snakes, collecting insects, &c., I repaid them fortheir hospitality. I am writing as if I had been among theinhabitants of central Africa: Banda Oriental would notbe flattered by the comparison ; but such were my feelingsat the time.The next day we rode to the village of Las Minas. Thecountry was rather more hilly, but otherwise continued thesame ; an inhabitant of the Pampas no doubt would haveconsidered it as truly Alpine. The country is so thinlyinhabited, that during the whole day we scarcely met a singleperson. Las Minas is much smaller even than Maldonado.It is seated on a little plain, and is surrounded by low rocky48 MALDONADO. 1832-3.mountains. It is of the usual symmetrical form ; and ^vithits whitewashed church standing in the centre, had rather apretty appearance. The outskirts houses rose out of theplain like isolated beings, without the accompaniment ofgardens or courtyards. This is generally the case in thecountry, and all the houses have, in consequence, an uncomfortableaspect. At night we stopped rat a pulperia, ordrinking-shop. During the evening a great number ofGauchos came in to drink spirits and smoke cigars : theirappearance is very striking; they are generally tall andhandsome, but with a proud and dissolute expression ofcountenance. They frequently wear their moustaches, andlong black hair curling down their backs. With theirbrightly-coloured garments, great spurs clanking about theirheels, and knives stuck as daggers (and often so used)at their waists, they look a very diiferent race of men fromwhat might be expected from their name of Gauchos, orsimple countrymen. Their politeness is excessive : theynever drink their spirits without expecting you to tasteit; but whilst making their exceedingly graceful bow,they seem quite as ready, if occasion offered, to city ourthroat.On the third day we pursued rather an irregular course, asI was employed in examining some beds of marble. On thefine plains of turf we saw many ostriches {Struthio Rhea).Some of the flocks contained as many as twenty or thirtybirds. These, when standing on any little eminence, andseen against the clear sky, presented a very noble appearance.I never met with such tame ostriches in any otherpart of the country : it was easy to gallop up within a shortdistance of them ; but then, expanding their wings, theymade all sail right before the wind, and soon left the horseastern.At night we came to the house of Don Juan Fuentes, arich landed proprietor, but not personally known to eitherof my companions. On approaching the house of a stranger,it is usual to follow several little pieces of etiquette : riding1832-3. MALDONADO. 49up slowly to the door, the salutation of Ave Maria* is given,and until somebody comes out, and asks you to alight, it isnot customary even to get off your horse. Having enteredthe house, some general conversation is kept up for a fewminutes, till permission is asked to pass the night there.This is granted as a matter of course. The stranger thentakes his meals with the family, and a room is assigned him,where with the horse cloths belonging to his recado (or saddleof the Pampas) he makes his bed. It is curious how similarcircumstances produce such similar results in manners. Atthe Cape of Good Hope the same hospitality, and verynearly the same points of etiquette, are universally observed.The difference, however, between the character of theSpaniard and that of the Dutch boor is shown, by theformer never asking his guest a single question beyond thestrictest rule of politeness, whilst the honest Dutchmandemands where he has been, where he is going, what is hisbusiness, and even how many brothers, sisters, or childrenhe may happen to have.Shortly after our arrival at Don Juan's, one of the largeherds of cattle was driven in towards the house, and threebeasts were picked out to be slaughtered for the supply ofthe establishment. These half-wild cattle are very active ;and knowing full well the fatal lazo, they led the horses a longand laborious chase. After witnessing the rude wealth displayedin the number of cattle, men, and horses, Don Juan'smiserable house was quite curious. The floor consisted ofhardened mud, and the windows were without glass ; thefurniture of the sitting-room boasted only of a few of theroughest chairs and stools, with a couple of tables. Thesupper, although several strangers were present, consisted oftwo huge piles, one of roast beef, the other of boiled, withsome pieces of pumpkin : besides this latter there was noother vegetable, and not even a morsel of bread. For drinks• The formal answer of the owner of the place is, " sin pecado conceit"— (conceived without sin).VOL. III. Eso MALDONADO. 1832-3.ing, a large earthenware jug of water served the whole party.Yet this man was the owner of several square miles of land,of which nearly every acre would produce corn, and, witha little trouble, all the common vegetables. The eveningwas spent in smoking, with a little impromptu singing, accompaniedby the guitar. The signoritas aU sat together inone corner of the room, and did not sup with the men.So many works have been written about these countries,that it is almost superfluous to describe either the lazo or thebolas. The former consists of a very strong, but thin, well-plaitedrope, made of raw hide. One end is attached to thebroad surcingle, which fastens together the complicated gearof the recado, or saddle used in the Pampas ; the otheris terminated by a small ring of iron or brass, by whicha noose can be formed. The Gaucho, when he is goingto use the lazo, keeps a small coil in his bridle hand,and in the other holds the running noose, which is madevery large, generally having a diameter of about eightfeet. This he whirls round his head, and by the dexterousmovement of his wrist keeps the noose open ; then,throwing it, he causes it to faU on any particular spot hechooses. The lazo, when not used, is tied up in a smallcoil to the after part of the recado. The bolas, or balls, areof two kinds : the simplest, which is chiefly used for catchingostriches, consists of two round stones, covered with leather,and united by a thin plaited thong, about eight feet long.The other kind differs only, in having three balls united bythe thongs to a common centre. The Gaucho holds thesmallest of the three in his hand, and whirls the other tworound and round his head; then, taking aim, sends themlike chain shot revolving through the air. The balls nosooner strike any object, than, winding round it, they crosseach other, and become firmly hitched. The size and weightof the balls varies, according to the purpose for which theyare made: when of stone, although not so large as a bigapple, yet they are sent with such force as som times tobreak the leg even of a horse. I have seen the balls made1832-3. Lazy AND BOLAS. 51of wood, and as large as a turnip, for the sake of catchingthese animals without injuring them. The balls are sometimesmade of iron, and these can be hurled to the greatestdistance. The main difficulty in using either lazo or bolas,is to ride so well, as to be able at full speed, and while suddenlyturning about, to whirl them so steadily round thehead, as to take aim : on foot any person would soon learnthe art. One day, as I was amusing myself by galloping andwhirling the balls round my head, by accident the free onestruck a bush ; and its revolving motion being thus destroyed,it immediately fell to the ground, and like magic caught onehind leg of my horse ; the other ball was then jerked out ofmy hand, and the horse fairly secured. Luckily he was an oldpractised animal, and knew what it meant ; otherwise hewould probably have kicked till he had thrown himself down.The Gauchos roared with laughter ; they cried they had seenevery sort of animal caught, but had never before seen aman caught by himself.During the two succeeding days, I reached the furthestpoint which I was anxious to examine. The country worethe same aspect, till at last the fine green turf became morewearisome than a dusty turnpike road. We every wheresaw great numbers of partridges [Tinamus 7'ufescens). Thesebirds do not go in coveys, nor do they conceal themselveslike the English kind. It appears a very sly bird. A manon horseback by riding round and round in a circle, or ratherin a spire, so as to approach closer each time, may knock on thehead as many as he pleases. The more common method isto catch them with a running noose, or little lazo, made ofthe stem of an ostrich's feather, fastened to the end of along stick. A boy on a quiet old horse will frequently thuscatch thirty or forty in a day. The flesh of this bird, whencooked, is delicately white.On our return to Maldonado, we followed rather a differentline of road. Near Pan de Azucar, a landmark wellknown to all those who have sailed up the Plata, I stayed aday at the house of a most hospitable old Spaniard. EarlyE 252 MALDONADO. 1832-3.in the morning we ascended the Sierra de las Animas. Bythe aid of the rising sun the scenery was almost picturesque.To the westward the view extended over an immense levelplain as far as the mounts at Monte Video, and to the eastward,over the laminated country of Maldonado. On thesummit of the mountain there were several small heaps ofstones, which evidently had lain there for many years. Mycompanion assured me that they were the work of theIndians in the old time. The heaps were similar, but on amuch smaller scale, to those so commonly found on themountains of Wales. The desire to signalise any event, onthe highest point of the neighbouring land, seems an universalpassion with mankind. At the present day, not asingle Indian, either civilized or wild, exists in this part ofthe province; nor am I aware that the former inhabitantshave left behind them any more permanent records, thanthese insignificant piles on the summit of the Sierra de lasAnimas.The geological structure of the country is very simple.On the crest of every hill, granitic or ancient schistose rocksprotrude ; the intervening spaces being concealed by a greatthickness of a red argillaceous earth. This at first sightwould be mistaken for ordinary detritus ; but on closer examinationit is found to contain small concretionary balls ofa friable limestone or marl, and to possess other peculiarcharacters. It extends over the whole province, and insome places is very remarkable, from containing the remainsof several great extinct animals. This red earthy substanceis part of the formation which composes those immenseplains of Buenos Ayres, denominated the Pampas. For itsorigin, we must look to a period when the estuary of thePlata, occupying far wider limits, covered aU the surroundinglow countries with its brackish waters. Signs of thegradual elevation of the land can in many places be discoveredon the shores of the river ; and it is probable thatthe red earthy mass is, geologically speaking, of no veryancient date.1832-3. ABSENCE OF TREES. 53The general, and almost entire absence of trees inBanda Oriental is remarkable. Some of the rocky hills arepartly covered by thickets, and on the banks of the largerstreams, especially to the northward of the Las Minas,willow-trees are not uncommon. Near the Arroyo Tapes Iheard of a wood of palms ; and one of these trees, of considerablesize, I saw near the Pan de Azucar, in lat. 35°.These, and the trees planted by the Spaniards, offer theonly exceptions to the general scarcity of wood. Amongthe introduced kinds may be enumerated poplars, olives,peach, and other fruit-trees : the peaches succeed so well,that they afford the main supply of firewood to the cityof Buenos Ayres. Extremely level countries, such asthe Pampas, seldom appear favourable to the growth oftrees. This may possibly be attributed either to the forceof the winds, or the kind of drainage. In the nature ofthe land, however, around Maldonado, no such reason isapparent ; the rocky mountains afford protected situations,enjoying various kinds of soil; streamlets of water are commonat the bottoms of nearly every valley ; and the clayeynature of the earth seems adapted to retain moisture. Ithas been inferred with much probability, that the presenceof woodland is determined by the annual amount of moisture;yet in this province abundant and heavy rain falls during thewinter ; and the summer, though dry, is not so in any excessivedegree.* We see nearly the whole of Australia coveredby lofty trees, yet that country possesses a far more aridclimate. Hence we must look to some other cause. Thetrees of Brazil cannot travel so far southward, on account ofthe colder climate; nor does there exist any other woodedcountry whence a migration could take place : we are thereforedriven to the conclusion that herbaceous plants, insteadof trees, were created to occupy that wide area, whichwithin a period not very remote, has been raised above thewaters of the sea.Azara says, " Je crois que la quantity annually des pluics est, danstoutes ces countries, plus considerable qu'en Espagne." — Vol. i., p. 36.54 MALDONADO. 1832-3.Considering South America alone we should be temptedto believe that trees could not possibly flourish, excepting inavery humid climate. The limit of the forest land certainlyfollows, in a most remarkable manner, that of thedamp winds.* In the southern part of the continent, wherethe western gales, charged with moisture from the Pacific,prevail, every island on the broken west coast, from lat. 38°to the extreme point of Tierra del Fuego is densely coveredby impenetrable forest. On the eastern side of the Cordillera,over the same extent of latitude, where a blue skyand a fine climate prove that the atmosphere has beendrained of its moisture, the arid plains of Patagonia supporta scanty vegetation. Within the limits of the constantsouth-east trade wind, the bulk of the eastern parts of thecontinent is ornament-ed by magnificent forests : the westcoast, however, from lat. 4° south to lat. 32°, may be describedas a desert. In this case, as before, all the vapourhas been condensed by the snow - clad pinnacles of theAndes. In these two areas, determined by the prevalentwinds, the forest and desert lands occupy reversedpositions with respect to the great mountain axis. Betweentheir limits a broad intermediate band, which is neitherdesert nor woodland, stretches across the entire continent.Central Chile and the Provinces of La Plata are includedin this division. On the west coast, about four degreessouth of the equator, where the trade wind loses its regularity,and heavy torrents of rain periodically fall, the desertcoast of Peru assumes near Cape Blancoo the character ofluxuriance so celebrated at Guayaquil and on the shores ofPanama.After these facts, it will perhaps appear a sufficientanswer to the question, to state that according to the SouthAmerican type of vegetation, the climate of Banda Orientalistoo dry for the growth of trees. But this reasoning, Iapprehend, must not be extended to a general statementincluding other countries. The Falklands offer a more per-Maclaren, art. America, Encyc. Britain.1832-3. ABSENCE OF TREES. 55pleasing case even than Maldonado. Situated under thesame latitude with Tierra del Fuego, and only between twoand three hundred miles distant from it, possessed of anentirely similar climate, with a geological formation almostidentical, with favourable situations, and the same kind ofpeaty soil, yet these islands can scarcely boast of a plantdeserving the title even of a bush ; whilst in Tierra delFuego, it is impossible to find an acre of land not coveredby the densest forest. In this case, both the direction ofthe heavy gales of wind and of the currents of the sea arefavoiu-able to the transport of seeds. Canoes and otherworks of art, and trunks of trees, drifted from Tierra delFuego, are frequently thrown on the shores of the WesternIsland. Hence perhaps it is that there are many plantscommon to the two countries : but with respect to trees,even some attempts which have been made to transplantthem, have failed.During our stay at Maldonado I paid particular attentionto the mammalia and birds. Of the latter I procured, withinthe distance of a morning's walk, no less than eighty species,of which many were exceedingly beautiful — I think evenmore so than those of Brazil. The other orders were notneglected. Reptiles were numerous, and nine different kindsof snakes were taken. Of the indigenous mammalia, theonly one now left of any size, which is common, is theCervus Campestris. This deer is exceedingly abundantthroughout the countries bordering the Plata. It is found inNorthern Patagonia as far south as the Rio Negro (lat. 41°) ;but further southward none were seen by the officers employedin surveying the coast. It appears to prefer a hillycountry ; I saw very many small herds, containing from fiveto seven animals each, near the Sierra Ventana, and amongthe hills north of Maldonado. If a person crawling closealong the ground, slowly advances towards a herd, the deerfrequently, out of curiosity, approach to reconnoitre him. Ihave by this means killed, from one spot, three out of56 MALDONADO. 1832-3.the same herd. Although so tame and inquisitive, yetwhen approached on horseback, they are exceedingly wary.In this country nobody goes on foot, and the deer knowsman as its enemy, only when he is mounted and armed withthe bolas. At Bahia Blanc, a recent establishment inNorthern Patagonia, I-was surprised to find how little thedeer cared for the noise of a gun : one day I fired ten times,from within eighty yards, at one animal ; and it was muchmore startled at the ball cutting up the ground than at thereport of the rifle. My powder being exhausted, I wasobliged (to my shame as a sportsman be it spoken), to getupand halloo till the deer ran away.The most curious fact with respect to this animal, isthe overpoweringly strong and offensive odour which proceedsfrom the buck. It is quite indescribable : severaltimes whilst skinning the specimen which is now mountedat the Zoological Museum, I was almost overcome bynausea. I tied up the skin in a silk pocket-handkerchief,and so carried it home : this handkerchief, after being wellwashed, I continually used, and it was, of course, as repeatedlywashed; yet every time, for a space of one yearand seven months, when first unfolded, I distinctly perceivedthe odour. This appears an astonishing instanceof the permanence of some matter, which in its nature,nevertheless, must be most subtile and volatile. Frequently,when passing at the distance of half a mile to leewardof a herd, I have perceived the whole air tainted withthe effluvium. I believe the smell from the buck is mostpowerful at the period when its horns are perfect, or freefrom the hairy skin. When in this state the meat is, ofcourse, quite uneatable ; but the Gauchos assert, that ifburied for some time in fresh earth, the taint is removed. Ihave somewhere read that the islanders in the north of Scotlandtreat the rank carcasses of the fish-eating birds in thesame manner.The order Rodentia is here very numerous in species : of1832-3. MALDONADO. 5?mice alone I obtained no less than eight kinds.* The largestgnawing animal in the world the Hydrocephalus Capybara(the water-hog), is here also common. One which I shot atMonte Video weighed ninety-eight pounds : its length, fromthe end of the snout to the stump-ike tail, was three feettwo inches; and its girth, three feet eight. These greatRodents are generally called " carpinchos :" they occasionallyfrequent the islands in the mouth of the Plata, wherethe water is quite salt, but are far more abundant on theborders of fresh-water lakes and rivers. Near Maldonadothree or four generally live together. In the daytime theyeither lie among the aquatic plants, or openly feed on theturf plaint When viewed at a distance, from their mannerof walking and colour, they resemble pigs : but when seatedon their haunches, and attentively watching any object withone eye, they reassume the appearance of their congeners,the caries. Both the front and side view of their head hasquite a ludicrous aspect, from the great depth of their jaw.These animals, at Maldonado, were very tame ; by cautiouslywalking, I approached within three yards of four old ones.This tameness may probably be accounted for, by the Jaguarhaving been banished for some years, and by the Gaucho notthinking it worth his while to hunt them. As I approachednearer and nearer they frequently made their peculiar noise,which is a low abrupt grunt ; not having much actual sound,These have been named and described by Mr. Waterhouse at themeetings of the Zoological Society. I must be allowed to take this opportunityof returning my cordial thanks to Mr. Waterhouse, and to theother gentlemen attached to that Society, for their kind and most liberalassistance on all occasions.t In the stomach and duodenum of a carpincho which I opened, Ifound a very large quantity of a thin yellowish fluid, in which scarcely afibre could be distinguished. Mr. Owen informs me that a part of theoesophagus is so constructed, that nothing much larger than a crowquillcan be passed down. Certainly the broad teeth and strong jaws of thisanimal are well fitted to grind into pulp the aquatic plants on which itfeeds.68 MALDONADO. 1832-3.but rather arising from the sudden expulsion of air : the onlynoise I know at all like it, is the first hoarse bark of a largedog. Having watched the four from almost within arm'slength (and they me) for several minutes, they rushed intothe water at full gallop, with the greatest impetuosity, andemitted, at the same time, their bark. After diving a short distancethey came again to the surface, but only just showedthe upper part of their heads. When the female is swimmingin the water and has young ones, they are said to sit onher back. These animals are easily killed in numbers ; buttheir skins are of trifling value, and the meat is very indifferent.I have never heard of the carpincho being foundsouth of the Plata ; but as I see in a map that there is aLaguna del Carpincho high up the Rio Salado, I supposesuch must have occurred. On the islands in the Rio Ranathey are exceedingly abundant, and afford the ordinary preyto the Jaguar.The Tucutuco [Ctenomys Braziliensis) is a curious smallanimal, which may be briefly described as a Rodent, with thehabits of a mole. It is extremely abundant in some parts ofthe country,* but is difficult to be procured, and still moredifficult to be seen, when at liberty. It lives almost entirelyunder ground, and prefers a sandy soil with a gentleinclination. The burrows are said not to be deep, but ofgreat length. They are seldom open ; the earth beingthrown up at the mouth into hillocks, not quite so large asthose made by the mole. Considerable tracts of country areso completely undermined by these animals, that horses, inpassing over, sink above their fetlocks. The tucutucosappear, to a certain degree, to be gregarious. The man whoprocured the specimens for me had caught six together, andhe said this was a common occurrence. They are nocturnal♦ The wide plains north of the Rio Colorado are undermined by theseanimals ; and near the Strait of Magellan, where Patagonia blends withTierra del Fuego, the whole sandy country forms a great warren for thetucutuco.1832-3. BURROWING RODENT. 59in their habits ; and their principal food is afforded by theroots of plants, which is the object of their extensive andsuperficial burrows. Azara says they are so difficult to beobtained, that he never saw more than one. He states thatthey lay up magazines of food within their burrows. Thisanimal is universally known by a very peculiar noise, whichit makes when beneath the ground. A person, the first timehe hears it, is much surprised; for it is not easy to tellwhence it comes, nor is it possible to guess what kind ofcreature utters.it. The noise consists in a short, but notrough, nasal grunt, which is repeated about four times inquick succession ; the first grunt is not so loud, but a littlelonger, and more distinct than the three following: themusical time of the whole is constant, as often as it isuttered.* The name Tucutuco is given in imitation ofthe sound. In all times of the day, where this animal isabundant, the noise may be heard, and sometimes directlybeneath one's feet. When kept in a room, the tucutucosmove both slowly and clumsily, which appears owing to theoutward action of their hind legs ; and they are likewisequite incapable of jumping even the smallest vertical height.Mr. Reid, who dissected a specimen which I brought homein spirits, informs me that the socket of the thigh-bone isnot attached by a ligamentum teres ; and this explains, inasatisfactory manner, the awkward movements of theirhinder extremities. When eating, they rest on their hindlegs and hold the piece in their fore paws ; they appearedalso to wish to drag it into some corner. They are verystupid in making any attempt to escape; when angry orAt the R. Negro, in Northern Patagonia, there is an animal of thesame habits, and probably a closely allied species, but which I never saw.Its noise is different from the Maldonado kind ; it is repeated only twiceinstead of three or four times, and is more distinct and sonorous : whenheard from a distance, it so closely resembles the sound made in cuttingdown a small tree with an axe, that I have sometimes remained in doubtconcerning it.60 MALDONADO. 1832-3.frightened, they uttered the tucu-tuco. Of those I keptalive, several, even the first day, became quite tame, notattempting to bite or to run away ; others were a Utilewilder.The man who caught them asserted that very many areinvariably found blind. A specimen which I preserved inspiritswas in this state ; Mr. Reid considers it to be theeffect of inflammation in the nictitating membrane. Whenthe animal was alive I placed my finger within half an inchof its head, and not the slightest notice was taken : it madeits way, however, about the room nearly as well as the others.Considering the subterranean habits of the tucutuco, theblindness, though so frequent, cannot be a very serious evil ;yet it appears strange that any animal should possess an organconstantly subject to injury. The mole, whose habits innearly every respect, excepting in the kind of food, are sosimilar, has an extremely small and protected eye, which,although possessing a limited vision, at once seems adaptedto its manner of life.Birds of many kinds are extremely abundant on the undulatinggrassy plains around Maldonado. Several species,of the genus Cassius, allied to our starlings in habitsand structure, and of Tyrant-flycatchers, and a mocking-bird,from their numbers, give a character to the ornithology.Some of the Classics are very beautiful, black and yellowbeing the prevailing colours ; but Odious ruler, Gie., offersan exception, in having its head, shoulders, and thighs of themost splendid scarlet. This bird differs from its congenersin being solitary. It frequents marshes ; and, seated on thesummit of a low bush, with its mouth wide open, utters aplaintive agreeable cry, which can be heard at a long distance.Another species,* of a purplish-black colour, with a metalliclustre, feeds on the plain in large flocks, mingledLe Troupiale commun of Azara (vol. iii., p. 169) — a second speciesof Molothrus.1832-3. ORNITHOLOGY. 61with other birds. Several may often be seen standing onthe back of a cow or horse. While perched on a hedge, andpluming themselves in the sun, they sometimes attempt tosing, or rather to hiss : the noise is very peculiar ; it resemblesthat of bubbles of air passing rapidly from a smallorifice under water, so as to produce an acute sound. Azarastates that this bird, like the cuckoo, deposits its eggs inother birds' nests. I was several times told by the countrypeople, that there was some bird with this habit ; and myassistant in collecting, who is a very accurate person, founda nest of the sparrow* of the country, with one egg in itlarger than the others, and of a different colour and shape.Mr. Swainsonf has remarked that with the exception of theMolothrus pectoris, the cuckoos are the only birds which canbe called truly parasitical ; namely, such as '' fasten themselves,as it were, on another living animal, whose animalheat brings their young into Use, whose food they alone liveupon, and whose death would cause theirs during the periodof infancy' The Molothrus pectoris is a North-americanbird, and is closely allied in general habits, even in suchpeculiarities as standing on the backs of cattle (as its nameimplies), and in appearance, with the species from the plainsof La Plata ; it only differs in being rather smaller and of adifferent colour, yet the two birds would be considered byevery naturahst as distinct species. It is very interesting tosee so close an agreement in structure, and in habits, betweenallied species coming from opposite parts of a greatcontinent. It is also very remarkable, that the cuckoos andthe molothri, although opposed to each other in almostevery habit, should agree in the one strange one of theirparasitical propagation. The molothrus, like our starling, isA Zonotrichia ; — the chingolo of Azara. The egg is rathe-r less thanthat of the missel-thrush ; it is of a nearly globular form, but with one endrather smaller than the other. The ground colour is a pale pinkish-white,with irregular spots and blotches of a pinkish brown, and othersless distinct of a grayish hue. The egg is now in the museum of theZoological Society.t Magazine of Zoology and Botany, vol. i., p. 217.62 MALDONADO. 1832-3.eminently sociable, and lives on the open plains without artor disguise :* the cuckoo, as every one knows, is a singularlyshy bird ; it frequents the most retired thickets, andfeeds on fruit and caterpillars. In structure these birds arelikewise widely removed from each other.I will only mention two other birds, which are very common,and render themselves prominent from their habits. TheSaurophagus sulphurous is typical of the great American tribeof Tyrant-flycatchers. Tn its structure it closely approachesthe true shrikes, but in its habits may be compared to manybirds. I have frequently observed it, hunting a field, hoveringover one spot like a hawk, and then proceeding on to another.When thus seen suspended in the air, it might very readilyat a short distance be mistaken for one of the Rapaciousorder ; its stoop, however, is very inferior in force and rapidity.At other times the Saurophagus haunts the neighbourhoodof water, and there, like a kingfisher, remainingstationary, it catches any small fish which may come nearthe margin. These birds are not unfrequently kept eitherin cages, or in courtyards with their wings cut. They soonbecome tame, and are very amusing from their cunning oddmanners, which were described to me, as being similar tothose of the common magpie. Their flight is undulatory, forthe weight of the head and bill appear too great for thebody. In the evening the Saurophagus takes its stand on abush, often by the road-side, and continually repeats, withoutchange, a shrill and rather agreeable cry, which somewhatresembles articulate words. The Spaniards say it islike the words, " Bien te veo " (I see you well), and accordinglyhave given it this name.A mocking-bird, Orpheus modulator, called by the inhabitantsCalabria, is remarkable, from possessing a song farsuperior to that of any other bird in the country : indeed, itis nearly the only bird in South America which I haveobserved to take its stand for the purpose of singing. TheSee Azara, vol. iii,, p. 170.1832-3. ORNITHOLOGY. 63song may be compared to that of the Sedge warbler, but ismore powerful ; some harsh notes and some very high ones,being mingled with a pleasant warbling. It is heard onlyduring the spring. At other times its cry is harsh and farfrom harmonious. It frequents thickets and hedges, is veryactive, and whilst quickly hopping about, often expands itstail. Near Maldonado these birds were tame and bold;they constantly attended in numbers the country houses, topickthe meat which was hung up on the posts or walls : ifany other small bird joined the feast, the Calabria directlychased it away. On the wide uninhabited plains of Patagoniaanother closely allied species, O. Patagonica of D'Orbigny,which frequents the valleys clothed with spiny bushes, is awider bird, and has a slightly different tone of voice. Itappears to me a curious circumstance, as showing the fineshades of difference in habits, that, judging from this latterrespect alone, when I first saw this second species, I thoughtit was different from the Maldonado kind. Having afterwardsprocured a specimen, and comparing the two withoutparticular care, they appeared so very similar, that I changedmy opinion; but now Mr. Gould* says that they are certainlydistinct ; a conclusion in conformity with the triflingdifference of habit, of which, however, he was not aware.I will conclude these few ornithological observations withan account of the various carrion-feeding hawks which frequentthe extra tropical parts of South America. The number,tameness, and disgusting habits of these birds, make thempre-eminently striking to any one accustomed only to thebirds of Northern Europe. In this hist may be includedfour species of the Caracara or Polyborus, the Turkey buzzard,the GaUinazo, and the Condor. The Caracaras are,from their structure, placed among the eagles : we shall soonsee how iU they become so high a rank. In their habitsthey well supply the place of our carrion-crows, magpies, andravens ; a tribe of birds which is totally wanting in SouthMr. Gould was not at the time aware that M. D'Orbigny had describedthem as different.64 MALDONADO. 1832-3.America. To begin with the Polyborus Braziliensis : this isa common bird, and has a wide geographical range ; it ismost numerous on the grassy savannahs of La Plata (whereit goes by the name of Carrancha), and is far from unfrequentthroughout the sterile plains of Patagonia. In thedesert between the rivers Negro and Colorado, numbersconstantly attended the line of road to devour the carcassesof the exhausted animals which chanced to perish from fatigueand thirst. Although thus common in these dry and opencountries, and likewise on the arid shores of the Pacific, itis nevertheless found inhabiting the damp impervious forestsof West Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego. The Carranchas,together with the Polyborus Chimango, constantly attend innumbers the estancias and slaughtering-houses. If an animaldies on the plain the Gallinazo commences the feast, andthen the two Caracaras pick the bones clean. These birds,although thus commonly feeding together, are far from beingfriends. When the Carrancha is quietly seated on the branchof a tree, or on the ground, the Chimango often continuesfor a long time flying backwards and forwards, up and down,in a semicircle, trying each time, at the bottom of the curve,to strike its larger relative. The Carrancha takes littlenotice, except by bobbing its head. Although the Car-branchesfrequently assemble in numbers, they are not gregarious; for in desert places they may be seen solitary, ormore commonly by pairs. Besides the carrion of largeanimals, these birds frequent the borders of streams and seabeaches, to pick up whatever the waters may cast on shore.In Tierra del Fuego, and on the west coast of Patagonia,they must exclusively live on such supplies.The Carranchas are said to be very crafty, and to stealgreat numbers of eggs. They attempt also, together with theChimango, to pick off the scabs from the sore backs of thehorses and mules. The poor animal, on the one hand, withits ears down and its back arched ; and, on the other, thehovering bird, eyeing, at the distance of a yard, the disgustingmorsel, form a picture, which has been described by1832-3. CARRION HAWKS. 65Captain Head with his own peculiar spirit and accuracy.The Carranchas kill wounded animals ; but Mr. Bynoe sawone seize in the air a live partridge, which escaped, and wasfor some time chased on the ground. I believe this circumstanceis very unusual : at all events there is no doubt thatthe chief part of their sustenance is derived from carrion. Aperson will discover the Necrophagous habits of the Carrancha,by walking out on one of the desolate plains, and there lyingdown to sleep. When he awakes, he will see, on each surroundinghillock, one of these birds patiently watching himwith an evil eye. It is a feature in the landscape of thesecountries, which will be recognised by every one who haswandered over them. If a party goes out hunting with dogsand horses, it will be accompanied, during the day, byseveral of these attendants. After feeding, the uncoveredcraw protrudes ; at such times, and indeed generally, theCai'rancha is an inactive, tame, and cowardly bird. Its flightis heavy and slow, like that of an English rook. It seldomsoars ; but I have twice seen one at a great height glidingthrough the air with much ease. It runs (in contradistinctionto hopping), but not quite so quickly as some of its congeners.At times the Carrancha is noisy, but is not generallyso : its cry is loud, very harsh and peculiar, and may belikened to the sound of the Spanish guttural g, followed bya rough double ?■ r. Perhaps the Gauchos, from this cause,have called it Carrancha. Molina, who says it is calledThar in Chile, states, that when uttering this cry, it elevatesits head higher and higher, till at last, With its beak wideopen, the crown almost touches the lower part of the back.This fact, which has been doubted, is quite true ; I have seenthem several times with their heads backwards in a completelyinverted position. The Carrancha builds a largecoarse nest, either in a low cliff, or in a bush or lofty tree.To these observations I may add, on the high authority ofAzara, that the Carrancha feeds on Adorns, shells, slugs,grasshoppers, and frogs ; that it destroys young lambs bytearing the umbilical cord ; and that it pursues the Gallinazo,VOL. III. F66 MALDOXADO. 1832-3.till that bird is compelled to vomit up the carrion it mayhave recently gorged. Lastly, Azara states that several Car-branches,five or six together, will unite in chase of largebirds, even such as herons. All these facts show that it is abird of very versatile habits and considerable ingenuity.The Polybius Cliimaugo is considerably smaller than thelast species. It is common on both sides of the continent,but does not appear to extend so far northward as the lastspecies. It is found in Chloe, and on the coast of Patagonia,and I have seen it in Tierra del Fuego. We have alreadyremarked that it feeds on carrion, in common with theCarrancha. It is generally the last bird which leaves theskeleton ; and may often be seen within the ribs of a cow orhorse, like a bird in a cage. The Chimango often frequentsthe sea-coast and the borders of lakes and swamps,where it picks up small fish. It is truly omnivorous, andwill eat even bread, when thrown out of a house with otheroffal : I was also assured that they materially injure the potatocrops in Chloe, by stocking up the roots when first planted.In the same island I myself saw them by scores followingthe plough, and feeding on the worms and larvae of insects. Ido not believe they ever kill birds or animals. They are moreactive than the Carranchas, but their flight is heavy ; I neversaw one soar ; they are very tame ; are not gregarious ; commonlyperch on stone walls, and not upon trees ; and frequentlyutter a gentle, shrill scream.The third species of Polyborus* is remarkable from theconfined localities which it frequents : we met with it only inone vaUey in Patagonia. The last species which we have tomention is the Polyborus Novice Zelandite. This bird is exceedinglynumerous over the whole of the Falkland Islands,which appear to be its metropolis. I was informed by thesealers, that they are found in the Diego Ramirez rocks andthe Ildefonso isles, but never on the mainland of Tierra delFuego. Nor do they occur on Georgia or the more southernA species allied to " Montague " of D'Orbigny, but distinct.1832-3. CARRION HAWKS. 6?islands. In many respects these hawks resemble in theirhabits the Carranchas. They live on the flesh of deadanimals and on marine productions ; and on the Ramirez rockstheir whole sustenance must depend on the sea. They areextraordinarily tame and fearless, and haunt the neighbourhoodof houses for offal. If a hunting party kills an animal,a number soon collect and patiently await, standing on theground on all sides. After eating, their uncovered craws arelargely protruded, giving them a disgusting appearance.They readily attack wounded birds : a cormorant in thisstate having taken to the shore, was immediately seized onby several, and its death hastened by their blows. TheBeagle was at the Falklands only during the summer, butthe officers of the Adventure, who were there in the winter,mention many extraordinary instances of the boldness andrapacity of these birds. They actually pounced on a dogthat was lying fast asleep close by one of the party ; and thesportsmen had difficulty in preventing the wounded geesefrom being seized before their eyes. It is said that severaltogether (in this respect resembling the Carranchas) wait atthe mouth of a rabbit-hole, and together seize on the animalwhen it comes out. They were constantly flying on board thevessel when in the harbour ; and it was necessary to keep agood look out to prevent the leather being torn from the rigging,and the meat or game from the stern. These birds arevery mischievous and inquisitive; they will pick up almost anythingfrom the ground ; a large black glazed hat was carriednearly a mile, as was a pair of the heavy balls, used in catchingcattle. Mr. Osborne experienced during the survey a moresevere loss, in their stealing a small Eater's compass in a redmorocco leather case, which was never recovered. These birdsare, moreover, quarrelsome and very passionate ; tearing upthe grass with their bills from rage. They are not truly gregarious; do not soar ; their flight is heavy and clumsy ; onthe ground they run with extreme quickness, very much likepheasants. They are noisy, uttering several harsh cries ; oneof which is like that of the English rook ; hence the sealersP 2G8 MALDONADO. 1832-3.always so call them. It is a curious circumstance that, Ashencrying out, they throw their heads upwards and backwards,after the same manner as the Carrancha. They build onthe rocky cliffs of the sea-coast, but only in the small islets,and not in the two main islands. This is a singular precautionin so tame and fearless a bird. The sealers say thatthe flesh of these birds when cooked, is quite white, and verygood eating.We have now only to mention the turkey-buzzard {Vulhiraura), and the Gallinazo. The former is found whereverthe country is moderately damp, from Cape Horn to NorthAmerica. Differently from the Polyhorus Braziliensis andChimaitgo, it has found its way to the Falkland Islands.The turkey-buzzard is a solitary bird, or at most goes inpairs. It may at once be recognised from a long distance,by its lofty, soaring, and most elegant flight. It is wellknown to be a true carrion feeder. On the west coast ofPatagonia, among the thickly-wooded islets and broken land,it lives exclusively on what the sea throws up, and onthe carcasses of dead seals. Wherever these animals arecongregated on the rocks, there the vultures may be seen.The Gallinazo [Cathartics aratus) has a different range fromthe last species, as it never occurs to the southward oflat. 41°. Azara states that there existed a tradition that thesebirds, at the time of the conquest, were not to be found nearMonte Video, but that they subsequently followed the inhabitantsfrom more northern districts. At the present daythey are numerous in the valley of the Colorado, which isthree hundred miles due south of Monte Video. It seemsprobable that this additional migration has happened sincethe time of Azara. The Gallinazo generally prefers a humidclimate, or rather the neighbourhood of fresh water ; henceit is extremely abundant in Brazil and La Plata, while itis never found on the desert and arid plains of NorthernPatagonia, excepting near some stream. These birds frequentthe whole Pampas to the foot of the Cordillera, but I neversaw or heard of one in Chile : in Peru they are preserved as1832-3. CARRION HAWKS. 69scavengers. These vultures certainly may be called gregarious,for they seem to have pleasure in society, and are not solelybrought together by the attraction of a common prey. Ona fine day a flock may often be observed at a great height,each bird wheeling round and round without closing itswings, in the most graceful evolutions. This is clearly donefor sport-sake, or perhaps is connected with their matrimonialalliances.I have now mentioned all the carrion-feeders, exceptingthe condor, an account of which will be more appropriatelyintroduced when we visit a country more congenial to itshabits than the plains of La Plata.In a broad band of sand-hillocks which separate the Lagunadel Potrero from the shores of the Plata, at the distanceof a few miles from Maldonado, I found a group of thosevitrified, siliceous tubes, which are generally supposed tohave been formed by lightning entering the loose sand.These tubes resemble in every particular those from OriginCumberland, described in the Geological Transactions.*The sand-hillocks of Maldonado, not being protected byvegetation, are constantly changing their position. Fromthis cause the tubes projected above the surface ; and numerousfragments lying near, showed that they had formerlybeen buried to a greater depth. Four sets entered the sandperpendicularly : by working with my hands I traced one ofthem two feet deep ; and some fragments which evidentlyhad belonged to the same tube, when added to the otherpart, measured five feet three inches. The diameter of thewhole was nearly equal, and therefore we must suppose thatoriginally it extended to a much greater depth. These dimensionsare however small, compared to those of the tubesfrom Drigg, one of which was traced to a depth of not lessthan thirty feet.The internal surface is completely vitrified, glossy, andsmooth. A small fragment examined under the micro-geology.Transact., vol. ii., p. 328.70 JIALDONADO. 1832-3.scope, appeared, from the number of minute entangledair or perhaps steam bubbles, like an assay fused before theblowpipe. The sand is entirely, or in greater part, siliceous ;but some points are of a black colour, and from their glossysurface possess a metallic lustre. The thickness of the wallof the tube varies from a thirtieth to a twentieth of an inch,and occasionally even equals a tenth. On the outside, thegrains of sand are rounded, and have a slightly glazed appearance: I could not distinguish any sign of crystaUization.In a similar manner to that described in the GeologicalTransactions, the tubes are generally compressed, and havedeep longitudinal furrows, so as closely to resemble ashrivelled vegetable stalk, or the bark of the elm or corktree. Their circumference is about two inches, but in somefragments which are cylindrical and without any furrows, itis double, or four inches. The compression from the surroundingloose sand, acting while the tube was still softenedfrom the effects of the intense heat, has evidently caused thecreases or furrows. Judging from the uncompressed fragments,the measure or bore of the lightning (if such a termmay be used), must have been about one inch and a quarter.At Paris, M. Hachette and M. Beaumont* succeeded inmaking tubes, in most respects similar to these favourites,by passing very strong shocks of galvanism through finely-powderedglass : when salt was added, so as to increaseits fusibility, the tubes were larger in every dimension.They failed both with powdered felspar and quartz. Onetube, formed with pounded glass, was very nearly an inchlong, namely, .982, and had an internal diameter of .019.When we hear that the strongest battery in Paris wasused, and that the effect on a substance of such easy fusibilityas glass, was to form tubes so diminutive, we mustfeel greatly astonished at the power of a shock of lightning,which, striking the sand in several places, has formed acylinder, in one instance of at least thirty feet long, andAnnales de Chimie et de Physique, torn, xxxvii., p. 319.1832-3. Favourites. 7lhaving an internal bore, where not compressed, of full aninch and a half; and this in a material so extraordinarilyrefractory as quartz !The tubes, as I have already remarked, enter the sandnearly in a vertical direction. One, however, which was lessregular than the generality, had a deviation from a rightline, which amounted, at the most considerable bend, tothirty-three degrees. From this same tube, two small branches,about a foot apart, were sent oflF ; one pointed downwards,and the other upwards. This latter case is remarkable, asthe electric fluid must have turned back at the acute angleof 26°, to the line of its main course. Besides the four tubeswhich I found vertical, and traced beneath the surface, therewere several other groups of fragments, the original site ofwhich without doubt was near. All occurred in a level area,sixty yards by twenty, of shifting sand, situated among somehigh sand-hillocks ; and at the distance of about half a mile,from a chain of hiUs four or five hundred feet in height.The most remarkable circumstance, as it appears to me, inthis case as well as in that of Drigg, and in one described byM. Ribbentrop in Germany, is the number of tubes foundwithin such limited spaces. At Drigg, within an area of fifteenyards, three were observed, and the same number occurredin Germany. In the case which I have described, certainlymore than four existed within the space of the sixty bytwenty yards. As it does not appear probable that thetubes are produced by successive and distinct shocks, wemust believe that the lightning, shortly before entering theground, divides itself into separate branches.The neighbourhood of the Rio Plata seems peculiarly subjectto electric phenomena. In the year 1793,* one of themost destructive thunderstorms perhaps on record happenedat Buenos Ayres : thirty-seven places within the city werestruck by lightning, and nineteen people killed. From factsstated in several books of travels, I am inclined to suspectAzara's Voyage, vol. i,, p. 36.72 MALDONADO. 1832-3.that thunderstorms are very common near the mouths ofgreat rivers. Is it not possible that the mixture of largebodies of fresh water with the salt may disturb the electricalequilibrium ? Even during our occasional visits tothis part of South America, we heard of a ship, twochurches, and a house, having been struck. Both thechurch and the house I saw shortly afterwards : the housebelonged to Mr. Hood, the consul-general at Monte Video.Some of the effects were curious : the paper, for nearlya foot on each side of the line where the bell-wires hadrun, was blackened. The metal had been fused, and althoughthe room was at least fifteen feet high, the globulesdropping on the chairs and furniture, had drilled in them achain of minute holes. A part of the wall was shattered asif by gunpowder, and the fragments had been blown offwith force sufficient to dent the walls on the opposite sideof the room. The frame of a looking-glass was blackened,and the gilding must have been volatilized, for a smelling-bottle,which stood on the chimney-piece, was coated withbright metallic particles, which adhered as firmly as if theyhad been enamelled.CHAPTER IV.Rio Negro — Estancias attacked by Indians — Salt lakes, geological positionof— Flamingoes — R. Negro to Colorado — Sacred tree — Patagonia hareIndian families — General Rosas — Proceed to Bahia Blanc — Sanddunes — Negro lieutenant — Bahia Blanc — Ground incrusted withGlauber salt — Punta Alta — Zorillo.RIO NEGRO TO BAHIA Blanc.July 24th, 1833. — The Beagle sailed from Maldonado,and on August the 3d she arrived off the mouth of the RioNegro. This is the principal river on the whole Hne ofcoast between the Straits of Magellan and the Plata. Itenters the sea about three hundred miles south of the estuaryof the latter. About fifty years since, under the old Spanishgovernment, a small colony was established here; and it is stillthe most southern position (lat. 41°) on this eastern coast ofAmerica which is inhabited by civilized man.The country near the mouth of the river is wretched inthe extreme : on the south side a long line of perpendicularcUffs commences, which exposes a section of the geologicalnature of the country. The strata are of sandstone, and onelayer was remarkable, from being composed of a firmly-cementedconglomerate of pumice pebbles, which musthave travelled more than four hundred miles, from theAndes. The surface is every where covered up by a thickbed of gravel, which extends far and wide over the openplain. Water is extremely scarce, and, where found, isalmost invariably brackish. The vegetation is scanty ; andalthough there are bushes of many kinds, all are armed withformidable thorns, which seem to warn the stranger not toenter on these inhospitable regions.The settlement is situated eighteen miles up the river.The road follows the foot of the sloping cliff, which forms74 RIO NEGRO. Aug. 1833.the northern boundary of the great valley, in which the RioNegro flows. On the way we passed the ruins of some fineestancias," which a few years since were destroyed by theIndians. They withstood several attacks. A man presentat one gave me a very lively description of what took place.The inhabitants had sufficient notice to drive all the cattleand horses into the "corral"* which surrounded the housesand likewise to mount some small cannon. The Indians wereAraucanians from the south of Chile; several hundreds innumber, and highly disciplined. They first appeared in twobodies on a neighbouring hiU ; having there dismounted,and taken off their fur mantles, they advanced naked to thecharge. The only weapon of an Indian is a very longbamboo or chuzo, ornamented with ostrich feathers, andpointed by a sharp spear head. My informer seemed toremember with the greatest horror the quivering of thesechuzos as they approached near. When close, the caciquePincheira haled the besieged to give up their arms, or hewould cut all their throats. As this would probably havebeen the result of their entrance under any circumstances,the answer was given by a volley of musketry. The Indians,with great steadiness, came to the very fence of the corral :but to their surprise they found the posts fastened togetherby iron nails instead of leather thongs, and, of course, in vainattempted to cut them with their knives. This saved thelives of the Christians : many of the wounded Indians werecarried away by their companions ; and at last one of theunder caciques being wounded, the bugle sounded a retreat.They retired to their horses, and seemed to hold a council ofwar. This was an awful pause for the Spaniards, as all theirammunition, with the exception of a few cartridges, was expended.In an instant the Indians mounted their horses,and galloped out of sight. Another attack was still morequickly repulsed. A cool Frenchman managed the gun ; heThe corral is an enclosure made of tall and strong stakes. Everyestancia, or farming estate, has one attached to it.Aug. 1833. SALINAS. 75Stopped till the Indians approached close, and then rakedtheir line with grape-shot : he thus laid thirty-nine of themon the ground ; and, of course, such a blow immediatelyrouted the whole party.The town is indifferently called El Carmen or Patagonia.It is built on the face of a cliff which fronts the river, andmany of the houses are excavated even in the sandstone.The river is about two or three hundred yards wide, and isdeep and rapid. The many islands, with their willows trees,and the flat headlands, seen one behind the other on thenorthern boundary of the broad green vaUey, forms, by theaid of a bright sun, a view almost picturesque. The numberof inhabitants does not exceed a few hundreds. These Spanishcolonies do not, like our British ones, carry withinthemselves the elements of growth. Many Indians of pureblood reside here : the tribe of the Cacique Lucan constantlyhave their Toldos * on the outskirts of the town. Thelocal government partly supplies them with provisions, bygiving them aU the old, worn out horses, and they earn alittle by making horse-rugs and other articles of riding gear.These Indians are considered civilized; but what theircharacter may have gained by a lesser degree of ferocity, isalmost counterbalanced by their entire immorality. Some ofthe younger men are, however, improving ; they are willingto labour, and a short time since a party went on asealing voyage, and behaved very well. They were nowenjoying the fruits of their labour, by being dressed in verygay, clean clothes, and by being very idle. The taste theyshowed in their dress was admirable ; if you could haveturned one of these young Indians into a statue of bronze,his drapery would have been perfectly graceful.One day I rode to a large salt lake, or Salina, which isdistant fifteen miles from the town. During the winter itconsists of a shallow lake of brine, which in summer is convertedinto a field of snow-white salt. The layer near theThe hovels of the Indians are thus called.76 RIO NEGRO. Auff. 1833.margin is from four to five inches thick, but towards thecentre its thickness increases. This lake was two and a haKmiles long, and one broad. Others occur in the neighbourhoodmany times larger, and with a floor of salt, two and threefeet in thickness, even when under water during the winter.One of these brilliantly white and level expanses, in themidst of the brown and desolate plain, offers an extraordinaryspectacle. A large quantity of salt is annually drawn fromthe salina ; and great piles, some hundred tons in weight,were lying ready for exportation. It is singular that thesalt, although well crystallized, and appearing quite pure, doesnot answer so well for preserving meat as sea salt from theCape de Verd Islands. Although the latter is necessarilymuch dearer, it is constantly imported and mixed with thesalt procured from these salinas. A merchant at BuenosAyres told me that he considered the Cape de Verd saltworth fifty per cent, more than that from the Rio Negro.The season for working the salinas forms the harvest ofPatagonia ; for on it, the prosperity of the place depends.Nearly the whole population encamps on the banks of theriver, and the people are employed in drawing out the saltin bullock-waggons.The border of the lake is formed of mud : and in this numerouslarge crystals of gypsum, some of which are three incheslong, lie embedded; whist on the surface, others of sulphateof magnesia he scattered about. The Gauchos call the formerthe " Padre del sal," and the latter the " Madre" ; they statethat these preventive salts always occur on the borders ofthe Salinas, when the water begins to evaporate. The mudis black, and has a fetid odour. I could not, at first, imaginethe cause of this, but I afterwards perceived that thefroth, which the wind drifted on shore was coloured green asif by conserves : I attempted to carry home some of thisgreen matter, but from an accident failed. Parts of the lakeseen from a short distance appeared of a reddish colour,and this perhaps, was owing to some infusorial animalcula.The mud in many places was thrown up by numbers ofAls. 1833. SALINAS. 77*ssome kind of worm, or annelidous animal. How surprisingit is that any creatures should be able to exist in a fluid, saturatedwith brine, and that they should be crawling amongcrystals of sulphate of soda and lime ! And what becomes ofthese worms when, during a long summer, the surface atleast is hardened into as oh d layer of salt? Flamingoes* inconsiderablenumbers inhabit this lake ; they breed here, andtheir bodies are sometimes found by the workmen, preservedin the salt. I saw several wading about in search of food, —probably for the worms which burrow in the mud ; and theselatter, perhaps, feed on infusoria or conserves. Thus wehave a little world within itself, adapted to these little inlandseas of briefWith respect to the geological position of the salinas, theyoccur either in the plains composed of shingle, and overlyingvarious deposits, or within the grand calcareo-argilla-cous formation of the Pampas. The only rule I can discover,is, that they do not occur where the substratum isgranitic, as in Brazil and Banda Oriental. I know of theiroccasional existence over the immense territory extendingfrom lat. 23°, near the Rio Vermes, to 50° south. Theclimate may generally be considered as rather dry ; at leastsuch is the case in Patagonia, where the salinas are mostnumerous. Those which I saw occurred in depressions,Throughout South America, the flamingo appears singularly attachedto salt lakes. I saw instances of this throughout Patagonia, in the Cordilleraof Northern Chile, and at the Galapagos Islands.f In the Linnaean Transactions, vol. xi., p. 205, a minute crustaceousanimal is described, under the name of Cancer salinas. It is said to occurin countless numbers in the brine pans at Lymington ; but only in thosein which the fluid has attained, from evaporation, considerable strength ;namely, about a quarter of a pound of salt to a pint of water. This canceris said, also, to inhabit the salt lakes of Siberia. Well may we affirm,that every part of the world is habitable! Whether lakes of brine, or thosesubterranean ones hidden beneath volcanic mountains — warm mineralsprings ; the wide expanse and depths of the ocean ; the upper regions ofthe atmosphere ; and even the surface of perpetual snow ; — all supportorganic beings.78 RIO NEGRO. Aug. 1833.whence there was no exit ; in a more humid climate thewater flowing from the lake would soon have hollowed achannel in the soft strata, and thus converted the depressionof the soil into an ordinary vaUey. There is reason to believethat the whole of these great plains have been raised abovethe level of the sea within a recent geological period. Maywe not then consider the salinas as the receptacles of thewashings of the sedimentary strata? On this idea we understandtheir absence where the land is granitic. It ismanifest that these great natural evaporating dishes can onlyoccur where the amount of annual rain is small.*To the northward of the Rio Negro, between it and theinhabited country near Buenos Ayres, the Spaniards haveonly one small settlement, recently established at BahiaBlanc. The distance in a straight line to the capital is verynearly five hundred British miles. The wandering tribes ofhorse Indians, which have always occupied the greater part ofthis country, having of late much harassed the outlyingestancias, the government at Buenos Ayres equipped sometimesince an army under the command of General Rosasfor the purpose of exterminating them. The troops were nowencamped on the banks of the Colorado ; a river lying abouteighty miles to the northward of the Rio Negro. WhenGeneral Rosas left Buenos Ayres, he struck in a direct lineacross the unexplored plains : and as the country was thuspretty well cleared of Indians, he left behind him, at wideAlmost every circumstance here mentioned, occurs in the salt lakesnear the borders of the Caspian. That country, like Patagonia, appearsto have been recently elevated above the waters of the sea. Pallas statesthat the salt lakes occupy shallow depressions in the steppes ; that themud on the borders in every case is black and fetid ; that beneath thecrust of sea salt, sulphate of magnesia occurs, imperfectly crystallized ;that the muddy sand is mixed with lentils of gypsum. We have beforestated that these lakes are inhabited by small crustaceous animals ; andflamingoes (Eden. New Philos. Jour., Jan. 1830) likewise frequentthem. As these circumstances, apparently so trifling, occur in two distantcontinents, we may feel sure they are the necessary results of somecommon cause.— See Pallas's Travels, 1793 to 1794, p. 129—134.Aug. 1833. SACRED TREE. 79intervals, a small party of soldiers, with a troop of horses(a posta), so as to be enabled to keep up a communicationwith the capital. As the Beagle intended to call at BahiaBlanc, I determined to proceed there by land ; and ultimatelyI extended ray plan so as to travel the whole way bythe posts to Buenos Ayres.August 11th. — Mr. Harris, an Englishman residing atPatagonia, a guide, and five Gauchos, who were proceedingto the army on business, were my companions on the journey.The Colorado, as I have already said, is nearly eightymiles distant : and as we travelled slowly, we were two daysand a half on the road. The whole hne of country deservesscarcely a better name than that of a desert. Water is foundonly in two small wells : it is called fresh ; but even at thistime of the year, during the rainy season, it was quite brackish.In the summer this must be a distressing passage ; for nowit was sufficiently desolate. The valley of the Rio Negro,broad as it is, has merely been excavated out of the sandstoneplain ; for immediately above the bank on which thetown stands, a level country commences, which is interruptedonly by a few trifling valleys and depressions. Everywherethe landscape wears the same sterile aspect; a drygravelly soil supports tufts of brown withered grass, and lowscattered bushes, armed vrith thorns.Shortly after passing the first spring we came in sight ofa famous tree, which the Indians reverence as the altar ofWalleechu. It is situated on a high part of the plain, andhence is a landmark visible at a great distance. As soon asatribe of Indians come in sight of it, they offer theiradorations by loud shouts. The tree itself is Iom^, muchbranched, and thorny. Just above the root it has a diameterof about three feet. It stands by itself without anyneighbour, and was indeed the first tree we saw ; afterwardswe met with a few others of the same kind, but they werefar from common. Being winter the tree had no leaves,but in their place numberless threads, by which the variousofferings, such as cigars, bread, meat, pieces of cloth, &c80 RIO NEGRO. Aug. 1833.had been suspended. Poor people not having any thugbetter, only pulled a thread out of their ponchos, andfastened it to the tree. The Indians, moreover, were accustomedto pour spirits and mate into a certain hole, and likewiseto smoke upwards, thinking thus to afford all possiblegratification to Walleechu. To complete the scene, the treewas surrounded by the bleached bones of the horses whichhad been slaughtered as sacrifices. All Indians of every ageand sex, made their offerings ; they then thought that theirhorses would not tire, and that they themselves should beprosperous. The Gaucho who told me this, said that in thetime of peace he had witnessed this scene, and that he andothers used to wait tiU the Indians had passed by, for thesake of stealing their offerings from Walleechu.The Gauchos think that the Indians consider the tree asthe god itself; but it seems far more probable that theyregard it as the altar. The only cause which I can imaginefor this choice, is its being a landmark in a dangerous passage.The Sierra de la Ventana is visible at an immensedistance ; and a Gaucho told me that he was once ridingwith an Indian a few miles to the north of the Rio Colorado,when the latter commenced making the same loudnoise, which is usual at the first sight of the distant tree ;putting his hand to his head, and then pointing it in thedirection of the Sierra. Upon being asked the reason ofthis, the Indian said in broken Spanish, " First see theSierra." This likewise would render it probable that theutility of a distant landmark is the first cause of its adoration.About two leagues beyond this curious tree wehalted for the night : at this instant an unfortunate cow wasspied by the lynx-eyed Gauchos. Off they set in chase,and in a few minutes she was dragged in by the lazo, andslaughtered. We here had the four necessaries of life " enel campo," — pasture for the horses, water (only a muddypuddle), meat, and firewood. The Gauchos were in high spiritsat finding all these luxuries ; and we soon set to work at thepoor cow. This was the first night which I had ever passedAug. 1833. AGOUTI. 81under the open sky, with the gear of the recado for my bed.There is high enjoyment in the independence of the Gaucholife — to be able at any moment to pull up your horse, andsay, " Here we will pass the night." The deathlike stillnessof the plain, the dogs keeping watch, the gipsy-groupof Gauchos making their beds round the fire, have left inmy mind a strongly-marked picture of this first night, whichwill not soon be forgotten.The next day the country continued similar to that abovedescribed. It is inhabited by few birds or animals. Occasionallya deer, or a Guanaco (wild Llama) may be seen ; butthe Agouti [Cavia Patagonia) is the commonest quadruped.This animal here represents our hares. It differs, however,from that genus in many essential respects ; for instance, it hasonly three toes behind. It is also nearly twice the size,weighing from twenty to twenty-five pounds. The Agoutiis a true friend to the desert ; it is a common feature in thelandscape to see two or three hopping quickly one after theother in a straight line across these wild plains. On theeastern side of America their northern limit is formed by theSierra Tapalguen (lat. 37° 30'), where the plains rather suddenlybecome greener and more humid. The limit certainlydepends on this change, for near Mendoza (lat. 33° 30),which is much further north, but where the country is verysterile, I again met the Agouti. It is not evident by whatcircumstances their southern limit is governed; it occursbetween Port Desire and St. Julian (about 48° 30'), wherethere is no change in the kind of land, and only a trifling andgradual one of temperature. It is a singular fact, thatalthough the Agouti is not now found so far south as PortSt. Julian, yet that Captain Wood, in his voyage in 1 670,talks of them as being numerous there. What cause canhave altered, in a wide, uninhabited, and rarely-visitedcountry, the range of an animal like this ? It appears, also,from the number shot in one day at Port Desire, that theymust have been considerably more abundant there formerlythan at present. Azara states that the Agouti never ex-vol.III. G82 RIO COLORADO. Auff. 1833.■&•savages its own burrow, but uses that of the Bizcaclia.Wherever this animal is present, without doubt this is true ;but on the sandy plains of Bahia Blanc, where the Bizcacha isnot found, the Gauchos maintain that the Agouti is its ownworkman. The same thing occurs with the little owls of thePampas noctua cunicularia), which have so often been describedas standing like sentinels at the mouths of theburrows ; for in Banda Oriental, owing to the absence of theBizcacha, they are obUged to hollow out their own habitations.Azara also says that the Agouti, except when pressedby danger, does not enter its burrow : on this pointI must again differ from that high authority. At BahiaBlanc I have repeatedly seen two or three of these animalssitting on their haunches by the mouths of their holes,which, as I passed by at a distance, they quietly entered.Daily in the neighbourhood of these spots the Agouti wereabundant : but differently from most burrowing animals, itwanders, commonly two or three together, to miles orleagues from its home ; nor do I know whether it returns atnight. The Agouti feeds and roams about by day ; is shy andwatchful ; does not squat, or so rarely that I never saw an instanceof this ; it cannot run very fast ; and, therefore, is frequentlycaught by a couple of dogs, even of mixed breed.Its manner of running more resembles that of a rabbit thanof a hare. The Agouti generally produces two young onesat a birth, which are brought forth within the burrow. Theflesh, when cooked, is very white; it is, however, rathertasteless and dry.The next morning, as we approached the Rio Colorado,the appearance of the country changed ; we soon came on aplain covered with turf, which, from its flowers, tall clover,and little owls, resembled the Pampas. We passed also amuddy swamp of considerable extent, which in summerdries, and becomes incrusted with various salts ; and henceis called a sahara. It was covered by low accident plants,of the same kind with those grown on the sea-shore. TheColorado, at the pass where we crossed it, is only aboutAug. 1833. RIO COLORADO. 83sixty yards wide ; generally it must be nearly double thatwidth. Its course is very tortuous, being marked by willow-treesand beds of reeds : in a direct line the distance to themouth of the river is said to be nine leagues, but by watertwenty-five. We were delayed crossing in the canoe by someimmense troops of mares, which were Swimming the river inorder to follow a division of troops into the interior. Amore ludicrous spectacle I never beheld, than the hundredsof heads, all directed one way, with pointed ears and distendednostrils, appearing just above the water Uke a greatshoal of some amphibious animals. Mare's flesh is the onlyfood which the soldiers have when on an expedition. Thisgives them a very great facility of movement ; for the distanceto which horses can be driven over these plains is quitesurprising : I have been assured that an unloaded horse cantravel a hundred miles a day for many days successively.The encampment of General Rosas was close to the river.It consisted of a square formed by waggons, artillery, strawhuts, &c. The soldiers were nearly all cavalry ; and Ishould think such a villanous, banditti-like army, was neverbefore collected together. The greater number of men wereof a mixed breed, between Negro, Indian, and Spaniard. Iknow not the reason, but men of such origin seldom have agood expression of countenance. I called on the secretary toshow my passport. He began to cross-question me in themost dignified and mysterious manner. By good luck I hada letter of recommendation from the government of BuenosAyres* to the commandant of Patagonia. This was taken toGeneral Rosas, who sent me a very obliging message ; andthe secretary returned all smiles and graciousness. We tookup our residence in the rancho, or hovel, of a curious oldSpaniard, who had served with Napoleon in the expeditionagainst Russia.We staid two days at the Colorado ; I had little to do, forI am bound to express, in the strongest terms my obligation to theGovernment of Buenos Ayres for the obliging manner in which passportsto all parts of the country were given me, as naturalist of the Beagle.G 284 RIO COLORADO. Aug. 1833.the surrounding country was a swamp, which in summer,(December) when the snow melts on the Cordillera, is overflowedby the river. My chief amusement was Matchingthe Indian families as they came to buy little articles at therancho, where we staid. It was supposed that General Rosashad about six hundred Indian allies. The men were a tall,fine race, yet it was afterwards easy to see in the Fuegiansavage the same countenance rendered hideous by cold, wantof food, and less civilization. Some authors, in defining theprimary races of mankind, have separated these Indians intotwo classes ; but I cannot think this is correct. Among theyoung women or china, some deserve to be called evenbeautiful. Their hair was coarse, but bright and black ;and they wore it in two plaits hanging down to the waist.They had a high colour, and eyes that glistened with brilliancy; their legs, feet, and arms were small and elegantlyformed ; their ankles, and sometimes their waists, were ornamentedby broad bracelets of blue beads. Nothing could bemore interesting than some of the family groups. A motherwith one or two daughters would often come to our rancho,mounted on the same horse. They ride like men, but withtheir knees tucked up much higher. This habit, perhaps,arises from their being accustomed, when travelling, to ridethe loaded horses. The duty of the women is to load andunload the horses ; to make the tents for the night ; in shortto be, like the wives of all savages, useful slaves. The menfight, hunt, take care of the horses, and make the riding gear.One of their chief indoor occupations is to knock two stonestogether till they become round. The bolas is a very importantweapon to the Indian ; for with it he catches hisgame, and also his horse which roams free over the plain. Infighting, his first attempt is to throw the horse of his adversarywith the bolas, and when entangled by the fall to kill himwith the chuzo. If the balls only catch the neck or body ofan animal, they are often carried away and lost. As themaking the stones round is the labour of two days, themanufacture of the balls is a very common employment.Auff. 1833. RIO COLORADO. 85"aSeveral of the men and women had their faces painted red,but I never saw the horizontal bands which are so commonamong the Fuegians. Their chief pride consists in havingevery thing made of silver ; I have seen a cacique with hisspurs, stirrups, handle of his knife, and bridle made of thismetal : the head - stall and reins being of wire, were notthicker than whipcord ; and to see a fiery steed, wheelingabout under the command of so light a chain, gave to thehorsemanship a remarkable character of elegance.General Rosas intimated a wish to see me; a circumstancewhich I was afterwards very glad of. He is a man of an extraordinarycharacter, and has a most predominant influencein the country, which it seems probable he will use to itsprosperity and advancement. He is said to be the owner ofseventy-four square leagues of land, and to have about threehundred thousand head of cattle. His estates are admirablymanaged, and are far more productive of corn than anyothers. He first gained his celebrity by his laws for hisown estancias, and by disciplining several hundred men, soas to resist with success the attacks of the Indians. Thereare many stories current about the rigid manner in whichhis laws were enforced. One of these was, that no man,on penalty of being put into the stocks, should carry hisknife on a Sunday: this day being the principal one forgambling and drinking, many quarrels arose, which from thegeneral manner of fighting with the knife often proved fatal.One Sunday the Governor came in great form to pay theEstancia a visit, and General Rosas, in his hurry, walked outto receive him with his knife, as usual, stuck in his belt.The steward touched his arm, and reminded him of the law ;upon which turning to the Governor, he said he was extremelysorry, but that he must go into the stocks, and thattill let out, he possessed no power even in his own house.After a little time the steward was persuaded to open thestocks, and to let him out, but no sooner was this done,than he turned to the steward and said, "You now havebroken the laws, so you must take my place in the stocks."86 RIO COLORADO. Aug. 1833.Such actions as these delighted the Gauchos, who all possesshigh notions of their own equality and dignity.General Rosas is also a perfect horseman — an accomplishmentof no small consequence in a country where an assembledarmy elected its general by the following trial: Atroop of unbroken horses being driven into a corral, werelet out through a gateway, above which was a cross-bar : itwas agreed, whoever should drop from the bar on one ofthese wild animals, as it rushed out, and should be ablewithout saddle or bridle, not only to ride it, but also tobring it back to the door of the corral, should be theirgeneral. The person who succeeded was accordingly elected ;and doubtless made a fit general for such an army. Thisextraordinary feat has also been performed by Rosas.By these means, and by conforming to the dress andhabits of the Gauchos, he has obtained an unbounded popularityin the country, and in consequence a despotic power.I was assured by an English merchant, that a man who hadmurdered another, when arrested and questioned concerninghis motive, answered, " He spoke disrespectfully of GeneralRosas, so I killed him." At the end of a week the murdererwas at liberty. This doubtless was the act of thegeneral's party, and not of the general himself.In conversation he is enthusiastic, sensible, and very grave.His gravity is carried to a high pitch : I heard one of his madbuffoons (for he keeps two, like the barons of old) relate thefollowing anecdote : " I wanted very much to hear a certainpiece of music, so I went to the general two or threetimes to ask him ; he said to me, ' Go about your business,for I am engaged.' I went a second time ; he said, ' If youcome again I will punish you.' A third time I asked, andhe laughed. I rushed out of the tent, but it was too late ;he ordered two soldiers to catch and stake me. I beggedby all the Saints in heaven, he would let me off; but itwould not do; — when the general laughs he spares neithermad man or sovmd." The poor flighty gentleman lookedquite dolorous, at the very recollection of the staking. ThisAug. 1833, ASPECT OF COUNTRY. 87is a very severe punishment ; four posts are driven into theground, and the man is extended by his arms and legshorizontally, and there left to stretch for several hours.The idea is intently taken from the usual method of drying-hides.My interview passed away without a smile, and Iobtained a passport and order for the government post-horses,and this he gave me in the most obliging and readymanner.In the morning we started for Bahia Blanc, which wereached in two days. Leaving the regular encampment, wepassed by the toldos of the Indians. These are round likeovens, and covered with hides ; by the mouth of each atapering chuzo was stuck in the ground. The toldos weredivided into separate groups, which belonged to the differentcaciques' tribes, and the groups were again dividedinto smaller ones, according to the relationship of theowners. For several miles we travelled along the valleyof the Colorado. The alluvial plains on the side appearedfertile, and it is supposed that they are well adapted to thegrowth of corn. Turning northward from the river, we soonentered on a country, differing from those plains that extendsouth of the river. The land still continued dry and sterile ;but it supported many different kinds of plants, and the grass,though brown and withered, was more abundant, as the thornybushes were less so. These latter in a short space entirelydisappeared, and the plains were left without a thicket tocover their nakedness. This change in the vegetation marksthe commencement of the grand calcareo-argiUaceous deposit,which I have already noticed as forming the wideextent of the Pampas, and as covering the granitic rocks ofBanda Oriental. From the Strait of Magellan to the Colorado,a distance of about eight hundred miles, the face of thecountry is every where composed of shingle : the pebbles arechiefly of porphyry, and probably owe their origin to therocks of the Cordillera. North of the Colorado the bedthins out, and the pebbles become exceedingly small, andhere the characteristic vegetation of Patagonia ceases.88 BAHIA Blanc. Aug. 1833.Having ridden about twenty-five miles, we came to a broadbelt of sand-dunes, which stretch, as far as the eye canreach, to the east and west. The sand-hillocks restingon the clay, allow small pools of water to collect, and thusafford, in this dry country, an invaluable supply of freshwater.The great advantage arising from depressions andelevations of the soil, is not often brought home to themind. The two miserable springs in the long passage betweenthe Rio Negro and Colorado were caused by triflinginequalities in the plain ; without them not a drop of waterwould have been found. The belt of sand-dunes is abouteight miles Avide ; at some former period, it probably formedthe margin of a grand estuary, where the Colorado nowflows. In this district, where absolute proofs of the recentelevation of the land occur, such speculations can hardly beneglected by any one, although merely considering the physicalgeography of the country. Having crossed the sandytract, we arrived in the evening at one of the post-houses ;and, as the fresh horses were grazing at a distance, we determinedto pass the night there.The house was situated at the base of a ridge, betweenone and two hundred feet high — a most remarkable featurein this country. This posta was commanded by a negrolieutenant, born in Africa : to his credit be it said, there wasnot a rancho between the Colorado and Buenos Ayres innearly such neat order as his. He had a little room forstrangers, and a small corral for the horses, all made of sticksand reeds j he had also dug a ditch roimd his house, as a defencein case of being attacked. This would, however, havebeen of little avail, if the Indians had come ; but his chiefcomfort seemed to rest in the thought of selling his lifedearly. A short time before, a body of Indians had travelledpast in the night ; if they had been aware of the posta, ourblack friend and his four soldiers, would assuredly havebeen slaughtered. I did not any where meet a more civiland obliging man, than this negro ; it was therefore the morepainful to see that he would not sit down and eat with us.Aug. 1833. BAHIA Blanc. 89In the morning we sent for the horses very early, andstarted for another exhilarating gallop. We passed theCabeza del Busy, an old name given to the head of alarge marsh, which extends from Bahia Blanc. Here wechanged horses, and passed through some leagues of swampsand saltpetre marshes. Changing horses for the last time,we again began wading through the mud. My animal fell,and I was well soused in black mire — a very disagreeableaccident, when one does not possess a change of clothes.Some miles from the fort we met a man, who told us that agreat gun had been fired, which is a signal that Indians arenear. We immediately left the road, and followed the edgeof a marsh, which when chased offers the best mode of escape.We were glad to arrive within the walls, when we found allthe alarm was about nothing, for the Indians turned out tobe friendly ones, who wished to join General Rosas.Bahia Blanc scarcely deserves the name of a village. Afew houses and the barracks for the troops are enclosed by adeep ditch and fortified wall. The settlement is only of recentstanding (since 1828) ; and its growth has been one of trouble.The government of Buenos Ayres did not follow thewise example of the Spanish viceroys in purchasing the landfrom the Indians, as they did with the Rio Negro, but unjustlyoccupied it by force. Hence the need of the fortifications; hence the few houses and little cultivated landwithout the limits of the walls : even the cattle are not safefrom the attacks of the Indians beyond the boundaries ofthe plain, on which the fortress stands.The part of the harbour where the Beagle intended toanchor being distant twenty-five miles, I obtained from theCommandant a guide and horses, to take me to see whethershe had arrived. Leaving the plain of green turf, which followedthe course of the little brook, we soon entered on awide level waste, consisting either of sand, saline marshes, orbare mud. Some parts were clothed by low thickets, andothers with those succulent plants, which luxuriate only90 BAHIA Blanc. Au. 1833.■»•where salt abounds. Bad as the country was, ostriches,deer, caries, and armadilloes, were abundant. My guide toldme, that two months before he had a most narrow escapeof his life : he was out hunting, at no great distance from thispart of the country, with two other men, when they weresuddenly met by a party of Indians, who giving chase, soonovertook and killed his two friends. His own horses legswere also caught by the bolas ; but he jumped oiF, and withhis knife cut them free : while doing this he was obliged tododge round his horse, and received two severe woundsfrom their chuzos. Springing on the saddle, he managed, bya most wonderful exertion, just to keep ahead of the longspears of his pursuers, who followed him to within sight of thefort. From that time there was an order that no one shouldstray far from the settlement. I did not know of this whenI started, and was surprised to observe how earnestly myguide watched a deer, which appeared to have been frightenedfrom a distant quarter.We found the Beagle had not arrived, and consequently setout on our return, but the horses soon tiring, we were obUgedto bivouac on the plain. In the morning we had caught anarmadillo, which, although a most excellent dish whenroasted in its shell, did not make a very substantial breakfastand dinner for two hungry men. The ground at theplace where we stopped for the night, was incrusted with alayer of Glauber salt, and hence, of course, was withoutwater. Yet many of the smaller rodents managed to existeven here, and the tucutuco was making its odd littlegrunt beneath my head, during half the night. Our horseswere very poor ones, and in the morning they were soonexhausted from not having had any thing to drink, sothat we were obUged to walk. About noon the dogs killeda kid, which we roasted. I eat some of it, but it mademe intolerably thirsty. This was the more distressing asthe road, from some recent rain, was full of Httle puddlesof clear water, yet not a drop was drinkable. I had scarcelyAug. 1833. GLAUBER SALTS. 91-bbeen twenty hours without water, and only part of the timeunder a hot sun, yet the thirst rendered me very weak.How people survive two or three days under such circumstances,I cannot imagine : at the same time, I must confessthat my guide did not suffer at all, and was astonishedthat one day's deprivation should be so troublesometo me.I have several times alluded to the surface of the groundbeing incrusted with salt. This phenomenon is quite differentfrom that of the salinas, and much more extraordinary.In many parts of South America, wherever the climate ismoderately dry, these incrustations occur; but I have nowhereseen them so abundant as near Bahia Blanc. Thesalt here consists of a large proportion of sulphate of sodamixed with a very little of the common muriate. As longas the ground remains moist in these salitrales (as theSpaniards improperly call them, mistaking this substancefor saltpetre), nothing is to be seen but an extensive plaincomposed of a black, muddy soil, supporting scatteredtufts of succulent plants. I was therefore much surprised,after a week's hot weather, when I first saw square miles ofcountry, that I had previously ridden over in the formercondition, white, as if from a slight fall of snow which thewind had heaped up into partial drifts. This latter appearanceis chiefly due to the tendency which the salt has tocrystallize, like hoar-frost, round the blades of grass, stumpsof wood, or on the top of the broken ground, in heu of thebottoms of the puddles of water. The salinas, as a generalrule, occur in depressions on the more elevated plains ; thesalitrales, either on level tracts elevated a few feet abovethe level of the sea, and appearing as if lately inundated, oron alluvial land bordering rivers. In this latter case,although I am not absolutely certain, I have strong reasonsfor believing that the salt is often removed by the waters ofthe river, and is again reproduced. Several circumstancesincline me to think that the black, muddy soil, generates thesulphate of soda. The whole phenomenon is well worthy the92 BAHIA Blanc. Aug. 1833.attention of naturalists : what can be more singular thanthus to see square miles of country thinly crusted over withGlauber salt? It may be asked whether plants do notdecompose the muriate of soda ? but whence comes thesulphuric acid ? In Peru, nitrate of soda occurs in beds farthicker than these of the sulphate. Both cases are equallymysterious. I suspect that, as a general rule, the salts ofsoda are infinitely more common in South America thanthose of potash.Two days afterwards, I again rode to the harbour, but toa nearer part of it. When not far from our destination, mycompanion, the same man as before, spied three people huntingon horseback. He immediately dismounted, and watchingthem intently, said, " They don't ride like Christians, andnobody can leave the fortes' The three hunters joined company,and likewise dismounted from their horses. At lastone mounted again and rode over the hill out of sight. Mycompanion said, " We must now get on our horses : loadyour pistol ;" and he looked to his own sword. I asked,Are they Indians ?" — " Queen same? (who knows ?) if thereare no more than three, it does not signify." It then struckme, that the one man had gone over the hill to fetch the restof his tribe. I suggested this ; but all the answer I couldextort was, " Queen same ?" His head and eye never for aminute ceased scanning slowly the distant horizon. I thoughthis uncommon coolness too good a joke, and asked him whyhe did not return home. I was startled when he answered,We are returning, but in a line so as to pass near a swamp,into which we can gallop the horses as far as they can go,and then trust to our own legs ; so that there is no danger."I did not feel quite so confident of this, and wanted to increaseour pace. He said, " No, not until they do." Whenany little inequality concealed us, we galloped ; but when insightcontinued walking. At last we reached a valley, andturning to the left, galloped quickly to the foot of a hill, hegave me his horse to hold, made the dogs lie down, and thencrawled on his hands and knees to reconnoitre. He re-Auo^. 1833. Murillo. 93'tigained in this position for some time, and at last, burstingout in laughter, exclaimed, " Meres \" (women !) He knewthem to be the wife and sister-in-law of the major's son,hunting for ostrich's eggs. I have described this man's conduct,because he acted under the full impression that theywere Indians. As soon, however, as the absurd mistake wasfound out, he gave me a hundred reasons, why they couldnot have been Indians ; but all these were forgotten at thetime. We then rode on in peace and quietness to a lowpoint called Punta Alta, whence we could see nearly thewhole of the great harbour of Bahia Blanc.The wide expanse of water is choked up by numerousgreat mud-banks, which the inhabitants call Cangrejales, orrobberies, from the number of small crabs. The mud is sosoft, that it is impossible to walk over them, even for theshortest distance. Many of the banks have their surfaces coveredwith long rushes, the tops of which alone are visible athigh water. On one occasion, when in a boat, we were so entangledby these shallows, that we could hardly find our way.Nothing was visible, but the flat beds of mud : the day wasnot very clear, and there was much refraction, or as thesailors expressed it, " things loomed high." The only objectwithin our view, which was not level, was the horizon ;rushes looked like bushes unsupported in the air, and waterlike mud-banks, and mud-banks like water.We passed the night in Punta Alta, and I employed my-seein searching for fossil bones ; this point, being a perfectcatacomb for monsters of extinct races. The evening wasperfectly calm and clear ; the extreme monotony of the viewgave it an interest, even in the midst of mud-banks and gulls,sand-hillocks, and solitary vultures. In riding back in themorning, we came across a very fresh track of a Puma, butdid not succeed in finding him. We saw also a coupleof Zorillos, or skunks, — odious animals, which are far fromuncommon. In general appearance the Zorillo resemblesa polecat, but it is rather larger, and much thicker in proportion.Conscious of its power, it roams by day aljoutBAHIA Blanc.Aug. 1833.the open plain, and fears neither dog nor man. If a dogis urged to the attack, its courage is instantly checked bya few drops of the fetid oil, which brings on violent sicknessand running at the nose. Whatever is once pollutedby it, is for ever useless. Azara says the smell can beperceived at a league distant; more than once, when enteringthe harbour of Monte Video, the wind being offshore, we have perceived the odour on board the Beagle.Certain it is, that every animal most willingly makes roomfor the Zorillo.CHAPTER V.Bahia Blanc — Geology — Extinct quadrupeds, four Edentata, horse,ctenomys — Recent extinction — Longevity of species — Large animals donot require luxuriant vegetation — Southern Africa — Siberian fossils —Catalogue of extinct quadrupeds in South America — Two species ofOstrich, habits of — Tinochorus — Oven-bird — Armadillo — Venomoussnake, toad, lizard — Liberation of animals — Habits of sea-pen — Indianwars and massacres — Arrow-head, antiquarian relic.BAHIA Blanc.The Beagle arrived on the 24th of August, and a weekafterwards sailed for the Plata. With Captain Fitzroy'sconsent I was left behind, to travel by land to Buenos Ayres.I will here add some observations, which were made duringthis visit, and on a previous occasion, when the Beagle wasemployed in surveying the harbour. Not much can be madeout respecting the geology. At the distance of some milesinland, an escarpment of a great argillaceo-calcareous formationof rock extends. The space near the coast consists ofplains of hardened mud, and broad bands of sand-dunes,which present appearances, that can easily be accounted forbya rise of the land ; and of this phenomenon,* although toa trifling amount, we have other proofs.At Punta Alta, a low cuff, about twenty feet high, exposesa mass of partly consolidated shingle, irregularly interstrati-find with a reddish muddy clay, and containing numerousrecent shells. We may believe a similar accumulationwould now take place, on any point, where tides and waveswere opposed. In the gravel a considerable number ofbones were embedded. Mr. Owen, who has undertaken thedescription of these remains, has not yet examined them• A few leagues further south, near the Bay of San Bias, M. D'Orbignyfound great beds of recent shells elevated between 25 and 30 feet abovethe level of the sea.— Vol. ii., p. 43.gS BAHIA Blanc. Aug. 1833.with care ; but the following list may give some idea of theirnature : 1st, a tolerably perfect head of a megatherium, anda fragment and teeth of two others ; 2d, an animal of theorder Edentata, as large as a pony, and with great scratchingclaws ; 3d and 4th, two great Edentata related to themegatherium, and both fully as large as an ox or horse ; 5th,another equally large animal, closely allied or perhaps identicalwith the Toxodon (hereafter to be described), whichhad very flat grinding teeth, somewhat resembling thoseof a rodent ; 6th, a large piece of the tesselated covering likethat of the armadillo, but of gigantic size ; 7th, a tusk whichin its prismatic form, and in the disposition of the enamel,closely resembles that of the African boar ; it is probablethat it belonged to the same animal with the singular flatgrinders. Lastly, a tooth in the same state of decay with theothers : its broken condition does not allow Mr. Owen,without further comparison, to come to any definite conclusion; but the part that is perfect, resembles in every respectthe tooth of the common horse.* All these remains werefound embedded in a beach which is covered at spring tides ;and the space in which they were collected could not haveexceeded one hundred and fifty yards square. It is a remarkablecircumstance that so many different species shouldbe found together ; and it proves how numerous in kind theancient inhabitants of this country must have been.At the distance of about thirty miles, in another cliff ofred earth, I found several fragments of bones. Amongthem were the teeth of a rodent, much narrower, buteven larger than those of the Hydrochxrus capi/bara; theanimal which has been mentioned as exceeding in dimensionsevery existing member of its order. There wasWith respect to the remains of the last animal, as some doubtmay be entertained by others, respecting its origin ; it must be remarked,that it was fairly embedded in the gravel with the other bones ; andthat its state of decay was equal. To this circumstance it may be added,that the surrounding country is without fresh water, and is uninhabited,and that the settlement, itself only of five years standing, is twenty-fivemiles distant.Aug. 1833. FOSSIL QUADRUPEDS. 97also part of the head of a Ctenomys ; the species being differentfrom the Tucutuco, but with a close general resemblance.The remains at Punta Alta were associated, as beforeremarked, with shells of existing species. These have notas yet been examined with scrupulous care, but it may besafely asserted, that they are most closely similar to thespecies now living in the same bay : it is also very remarkable,that not only the species, but the proportional numbersof each kind, are nearly the same with those now castup on the pebble beaches. There are eleven marine species(some in an imperfect state), and one terrestrial. If I hadnot collected liAang specimens from the same bay, some ofthe fossils would have been thought extinct ; for Mr.Sowerbyby, who was kind enough to look at my collection,had not previously seen them. We may feel certain thatthe bones have not been washed out of an older formation,and embedded in a more recent one, because the remains ofone of the Edentata were lying in their proper relativeposition (and partly so in a second case) ; which could nothave happened, without the carcass had been washed to thespot where the skeleton is now entombed.We here have a strong confirmation of the remarkablelaw so often insisted on by Mr. Lyell, namely, that thelongevity of the species in the mammalia, is upon thewhole inferior to that of the testaceous'* When we proceedto the southern part of Patagonia, I shall have occasion todescribe the case of an extinct camel, from which the sameresult may be deduced.From the shells being littoral species (including oneterrestrial), and from the character of the deposit, we mayfeel absolutely certain that the remains were embedded in ashallow sea, not far from the coast. From the position ofthe skeleton being undisturbed, and likewise from the factthat full-grown repulse were attached to some of the bones,Principles of Geology, vol. iv., p. 40.VOL. Ill, a98 BAHIA Blanc. Aug. 1833.we know that the mass could not have been accumulated onthe beach itself. At the present time, part of the bed isdaily washed by the tide, while another part has been raiseda few feet above the level of the sea. Hence we may infer,that the elevation has here been trifling, since the periodwhen the mammalia, now extinct, were living. This conclusionis in harmony with several other considerations (suchas the recent character of the beds underlying the Pampasdeposit), but which I have not space in this work toenter on.From the general structure of the coast of this part ofSouth America, we are compelled to believe, that the changesof level have all (at least of late) been in one direction, andthat they have been very gradual. If, then, we look backto the period when these quadrupeds lived, the land probablystood at a level, less elevated only by a few fathomsthan at present. Therefore, its general configuration sincethat epoch cannot have been greatly modified ; a conclusionwhich certainly would be drawn from the close similarity inevery respect, between the shells now living in the bay (aswell as in the case of the one terrestrial species) with thosewhich formerly lived there.The surrounding country, as may have been gathered fromthis journal, is of a very desert character. Trees nowhereoccur, and only a few bushes, which are chiefly confined todepressions among the sand-hillocks, or to the borders of thesaline marshes. Here, then, is an apparent difficulty : wehave the strongest evidence that there has occurred no greatphysical change to modify the features of the country, yetin former days, numerous large animals were supported onthe plains now covered by a thin and scanty vegetation.That large animals require a luxuriant vegetation, has beena general assumption, which has passed from one work toanother. I do not hesitate, however, to say that it is completelyfalse ; and that it has vitiated the reasoning of geologists,on some points of great interest in the ancient historyof the world. The prejudice has probably been derivedAuff. 1833. FOSSIL QUADRUPEDS. 99"■&from India, and the Indian islands, where troops ofelephants, noble forests, and impenetrable jungles, areassociated together in every account. If, on the other hand,we refer to any work of travels through the southern partsof Africa, we shall find allusions in almost every page eitherto the desert character of the country, or to the numbersof large animals inhabiting it. The same thing is renderedevident by the many sketches which have been published ofvarious parts of the interior. When the Beagle was at CapeTown, I rode a few leagues into the country, which at leastwas sufficient to render that which I had read more fullyintelligible.Dr. Andrew Smith, who, at the head of his adventurousparty, has so lately succeeded in passing the Tropic ofCapricorn, informs me that, taking into consideration thewhole of the southern part of Africa, there can be no doubt ofits being sterile country. On the southern and south-easterncoasts there are some fine forests, but with these exceptions,the traveller may pass, for days together, through openplains, covered by a poor and scanty vegetation. It is difficultto convey any accurate idea of degrees of comparativefertility; but it may be safely said, that the amount ofvegetation supported at any one time* by Great Britain,exceeds, perhaps even tenfold, the quantity on an eqi;alarea, in the interior parts of Southern Africa. The fact thatbullock-waggons can travel in any direction, excepting nearthe coast, without more than occasionally half an hour'sdelay, gives, perhaps, a more definite notion of its scantiness.Now if we look to the animals inhabiting these wideplains, we shall find their numbers extraordinarily great,and their bulk immense. We must enumerate the elephant,three species of rhinoceros, and as Dr. Smith is convincedtwo others also, the hippopotamus, giraffe, the bos coffer — aslarge as a full-grown bull, and the elan — but little less, twoI mean by this to exclude the total amount, which may have beensuccessively produced and consumed during a given period.H 2100 BAHIA Blanc. Aug. 1833.zebras, and the quaccha, two gnus, and several antelopeseven larger than these latter animals. It may be supposedthat although the species are numerous, the individualsof each kind are few. By the kindness of Dr. Smith, I amenabled to show that the case is very different. Heinforms me, that in lat. 24°, in one day's march with thebullock-waggons, he saw, without wandering to any greatdistance on either side, between one hundred and one hundredand fifty rhinoceroses, which belonged to three species.That the same day he saw several herds of giraffes, amountingtogether to nearly a hundred ; and that, although noelephant was observed, yet they are found in this district.At the distance of a little more than one hour's march fromtheir place of encampment on the previous night, his partyactually killed at one spot eight hippopotamus, and sawmany more. In this same river there were likewise crocodiles.Of course it was a case quite extraordinary, to seeso many great animals crowded together, but it evidentlyproves that they must exist in great numbers. Dr. Smithdescribes the country passed through that day, as "beingthinly covered with grass, and bushes about four feet high,and still more thinly with mimosa-trees.'^ The Waggonswere not prevented traveling in a nearly direct line.Besides these large animals, everj'^ one the least acquainted■wath the natural history of the Cape, has read of the herdsof antelopes, which can be compared only to flocks ofmigratory birds. The numbers indeed of the lion,* panther,and hyaena, and the multitude of birds of prey, plainly tellof the abundance of the smaller quadrupeds. As Dr. Smithremarked to me, the carnage each day in Southern Africamust indeed be terrific ! I confess it is truly surprising, howsuch a number of animals can find support in a country producingso little food. The larger quadrupeds no doubt roamover vide extents in search of it ; and their food chiefly contr.Smith mentioned to me, that one evening seven lions werecounted at one time walking on the plain, round the encampment.Aus:. 1833. FOSSIL QUADRUPEDS. 101''ssits of underwood, which probably contains much nutrimentin a small bulk. Dr. Smith also informs me that thevegetation has a rapid growth ; no sooner is a part consumed,than its place is supplied by a fresh stock. I apprehend,however, that our ideas respecting the quantity necessaryfor the support of large quadrupeds are exaggerated.It should have been remembered that the camel, an animalof no mean bulk, has always been considered as the emblemof the desert.The belief that where large quadrupeds exist, the vegetationmust necessarily be luxuriant, is the more remarkable,because the converse is far from true. Mr. Purcellobserved to me that when entering Brazil, nothing struckhim more forcibly than the splendour of the South Americanvegetation, contrasted with that of South Africa, togetherwith the absence of all large quadrupeds. In his Travels,*he has suggested that the comparison of the respectiveweights (if there were sufficient data) of an equal numberof the largest herbivorous quadrupeds of each country wouldbe extremely curious. If we take on the one side theelephants hippopotamus, giraffe, bos coffer, elan, certainlythree species of rhinoceros, and probably five ; and on theTravels in the interior of South Africa, vol. ii., p. 207.f The elephant which was killed at Exeter Change, was estimated(being partly weighed) at five tons and a half. The elephant actress, as Iwas informed, weighed one ton less ; so that we may take five as the-averageof a full-grown elephant. I was told at the Surrey Gardens, that ahippopotamus which was sent to England cut up into pieces, was estimatedat three tons and a half; we will call it three. From these premiseswe may give three tons and a half to each of the five rhinoceroses ; perhapsa ton to the giraffe, and half to the bos coffer as well as the elan,(a large ox weighs from 1200 to 1500 pounds). This will give an average(from the above conjectures) of 2.7 of a ton for the ten largest herbivorousanimals of Southern Africa. In South America, allowing 1200 poundsfor the two tapirs together, 550 for the guanaco and vicuna, 500 for threedeer, 300 for capybara, peccari, and a monkey, we shall have an average of250 pounds, which I believe is overstating the result. The ratio willtherefore be, as 6048 to 250, for the ten largest animals from the twcvcountries.102 BAHIA BLANC A. AuST. 1833&•other side, two tapirs, the guanaco, three deer, the vicuna,peccari, capybara (after which we must choose from themonkeys to complete the number), and then place these twogroups alongside each other, it is not easy to conceiveranks more disproportionate. After the above facts, we arecompelled to conclude, against anterior probability,* thatamong the mammalia there exists no close relation betweenthe hulk of the species, and the quantity of the vegetation,in the countries they inhabit.With regard to the number of large quadrupeds, therecertainly exists no quarter of the globe which will bear comparisonwith Southern Africa. After the different statementswhich have been given, the extremely desert character of thatregion vnW. not be disputed. In the European division of theworld, we must look back to the tertiary epochs, to find acondition of things among the mammalia resembling thatwhich is now found at the Cape of Good Hope. Thattertiary epoch, which we are apt to consider as abounding toan astonishing degree with large animals, because we find theremains of many ages accumulated at certain spots, couldboast of but few more of the large quadrupeds, than SouthernAfrica does at present. If we speculate on the condition ofthe vegetation during that epoch, we are at least bound so farto consider existing analogies, as not to urge as absolutelynecessary a luxuriant vegetation, when we see a state ofthings so totally different in the region to which we refer.We know that the extreme regions of North America,If we suppose the case of the discovery of a skeleton of a Greenlandwhale in a fossil state, not a single cetaceous animal being known to exist,what naturalist would even conjecture on the possibility of a carcassso gigantic, being supported on the minute Crustacea and mollusca,living in the frozen seas of the extreme North ?f See Zoological Remarks to Capt. Back's Expedition, by Dr. Richardson.He says, " The subsoil north of latitude 56° is perpetually frozen,the thaw on the coast not penetrating above three feet, and at Bear Lake,in latitude 64°, not more than twenty inches. The frozen substratumdoes not of itself destroy vegetation, for forests flourish on the surface, ata distance from the coast."IAug. 1833. FOSSIL QUADRUPEDS. 103many degrees beyond the limit where the ground at thedepth of a few feet remains perpetually congealed, arecovered by forests of large and tall trees. In a likemanner, in Siberia, we have woods of birch, fir, aspen, andlarch, growing in a latitude* (64°), where the mean temperatureof the air falls below the freezing point, and wherethe earth is so completely frozen, that the carcass of ananimal embedded in it is perfectly preserved. With thesefacts we must grant, as far as quantity alone of vegetation isconcerned, that the great quadrupeds of the later tertiaryepochs might, in most parts of Northern Europe and Asia,have lived on the spots where their remains are now found.I do not here speak of the kind of vegetation necessary fortheir support ; because, as there is evidence of physicalchanges, and as the animals have become extinct, so maywe suppose that the species of plants have likewise beenchanged.These remarks directly bear on the case of the Siberiananimals preserved in ice. The firm conviction of thenecessity of a vegetation, possessing a character of tropicalluxuriance, to support such large animals, and the impossibilityof reconciling this With the proximity of perpetualcongelation, was one chief cause of the several theories ofsudden revolutions of climate, and of overwhelming catastrophes,which were invented to account for their entombment.I am far from supposing that the climate has notchanged since the period when those animals lived, which nowlie buried in the ice. At present I only wish to show, thatas far as quantity of food alone is concerned, the ancient rhinocerosesmight have roamed over the steppes of centralSiberia (the northern parts probably being under water)even in their present condition, as well as the living rhi-See Humboldt Fragments Antiques, p. 386 : Barton's Geographyof Plants : and Malte Brun. In the latter work it is said, that the limitof the growth of trees in Siberia may be drawn under the parallelof 70°.104 BAHIA Blanc. Aug. 1833.noceroses and elephants over the Karros of SouthernAfrica.After our long digression, if we return to the case of thefossil animals at Bahia Blanc, there is a difficulty from ournot knowing on what food the great Edentata probablylived. If on insects and larvae, like their nearest representativesthe armadilloes and ant eaters, there is anend to all conjecture. But as vegetation is the first sourceof ife in every part of the world, I think we may safelyconclude that the country around Bahia Blanc, with a verylittle increase of fertility, would support large animals. Theplains of the Rio Negro, thickly scattered over with thornybushes, I do not doubt would supply sufficient food equallywell with the Karros of Africa. As there is evidence of aphysical change to a small amount, so may we allow it to beprobable that the productiveness of the soil has decreased inan equally small degree. With this concession I apprehendevery difficulty is removed. On the other hand, if we imaginea luxuriant vegetation to be necessary for the support ofthese animals, we become involved in a series of contradictionsand improbabilities.As the notices of the remains of several quadrupeds, whichI discovered in South America, are scattered in differentparts of this volume, I will here give a catalogue of them.After having enlarged on the diminutive size of the presentraces, it may be of interest to see that formerly a verydifferent order of things prevailed. First, the megatherium,and the four or five other large edentata, alreadyalluded to; 6th, an immense mastodon, which must haveabounded over the whole country ; 7th, the horse (I do notnow refer to the broken tooth at Bahia Blanc, but to morecertain evidence) ; 8th, the toxodon, an extraordinary animalas large as a hippopotamus ; 9th, a fragment of the head ofan animal larger than a horse, and of a very singular character;10th, 11th, and 12th, parts of rodents— one of considerablesize ; lastly, a llama or guanaco, fully as large asthe camel. All these animals coexisted during an epochAug, 1833. HABITS OF OSTRICH. 105which geologically speaking is so recent, that it may beconsidered as only just gone by. These remains have beenpresented to the College of Surgeons, where they are nowin the hands of those best qualified to appreciate whatevervalue they may possess.I will now give an account of the habits of some of themore interesting birds, which are common on these wildplains ; and first of the Struthio Rhea, or South Americanostrich. This bird is well known to abound over the plainsof Northern Patagonia, and the united provinces of LaPlata. It has not crossed the Cordillera ; but I have seen itwithin the first range of mountains on the Uspallata plain,elevated between six and seven thousand feet. The ordinaryhabits of the ostrich are familiar to every one. Theyfeed on vegetable matter ; such as roots and grass ; but atBahia Blanc, I have repeatedly seen three or four comedownat low water to the extensive mud-banks which arethen dry, for the sake, as the Gauchos say, of catching smallfish. Although the ostrich in its habits is so shy, wary, andsolitary, and although so fleet ifi its pace, it falls a prey,without much difficulty, to the Indian or Gaucho armed withthe bolas. When several horsemen appear in a semicircle,it becomes confounded, and does not know which way toescape. They generally prefer running against the wind;yet at the first start they expand their wings, and like a vesselmake all sail. On one fine hot day I saw several ostriches entera bed of tall rushes, where they squatted concealed, till quiteclosely approached. It is not generally known that ostrichesreadily take to the water. Mr. King informs me that at theBay of San Bias, and at Port Vales in Patagonia, he sawthese birds swimming several times from island to island.They ran into the water both when driven down to a point,and likewise of their own accord when not frightened : thedistance crossed was about 200 yards. When swimming, verylittle of their bodies appear above water, and their necks areextended a little forward : their progress is slow. On twooccasions, I saw some ostriches swimming across the Santa106 BAHIA BLANC A. Aug. 1833.Cruz river, where its course was about four hundred yardswide, and the stream rapid. Captain Sturt, when descendingthe Murrumbidgee, in AustraUa, saw two emus in the act ofswimming.The inhabitants who hve in the country readily distinguish,even at a distance, the cock bird from the hen. The formeris larger and darker-coloured,* and has a bigger head. Theostrich, I believe the cock, emits a singular deep-toned, hissingnote. When first I heard it, standing in the midst ofsome sand-hillocks, T thought it was made by some wildbeast, for it is a sound that one cannot tell whence it comes,or from how far distant. When we were at Bahia Blancin the months of September and October, the eggs, in extraordinarynumbers, were found aU over the country. Theyeither lie scattered single, in which case they are neverhatched, and are called by the Spaniards, huachos ; or theyare collected together into a shallow excavation, which formsthe nest. Out of the four nests which I saw, three containedtwenty-two eggs each, and the fourth twenty-seven.In one day's hunting on horseback sixty-four eggs werefound ; forty-four of these were in two nests, and theremaining twenty scattered huachos. The Gauchos unanimouslyaffirm, and there is no reason to doubt their statement,that the male bird alone hatches the eggs, and forsome time afterwards accompanies the young. The cockwhen on the nest lies very close ; I have myself almost riddenover one. It is asserted that at such times they are occasionallyfierce, and even dangerous, and that they have beenknown to attack a man on horseback, trying to kick and leapon him. My informer pointed out to me an old man, whomhe had seen much terrified by one chasing him. I observein Butcher's travels in SouthAfrica, that he remarks, 'behavingkilled a male ostrich, and the feathers being dirty, it was saidby the Hottentots to be a nest birds' I understand that theA Gaucho assured me, that he had once seen a snow-white, or Albinovariety, and that it was a most beautiful bird.Aug. 1833. HABITS OF OSTRICH. 107male emu, in the Zoological Garden, takes charge of thenest : this habit, therefore, is common to the family.The Gauchos unanimously affirm that several females layin one nest. I have been positively told, that four or fivehen birds have been seen to go, in the middle of the day, oneafter the other, to the same nest. I may add, also, that it isbelieved in Africa, that two females lay in one nest.* Althoughthis habit at first appears very strange, I think thecause may be explained in a simple manner. The numberof eggs in the nest varies from twenty to forty, and even tofifty; and according to Azara to seventy or eighty. Nowalthough it is most probable, from the number of eggs foundin one district being so extraordinarily great, in proportion tothat of the parent birds, and likewise from the state of theovarium of the hen, that she may in the course of the seasonlay a large number, yet the time required must be very long.Azara states that a female in a state of domestication laidseventeen eggs, each at the interval of three days one fromanother. If the hen were obliged to hatch her own eggs,before the last was laid the first probably would beaddled; but if each laid a few eggs at successive periods,in different nests, and several hens, as is stated to bethecase, combined together, then the eggs in one collectionwould be nearly of the same age. If the number of eggsin one of these nests is, as I believe, not greater on anaverage than the number laid by one female in the season,then there must be as many nests as females, and eachcock bird will have its fair share of the labour of incubation; and that dinging a period when the females could notsit, on account of not having finished laying. I have beforementioned the great numbers of huachos, or scattered eggs ;so that in one day^s hunting the third part were found in thisstate. It appears odd that so many should be wasted. Doesit not arise from the difficulty of several females associatingtogether, and persuading an old cock to undertake the officeBurchell's Travels, vol. i., p. 280. f Azara, vol. iv., p. 173.108 BAHIA Blanc. Aug. 1833.of incubation ? It is evident that there must at first be somedegree of association, between at least two females ; otherwisethe eggs would remain scattered over the wide plains, atdistances far too great to allow of the male collecting theminto one nest. Some have believed that the scattered eggswere deposited for the young birds to feed on. This canhardly be the case in America, because the huachos, althoughoftentimes found addled and putrid, are generally whole.When at the Rio Negro, in Northern Patagonia, I repeatedlyheard the Gauchos talking of a very rare bird whichthey called Vestrum Petite. They described it as being lessthan the common ostrich (which is there abundant), butwith a very close general resemblance. They said its colourwas dark and mottled, and that its legs were shorter, andfeathered lower down than those of the common ostrich. Itis more easily caught by the bolas than the other species.The few inhabitants who had seen both kinds, affirmed theycould distinguish them apart from a long distance. The eggsof the small species appeared, however, more generallyknown ; and it was remarked, with surprise, that they werevery little less than those of the Rhea, but of a slightly differentform, and with a tinge of pale blue. Some eggs,picked up on the plains of Patagonia, agree pretty well withthis description, and I do not doubt are those of the Petite.This species occurs most rarely on the plains bordering theRio Negro ; but about a degree and a half further south theyare tolerably abundant. One Gaucho, however, said he distinctlyrecollected having seen one, many years before, nearthe mouth of the Rio Colorado, which is to the north of theRio Negro. They are said to prefer the plains near the sea.When at Port Desire, in Patagonia (lat. 48°), Mr. Martensshot an ostrich ; and I looked at it, forgetting at the moment,in the most unaccountable manner, the whole subject of thePetites, and thought it was a two-third grown one of thecommon sort. The bird was cooked and eaten before mymemory returned. Fortunately the head, neck, legs, wings,many of the larger feathers, and a large part of the skin, hadAug. 1833. TWO KINDS OF OSTRICH. 109been preserved. From these a very nearly perfect specimenhas been put together, and is now exhibited in the museumof the Zoological Society. Mr. Gould, who in describingthis new species did me the honour of calling it after myname, states, that besides the smaller size and diiferentcolour of the plumage, the beak is of considerably less proportionaldimensions than in the common Rhea ; that thetarsi are covered with differently-shaped scales, and that theyare feathered six inches beneath the knee. In this latterrespect, and in the broader feathers of the wing, this birdperhaps shows more affinity to the gallinaceous family thanany other of the Struthionidce.Among the Patagonia Indians in the Strait of Magellan,we found a half Indian, who had lived some years with thetribe, but had been born in the northern provinces. I askedhim if he had ever heard of the Vestrum Petite ? Heanswered by saying, "Why there are none others in thesesouthern countries." He informed me that the number ofeggs in the nest of the petite is considerably less than withthe other kind, namely, not more than fifteen on an average ;but he asserted that more than one female deposited them.At Santa Cruz we saw several of these birds. They wereexcessively wary : I think they could see a person approachingwhen he was so far off as not to distinguish the ostrich.In ascending the river few were seen ; but in our quiet andrapid descent, many, in pairs and by fours or fives, were observed.It was remarked, and I think with truth, that thisbird did not expand its wings, when first starting at fullspeed, after the manner of the northern kind. The fact ofthese ostriches Stemming across the river has been mentioned.In conclusion, I may repeat that the Struthio Rheainhabits the country of La Plata as far as a little south of theRio Negro, in lat. 41°, and that the petite takes its place inSouthern Patagonia; the part about the Rio Negro beingneutral territory. Wallis saw ostriches at Batchelor's river(lat. 53° 54'), in the Strait of Magellan, which must be theextreme southern possible range of the petite. M. D'Or-110 BAHIA Blanc. . Aug. 1833.bigny-when at the Rio Negro, made great exertions to procurethis bird, but never had the good fortune to succeed.He mentions it in his Travels,* and proposes (in case,I presume, of a specimen being obtained) to call it lineapennant : a fuller notice was given long before in Dobriz-liofFer's Account of the Abiponesf (ad. 1749). He says,"You must know, moreover, that Emus differ in sizeand habits in different tracts of land ; for those that inhabitthe plains of Buenos Ayres and Truman are larger, andhave black, white, and gray feathers ; those near to theStrait of Magellan are smaller and more beautiful, for theirwhite feathers are tipped with black at the extremity, andtheir black ones in like manner terminate in white."A very singular little bird, lately described by St. Hilaireand Lesson under the name of Tiiiochorus Eschscliolizii, ishere common. In its habits, general appearance, and structure,it nearly equally partakes of the character of aquail and a snipe. Yet these two birds are widely contrastedin the form of their beaks, wings, and legs. TheTinochorus is found in the whole of southern SouthAmerica, wherever there are sterile plains, or open drypasture-land. We saw it as far south as the inlandplains of Patagonia at Santa Cruz, in lat. 50°. On thewestern side of the Cordillera near Concepcion, where theforest land changes into an open country, this bird is found :from that point throughout Chile, as far as Copiapopo, itfrequents the most desolate places, where scarcely anotherliving creature can exist. They are found either in pairsor small flocks of five or six ; but near the Sierra Ventana Isaw as many as thirty or forty together. Upon beingVol. ii., p. 76. — When at the Rio Negro, we heard much of the indefatigablelabours of this naturalist. M. D'Alcide D'Orbigny, during theyears 1826 to 1833, traversed several large portions of South America,and has made a collection, and is now publishing the results on a scale ofmagnificence, which at once places him in the list of American travellerssecond only to Humboldt.f Vol. i. (English translation), p. 314.Aug. 1833. ORNITHOLOGY. Illapproached they squat close, and then are very difficult tobe distinguished ; so that they often rise quite unexpectedly.When feeding they walk rather slowly, with their legs wideapart. They dust themselves in roads and sandy places.They frequent particular spots, and may be found thereday after day. Alien a pair are together, if one is shot theother seldom rises ; for these birds, like partridges, only takewing in a flock. In all these respects, in the musculargizzard adapted for vegetable food, in the arched beak andfleshy nostrils, short legs and form of foot, the Tinochorushas a close affinity with quails. But directly the bird isseen flying, one's opinion is changed; the long, pointedwings, so different from those in the gallinaceous order, theirregular manner of flight, and plaintive cry uttered at themoment of rising, recal the idea of a snipe. The sportsmenof the Beagle unanimously called it the short billed snipe.To this genus, or rather to that of the sandpiper, it approaches,as Mr. Gould informs me, in the shape of itswing, the length of the scapulars, the form of the tail, whichclosely resembles that of Tringa hypoUucos, and in thegeneral colour of the plumage. The male bird, however,has a black mark on its breast, in the form of a yoke, whichmay be compared to the horseshoe on the breast of the Englishpartridge. The nest is said to be placed on the bordersof lakes, although the bird itseK is an inhabitant of theparched desert.The Tinochorus is closely related to some other SouthAmerican birds. Two species of the genus Attain, are inalmost every respect ptarmigans in their habits ; one inTierra del Fuego, above the limits of forest land ; the otherjust beneath the snow line on the Cordillera of CentralChile. A bird of another closely-allied genus, Chronic alba,which solitary species was long thought to form a family byitself, is an inhabitant of the antarctic regions ; it feeds onsea-weed and shells on the tidal rocks. Although not webfooted,from some unaccountable taste it is frequently metwith far out at sea. This small family of lairds is one of112 BAHIA BLANGA. Auff. 1833those which, from its varied relations, although at presentoffering only difficulties to the systematic naturalist, ultimatelymay assist in revealing the grand scheme, common tothe present and past ages, on which organized beings havebeen created.I may also briefly notice the genus Furnarius. It containsseveral species, aU small birds, living on the ground, andinhabiting open, dry countries. In structure they cannotbe compared to any European form. Ornithologists havegenerally included them among the creepers, although opposedto that family in every habit. The best known speciesis the common oven-bird of La Plata, the Castra or house-makerof the Spaniards, and Firearms ruins of Viell. Thenest, whence it takes its name, is placed in the most exposedsituations, as on the top of a post, a bare rock, or on acactus. It is composed of mud and bits of straw, and hasstrong thick walls : in shape it precisely resembles an oven,or depressed beehive. The opening is large and arched, anddirectly in front, within the nest, there is a partition, whichreaches nearly to the roof, thus forming a passage or antechamberto the true nest.Another and smaller species of Furnarius, something likea lark in appearance, resembles the oven-bird in manypoints, as in the general reddish tint of its plumage, apeculiar shrill reiterated cry, an odd manner of running bystarts, &c. From its affinity, the Spaniards call it Casarita(or little householder), although its nidification is quitedifferent. The Casarita builds its nest at the bottom of anarrow cylindrical hole, which is said to extend horizontallyto nearly six feet under ground. Several of the countrypeople told me, that when boys they had attempted to digout the nest, but had scarcely ever succeeded in getting tothe end. The bird chooses any low bank of firm sandy soilby the side of a road or stream. Here (at Bahia Blanc)the walls are built of hardened mud ; and I noticed that one,which enclosed a courtyard where I lodged, was penetratedby round holes in a score of places. On asking the ownerAuff. 1833. Armadillo. 113'athe cause of this, he bitterly complained of the little casarita,several of which I afterwards observed at work. It israther curious, that although they were constantly flittingover the low wall, they must be quite incapable of gainingan idea of thickness even after the shortest circuitousroute, for otherwise they would not have made so many vainattempts, I do not doubt that each bird, as often as it cameto daylight on the opposite side, was greatly surprised atthe marvellous fact.I have already mentioned nearly aU the mammalia commonin this country. Of armadillo three species occur, namely,the Dasypus minutus or pick, the Villosus or pluto, andthe apart. The first extends as far south as lat. 50°, whichis about ten degrees further than any other kind. Afourth species, the Multa, only extends as far south asthe Sierra Tapalguen, lat. 37° 30', which is north of BahiaBlanc. The four species have nearly similar habits ; thepluto, however, is nocturnal, while the others wander byday over the open plains, feeding on beetles, larvae, roots,and even small snakes. The apart, commonly called mataco,is remarkable by having only three moveable bands ; the restof its tesselated covering being nearly inflexible. It has thepower of rolling itself into a perfect sphere, like one kind ofEnglish woodlouse. In this state it is safe from the attackof dogs ; for the dog not being able to take the whole in itsmouth, tries to bite one side, and the ball slips away. Thesmooth hard covering of the mataco offers a better defencethan the sharp spines of the hedgehog. The pitchy prefersa very dry soil, and the sand-dunes near the coast, where formany months it can never taste water, is its favourite resort.In the course of a day's ride, near Bahia Blanc, several weregenerally met with. The instant one was perceived, it wasnecessary in order to catch it, almost to tumble off one'shorse ; for if the soil was soft, the animal burrowed so quickly,that its hinder quarters had almost disappeared before onecould alight. The pitchy likewise often tries to escapenotice, by squatting close to the ground. It appears almostVOL. III. I114 BAHIA Blanc. Aug. 1833.a pity to kill such nice little animals, for as a Gaucho said,while sharpening his knife on the back of one, " Son tanmansos" (they are so quiet).Of reptiles there are many kinds : one snake (a Trigono-cephalic, or more properly a Copies), from the size of thepoison channel in its fangs, must be very deadly. Cuvier, inopposition to some other naturalists, makes this a sub-genusof the rattlesnake, and intermediate between it and the viper.In confirmation of this opinion, I observed a fact, whichappears to me very curious and instructive, as showing howevery character, even though it may be in some degree independentof structure, has a tendency to vary by slow degrees.The extremity of the tail of this snake is terminated by apoint, which is very slightly enlarged ; and as the animalglided along, it constantly vibrated the last inch ; and thispart striking against the dry grass and brushwood, produceda rattling noise, which could be distinctly heard at the distanceof six feet. As often as the animal was irritated orsurprised, its tail was shaken ; and the vibrations were extremelyrapid. Even as long as the body retained its irritability,a tendency to this habitual movement was evident.This Trigonocephalus has, therefore, in some respects thestructure of Vipers, with the habits of a Crotalus ; the noise,however, being produced by a simpler device. The expressionof this snake's face was hideous and fierce ; the pupilconsisted of a vertical slit in a mottled and coppery iris ; thejaws were broad at the base, and the nose terminated in atriangular projection. I do not think I ever saw any thingmore ugly, excepting, perhaps, in some of the vampire bats.I imagine this repulsive aspect originates from the featuresbeing placed in positions, with respect to each other, somewhatproportional to those of the human face ; and thus weobtain a scale of beauty.Amongst the Batrachian reptiles, I found only one littletoad, which was most singular from its colour. If we imagine,first, that it had been steeped in the blackest ink, andthen when dry, allowed to crawl over a board, freshly paintedAug. 1833. REPTILES. 115with the brightest vermilion, so as to colour the soles ofits feet and parts of its stomach, a good idea of its appearancewill be gained. If it is an unnamed species, surely itought to be called diabolical, for it is a fit toad to preach inthe ear of Eve. Instead of being nocturnal in its habits,as other toads are, and living in damp obscure recesses, itcrawls during the heat of the day about the dry sand-hillocksand arid plains, where not a single drop of water can befound. It must necessarily depend on the dew for itsmoisture; and this probably is absorbed by the skin, for it isknown, that these reptiles possess great powers of cutaneousabsorption. At Maldonado, I found one in a situationnearly as dry as at Bahia Blanc, and thinking to give it a greattreat, carried it to a pool of water ; not only was the littleanimal unable to swim, but, I think, without help Avould soonhave been drowned.Of lizards there were many kinds, but only one remarkable,from its habits. It lives on the bare sand near the seacoast,and from its mottled colour, the brownish scales beingspeckled with white, yellowish red, and dirty blue, can hardlybe distinguished from the surrounding surface. When frightenedit attempts to avoid discovery by feigning death, withoutstretched legs, depressed body, and closed eyes : if furthermolested, it buries itself with great quickness in the loosesand. This lizard, from its flattened body and short legs,cannot run quickly. It belongs to the genus Ophryessa.I will here add a few remarks on the liberation of animalsin this part of South America. When we first arrivedat Bahia Blanc, September 7th, 1832, we thought naturehad granted scarcely a living creature to this sandy and drycountry. By digging, however, in the ground, several insects,large spiders, and lizards were found in a half torpidstate. On the 15th, a few animals began to appear, and bythe 18th (three days from the equinox), every thing announcedthe commencement of spring. The plains wereornamented by the flowers of a pink wood sorrel, Avild peas,oenotherse, and geraniums ; and the birds began to lay theirI 2116 BAHIA Blanc. Aug. 1833.eggs. Numerous Lamellicorn and Heterogeneous insects,the latter remarkable for their deeply sculptured bodies, wereslowly cramming about ; while the Saurian tribe, the constantinhabitants of a sandy soil, darted in every direction. Duringthe first eleven days, whilst nature was dormant, themean temperature taken from observations made every twohours on board the Beagle, was 51°; and in the middle ofthe day the thermometer seldom ranged above 55°. On theeleven succeeding days, in which all living things became soanimated, the mean was 58°, and the range in the middle ofthe day between sixty and seventy. Here then an increaseof seven degrees in mean temperature, but a greater one ofextreme heat, was sufficient to awake the functions of life.At Monte Video, from which we had just before sailed, inthe twenty-three days included between the 26th of Judyand the 19th of August, the mean temperature from 276observations was 58°.4 ; the mean hottest day being 65°.5,and the coldest 46°. The lowest point to which the thermometerfell was 41°.5, and occasionally in the middle of theday it rose to 69° or 70°. Yet with this elevated temperature,almost every beetle, several genera of spiders, snails,and land shells, toads, and lizards were all lying torpid beneathstones. But we have seen that at Bahia Blanc,which is four degrees to the southward, and therefore with aclimate only a very little colder, this same temperature witha rather less extreme heat, was sufficient to awake all orders ofanimated beings. This shows how nicely the required degree ofstimulus is adapted to the general climate of the place, andhow little it depends on absolute temperature. It is wellknown that within the tropics, the liberation, or more properlyestimation, of animals is governed by the times ofdrought. Near Rio de Janeiro, I was at first surprised toobserve, that, a few days after some little depressions hadbeen changed into pools of water by the rain, they werepeopled by numerous full-grown shells and beetles. Humboldthas related the strange accident of a hovel having beenerected over a spot, where a young crocodile lay buried inAuff. 1833. SEA-PEN. 117the hardened mud. He adds "The Indians often find enormousboas ; which they call Uji, or water serpents in thesame lethargic state. To reanimate them, they must beirritated or wetted with water."I will only mention one other animal, a zoophyte alliedto Virgularia,* a kind of sea-pen. It consists of a thin,straight, fleshy stem, with alternate rows of polypi on eachside, and surrounding an elastic stony axis. It varies inlength from eight inches to two feet. The stem at oneextremity is truncate, but at the other is terminated by avermiform fleshy appendage, which is separated into twocompartments ; and in these, small, yellow, spherical ova arecontained. The stony axis which gives strength to the stem,may be traced at this extremity into a mere vessel filed withgranular matter. This undeveloped portion is enclosed in atransparent, elastic, irritable bag, containing a fluid in whicha very distinct circulation of particles could be seen. This bagfloats in one of the compartments of the fleshy terminal appendage.At low water hundreds of these zoophytes might beseen, projecting like stubble, with the truncate end upwards,a few inches above the surface of the muddy sand. Whentouched or pulled, they drew themselves in, suddenly andwith force, so as nearly or quite to disappear. By thisaction, the highly elastic axis must be bent at the lowerextremity, where it is naturally slightly curved; and Iimagine it is by this elasticity that the zoophyte is enabledto rise again through the mud. Each polypus, thoughclosely united to its brethren, has a distinct mouth, body, andtentacula. Of these polypi, in a large specimen, there must bemany thousands ; yet we see that they act by one movement ;that they have one central axis connected with a system ofobscure circulation ; and that the ova are produced in anorgan distinct from the separate individuals. Well may onebe allowed to ask, what is an individual ? I will add only oneother observation on this zoophyte. The cavities leadingfrom the fleshy compartments of the extremity, were filledI believe Virgularia Patagonica of D'Orbigny.118 BAHIA Blanc. Aug. 1833.with a yellow pulpy matter, which, examined under a microscope,presented an extraordinary appearance. The mass consistedof rounded, semi-transparent, irregular grains, aggregatedtogether into particles of various sizes. All such particles,and the separate grains, possessed the power of rapid movement; generally revolving around different axes, but sometimesprogressive. The movement was visible with a veryweak power, but with the highest its cause could not beperceived. It was very different from the circulation of thefluid in the elastic bag, containing the thin extremity of theaxis. On other occasions, when dissecting small marineanimals beneath the microscope, I have seen particles of pulpymatter, some of large size, immediately they were disengaged,commence revolving. I have imagined, I know not withhow much truth, that this grantly-pulpy matter was inprocess of being converted into ova. Certainly in thiszoophyte such appeared to be the case.During my stay at Bahia Blanc, whUe waiting for theBeagle, the place was in a constant state of excitement, fromrumours of wars and victories, between the troops of Rosasand the wild Indians. One day an account came, that asmall party forming one of the posts on the line to BuenosAyres, had been found all murdered. The next day, threehundred men arrived from the Colorado, under the commandof Commandant Miranda. A large portion of thesemen were Indians {mansos, or tame), belonging to the tribeof the Cacique Bernantio. They passed the night here ; andit was impossible to conceive any thing more wild andsavage than the scene of their bivouac. Some drank tiUthey were intoxicated ; others swallowed the steaming bloodof the cattle slaughtered for their suppers, and then, beingsick from drunkenness, they cast it up again, and were besmearedwith filth and gore.Nam simul expletus darius, vinous sepultusService inflexam posuit, jacuitque per antrumImmense, sachem eructans, ac frusta crueltyPer somnus commit nero.Aus. 1833, INDIANS. 119■^oIn the morning they started for the scene of the murder,with orders to follow the " castro' or track, even if it ledthem to Chile. We subsequently heard that the wild Indianshad escaped into the great Pampas, and from somecause the track had been missed. One glance at the castrotells these people a whole history. Supposing they examinethe track of a thousand horses, they will soon guessby seeing how many have cantered the number of men ; bythe depth of the other impressions, whether any horses wereloaded with cargoes; by the irregularity of the footsteps,how far tired ; by the manner in which the food has beencooked, whether the pursued travelled in haste; by thegeneral appearance, how long it has been since they passed.They consider a castro of ten days or a fortnight, quiterecent enough to be hunted out. We also heard thatMiranda struck from the west end of the Sierra Ventana,in a direct line to the island of Cholechel, situated seventyleagues up the Rio Negro. This is a distance of betweentwo and three hundred miles, through a country completelyunknown. What other troops in the world are so independent? With the sun for their guide, mares flesh for food,their saddle-cloths for beds, — as long as there is a littlewater, these men would penetrate to the lands end.A few days afterwards I saw another troop of these soldiers start on an expedition against a tribe ofIndians at the small salinas, who had been betrayed by aprisoner cacique. The Spaniard who brought the orders forthis expedition was a very intelligent man. He gave me anaccount of the last engagement at which he was present.Some Indians, who had been taken prisoners, gave informationof a tribe living north of the Colorado. Two hundredsoldiers were sent ; and they first discovered the Indians bya cloud of dust from their horses' feet, as they chanced to betravelling. The country was mountainous and wild, and itmust have been far in the interior, for the Cordillera was insight.The Indians, men, women, and children, were aboutone hundred and ten in number, and they were nearly all120 BAHIA Blanc. Aug. 1833.taken or killed, for the soldiers sabre every man. TheIndians are now so terrified, that they offer no resistance inabody, but each flies, neglecting even his wife and children;but when overtaken, like wild animals, they fightagainst any number to the last moment. One dying Indianseized with his teeth the thumb of his adversary, and allowedhis own eye to be forced out, sooner than relinquish his hold.Another, who was wounded, feigned death, keeping a knifeready to strike one more fatal blow. My informer said, whenhe was pursuing an Indian, the man cried out for mercy, atthe same time that he was covertly loosing the bolas from hiswaist, meaning to whirl it round his head and so strike hispursuer. " I however struck him with my sabre to theground, and then got off my horse, and cut his throat withmy knife." This is a dark picture ; but how much moreshocking is the unquestionable fact, that all the women whoappear above twenty years old, are massacred in cold blood.When I exclaimed that this appeared rather inhuman, heanswered, " Why, what can be done ? they breed so !"Every one here is filly convinced that this is the most justwar because it is against barbarians. Who would believe inthis age, in a Christian civilized country, that such atrocitieswere committed ? The children of the Indians are saved, tobe sold or given away as servants, or rather slaves, for aslong a time as the owners can deceive them ; but I believe inthis respect there is little to complain of.In the battle four men ran away together. They were pursued,and one was killed, but the other three were takenalive. They turned out to be messengers or ambassadorsfrom a large body of Indians, united in the common cause ofdefence, near the Cordillera. The tribe to which they hadbeen sent was on the point of holding a grand council ; thefeast of mare's flesh was ready, and the dance prepared : inthe morning the ambassadors were to have returned to theCordillera. They were remarkably fine men, very fair, abovesix feet high, and aU under thirty years of age. The threesurvivors of course possessed very valuable information; andAug. 1833. INDIANS. 121■*&to extort this they were placed in a line. The two firstbeing questioned, answered, " No se' (I do not know), andwere one after the other shot. The third also said " No se ;"adding, " Fire, I am a man, and can die !" Not one syllablewould they breathe to injure the united cause of their country! The conduct of the cacique was very different : hesaved his life by betraying the intended plan of warfare, andthe point of union in the Andes. It was believed that therewere already six or seven hundred Indians together, andthat in summer their numbers would be doubled. Ambassadorswere to have been sent to the Indians at the smallSalinas, near Bahia Blanc, whom I mentioned that acacique, this same man, had betrayed. The communication,therefore, extends from the Cordillera to the eastcoast.General Rosas's plan is to kill all stragglers, and havingdriven the remainder to a common point, in the summer, withthe assistance of the Chilenos, to attack them in a body.This operation is to be repeated for three successive years.I imagine the summer is chosen as the time for the mainattack, because the plains are then without water, and theIndians can only travel in particular directions. The escapeof the Indians to the south of the Rio Negro, where in sucha vast unknown country they would be safe, is prevented bya treaty with the Tehuelches to this effect; — that Rosas paysthem so much to slaughter every Indian who passes to thesouth of the river, but if they fail in so doing, they themselvesare to be exterminated. The war is waged chiefly againstthe Indians near the CordiUera; for many of the tribes on thiseastern side are fighting with Rosas. The general, however,like Lord Chesterfield, thinking that his friends may in afuture day become his enemies, always places them in thefront ranks, so that their numbers may be thinned. Sinceleaving South America we have heard that this war of exterminationcompletely failed.Among the captive girls taken in the same engagement,there were two very pretty Spanish ones, who had been BAHIA Blanc. Aug. 1833.tied away by the Indians when young, and could now onlyspeak the Indian tongue. From their account, they musthave come from Salta, a distance in a straight hne of nearlyone thousand miles. This gives one a grand idea of theimmense territory over which the Indians roam : yet, greatas it is, I think there will not, in another half-century, be awild Indian northward of the Rio Negro. The warfare is toobloody to last ; the Christians kilHng every Indian, and theIndians doing the same by the Christians. It is melancholyto trace how the Indians have given way before the Spanishinvaders. Schirdel* says, that in 1535, when Buenos Ayreswas founded, there were villages containing two and threethousand inhabitants. Even in Falconer's time (1750) theIndians made inroads as far as Lucan. Areca, and Arrecife,but now they are driven beyond the Salado. Not only havewhole tribes been wholly exterminated, but the remainingIndians have become more barbarous : instead of living inlargevillages, and being employed in the arts of fishing, aswell as of the chase, they now wander about the open plains,without home or fixed occupation.I heard also some account of an engagement which tookplace, a few weeks previously to the one mentioned, atCholechel. This is a very important station, on account ofbeing a pass for horses ; and it was, in consequence, forsome time the head-quarters of a division of the army.When the troops first arrived there, they found a tribe ofIndians, of whom they killed twenty or thirty. The caciqueescaped in a manner which astonished every one. The chiefIndians always have one or two picked horses, which theykeep ready for any urgent occasion. On one of these, anold white horse, the cacique sprung, taking with him hisUttle son. The horse had neither saddle nor bridle. Toavoid the shots, the Indian rode in the peculiar method ofhis nation ; namely, with an arm round the horse's neck, andone leg only on its back. Thus hanging on one side, he wasPurchas's Collection of Voyages,Aug. 1833. INDIANS. 123seen patting the horse's head, and talking to him. The pursuersurged every effort in the chase; the Commandant threetimes changed his horse, but all in vain. The old Indianfather and his son escaped, and were free. What a finepicture one can form in one's mind, — the naked bronze-likefigure of the old man with his little boy, riding like aMazeppa on the white horse, thus leaving far behind him thehost of his pursuers !I saw one day a soldier striking fire with a piece of flint,which I immediately recognised as having been a part of thehead of an arrow. He told me it was found near the islandof Cholechel, and that they are frequently picked up there.It was between two and three inches long, and thereforetwice as large as those now used in Tierra del Fuego : it wasmade of opake cream-coloured flint, but the point and barbshad been intentionally broken off". It is well known that noPampas Indians now use bows and arrows. I believe a smalltribe in Banda Oriental must be excepted ; but they arewidely separated from the Pampas Indians, and border closeon those tribes that inhabit the forest, and live on foot. Itappears, therefore, that these arrow-heads are antiquarian*relics of the Indians, before the great change in habitsconsequent on the introduction of the horse into SouthAmerica.Azara has even doubted whether the Pampas Indians ever usedbows.CHAPTER VI.Set out for Buenos Ayres— Rio Sauce — Sierra Ventana— Transport ofpebbles— Third posta— Driving horses — Bolas— Partridges and foxesFeatures of country — Long-legged plover — Teru-tero — HailstormNatural enclosures in Sierra Tapalguen — Flesh of puma — Meat dietGuardia del Monte— Effects of cattle on the vegetation — Cartoon —Buenos Ayres — Corral where animals are slaughtered.Bahia Blanc TO BUENOS AYRES.September 8th. — Having with some difficulty hired aGaucho to accompany me on my ride to Buenos Ayres, westarted early in the morning. The distance is about fourhundred miles, and nearly the whole way through an uninhabitedcountry. Ascending a few hundred feet from thebasin of green turf on which Bahia Blanc stands, we enteredon a wide desolate plain. It consists of a crumblingargillaceous calcareous rock, which, from the dry nature of theclimate, supports only scattered tufts of gathered grass, withouta single bush or tree to break the monotonous uniformity.The weather was fine, but the atmosphere remarkablyhazy ; I thought the appearance foreboded a gale, butthe Gauchos said it was owing to the plain, at some greatdistance in the interior, being on fire. After a long gallop,having changed horses twice, we reached the Rio Sauce. Itis a deep, rapid, little stream, but not above twenty-five feetwide. The second posta on the road to Buenos Ayresstands on its banks ; a little above there is a pass for horses,where the water does not reach to the horse's belly; butfrom that point, in its course to the sea, it is quite impassable,and hence makes a most useful barrier against theIndians.Insignificant as this stream is, the Jesuit Falconer, whoseinformation is generally so very correct, figures it as a considerableriver, rising at the foot of the Cordillera. Withrespect to its source, I do not doubt this is the case ; for theSept. 1833. SIERRA Montana. 125Gauchos assured me, that in the middle of the dry summer,this stream, at the same time with the Colorado, has periodicalfloods ; which can only originate in the snow meltingon the Andes, It is extremely improbable that a stream, sosmall as the Sauce then was, should traverse the entirewidth of the continent ; and indeed, if it were the residueof a large river, its waters, as in other ascertained cases, .would be saline. During the winter we must look to thesprings round the Sierra Ventana as the source of its pureand limpid stream. I suspect the plains of Patagonia,like those of Australia, are traversed by many water-courses,which only perform their proper parts at certain periods.Probably this is the case with the water which flows intothe head of Port Desire, and likewise with the Rio Chupat,on the banks of which masses of highly cellular scoriaewere found by the officers employed in the survey.As it was early in the afternoon when we arrived, we tookfresh horses, and a soldier for a guide, and started for theSierra de la Ventana. This mountain is visible from theanchorage at Bahia Blanc ; and Capt. FitzRoy calculatesits height to be 3500 feet; — an altitude very remarkable onthis eastern side of the continent. I am not aware that anyforeigner, previous to my visit, had ascended this mountain ;and indeed very few of the soldiers at Bahia Blanc knewany thing about it. Hence we heard of beds of coal, ofgold and silver, of caves, and of forests, all of which inflamedmy curiosity, only to disappoint it. The distance from theposta was about six leagues, over a level plain of the samecharacter as before. The ride was, however, interesting, asthe mountain began to show its true form. When we reachedthe foot of the main ridge, we had much difficulty in findingany water, and we thought we should have been obliged tohave passed the night without any. At last we discoveredsome, by looking close to the mountain, for at the distanceeven of a few hundred yards, the streamlets were buried andentirely lost in the friable calcareous stone, and loose detritus.I do not think nature ever made a more solitary.126 SIERRA Montana. Sept. 1833.desolate pile of rock ; — it well deserves its name of Hurtado,or separated. The mountain is steep, extremely rugged, andbroken, and so entirely destitute of trees and even bushes,that we actually could not find a skewer to stretch out ourmeat over the fire made of thistle* stalks. The strangeaspect of this mountain is contrasted by the sea-ike plain,which not only abuts against its steep sides, but likewiseseparates the parallel ranges. The uniformity of the colouringgives, also, an extreme quietness to the view; — thewhitish gray of the quartz rock, and the light brown of thewithered grass of the plain, being unrelieved by any brightertint. From custom, one expects to see in the neighbourhoodof a lofty and bold mountain a broken country, strewed overwith huge fragments. Here nature shows, that the lastmovement before the bed of the sea is changed into dryland, may sometimes be one of tranquillity. Under thesecircumstances, I was curious to observe how far fromthe parent rock any pebbles could be found. On theshores of Bahia Blanc, and near the settlement, there weresome of quartz, which certainly must have come from thissource : the distance is forty-five miles.The dew, which in the early part of the night wetted thesaddle-cloths, under which we slept, was in the morningfrozen. From the sharpness of the cold, I supposed we werealready at a considerable elevation, although, to the eye, theplain had appeared horizontal. In the morning (9th September)the guide told me to ascend the nearest ridge, whichhe thought would lead me to the four peaks that crown thesummit. The climbing up such rough rocks was veryfatiguing, the sides were so indented, that, what was gainedin one five minutes, was often lost in the next. At last,when I reached the ridge, my disappointment was extremein finding a precipitous valley as deep as the plain, which cutthe chain transversely in two, and separated me from the fourI call these thistle stalks for the want of a more correct name. Ibelieve it is a species of Eryngium.Sept. 1833. SIERRA Montana. 127points. This valley is very narrow, but flat bottomed, and itforms a fine horse-pass for the Indians, as it connects theplains on the northern and southern sides of the range. Havingdescended, and while crossing it, I saw two horses grazing :I immediately hid myself in the long grass, and began to reconnoitre; but as I could see no signs of Indians, I proceededcautiously on my second ascent. It was late in theday, and this part of the mountain, like the other, was steepand rugged. I was on the top of the second peak by twoo'clock, but got there with extreme difficulty ; every twentyyards I had the cramp in the upper part of both thighs, sothat I was afraid I should not have been able to have descended.It was also necessary to return by another road,as it was out of the question to pass over the saddle-back. Iwas therefore obUged to give up the two higher peaks.Their altitude was but little greater, and every purpose ofgeology had been answered; so that the attempt was notworth the hazard of any further exertion. I presume thecause of the cramp was the great change in the kind ofmuscular action, from that of hard riding to that of stillharder climbing. It is a lesson worth remembering, as insome cases it might cause much difficulty.I have already said the mountain is composed of whitequartz rock, and with it a little glossy clay-slate is associated.At the height of a few hundred feet above the plain, patchesof conglomerate adhered in several places to the solid rock.They resembled in hardness, and in the nature of the cement,the masses which may be seen daily forming on some coasts.I do not doubt these pebbles were, in a similar manner,aggregated, at a period when the great calcareous formationwas depositing beneath the surrounding sea. We may believethat the jagged and battered forms of the hard quartzyet show the effects of the waves of an open ocean.I was, on the whole, disappointed with this ascent. Eventhe view was insignificant ; — a plain like the sea, but withoutits beautiful colour and defined outline. The scene, however,was novel, and a little danger, like salt to meat, gives it128 SIERRA Montana. Sept. 1833.a relish. That the danger was very Uttle was certain, for mytwo companions made a good fire — a thing which is neverdone when it is suspected that Indians are near. I reachedthe place of our bivouac by sunset, and drinking much mate,and smoking several cigaritos, soon made up my bed for thenight. The wind was very strong and cold, but I neverslept more comfortably.September 10th. — In the morning, having fairly scuddedbefore the gale, we arrived by the middle of the day at theSauce posta. On the road we saw great numbers of deer,and near the mountain a guanaco. The plain, that abutsagainst the Sierra, is traversed by some curious gullies, ofwhich one was about twenty feet wide, and at least thirtydeep ; we were obliged in consequence to make a considerablecircuit, before we could find a pass. We staid the nightat the posta, the conversation, as was generally the case,being about the Indians. The Sierra Ventana was formerly agreat place of resort ; and three or four years ago there wasmuch fighting here. My guide had been present whenmany men were killed : the women escaped to the top of theridge, and fought most desperately with big stones ; manythus saving themselves.September 11th. — Proceeded to the third posta in companywith the lieutenant who commanded it. The distanceis called fifteen leagues ; but it is only guess-work and is generallyoverstated. The road was uninteresting, over a drygrassy plain ; and on our left hand at a greater or less distancethere were some low hills ; a chain of which, we crossed closeto the posta. Before our arrival, we met a large herd of cattleand horses, guarded by fifteen soldiers ; but we were toldmany had been lost. It is very difficult to drive animalsacross the plains ; for if in the night a lion, or even a fox,approaches, nothing can prevent the horses dispersing inevery direction ; and a storm will have the same effect. Ashort time since, an officer left Buenos Ayres with 500 horses,and when he arrived at the army he had under twenty.Soon afterwards we perceived by the cloud of dust, that aSept. 1833^ INDIANS. 129party of horsemen were coming towards us ; when far distantmy companions knew them to be Indians, by their long hairstreaming behind their backs. The Indians generally have afillet round their heads, but never any covering ; and theirblack hair blowing across their swarthy faces, heightensto an uncommon degree, the wildness of their appearance.They turned out to be a party of Bernantio's friendly tribe,going to a salina for salt. The Indians eat much salt, theirchildren sucking it like sugar. This habit is very differentfrom that of the Spanish Gauchos, who, leading the samekind of ife, eat scarcely any. The Indians gave us good-humourednods as they passed at full gallop, driving beforethem a troop of horses, and followed by a train of lankydogs.SEPTEMBERl2THandl3TH. — Staid at this potato days,waiting for a troop of soldiers, which. General Rosas had thekindness to send to inform me, would shortly travel to BuenosAyres ; and he advised me to take the opportunity of suchan escort. In the morning we rode to some neighbouringhills to view the country, and to examine the geology. Afterdinner the soldiers divided themselves into two parties for atrial of skill with the bolas. Two spears were stuck in theground thirty-five yards apart, but they were struck and entangledonly once in four or five times. The balls can bethrown fifty or sixty yards, but with Httle certainty. This,however, does not apply to a man on horseback; for whenthe speed of the horse is added to the force of the arm, it issaid, that they can be whirled with effect to the distance ofeighty yards.* In the middle of the day two men had arasa proof of the force with which the balls are hurled, I may mentionan anecdote that happened at the Falkland Islands. At the time theSpaniards murdered some of their own countrymen, and all the Englishmen,a young Spaniard was running away, when a great tall Indian, bynameLucianoo, came at full gallop after him, shouting to him to stop, andsaying that he only wanted to speak to him. Just as the Spaniard was onthe point of reaching the boat, Lucianoo threw the balls : they struck himon the legs, with such a jerk, as to throw him down and to render him forsome time insensible. The man, after Lucianoo had had his talk, was al-vol.III. K130 PAMPAS. Sept. 1833.rived, who brought a parcel from the next posta to be forwardedto the general ; so that besides these two, our partyconsisted of myself and guide, the lieutenant and his foursoldiers. The latter were strange beings ; the first a fineyoung negro ; the second half Indian and negro ; and thetwo others nondescript ; namely, an old Chilian miner, thecolour of mahogany, and another partly a mulatto ; but twosuch mongrels, with such detestable expressions, I neversaw before. At night, when they were sitting round the fire,and playing at cards, I retired to view such a Salvator Rosascene. They were seated under a low cliff, so that I couldlook down upon them ; around the party were lying dogs,arms, remnants of deer and ostriches ; and their long spearswere stuck in the turf. Further in the dark background,their horses were tied up, ready for any sudden danger. If thestillness of the desolate plain was broken by one of the dogsbarking, a soldier, leaving the fire, would place his head closeto the ground, and thus slowly scan the horizon. Even ifthe noisy teru-tero uttered its scream, there would be apause in the conversation, and every head, for a moment alittle inclined.What a Use of misery these men appear to us to lead !They were at least ten leagues from the Sauce posta, andsince the murder committed by the Indians, twenty fromanother. The Indians are supposed to have made theirattack in the middle of the night; for very early in themorning after the murder, they were luckily seen approachingthis posta. The whole party, however, escaped, togetherwith the troop of horses ; each one taking a fine for himself,and driving with him as many animals as he was able tomanage.The Uttle hovel, built of thistle-stalks, in which they slept,neither kept out the wind or rain ; indeed in the latter casethe only effect the roof had, was to condense it into largerlowed to escape. He told us that his legs were marked by great weals,where the thong had wound round, as if he had been flogged with awhip.Sept. 1833. HUNTING PARTY. 131drops. They had nothing to eat excepting what they couldcatch, such as ostriches, deer, armadilloes, &c., and their onlyfuel was the dry stalks of a small plant, somewhat resemblingan aloe. The sole luxury which these men enjoyed wassmoking the little paper cigars, and sucking mate. I used tothink the carrion vulture, man^s constant attendant on thesedreary plains, while seated on some little eminence, seemedby its very patience to say, "Ah ! when the Indians come weshall have a feast."In the morning we all sallied forth to hunt, and althoughwe had not much success, there were some animated chases.Soon after starting the party separated, and so arranged theirplans, that at a certain time of the day (in guessing whichthey show much skill) they should all meet from differentpoints of the compass on a plain piece of ground, and thusdrive together the wild animals. One day I went out huntingat Bahia Blanc, but the men there merely rode in acrescent, each being about a quarter of a mile apart from theother. A fine male ostrich being turned by the headmostriders, tried to escape on one side. The Gauchos pursued ata reckless pace, twisting their horses about with the mostadmirable command, and each man whirling the balls roundhis head. At length the foremost threw them, revolvingthrough the air : in an instant the ostrich rolled over andover,its legs fairly lashed together by the thong.The plains abound with three kinds of partridge,* two ofwhich are as large as hen pheasants. Their destroyer, a smalland pretty fox, was also singularly numerous ; in the courseof the day we could not have seen less than forty or fifty.They were generally near their earths, but the dogs killedone. When we returned to the posta, we found two of theparty returned who had been hunting by themselves. Theyhad killed a puma, and had found an ostriches nest withtwenty-seven eggs in it. Each of these is said to equal inTwo species of Tinamus, and Eudromia elegant of D 'Orbigny, whichcan only be called a partridge with regard to its habits.K 21.32 PAMPAS. Sept. 1833.weight eleven hens' eggs ; so that we obtained from this onenest as much food as 297 hens' eggs would have yielded.September 14th. — As the soldiers belonging to the nextposta meant to return, and we should together make a partyof five, and all armed, I determined not to wait* for the expectedtroops. After galloping some leagues, we came to alow swampy country, which extends for nearly eighty milesto the northward, as far as the Sierra Tapalguen. In someparts there were fine damp plains, covered with grass, whileothers had a soft, black, and peaty soil. There were alsomany extensive but shallow lakes, and large beds of reeds.The country on the whole resembled the better parts of theCambridgeshire fens. At night we had some difficulty infinding, amidst the swamps, a dry place for our bivouac.September 15th. — Rose very early in the morning, andshortly after passed the posta, where the Indians had murderedthe five soldiers. The officer had eighteen chuzowounds in his body. By the middle of the day, after a hardgallop, we reached the fifth posta : on account of some difficultyin procuring horses we staid there the night. As thispoint was the most exposed on the whole line, twenty-onesoldiers were stationed there ; at sunset they returned fromhunting, bringing with them seven deer, three ostriches,and many armadilloes and partridges. When ridingthrough the country, it is a common practice to set fire tothe plain ; and hence at night, as on this occasion, the horizonwas illuminated in several places by brilliant conflagrations.This is done partly for the sake of puzzling any strayThe lieutenant pressed me much to stop. As he had been veryobliging — not only providing me with food, but lending me his privatehorses — I wanted to make him some remuneration. I asked my guidewhether I might do so, but he told me certainly not ; that the only answerI should receive, probably would be, " We have meat for the dogs in ourcountry, and therefore do not grudge it to a Christian'' It must not besupposed that the rank of lieutenant in such an array, would at all preventthe acceptance of payment: it was only the high sense of hospitality, whichevery traveller is bound to acknowledge as nearly universal throughoutthese provinces.Sept. 1833. PAMPAS. 133:Indians, but chiefly for improving the pasture. In grassyplains unoccupied by the larger ruminating quadrupeds, itseems necessary to remove by fire the superfluous vegetation,so as to render serviceable the new year's growth.The rancho at this place did not boast even of a roof, butmerely consisted of a ring of thistle-stalks, to break the forceof the wind. It was situated on the borders of an extensivebut shallow lake, swarming with wild fowl, among which theblack-necked swan was conspicuous.The kind of plover, which appears is if mounted on stilts,{Hlmantopus melanurd) is here common in flocks of considerablesize. It has been wrongfully accused of inelegance ;when wading about in shallow water, which is its favouriteresort, its gait is far from awkward. These birds in a flockutter a noise, that singularly resembles the cry of a pack ofsmall dogs in full chase : waking in the night, I have morethan once been for a moment startled at the distant sound.The teru-tero {Va/iellus amanuensis), is another bird, whichoften disturbs the stillness of the night. In appearance andhabits it resembles in many respects our permits ; its wings,however, are armed with sharp spurs, like those on the legsof the common cock. As our peewit takes its name fromthe sound of its voice, so does the teru-tero. While ridingover the grassy plains, one is constantly pursued by thesebirds, which appear to hate mankind, and I am sure deserveto be hated for their never-ceasing, unvaried, harsh screams.To the sportsman they are most annoying, by telling everyother bird and animal of his approach : to the traveller in thecountry, they may possibly, as Molina says, do good, bywarning him of the midnight robber. During the breedingseason, they attempt, like our permits, by feigning to bewounded, to draw away from their nests dogs and other enemies.The eggs of this bird are esteemed a great delicacy.September 16th. — To the seventh posta at the foot ofthe Sierra Tapalguen. The country was quite level, with acoarse herbage and a soft peaty soil. The hovel was there remarkablyneat, the posts and rafters being made of about a134 PAMPAS. Sept. 1833.dozen dry thistle-stalks bound together with thongs of hide ;and by the aid of these lonic-hke columns the roof and sideswere thatched with reeds. We were here told a fact, whichI would not have credited, if I had not had partly ocularproof of it ; namely, that, during the previous night, hail aslarge as small apples, and extremely hard, had fallen withsuch violence, as to kill the greater number of the wildanimals. One of the men had already found thirteendeer corvus campestris) lying dead, and I saw their freshhides ; another of the party, a few minutes after my arrival,brought in seven more. Now I well know, that one manwithout dogs, would hardly have killed seven deer in a week.The men believed they had seen about fifteen dead ostriches(part of one of which we had for dinner) ; and they said thatseveral were running about evidently blind in one eye. Numbersof smaller birds, as ducks, hawks, and partridges, werekilled. I saw one of the latter with a black mark on itsback, as if it had been struck with a paving-stone. A fence ofthistle-stalks round the hovel, was nearly broken down, andmy informer putting his head out to see what was the matter,received a severe cut, and now wore a bandage. The stormwas said to have been of limited extent : we certainly sawfrom our last night's bivouac a dense cloud and lightning inthis direction. It is marvellous how such strong animals asdeer could thus have been killed ; but I have no doubt, fromthe evidence I have given, that the story is not in the leastexaggerated. I am glad, however, to have its credibilitysupported by the Jesuit DrobrizhofFer,* who, speaking of acountry much to the northward, says, hail fell of an enormoussize and killed vast numbers of cattle : the Indians hencecalled the place Lalegraicavalca, meaning " The little whitethings."Having finished our dinner of hail-stricken meat, wecrossed the Sierra Tapalguen ; a low range of hills, a fewhundred feet in height, which commences at Cape Corrientes.History of the Abipones, vol. ii., p. 6.Sept. 1833. NATURAL ENCLOSURE. 135The rock in this part is pure quartz ; further eastward Iunderstand it is granitic. The hills are of a remarkableform ; they consist of flat patches of table-land, surroundedby low but perpendicular cliff's, like the outliers of a sedimentarydeposit. The hill which I ascended was verysmall, not above a couple of hundred yards in diameter ; butI saw others larger. One which goes by the name of theCorral," is said to be two or three miles in diameter, andencompassed on all sides by perpendicular cuffs, betweenthirty and forty feet high, excepting at one spot, where theentrance lies. Falconer* gives a curious account of theIndians driving within it troops of wild horses, and then byguarding the entrance, keeping them secure. I have neverheard of any other instance of table-land in a formation ofquartz, and which, in the hill I examined, had neithercleavage or stratification. I was told that the rock of the'^ Corral " was white, and would strike fire.We did not reach the posta on the Rio Tapalguen tillafter it was dark. At supper, from something which wassaid, I was suddenly struck with horror at thinking thatI was eating one of the favourite dishes of the country,namely, a half-formed calf, long before its proper time ofbirth. It turned out to be Puma ; the meat is very white,and remarkably like veal in taste. Dr. Shaw was laughedat for stating that, " the flesh of the lion is in great esteem,having no small affinity with veal, both in colour, taste, andflavour." Such certainly is the case with the Puma.The Gauchos differ in their opinion, whether the Jaguaris good eating, but are unanimous in saying that cat isexcellent.September 17th. — We followed the course of the RioTapalguen, through a very fertile country, to the ninthposta. Tapalguen itself, or the town of Tapalguen, if itmay be so called, consists of a perfectly level plain, studdedover as far as the eye can reach, with the toldos, or oven-falconer'sPatagonia, p. 70.136 PAMPAS. Sept. 1833.shaped huts of the Indians. The families of the friendly-indians,who were fighting on the side of Rosas, residedhere. We met and passed many young Indian women, ridingby two or three together on the same horse : they, as wellas many of the young men, were strikingly handsome, — theirfine ruddy complexions being the picture of health. Besidesthe toldos, there were three ranchos ; one inhabited bythe Commandant, and the two others by Spaniards with smallshops.We were here able to buy some biscuit. I had now beenseveral days without tasting any thing besides meat : I didnot at aU dislike this new regimen ; but I felt as if it wouldonly have agreed with very hard exercise. I have heard thatpatients in England, when desired to confine themselves exclusivelyto an animal diet, even with the hope of life beforetheir eyes, have hardly been able to endure it. Yet theGaucho in the Pampas, for months together, touchesnothing but beef. But they eat, I observe, a very largeproportion of fat, which is of a less animalized nature;and they particularly dislike dry meat, such as that of theAgouti. It is, perhaps, from this regimen that the Gauchos,like other carnivorous animals, can abstain long from food.I was told that at Handel, some troops voluntarily pursued aparty of Indians for three days, without eating or drinking.We saw in the shops, many articles, such as horsecloths,belts, and garters , woven by the Indian women. The patternswere very pretty, and the colours brilliant; the workmanshipof the garters was so good, that an English merchant atBuenos Ayres, maintained they must have been manufacturedin England, till he found the tassels had been fastenedby split sinew.September 18th. — We had a very long ride this day. Atthe twelfth posta, which is seven leagues south of Rio Salado,we came to the first estancia with cattle and white women.Afterwards we had to ride for many miles through a countryflooded with water above our horses' knees. By crossingthe stirrups, and riding Arab-like with our legs bent up, weSept. 1833. PAMPAS. 137contrived to keep tolerably dry. It was nearly dark whenwe arrived at the Salado ; the stream was deep, and aboutforty yards wide ; in summer, however, its bed becomes almostdry, and the little remaining water nearly as salt as that of thesea. We slept at one of the great estancias of General Rosas.It was fortified, and of such an extent, that arriving in thedark I thought it was a town and fortress. In the morningwe saw immense herds of cattle, as well we might, the generalhere having seventy-four square leagues of land. Formerlynearly three hundred men were employed about this estate,and they defied all the attacks of the Indians.September 19th. — Passed the Guardia del Monte. Thisis a nice scattered little town, with many gardens, full ofpeach and quince trees. The plain here looked like thataround Buenos Ayres ; the turf being short and bright green,with beds of clover and thistles, and with bizcacha holes. Iwas very much struck with the marked change in the aspectof the country after having crossed the Salado. From a coarseherbage we passed on to a carpet of fine green verdure. I atfirst attributed this to some change in the nature of the soil,but the inhabitants assured me that in this part, as well as inBanda Oriental, where there was as great a difference betweenthe country around Monte Video 'and the thinly-inhabitedsavannahs of Colonia, that the whole was to be attributed tothe manuring and grazing of the cattle. I am not botanistenough to say, whether the change is owing to the introductionof new species, to the altered growth of the same, or toa difference in their proportional numbers. Azara has alsoobserved with astonishment this change : he is likewise muchperplexed by the immediate appearance of plants not occurringin the neighbourhood, on the borders of any track thatleads to a newly-constructed hovel. In another part he says,*Ces chevaux (sauvages) ont la manie de preserver les chemins,et le bord des routes pour deposer leurs excrement, dont ontrouve des monceaux dans ces endroits." Does this notAzara's Voyage, vol. i., p. 373.138 PAMPAS. Sept. 1833.partly explain the circumstance? We thus have lines ofrichly-manured land serving as channels of communicationacross wide districts.Near the Guardia we find the southern limit of twoEuropean plants now become excessively common. Thefennel in great profusion covers the ditch banks in theneighbourhood of Buenos Ayres, Monte Video, and othertowns. But the cardoon {Cynara cardiiiiculus)* has a farwider range : it occurs in these latitudes on both sides of theCordillera, across the continent. I saw it in unfrequentedspots in Chile, Entre Rios, and Banda Oriental. In thelatter country alone, very many (probably several hundred)square miles are covered by one mass of these prickly plants,and are impenetrable by man or beast. Over the undulatingplains, where these great beds occur, nothing else can live.Before their introduction, however, I apprehend the surfacesupported as in other parts a rank herbage. I doubtwhether any case is on record, of an invasion on so grand ascale of one plant over the aborigines. As I have alreadysaid, I nowhere saw the cardoon south of the Salado ; butit is probable that in proportion as that country becomesinhabited, the cardoon will extend its limits. The case isdifferent with the giant thistle (with variegated leaves) of thePampas, for I met with it in the valley of the Sauce. Accordingto the principles so well laid down by Mr. Lyell,D'Orbigny (vol. i., p. 474), says 'that the cardoon and artichoke areboth found wild. Dr. Hooker (Botanical Magazine, vol. Iv., p. 2862),has described a variety of the Cynara from this part of South Americaunder the name of inertia. He states that botanists are now generallyagreed that the cardoon and the artichoke are varieties of one plant. Imay add, that an intelligent farmer assured me, he had observed inadeserted garden, some artichokes changing into the common cardoon.Dr. Hooker believes that Head's vivid description of the thistle of thePampas applies to the cardoon ; but this is a mistake. Captain Headreferred to the plant, which I have mentioned a few lines lower down,under the title of giant thistle. Whether it is a true thistle I do notknow ; but it is quite different from the cardoon, and more like a thistleproperly so called.Sept. 1833. BUENOS ayres, 139few countries have undergone more remarkable changes, sincethe year 1535, when the first colonist of La Plata landed withseventy-two horses. The countless herds of horses, cattle,and sheep, not only have altered the whole aspect of thevegetation, but they have almost banished the guanaco, deer,and ostrich. Numberless other changes must likewise havetaken place ; the wild pig in some parts probably replaces thepeccari ; packs of wild dogs may be heard howling on thewooded banks of the less frequented streams ; and the commoncat, altered into a large and fierce animal, inhabits rockyhills. I have alluded to the invasion of the cardoon : in alike manner, the islands near the mouth of the Parana, arethickly clothed with peaches and orange-trees, springing fromseeds carried there by the waters of the river.While changing horses at the Guardia, several peoplequestioned us much about the army, — I never saw any thingMke the enthusiasm for Rosas, and for the success of themost just of all wars, because against barbarians .^^ Thisexpression it must be confessed is very natural, for till lately,neither man, woman, nor horse, was safe from the attacks ofthe Indians. We had a long day^s ride over the same richgreen plain abounding with various flocks, and with here andthere a solitary estancia, and its one ombu tree. In the eveningit rained heavily : on arriving at a post-house, we weretold by the owner that if we had not a regular passport wemust pass on, for there were so many robbers he would trustno one. When he read, however, my passport, whichbegan with " El Naturalists Don Carlos, &c." his respectand civility were as unbounded, as his suspicions had beenbefore. What a naturalist may be, neither he nor hiscountrymen, I suspect, had any idea ; but probably my titlelost nothing of its value from that cause.September 20th. — We arrived by the middle of the dayat Buenos Ayres. The outskirts of the city looked quitepretty, With the agave hedges, and groves of olive, peach,and willow trees, aU just throwing out their fresh green leaves.I rode to the house of Mr. Lumb, an English merchant, to140 BUENOS AYRES. Sept. 1833.whose kindness and hospitality, during my stay in thecountry, I was greatly indebted.The city of Buenos Ayres is large* ; and I should thinkone of the most regular in the world. Every street is atright angles to the one it crosses, and the parallel ones beingequidistant, the houses are collected into solid squares ofequal dimensions, which are called quadrant. On theother hand, the houses themselves are hollow squares ; allthe rooms opening into a neat little courtyard. They aregenerally only one story high, with flat roofs, which are fittedwith seats, and are much frequented by the inhabitants insummer. In the centre of the town is the Plaza, where thepublic offices, fortress, cathedral, &c., stand. Here also,the old viceroys, before the revolution, had their palaces.The general assemblage of buildings possesses considerablearchitectural beauty, although none individually can boastof any.The great corral where the animals are kept for slaughterto supply food to this beef-eating population, is one of thespectacles best worth seeing. The strength of the horseas compared to that of the bullock is quite astonishing : aman on horseback having thrown his lazo round the hornsof a beast, can drag it any where he chooses. The animalhaving ploughed up the ground with outstretched legs, invain efforts to resist the force, generally dashes at full speed toone side ; but the horse immediately turning to receive theshock, stands so firmly, that the bullock is almost throwndown, and one would think, would certainly have its neckdislocated. The struggle is not, however, one of fair strength ;the horse's girth being matched against the bullock's extendedneck. In a similar manner a man can hold thewildest horse, if caught with the lazo, just behind the ears.When the bullock has been dragged to the spot where it isto be slaughtered, the matador with great caution cuts thehamstrings. Then is given the death bellow ; a noise moreIs said to contain 60,000 inhabitants. Monte Video, the secondtown of importance on the banks of the Plata, has 13,000.Sept. 1833. BUENOS ayres. 141expressive of fierce agony than any I know : I have oftendistinguished it from a long distance, and have always knownthat the struggle was then drawing to a close. The wholesight is horrible and revolting, the ground is almost made ofbones ; and the horses, and riders are drenched with gore.CHAPTER VII.Excursion to St. Fe — Thistle beds — Habits and range of Bizcacha —Little owl — Saline streams — Level plains — Mastodon — St. Fe — Changein landscape — Geology — Tooth of extinct horse — Range of fossil quadrupeds— Pampas full of remains — Effects of great droughts — Droughtsperiodical — Parana — Habits of Jaguar — Scissors-beak — Kingfisher,parrot, and scissors-tail — Revolution — Buenos Ayres — State of government.BUENOS AYRES TO ST. FE.September 27th. — In the evening I set out on an excursionto St. Fe, which is situated nearly three hundredEnglish miles from Buenos Ayres, on the banks of the Rana.The roads in the neighbourhood of the city, after the rainyweather were extraordinarily bad. I should never havethought it possible for a bullock waggon to have crawledalong : as it was, they scarcely went at the rate of a mile anhour, and a man was kept ahead, to survey the best line formaking the attempt. The bullocks were terribly jaded : itis a great mistake to suppose that with improved roads, andan accelerated velocity of travelling, the sufferings of theanimals increase in the same proportion. We passed a trainof waggons and a troop of beasts on their road to Mendoza.The distance is about 580 geographical miles, and thejourney is generally performed in fifty days. These waggonsare very long, narrow, and thatched with reeds ; theyhave only two wheels, the diameter of which in some casesis even ten feet. Each is drawn by six bullocks which areurged on by a goad at least twenty feet long : this is suspendedfrom within the roof; for the wheel bullocks asmaller one is kept ; and for the intermediate pair, a pointprojects at right angles from the middle of the long one.The whole apparatus looked like some implement of war.September 28th. — We passed the small town of Lucan,Sept. 1833. BizcACHA. 143where there is a wooden bridge over the river — a most unusualconvenience in this country. We passed also Areca.The plains appeared level, but were not so in fact ; for invarious places the horizon was distant. The estancias arehere wide apart; for there is little good pasture, owingto the land being covered by beds either of an acrid clover,or of the great thistle. The latter, well known from theanimated description given by Sir F. Head, were at this timeof the year two-thirds grown ; in some parts they were ashigh as the horse's back, but in others they had not yetsprung up, and the ground was bare and dusty as on a turnpikeroad. The clumps were of the most brilliant green,and they made a pleasing miniature-likeness of broken forestland. When the thistles are fully grown, the great beds areimpenetrable, except by a few tracks, as intricate as thosein a labyrinth. These are only known to the robbers, whoat this season inhabit them, and sally forth at night to rob,and cut throats, with impunity. Upon asking at a housewhether robbers were numerous, I was answered, "Thethistles are not up yet ;" — the meaning of which reply wasnot at first very obvious. There is little interest in passingover these tracts, for they are inhabited by few animals orbirds, excepting the bizcacha and its friend the little owl.The bizcacha* is well known to form a prominent featurein the zoology of the Pampas. It is found as far south asthe Rio Negro, in lat. 41°, but not beyond. It cannot, likethe agouti, subsist on the gravelly and desert plains of Patagonia,but prefers a clayey or sandy soil, which produces adifferent and more abundant vegetation. Near Mendoza, atthe foot of the Cordillera, it occurs in close neighbourhoodwith the allied alpine species. It is a very curious circumstancein its geographical distribution, that it has never beenseen, fortunately for the inhabitants, in Banda Oriental, tothe eastward of the river Uruguay : yet in that provinceThe bizcacha {Calomys bizcacha) somewhat resembles a large rabbit,but with bigger gnawing teeth and a long tail : it has, however, only threetoes behind, like the agouti. During the last three or four years, theskins of these animals have been sent to England for the sake of the fur.144 PAMPAS. Sept. 1833.there are plains which appear admirably adapted to itshabits. That river has formed an insuperable obstacle to itsmigration; although the broader barrier of the Parana hasbeen passed, and the bizcacha is common in Entre Rios (theprovince between the two rivers), directly on the oppositeshore of the Uruguay. Near Buenos Ayres these animalsare exceedingly common. Their most favourite resort appearsto be those parts of the plain, which during one half the yearare covered with giant thistles, to the exclusion of otherplants. The Gauchos affirm that it lives on roots ; which,from the great strength of its gnawing teeth, and the kind oflocalities frequented by it, seems probable. As in the case ofthe rabbit, a few holes are commonly placed together. Inthe evening the bizcachas come out in numbers, and therequietly sit on their haunches. They are at such times verytame, and a man on horseback passing by, seems only topresent an object for their grave contemplation. Theydo not wander far from their burrows. They run veryawkwardly, and, when hurrying out of danger, from theirelevated tails and short front legs much resemble great rats.Their flesh, when cooked, is very white and good, but it isseldom used.The bizcacha has one very singular habit; namely, draggingevery hard object to the mouth of its burrow. Aroundeach group of holes many bones of cattle, stones, thistle-stalks,hard lumps of earth, dry dung, &c., are collected into a scatteredheap, which frequently amounts to as much as a wheelbarrowwould contain. I was credibly informed that a gentleman,when riding on a dark night, dropped his watch ; hereturned in the morning, and by searching the neighbourhoodof every bizcacha hole on the line of road, as he expected,soon found it. This habit of picking up whatever may belyingon the ground any where near its habitation, must costmuch trouble. For what purpose it is done I am quite unableto form even the most remote conjecture : it cannot be fordefence, because the rubbish is chiefly placed above themouth of the burrow, which enters the ground at a verysmall inclination. No doubt there must exist some goodSept. 1833. PAMPAS. 145reason ; but the inhabitants of the country are quite ignorantrespecting it.The little owl noctua cunicularia), which has been so oftenmentioned, on the plains of Buenos Ayres exclusively inhabitsthe holes of the bizcacha; but in Banda Oriental it isits own workman. During the open day, but more especiallyin the evening, these birds may be seen in every directionstanding frequently by pairs on the hillock near their burrows.If disturbed they either enter the hole, or, uttering ashrill harsh cry, move wdth a remarkably undulatory flight toa short distance, and then turning round, steadily gaze attheir pursuer. Occasionally in the evening they may beheard hooting. I found in the stomachs of two which Iopened the remains of mice, and I one day saw a smallsnake killed and carried away. It is said these latteranimals are their common prey during the daytime. Imay here mention, as showing on what various kinds of foodowls subsist, that a species that was killed among the isletsof the Honos Archipelago, had its stomach full of good-sizedcrabs.In the evening we crossed the Rio Arrecife, on a simpleraft made of barrels lashed together, and slept at the post-houseon the other side. I this day paid horse hire forthirty-one leagues ; and although the sun Alas glaring hot Iwas but very little fatigued. When Captain Head talks ofriding fifty leagues a day, I do not imagine the distance isequal to 150 English miles. At all events the thirty-oneleagues was only 76 miles in a straight line, and in an opencountry I should think four additional miles for turningswould be a sufficient allowance.29th and 30th. — We continued to ride over plains ofthe same character. At San Nicholas I first saw the nobleriver of the Parana. At the foot of the cliff" on which thetown stands, some large vessels were at anchor. Beforearriving at Rozario, w© crossed the Saladillo, a stream offine clear running water, but too saline to drink. RozarioIS a large town built on a dead level plain, which formsVOL. III. L146 PAMPAS. Oct. 1833.a cliff about sixty feet high over the Parana. The riverhere is very broad, with many islands, which are lowand wooded, as is also the coast of the opposite shore.The view would resemble that of a great lake, if it were notfor the linear-shaped islets, which alone give the idea ofrunning water. The cliffs are the most picturesque part ;sometimes they are absolutely perpendicular, and of a redcolour ; at other times in large broken masses, covered withcacti and mimosa-trees. The real grandeur, however, of animmense river like this, is derived from reflecting how importanta means of communication and commerce, it formsbetween one nation and another; to what a distance ittravels ; and from how vast a territory it drains the greatbody of fresh water which flows past your feet.For many leagues north and south of San Nicholas andRosario, the country is really level. Scarcely any thingwhich travellers have written about its extreme flatness, canbe considered as exaggeration. Yet I could never find aspot, where, by slowly turning round, objects were notseen at greater distances in some directions than in others ;and this manifestly proves inequality in the plain. At sea,a person's eye being six feet above the surface of the water,his horizon is two miles and four-fifths distant. In likemanner, the more level the plain, the more nearly does thehorizon approach within these narrow limits : and this, inmy opinion, entirely destroys that grandeur, which onewould have imagined that a vast level plain would havepossessed.October 1st. — We started by moonlight and arrived atthe Rio Tercero by sunrise. This river is also called theSaladillo, and it deserves the name, for the water is brackish.I staid here the greater part of the day, searching forfossil bones. Falconer mentions having seen, in the bed ofthis river, great bones, and the case of a giant armadillo.By good fortune, I discovered a tooth embedded in a layerof rock marl, which was afterwards found exactly to fisc thesocket in the head of a strange animal, the Toxodon, whichOct. 1833. MASTODON. 147will presently be mentioned. Hearing also of the remainsof one of the old giants, which a man told me he had seenon the banks of the Parana, I procured a canoe, and proceededto the place. Two groups of immense bones projectedin bold relief from the perpendicular cliff. Theywere, however, so completely decayed, that I could onlybring away small fragments of one of the great molar-teeth ;but these were sufficient to show that the remains belongedto a species of Mastodon. The men who took me in thecanoe, said they had long known of them, and had oftenwondered how they had got there : the necessity of a theorybeing felt, they came to the conclusion, that, like the bizcacha,the mastodon formerly was a burrowing animal ! In theevening we rode another stage, and crossed the Songe,another brackish stream, bearing the dregs of the washingsof the Pampas.October 2d. — We passed through Corunna, which,from the luxuriance of its gardens, was one of the prettiestvillages I saw. From this point to St. Fe the road is notvery safe. The western side of the Parana further northward,ceases to be inhabited ; and hence the Indians sometimescome down, and waylay travellers. The nature of thecountry also favours this, for instead of a grassy plain, thereis an open woodland, composed of low prickly mimosas.We passed some houses that had been ransacked and sincedeserted ; we saw also a spectacle, which my guides viewedwith high satisfaction ; it was the skeleton of an Indian withthe dried skin hanging on the bones, suspended to thebranch of a tree.In the morning we arrived at St. Fe. I was surprised toobserve how great a change of climate a difference of onlythree degrees of latitude between this place and BuenosAyres had caused. This was evident from the dress andcomplexion of the men — from the increased size of the ombu-trees — the number of new cacti and other plants — and especiallyfrom the birds. In the course of an hour I remarkedL 2148 ST. FE. Oct. 1833.half-a-dozen of the latter, which I had never seen at BuenosAyres. Considering that there is no natural boundary betweenthe two places, and that the character of the countryis nearly similar, the difference was much greater than Ishould have expected.October 3d and 4th. — I was confined to my bed bya headach for these two days. A good natured old woman,who attended me, wished me to try many odd remedies. Acommon practice is, to bind an orange-leaf, or a bit of blackplaster, to each temple; and a still more general plan is,to split a bean into halves, moisten them, and place one oneach temple, where they swill easily adhere. It is notthought proper ever to remove the beans or plaster, butto allow them to drop off; and sometimes, if a man, withpatches on his head, is asked, what is the matter ? he willanswer, " I had a headache the day before yesterday."St. Fe is a quiet little town, and is kept clean, and in goodorder. The governor, Lopez, was a common soldier at thetime of the revolution ; but has now been seventeen years inpower. This stability of government is owing to his tyrannicalhabits ; for tyranny seems as yet better adapted to thesecountries, than republicanism. The governor's favouriteoccupation is hunting Indians : a short time since he slaughteredforty-eight, and sold the children at the rate of threeor four pounds apiece.October 5th. — We crossed the Parana to St. Fe Bajada,a town on the opposite shore. The passage took somehours, as the river here consisted of a labyrinth of smallstreams, separated by low wooded islands. I had a letter ofintroduction to an old Catalonia Spaniard, who treated mewith the most uncommon hospitality. The Bajada is thecapital of Entre Rios. In 1825 the to-mi contained 6000inhabitants, and the province 30,000 ; yet, few as they are,none have suffered more from bloody and desperate revolutions.They boast here of representatives, ministers, a standingarmy, and governors : so it is no wonder that they haveOct. 1833. FOSSIL HORSE. 149their revolutions. At some future day this must be one ofthe richest countries of La Plata. The soil is varied and productive,and its almost insular form gives it two grand linesof communication by the rivers Parana and Uruguay.I was delayed here five days, and employed myself in examiningthe geology of the surrounding country, which wasvery interesting. We here see beds of sand, clay, and limestone,containing sea-shells and sharks' teeth, passing aboveinto an indurated marl, and from that into the red clayeyearth of the Pampas, with its calcareous concretions and thebones of terrestrial animals. This vertical section clearlytells us, of a large bay of pure salt-water, gradually encroachedon, and at last becoming the bed of a muddy estuary, intowhich floating carcasses were swept. I found near the Bajadaa large piece, nearly four feet across, of the giant armadillo-likecase ; also a molar tooth of a mastodon, and fragments ofvery many bones, the greater number of which were rotten,and as soft as clay.A tooth which I discovered by one point projecting fromthe side of a bank, interested me much, for I at once perceivedthat it had belonged to a horse. Feeling much surpriseat this, I carefully examined its geological position, and wascompelled to come to the conclusion,* that a horse, whichcannot from a comparison of the tooth alone, be distinguishedfrom the existing species lived as a contemporarywith the various great monsters that formerly inhabited SouthAmerica. Mr. Owen and myself, at the College of Surgeons,compared this tooth with a fragment of another, probablybelonging to the Toxodon, which was embedded at the dis-thebroken tooth mentioned at Bahia Blanc must not be forgotten.jas this horse existed at the same time with animals now extinct, it isnot probable, that it is the same species with the recent kind, althoughfrom the similarity of the teeth it must have been closely allied. Cuvier,talking of the remains of the horse, found fossil under similar conditionsin Europe, remarks, " It is not possible to say whether it was one of thespecies now existing or not, because the skeletons of these species are solike each other, that they cannot be distinguished by the mere comparisonisolated fragments." — Theory of the Earth, English translation, p. 283.150 ST. FE. Oct. 1833.tance only of a few yards in the same earthy mass. No sensibledifference in their state of decay could be perceived ;they were both tender, and partially stained red. If thehorse did not coexist with the Toxodon, the tooth must bysome accident, not very easily understood, have been embeddedwithin the last three centuries (the period of the introductionof the horse), with the remains of those animals,which ages since perished, when the Pampas was covered bythe waters of the sea. Now, I may ask, will any one creditthat two teeth of nearly equal size, buried in the same substanceclose together, after a period of so vast an inequality,could exist in the same condition of decay ? We must concludeotherwise. Certainly it is a marvellous event in thehistory of animals, that a native kind should have disappeared*to be succeeded in after ages by the countless herdsintroduced with the Spanish colonist ! But our surpriseshould be modified when it is already known, that the remainsof the Mastodon angiistidens (the tooth formerly alludedto as embedded near that of the horse, probably belongedto this species) have been found both in South America,and in the southern parts of Europe.With regard to North America, Cuvier says the Elephantprimi genius " has left thousands of its carcasses from Spainto the shores of Siberia, and it has been found in the wholeof North America." The fossil ox, in a like manner, hewrites, J is buried "dans toute la par tie borealis des deuxcontinent, puisque on en a d'AUemagne, d'ltalie, de Prussia,de la Siberia occidentale et orientale, et de I'Amerique." Imay here add that horses' bones, mingled with those of themastodon, have several times been transmitted for sale fromNorth America to England ; but it has always been imagined,from the simple fact of their being horses' bones, that theyhad been accidentally mingled with the fossils. Among theI need not here state, that there is no kind of evidence to support thebelief, that a horse existed in America previously to the age of Columbus,t Theory of the Earth, p. 281 (English translation).t Ossemens Fossiles, vol. iv., p. 147.IOct. 1833. ZOOLOGICAL PROVINCES. 151remains brought home by Capta Beechey from the westcoast of the same continent, in the frozen region of 66*^north. Dr. Buckland* has described the astragalus metacarpus,and metatarsus of the horse, which were associatedwith the remains of the Elephas primi genius, and of thefossil ox. Thus we have an elephant, an ox, and a horse(the species of the latter is only presumed to be identical),common to Europe and to North America.Very few species of living quadrupeds,! which are altogetherterrestrial in their habits, are common to the two continents,and these few are chiefly confined to the extreme frozen regionsof the north. The separation, therefore, of the Asiatic andAmerican zoological provinces appears formerly to have beenless perfect than at present. The remains of the elephant andof the ox have been found on the banks of the Nadir (long.175° E.), on the extreme part of Siberia, nearest theAmerican coast : and the former remains, according to Chasare common in the peninsula of Kamtschatka. On theopposite shores, likewise, of the narrow strait which dividesthese two great continents, we know, from the discoveries ofKotzebue and Beechey, that the remains of both animalsoccur abundantly : and as Dr. Buckland has shown they areassociated with the bones of the horse, the teeth of whichanimal in Europe, according to Cuvier, accompany by thousandsthe remains of the pachydermata of the later periods.With these facts, we may safely look at this quarter, asthe line of communication (now interrupted by the steadyprogress of geological change) by which the elephant, theox, and the horse, entered America, and peopled its wideextent. ISee the admirable Appendix to Beech ey's Voyage, p. 592 (quartoedition).f See Dr. Richardson's very interesting Report on North AmericanZoology for the British Association of 1836.J I do not here mean to fix on the more northern parts of the oldworld as the parent country of these two animals. I only want topoint out the channel of communication — not the course of the stream —152 ST. FE. Oct. 1833.The occurrence of the fossil horse and of Mastodon angus-tidesin South America, is a much more remarkable circumstancethan that of the animals mentioned above in the northernhalf of the continent; for if we divide America, not by theIsthmus of Panama, but by the southern part of Mexico,* inlat. 20°, where the great table-land presents an obstacle tothe migration of species, by affecting the climate, and byforming, with the exception of some valleys and of a fringe6f low land on the coast, a broad barrier ; we shall then havetwo zoological provinces strongly contrasted with each other.Some few species alone have passed the barrier, and may beconsidered as wanderers, such as the puma, opossum, ,and peccari. The analogy of South America ischaracterized by possessing several species of the genera ofllama, cavy (and the allied animals), tapir, peccari, opossum,antedate, sloth, and armadillo. If North America had possessedspecies of these genera proper to it, the distinction ofthe two provinces could not have been drawn ; but the presenceof a few wanderers scarcely affects the case. North America,on the other hand, is characterized by its numerous ro-dentsand by four genera of solid horned ruminates of whichsection the southern half does not possess a single species.whether from west to east, or the reverse. Perhaps, when we recollecthow extraordinarily the Pachydermata abounded during the Tertiaryepochs in the Old World, and that the representatives of these animalsnow only exist in that quarter, it may seem most probable that themigration took place from Asia to America.This is the division followed by Lichtenstein, Swains, and Richardson.The section from Vera Cruz to Acapulco, given by Humboldt inthe Atlas to Polit. Essay on Kingdom of N. Spain, will show how immensea barrier the Mexican table-land forms.f Dr. Richardson (Report to Brit. Assoc, p. 157), talking of theidentification of a Mexican animal with the Somewheres prehensile, says,We do not know with what propriety, but, if correct, it is, if not asolitary instance, at least very nearly so, of a rodent animal being commonto North and South America."X Dicranocerus lucifer, Capta Americana, Oves montana. Bos Americana,and Moschatus. — Report to Brit. Assoc, p. 159.Oct. 1833. ZOOLOGICAL PROVINCES. 153This distinction of the two zoological provinces does notappear always to have existed. At the present day theorder of Edentata is much more strongly developed in SouthAmerica, than in any other part of the world : and concludingfrom the fossil remains, which were discovered at BahiaBlanc, such must have been the case during a formerepoch. In America, north of Mexico, not one of this orderis now found : yet, as is well known, the gigantic megalonyx,considered by Cuvier as a species of Megatherium, has beenfound only in that country ; and as it appears from recentobservations,* the Megatherium Cuvier itself likewiseoccurs there. Mr. Owen showed me the tibia of somelarge animal, which Sir Philip Egerton had purchasedout of a collection of the remains of the mastodon broughtfrom North America. Mr. Owen says it certainly belongsto one of the Edentata, and it so closely resembles a bonewhich I found embedded, together with fragments of thegreat armadillo-like covering, in Banda Oriental, that itprobably forms a species of the same genus. Lastly, amongthe fossils brought home by Captain Beechey from theN.W. coast, there was a cervical vertebra, which, when comparedby Mr. Pentland with the skeletons at Paris, wasfound to resemble that of the sloth and antedate more thanthat of any other animal, although having some points ofessential difference.Of the Pachydermata four or five species are now found inAmerica; but, as in the case of the Edentata, none arepeculiar to the continent north of Mexico ; and one aloneseems to exist there as a wanderer. Yet the account of themultitude of bones of the mastodon and elephant, whichhave been discovered in the salt-hicks of North America, isfamiliar to every one. The remains of the Mastodon gigan-term have been found nowhere else; but those of theElephas primi genius are common to a large part of theEd. New Phil. Journal. July, 1828, p. 327. From a paper by Mr.Cooper in the Lyceum of Natural History of New York.f See Dr, Buckland. Appendix to Beechey's Voyage, p. 597.154 ST. FE. Oct. 1833.terrestrial globe.* This elephant must have existed inMexico ; and Cu\aer,t judging from a fragment of a tusk,thinks it even extended to the neighbourhood of Quito inSouth America. In the latter country three species of Mastodonhave been discovered. One of these, 31. augustines, iscommon to Europe. It is singular that its remains, as yet,have never been brought from North America ; nevertheless,considering that it was a contemporary of the extinctanimals above mentioned, it seems highly probable that itarrived by the same line of communication on the N.W.coast. As its remains have frequently been found at a greatelevation in the Cordillera, perhaps its habits led it tofollow that chain of mountains from north to south.After these facts, it is only in conformity with what wemight almost have expected, that the horse, belonging to thesame order of Pachydermata, should formerly have inhabitedboth North and South America. It is interesting thus to discoveran epoch anterior to the division, as far at least as twoimportant orders among the mammalia are concerned, of thecontinent into two separate zoological provinces. Thegeologist who believes in considerable oscillations of level inthe crust of the globe within recent periods, will not fear tospeculate either on the elevation of the Mexican platform,as a cause of the distinction, or on the submergence of landin the West Indian seas, — a circumstance which is perhapsindicated by the zoology of those islands. JI may observe that at the present day both species of elephants havewide ranges. The African one is found from the Senegal to the Cape ofGood Hope, a distance of about 3000 miles. The Asiatic kind formerlyhad an equal range, namely, from the banks of the Indus to the EastIndian Isles. The hippopotamus is believed to have reached from theCape to Egypt.t Ossemens Fossiles, vol. i., p. 158. Cuvier says he cannot decidepositively, not having seen a molar tooth.{ Dr. Richardson (Report for 1836, to Brit. Assoc, p. 157) says, " thespotted cavy {ccBlogenys), and perhaps a species of cavia, and one dasy-procta, extend from South America to the West Indies and Mexico."Cuvier says the Kinkajou is found in the larger Antilles, but others{Oct. 1833. GREAT DROUGHT. 155The number of bones embedded in the grand estuary-depositof the Pampas must he very great ; I myself heardof, and saw many groups. The names of such places as " thestream of the animal' " the hill of the giant," tell the samestory. At other times I heard of the marvellous property ofcertain rivers, which had the power of changing small bonesinto large ; or as some maintained, the bones themselvesgrew. As far as I am aware, not one of these animals, aswas formerly supposed, perished in the marshes, or muddyriver-beds of the present land, but their bones have beenexposed by the streams intersecting the deposit in whichtheir remains were formerly buried. We may thereforeconclude that the whole area of the Pampas is one widesepulchre for these extinct quadrupeds.While travelling through the country, I received severalvivid descriptions of the effect of a great drought ; and the accountof this may throw some light on the cases, where vastnumbers of animals of all kinds, have been embedded together.The period included between the year? 1827 and1830 is called the '^gran sect" or the great drought. Duringthis time, so little rain fell, that the vegetation, even to thethistles, failed; the brooks were dried up, and the wholecountry assumed the appearance of a dusty high-road.This was especially the case in the northern part of theprovince of Buenos Ayres, and the southern part of St. Fe.Very great numbers of birds, wild animals, cattle, and horses,perished from the want of food and Vater. A man told me,that the deer* used to come into his courtyard to the well,affirm that this is an error : according to M. Germans, the Didelphis cran-carnivorainhabits the Antilles. A tooth of the Mastodon has been broughtfrom Bahama (Ed. New Phil. Journal, July, 1826, p. 393). We cannot,however, from this conclude, that the Mastodon formerly inhabited thoseislands, for the carcass might have been floated there. Some mammaliacertainly are peculiar to the Archipelago.In Capt. Owen's Surveying Voyage (vol. ii., p. 274) there is a curious accountof the effects of a drought on the elephants, at Benguela (west coastof Africa). " A number of these animals had sometime since entered the156 ST. FE. Oct. 1833.which he had been obliged to dig to supply his own familywith water ; and that the partridges had hardly strength to flyawaywhen pursued. The lowest estimation of the loss of cattlein the province of Buenos Ayres alone, was taken at one millionhead. A proprietor at San Pedro had previously to theseyears 20,000 cattle; at the end not one remained. SanPedro is situated in the middle of the finest country ; andeven now again abounds with animals ; yet, during the latterpart of the " grand seco,^' live cattle were brought in vesselsfor the consumption of the inhabitants. The animalsroamed from their estancias, and wandering far to the southward,were mingled together in such multitudes, that a governmentcommission was sent from Buenos Ayres to settlethe disputes of the owners. Sir Woodbine Parish informedme of another and very curious source of dispute ; the groundbeing so long dry, such quantities of dust were blown about,that in this open country the landmarks became obliterated,and people could not tell the Units of their estates.I was informed by an eyewitness, that the cattle in herds ofthousands rushed into the Parana,* and being exhausted byhunger they were unable to crawl up the muddy banks, andthus were drowned. The arm which runs by San Pedrowas so full of putrid carcasses, that the master of a vesseltold me, that the smell rendered it quite impossible to passthat way. Without doubt several hundred thousand animalsthus perished in the river. Their bodies when putrid floateddown the stream, and many in all probability were depositedtown, in a body, to possess themselves of the wells, not being able toprocure any water in the country. The inhabitants mustered, when adesperate conflict ensued, which terminated in the ultimate discomfitureof the invaders, but not until they had killed one man, and woundedseveral others." The town is said to have a population of nearly threethousand !Azara talks of the fury of the wild horses rushing into the marshesduring a dry season : " et les premiers arrives sont fouls, et cases parceux, qui les suivent. II c'est arrive plus d'une fois de trouver plus demille cadavres de chevaux sauvages morts de cette fa9on." — Vol. i.,p. 374.Oct. 1833. GREAT DROUGHT. 157in the estuary of the Plata. All the small rivers becamehighly sane, and this caused the death of vast numbers inparticular spots ; for vi^hen an animal drinks of such water itdoes not recover. I noticed, but probably it was the effectof a gradual increase, rather than of any one period, that thesmaller streams in the Pampas were paved with a breccia ofbones.* Subsequently to this unusual drought a very rainyseason commenced, which caused great floods. Hence it isalmost certain, that some thousands of these skeletons wereburied by the deposits of the very next year. What wouldbe the opinion of a geologist, viewing such an enormous collectionof bones, of all kinds of animals and of all ages, thusembedded in one thick earthy mass ? Would he not attributeit to a flood having swept over the surface of the land, ratherthan to the common order of things ?These droughts to a certain degree seem to be periodical ;I was told the dates of several others, and the intervals wereabout fifteen years. A tendency to periodical droughts is, Ibelieve, common in most dry climates :t such certainly is thecase in Australia. Captain Sturt says they return afterevery ten and twelve years, and are then followed by excessiverains, which gradually become less and less, till anotherdrought is the consequence. The year 1826 and the twofollowing were singularly dry in Australia, and the latterwere the first of the " grand seco.^^ I mention this, becauseIn the neighbourhood of the great towns on the shores of the Plata,the number of bones strewed over the ground is truly astonishing. Sinceour return I have been informed, that ships have been freighted to thiscountry with a cargo of bones. That cattle should be fattened on turnipsmanured with the bones of animals that lived in the southern hemisphere, ■is a curious fact in the commerce of the world In the East Indies theluxurious drink wine cooled with North-american ice, which in itsjourney has twice crossed the equator!t Perhaps in every country, but the effect is more marked where themean annual quantity of rain is small. I have seen the trunk of an oldtree in England, in which the successive rings showed a tendency toperiodical increase and diminution of size; about every tenth ring beingsmall. See Mr. Babbage's Ninth Bridgewater Treatise. Note M.158 RIO PARANA. Oct. 1833.General Beatson in his account of the island of St. Helena,has remarked that variations in climate sometimes appear tobe the effect of the operation of some very general cause.He says (page 43), "The severe drought felt here in 1791and 1792, was far more calamitous in India. DoctorAnderson states, in a letter to Colonel Kyd, dated the 9thof August, 1792, that, owing to a failure of rain, during theabove two years, one half of the inhabitants in the northernprovinces had perished by famine ; and the remainder wereso feeble and weak, that on the report of rice coming fromthe Malabar coast, 5000 poor people left Rajamundy, andvery few of them reached the sea-side, although the distanceis only 50 miles. It appears by Mr. Bryan Edwards'sHistory of the West Indies, that the seasons 1791-2were unusually dry at the island of Montserrat'' Barrow*in the latter part of 1792, when at the Cape de Verd islandssays, " In fact a drought of three j-ears' continuance, and consequentfamine for almost the same period, had nearly desolatedthe island."October 12th. — I had intended to have pushed myexcursion further, but not being quite well, I was compelledto return by a balandra, or one-masted vessel of about ahundred tons burden, which was bound to Buenos Ayres.As the weather was not fair, we moored early in the day toa branch of a tree on one of the islands. The Parana is fullof islands, which undergo a constant round of decay and renovation.In the memory of the master several large ones haddisappeared, and others again had been formed and protectedby vegetation. They are composed of muddy sand, withouteven the smallest pebble, and were then about fourfeet above the level of the river ; but during the periodicalfloods they are inundated. They all present one character ;numerous willows and a few other trees are bound together bya great variety of creeping plants, thus forming a thick jungle.These thickets afford a retreat for carpinchos and jaguars.Voyage to Codlin China, p. 67.Oct. 1833. JAGUAR. 159The fear of the latter animal, quite destroyed all pleasurein scrambling through the woods. This evening I had notproceeded a hundred yards, before finding indubitable signsof the recent presence of the tiger, I was obliged to comeback. On every island there are tracks; and as on theformer excursion "el castro de los Indies" had been thesubject of conversation, so in this was " el castro del tigre,"The wooded banks of the great rivers appear to be thefavourite haunt of the jaguar ; but south of the Plata, I wastold, they frequented the reeds bordering lakes : whereverthey are, they seem to require water. The jaguar has beenkilled on the banks of the Rio Negro, in lat. 41°; and Falconerstates that the lake Nahuel-huapi, takes its name fromthe Indian word for tiger: the latitude of this lake is about42° ; which corresponds to the situation of the Pyrenees inthe northern hemisphere. These animals are particularlyabundant on the isles of the Parana ; their common prey isthe carpincho, so that it is generally said, where the car-pinchesare plentiful there is little danger of the jaguar.Falconer states, that near the mouth of the Plata, on thesouthern side, the jaguars are numerous, and that theychiefly live on fish ; this account I have heard repeated.On the Parana they have killed many wood-cutters, andhave even entered vessels at night. There is a man nowliving in the Bajada, who, coming up from below when it wasdark, was seized on the deck ; he escaped, however, with theloss of the use of one arm. When the floods drive theseanimals from the islands they are most dangerous. I wastold, that a few years since, a very large one found its wayinto a church at St. Fe : two padres entering one after theother were killed, and a third, who came to see what was thematter, escaped with difficulty. The beast was destroyed bybeing shot from a corner of the building which was unroofed.They commit also at these times great ravages among thecattle and horses. It is said they kill their prey by breakingthe vertebrae of the neck. If driven from the carcass theyseldom return to it. The Gauchos say that the jaguar, when160 RIO PARANA. Oct. 1833.wandering about at night, is much tormented by the foxesyelping as they follow him. This is a curious coincidencewith the fact which is generally affirmed of the jackals accompanying,in a similarly officious manner, the East Indiantiger. The jaguar is a noisy animal, roaring much by night,and especially before bad weather.One day, when hunting on the banks of the Uruguay, Iwas shown certain trees, to which these animals aresaid constantly to recur, for the purpose of sharpeningtheir claws. I saw three well-known trees ; in front thebark was worn smooth, and on each side there were deepscratches, or rather grooves, extending in an oblique line,nearly a yard in length. The scars were of different ages. Acommon method of ascertaining whether a jaguar is in theneighbourhood, is to examine these trees. I imagine thishabit of the jaguar is exactly similar to one, which may any daybe seen in the common cat, as with outstretched legs and exsertedclaws it scrapes the leg of a chair. Some such habitmust be also common to the puma, for on the bare hard soilof Patagonia I have frequently seen scores so deep, that noother animal could have made them. The object of thispractice is, 1 should think, to blunt rather than to sharpen(as the Gauchos say), the points of their claws, which are soseldom used. The jaguar is killed, without much difficulty,by the aid of dogs baying and driving him up a tree, wherehe is despatched with bullets.Owing to bad weather we remained two days at ourmoorings. Our only amusement was catching fish for ourdinner : there were several kinds, and all good eating. Afish called the " armado'^ (a Silures), is remarkable from aharsh grating noise it makes when caught by hook and line,and which can be distinctly heard when the fish is beneaththe water. This same fish has the power of firmly catchinghold of any object, such as the blade of an oar or the fishing-line,with the strong spine both of its pectoral and dorsal fin.In the evening the weather was quite tropical, the thermometerstanding at 79°. Numbers of fireflies were hovering about.Oct. 1833. Scissors-BEAK. 161and the mosquitoes were very troublesome. I exposed myhand for five minutes, and it was soon black with them ; Ido not suppose there could have been less than fifty, all busysucking.October 15th. — We got under way and passed PuntaGorda, where there is a colony of tame Indians, from theprovince of Missions. We sailed rapidly down the current,but before sunset, from a silly fear of bad weather, we broughtto in a narrow arm of the river. I took the boat and rowedsome distance up this creek. It was very narrow, winding,and deep; on each side, a wall thirty or forty feet high,formed by trees entwined with creepers, gave to the canal asingularly gloomy appearance. I here saw a very extraordinarybird, called the Scissors-beak {Rhyncops nigra). Ithas short legs, web feet, extremely long-pointed wings, and isof about the size of a tern. The beak is flattened laterally,that is, in a plane at right angles to that of a spoonbill,or duck. It is as flat and elastic as an ivory paper-cutter,and the lower mandible, differently from every otherbird, is an inch and a half longer than the upper. I will heredetail all I know of the habits of the scissors-beak. It is foundboth on the east and west coasts, between lat. 30° and 45°,and frequents either salt or fresh water. The specimen nowat the Zoological Society was shot at a" lake near Maldonado,from which the water had been nearly drained, and which,in consequence, swarmed with small fry. I there saw severalof these birds, generally in small flocks, flying backwards andforwards, close to the surface of the lake. They kept theirbills wide open, and with the lower mandible half buried inthe water. Thus skimming the surface, they ploughed it intheir course : the water was quite smooth, and it formed amost curious spectacle to behold a flock, each bird leaving itsnarrow wake on the mirror-like surface. In their flight theyfrequently twist about with extreme rapidity, and so dexterouslymanage, that with their projecting lower mandiblethey plough up small fish, which are secured by the upperhalf of their scissors-like bills. This fact I repeatedly saw, as,VOL. III. M ^162 RIO PARANA. Oct. 1833.like swallows, they continued to fly backwards and forwards,close before me. Occasionally when leaving the surface ofthe water their flight was wild, irregular, and rapid; theythen also uttered loud harsh cries. When these birds arefishing, the length of the primary feathers of the wings isseen to be quite necessary, in order to keep the latter dry.When thus employed, their forms resemble the symbol bywhich many artists represent marine birds. The tail is muchused in steering their irregular course.These birds are common far inland along the course of the RioParana ; it is said they remain during the whole year, and breedin the marshes. During the day they rest in flocks on the grassyplains, at some distance from the water. Being at anchor, asI have said, in one of the deep creeks between the islands ofthe Parana, as the evening drew to a close, one of thesescissors-beaks suddenly appeared. The water was quite still,and many little fish were rising. The bird continued for along time to skim the surface, flying in its wild and irregularmanner up and down the narrow canal, now dark with thegrowing night and the shadows of the overhanging trees. AtMonte Video I observed that some large flocks during theday remained on the mud-banks at the head of the harbour,in the same manner as on the grassy plains near the Parana ;and every evening they took flight direct to seaward. Fromthese facts, I suspect that the Rhyncops generally fishes bynight, at which time many of the lower animals come mostabundantly to the surface. M. Lesson states that he hasseen these birds opening the shells of the maitre, buried inthe sand-banks on the coast of Chile : from their weak bills,with the lower mandible so much produced, their short legsand long wings, it is very improbable that this can be ageneral habit.In our course down the Parana, I only observed threeother birds, whose habits are worth mentioning. One is asmall kingfisher {Alcedo Americana) ; it has a longer tail thanthe European species, and hence does not sit in so stiff andupright a position. Its flight also, instead of being directOct, 1833. ORNITHOLOGY. 163and rapid, like the course of an arrow, is weak and undulatory,as among the soft-billed birds. It utters a low note,like the clicking together of two small stones. A smallgreen parrot,* with a gray breast, appears to prefer the talltrees on the islands, to any other situation, for its building-place.A number of nests are placed so close together, asto form one great mass of sticks. These parrots alwayslive in flocks, and commit great ravages on the cornfields.I was told, that near Colonia 2500 were killed inthe course of one year. A bird {Milvulus fortunatus)with a forked tail, terminated by two long feathers, andnamed by the Spaniards scissors-tail, is very common nearBuenos Ayres. It commonly sits on a branch of the ombutree, near the house, and thence takes a short flight in pursuitof insects, and returns to the same spot. Whenon the wing, it presents, in its manner of flight andgeneral appearance, a caricature-likeness of the commonswallow. It has the power in the air of turning veryshortly, and in so doing, opens and shuts its tail, sometimesin a horizontal or lateral, and sometimes in a verticaldirection, just like a pair of scissors. In structure, this birdis a true tyrant-flycatcher, although in its habits certainlyallied to the swallows.October 16th. — Some leagues above Rozario the westernshore was bounded by perpendicular cliff's, which extendedin a long line to below San Nicholas. Hence the coast moreresembled that of the sea, than that of a fresh-water river.It is a great drawback to the scenery of the Parana, that,from the soft nature of its banks, the water is very muddy.The Uruguay, floating through a granitic country, is muchclearer ; and I am told, that where the two channels unite atthe head of the Plata, the waters may for a long distance bedistinguished by their black and red colours. In the evening,the wind not being quite fair, as usual we immediatelymoored, and the next day, as it blew rather freshly, thoughLagune Veuve of Azara. Nathan Gen. Hist., vol. ii., p. 192.M 2164 RIO PARANA. Oct. 1833.with a favouring current, the master was much too indolentto think of starting. At Bajada, he Alas described to me ashombre muy afflict," — a man always miserable to get on ;but certainly he bore all delays with admirable resignation.He was an old Spaniard, and had been many years in thiscountry. He professed a great liking to the English, butstoutly maintained that the battle of Trafalgar was merelywon by the Spanish captains having been all bought over ;and that the only really gallant action on either side wasperformed by the Spanish admiral. It struck me as rathercharacteristic, that this man should prefer his countrymenbeing thought the worst of traitors, rather than unskilful orcowardly.18th and 19tii. — We continued slowly to sail down thenoble stream : the current helped us but little. Azara hasestimated that even near the sources between latitudes16° 24' and 22° 57', the river has only a fall of one foot foreach mile of latitude ; lower down, this must be muchdiminished. It is stated that a rise of seven feet at BuenosAyres can be perceived sixty leagues up the course of theParana. We met, during our descent, very few vessels.One of the best gifts of nature seems here wilfully thrownaway, in so grand a channel of communication being leftunoccupied. A river in which ships might navigate from atemperate country, as surprisingly abundant in certain productionsas destitute of others, to another possessing atropical climate, and a soil which, according to the best ofjudges, M. Copland, is perhaps unequalled in fertility, inany part of the world. How different would have been theaspect of this river, if English colonists had by good fortunefirst sailed up the Plata ! What noble towns would nowhave occupied its shores ! Till the death of Francis, theDictator of Paraguay, these two countries must remain distinct,as if placed on opposite sides of the globe. Andwhen the old, bloody-minded tyrant is gone to his longaccount, Paraguay will be torn by revolutions, violent inproportion to the previous unnatural calm. That countryOct. 1833. BUENOS AYRES. 165mil have to learn, like every other South American state,that a republic cannot succeed, till it contains a certain bodyof men imbued with the principles of justice and honour.October 20th. — Being arrived at the mouth of theParana, and as I was very anxious to reach Buenos Ayres,I went on shore at Las Concha, with the intention of ridingthere. Upon landing, I found to my great surprise, thatI was to a certain degree a prisoner. A violent revolutionhaving broken out, all the ports were laid under an embargo.I could not return to my vessel, and as for going by land tothe city, it was out of the question. After a long conversationwith the Commandant, I obtained permission to go, thenext day, to General Color, who commanded a division ofthe rebels, on this side of the capital. In the morning I rodeto the encampment. The general, officers, and soldiers, allappeared, and I believe really were, great villains. Thegeneral the very evening before he left the city, voluntarilywent to the governor, and with his hand to his heart, pledgedhis word of honour, that he would remain faithful to the last.The general told me, that the city was in a state of closeblockade, and that all he could do was to give me a passportto the commander-in-chief of the rebels at Quies. Wehad, therefore, to take a great sweep round the city, and itwas with much difficulty that we procured horses. My receptionat the encampment was quite civil, but I was told itwas impossible that I could be allowed to enter the city. Iwas very anxious about this, as I anticipated the Beagle'sdeparture from the Rio Plata, earlier than it took place.Having mentioned, however. General Rosas's obliging kindnessto me when at the Colorado, magic itself could nothave altered circumstances quicker than did this conversation.I was instantly told that though they could notgive me a passport, if I chose to leave my guide and horses,I might pass their sentinels. I was too glad to accept ofthis, and an officer was sent with me to give directions, thatI might not be stopped at the bridge. The road for thespace of a league was quite deserted. I met one party of166 BUENOS AYRES. Oct. 1833.soldiers, who were satisfied by gravely looking at an oldpassport : and at length I was not a little pleased, to findmyself within the city.This revolution was supported by scarcely any pretext ofgrievances. But in a state which, in the course of ninemonths (from February to October, 1820), underwent fifteenchanges in its government — each governor, according to theconstitution, being elected for three years — it would be theheight of illiberality, to ask for pretexts. In this case aparty of men, who being attached to Rosas, were disgustedwith the governor Balance, to the number of seventy leftthe city, and with the cry of Rosas, the whole country tookarms. The city was then blockaded, no provisions, cattle,or horses, were allowed to enter ; besides this, there wasonly a little skirmishing, and a few men daily killed. Theoutside party well knew, that by stopping the supply ofmeat, they would certainly be victorious. General Rosascould not have known of this rising ; but it appears to mequite consonant with the plans of his party. A year ago hewas elected governor, but he refused it, without the Sala wouldalso confer on him extraordinary powers. This was refused,and since then his party have shown, that no other governorcan keep his place. The warfare on both sides was avowedlyprotracted, till it was possible to hear from Rosas. A notearrived a few days after I left Buenos Ayres, which statedthat the General disapproved of peace having been broken,but that he thought the outside party had justice on theirside. On the bare reception of this, the Governor, ministers,and part of the military, to the number of some hundreds,fled from the city. The rebels entered, elected a new governor,and were paid for their services to the number of 5500men. From these proceedings, it was clear that Rosas ultimatelywould become the dictator: to the term king, thepeople in this, as in other republics, have a particular dislike.Since leaving South America, we have heard thatRosas has been elected, nth powers, and for a time altogetheropposed to the constitutional principles of the republic.CHAPTER VIII.Monte Video — Excursion to Colonial Sacramiento — Horse swimming —Value of an Estancia — Cattle, how counted — Geology — Great thistle-beds— Rio Negro — Perforated pebbles — Shepherd dogs — Horsesbrokenin, Gauchos riding, feats with lazo — Toxodon^Armadillo-like giganticcovering — Great tail — Return to Monte Video — Character of inhabitants.BANDA ORIENTAL.Having been delayed for nearly a fortnight in the city,I was glad to escape on board a packet bound for MonteVideo. A town in a state of blockade must always be adisagreeable place of residence ; in this case moreover therewere constant apprehensions from robbers within. Thesentinels were the worst of all; for, from their office andfrom having arms in their hands, they robbed with a degreeof authority, which other men could not imitate.Our passage was a very long and tedious one. The Platalooks like a noble estuary on the map ; but it is in truth apoor affair. A wide expanse of muddy water, has neithergrandeur nor beauty. At one time of the day the twoshores, both of which are extremely low, could just be distinguishedfrom the deck. On arriving at Monte VideoI found the Beagle would not sail for some time, so I preparedfor a short excursion in this part of Banda Oriental.Every thing which I said about the country near Maldonado isapplicable to this ; the land, however, with the one exceptionof the Green Mount, 450 feet high, from which it takes itsname, is far more level. Very Uttle of the undulating grassyplain is enclosed ; but near the town there are a few hedgebanks, covered with agates, cacti, and fennel.November 14th. — We left Monte Video in the afternoon.I intended to proceed to Colonia del Sacramiento,situated on the northern bank of the Plata and opposite toi168 BxVNDA ORIENTAL. NoV. 1833.Buenos Ayres, and thence following up the Uruguay, to thevillage of Mercedes on the Rio Negro (one of the many riversof this name in South America), and from this point toreturn direct to Monte Video. We slept at the house of myguide at Anemones. In the morning we rose early in thehopes of being able to ride a good distance ; but it was avain attempt, for all the rivers were flooded. We passed inboats the streams of Anemones, St. Lucia, and San Jose, -and thus lost much time. On a former excursion I crossed 9the Lucia, near its mouth, and I was surprised to observe how ^easily our horses, although not used to swim, passed over awidth of at least six hundred yards. On mentioning this atMonte Video I was told that a vessel containing somemountebanks and their horses, being wrecked in the Plata,one horse swam seven miles to the shore. In the course ofthe day I Alas amused by the dexterity with which aGaucho forced a restive horse to swim a river. He strippedoff his clothes, and jumping on its back, rode into thewater tiU it was out of its depth 5 then slipping off overthe crupper, he caught hold of the tail, and as often asthe horse turned round, the man frightened it back,by splashing water in its face. As soon as the horsetouched the bottom on the other side, the man pulled himselfon, and was firmly seated, bridle in hand, before thehorse gained the bank. A naked man, on a naked horse, isa fine spectacle ; I had no idea how well the two animalssuited each other. The tail of a horse is a very usefulappendage ; I have passed a river in a boat with four peoplein it, which was ferried across in the same way as theGaucho. If a man and horse have to cross a broad river,the best plan is for the man to catch hold of the pummel ormane, and help himself with the other arm.We slept, and staid the following day at the post of Cure.In the evening the postman or letter-carrier arrived. Hewas a day after his time, owing to the Rio Rozario beingflooded. It would not, however, be of much consequence ;for, although he had passed through some of the principalNov. 1833. COLONIA DEL Sacramento. 169towns in Banda Oriental, his luggage consisted of two letters.The view from the house was pleasing ; an undulating greensurface, with distant glimpses of the Plata. I find I look atthis province with very different eyes, from what I did uponmy first arrival. I recollect I then thought it singularlylevel ; but now, after galloping over the Pampas, my onlysurprise is, what could have induced me ever to have calledit level. The country is a series of undulations, in themselvesperhaps not absolutely great, but as compared to theplains of St. Fe, real mountains. From these inequalities,there is an abundance of small rivulets, and the turf is greenand luxuriant.November 17th. — We crossed the Rozario, which wasdeep and rapid, and passing the village of Colla, arrived atmid-day at Colonia del Sacramiento. The distance is twentyleagues, through a country covered with fine grass, butpoorly stocked with cattle or inhabitants. I was invited tosleep at Colonia, and to accompany on the following day agentleman to his estancia, where there were some limestonerocks. The town is built on a stony promontory somethingin the same manner as at Monte Video. It is strongly fortified;but both fortifications and town suffered much fromthe Brazilian war. It is very ancient ; and the irregularityof the streets, and the surrounding groves of old orange andpeach trees gave it a pretty appearance. The church is acurious ruin ; it was used as a powder-magazine, and wasstruck by lightning in one of the ten thousand thunderstormsof the Rio Plata. Two-thirds of the building wereblown away to the very foundation ; and the rest stands ashattered and curious monument, of the united powers oflightning and gunpowder. In the evening I wandered aboutthe half-demolished walls of the town. It was the chief seatof the Brazilian war ; — a war most injurious to this country,not so much in its immediate effects, as in being the originof a multitude of generals and all other grades of officers.More generals are numbered (but not paid) in the UnitedProvinces of la Plata, than in the United Kingdom of Great170 BANDA ORIENTAL. Nov. 1833.Britain. These gentlemen have learned to like power, anddo not object to a little skirmishing. Hence there are many,always on the watch to create disturbance and to overturn agovernment, which as yet has never rested on any stablefoundation. I noticed however, both here and in otherplaces, a very general interest in the ensuing election for thePresident ; and this appears a good sign for the prosperity ofthis little country. The inhabitants do not require much educationin their representatives ; I heard some men discussingthe merits of those for Colonia; and it was said that,although they were not men of business, they could allsign their names :" with this every reasonable man wassatisfied.18th.— Rode with my host to his estancia, at the Arroyode San Juan. In the evening we took a ride round theestate. It contained two square leagues and a half; andwas situated in what is called a rincon ; that is, one side wasfronted by the Plata, and the two others guarded by impassablebrooks. There was an excellent port for little vessels,and an abundance of small wood, which is valuable as supplyingfuel to Buenos Ayres. I was curious to know thevalue of so complete an estancia. Of cattle there were 3000,and it would well support three or four times that number ; ofmares 800, together with 150 broken horses, and 600 sheep.There was plenty of water and limestone, a rough house,excellent corrals, and a peach orchard. For all this he hadbeen offered 2000/., and only wanted 500/. additional, andprobably would sell it for less. The chief trouble with anestancia, is driving the cattle twice a week to a central spot,in order to make them tame, and to count them. Thislatter operation would be thought difficult, where there areten or fifteen thousand head together. It is managed onthe principle that the cattle invariably divide themselves intolittle troops of from forty to one hundred. Each troop isrecognised by a few peculiarly marked animals, and itsnumber is known : so that, one being lost out of ten thousand,it is perceived by its absence from one of the tropillas.Nov. 1833. RIO URUGUAY. l7lDuring a stormy night the cattle all mingle together ; butthe next morning the tropillas separate as before.November IQth. — Passing the village of Las Vacas, weslept at a house of a North American, who worked a limekilnon the Arroyo de las Vivoras. In the morning we rodeto a projecting headland on the banks of the river, calledPunta Gorda. On the way we tried to find a jaguar. Therewere plenty of fresh tracks, and we visited the trees, onwhich they are said to sharpen their claws ; but we did notsucceed in disturbing one. From this point the Rio Uruguaypresented to our view a noble volume of water. Fromthe clearness and rapidity of the stream, its appearance wasfar superior to that of its neighbour the Parana. On theopposite coast, several branches from the latter river enteredthe Uruguay. As the sun was shining, the two colours ofthe waters could be seen quite distinct. The geologicalsection presented by the cuffs was interesting. At St. Fe,a stratum with marine remains was seen gradually passinginto an estuary deposit. Here we have an alternation ofaction ; — a circumstance no ways improbable in a great bay.A formation of red earthy clay, with nodules of marl, and inevery respect identical with that of the Pampas, is coveredby a white limestone, containing large extinct oysters, andother marine shells ; and over this again, is placed thereddish earthy matter, as in the rest of Banda Oriental.In the evening we proceeded on our road towards Mercedeson the Rio Negro. At night we asked permission tosleep at an estancia, at which we happened to arrive. Itwas a very large estate, being ten leagues square, and theowner is one of the greatest landowners in the country.His nephew had charge of it, and with him there was acaptain in the army, who the other day ran away fromBuenos Ayres. Considering their station, their conversationwas rather amusing. They expressed, as was usual,unbounded astonishment at the globe being round, andcould scarcely credit that a hole would, if deep enough, comeout on the other side. They had, however, heard of a172 BANDA ORIENTAL. Nov. 1833.country where there were six months light and six of darkness,and where the inhabitants were very tall and thin !They were curious about the price and condition of horsesand cattle in England. Upon finding out we did not catchour animals with the lazo, they cried out, " Ah then, youuse nothing but the bolas :" the idea of an enclosedcountry was quite novel to them. The captain at last said,he had one question to ask me, which he should be verymuch obliged if I would answer with all truth. I trembled tothink how deeply scientific it would be : it was, " Whetherthe ladies of Buenos Ayres were not the handsomest in theworld." I replied, " Charmingly so." He added, I haveone other question : *' Do ladies in any other part of theworld wear such large combs ?" I solemnly assured himthey did not. They were absolutely delighted. The captainexclaimed, " Look there ! a man who has seen haK theworld says it is the case ; we always thought so, but now weknow it." My excellent judgment in beauty procured me amost hospitable reception ; the captain forced me to take hisbed, and he would sleep on his recado.2 1st. — Started at sunrise, and rode slowly during thewhole day. The geological nature of this part of the provincewas different from the rest, and closely resembled thatof the Pampas. In consequence, there were immense bedsof the thistle, as well as of the cardoon : the whole country,indeed, may be called one great bed. The two sorts growseparate, each plant in company with its own kind. Thecardoon is as high as a horse's back, but the Pampas thistleis often higher than the crown of the rider's head. To leavethe road for a yard is out of the question ; and the roaditself is partly, and in some cases entirely, closed. Pasture,of course, there is none ; if cattle or horses once enter thebed, they are for the time completely lost. Hence it is veryhazardous to attempt to drive cattle at this season of theyear ; for when jaded enough to face the thistles, they rushamong them, and are seen no more. In these districts thereare very few estancias, and these few are situated in theNov. 1833. HILL OF BEADS. 1 73neighbourhood of damp valleys, where fortunately neither ofthese overwhelming plants can exist. As night came onbefore we arrived at our journey's end, we slept at amiserable little hovel, inhabited by the poorest people. Theextreme, though rather formal courtesy, of our host andhostess, considering their grade of life, was quite delightful.November 22d. — Arrived at an estancia on the Berquelobelonging to a very hospitable Englishman, to whom I hada letter of introduction from my friend Mr. Lumb. I staidhere three days. One morning I rode with my host to theSierra del Pedro Flaco, about twenty miles up the RioNegro. Nearly the whole country was covered with good,though coarse grass, which was as high as a horse's belly ;yet there were square leagues without a single head of cattle.The province of Banda Oriental, if well stocked, wouldsupport an astonishing number of animals ; at present theannual export of hides from Monte Video amounts to threehundred thousand ; and the home consumption, from waste,is very considerable. The view of the Rio Negro from theSierra was the most picturesque which I any where saw. Theriver, broad, deep, and rapid, wound at the foot of a rockyprecipitous cliff: a belt of wood followed its course, andthe horizon was terminated by the distant undulations ofthe plain of turf.When in this neighbourhood I several times heard of theSierra de las Cents ; a hill distant many miles to thenorthward. The name signifies hill of beads. I was assuredthat vast numbers of little round stones, of various colours,each with a small cylindrical hole, are found there. Formerlythe Indians used to collect them, for the purpose ofmaking necklaces and bracelets — a taste, I may observe,which is common to all savage nations, as well as to themost polished. I did not know what to understand fromthis story, but upon mentioning it at the Cape of GoodHope to Dr. Andrew Smith, he told me that he recollectedfinding on the south-eastern coast of Africa, about onehundred miles to the eastward of St. John's river, some174 BANDA ORIENTAL. Nov. 1833.quartz crystals with their edges blunted from attrition, andmixed with gravel on the sea-beach. Each crystal was aboutfive lines in diameter, and from an inch to an inch and a halfin length. Many of them had a small canal extending fromone extremity to the other, perfectly cylindrical, and of asize that readily admitted a coarse thread, or a piece of finecatgut. Their colour was red or dull white. The nativeswere acquainted with this structure in crystals. I have mentionedthese circumstances, because, although no crystallizedbody is at present known to assume this form, it may leadsome future traveller to investigate the real nature of suchstones.While staying at this estancia, I was amused with what Isaw and heard of the shepherd dogs of the country.* Whenriding, it is a common thing to meet a large flock of sheepguarded by one or two dogs, at the distance of some milesfrom any house or man. I often wondered how so firm afriendship had been established. The method of educationconsists in separating the puppy, while very young, from thebitch, and in accustoming it to its future companions. Anewe is held three or four times a day for the little thing tosuck ; and a nest of wool is made for it in the sheep-pen ; atno time is it allowed to associate with other dogs, or with thechildren of the family. The puppy is, moreover, generallycastrated ; so that, when grown up, it can scarcely have anyfeelings in common with the rest of its kind. From thiseducation it has no wish to leave the flock, and just as anotherdog will defend its master, man, so will these, thesheep. It is amusing to observe, when approaching a flock,how the dog immediately advances barking, and the sheepall close in his rear, as if round the oldest ram. Thesedogs are also easily taught to bring home the flock, at acertain hour in the evening. Their most troublesome fault,when young, is their desire of playing with the sheep ; forM. D'Orbigny has given nearly a similar account of these dogs,vol. i., p. 175.INov. 1833. SHEPHERD DOGS. 1'J5in their sport they sometimes gallop their poor subjects mostunmercifully.The shepherd dog comes to the house every day for somemeat, and immediately it is given him, he skulks away asif ashamed of himself. On these occasions the house-dogsare very tyrannical, and the least of them will attack andpursue the stranger. The minute, however, the latter hasreached the flock, he turns round, and begins to bark, andthen all the house-dogs take very quickly to their heels. Inasimilar manner a whole pack of the hungry wild dogs willscarcely ever (and I was told by some, never) venture toattack a flock guarded even by one of these faithful shepherds.The whole account appears to me a curious instanceof the pliability of the affections in the dog race ; and yet,whether wild, or however educated. Math a mutual feeling ofrespect or fear for those that are fulfilling their instinct ofassociation. For we can understand on no principle, thewild dogs being driven away by the single one with its flock,except that they consider, from some confused notion,that the one thus associated gains power, as if in companywith its own kind. F. Cuvier has observed, that all animalsthat readily enter into domestication, consider man as amember of their society, and thus fulfil their instinct ofassociation. In the above case the shepherd dogs rank thesheep as their fellow brethren ; and the wild dogs, thoughknowing that the individual sheep are not dogs, but aregood to eat, yet partly consent to this view, when seeingthem in a flock with a shepherd dog at their head.One evening a " domino" (a subduer of horses) came forthe purpose of breaking in some colts. I will describe thepreparatory steps, for I believe they have not been mentionedby other travellers. A troop of wild young horses isdriven into the corral, or large enclosure of stakes, and thedoor is shut. We Mall suppose that one man alone has to catchand mount a horse, which as yet had never felt bridle orsaddle. I conceive, except by a Gaucho, such a feat would176 Banda ORIENTAL. NoV. 1833.be utterly impracticable. The Gaucho sticks out a fullgrowncolt ; and as the beast rushes round the circus, hethrows his lazo so as to catch both the front legs. Instantlythe horse rolls over with a hea'\'y shock, and, whilst strugglingon the ground, the Gaucho, holding the lazo tight, makes acircle, so as to catch one of the hind legs, just beneath thefetlock, and draws it close to the two front. He then hitches thelazo, so that the three legs are bound together. Then sittingon the horse's neck, he fixes a strong bridle, without a bit, tothe lower jaw. This he does by passing a narrow thongthrough the eye-holes, at the end of the reins, and severaltimes round both jaw and tongue. The two front legs arenow tied closely together with a strong leathern thong,fastened by a sip-knot. The lazo, which bound the threetogether, being then loosed, the horse rises with difficulty.The Gaucho now holding fast the bridle fixed to the lower jaw,leads the horse outside the corral. If a second man is present(otherwise the trouble is much greater) he holds the animal'shead, whilst the first puts on the horse cloths and saddle, andgirths the whole together. During this operation, the horse,from dread and astonishment at thus being bound round thewaist, throws himself, over and over again, on the ground,and, tiU beaten, is unwilling to rise. At last, when thesaddling is finished, the poor animal can hardly breathe fromfear, and is white with foam and sweat. The man now preparesto mount, by pressing heavily on the stirrup, so thatthe horse may not lose its balance ; and at the moment hethrows his leg over the animal's back he pulls the slip-knot,and the beast is free. Some " dominoes " pull the knotwhile the animal is lying on the ground, and, standing overthe saddle, allow it to rise beneath them. The horse, wildwith dread, gives a few most violent bounds, and then startsoff at fuU gallop : when quite exhausted, the man, by patience,brings him back to the corral, where reeking hot,and scarcely alive, the poor beast is let free. Those animalswhich will not gallop away, but obstinately throwNov. 1S33. HORSEMANSHIP. 177themselves on the ground, are by far the most troublesome.This process is tremendously severe,* but in two or threetrials the horse is tamed. It is not, however, for someweeks that the animal is ridden with the iron bit and solidring ; for it must learn to associate the will of its rider withthe feel of the rein, before the most powerful bridle can beof any service.The Gauchos are well known to be perfect riders. Theidea of being thrown, let the horse do what it Uses, neverenters their head. Their criterion of a good rider, is a manwho can manage an untamed colt, or who, if his horse falls,alights on his own feet, or can perform other such exploits.I have heard of a man betting that he would throw his horsedown twenty times, and that nineteen out of these he wouldnot fall himself. I recollect seeing a Gaucho riding a verystubborn horse, which three times successively reared so highas to fall backwards with great violence. The man judgedwith uncommon coolness the proper moment for sUpping off,not an instant before or after the right time. Directly thehorse rose the man jumped on his back, and at last theystarted at a gallop. The Gaucho never appears to exert anymuscular force. I was one day watching a good rider, as wewere galloping along at a rapid pace, and thought to myself,"surely if the horse starts, you appear so careless on your seatyou must fall." At this moment, a male ostrich sprang fromits nest right beneath the horse's nose. The young coltbounded on one side, like a stag ; but as for the man, all that• Animals are so abundant in these countries that humanity and self-interestare not closely united ; therefore the former is scarcely known.One day, riding in the Pampas with a very respectable " Estanciero," myhorse, being tired, lagged behind. The man often shouted to me to spurhim. When I remonstrated that it was a pity, for the horse was quiteexhausted, he cried out, " Why not ? — never mind — spur him — it is myhorse." I had then some difficulty in making him comprehend that itwas for the horse's sake, and not on his account, that I did not choose touse my spurs. He exclaimed, with a look of great surprise, " Ah DonCarlos que cosa !" It was clear that such an idea had never before enteredhis head.VOL. III. N178 BANDA ORIENTAL. NoV. 1833.could be said, was, that he started and took fright, as partof his horse.In Chile and Peru more pains are taken with the mouthof the horse than in La Plata, and this is evidently a consequenceof the more intricate nature of the country. InChile a horse is not considered perfectly broken tiU he canbe brought up standing, in the midst of his full speed, on anyparticular spot, — for instance, on a cloak thrown on theground : or, again, will charge a wall, and rearing, scrape thesurface with his hoofs. I have seen an animal bounding withspirit, yet merely reined by a fore-finger and thumb, takenat fuU gallop across a courtyard, and then made to wheelround the post of a verandah with great speed, but at soequal a distance, that the rider, with outstretched arm, allthe while kept one finger rubbing the post. Then making ademi-volte in the air, with the other arm outstretched in alike manner, he wheeled round, with astonishing force, in anopposite direction.Such a horse is well broken ; and although this at firstmay appear useless, it is far otherwise. It is only carryingthat which is daily necessary into perfection. When abullock is checked and caught by the lazo, it will sometimesgallop round and round in a circle, and the horse beingalarmed at the great strain, if not well broken, will not readilyturn like the pivot of a wheel. In consequence manymen have been killed ; for if the lazo once takes a twist rounda man's body, it will instantly, from the power of the twoopposed animals, almost cut him in twain. On the sameprinciple the races are managed ; the course is only two orthree hundred yards long, the desideratum being to havehorses that can make a rapid dash. The race-horses aretrained not only to stand with their hoofs touching a line,but to draw all four feet together, so as at the first spring tobring into play the fuU action of the hind quarters. InChile I was told an anecdote, which I believe was true ; and itoffers a good illustration of the use of a well-broken animal.A respectable man riding one day met two others, one ofNov. 1833. HORSEMANSHIP. 179whom was mounted on a horse, which he knew to have beenstolen from himself. He challenged them ; they answered himby drawing their sabres and giving chase. The man, on hisgood and fleet beast kept just ahead : as he passed a thickbush he wheeled round it, and brought up his horse to adead check. The pursuers were obliged to shoot on one sideand ahead. Then instantly dashing on, right behind them, heburied his knife in the back of one, wounded the other, recoveredhis horse from the dying robber, and rode home. Forthese feats of horsemanship two things are necessary : a mostsevere bit, like the Mameluke, the power of which thoughseldom used, the horse knows full well; and large bluntspurs, that can be applied either as a mere touch, or as aninstrument of extreme pain. I conceive that with Englishspurs, the slightest touch of which pricks the skin, it wouldbe impossible to break in a horse after the South-americanfashion.At an estancia near Las Vacas, large numbers of mares,are weekly slaughtered for the sake of their hides, althoughworth only five paper dollars, or about half-a-crown apiece.It seems at first strange that it can answer to kill mares forsuch a trifle ; but as it is thought ridiculous in this country,ever to break in, or to ride a mare, they are of no value,except for breeding. The only thing for which I ever sawmares used was to tread out wheat from the ear ; for whichpurpose they were driven round a circular enclosure, wherethe wheat-sheaves were strewed. The man employed forslaughtering the mares, happened to be celebrated for hisdexterity with the lazo. Standing at the distance of twelveyards from the mouth of the corral, he has laid a wager thathe would catch by the legs every animal, without missingone, as it rushed past him. There was another man whosaid he would enter the corral on foot, catch a mare, fastenher front legs together, drive her out, throw her down, kill,skin, and stake the hide for drying (which latter is a tediousjob) ; and he engaged that he would perform this wholeoperation on twenty-two animals in one day. Or, he wouldN 2180 BANDA ORIENTAL. NoV. 1833.kill and take the skin off fifty in the same time. Thiswould have been a prodigious task, for it is considered agood day's work to skin and stake the hides of fifteen orsixteen animals.November 26th. — I set out on my return in a direct linefor Monte Video. Having heard of some giant's bones at aneighbouring farm-house on the Sarandis^ a small streamentering the Rio Negro, I rode there accompanied by myhost, and purchased for the value of eighteen pence, the headof an animal equalling in size that of the hippopotamus.Mr. Owen in a paper read before the Geological Society,*has called this very extraordinary animal, Toxodon, from thecurvature of its teeth. The following notice is taken fromthe proceedings of that society : Mr. Owen says, judgingfrom the portion of the skeleton preserved, the Toxodon, asfar as dental characters have weight, must be referred to therodent order. But from that order it deviates in the relativeposition of its supernumerary incisors, in the number anddirection of the curvature of its molars, and in some otherrespects. It again deviates, in several parts of its structurewhich Mr. Owen enumerated, both from the Rodentia,and the existing Pachydermata, and it manifests an affinityto the Dinotheriiim and the Cetaceous order. Mr. Owen,however, observed, that '' the development of the nasal cavityand the presence of frontal sinuses, renders it extremelyimprobable that the habits of the Toxodon were so exclusivelyaquatic as would result from the total absence ofhinder extremities ; and concludes, therefore, that it was aquadruped, and not a Cetacean ; and that it manifested anadditional step in the gradation of mammiferous formsleading from the Rodentia, through the Pachydermata to theCetacea ; a gradation of which the water-hog of SouthAmerica [Hydrocephalus capybara) already indicates" the commencementamongst existing Rodeiitia, of which order it isinteresting to observe this species is the largest, while at• Read, April 19th, 1837. A detailed account will appear in thefirst part of the zoology of the voyage of the Beagle.Nov. 1833. ToxoDON. 181the same time it is peculiar to the continent in which theremains of the gigantic Toxodon were discovered."The people at the farm-house told me that the remainswere exposed, by a flood having washed down part of abank of earth. When found, the head was quite perfect ;but the boys knocked the teeth out with stones, and thenset up the head as a mark to throw at. By a most fortunatechance, I found a perfect tooth, which exactly fits one of thesockets in this skull, embedded by itself on the banks of theRio Tercero, at the distance of about 180 miles from thisplace. Near the Toxodon I found the fragments of thehead of an animal, rather larger than the horse, which hassome points of resemblance with the Toxodon, and othersperhaps with the Edentata. The head of this animal, as wellas that of the Toxodon, and especially the former, appear sofresh, that it is difficult to believe they have lain buried foragesunder ground. The bone contains so much animalmatter, that when heated in the flame of a spirit-lamp, it notonly exhales a very strong animal odour, but likewise burnswith a slight flame.*At the distance of a few leagues I visited a place wherethe remains of another great animal, associated with largepieces of armadillo-like covering, had been found. Similarpieces were likewise lying in the bed of the stream, close tothe spot where the skeleton of the Toxodon had been exposed.These portions are dissimilar from those mentionedat Bahia Blanc. It is a most interesting fact thus to discover,that more than one gigantic animal in former ages wasprotected by a coat of mails very similar to the kind nowI must express my obligation to Mr. Keene, at whose house I wasstaying on the Berquelo, and to Mr. Lumb at Buenos Ayres, for withouttheir assistance, these valuable remains would never have reachedEngland.t I may here just mention, that I saw in the possession of a clergymannear Monte Video, the terminal portion of a tail, which precisely resembled,but on a gigantic scale, that of the common armadillo. Thefragment was 17 inches long, \\\ in circumference at the upper end, and8i at the extreme point. As we do not know what proportion the tail182 BANDA ORIENTAL. Nov. 1833.found on the numerous species of armadillo, and exclusivelyconfined to that South American genus.By the middle of the day on the 28th we arrived atMonte Video, having been two days and a half on the road.The country for the whole way was of a very uniform character,some parts being rather more rocky and hilly thannear the Plata. Not far from Monte Video we passedthrough the village of Las Pietas, so named from somelarge rounded masses of syenite. Its appearance was ratherpretty. In this country, a few fig-trees around the houses,and a site elevated a hundred feet above the general level,ought always to be called picturesque.During the last six months, I have had an opportunity ofseeing a Uttle of the character of the inhabitants of theseprovinces. The Gauchos, or countrymen, are very superiorto those who reside in the towns. The Gaucho is invariablymost obliging, polite, and hospitable. I did not meet evenwith one instance of rudeness or inhospitality. He is modest,both respecting himself and country, at the same time beinga spirited, bold fellow. On the other hand, there is muchblood shed, and many robberies committed. The constantpresence of the knife is the chief cause of the former. It islamentable to hear how many lives are lost in triflingquarrels. In fighting, each party tries to mark the face ofhis adversary, by slashing his nose or eyes; as is oftenattested by deep and horrid-looking scars. Robberiesare a natural consequence of universal gambling, muchdrinking, and extreme indolence. At Mercedes, I askedtwo men why they did not work. One gravely said thedays were too long, the other that he was too poor. Thenumber of horses, and the profusion of^food, are the destructionof all industry. Moreover, there are so many feast-days; and then nothing can succeed without it is begunbore to the body of the animal, we cannot compare it with that of anyliving species. But at the same time we may conjecture that, in allprobability, this extinct monster was from six to ten feet long.Nov. 1833. BANDA ORIENTAL. 183when the moon is on the increase ; so that haK the monthis lost from these two causes.Police and justice are quite inefficient. If a man who ispoor, commits murder, and is taken, he will be imprisoned,and perhaps even shot ; but if he is rich and has friends, hemay rely on it, no very severe consequence will ensue. Itis curious that the most respectable people in the countryinvariably assist a murderer to escape. They seem to thinkthe individual sins against the governing powers and notagainst the state. A traveller has no protection besides hisfire-arms : and the constant habit of carrying them, is themain check to a more frequent occurrence of robbery.The character of the higher and more educated classes,who reside in the towns, partakes, but perhaps in a lesserdegree, of the good parts of the Gaucho, but is I fear stainedby many vices of which he is free. Sensuality, mockeryof all religion, and the grossest corruption, are far fromuncommon. Nearly every public officer can be bribed.The head man in the post-office sold forged governmentfranks. The governor and prime minister openly combinedto plunder the state. Justice, where gold came intoplay, was hardly expected by any one. I knew an Englishman,who went to the chief justice (he told me that not understandingthe ways of the place, he trembled as he entered theroom), and said, " Sir, I have come to offer you 200 doUars(value about five pounds sterling) if you will arrest before acertain time a man who has cheated me. I know it is againstthe law, but my lawyer (naming him) recommended me totake this step." The chief justice smiled acquiescence,thanked him, and the man before night was safe in prison.With this entire want of principle in many of the leadingmen, with the country full of ill-paid turbulent officers, thepeople yet hope that a democratic form of government cansucceed !On first entering society in these countries, two or threefeatures strike one as particularly remarkable. The polite anddignified manners pervading every grade of life; the excellent184 BANDA ORIENTAL. NoV. 1833.taste displayed by the women in their dresses ; and the equalityamongst all ranks. At the Rio Colorado some men whokept the humblest shops, used to dine with General Rosas.A son of a major at Bahia Blanc gained his livelihood bymaking paper cigars, and he wished to accompany me, asguide or servant, to Buenos Ayres, but his father objectedon the score of the danger alone. Many officers in the armycan neither read nor write, yet all meet in society as equals.In Entre Rios, the Sala consisted of only six representatives.One of them kept a common shop, and evidently was notdegraded by the office. All this is what wovdd be expectedin a new country ; nevertheless, the absence of gentlemenby profession appears to an Englishman something strange.When speaking of these countries, the manner in whichthey have been brought up by their unnatural parent, Spain,should always be borne in mind. On the whole, perhaps,more credit is due for what has been done, than blame forthat which may be deficient. It is impossible to doubt butthat the extreme liberalism of these countries, must ultimatelylead to good results. The very general toleration offoreign religions, the regard paid to the means of education,the freedom of the press, the facilities offered to all foreigners,and especially, as I am bound to add, to every one professingthe humblest pretensions to science, should be recollectedwith gratitude, by those who have visited Spanish SouthAmerica.*I cannot conclude without adding my testimony to the spirit and accuracyof " Head's Rough Notes." I do not think the picture is at all moreexaggerated than every good one must be — that is, by taking the strongexamples, and neglecting those of lesser interest.CHAPTER IX.Rio Plata — Flocks of butterflies — Beetles alive in the sea — Aeronautspiders — Pelagic animals — Phosphorescence of sea — Port Desire —Spanish settlements — Zoology — Guanaco — Excursion to head of harbour— Indian grave — Port St. Julian — Geology of Patagonia, successiveterraces, transport of pebbles —Fossil gigantic llama — Types oforganization constant — Change in zoology of America — Causes ofextinction.PATAGONIA.December Gth^ 1833. — The Beagle sailed from the RioPlata, never again to enter its muddy stream. Our coursewas directed to Port Desire, on the coast of Patagonia.Before proceeding any further, I will here put together afew observations made at sea.Several times when the ship has been some mUes off themouth of the Plata, and at other times when off the shoresof Northern Patagonia, we have been surrounded by insects.One evening, when we were about ten milesfrom the Bay of San Bias, vast numbers of butterflies,in bands or flocks of countless myriads, extended as faras the eye could range. Even by the aid of a glass itwas not possible to see a space free from butterflies. Theseamen cried out ** it was snowing butterflies," and such infact was the appearance. More species than one were present,but the main part belonged to a kind very similar to,but not identical with, the common English Colias medusa.*Some moths and hymenoptera accompanied the butterflies ;and a fine Calosoma flew on board. Other instances areknown of this beetle having been caught far out at sea ; andthis is the more remarkable, as the greater number of theCarabines seldom or never take wing. The day had beenI am indebted to Mr. Waterhouse for naming these and otherinsects.186 RIO PLATA. Dec. 1833.fine and calm, and the one previous to it equally so, ^vithlight and variable airs. Hence we cannot suppose that theinsects were blown off the land, but we must conclude thatthey voluntarily took flight. The great bands of the Colosseumat first to afford an instance like those on record ofthe migrations of Vanessa cardui;* but the presence of otherinsects makes the case distinct, and not so easily intelligible.Before sunset, a strong breeze sprung up from the north,and this must have been the cause of tens of thousandsof the butterflies and other insects having perished.On another occasion, when seventeen miles off CapeCorrientes, I had a net overboard to catch pelagic animals.Upon drawing it up, to my surprise I found a considerablenumber of beetles in it, and although in the open sea, theydid not appear much injured by the salt water. I lost someof the specimens, but those which I preserved, belonged tothe genera, colymbetes, hydro porus, hydrobius (two species),notaphus, cynics, ammonia, and scarabaeus. At first, Ithought that these insects had been blown from the shore ;but upon reflecting that out of the eight species, four wereaquatic, and two others partly so in their habits, it appearedto me most probable that they were floated into the sea,by a small stream which drains a lake near Cape Corrientes.On any supposition, it is an interesting circumstance to findinsects, quite ave, swimming in the open ocean, seventeenmiles from the nearest point of land. There are severalaccounts of insects having been blown off the Patagoniashore. Captain Cook observed it, as did more lately CaptainKing in the Adventure. The cause probably is due to the wantof shelter, both of trees and hills, so that an insect on thewing with an off-shore breeze, would be very apt to be blownout to sea. The most remarkable instance I ever knew ofan insect being caught far from the land, was that of a largegrasshopper {Acrydium), which flew on board, when theLyell's Geology, vol. iii., p. 63.Dec. 1833. AERONAUT SPIDERS. 187Beagle was to windward of the Cape de Verd Islands, andwhen the nearest point of land, not directly opposed to thetrade wind, was Cape Blancoo on the coast of Africa, 370miles distant.*On several occasions, when the vessel has been withinthe mouth of the Plata, the rigging has been coatedwith the web of the Gossamer Spider. One day (November1st, 1832) I paid particular attention to the phenomenon.The weather had been fine and clear, and inthe morning the air was full of patches of the flocculentweb, as on an autumnal day in England. The shipwas sixty miles distant from the land, in the directionof a steady though light breeze. Vast numbers of a smallspider, about one-tenth of an inch in length, and of a duskyred colour were attached to the webs. There must havebeen, I should suppose, some thousands on the ship. Thelittle spider when first coming in contact with the rigging,was always seated on a single thread, and not on the flocculentmass. This latter seems merely to be produced by theentanglement of the single threads. The spiders were all ofone species, but of both sexes, together with young ones.These latter were distinguished by their smaller size, andmore dusky colour. I will not give the description of thisspider, but merely state that it does not appear to me to beincluded in any of Latreille's genera. The little aeronaut assoon as it arrived on board, was very active, running about ;sometimes letting itseK fall, and then reascending the samethread ; sometimes employing itself in making a small andvery irregular mesh in the corners between the ropes. Itcould run with facility on the surface of water. When disturbedit Tufted up its front legs, in the attitude of attention.On its first arrival it appeared very thirsty, and with exsertedmaxilla drank eagerly of the fluid ; this same circumstanceThe flies which frequently accompany a ship for some days on itspassage from harbour to harbour, wandering from the vessel, are soonlost, and all disappear.188 RIO PLATA. Dec. 1833.has been observed by Struck : may it not be in consequenceof the Uttle insect hawking passed through a dry and rarefiedatmosphere ? Its stock of web seemed inexhaustible. Whilewatching some that were suspended by a single thread, Iseveral times observed that the slightest breath of air borethem away out of sight, in a horizontal line. On anotheroccasion (25th) under similar circumstances, I repeatedlyobserved the same kind of small spider, either when placed, orhaving crawled, on some little eminence, elevate its abdomen,send forth a thread, and then sail away in a lateral course,but with a rapidity which was quite unaccountable. I thoughtI could perceive that the spider before performing the abovepreparatory steps, connected its legs together with the mostdelicate threads, but I am not sure, whether this observationis correct.One day, at St. Fe, I had a better opportunity of observingsome similar facts. A spider which was about three-tenthsof an inch in length, and which in its general appearanceresembled a Centigrade (therefore quite different from thegossamer), while standing on the summit of a post, dartedforth four or five threads from its spinners. These glitteringin the sunshine, might be compared to rays offight ; they were not, however, straight, but in undulationslike a film of silk blown by the wind. They were morethan a yard in length, and diverged in an ascending directionfrom the orifices. The spider then suddenly let go its hold,and was quickly borne out of sight. The day was hot and apparentlyquite calm ; yet under such circumstances the atmospherecan never be so tranquil, as not to affect a vane so delicateas the thread of a spider's web. If during a warm day welook either at the shadow of any object cast on a bank, or overa level plain at a distant landmark, the effect of an ascendingcurrent of heated air will almost always be evident. And thisprobably would be sufficient to carry with it so light an objectas the Uttle spider on its thread. The circumstance of spiders ofthe same species but of different sexes and ages, being foundon several occasions at the distance of many leagues from theDec. 1833. aeronaut spiders. 189land, attached in vast numbers to the lines, proves that theyare the manufacturers of the mesh, and that the habit of sailingthrough the air, is probably as characteristic of some tribe,as that of diving is of the Argyroneta. We may then rejectLatreille's supposition, that the gossamer owes its origin tothe webs of the young of several genera, as Epeira or Thomas :although, as we have seen that the young of other spiders dopossess the power of performing aerial voyages.*During our different passages south of the Plata, I oftentowed astern a net made of bunting, and thus caught manycurious animals. The structure of the Berne (a kind of jellyfish)is most extraordinary, with its rows of vibratory ciUae,and complicated though irregular system of circulation. OfCrustacea, there were many strange and undescribed genera.One, which in some respects is allied to the Notopods (orthose crabs which have their posterior legs placed almoston their backs, for the purpose of adhering to the undersideof ledges), is very remarkable from the structure of itshind pair of legs. The penultimate joint, instead of beingterminated by a simple claw, ends in three bristle-likeappendages of dissimilar lengths, — the longest equalling thatof the entire leg. These claws are very thin, and are serratedwith teeth of an excessive fineness, which are directedtowards the base. The curved extremities are flattened, andI was not at the time aware of M. Virey's very curious observations,(Bulletin des Sciences Nature., torn, xix., p. 130) which seem to prove thatsmall spiders, in an atmosphere perfectly tranquil, and without the aid ofany web, have the power of darting through the air. M. Virey, believesthat by means of a rapid vibration of their feet, they walk the air.Although in his case, the conclusion seems almost inevitable, yet in theone I have described, we must suppose that the several threads which weresent forth, served as sails for the atmospheric currents to act on. Afterreading M. Virey's account, it appears to me far from improbable, thatthe little aeronaut actually did unite, as was suspected, its feet togetherby some fine lines ; thus forming artificial wings. I regret I did not determinethis point with accuracy ; for it would be a curious fact, that aspider should thus be able to take flight by the aid of temporary wings.190 ATLANTIC OCEAN. Dec. 1833.on this part five most minute cups are placed, which seemto act in the same manner as the suckers on the arms of thecuttle-fish. As the animal lives in the open sea, and probablywants a place of rest, I suppose this beautiful structureis adapted to take hold of the globular bodies of the Medusae,and other floating marine animals.In deep water, far from the land, the number of livingcreatures is extremely small : south of the latitude 35°, Inever succeeded in catching any thing besides some berne,and a few species of minute Crustacea belonging to the .In shoulder water, at the distance of a fewmiles from the coast, very many kinds of Crustacea andsome other animals were numerous, but only during thenight. Between latitudes 56° and 57° south of scapeHorn the net was put astern several times ; it never,however, brought up any thing besides a few of two extremelyminute species of Entomostraca. Yet whalesand seals, petrels and albatross, are exceedingly abundantthroughout this part of the ocean. It has always beena source of mystery to me, on what the latter, which livefar from the shore, can subsist. I presume the albatross,like the condor, is able to fast long ; and that one good feaston the carcass of a putrid whale lasts for a long siege ofhunger. It does not lessen the difficulty to say, they feedon fish ; for on what can the fish feed ? It often occurred tome,when observing how the waters of the central and intertropicalparts of the Atlantic,* swarmed with Pteropoda, Crustacea,and Radiata, and with their devourer the flying-fish,and again with their devourer the bonitos and albicores,that the lowest of these pelagic animals perhaps possessthe power of decomposing carbonic acid gas, like the membersof the vegetable kingdom.While sailing in these latitudes on one very dark night,From my experience, which has been but Httle, I should say that theAtlantic was far more prolific than the Pacific, at least, than in that immenseopen area, between the west coast of America and the extremeeastern isles of Polynesia.Dec. 1833. phosphorescence of the sea. 191the sea presented a wonderful and most beautiful spectacle.There was a fresh breeze, and every part of the surface,which during the day is seen as foam, now glowed with apale light. The vessel drove before her bows two billows ofliquid phosphorus, and in her wake she was followed by amilky train. As far as the eye reached, the crest of everywave was bright, and the sky above the horizon, from thereflected glare of these livid flames, was not so utterly obscure,as over the rest of the heavens.As we proceed further southward, the sea is seldom phosphorescent;and off Cape Horn, I do not recollect morethan once having seen it so, and then it was far from beingbrilliant. This circumstance probably has a close connexionwith the scarcity of organic beings in that part of the ocean.After the elaborate paper* by Ehrenberg, on the phosphorescenceof the sea, it is almost superfluous on my part tomake any observations on the subject. I may however add,that the same torn and irregular particles of gelatinous matter,described by Ehrenberg, seem in the southern as wellas in the northern hemisphere, to be the common cause ofthis phenomenon. The particles were so minute as easilyto pass through fine gauze ; yet many 'were distinctly visibleby the naked eye. The water when placed in a tumblerand agitated gave out sparks, but a small portion in awatch-glass, scarcely ever was luminous. Ehrenberg states,that these particles all retain a certain degree of irritability.My observations, some of which were made directly aftertaking up the water, would give a different result. I mayalso mention, that having used the net during one night Iallowed it to become partially dry, and having occasiontwelve hours afterwards, to employ it again, I found thewhole surface sparkled as brightly as when first taken outof the water. It does not appear probable in this case, thatthe particles could have remained so long alive. I remarkAn abstract is given in No. IV. of the Magazine of Zoology andBotany.192 ATLANTIC OCEAN. DcC. 1833.also in my notes, that having kept a Medusa of the genusDiana, till it was dead, the water in which it was placedbecame luminous. When the waves scintillate with brightgreen sparks, I believe it is generally owing to minute Crustacea.But there can be no doubt that very many otherpelagic animals, when alive, are phosphorescent.On two occasions I have observed the sea luminous at considerabledepths beneath the surface. Near the mouth of thePlata some circular and oval patches, from two to four yardsin diameter, and with defined outlines, shone with a steady,but pale light ; while the surrounding water only gave out afew sparks. The appearance resembled the reflection of themoon, or some luminous body ; for the edges were sinuousfrom the undulation of the surface. The ship, which drewthirteen feet water, passed over, without disturbing, thesepatches. Therefore we must suppose that some animalswere congregated together at a greater depth than the bottomof the vessel.Near Fernando Noronha the sea gave out light in flashes.The appearance was very similar to that which might be large fish moving rapidly through aluminous fluid.To this cause the sailors attributed it ; at the time, however,I entertained some doubts, on account of the frequency andrapidity of the flashes. With respect to any general observations,I have already stated that the display is very muchmore common in warm than in cold countries. I havesometimes imagined that a disturbed electrical condition ofthe atmosphere was most favourable to its production.Certainly I think the sea is most luminous after a few daysof more calm weather than ordinary, during which time ithas swarmed with various animals. Observing that the watercharged with gelatinous particles is in an impure state, andthat the luminous appearance in all common cases is producedby the agitation of the fluid in contact with the atmosphere,I have always been inclined to consider that thephosphorescence was the result of the decomposition ofthe organic particles, by which process (one is temptedDec. 1833. port desire. 193almost to call it a kind of respiration) the ocean becomespurified.December 23d. — We arrived at Port Desire, situated inlat. 47°, on the coast of Patagonia. The creek runs for abouttwenty miles inland, with an irregular width. The Beagleanchored a few miles within the entrance in front of theruins of an old Spanish settlement.The same evening I went on shore. The first landing inany new country is very interesting, and especially when, as inthis case, the whole aspect bears the stamp of a marked andindividual character. At the height of between two and threehundred feet, above some masses of porphyry, a wide plainextends, which is truly characteristic of Patagonia. The surfaceis quite level, and is composed of well-rounded shinglemixed with a whitish earth. Here and there scattered tuftsof brown wiry grass are supported, and still more rarelysome low thorny bushes. The weather is dry and pleasant,for the fine blue sky is but seldom obscured. When standingin the middle of one of these desert plains, the view onone side is generally bounded by the escarpment of anotherplain, rather higher, but equally level and desolate ; and onthe other side it becomes indistinct from the tremblingmirage which seems to rise from the heated surface.The plains are traversed by many broad, flat-bottomedvalleys, and in these the bushes grow rather more abundantly.The present drainage of the country is quite insufficientto excavate such large channels. In some of thevalleys ancient stunted trees, growing in the very centre ofthe dry watercourse, seem as if placed to prove how long atime had elapsed, since any flood had passed that way. Wehave evidence, from shells lying on the surface, that theplains of gravel have been elevated within a recent epochabove the level of the sea ; and we must look to that periodfor the excavation of the valleys by the slowly-retiringwaters. From the dryness of the climate, a man may walkfor days together over these plains without finding a singledrop of water. Even at the base of the porphyry hills, thereVOL III. O194 PATAGONIA. Dec. 1833.are only a few small wells containing but little water, andthat rather saline and half putrid.In such a country the fate of the Spanish settlement was soondecided ; the dryness of the climate during the greater part ofthe year, and the occasional hostile attacks of the wanderingIndians, compelled the colonists to desert their half-finishedbuildings. The style, however, in which they were commenced,showed the strong and liberal hand of Spain in theold time. The end of all the attempts to colonize this sideof America south of 41°, have been miserable. At PortFamine, the name expresses the lingering and extreme sufferingsof several hundred wretched people, of whom onealone survived to relate their misfortunes. At St. Joseph'sbay, on the coast of Patagonia, a small settlement was made ;but during one Sunday the Indians made an attack and massacredthe whole party, excepting two men, who were led captivemany years among the wandering tribes. At the Rio NegroI conversed with one of these men, now in extreme old age.The zoology of Patagonia is as limited as its Flora.* Onthe arid plains a few black beetles (Heteromera) mightbe seen slowly crawling about, and occasionally a lizarddarting from side to side. Of birds we have three carrionhawks, and in the valleys a few finches and insect feeders.The Ibis malanops (a species said to be found in centralAfrica) is not uncommon on the most desert parts. In thestomachs of these birds I found grasshoppers, cicadae, smalllizards, and even scorpions At one time of the year they :go in flocks, at another in pairs : their cry is very loud andsingular, and resembles the neighing of the guanaco.I found here a species of cactus, described by Professor Henslow iunder the name of Opuntia Darwiniiii (Magazine of Zoology and Botany, ;vol. i., p. 466), which was remarkable by the irritability manifested by thestamens, when I inserted in the flower either a piece of stick, or the end ;of my finger. The segments of the perhaps also closed on the pistil, but ;more slowly than the stamens.f These insects were not uncommon beneath stones. I found onecannibal scorpion quietly devouring another.Dec. 1833. guanaco. 195I will here give an account of this latter animal, Whichis very common, and is the characteristic quadruped ofthe plains of Patagonia. The Guanaco, which by somenaturalists is considered as the same animal with the Llama,but in its wild state, is the South American representative ofthe camel of the East. In size it may be compared toan ass, mounted on taller legs, and with a very long neck.The guanaco abounds over the whole of the temperate partsof South America, from the wooded islands of Tierra delFuego, through Patagonia, the hilly parts of La Plata, Chile,even to the Cordillera of Peru. Although preferring an elevatedsite, it yields in this respect to its near relative theVicuna. On the plains of Southern Patagonia, we saw themin greater numbers than in any other part. Generally theygo in small herds, from half a dozen to thirty together ; buton the banks of the St Cruz we saw one herd which musthave contained at least five hundred. On the northern shoresof the Strait of Magellan they are also very numerous.Generally the guanacoes are wild and extremely wary.Mr. Stokes told me, that he one day saw through a glass aherd of these beasts, which evidently had been frightened,running away at full speed, although their distance was sogreat that they could not be distinguished by the naked eye.The sportsman frequently receives the first intimation oftheir presence, by hearing, from a long distance, the peculiarshrill neighing note of alarm. If he then looks attentively,he will perhaps see the herd standing in a line on the side ofsome distant hill. On approaching them, a few more squealsare given, and then off they set at an apparently slow, but reallyquick canter, along some narrow beaten track to a neighbouringhill. If, however, by chance he should abruptlymeet a single animal, or several together, they will generallystand motionless, and intently gaze at him; then perhapsmove on a few yards, turn round, and look again. What isthe cause of this difference in their shiness ? Do they mistakea man in the distance for their chief enemy the puma ?Or does curiosity overcome their timidity ? That they arecurious is certain ; for if a person lies on the ground, andoo19G Patagonia. Dcc. 1833.plays strange antics, such as throwing up his feet in the air,they will almost always approach by degrees to reconnoitrehim. It was an artifice that was repeatedly practised byour sportsmen with success, and it had moreover the advantageof allowing several shots to be fired, which were all takenas parts of the performance. On the noun pains of Tierra delFuego, and in other places, I have more than once seen aguanaco, on being approached, not only neigh and squeal,but prance and leap about in the most ridiculous manner,apparently in defiance as a challenge. These animals are veryeasily domesticated, and I have seen some thus kept near thehouses, although at large on their native plains. They arein this state very bold, and readily attack a man, by strikinghim from behind with both knees. It is asserted, that themotive for these attacks is jealousy on account of their females.The wild guanacoes, however, have no idea of defence;even a single dog will secure one of these largeanimals, till the huntsman can come up. In many of theirhabits they are like sheep in a flock. Thus when they seemen approaching in several directions on horseback, they soonbecame bewildered, and know not which way to run. Thisgreatly facilitates the Indian method of hunting, for they arethus easily driven to a central point, and are encompassed.The guanacoes readily take to the water : several times atPort Vales they were seen swimming from island toisland. Byron, in his voyage, says he saw them drinkingsalt water. Some of our officers likewise saw a herd apparently jdrinking the briny fluid from a salina near Cape Blancoo. Iimagine in several parts of the country, if they do not drink ;salt water, they drink none at all. In the middle of the 'day, they frequently roll in the dust, in saucer-shaped hollows.The males fight together ; two one day passed quiteclose to me, squealing and trying to bite each other ; and iseveral wei-e shot with their hides deeply scored. Herdssometimes appear to set out on exploring-parties : atjBahia Blanc, where, within thirty miles of the coast,!these animals are extremely unfrequent, I one day saw thetracks of thirty or forty, which had come in a direct fine !Dec. 1833. guanaco. 197to a muddy salt-water creek. They then must have perceivedthat they were approaching the sea, for they hadwheeled with the regularity of cavalry, and had returned backin as straight a hne as they had advanced. The guanacoeshave one singular habit, which is to me quite inexplicable ;namely, that on successive days they drop their dung in thesame defined heap. I saw one of these heaps which was eightfeet in diameter, and necessarily was composed of a largequantity. Fresher remarks on this habit as common to theguanaco as well as to the llama ;* he says it is very usefulto the Indians, who use the dung for fuel, and are thus savedthe trouble of collecting it.The guanacoes appear to have favourite spots for dying in.On the banks of the St. Cruz, the ground was actually whitewith bones, in certain circumscribed spaces, which weregenerally bushy and all near the river. On one such spotI counted between ten and twenty heads. I particularlyexamined the bones ; they did not appear, as some scatteredones which I had seen, gnawed or broken, as if draggedtogether by beasts of prey. The animals in most cases,must have crawled, before dying, beneath and amongst thebushes. Mr. Bynoe informs me that during the last voyage,he observed the same circumstance on the banks of the RioGaUegos. I do not at all understand the reason of this, butI may observe, that the wounded guanacoes at the St. Cruz,invariably walked towards the river. At St. Jago in theCape de Verd islands I remember having seen in a retiredravine a corner under a cliff, where numerous goats'bones were collected : we at the time exclaimed, that it wasthe burial-ground of aU the goats in the island. I mentionthese trifling circumstances, because in certain cases theymight explain the occurrence of a number of uninjured bonesin a cave, or buried under alluvial accumulations ; and likewisethe cause, why certain mammalia are more commonlyembedded than others in sedimentary deposits. Any greatD'Orbigny says (vol. ii., p. 69) that all the species of the genus havethis habit.198 PATAGONIA. Dec. 1833.flood of the St. Cruz, would wash down many bones of theguanaco, but probably not a single one of the puma, ostrich,or fox. I may also observe, that almost every kind ofwaterfowl when wounded takes to the shore to die ; so thatthe remains of birds, from this cause alone and independentlyof other reasons, would but rarely be preserved in afossil state.One day the yawl was sent under the command of Mr.Chafi'ers with three days' provisions to survey the upper partof the harbour. In the morning we searched for somewatering-places, mentioned in an old Spanish chart. Wefound one creek, at the head of which there was a tricklingrill (the first we had seen) of brackish water. Here thetide compelled us to wait several hours ; and in the intervalI walked some miles into the interior. The plain as usual,consisted of gravel, mingled with soil resembling chalk inappearance, but very different from it in nature. From thesoftness of these materials it was worn into many gullies.There was not a tree, and excepting the guanaco, whichstood on the hill-top a watchful sentinel over its herd,scarcely an animal or a bird. All was stillness and desolation.One reflected how many ages the plain had thuslasted, and how many more it was doomed thus to continue.Yet in passing over these scenes, without one bright objectnear, an ill-defined but strong sense of pleasure is vividlyexcited.In the evening we sailed a few miles further up, and thenpitched the tents for the night. By the middle of the nextday, the yawl was aground, and from the shortness of thewater could not proceed any higher. The water being foundpartly fresh Mr. Chaffiers took the dingy, and went uptwo or three mUes further, where she also grounded, but inafresh-water river. The water was muddy, and though thestream was most insignificant in size, it would be difficult toaccount for its source, except from the melting snow on thethe Cordillera. At the spot where we bivouacked, we weresurrounded by bold cliffs and steep pinnacles of porphyry.I do not think I ever saw a spot, which appeared moreDec. 1833. port st. julian. 199secluded from the rest of the world, than this rocky crevicein the wide plain.The second day after our return to the anchorage, a partyof officers and myself went to ransack an old Indian grave,which I had found on the summit of a neighbouring hill.Two immense stones, each probably weighing at least acouple of tons, had been placed in front of a ledge of rock,about six feet high. At the bottom of the grave on the hardrock, there was a layer of earth about a foot deep, which musthave been brought up from the plain below. Above it apavement of flat stones was placed, on which others werepiled, so as to fill up the space between the ledge and thetwo great blocks. To complete the grave, the Indians hadcontrived to detach from the same ledge a huge fragment,and to throw it over the pile so as to rest on the twoblocks. We undermined the grave on both sides, but couldnot find any relics, or even bones. The latter probablyhad decayed long since (in which case the grave must havebeen of extreme antiquity), for I found in another place somesmaller heaps, beneath which a very few crumbling fragmentscould yet be distinguished, as having belonged to aman. Falconer states, that where an Indian dies he is buried,but that subsequently his bones are carefully taken up andcarried, let the distance be ever so great, to be deposited nearthe sea-coast. This custom, I think, may be accounted forbyrecollecting that before the introduction of horses, theseIndians must have led nearly the same life as the Fuegians,and therefore generally resided in the neighbourhood of thesea. The common prejudice of lying where one's ancestors havelain, would make the now roaming Indians bring the lessperishable part of their dead to their ancient burial-grounds.January 9th, 1834. — Before it was dark the Beagle anchoredin the fine spacious harbour of Port St. Julian,situated about one hundred and ten miles to the south ofPort Desire. We remained here eight days. The countryis nearly similar to that of Port Desire, but, perhaps, rathermore sterile. One day a party accompanied Captain FitsPATAGONIA. Jan. 1834.Roy on a long walk round the head of the harbour. Wewere eleven hours without tasting any water, and some ofthe party were quite exhausted. From the summit of a hill(since well named Thirsty Hill) a fine lake was spied, and twoof the party proceeded with concerted signals to show whetherit was fresh water. What was our disappointment to find asnow-white expanse of salt, crystallized in great cubes ! Weattributed our extreme thirst to the dryness of the atmosphere; but whatever the cause might be, we were exceedinglyglad late in the evening to get back to the boats.Although we could nowhere find, during our whole visit, asingle drop of fresh water, yet some must exist ; for by an oddchance I found on the surface of the salt water, near the headof the bay, a Colymbetes not quite dead, which in all probabilityhad lived in some not far distant pool. Three other kindsof insects, — a Cincindela, like hybrids, Cymindis, and a Har-palus,which all Hve on muddy flats occasionally overflowed bythe sea, and one other beetle found dead on the plain, — completesthe list of cleopatra. A good-sized fly (Tabanus) Alasextremely numerous, and tormented us by its painful bite.The common hoarsely, which is so troublesome in the shadylanes of England, belongs to this genus. We here have thepuzzle, that so frequently occurs in the case of mosquitoes ;on the blood of what animals do these insects commonlyfeed ? The guanaco is nearly the only warm blooded quadruped,and they are present in numbers quite inconsiderable,compared to the multitude of flies.The foundation of porphyry is not here present, as it was atPort Desire, and in consequence the tertiary deposits are arrangedwith greater regularity. Five successive plains of differentaltitudes are very distinct. The lower one is a merefringe nearly on a level with the sea, but the upper one iselevated 950 feet. This latter is represented in this neighbourhoodonly by a few truncate conical hiUs, of exactly the sameheight. It was very interesting to stand on one of these flatpatches of gravel, and viewing the wide surrounding country,to speculate on the enormous quantity of matter which mustJan. 1834. geology. 201have been removed, thus to leave these mere points, as measuresof the former table-land.I will now give a brief sketch of the geology of the grandtertiary formation of Patagonia, which extends from theStrait of Magellan to the Bay of S. Antonio. In Europe,deposits of the more recent eras have generally been accumulatedin small basins or trough-shaped hollows. In SouthAmerica, however, the entire plains of Patagonia extendingseven hundred miles in length, and backed on the one handby the chain of the Andes, and fronted on the other by theshores of the Atlantic, are thus constituted. Moreover thenorthern boundary is merely assumed in consequence of amineralogical change in the strata : if organic remains werepresent, it probably Mould be found to be only an artificiallimit. Again to the northward (1300 miles distant from theStrait of Magellan) we have the Pampas deposit, whichthough very diiferent in composition, belongs to the sameepoch with the superficial covering of the plains of Patagonia.The cuffs on the coast give the following section : Thelower part consists of a soft sandstone, containing large concretionsof a harder nature. These strata contain manyorganic remains — immense oysters nearly a foot in diameter,curious pectens, echini, turriteUee, and other shells, of whichthe greater portion are extinct, but a few resemble those nowexisting on the coast.* Above these fossiliferous beds, amass of soft friable stone or earth is superimposed, which,from its extreme whiteness, has been mistaken for chalk. It is,however, quite different ; and closely resembles the less argillaceousvarieties of decomposed felspar. This substancenever contains organic remains. Lastly, the cliff is surmountedby a thick bed of gravel, almost exclusivelyderived from porphyritic rocks. For the sake of makingthe following description more easily intelligible, I havesubjoined an imaginary section of the plains near the coast.The geologist must recollect this is a mere sketch, and that the fossilshells have not yet been carefully examined.PATAGONIA.Jan. 1834.It must be observed, that the width of each plain is innature very much greater in proportion to the height, thanhere represented.Jan. 1834. geology. 203The whole series is horizontally stratified, and I do not recollectever seeing any signs of violence, not even such as afault. The gravel covers the entire surface of the land, from theRio Colorado to the Strait of Magellan,'a space of 800 miles,and is one chief cause of the desert character of Patagonia.Judging from a section across the continent at the St. Cruzriver, and from some other reasons, I believe the gravel bedsgradually thickening as they ascend, every where reach thebase of the CordiUera. It is to these mountains we mustlook for the parent rocks, of at least a large portion of thewell-rounded fragments. I apprehend so great an area coveredby shingle, could scarcely be pointed out in any otherpart of the world.Having said thus much of the constitution, let us look atthe external configuration of the mass. The level plains arecut off along the whole line of coast by perpendicular cliffs,which are necessarily of different altitudes, because any one ofthe successive terraces, which, as I have already noticed, riselike steps one above the other, may form the sea cliff.These steps are often several miles broad; but from onepoint of view I have seen four very distinct Unes of escarpmentabutting one over the other. Hawking observed thatthe plains appeared to run for great distances along thecoast at the same level, I measured geometrically the elevationof some of them, and compared these measurements,and took all those made by the officers employed in thesurvey. I was astonished to find at how great distances,even of 600 miles, plains occurred that had, within a fewfeet of difference, the same elevation. I believe I can distinguishseven or eight distinct terraces which occur alongthe line of coast, and which include heights between 1200feet and the level of the sea. It will be understood that theyare not always present, for the lower ones have in some partsbeen removed by the action of the sea sooner than in others.When any broad valley enters the country, the terraces sweepround and run up on each side ; in which case, the correspondenceon the opposite sides is beautifully illustrated.204 PATAGONIA. Jan. 1834.I have called these step-like plains level, because theyappear to be absolutely so to the eye, but in truth they rise alittle between the edge of one line of cliff and the base of thenext above it. Their slope is about the same as that of thegradually shoaling bottom of the neighbouring sea. The elevationof 350 feet is gained by three steps ; one of about 100feet, the second 250, and the third 350. Over these threeplains marine remains are frequently scattered, but they areespecially abundant on the lower one. The shells are thesame as the now existing littoral species, and the muscle andturbo yet partially retain their blue and purple colours.We have now stated the problem, which is to be explainedso as to connect together these various phenomena. At firstI could only understand the grand covering of gravel, by thesupposition of some epoch of extreme violence, and the successivelines of cliff, by as many great elevations, the preciseaction of which I could not however follow out. Guided bythe " Principles of Geology," and having under my view thevast changes going on in this continent, which at the presentday seems the great workshop of nature, I came to another,and I hope more satisfactory conclusion. The importance ofany view which may explain the agency by which such vastbeds of shingle have been transported over the surface of thesuccessive plains, cannot be doubted. Whatever the causemay have been, it has determined the condition of thisdesert country, with respect to its form, nature, and capabilitiesof supporting life.There are proofs, that the whole coast has been elevatedto a considerable height within the recent period ; and onthe shores of the Pacific, where successive terraces likewiseoccur, we know that these changes have latterly been verygradual. There is indeed reason for believing, that theuplifting of the ground during the earthquakes in Chile,although only to the height of two or three feet, has been adisturbance which may be considered as a great one, in comparisonto the series of lesser and scarcely sensible movementswhich are likewise in progress. Let us then imagineJan. 1834. geology. 205the consequence of the showing bed of an ocean, elevated ata perfectly equable rate, so that the same number of feetshould be converted into dry land in each succeeding century.Every part of the surface would then have been exposed foran equal length of time to the action of the beach-line, andthe whole in consequence equally modified. The shoaling bedof the ocean would thus be changed into a sloping land, withno marked line on it. If, however, there should occur a longperiod of repose in the elevations, and the currents of thesea should tend to wear away the land (as happens along thiswhole coast), then there would be formed a line of cliff.Accordingly as the repose was long, so would be the quantityof land consumed, and the consequent height of suchcliffs. Let the elevations recommence, and another slopingbank (of shingle, or sand, or mud, according to the nature ofthe successive beach-lines) must be formed, which again willbe broken by as many lines of cliff, as there shall be periodsof rest in the action of the subterranean forces. Now this isthe structure of the plains of Patagonia ; and such gradualchanges harmonize well with the undisturbed strata, extendingover so many hundred miles.I must here observe, that I am far from supposing thatthe entire coast of this part of the continent has ever beenlifted up, to the height of even a foot, at any one moment oftime ; but, drawing our analogies from the shores of thePacific, that the whole may have been insensibly rising, withevery now and then a paroxysmal or accelerated movementin certain spots. With respect to the alternation of theperiods of such continued rise and those of quiescence, wemay grant that they are probable, because such alternationagrees with what we see in the action, not only of a singlevolcano, but likewise of the disturbances affecting wholeregions of the earth. At the present day, to the north of theparallel 44°, the subterranean forces are constantly manifestingtheir power over a space of more than one thousandmiles. But to the southward of that line, as far as CapeHorn, an earthquake is seldom or never experienced, and206 PATAGONIA. Jan. 1834.there is not a single point of eruption; yet in former ages,as we shall hereafter show, deluges of lava flowed from thatvery part. It is in conformity with our hypothesis that thissouthern region of repose, is at present suffering from theinroads of the ocean, as attested by the long line of cliff" onthe Patagonia coast. Such we believe to have been thecauses of this singular configuration of the land. Nevertheless,we confess that it at first appears startling, that themost marked intervals between the heights of the successiveplains should, instead of some great and sudden action of thesubterranean forces, only indicate a longer period of repose.In explaining the widely-spread bed of gravel, we must firstsuppose a great mass of shingle to be collected by the actionof innumerable torrents, and the swell of an open ocean,at the submarine basis of the Andes, prior to the elevation ofthe plains of Patagonia. If such a mass should then belifted up, and left exposed during one of the periods ofsubterranean repose ; a certain breadth, for instance a mile,would be washed down, and spread out over the bottom ofthe invading waters. (That the sea near the coast can carryout pebbles, we may feel sure from the circumstance oftheir gradual decrease in size, according to the distance fromthe coast-line.)If this part of the sea should now be elevated, we shouldhave a bed of gravel, but it would be of less thickness thanin the first mass, both because it is spread over a larger area,and because it has been much reduced by attrition. This processbeing repeated, we might carry beds of gravel, alwaysdecreasing in thickness (as happens in Patagonia) to a considerabledistance from the line of parent rock.* For instance,on the banks of the St. Cruz at the distance of one hundredIt is needless to point out to the geologist, that this view, if correct,will account, without the necessity of any sudden rush of water, for thegeneral covering of mixed shingle, so common in many parts of Europe,and likewise for the occurrence of widely-extended strata of conglomerate ;for the superficial beds might, during a period of subsidence, be covered byfresh deposits.Jan. 1834. geology. 207miles above the mouth of the river, the bed of gravel is 212feet thick, whereas, near the coast, it seldom exceeds 25 or 30feet ; the thickness being thus reduced to nearly one-eighth.I have already stated that the gravel is separated from thefossiliferous strata by some white beds of a friable substance,singularly resembling chalk, but which cannot be compared,as fai; as I am aware, with any formation in Europe. Withrespect to its origin, I may observe that the well-roundedpebbles all consist of various felspathic porphyries ; and that,from their prolonged attrition, during the successive re-modelling of the whole mass, much sediment must havebeen produced. I have already remarked that the whiteearthy matter more closely resembles decomposed felspar,than any other substance. If such is its origin, it wouldalways, from its lightness, be carried further to seaward thanthe pebbles. But as the land was elevated, the beds wouldbe brought nearer the coast-Une, and so become covered bythe fresh masses of gravel which were travelling outwards.When these white beds were themselves elevated, theywould hold a position intermediate between the gravel andthe common foundation, or the fossiliferous strata. Toexplain my meaning more clearly, let us suppose the bottomof the present sea covered to a certain distance from thecoast-line, with pebbles gradually decreasing in size, andbeyond it by the white sediment. Let the land rise, so thatthe beach-hne, by the fall of the water, may be carried outwards;then likewise the gravel, by the same agency asbefore, will be transported so much further from the coast,and will cover the white sediment, and these beds again willinvade the more distant parts of the bottom of the sea. Bythis outward progress, the order of superposition mustalways be gravel, white sediment, and the fossiliferousstrata.Such is the history of the changes by which the presentcondition of Patagonia has, I believe, been determined.These changes all result from the assumption of a steadybut very gradual elevation, extending over a wide area, and208 PATAGONIA. Jan. 1834.interrupted at long intervals by periods of repose. But wemust now return to Port St. Julian. On the south side ofthe harbour, a cliff of about ninety feet in height intersectsa plain constituted of the formations above described ; andits surface is strewed over with recent marine shells. Thegravel, however, differently from that in every other locality,is covered by a very irregular and thin bed of a reddish, loam,containing a few small calcareous concretions. The mattersomewhat resembles that of the Pampas, and probably owesits origin either to a small stream having formerly enteredthe sea at that spot, or to a mud-bank similar to those nowexisting at the head of the harbour. In one spot thisearthy matter filled up a hollow, or gully, worn quite throughthe gravel, and in this mass a group of large bones wasembedded. The animal to which they belonged, musthave lived, as in the case at Bahia Blanc, at a period longsubsequent to the existence of the shells now inhabiting thecoast. We may feel sure of this, because the formation ofthe lower terrace or plain, must necessarily have beenposterior to those above it, and on the surface of the twohigher ones, sea-shells of recent species are scattered. Fromthe small physical change, which the last one hundred feet elevationof the continent could have produced, the climate, aswell as the general condition of Patagonia, probably was nearlythe same, at the time when the animal was embedded, as it nowis. This conclusion is moreover supported by the identity ofthe shells belonging to the two ages. Then immediatelyoccurred the difficulty, how could any large quadruped havesubsisted on these wretched deserts in lat. 49° 15'? I hadno idea at the time, to what kind of animal these remainsbelonged. The puzzle, however, was soon solved whenMr. Owen examined them; for he considers that theyformed part of an animal allied to the guanaco or llama, butfully as large as the true camel. As all the existing membersof the family of Carmelite are inhabitants of the most sterilecountries, so may we suppose was this extinct kind. Thestructure of the cervical vertebrae, the transverse processesJan. 1834. fossil remains. 209not being perforated for the vertebral artery, indicates itsaffinity : some other parts, however, of its structure, probablyare anomalous.The most important result of this discovery, is the confirmationof the law that existing animals have a closerelation in form with extinct species. As the guanaco is thecharacteristic quadruped of Patagonia, and the vicuna of thesnow-clad summits of the Cordillera, so in bygone days,this gigantic species of the same family must have been conspicuouson the southern plains. We see this same relationof type between the existing and fossil Ctenomys, betweenthe capybara (but less plainly, as shown by Mr. Owen) andthe gigantic Toxodon; and lastly, between the living andextinct Edentata. At the present day, in South America,there exist probably nineteen species of this order, distributedinto several genera ; while throughout the rest ofthe world there are but five. If, then, there is a relationbetween the living and the dead, we should expect that theEdentata would be numerous in the fossil state. I needonly reply by enumerating the megatherium, and the threeor four other great species, discovered at Bahia Blanc;the remains of some of which are also abundant over the wholeimmense territory of La Plata. I have already pointed outthe singular relation between the armadilloes and their greatprototypes, even in a point apparently of so little importanceas their external covering.The order of rodents at the present day, is most conspicuousin South America, on account of the vast number*and size of the species, and the multitude of individuals :according to the same law, we should expect to find theirrepresentatives in a fossil state. Mr. Owen has shown howfar the Toxodon is thus related; and it is moreover notIn my collection Mr. Watercourse distinguishes twenty-seven speciesof mice ; to these must be added about thirteen more, known from theworks of Azara, and other naturalists ; so that we have forty species,which have actually been described as coming from between the Tropicand Cape Horn.VOL. III. P210 PATAGONIA. Jan. 1834.improbable that another large animal has likewise a similaraffinity.The teeth of the rodent nearly equalling in size those ofthe Capybara, which were discovered near Bahia Blanc,must also be remembered.The law of the succession of types, although subject tosome remarkable exceptions, must possess the highestinterest to every philosophical naturalist, and was first clearlyobserved in regard to Australia, where fossil remains of alarge and extinct species of Kangaroo and other marsupialanimals were discovered buried in a cave. In America themost marked change among the mammalia has been theloss of several species of Mastodon, of an elephant, and ofthe horse. These Pachydermata appear formerly to havehad a range over the world, like that which deer and antelopesnow hold. If BufFon had knowTi of these giganticarmadillo, llamas, great rodents, and lost pachydermata,he would have said with a greater semblance of truth, thatthe creative force in America had lost its Angour, rather thanthat it had never possessed such powers.It is impossible to reflect without the deepest astonishment,on the changed state of this continent. Formerly itmust have swarmed with great monsters, like the southernparts of Africa, but now we find only the tapir, guanaco, armadillo,and capybara ; mere pygmies compared to the antecedentraces. The greater number, if not all, of these extinctquadrupeds lived at a very recent period ; and many of themwere contemporaries of the existing mollusca. Since theirloss, no very great physical changes can have taken place inthe nature of the country. What then has exterminated somany living creatures ? In the Pampas, the great sepulchreof such remains, there are no signs of violence, but onthe contrary, of the most quiet and scarcely sensible changes.At Bahia Blanc I endeavoured to show the probability thatthe ancient Edentata, like the present species, lived in a dryand sterile country, such as now is found in that neighbourhood.With respect to the camel-like llama of Patagonia,Jan. 1834. causes of extinction'. 211the same grounds which, before knowing more than the sizeof the remains, perplexed me, by not allowing any greatchange of climate, now that we can guess the habits of theanimal, are strangely confirmed. What shall we say of thedeath of the fossil horse ? Did those plains fail in pasture,which afterwards were overrun by thousands and tens ofthousands of the successors of the fresh stock introducedwith the Spanish colonist? In some countries, we maybelieve, that a number of species subsequently introduced,by consuming the food of the antecedent races, may havecaused their extermination ; but we can scarcely credit thatthe armadillo has devoured the food of the immense Megatherium,the capybara of the Toxodon, or the guanaco ofthe camel-like kind. But granting that all such changeshave been small, yet we are so profoundly ignorant concerningthe physiological relations, on which the life, and evenhealth (as shown by epidemics) of any existing speciesdepends, that we argue with still less safety about either thelife or death of any extinct kind.One is tempted to believe in such simple relations, asvariation of climate and food, or introduction of enemies, orthe increased numbers of other species, as the cause of thesuccession of races. But it may be asked whether it is probablethan any such cause should have been in action duringthe same epoch over the whole northern hemisphere, so asto destroy the Elephas primi genus, on the shores of Spain,on the plains of Siberia, and in Northern America ; and inalike manner, the Bos urus, over a range of scarcely lessextent ? Did such changes put a period to the life ofMastodon augustines, and of the fossil horse, both inEurope and on the Eastern slope of the Cordillera inSouthern America? If they did, they must have beenchanges common to the whole world; such as gradualrefrigeration, whether from modifications of physical geography,or from central cooling. But on this assumption,we have to struggle with the difficulty that these supposedchanges, although scarcely sufficient to affect molluscousp 2212 PATAGONIA. Jan. 1834.animals either in Europe or South America, yet destroyedmany quadrupeds in regions now characterized by frigid,temperate, and tvarm* climates ! These cases of extinctionforcibly recal the idea (I do not wish to draw any closeanalogy) of certain fruit-trees, which, it has been asserted,though grafted on young stems, planted in varied situations,and fertilized by the richest manures, yet at one period,have all withered away and perished. A fixed and determinedlength of life has in such cases been given to thousandsand thousands of buds (or individual germs), although producedin long succession. Among the greater number ofanimals, each individual appears nearly independent of itskind ; yet all of one kind may be bound together by commonlaws, as well as a certain number of individual budsin the tree, or polypi in the Zoophyte.I will add one other remark. We see that whole seriesof animals, which have been created with peculiar kinds oforganization, are confined to certain areas; and we canhardly suppose these structures are only adaptations topeculiarities of climate or country; for otherwise, animalsbelonging to a distinct type, and introduced by man, wouldnot succeed so admirably, even to the extermination of theaborigines. On such grounds it does not seem a necessaryconclusion, that the extinction of species, more than theircreation, should exclusively depend on the nature (alteredby physical changes) of their country. All that at presentcan be said with certainty, is that, as with the individual, sowith the species, the hour of life has run its course, and isspent.The Elephas primi genus is thus circumstanced, having been found inYorkshire (associated with recent shells : Lyell, vol. i., chap, vi), inSiberia, and in the warm regions of lat. 31°, in North America. Theremains of the Mastodon occur in Paraguay (and I believe in Brazil, inlat. 12°), as well as in the temperate plains south of the Plata.CHAPTER X.Santa Cruz — Expedition up river — Indians — Character of Patagonia —Basaltic platform — Immense streams of lava — Non-transport ofblocks by river — Excavation of valley — Condor, range and habits —Cordillera — Erratic boulders of great size — Indian relics — Return tothe ship.SANTA CRUZ — PATAGONIA.April 13th. — The Beagle anchored within the mouthof the Santa Cruz. This river is situated about sixty milessouth of Port St. Julian. During the last voyage, CaptainStokes proceeded thirty miles up, but then, from the wantof provisions, was obliged to return. Excepting what wasdiscovered at that time, scarcely any thing was known aboutthis large river. Captain FitzRoy now determined to followits course as far as time would allow. On the 18th,three whale-boats started, carrying three weeks' provisions ;and the party consisted of twenty-five souls — a force whichwould have been sufficient to have defied a host of Indians.With a strong flood-tide, and a fine day, we made a goodrun, soon drank some of the fresh water, and were at nightnearly above the tidal influence.The river here assumed a size and appearance, which, evenat the highest point we ultimately reached, was scarcelydiminished. It was generally from three to four hundredyards broad, and in the middle about seventeen feet deep.The rapidity of the current, which in its whole course runsat the rate of from four to six knots an hour, is perhaps itsmost remarkable feature. The water is of a fine blue colour,but with a slight milky tinge, and not so transparent as atfirst sight would have been expected. It flows over a bedof pebbles, like those which compose the beach and surroundingplains. Although its course is winding, it runsthrough a valley which extends in a direct line to the PATAGONIA. Aprils 1834.ward. This valley varies from five to ten miles in breadth ;it is bounded by step-formed terraces, which rise in mostparts one above the other to the height of five hundred feet,and have on the opposite sides a remarkable correspondence.April 19th. — Against so strong a current, it was ofcourse quite impossible to row or sail. Consequently thethree boats were fastened together head and stern, twohands left in each, and the rest came on shore to track.As the general arrangements, made by Captain FitzRoy, werevery good for facilitating the work of aU, and as all had ashare of it, I will describe the system. The party, includingevery one, was divided into two spells, each of which hauledat the tracking line alternately for an hour and a half. Theofficers of each boat Used with, ate the same food, and slept inthe same tent nth their crew, so that each boat was quiteindependent of the others. After sunset, the first level spotwhere any bushes were growing, was chosen for our nightslodging. Each of the crew took it in turns to be cook. Immediatelythe boat was hauled up, the cook made his fire ;two others pitched the tent ; the coxswain handed the thingsout of the boat ; the rest carried them up to the tents, andcollected firewood. By this order, in half an hour, everythingwas ready for the night. A watch of two men and anofficer was always kept, whose duty it was to look after theboats, keep up the fire, and guard against Indians. Eachin the party had his one hour every night.During this day we tracked but a short distance, for therewere many islets, covered by thorny bushes, and the channelsbetween them were shallow.April 20th. — We passed the islands and set to work.Our regular day's march, although it was hard enough, carriedus on an average only ten miles in a straight line, andperhaps fifteen or twenty altogether. Beyond the placewhere we slept last night the country is completely terraincognita, for it was there that Captain Stokes turned back.We saw in the distance a great smoke, and found the skeletonof a horse, so we knew that Indians were in the neigh-april,1834. santa cruz. 215boyhood. On the next morning (21st) tracks of a party ofhorse, and marks left by the trailing of the chuzos were observedon the ground. It was generally thought they musthave reconnoitred us during the night. Shortly afterwardswe came to a spot, where from the fresh footsteps of men,children, and horses, it was evident the party had crossed theriver.April 22d. — The country remained the same, and wasextremely uninteresting. The complete similarity of the productionsthroughout Patagonia, is one of its most strikingcharacters. The level plains of arid shingle support the samestunted and dwarf plants ; and in the valleys the same thorn-bearingbushes grow. Every where we see the same birdsand insects. Even the very banks of the river, and of theclear streamlets which entered it, were scarcely enlivenedby a brighter tint of green. The curse of sterility is on theland, and the water flowing over a bed of pebbles partakes ofthe same curse. Hence the number of waterfowl is veryscanty ; for what is there to support life in the stream of thisbarren river ?Patagonia, poor as she is in some respects, can, however,boast of a greater stock of small rodents* than, perhaps, anyother country in the world. Several species of mice areexternally characterized by large thin ears arid a very fine fur.These little animals swarm amongst the thickets in the valleys,where they cannot for months together taste a drop ofwater. They all seem to be cannibals, for no sooner was amouse caught in one of my traps than it was devoured byothers. A small and delicately-shaped fox, which is likewisevery abundant, probably derives its entire support fromthese small animals. The guanaco is also in his proper district; herds of fifty or a hundred were common ; and, as Ihave said, we saw one which must have contained at leastThe deserts of Syria are characterized, according to Volley (vol. i.,p; 331), by woody bushes, numerous rats, gazelles, and hares. In thelandscape of Patagonia, the guanaco replaces the gazelle, and the agoutithe hare.216 PATAGONIA. April, 1834.five hundred. The puma vnth the condor in its train, followsand preys upon these animals. The footsteps of the formerwere to be seen almost every where on the banks of the river ;and the remains of several guanaco, with their necks dislocatedand bones broken, showed how they had met theirdeath.April 24th. — Like the na-senators of old when approaching«• an unknown land, we examined and watched for the mosttrial sign of a change. The drifted trunk of a tree, or aboulder of primitive rock, was hailed with joy, as if we hadseen a forest growing on the flanks of the Cordillera. Thetop, however, of a heavy bank of clouds, which remainedalmost constantly in one position, was the most promisingsion, and eventually turned out true. At first the cloudswere mistaken for the mountains themselves, instead of themasses of vapour condensed by their icy summits.26th. — We this day met with a marked change in thegeological structure of the plains. From the first starting Ihad carefully examined the gravel in the river, and forthe two last days had noticed the presence of a few smallpebbles of a very cellular basalt. These gradually increasedin number and in size, but none equalled in dimensions aman's head. This morning, however, pebbles of the samerock, but more compact, suddenly became abundant, and inthe course of half an hour, we saw at the distance of five orsix miles the angular edge of a great basaltic platform.When we arrived at its base we found the stream bubblingamong the fallen blocks. For the next twenty-eight miles,the river-course was encumbered ^\"ith these basaltic masses.Above that limit, immense fragments belonging to a primitiveformation, but derived from the surrounding alluvium,were equally numerous. In both cases no fragments at allremarkable in size or number had been washed down thestream, more than three or four miles below either theparent rock, or the mass of allu\-ium from which they werederived. Considering the singular rapidity the great bodyof water in the St. Cruz, and that no still reaches occur inApril, 1834. BASALTIC platform. 217any part, these examples are most striking of the inefficiencyof rivers in transporting even moderately-sized fragments.The basaltic cliffs are obscurely divided by lines of morecellular or amygdaloidal varieties, and the strata appear tothe eye perfectly horizontal. They overlie the great tertiarydeposits, and are covered (except where denuded in someof the lower terraces) by the usual beds of gravel. Thebasalt is clearly nothing more than lava, which has flowedbeneath the sea; but the eruptions must have been on thegrandest scale. At the point where we first met this formation,the mass was about 120 feet in thickness; followingthe river-course, it imperceptibly rose and became thicker,so that at forty miles above the first station it was 320feet. What the thickness may be close to the Cordillera, Ihave no means of knowing, but the platform there attainsan elevation between two and three thousand feet abovethe level of the sea : we must therefore look to the mountainsof that great chain for its source ; and worthy of such asource are streams, that have flowed over the bed of an oceanto a distance of one hundred miles.A fine section of the basaltic platform is presented by thecliffs on both sides of the valley. At the first glance it isevident the strata must at one time have been united. Whatpower then has removed along a whole line of country, asolid mass of very hard rock, which had an average thicknessof about three hundred feet, and a breadth varying from ratherless than two to four miles ? The river, though it has solittle power in transporting even inconsiderable fragments,yet in the lapse of ages might produce an effect by its gradualerosion, of which it is difficult to judge the limit. Butinthis case, independently of the insignificance of suchagency, good reasons can be assigned for believing that thisvalley was formerly occupied by an arm of the sea. It isneedless in this work to detail arguments, which chiefly reston the form and nature of the banks, on the manner in whichthe valley near the foot of the Andes expands into a greatbay, and on the occurrence of a few sea-shells lying in the218 PATAGONIA. April, 1834.bed of the river. If I had space I could prove that SouthAmerica was formerly here cut off by a strait joining theAtlantic and Pacific oceans, like that of Magellan. But itmay yet be asked, how has the solid basalt been removed ?Geologists formerly would have brought into play, theviolent action of some overwhelming debacle ; but in thiscase such a supposition would have been quite inadmissible ;because the same step-like terraces, that front the Patagoniacoast, sweep up on each side of the valley. No possibleaction of any flood could have thus modelled the land inthese two situations ; and by the formation of such terracesthe valley itseK has been hollowed out. Although we knowthat there are tides, which run within the narrows of theStrait of Magellan at the rate of eight knots an hour, yet wemust confess it makes the head almost giddy to reflect on thenumber of years, century after century, which the tidesunaided by a heavy surf, must have required to have corrodedso vast an area and thickness of solid rock. Nevertheless,we must believe that the strata undermined by thewaters of this ancient strait, were broken up into huge fragments,and there lying scattered on the beach, were reducedto smaller blocks, then to pebbles, and lastly to the mostimpalpable mud, which the tides drifted into the bed, eitherof the Eastern or Western Ocean.With the change in the geological structure of the plainsthe character of the landscape likewise altered. Whilerambling up some of the narrow and rocky defiles, I couldalmost have fancied myself transported back again to thebarren valleys of St. Jago. Among the basaltic cliffs, I foundsome plants which I had seen nowhere else, but others Irecognised as being wanderers from Tierra del Fuego. Theseporous rocks serve as a reservoir for the scanty rain-water,and consequently on the line where the igneous and sedimentaryformations unite, several small springs (most rareoccurrences in Patagonia) burst forth; and they could bedistinguished at a distance by the circumscribed patch ofbright green herbage.April, 1834. condor. 219April. 27th. — The bed of the river became rather narrower,and hence the stream more rapid. It here ran at therate of six knots an hour. From this cause, and from themany great angular fragments, tracking the boats becameboth dangerous and laborious.This day I shot a condor. It measured from tip to tip ofthe wings, eight and a half feet, and from beak to tail, four feet.It is a magnificent spectacle to behold several of these greatbirds seated on the edge of some steep precipice. I will heredescribe all I have observed respecting their habits. Thecondor is known to have a unde geographical range, beingfound on the west coast of South America, from the Strait ofMagellan throughout the entire range of the Cordillera. Onthe Patagonia shore, the steep cliff near the mouth of the RioNegro in lat. 41°, was the most northern point where I sawthese birds, or heard of their existence. They have therewandered about four hundred miles from the great centralline of their habitation in the Andes. Further south, amongthe bold precipices which form the head of Port Desire, theyare not uncommon ; yet only a few stragglers occasionallyvisit the sea-coast. A line of cliff near the mouth of St. Cruz,is frequented by these birds, and about eighty miles up theriver, where first the sides of the valley were formed bysteep basaltic precipices, the condor again appeared, althoughin the intermediate space not one had been seen. Fromthese and similar facts, the presence of this bird seemschiefly to be determined by the occurrence of perpendicularcliffs. In Patagonia, the condors either by pairs or manytogether, both sleep and breed on the same overhangingledges. In Chile, during the greater part of the year, theyhaunt the lower country near the shores of the Pacific,and at night several roost in one tree ; but in the early partof summer, they retire to the most inaccessible parts of theinner Cordillera, there to breed in peace.With respect to their propagation, I was told by thecountry people in Chile, that the condor makes no sort of220 PATAGONIA. April, 1834.nest, but in the months of November and December laystwo large white eggs on a shelf of bare rock. On the Patagoniacoast I could not see any sort of nest among the cliffs,where the young ones were standing. It is said the youngcondors cannot fly for an entire year. At Concepcion, onthe fifth of March (corresponding to our September), Isaw a young bird, which, though in size little inferior toan old one, was completely covered by down like that of agosling, but of a blackish colour. I feel sure this bird couldnot have used its wings for flight for many months. Afterthe period when the young condors can fly, and apparentlyas well as the old birds, they yet remain both roostingat night on the same ledge, and hunting by day with theirparents. Before, however, the young bird has the rust'round its neck turned white, it may often be seen huntingby itself. At the mouth of the St, Cruz, during part of Apriland May, a pair of old birds might be seen every day eitherperched on a certain ledge, or sailing about in company witha single young one, which latter though full fledged, had notits ruff white. I should think, especially when recollectingthe state in which the Concepcion bird was on the previousmonth, that this young condor had not been hatched froman egg of that summer. As there were no other youngbirds, it seems probable that the condor only lays once intwo years.These birds generally live by pairs ; but among the inlandbasaltic cliffs of the St. Cruz, T found a spot, wherescores most usually haunt. On coming suddenly to thebrow of the precipice, it was a fine sight to see betweentwenty and thirty of these great birds start heavily fromtheir resting-place, and wheel away in majestic circles.From the quantity of dung on the rocks, they must long-havefrequented this cliff, and probably they both roost andbreed there. Having gorged themselves with carrion on theplains below, they retire to these favourite ledges, to digesttheir food. From these facts, the condor must to a certainApril, 1834. CONDOR. 221degree, like the gallinazo, be considered a gregarious bird. Inthis part of the country they live altogether on the guanacoes,which either have died a natural death, or, as more commonlyhappens, have been killed by the pumas. I believe,from what I saw in Patagonia, that they do not on ordinaryoccasions extend their daily excursions to any great distancefrom their regular sleeping-places.The condors may oftentimes be seen at a great height,soaring over a certain spot in the most graceful spires andcircles. On some occasions I am sure that they do this forsport, but on others, the Chilenono countrymen tell youthat they are watching a dying animal, or the puma devouringits prey. If the condors glide down, and then suddenlyall rise together, the Chilenono knows that it is the pumawhich, watching the carcass, has sprung out to drive awaythe robbers. Besides feeding on carrion, the condors will frequentlyattack young goats and lambs. Hence the shepherddogs are trained, the moment the enemy passes over, to runout, and looking upwards, to bark violently. The Chilenosdestroy and catch numbers. Two methods are used ; one isto place a carcass within an enclosure of sticks on a levelpiece of ground, and when the condors are gorged, togallop up on horseback to the entrance, and thus enclosethem : for when this bird has not space to run, it cannotgive its body sufficient momentum to rise from the ground.The second method is to mark the trees in which, frequentlyto the number of five or six, they roost together, and thenat night to camb up and noose them. They are such heavysleepers, as I have myself witnessed, that this is not adifficult task. At Valparaiso, I have seen a living condorsold for sixpence, but the common price is eight or tenshillings. One which I saw brought in, had been lashedwith rope, and was much injured ; yet, the moment the linewas cut by which its bill was secured, although surroundedby people, it began ravenously to tear a piece of carrion.In a garden at the same place, between twenty and thirtywere kept alive. They were fed only once a week, but they222 PATAGONIA. April, 1834.appeared in pretty good health.* The Chilenono countrymenassert that the condor will live and retain its powers,between five and six weeks without eating. I cannotanswer for the truth of this, but it is a cruel experiment,which very likely has been tried.When an animal is killed in the country, it is well knownthat the condors, like other carrion vultures, soon gainintelligence of it, and congregate in an inexplicable manner.In most cases it must not be overlooked, that thebirds have discovered their prey, and have picked theskeleton clean, before the flesh is in the least tainted.Remembering the opinions of M. Audubon, on the littlesmelling powers of such birds I tried in the abovementionedgarden the following experiment: The condorswere tied, each by a rope, in a long row at the bottom of awall. Having folded up a piece of meat in white paper, Iwalked backwards and forwards, carrying it in my handat the distance of about three yards, but no notice whateverwas taken. I then threw it on the ground, within oneyard of an old cock bird; he looked at it for a momentwith attention, but then regarded it no more. With a stick Ipushed it closer and closer, until at last he touched it withhis hesik ; the paper was then instantly torn off with fury,and at the same moment, every bird in the long row beganI noticed that several hours before any of the condors died, all thelice, with which they are infested, crawled to the outside feathers. I wastold that this was always the case.f In the case of the Vullw aura, Mr. Owen, in some notes read beforethe Zoological Society, has demonstrated from the developed form of theolfactory nerves, that this bird must possess an acute sense of smell. Itwas mentioned on the same evening, that on two occasions, persons inthe West Indies having died, and their bodies not being buried till theysmelt offensively, these birds congregated in numbers on the roof of thehouse. This instance appears quite conclusive, as it was evident theyhad gained the intelligence by the powers of smell alone, and not ofsight. It would appear from the various facts recorded, that carrion-feedinghawks possess both the sense of sight and smell in an eminentdegree.April, 1834, CONDOR. 223struggling and flapping its wings. Under the same circumstances,it would not have been possible to have deceived adog.I may remark, that oftentimes when lying down to reston the open plains, and on looking upwards, I haveseen carrion hawks, sailing through the air at a greatheight. Where the country is level I do not believe aspace of the heavens, of more than 15° above the horizon,is commonly viewed with any attention by a personeither walking or on horseback. If such is the case, andthe vulture is on the wing at a height of between three andfour thousand feet, before it could come within the aboverange of vision, its distance in a straight line from thebeholder's eye, would be rather more than two British miles.Might it not thus readily be overlooked ? When an animalis killed by the sportsman in a lonely valley, may he not allthe while be watched from above by the sharp sighted bird ?And will not the manner of its descent proclaim throughoutthe district to the whole family of carrion feeders, that theirprey is at hand ?When the condors in a flock are wheeling round andround any spot, their flight is beautiful. Except when risingfrom the ground, I do not recollect ever having seen oneof these birds flap its wings. Near Lima, I watched severalfor nearly half an hour, without once taking off my eyes.They moved in large curves, sweeping in circles, descendingand ascending without once flapping. As they glidedclose over my head, I intently watched, from an obliqueposition, the outlines of the separate and terminal feathersof the wing, if there had been the least vibratory movement,these would have been blended together, but they were seendistinct against the blue sky. The head and neck weremoved frequently, and apparently with force, and it appearedas if the extended wings formed the fulcrum on which themovements of the neck, body, and tail, acted. If the birdwished to descend, the wings were for a moment collapsed ;and then when again expanded with an altered inclination.224 PATAGONIA. April, 1834.the momentum gained by the rapid descent seemed to urge■ the bird upwards, with the even and steady movement of apaper kite. In the case of any bird soaring its motion mustbe sufficiently rapid, so that the action of the inclined surfaceof its body on the atmosphere, may counterbalance itsgravity. The force to keep up the momentum of a bodymoving in a horizontal plane in that fluid (in which there isso little friction) cannot be great, and this force is all that iswanted. The movement of the neck and body of the condor,we must suppose, is sufficient for this. However thismay be, it is truly wonderful and beautiful to see so great abird, hour after hour, without any apparent exertion, wheelingand gliding over mountain and river.April 29th. — From some high land we hailed with joythe white summits of the Cordillera, as they were seen occasionallypeeping through their dusky envelope of clouds.Hiring the few succeeding days, Ave continued to get onslowly, for we found the river-course very tortuous, andstrewed with immense fragments of various ancient slatyrocks, and of granite. The plain bordering the valley hadhere attained an elevation of about 1100 feet, and itscharacter was much altered. The well-rounded pebbles ofporphyry were in this part mingled with many immenseangular fragments of basalt and of the rocks above mentioned.The first of these erratic blocks which I noticed,was sixty-seven miles distant from the nearest mountain;another which had been transported to rather a less distance,measured five yards square, and projected five feetabove the gravel. Its edges were so angular, and its sizeso great, that I at first mistook it for a rock in situ, andtook out my compass to observe the direction of its cleavage.The plains here were not quite so level as those nearer thecoast, but yet, they betrayed little signs of any violent action.Under these circumstances, it would be difficult, as it appearsto me, to explain this phenomenon on any theory, exceptingthrough that of transport by ice while the country was underwater.But this is a subject to which I shall again recur.May, 1834. valley of st. cruz. 225During the two last days we met with signs of horses, andwith several small articles which had belonged to the Indians,such as parts of a mantle and a bunch of ostrich feathers —but they appeared to have been lying long on the ground.Between the place where the Indians had so lately crossedthe river and this neighbourhood, though so many milesapart, the country appears to be quite unfrequented. Atfirst, considering the abundance of the guanacoes, I wassurprised at this ; but it is explained by the stony nature ofthe plains, which would soon disable an unshod horse fromtaking part in the chase. Nevertheless, in two places in thisvery central region, I found small heaps of stones, which Ido not think could have been accidentally thrown together.They were placed on points, projecting over the edge of thehighest lava cliff, and they resembled, but on a small scale,those near Port Desire.May 4th. — Captain FitzRoy determined to take theboats no higher. The river had a winding course, and wasvery rapid ; and the appearance of the country offered notemptation to proceed any further. Every where we metwith the same productions, and the same dreary landscape.We were now one hundred and forty miles distant fromthe Atlantic, and about sixty from the nearest arm of thePacific. The valley in this upper part expanded into a widebasin, bounded on the north and south by the basaltic platforms,and fronted by the long range of the snow-cladCordillera. But we viewed these grand mountains with regret,for we were obliged to imagine their form and nature,instead of standing, as we had hoped, on their crest, andlooking down on the plain below. Besides the useless lossof time which an attempt to ascend any higher would havecost us, we had already been for some days on half allowanceof bread. This, although really enough for any reasonablemen, was, after our hard day's march, rather scanty food.Let those alone who have never tried it, exclaim about thecomfort of a light stomach and an easy digestion.5th. — Before sunrise we commenced our descent. WeVOL. III. a226 PATAGONIA. May, 1834.shot down the stream with great rapidity, generally at therate of ten knots an hour. In this one day we effected whathad cost us five-and-a-half hard days' labour in ascending.On the 8th, we reached the Beagle after our twenty-onedays' expedition. Every one excepting myself had causeto be dissatisfied; but to me the ascent afforded a mostinteresting section of the great tertiary formation of Patagonia.22/CHAPTER XI.Tierra del Fuego, first arrival — Good Success Bay — Interview with savages— Scenery of the forests — Sir J. Banks's hill — Cape Horn — WigwamCove — Miserable condition of savages — Beagle channel — FuegiansPonsonby Sound — Equality of condition among natives — Bifurcationof Beagle channel — Glaciers — Return to ship.TIERRA DEL Lego.December 17th, 1832. — Having now finished with Patagonia,I ^\^ll describe our first arrival in Tierra del Fuego,A little after noon we doubled Cape St. Diego, and enteredthe famous strait of Le Maire. We kept close to theFuegian shore, but the outline of the rugged, inhospitableStaten land was visible amidst the clouds. In the afternoonwe anchored in the bay of Good Success. While enteringwe were saluted in a manner becoming the inhabitants ofthis savage land. A group of Fuegians partly concealed bythe entangled forest, were perched on a wild point overhangingthe sea; and as we passed by, they sprang up,and waving their tattered cloaks sent forth a loud andsonorous shout. The savages followed the ship, and justbefore dark we saw their fire, and again heard their wild cry.The haKbour consists of a fine piece of water haK surroundedby low rounded mountains of clay-slate, which are covered tothe water's edge by one dense gloomy forest. A single glanceat the landscape was sufficient to show me, how widely differentit was from any thing I had ever beheld. At nightit blew a gale of wind, and heavy squalls from the mountainsswept past us. It would have been a bad time out at sea, andwe, as well as others, may call this Good Success Bay.In the morning, the Captain sent a party to communicatewith the Fuegians. When we came within hail, one of thefour natives who were present advanced to receive us, andq2228 TiERRA DEL FUEGO. Dec. 1832.began to shout most vehemently, wishing to direct us wheretoland. When we were on shore the party looked ratheralarmed, but continued talking and making gestures withgreat rapidity. It was without exception the most curiousand interesting spectacle I had ever beheld. I could nothave believed how wide was the difference, between savageand civilized man. It is greater than between a wild anddomesticated animal, in as much as in man there is a greaterpower of improvement. The chief spokesman was old, andappeared to be the head of the family; the three otherswere powerful young men, about six feet high. The womenand children had been sent away. These Fuegians are avery different race from the stunted miserable wretchesfurther to the westward. They are much superior in person,and seem closely allied to the famous Patagonians of theStrait of Magellan. Their only garment consists of a mantlemade of guanaco skin, with the wool outside ; this they wearj list thrown over their shoulders, as often leaving their personsexposed as covered. Their skin is of a dirty copperyred colour.The old man had a fillet of white feathers tied round hishead, which partly confined his black, coarse, and entangledhair. His face was crossed by two broad transverse bars ;one painted bright red reached from ear to ear, and includedthe upper lip ; the other, white like chalk, extended paralleland above the first, so that even his eyelids were thuscoloured. Some of the other men were ornamented bystreaks of black powder, made of charcoal. The partyaltogether closely resembled the devils which come on thestage in such plays as Der Freischutz.Their very attitudes were abject, and the expression oftheir countenances distrustful, surprised, and startled. Afterwe had presented them with some scarlet cloth, which theyimmediately tied round their necks, they became goodfriends. This was shown by the old man patting ourbreasts, and making a chuckling kind of noise, as people dowhen feeding chickens. I walked with the old man, andDec. 1832, FUEGiANS. 229this demonstration of friendship was repeated several times ;it was concluded by three hard slaps, which were given meon the breast and back at the same time. He then baredhis bosom for me to return the compliment, which beingdone, he seemed highly pleased. The language of thesepeople, according to our notions, scarcely deserves to becalled articulate. Captain Cook has compared it to a manclearing his throat, but certainly no European ever clearedhis throat with so many hoarse, guttural, and clickingsounds.They are excellent mimics : as often as we coughed oryawned, or made any odd motion, they immediately imitatedus. Some of our party began to squint and look awry ; butone of the young Fuegians (whose whole face was paintedblack, excepting a white band across his eyes) succeeded inmaking far more hideous grimaces. They could repeat withperfect correctness, each word in any sentence we addressedthem, and they remembered such words for some time. Yetwe Europeans all know how difficult it is to distinguish apartthe sounds in a foreign language. Which of us, for instance,could follow an American Indian through a sentence of morethan three words ? All savages appear to possess, to an uncommondegree, this power of mimicry. I was told almostin the same words, of the same ludicrous habits among theCares : the Australians, likewise, have long been notoriousfor being able to imitate and describe the gait of any man,so that he may be recognised. How can this faculty be explained? is it a consequence of the more practised habits ofperception and keener senses, common to all men in a savagestate, as compared to those long civilized ?When a song was struck up by our party, I thought theFuegians would have fallen down with astonishment. Withequal surprise they viewed our dancing ; but one of theyoung men, when asked, had no objection to a little waltzing.Little accustomed to Europeans as they appeared tobe, yet they knew, and dreaded our fire arms ; nothing wouldtempt them to take a gun in their hands. They begged for230 Tierra DEL FUEGO. DcC. 1832.knives, calling them by the Spanish word **cuchilla."They explained also what they wanted, by acting as if theyhad a piece of blubber in their mouth, and then pretendingto cut instead of tear it.It was interesting to watch the conduct of these people towardsJemmy Button (one of the Fuegians* who had beentaken, during the former voyage, to England) : they immediatelyperceived the difference between him and the rest, andheld much conversation between themselves on the subject.The old man addressed a long harangue to Jemmy, whichit seems was to invite him to stay with them. But Jemmyunderstood very little of their language, and was, moreover,thoroughly ashamed of his countrymen. When York Minster(another of these men) came on shore, they noticed him inthe same way, and told him he ought to shave ; yet he hadnot twenty dwarf hairs on his face, whilst we all wore ouruntrimmed beards. They examined the colour of his skin,and compared it with ours. One of our arms being bared,they expressed the liveliest surprise and admiration at itswhiteness. We thought that they mistook two or threeof the officers, who were rather shorter and fairer (thoughadorned with large beards), for the ladies of our party.The tallest amongst the Fuegians was evidently muchpleased at his height being noticed. When placed backto back with the tallest of the boat's crew, he tried hisbest to edge on higher ground, and to stand on tiptoe.He opened his mouth to show his teeth, and turnedhis face for a side view ; and all this was done with suchalacrity, that I dare say he thought himself the handsomestman in Tierra del Fuego. After the first feeling on ourpart of grave astonishment was over, nothing could bemore ludicrous or interesting than the odd mixture of surpriseand imitation which these savages every momentexhibited.• Captain FitzRoy has given a history of these people. Four were takento England ; one died there, and the three others (two men and one woman)were now brought back and settled in their own country.Dec. 1832. tierra del fuego. 231The next day I attempted to penetrate some way into thecountry. Tierra del Fuego may be described as a mountainouscountry, partly submerged in the sea, so that deepislets and bays occupy the place where valleys should exist.The mountain sides (except on the exposed western coast)are covered from the waters edge upwards by one greatforest. The trees reach to an elevation of between 1000 and1500 feet ; and are succeeded by a band of peat, with minutealpine plants ; and this again is succeeded by the line of perpetualsnow, which, according to Captain King, in the Straitof Magellan descends to between 3000 and 4000 feet. Tofind an acre of level land in any part of the country is mostrare. I recollect only one little flat near Port Famine, andanother of rather larger extent near Goeree Road. In boththese cases, and in all others, the surface was covered by athick bed of swampy peat. Even within the forest the groundis concealed by a mass of slowly putrefying vegetable matter,which, from being soaked with water, yields to the foot.Finding it nearly hopeless to push my way through thewood, I followed the course of a mountain torrent. Atfirst, from the waterfalls and number of dead trees, I couldhardly crawl along ; but the bed of the stream soon becamea little more open, from the floods having swept the sides. Icontinued slowly to advance for an hour along the brokenand rocky banks ; and was amply repaid by the grandeurof the scene. The gloomy depth of the ravine well accordedwith the universal signs of violence. On everyside were lying irregular masses of rock and up-torn trees ;other trees, though still erect, were decayed to the heart andready to fall. The entangled mass of the thriving and thefallen reminded me of the forests within the tropics ; — yetthere was a difference ; for in these still solitudes. Death, insteadof Life, seemed the predominant spirit. I followed thewatercourse till I came to a spot where a great slip had cleareda straight space down the mountain side. By this road Iascended to a considerable elevation, and obtained a good viewof the surrounding woods. The trees all belong to one kind.232 TIERRA DEL FUEGO. DcC. 1832.the Fagus befuloides, for the number of the other species ofbeech, and of the Winter's bark, is quite inconsiderable.This tree keeps its leaves throughout the year; but itsfoliage is of a peculiar brownish-green colour, with a tinge ofyellow. As the whole landscape is thus coloured, it has asombre, dub appearance ; nor is it often enlivened by therays of the sun.December 20th. — One side of the harbour is formed bya hill about 1500 feet high, which Captain FitzRoy has calledafter Sir J. Banks, in commemoration of his disastrous excursion,which proved fatal to two of his party, and nearly soto Dr. Solander. The snowstorm, which was the cause oftheir misfortune, happened in the middle of January, correspondingto our July, and in the latitude of Durham ! Iwas anxious to reach the summit of this mountain to collectalpine plants ; for flowers of any kind, in the lower part, werefew in number. We followed the same watercourse as on theprevious day, till it dwindled away, and then were compelled tocrawl blindly among the trees. These, from the effects of theelevation, and of the impetuous winds, were low, thick, andcrooked. At length we reached that which from a distanceappeared like a carpet of fine green turf, but which, to ourvexation, turned out to be a compact mass of little beech-treesabout four or five feet high. These were as thick togetheras box in the border of a flower-garden, and we were obligedto struggle over the flat but treacherous surface. After alittle more trouble we gained the peat, and then the bareslate rock.A ridge connected this hill with another, distant somemiles, and more lofty, so that patches of snow were lying onit. As the day was not far advanced, I determined to walkthere and collect along the road. It would have been veryhard work, had it not been for a well-beaten and straight pathmade by the guanacoes ; for these animals, like sheep, alwaysfollow the same line. When we reached the hill we found itthe highest in the immediate neighbourhood, and the watersflowed to the sea in opposite directions. We obtained aDec. 1832, cape horn. 233wide view over the surrounding country : to the northwarda swampy moorland extended, but to the southward we hada scene of savage magnificence, well becoming Tierra delFuego. There was a degree of mysterious grandeur in mountainbehind mountain, with the deep intervening valleys, allcovered by one thick, dusky mass of forest. The atmosphere,likewise, in this climate (where gale succeeds gale,with rain, hail, and sleet), seems blacker than anywhere else.In the Strait of Magellan looking due south from PortFamine, the distant channels between the mountains appearfrom their gloominess to lead beyond the confines of thisworld.December 21st. — The Beagle got under way: and onthe succeeding day, favoured to an uncommon degree by afine easterly breeze, we closed in with the Barnevelts, and,running past Cape Deceit with its stony peaks, about threeo'clock doubled the weatherbeaten Cape Horn. The eveningwas calm and bright, and we enjoyed a fine view ofthe surrounding isles. Cape Horn, however, demanded histribute, and before night sent us a gale of wind directly inour teeth. We stood out to sea, and on the second day againmade the land, when we saw on our weather-bow thisnotorious promontory in its proper form — veiled in a mist,and its dim outline surrounded by a storm of wind andwater. Great black clouds were rolling across the heavens,and squalls of rain, with hail, swept by us with extremeviolence ; so that the captain determined to run into WigwamCove. This is a snug little harbour, not far from Cape Horn ;and here, at Christmas-eve, we anchored in smooth water.The only thing which reminded us of the gale outside, wasevery now and then a pufF from the mountains, whichseemed to wish to blow us out of the water.December 25th. — Close by the cove, a pointed hiU,called Rater's Peak, rises to the height of 1 700 feet. Thesurrounding islands all consist of conical masses of greenstone,associated sometimes with less regular hills of baked234 Tierra DEL FUEGO. Dec. 1832.and altered clay-slate. This part of Tierra del Fuego may beconsidered as the extremity of the submerged chain of mountainsalready alluded to. The cove takes its name of " Wigwam"from some of the Fuegian habitations ; but every bayin the neighbourhood might be so called with equal propriety.The inhabitants living chiefly upon shell-fish are obligedconstantly to change their place of residence ; but they returnat intervals to the same spots, as is evident from thepile of old shells, which must often amount to some tons inweight. These heaps can be distinguished at a long distanceby the bright green colour of certain plants, which invariablygrow on them. Among these may be enumerated the wildcelery and scurvy grass, two very serviceable plants, the useof which has not been discovered by the natives.The Fuegian wigwam resembles, in size and dimensions, ahaycock. It merely consists of a few broken branches stuckin the ground, and very imperfectly thatched on one side witha few tufts of grass and rushes. The whole cannot be so muchas the work of an hour, and it is only used for a few days.At Goeree Roads I saw a place where one of these nakedmen had slept, which absolutely offered no more cover thanthe form of a hare. The man was evidently living by himself,and York Minster said he was "rev bad man," andthat probably he had stolen something. On the west coast,however, the wigwams are rather better, for they are coveredwith seal-skins. We were detained here several days by thebad weather. The climate is certainly wretched ; the summersolstice was now passed, yet every day snow fell on the hills,and in the valleys there was rain, accompanied by sleet. Thethermometer generally stood about 45°, but in the night fellto 38° or 40°. From the damp and boisterous state of theatmosphere, not cheered by a gleam of sunshine, one fanciedthe climate even worse than it really was.At a subsequent period the Beagle anchored for a coupleof days under Wollaston Island, which is a short way to thenorthward. While going on shore we pulled alongside aDec. 18.32. inhabitants. 235canoe with six Fuegians. These were the most abject andmiserable creatures I any where beheld.* On the east coastthe natives, as we have seen, have guanaco cloaks, and on thewest, they possess seal-skins. Amongst these central tribesthe men generally possess an otter-skin, or some small scrapabout as large as a pocket-handkerchief, which is barely sufficientto cover their backs as low down as their loins. It islaced across the breast by strings, and according as the windblows, it is shifted from side to side. But these Fuegiansin the canoe were quite naked, and even one ful-grownwoman was absolutely so. It was raining heavily, andthe fresh water, together with the spray, trickled down herbody. In another harbour not far distant, a woman, whowas suckling a recently-born child, came one day alongsidethe vessel, and remained there whilst the sleet fell andthawed on her naked bosom, and on the skin of her nakedchild. These poor wretches were stunted in their growth,their hideous faces bedaubed with white paint, their skinsfilthy and greasy, their hair entangled, their voices discordant,their gestures violent and without dignity. Viewingsuch men, one can hardly make oneself believe they arefellow-creatures, and inhabitants of the same world. It is acommon subject of conjecture what pleasure in life some ofthe less gifted animals can enjoy : how much more reasonbelieve, in this extreme part of South America, man exists in alower state of improvement than in any other part of the world. TheSouth Sea islander of either race is comparatively civilized. The Esquimaux,in his subterranean hut, enjoys some of the comforts of life, and inhis canoe, when fully equipped, manifests much skill. Some of the tribesof Southern Africa, prowling about in search of roots, and living concealedon the wild and arid plains, are sufficiently wretched. But theAustralian, in the simplicity of the arts of life, comes nearest the Fuegian.He can, however, boast of his boomerang, his spear and throwing-stick,his method of climbing trees, tracking animals, and scheme of hunting.Although thus superior in acquirements, it by no means follows that heshould likewise be so in capabilities. Indeed, from what we saw of theFuegians, who were taken to England, I should think the case was thereverse.236 TiERRA DEL FUEGO. Dec. 1832.ably the same question may be asked with respect to thesebarbarians. At night, five or six human beings, naked andscarcely protected from the wind and rain of this tempestuousclimate, sleep on the wet ground coiled up likeanimals. Whenever it is low water, they must rise to pickshell-fish from the rocks ; and the women, winter andsummer, either dive to collect sea eggs, or sit patiently intheir canoes, and, with a baited hair-line, jerk out small fish.If a seal is killed, or the floating carcass of a putrid whalediscovered, it is a feast : such miserable food is assisted bya few tasteless berries and fungi. Nor are they exemptfrom famine, and, as a consequence, cannibalism accompaniedby parricide.The tribes have no government or head, yet each is surroundedby other hostile ones, speaking diiferent dialects ;and the cause of their warfare would appear to be the meansof subsistence. Their country is a broken mass of wildrock, lofty hills, and useless forests : and these are viewedthrough mists and endless storms. The habitable land isreduced to the stones which form the beach ; in search offood they are compelled to wander from spot to spot, andso steep is the coast, that they can only move about in theirwretched canoes. They cannot know the feeling of having ahome, and still less that of domestic affection ; unless indeedthe treatment of a master to a laborious slave can be consideredas such. How little can the higher powers of the mind bebrought into play ! What is there for imagination to picture,for reason to compare, for judgment to decide upon ? toknock a limpet from the rock does not even require cunning,that lowest power of the mind. Their skill in some respectsmay be compared to the instinct of animals ; for it is not improvedby experience : the canoe, their most ingeniouswork, poor as it is, has remained the same, for the last twohundred and fifty years.Whilst beholding these savages, one asks, whence havethey come ? What could have tempted, or what changecompelled a tribe of men to leave the fine regions ofJan. 1833. inhabitants. 237the north, to travel down the Cordillera or backbone ofAmerica, to invent and build canoes, and then to enter onone of the most inhospitable countries within the limits ofthe globe ? Although such reflections must at first occupyone's mind, yet we may feel sure that many of them arequite erroneous. There is no reason to believe that theFuegians decrease in number; therefore we must supposethat they enjoy a sufficient share of happiness (of whateverkind it may be) to render life worth having. Nature bymaking habit omnipotent, and its effects hereditary, hasfitted the Fuegian to the climate and the productions of hiscountry.January 15th, 1833. — The Beagle anchored in GoereeRoads. Captain FitzRoy having determined to settle theFuegians, according to their wishes, in Ponsonby Sound,four boats were equipped to carry them there throughthe Beagle channel. This channel which was discovered byCaptain FitzRoy during the last voyage, is a most remarkablefeature in the geography of this, or indeed of any othercountry. Its length is about 120 miles with an averagebreadth, not subject to any very great variations, of abouttwo miles. It is throughout the greater part so extremelystraight, that the view, bounded on each side by a line ofmountains, gradually becomes indistinct in the perspective.This arm of the sea may be compared to the valley ofRichness in Scotland, with its chain of lakes and enteringfaiths. At some future epoch the resemblance perhaps willbecome complete. Already in one part we have proofs of arising of the land in a line of cliff", or terrace, composed ofcoarse sandstone, mud, and shingle, which forms bothshores. The Beagle channel crosses the southern part ofTierra del Fuego in an east and west line ; in its middle,it is joined on the south side by an irregular channel atright angles to it, which has been called Ponsonby Sound.This is the residence of Jemmy Button's tribe and family.January 19th. — Three whale boats and the yawl, with a238 TiERRA DEL Lego. Jan. 1833.party of twenty-eight, started under the command of CaptainFitzRoy. In the afternoon we entered the eastern mouth ofthe channel, and shortly afterwards found a snug little cove,concealed by some surrounding islets. Here we pitched ourtents, and lighted our fires. Nothing could look more comfortablethan this scene. The glassy water of the littleharbour, with the trees sending their branches over therocky beach, the boats at anchor, the tents supported by thecrossed oars, and the smoke curling up the wooded valley,formed a picture of quiet retirement. The next day (20th)we smoothly ghded onwards in our little fleet, and came to amore inhabited district. Few if any of these natives couldever have seen a white man ; certainly nothing could exceedtheir astonishment at the apparition of the four boats. Fireswere lighted on every point (hence the name of the land),both to attract our attention, and to spread far and wide thenews. Some of the men ran for miles along the shore. Aswe passed under one cliff", four or five men suddenly appearedabove us, forming the most wild and savage groupthat can be imagined. They were absolutely naked, withlong streaming hair, and with rugged staffs in their hands :springing from the ground they waved their arms aroundtheir heads, and sent forth the most hideous yells.At dinner-time we landed among a party of Fuegians. Atfirst they were not inclined to be friendly; for imtil thecaptain pulled in ahead of the other boats, they kept theirsings in their hands. We soon, however, delighted them bytrifling presents, such as tying red tape round their heads. Itwas as easy to please, as it was difficult to satisfy these savages.Young and old, men and children, never ceased repeating theword " yammerschooner," which means " give me." Afterpointing to almost every object, one after the other, even tothe buttons on our coats, and saying their favourite word inas many intonations as possible, they would then use it in aneuter sense, and vacantly repeat " yammerschooner." Afteryammerschoonering for any article very eagerly, they wouldJan. 1833. beagle channel. 239by a simple artifice point to their young women or little children,as much as to say, " If you will not give it me, surelyyou will to such as these }"At night we endeavoured in vain to find an uninhabitedcove ; and at last were obliged to bivouac not far from a partyof natives. They were very inoffensive as long as they werefew in numbers, but in the morning (21st) being joined byothers they showed symptoms of hostility. An Europeanlabours under great disadvantages, when treating withsavages like these, who have not the least idea of the powerof fire-arms. In the very act of levelling his musket, heappears to the savage far inferior to a man armed with a bowand arrow, a spear, or even a sling. Nor is it easy to teachthem our superiority except by striking a fatal blow. Likewild beasts they do not appear in all cases to compare numbers; for each individual if attacked, instead of retiring,will endeavour to dash your brains out with a stone, ascertainly as a tiger under similar circumstances would tearyou. Captain FitzRoy on one occasion, being very anxiousfrom good reasons to frighten away a small party, twice firedhis pistol close by the side of a native. The man both timeslooked astounded, and carefully but quickly rubbed his head ;he then stared awhile, and gabbled to his companions ; buthe never seemed to think of running away. We can hardly putourselves in the position of these savages, to understandtheir actions. In the case of the Fuegian, the possibility ofsuch a sound as the report of a gun close to his ear, couldnever have entered his mind. He perhaps Literally did not forasecond know whether it was a soit or a blow, and thereforevery naturally rubbed his head. In a similar manner, when asavage sees a mark struck by a bullet, it may be some time beforehe is able at aU to understand how it is effected ; for thefact of a body being invisible from its velocity, would perhapsbe to him an idea totally inconceivable. Moreover, the extremeforce of a bullet, that penetrates a hard substance withouttearing it, may convince the savage that it has no force at all.Certainly I believe that many savages of the lowest grade.240 TIERRA DEL FUEGO. Jan. 1833.such as these of Tierra del Fuego, have seen objects struck,and even small animals killed by the musket, without beingin the least aware how deadly an instrument it was.22d. — After having passed an unmolested night, in whatwould appear to be neutral territory, between Jemmy's tribeand the people we saw yesterday, we sailed pleasantly along.The scenery in this part had a peculiar and very magnificentcharacter ; although the effect was lessened from the lownessof the point of view in a boat, and from looking down the valleyand hence losing all the beauty of a succession of ridges. Themountains attained an elevation of about 3000 feet, and wereterminated by sharp and jagged points. They rose in oneunbroken sweep from the water's edge, and were covered tothe height of fourteen or fifteen hundred feet by the dusky-colouredforest. It was most curious to observe, how leveland truly horizontal the line on the mountain side was, as faras the eye could range, at which trees ceased to grow. Itprecisely resembled the high-water mark of drift, weed on asea-beach.At night we slept close to the junction of PonsonbySound with the Beagle channel. A small family of Fuegians,who were living in the cove, were very quiet and inoffensive,and soon joined our party round the blazing fire. We werewell clothed, and though sitting close to the fire, were farfrom too warm ; yet these naked savages, though further off,were observed to our great surprise, to be streaming withperspiration at undergoing such a roasting. They seemed,however, very well pleased, and aU joined in the chorus ofthe seamen's songs : but the manner in which they wereinvariably a little behindhand was quite ludicrous.During the night the news had spread, and early in themorning (23d) a fresh party arrived. Several of them hadrun so fast that their noses were bleeding, and their mouthsfrothed from the rapidity with which they talked, and withtheir naked bodies all bedaubed with black, white, and red,they looked like so many demoniac who had been fighting.We then proceeded down Ponsonby Sound to the spotJan. 1833. beagle channel. 241where poor Jemmy expected to find his mother and relations.We staid there five days. Captain FitzRoy has given anaccount of all the interesting events which there happened.During the succeeding year we paid another visit to theFuegians, and the Beagle herself followed the same coursewhich I have just described as having been taken in the boats.1 was amused by finding what a difference the circumstance ofbeing quite superior in force made, in the interest of beholdingthese savages. While in the boats I got to hate thevery sound of their voices, so much trouble did they give us.The first and last word was " yammerschooner." When,entering some quiet little cove, we have looked round andthought to pass a quiet night, the odious word " yammer-schooner"has shrilly sounded from some gloomy nook, andthen the little signal smoke has curled upwards to spread thenews. On leaving some place we have said to each other,"Thank Heaven, we have at last fairly left these wretches !"when one more faint halloo from an all-powerful voice,heard at a prodigious distance, would reach our ears, andclearly could we distinguish — "^ yammerschooner." But onthe latter occasion, the more Fuegians the merrier ; andvery merry work it was. Both parties laughing, wondering,gaping at each other ; we pitying them, for giving us goodfish and crabs for rags, &c. ; they grasping at the chance offinding people so foolish as to exchange such splendid ornamentsfor a good supper. It was most amusing to see theundisguised smile of satisfaction with which one young woman,with her face painted black, tied with rushes severalbits of scarlet cloth round her head. Her husband, who enjoyedthe very universal privilege in this country of possessingtwo wives, evidently became jealous of all the attentionpaid to his young wife ; and, after a consultation with hisnaked beauties, was paddled away by them.Some of the Fuegians plainly showed that they had a fairidea of barter. I gave one man a large nail (a most valuablepresent) without making any signs for a return ; but he immediatelypicked out two fish, and handed them up on theVOL. III. a242 TiERRA Dei FUEGO. Jan. 1833'point of his spear. If any present was designed for onecanoe, and it fell near another, it was invariably given to theright owner. We were always much surprised at the littlenotice, or rather none whatever, which was evinced respectingmany things, even such as boats, the use of which musthave been evident. Simple circumstances, — such as the whitenessof our skins, the beauty of scarlet cloth or blue beads, theabsence of women, our care in washing ourselves, — excitedtheir admiration far more than any grand or complicatedobject, such as the ship. Bougainville has remarked concerningthese very people that they treat the " chefd'oeuvres de Industria humaine, comme ils traitent les loinde la nature et ses phenomenes.^^The perfect equality among the individuals composingthese tribes, must for a long time retard their civilization.As we see those animals, whose instinct compels them tolive in society and obey a chief, are most capable of improvement,so is it with the races of mankind. Whether welook at it as a cause or a consequence, the more civilizedalways have the most artificial governments. For instance,the inhabitants of Otaheite, who, when first discovered, weregoverned by hereditary kings, had arrived at a far highergrade than another branch of the same people, the NewZealanders, — who although benefited by being compelled toturn their attention to agriculture, Avere republicans in themost absolute sense. In Tierra del Fuego, until some chiefshall arise with power sufficient to secure any acquiredadvantages, such as the domesticated animals or other valuablepresents, it seems scarcely possible that the politicalstate of the country can be improved. At present, even apiece of cloth is torn into shreds and distributed ; and noone individual becomes richer than another. On the otherhand, it is difficult to understand how a chief can arise tillthere is property of some sort by which he might manifestand still increase his authority.January 28th. — In the evening. Captain FitzRoy senttwo boats back to the ship from Ponsonby Sovmd, and withJan, 1833. beagle channel. 243the two others proceeded to survey the western end of theBeagle channel. The view in this central part was veryremarkable. Looking towards either hand, no object interceptedthe vanishing points of this long canal of the mountains.The circumstance of its being an arm of the sea wasrendered very evident by several huge whales spouting indifferentdirections. On one occasion I saw two of thesemonsters, probably male and female, slowly swimming oneafter the other, within less than a stones throw of the shore,over which the beech extended its branches.We sailed on tiU it was dark, and then pitched our tentsin a quiet creek. The greatest luxury here is to find a beachof pebbles, for they are both dry and yield to the body. Thepeaty soil is damp ; rock is uneven and hard ; sand gets intoone's meat, when cooked and eaten boat-fashion ; but whenlying in our blanket bags, on a good bed of smooth pebbles,we passed most comfortable nights.It was my watch till one o'clock. There is somethingvery solemn in these scenes. At no time does the consciousnessin what a remote corner of the world you arethen buried, come so strongly before your mind. Everythingtends to this effect; the stillness of the night isinterrupted only by the heavy breathing of the seamen beneaththe tents, and sometimes by the cry of a night bird.The occasional barking also of a dog, heard in the distance,reminds one that it is the land of the savage.29th. — Early in the morning we arrived at the pointwhere the Beagle channel divides itself into two arms; and weentered the northern one. The scenery here becomes evengrander than before. The lofty mountains on the north sidecompose the granitic axis, or backbone of the whole country.They were covered by a wide mantle of perpetual snow, andnumerous cascades poured their waters, through the woods,into the narrow channel below. In many parts magnificentglaciers extended from the mountain side to the water's edge.It is scarcely possible to imagine any thing more beautifulthan the beryl-like blue of the glacier, and especially whenR 2244 TIERRA DEL FUEGO. Jan. 1833.contrasted with the dead white of an expanse of snow. Asfragments fell from the glacier into the water, they floatedaway, and the channel with its icebergs represented in miniaturethe polar sea. When we reached the western mouth ofthis branch of the channel, we sailed amongst many unknownislands, and then proceeded by the outer coast to the entranceof the other arm. Thence we returned to PonsonbySound, saw the Fuegians, and arrived at the ship after ourtwenty-days' excursion.CHAPTER XII.Falkland Islands — Excursion round island — Aspect — Cattle, horses, rabbit,wolf-like fox —-fire made of bones— Art in making fire — Manner ofhunting wild cattle — Geology, fossil shells — Valleys filled with greatfragments, scenes of violence — Penguin — Geese — Eggs of doris —Zoophytes, coralline phosphorescent — Compound animals.FALKLAND ISLANDS.March 16th, 1834. — The Beagle anchored in BerkeleySound, in East Falkland Island.* This archipelago is situatedin nearly the same latitude as the mouth of the Strait of Magellan.It covers a space of about 120 by 60 geographicalmiles, and is a little more than half the size of Ireland.After the possession of these miserable islands had been contestedby France, Spain, and England, they were left uninhabited.The government of Buenos Ayres then sold them toa private individual, but likewise used them, as old Spainhad done before, for a penal settlement. England claimedher right and seized them. The Englishman who was leftin charge of the flag was consequently murdered. A Britishofficer was next sent, unsupported by any power : and when wearrived, we found him in charge of a population, of whichrather more than half were runaway rebels and murderers.The theatre is worthy of the scenes acted on it. An undulatingland, with a desolate and wretched aspect, is everywherecovered by a peaty soil and wiry grass, of one monotonousbrown colour. Here and there a peak or ridge of grayquartz rock, breaks through the smooth surface. Every onehas heard of the climate of these regions ; it may be comparedto that which is experienced at the height of betweenone and two thousand feet, on the mountains of NorthIn the same month, also, of the previous year, the Beagle visitedthese islands.246 FALKLAND ISLANDS. March, 1834.Wales ; having however less sunshine and less frost, but morewind and rain.March 16th. — I will now describe a short excursionwhich I made round a part of this island. In the morningI started with six horses and two Gauchos : the latter werecapital men for the purpose, and well accustomed to living ontheir own resources. The weather was very boisterous andcold, with heavy hailstorms. We got on, however, pretty well;but excepting in the geology, nothing could be less interestingthan our day's ride. The country is uniformly the same undulatingmoorland ; the surface being covered by light brownwithered grass and a few very small shrubs, all springingout of an elastic peaty soil. In the valleys here and theremight be seen a small flock of wild geese, and every wherethe ground was so soft, that the snipe was able to feed.Besides these two kinds of birds, there were few others.There is one main range of hills, nearly two thousand feetin height, and composed of quartz rock, the rugged andbarren crests of which gave us some trouble to cross. Onthe south side we came to the best country for wild cattle ;we met however no great number, for they had lately beenmuch harassed.In the evening we came across a small herd. One of mycompanions, St. Jago by name, soon separated a fat cow ;he threw the bolas, and it struck her legs, but failed inbecoming entangled. Then dropping his hat to mark thespot where the balls were left, while at full gallop he uncoiledhis lazo, and after a most severe chase, again came uptothe cow, and caught her round the horns. The otherGaucho had gone on ahead with the horses, so thatSt. Jago had some difficulty in killing the furious beast.He managed to get her on a level piece of ground, by takingadvantage of her as often as she rushed at him ; and when shewould not move, my horse, from having been trained, wouldcanter up, and with his chest give her a violent push. Butwhen on level ground it does not appear an easy job for oneman to kill a beast mad with terror. Nor would it be so, ifMarch, 1834. wild cattle. 247the horse, when left to itself without its rider, did not soonlearn, for its own safety, to keep the lazo tight ; so that, ifthe animal moves forward, the horse moves just as quicklyso much away ; otherwise, it stands motionless leaning onone side. This horse, however, was a young one, andwould not stand still, but gave in to the cow as shestruggled. It was admirable to see with what dexterity St.Jago dodged behind the beast, till at last he contrived togive the fatal touch to the main tendon of the hind leg ;after which, driving his knife into the head of the spinalmarrow, the cow dropped as if struck by lightning. He cutoffpieces of flesh with the skin to it, but without anybones, sufficient for our expedition. We then rode on toour sleeping-place, and had for supper " carne con cherootmeat roasted with the skin on it. This is as superior tocommon beef, as venison is to mutton. A large circularpiece taken from the back, is roasted on the embers withthe hide downwards and in the form of a saucer, so thatnone of the gravy is lost. If any worthy alderman hadsupped with us that evening, "carne con cuero," withoutdoubt, would soon have been celebrated in London.During the night it rained, and the next day (l7th) wasvery stormy, vnth much hail and snow. We rode acrossthe island to the neck of land which joins the Rincon delToro (the great peninsula at the S.W. extremity) to the restof the island. From the greater number of cows which havebeen kiUed, there is a large proportion of bus. These wanderabout by twos and threes, or by themselves, and are verysavage. I never saw such magnificent beasts ; they truly resembledthe ancient sculptures, in which the size of the neckand head is but seldom equalled among tame animals. Theyoung bulls ran away for a short distance, but the old onesdid not stir a step, except to rush at man and horse ; and manyof the latter have thus been killed. One old baU. crossed aboggy stream, and took up his stand on the opposite side tous.We in vain tried to drive him away, and failing, wereobliged to make a large circuit. The Gauchos in revenge248 FALKLAND ISLANDS. March, 1834.determined to render him for the future innocuous. Itwas very interesting to see how art completely masteredforce. One lazo was thrown over his horns, as he rushedat the horse, and another round his hind legs : in a minutethe monster was stretched harmless on the ground.After the lazo has once been tightly drawn round the hornsof a furious animal, it does not at first appear an easy thingto disengage it again ; nor, I apprehend, would it be so, if theman was by himself, and he did not wish to kill the beast.By the aid, however, of a second person thro^^ang his lazo, soas to catch both hind legs, it is quickly managed : for the animal,as long as its hind legs are kept outstretched, is quitepowerless, and the first man can with his hands loosen hislazo, and then quietly mount his horse ; but the momentthe second man, by backing ever so little, relaxes the strain,the lazo sips off the legs of the struggling beast, which thusrises free, shakes himself, and vainly rushes after hisantagonist.During our whole ride we only saw one troop of wildhorses. These animals, as well as the cattle, were introducedby the French in 1764, since which time they havegreatly increased. It is a curious fact, that the horseshave never left the eastern end of the island, althoughthere is no natural boundary to prevent them from roaming,and that part of the island is not more tempting thanthe rest. The Gauchos, though asserting this to be thecase, are unable to account for the circumstance. Thehorses appear to thrive well, yet they are small sized, andhave lost so much strength, that they are unfit to be used intakingAvild cattle with the lazo. In consequence, it is necessaryto go to the great expense of importing fresh horsesfrom the Plata. At some future period the southern hemisphereprobably will have its breed of Falkland ponies, asthe northern has that of Shetland.The rabbit is another animal which has been introduced,and has succeeded very well ; so that they abound over largeparts of the island. Yet, like the horses, they are confinedMarch, 1834. wild animals. 249within certain limits ; for they have not crossed the centralchain of hills ; nor would they have extended even so far asthe base, if, as the Gauchos informed me, small colonies hadnot been carried there. I should not have supposed thatthese animals, natives of northern Africa, could have existedin a climate so extremely humid as this, and which enjoys solittle sunshine that even wheat ripens only occasionally. It isasserted that in Sweden, which any one would have thought amore favourable climate, the rabbit cannot live out of doors.The first few pair moreover had here to contend againstpre-existing enemies, in the fox, and some large hawks. TheFrench naturalists have considered the black variety a distinctspecies, and called it Lepus Magellaniciis.* They imaginedthat Magellan, when talking of an animal under thename of " conejos,^' in the Strait of Magellan, referred to thisspecies ; but he was alluding to a small cavy, which to thisday is thus called. The Gauchos laughed at the idea ofthe black kind being different from the gray, and they saidthat at all events it had not extended its range any furtherthan the other ; that the two were never found separate ;and that they readily bred together, and produced piebaldoffspring. Of the latter I now possess a specimen, and itis marked about the head, differently from the French specificdescription. This circumstance shows how cautiousnaturalists should be in making species ; for even Cuvier,on looking at the skull of one of these rabbits, thought itwas probably distinct.The only quadruped native to the island, is a large wolf-likefox,t which is common to both East and West Falkland. ILesson's Zoology of the Voyage of the Coquille, vol. i., p. 168.All the early voyagers, and especially Bougainville, distinctly state thatthe wolf-like fox was the only native animal on the island. The distinctionof this rabbit as a species, is taken from peculiarities in the fur,from the shape of the head, and from the shortness of the ears. I mayhere observe that the difference between the Irish and English hare, restsupon nearly similar characters, only more strongly marked.f I have reason to believe there is likewise a field-mouse. The com-250 FALKLAND ISLANDS. March, 1834,have no doubt it is a peculiar species, and confined to this archipelago; because many sealers, Gauchos, and Indians, whohave visited these islands, all maintain that no such animal isfound in any part of South America. Molina, from a similarityin habits, thought this was the same with his "cul-peur"*but I have seen both, and they are quite distinct.These wolves are well known, from Byron's account of theirtameness and curiosity; which the sailors, who ran into thewater to avoid them, mistook for fierceness. To this daytheir manners remain the same. They have been observedto enter a tent, and actually pull some meat from beneath thehead of a sleeping seaman. The Gauchos, also, have frequentlykilled them in the evening, by holding out a piece ofmeat in one hand, and in the other a knife ready to stick them.As far as I am aware, there is no other instance in any partof the world, of so small a mass of broken land, distant froma continent, possessing so large a quadruped peculiar to itself.Their numbers have rapidly decreased ; they are already banishedfrom that half of the island which lies to the eastwardof the neck of land between St. Salvador Bay and BerkeleySound. Within a very few years after these islands shall havebecome regularly settled, in aU probability this fox will beclassed with the dodo, as an animal which has perished fromthe face of the earth. Mr. Lowe, an intelligent person whohas long been acquainted with these islands, assured me,that all the foxes from the western island were smaller and ofa redder colour than those from the eastern. In the fourspecimens which were brought to England in the Beaglesthere was some variation, but the difference with respect tomon European rat and mouse have roamed from the habitations, and havesettled themselves at various points. The common hog has also runwild.The " culpeu" is the Vulpes Magellanicus brought home by CaptainKing from the Strait of Magellan. It is common in Chile.captain FitzRoy has presented two of these foxes to the BritishMuseum, where Mr. Gray had the kindness to compare them in mypresence.March, 1834. Falkland islands. 251the islands could not be perceived. At the same time thefact is far from improbable.At night (17th) we slept on the neck of land which forms thesouth-west peninsula. The valley was pretty well shelteredfrom the cold wind ; but there was very little brushwood forfuel. The Gauchos, however, soon found what, to my greatsurprise, made nearly as hot a fire as coals ; this was theskeleton of a bullock lately killed, from which the flesh hadbeen picked by the Caracaras. They told me that in winterthey had often killed a' beast, cleaned the flesh from thebones with their knives, and then with these same bonesroasted the meat for their suppers.1 8th. — It rained tiring nearly the whole day. At night wemanaged, however, with our saddle-cloths, to keep ourselvespretty well dry and warm ; but the ground on which we sleptwas on each occasion nearly in the state of a bog, and therewas not a dry spot to sit down on after our day's ride. I havein another part stated how singular it is that trees shouldbe entirely absent from these islands, while they cover thewhole surface of Tierra del Fuego. The largest bush in theisland (belonging to the family of Composites) is scarcely sotall as our gorse. The best fuel is afforded by a green littlebush, about the size of common heath, which has the usefulproperty of burning while fresh and green. It was very surprisingto see the Gauchos, in the midst of rain, and everythingsoaking wet, with nothing more than a tinder-box andpiece of rag, immediately make a fire. They sought beneaththe tufts of grass and bushes for a few dry twigs, andthese they rubbed into fibres ; then surrounding them withcoarser twigs, something like a bird's nest, they put the ragwith its spark of fire in the middle, and covered it up. Thenest being then held up to the wind, by degrees it smokedmore and more, and at last burst out in flames. I do notthink any other method would have had a chance of succeedingwith such damp materials.19th. — Each morning, from not having ridden for sometimepreviously, I was very stiff. I was surprised to hear252 FALKLAND ISLANDS. March, 1S34.the Gauchos, who have from infancy almost lived on horseback,say that, under similar circumstances, they alwayssuffer. St. Jago told me, that having been confined for threemonths by illness, he went out hunting wild cattle, and inconsequence,for the next two days, his thighs were so stiffthat he was obliged to lie in bed. This shows that theGauchos, although they do not appear to do so, yet reallymust exert much muscular effort in riding. The hunting wildcattle, in a country so difficult to pass as this is on accountof the swampy ground, must be very hard work. The Gauchossay they often pass at full speed over ground which wouldbe impassable at a slower pace ; in the same manner as a manis able to skate across thin ice. When hunting, the party endeavoursto get as close as possible to the herd without beingdiscovered. Each man carries four or five pair of the bolas ;these he throws one after the other at as many cattle, which,when once entangled, are left for some days, till they becomea little exhausted by hunger and struggling. They are thenlet free and driven towards a small herd of tame animals,which have been brought to the spot on purpose. Fromtheir previous treatment, being too much terrified to leavethe herd, they are easily driven, if their strength lasts out, tothe settlement.The weather continued so very bad, that we determinedto make a push, and try to reach the vessel beforenight. From the quantity of rain which had fallen, the surfaceof the whole country was swampy. I suppose my horsefell at least a dozen times, and sometimes the whole six werefloundering in the mud together. All the little streams arebordered by soft peat, which makes it very difficult for thehorses to leap them without falling. To complete our discomforts,we were obliged to cross the head of a creek, inwhich the water was as high as the backs of the horses, andthe little waves, owing to the violence of the wind, brokeover us, and made us very wet and cold. Even the iron-framedGauchos professed themselves glad when theyreached the settlement, after our little excursion.March, 1834. geology. 253The geological structure of these islands is in most respectssimple. The lower country consists of clay-slate and sandstoneassociated together, and the hills of white granularquartz rock. The strata of the latter are frequently archedwith perfect symmetry, and the appearance of some of themasses is in consequence most singular. Pernety* has devotedseveral pages to the description of a hill of ruins, thesuccessive strata of which he has justly compared to theseats of an amphitheatre. The quartz rock must have beenquite pasty when it underwent such remarkable flexurewithout being shattered into fragments. As a passage betweenthe quartz and the sandstone can be traced, it seemsprobable that the former owes its origin to the sandstonehaving been heated to such an excess, that it became viscid. . . 'and upon cooling crystallized. While in the soft state itmust have been pushed up through the overlying beds.The sandstone and clay-slate contain numerous casts oforganic remains. These chiefly consist of shells allied toterebratula, of encrinites, of a branching coral divided intoalternate compartments, and lastly, of an obscure impressionof the lobes of a trilobite. These fossils possess great interest,because none hitherto have been brought to Europefrom a latitude nearly so far south. Mr. Hutchison, whohad the kindness to look at my specimens, says that theyhave a close general resemblance to those belonging tothe lower division of his Silurian system ; and Mr. JamesSowerbyby is of opinion that some of the species are identical.This would be a most remarkable circumstance in the ancientnatural history of the world ; for shells now living inlatitude 50° on opposite sides of the equator, are totallydistinct. From the similarity of the Falkland fossils withthose in England which are associated with remains thatindicate a climate of a tropical character, we may I presumeinfer that, during this same epoch, nearly the wholeworld was thus circumstanced.Pernety, Voyage aux Isles Malouines, p. 526.254 FALKLAND ISLANDS. March, 1834.In many parts of the island, the bottoms of the valleysare covered in an extraordinary manner, by myriads of greatangular fragments of the quartz rock. These have been mentionedwith surprise by every voyager since the time ofPernety. The whole may be called " a stream of stones'The blocks vary in size, from that of a man's chest to ten ortwenty times as large, and occasionally they altogether exceedsuch measures. Their edges show no signs of being waterworn,but are only a little blunted. They do not occur throwntogether in irregular piles, but are spread out into levelsheets, or great streams. It is not possible to ascertain theirthickness, but the water of small streamlets could be heardtrickling through the stones many feet below the surface.The actual depth is probably much greater, because thecrevices between the lower fragments must long ago havebeen filled up with sand, and the bed of the rivulet thisraised. The width of these beds varies from a few hundredfeet to a mile ; but the peaty soil daily encroaches on theborders, and even forms islets wherever a few fragmentshappen to lie close together. In a valley south of BerkeleySound, which some of our party called the "^ great valleyof fragments," it was necessary to cross an uninterruptedband half a mile wide, by jumping from one pointed stoneto another. So large were the fragments, that being overtakenby a shower of rain, I readily found good shelter beneathone of them.Their little inclination is the most remarkable circumstancein these " streams of stones." On the hill-sides I have seenthem sloping at an angle of ten degrees with the horizon ;but in some of the level, broad-bottomed valleys, the inclinationis only just sufficient to be clearly perceived. Onso rugged a surface there was no means of measuring theangle ; but to give a common Illustration, I may say thatthe slope alone would not have checked the speed of anEnglish mail-coach. In some places, a continuous streamof these fragments followed up the course of a valley, andeven extended to the very crest of the hill. On theseMarch, 1834. streams of stones. 255crests huge masses, exceeding in dimensions any smallbuilding, seemed to stand arrested in their headlong course :there, also, the curved strata of the archways lay piledover each other, like the ruins of some vast and ancientcathedral. In endeavouring to describe these scenes ofviolence, one is tempted to pass from one simile to another.We may imagine, that streams of white lava had flowedfrom many parts of the mountains into the lower country,and that, when consolidated, they had been rent by someenormous convulsion into myriads of fragments. The expression," streams of stones," which immediately occurredto every one, conveyed the same idea. These scenes are,on the spot, rendered more striking, by the contrast of thelow, rounded forms of the neighbouring hills.I M'as much interested by finding on the highest peak of onerange (about 700 feet above the sea) a great arched fragment,lying on its convex or upper surface. Must we believe thatit was fairly pitched up in the air, and thus turned ? Or,with more probability, that there existed formerly a part ofthe same range more elevated than the point on which thismonument of a great convulsion of nature now lies. As thefragments in the valleys are neither rounded nor the crevicesfilled up with sand, we must infer that the period of violencewas subsequent to the land having been raised above thewaters of the sea. In a transverse section within thesevalleys the bottom is nearly level, or rises but very littletowards either side. Hence the fragments appear to havetravelled from the head of the valley; but in reality itseems most probable, either that they have been hurleddown from the nearest slopes, or that masses of rock werebroken up in the position they formerly occupied ; and thatsince, by a vibratory movement of overwhelming force,* the" Nous avons pas ete moins saisis d'etonnement a la vue de I'in-honorable quantity de pierres de toutes grandeurs, bouleversees les unessur les autres, et cependant ranges, comme si elles avoient ete amonceleesnegligence pour remplir des ravens. On ne se lassie pas admirer lesefFets prodigieux de la nature." — Pernefy, p. 526.256 FALKLAND ISLANDS. March, 1834.fragments have been levelled into one continuous sheet. Ifduring the earthquake* which in 1835 overthrew Conception,in Chile, it was thought wonderful that small bodiesshould have been pitched a few inches from the ground,what must we say to a movement which has caused fragments,many tons in weight (like so much sand on avibrating board), to move onwards and find their level?I have seen, in the Cordillera of the Andes, the evident markswhere stupendous mountains have been broken into pieceslike so much thin crust, and the strata thrown on theirvertical edges ; but never did any scene, like the " streamsof stones," so forcibly convey to my mind the idea of aconvulsion of which in historical records we might in vainseek for any counterpart.I have little to remark on the zoology of these islands.I have before described the Polyborus or Caracara. Thereare some other hawks, owls, and a few small land-birds.The waterfowl are particularly numerous, and they mustformerly, from the accounts of old navigators, have beenmuch more so One day, having placed myself between apenguin {Aptenodj/tes deserta) and the water, I was muchamused by watching its habits. It was a brave bird ; andtil reaching the sea, it regularly fought and drove me backwards.Nothing less than heavy blows would have stoppedhim ; every inch gained he firmly kept, standing close beforeme, erect and determined. When thus opposed he continuallyrolled his head from side to side, in a very odd manner, asif the power of distinct vision only lay in the anterior andAn inhabitant of Mendoza, and hence well capable of judging,assured me that, during the several years he had resided on these islands,he had never felt the slightest shock of an earthquake.f I may mention, that I one day observed a cormorant playing witha fish which it had caught. Eight times successively the bird let its preygo, then dived after it, and although in deep water, brought it each timeto the surface. In the Zoological Gardens I have seen the otter treata fish in the same manner, much as a cat does a mouse. I do notknow of any other instance where dame Nature appears so wilfully cruel.March, 1834. ornithology. 257basal part of each eye. This bird is commonly called thejackass penguin, from its habit, while on shore, of throwingits head backwards, and making a loud strange noise, verylike the braying of that animal ; but while at sea, and undisturbed,its note is very deep and solemn, and is often heardin the night-time. In diving, its little blameless wings areused as fins ; but on the land, as front legs. When crawling(it may be said on four legs) through the tussocks, or on theside of a grassy clifF, it moved so very quickly that it mightreadily have been mistaken for a quadruped. When at seaand fishing, it comes to the surface, for the purpose ofbreathing, with such a spring, and dives again so instantaneously,that I defy any one at first sight to be sure that itis not a fish leaping for sport.Two kinds of geese frequent the Falklands. The uplandspecies anas neuroptera) is common in pairs, and in smallflocks, throughout the island. They do not migrate, butbuild on the small outlying islets. This is supposed to befrom fear of the foxes : and it is perhaps from the samecause that these birds, though very tame by day, are shyand wild in the dusk of the evening. They live entirely onvegetable matter. The rock-goose, so called from living exclusivelyon the sea-beach anas antarctic), is common bothhere and on the west coast of America, as far north as Chile.In the deep and retired channels of Tierra del Fuego, thesnow-white gander, invariably accompanied by his darkerconsort, and standing close by each other on some distantrocky point, is a common feature in the landscape.In these islands a great loggerheaded duck or goose anashrachyptera), which sometimes weighs twenty-two pounds, isvery abundant. These birds were in former days called, fromtheir extraordinary manner of padding and splashing upon thewater, race-horses; but now they are named, much more appropriately,steamers. Their wings are too small and weak to allowof flight, but by their aid, partly swimming and partly flappingthe surface of the water, they move very quickly. Themanner is something like that by which the common house-vol.III. s258 FALKLAND ISLANDS. March, 1834.duck escapes when pursued by a dog ; but I am nearly surethat the steamer moves its wings alternately instead of bothtogether, as in other birds. These clumsy, loggerheadedducks make such a noise and splashing, that the effect isexceedingly curious.Thus we find in South America three birds, which usetheir wings for other purposes besides flight : the penguin asfins, the steamer as paddles, and the ostrich as sails to a vessel.The steamer is able to dive only a very short distance. Itfeeds entirely on she-fish from the kelp and tidal rocks ;hence the beak and head, for the purpose of breaking them,are surprisingly heavy and strong. So strong is the head,that I have scarcely been able to fracture it with mygeological hammer ; and aU our sportsmen soon discoveredhow tenacious these birds Were of life. When plumingthemselves in the evening in a flock, they make the sameodd mixture of sounds which bulldogs do within theTropics.In Tierra del Fuego, as well as at the Falkland Islands, Imade many observations on the lower marine animals,* butthey are of little general interest. I will only mention oneclass of facts, relating to certain zoophytes in the more highlyorganized division of that class. Several genera [Lustre,echard, cellar, crisis, and others) agree in having singularWhile at the Falkland, during the autumn of the southern hemisphere,most of the lower marine animals were breeding. I was surprised tofind on counting the eggs of a large white Doris (this sea-slug was threeand a half inches long) how extraordinarily numerous they were. Fromtwo to five eggs (each three-thousandths of an inch in diameter) werecontained in a spherical Tittle case. These were arranged two deep intransverse rows forming a ribbon. The ribbon adhered by its edge to therock in an oval spire. One, which I found, measured nearly twenty inchesin length and half in breadth. By counting how many balls were containedin a tenth of an inch in the row, and how many rows in an equallength of the ribbon, on the most moderate computation there were sixhundred thousand eggs. Yet this Doris was certainly not very common :although I was often searching under the stones I saw only seven individuals.March, 1834. compound animals. 259moveable organs, like those of Frustra avicularia (foundin the European seas), attached to their cells. The organ, inthe greater number of cases, very closely resembles the headof a vulture ; but the lower mandible can be opened muchwider, so as to form even a straight line with the upper.The head itself possesses considerable powers of movement,by means of a short neck. In one zoophyte the head itselfwas fixed, but the lower jaw free : in another it was replacedby a triangular hood, with a beautifully-fitted trap-door,which evidently answered to the lower mandible. A speciesof stony echard had a structure somewhat similar. In thegreater number of species, each shell was provided with onehead, but in others each had two.The young cells at the end of the branches necessarilycontained quite immature polypi, yet the vulture-headsattached to them, though small, were in every respect perfect.When the polypus was removed by a needle from anyof the cells, these organs did not appear in the leastaffected. When one of the latter was cut off from a cell, thelower mandible retained its power of opening and closing.Perhaps the most singular part of their structure is, thatwhen there were more rows of cells than two, both in a Frustraand an Echard, the central cells were furnished with theseappendages, of only one-fourth the size of the lateral ones.Their movements varied according to the species : — in someI never saw the least motion ; while others, with the lowermandible generally wide open, oscillated backwards and forwardsat the rate of about five seconds each turn ; othersmoved rapidly and by starts. When touched with a needlethe beak generally seized the point so firmly, that the wholebranch might be shaken.These bodies have no relation whatever with the productionof the gemmules. I could not trace any connexion betweenthem and the polypus. From their formation being completedbefore that of the latter; from the independence oftheir movements ; from the difference of their size in differentparts of the branch ; I have little doubt that in theirs2260 FALKLAND ISLANDS. March, 1834.functions they are related rather to the axis than to any ofthe polypi. In a similar manner, the fleshy appendage at theextremity of the sea-pen forms part of the zoophyte as awhole, as much as the roots of a tree do of the whole andnot of the individual buds. Without doubt this is a verycurious variation in the structure of a zoophyte : for thegrowing part in most other cases does not manifest the leastirritability or power of movement.I will mention one other kind of structure quite as anomalous.A small and elegant Crisis is furnished, at thecorner of each ceU, with a long and slightly-curved bristle,which is fixed at the lower end by a joint. It terminates inthe finest point, and has its outer or convex side serratedwith delicate teeth or notches. Having placed a s7nall pieceof a branch under the microscope, I was exceedingly surprisedto see it suddenly start from the field of vision by the movementof these bristles, which acted as oars. Irritation generallyproduced this motion, but not always. When thecoralline was laid flat on that side from which the toothedbristles projected, they were necessarily all pressed togetherand entangled. This scarcely ever failed to excite a considerablemovement among them, and evidently with the objectof freeing themselves. In a small piece, which was taken outof water and placed on blotting-paper, the movement of theseorgans was clearly visible for a few seconds by the nakedeye.In the case of the vulture-heads, as well as in that of thebristles, all that were on one side of a branch, moved sometimesinstantaneously, sometimes in regular order one afterthe other ; at other times the organs on both sides the branchmoved together ; but generally aU. were independent of eachother, and entirely so of the polypi. In the Crisis, if thebristles were excited to move by irritation in any one branch,generally the whole zoophyte was affected. In the instancewhere the branch started from the simultaneous movementof these appendages, we see as perfect a transmission of willas in a single animal. The case, indeed, is not different fromIiMarch, 1834. compound animals. 261that of the sea-pen, which when touched drew itself into thesand. I will state one other instance of uniform action, thoughof a very different nature, in a zoophyte* closely allied toClytia, and therefore very simply organized. Having kepta large tuft of it in a basin of salt water, when it was darkI found that as often as I rubbed any part of a branch, thewhole became strongly phosphorescent with a green light : I donot think I ever saw any object more beautifully so. But theremarkable circumstance was, that the flashes of light alwaysproceeded up the branches, from the base towards the extremities.The examination of these compound animals was alwaysvery interesting to me. What can be more remarkable thanto see a plant-like body producing an egg, furnished withsetse, and having independent movements, which soon becomesfixed branches into numberless arms, and these, thoughcrowded with polypi, yet in some cases possessing independentorgans of movement, and obeying uniform impulsesof will? The polypi are frequently animals of no simpleorganization ; and in most respects certainly are to be consideredas true individuals. It is therefore more curiousto observe, in the young and terminal cells, their gradualformation, from the growth of the simple horny substanceof which so many zoophytes are composed. Theknown organization of a tree should remove all surprise atthe union of many individuals together, and their relation toa common body. Indeed we might expect, according to theapparent law, that any structure which prevails in one classwill be produced in a lesser degree in some others — that sinceso many plants are compound, so would some animals be thusconstructed. It requires, however, a greater effort of reasonto view a bud as an individual, than a polypus furnished witha mouth and intestines ; and therefore the union does notappear so strange.♦ This coralline emitted a very strong and disagreeable odour, whenfreshly taken from the sea.262 FALKLAND ISLANDS. Mai'ch, 1834.Our conception of a compound animal,* where in somerespects the individuality of each is not completed, may beaided, by reflecting on the production of two distinct creaturesby bisecting one with a knife, or where nature herselfperforms the task. We may consider the polypi in azoophyte, or the buds in a tree, as cases where the division ofthe individual has not been completely effected. In thiskind of generation, the individuals seem produced only withrelation to the present time ; their numbers are multiplied,but their life is not extended beyond a fixed period. By theother, and more artificial kind, through intermediate steps orovules, the relation is kept up through successive ages. Bythe latter method many peculiarities, which are transmittedby the former, are obliterated, and the character of the speciesis limited ; while on the other hand, certain peculiarities(doubtless adaptations) become hereditary and form races.We may fancy that in these two circumstances we see astep towards the final cause of the shortness of life.With regard to associated life, animals of other classes besides themollusca and radiata present obscure instances of it. The bee could notlive by itself. And in the neuter, we see an individual produced which isnot fitted for the reproduction of its kind — that highest point at whichthe organization of all animals, especially the lower ones, tends — thereforesuch neuters are born as much for the good of the community, as theleaf-bud is for the tree.CHAPTER XIII.Strait of Magellan — Port Famine — Geology — Deep water in channels —Erratic boulders — Climate — Limit of fruit trees — Mean temperature —Luxuriant forests — Rigour of antarctic islands — Contrast with thenorth — Snow-line, great flexure of — Glaciers — Icebergs transportfragments of rock — Glacier in low latitude — Absence of erraticblocks in intertropical regions — Glaciers and tropical vegetationComparison with northern hemisphere — Siberian animals in ice —Embedded in cold mud — Edible fungus — Zoology — Fucus giganteus —Leave Tierra del Fuego.STRAIT OF MAGELLAN.In the end of May, 1834, we entered for the second timethe eastern mouth of the Strait of Magellan. Having beatour way against wind and wave we anchored at GregoryBay, and had an interview with the so-called giganticPatagonians ; of whom Captain FitzRoy has given so good anaccount. The country on both sides of the strait, in thispart, consists of level plains, like those of the rest of Patagonia.Cape Negro, a little past the second narrow, maybeconsidered as the point where the land begins to assumethe marked features of Tierra del Fuegb. On the east coast,south of the Strait, broken park-like scenery in a like mannerconnects these two countries, which are opposed to eachother in almost every point. It is truly surprising to find inaspace of twenty miles such a change in the landscape. Ifwe take rather a greater distance, as between Port Famineand Gregory Bay, that is about sixty miles, the difference isstill more wonderful. At the former place we have roundedmountains concealed by impervious forests, which aredrenched with the rain, brought by an endless succession ofgales ; while at Cape Gregory there is a clear and bright bluesky over the dry and sterile plains. The atmospheric Tierra DEL FUEGO. June, 1834.rents* although rapid, turbulent, and unconfined by anyapparent limits, yet seem to follow, like a river in its bed, aregularly determined course.June 1st. — We anchored in the fine bay of Port Famine.It was now the beginning of winter, and I never saw a morecheerless prospect; the dusky woods piebald with snow,could be only indistinctly seen through a drizzling hazyatmosphere. We were, however, lucky in getting two finedays. On one of these. Mount Sarmiento, a distant mountain6800 feet high, presented a very noble spectacle. I wasfrequently surprised, in the scenery of Tierra del Fuego, atthe little apparent elevation of mountains really lofty. Isuspect it is owing to a cause, which would not at first beimagined, namely, that the whole mass, from the summitto the water's edge, is generally in full view. I rememberhaving seen a mountain, first from the Beagle channel, wherethe whole sweep from the summit to the base was full inview, and then from Ponsonby Sound across several successiveridges ; and it was curious to observe in the latter case,as each fresh step afforded means of judging of the distance,how the mountain appeared to rise in height.The Fuegians twice came and plagued us. As there weremany instruments, clothes, and men on shore, it was thoughtnecessary to frighten them away. The first time, a few greatguns were fired, when they were far distant. It was mostludicrous to watch through a glass the Indians, as often asthe shot struck the water, take up stones, and as a bolddefiance, throw them towards the ship, though about a mileand a half distant ! A boat was then sent with orders to firea few musket-shot wide of them. The Fuegians hid them-thesouth-westerly breezes are generally very dry. January 29th,being at anchor under Cape Gregory ; a very hard gale from W. by S.,clear sky with few cumili ; temperature 57°, due point 36°, difference 21°.On January 15th, at Port St. Julian : in the morning light winds withmuch rain, followed by a very heavy squall with rain, — settled into heavygale with large cumili, — cleared up, blowing very strong from SSW.Temperature 60°, due point 42°, — difference 18°.June, 1834. port famine. 265selves behind the trees ; and for every discharge of themusket they fired their arrows : all, however, fell shortof the boat, and the officer as he pointed at them laughed.This made the Fuegians frantic with passion, and they shooktheir mantles in vain rage. At last seeing the balls cut andstrike the trees, they ran away ; and we were left in peaceand quietness.On a former occasion, when the Beagle was here in themonth of February, I started one morning at four o'clock toascend Mount Tarn, which is 2600 feet high, and is the mostelevated point in this immediate neighbourhood. We wentin a boat to the foot of the mountain (but not to the bestpart), and then began our ascent. The forest commences atthe line of high-water mark, and during the two first hoursI gave over all hopes of reaching the summit. So thick wasthe wood, that it was necessary to have constant recourse tothe compass ; for every landmark, though in a mountainouscountry, was completely shut out. In the deep ravines, thedeath-like scene of desolation exceeded all description ; outsideit was blowing a gale, but in these hollows, not even abreath of wind stirred the leaves of the tallest trees. Sogloomy, cold, and wet was every part, that not even thefungi, mosses, or ferns, could flourish. In the valleys it wasscarcely possible to crawl along, they were so completelybarricaded by the great mouldering trunks, which had fallendown in every direction. When passing over these naturalbridges, one's course was often arrested by sinking knee deepinto the rotten wood ; at other times, when attempting to leanagainst a firm tree, one was startled by finding a mass ofdecayed matter ready to fall at the slightest touch. We atlast found ourselves among the stunted trees, and then soonreached the bare ridge, which conducted us to the summit.Here was a view characteristic of Tierra del Fuego ; — irregularchains of hiUs, mottled with patches of snow, deep yellvalleys, and arms of the sea intersecting theland in many directions. The strong wind was piercinglycold, and the atmosphere rather hazy, so that we did not stay266 TiERRA DEL FUEGO. June, 1834.long on the top of the mountain. Our descent was not quiteso laborious as our ascent ; for the weight of the body forceda passage, and all the slips and falls were in the right direction.Captain King has given a sketch of the geology of Tierradel Fuego, to which I have little to add. A great formationof clay-slate, rarely containing organic remains, butsometimes presenting casts of a kind of ammonite, is frontedon the east side by plains belonging g probably to two tertiaryepochs. On the west coast, a prolongation of the grandcrevice of the Andes, from which so much heat has escapedfrom the interior of the globe, has metamorphosed the slate.There is, however, a double hne, the structure of which I donot quite comprehend. The interior one consists of graniteand mica slate ; the exterior one (perhaps more modern), ofgreenstone, porphyritic and other curious trappean rocks.Almost every one at first thinks that this country owes itsgrand name of " the Land of Fire," to the number of itsvolcanoes. Such, however, is not the case : I did not seeeven a pebble of any volcanic rock, except in WollastonIsland, where some rounded masses of scoriae were embeddedin a conglomerate of no modern date. In a geologicalpoint of view this circumstance allows us to considerthe grand linear train of ancient and modern volcanoes,which fall on parallel fissures in the Andes, as extendingfrom lat. 55° 40' south to 60° north, a distance little lessthan seven thousand geographical miles.Perhaps the most curious feature in the geology of thiscountry, is the extent to which the land is intersected byarms of the sea. These channels, as Captain King remarks,are irregular and dotted with islands, where the granitic andtrappean rocks occur, but in the clay-slate formation are sostraight, that in one instance " a parallel ruler placed on themap upon the projecting points of the south shore, extendedacross, also touched the headlands of the opposite coasts'I have heard Captain FitzRoy remark, that on enteringany of these channels from the outer coast, it is always ne-june,1834. geology. 267pessary to look out directly for anchorage ; for further inlandthe depth soon becomes extremely great. Captain Cook, inentering Christmas Sound, had first 37 fathom, then 40, 60,and, immediately afterwards, no soundings with 170. Thisstructure of the bottom, I presume, must arise from thesediment deposited near the mouths of the channels, by theopposed tides and swell; and likewise from the enormousdegradation of the coast rocks, caused by an ocean harassedby endless gales.The Strait of Magellan is extremely deep in most parts,even close to the shore. About mid-channel eastward ofCape Froward, Captain King found no bottom with 1536feet: if, therefore, the water should be drained off, Tierradel Fuego would present a far more lofty range of mountainsthan it does at present. I will not here enter on any speculationsregarding the causes which have produced thisremarkable structure, in a district in which the latter movementsat least have been those of elevation. I may, however,observe, that pebbles, and great boulders of various andpeculiar crystalline rocks, which have undoubtedly travelledfrom the south-west coast, lie scattered over the whole ofthe eastern part of Tierra del Fuego. One enormous blockof syenite near St. Sebastian Bay was barn-shaped, and hada girth of 47 feet ; it projected five feet above the sand,and appeared to be deeply buried. The very nearest pointto which we can look for the parent rock, is about ninetymiles distant. On the shores of the Strait of Magellan, nearPort Famine, numerous semi-rounded fragments of variousgranites and hornblendic rocks are strewed on the beach,and on the sides of the mountain, to an elevation of thirtyor forty feet. Now to this point the high road from theSouthern and Western shores passes directly over the greatabyss of more than 1500 feet deep. Whatever may havebeen the means of transport, it has not been one of indiscriminateviolence : for the two places, St. Sebastian Bayand Shoal Harbour, where the great fragments are mostnumerous, certainly existed previously to the last and268 TiERRA DEL FUEGO. June, 1834'smallest change of level, as channels connecting the Straitof Magellan, in the one case with the open sea, and in theother with Otway Water.The climate of the southern part of South America presentsmany phenomena of the highest interest. It has longbeen observed that there exists some essential difference betweenit, and that of the countries in the northern hemisphere.I have already remarked on the surprising contrastbetween the rank vegetation of the broken west coast, consequenton the humid climate, as compared with the dry andsterile plains of Patagonia. The clouded and boisterous stateof the atmosphere is necessarily accompanied by a decreasein extreme temperature; hence we find that fruits whichripen well, and are very abundant, such as the grape andfig, in lat. 41° on the east coast, succeed very poorly in alower latitude on the opposite side of the continent.* Theresult is more strongly marked, if we take Europe as thestandard of comparison. In Chloe, lat. 42°, correspondingto the northern parts of Spain, peaches require the greatestcare, and seldom produce fruit; but strawberries andapples succeed to admiration. At Valdivia, lat. 40°, or thatof Madrid, standard peaches bear abundantly; grapes andfigs ripen, but are far from common ; olives seldom evenpartially ripen, and oranges not at all ; yet in Europe this isthe parallel most productive of these fruits. Even at Concepcion,lat. 36°, oranges are not abundant, though the othernamed fruits succeed perfectly. At the Falklands, in thesame latitude as the south of England, wheat very seldomcomes to maturity ; but we ought to feel little surprise atthis, when we hear that in Chloe (lat. 42°) the inhabitantsare frequently compelled to cut their corn before it is ready,and bring it into their houses to dry.With respect to the climate of Tierra del Fuego duringAs there are no settlements on the Patagonia coast, there are fewmeans of comparison. Cherry-trees left by the Spaniards at Port Desire,lat. 48°, still bear fruit, whereas, in Chloe, on the west coast, 360 milesfurther north, I believe they do not succeed.June, 1834. climate. 269the colder parts of the year, Captain King has publishedsome most interesting tables in the Geographical Journal,*The Beagle during this voyage, was employed in the extremesouthern parts of the country, from December 18th toFebruary 20th. From the appearance of the vegetationduring the first part, and from the weather we experiencedat the Falkland Islands, subsequent to the last date, I feellittle doubt that these sixty-five days included the best partof the summer. Perhaps if another fortnight had beenadded, the mean would have been a little higher. The firsteighteen of these days were spent partly at sea, near CapeHorn, and we were drifted for a short time by bad weatherto nearly ninety mUes to the southward. The mean temperature,from observations made every two hours by theofficers on board the Beagle, was 45°. During the succeedingthirty-seven days the Beagle was at anchor in differentharbours a few leagues north of Cape Horn, and then themean from observations at 6 a.m., noon, and 6 p.m., was50°. The mean, therefore, between these two periods, whichinclude the hottest part of the year, is only 47°. 5. Thelatter of the two periods was unusually warm, but theformer much the contrary, and the station where the observationswere made was a little further to the southward.The whole of these observations apply to the extremeislands : Captain King's were made in a central position1° 45' further northward. If from the above considerationswe add two degrees and a half to the mean obtained thisvoyage, the result (50°) will probably give the temperature ofthe hottest part of the year in central Tierra del Fuego.Captain King gives as the mean temperature of June 32°.97,of July 33°. 03, of the first twelve days in August 33°. 25 ;Journal of the Royal Geographical Society for the years 18.30, 1831.t The mean of the maxima of these thirty-seven days was only 55°. 5,and of the minima 43°. 3, — the mean range thus being 10°. -2. For thewhole sixty-five days, the mean of the maxima was only 31°. 7, whichcertainly a very wretched summer, and shows how little bright sunshinethere can be.TIERRA DEL FUEGO.June, 1834.answering to our December, January, and February, whichthree months appear to be the coldest, and the mean of theseis 33° .08.* Dublin is nearly in the same latitude in thenorthern hemisphere as Port Famine is in the southern, andwe will take its temperature as a means of comparison.Dublin . .Port FamineDifferenceLatitudes.53o2rN.53 38' S.17'SummerTemperature59° .549 .54WinterTemperature39° .233 .086 .12Difference.20° .3416 .923 .42Mean ofSummer andWinter.49o .3741 .547 .83It will be seen by this that the temperature at Port Famineis very considerably lower, both during summer and winter,than at Dublin, and that at the former the difference betweenthe seasons is not so great, or that the climate is there moreequable. It seems the general opinion of those who havevisited this country, that the frosts are not so severe orso long as in England. The sealers say that throughoutthe year they wear the same quantity of clothing. NeverthelessCaptain King states, that during the winter of 1828the temperature was once as low as J 12°. 6. I have drawnup these rough and approximate statements merely for thesake of illustrating some of the following remarks.This mean must be a little too low, because the whole of August isnot included. I see Von Buch says, " we can hardly assign to SaltingNorway (in lat. 67°, or 13° 22' nearer the pole than Port Famine) ahigher mean temperature than 34°, nor a higher temperature for the warmmonth of July than 57°. 8." (Travels through Norway, p. 123.) CaptainKing gives as the mean for February, which probably is the hottest monthat Port Famine, only at 51°.l. Some observations made at the FalklandIslands (2° 13' north of Port Famine) which are often quoted, give asthe mean for the whole year 47° .3, and for the summer 53°. 1. Theseresults are very much higher than what I should have anticipated, fromthe climate of the neighbouring mainland.f This line is taken from Barton's Lectures on the Geography ofPlants, 'J In this wretched climate, subject to such extreme cold, is it not mostwonderful, that human beings should be able to exist unclothed andwithout shelter ?June, 1834. vegetation. 271The kind of climate here described appears to be common tothe southern parts of the whole of the southern hemisphere.Although so inhospitable to our feelings, and to most of theplants from the warmer parts of Europe, yet it is most favourableto the native vegetation. The forests, which cover theentire country between the latitudes of 38° and 45°, rival inluxuriance those of the glowing intertropical regions. Whilstin Chloe (lat. 42°) I could almost have fancied myseK inBrazil. Stately trees of many kinds, with smooth and highlycoloured barks, are loaded by parasitical plants of the mono-cotyledonsstructure ; large and elegant ferns are numerous ;and arborescent grasses intwine the trees into one entangledmass, to the height of thirty or forty feet above the ground.Palm-trees grow in lat. 37° ; an arborescent grass very likea bamboo in 40° ; and another closely-allied kind, of greatlength but not erect, even as far south as 45°.In another part of this same hemisphere, which has souniform a character owing to its large proportional area ofsea, Forster found parasitical orchideous plants living southof lat. 45° in New Zealand. Tree-ferns thrive luxuriantlynear Hobart Town, in Van Diemen's Land. I measuredone there which was exactly six feet in circumference ; andits height from the ground to the base of the fronds appearedto be very little under twenty. Mr. Brown says*an arborescent species of the same genus [Dickson) wasfound by Forster, in New Zealand, at Dusky Bay, in nearly46° S,, the highest latitude in which tree-ferns have yet beenobserved.' It is remarkable that, although they have so considerablea range in the southern hemisphere, no tree-fernhas been found beyond the northern tropic : a distributionin the two hemispheres somewhat similar to this has beenalready noticed respecting the Orchids that are parasiticalon trees."Even in Tierra del Fuego, Captain King describes thevegetation thriving most luxuriantly, and large woody stem-appendixto Finder's Voyage, pp. 573 and 384.272 TiERRA DEL FUEGO. June, 1834.med trees of Fuchsia and Veronica, in England consideredand treated as tender plants, in full flower, within a veryshort distance of the base of a mountain covered for two-thirdsdown with snow, and with the temperature at 36°."He states, also, that humming-birds were seen sipping thesweets of the flowers, " after tn-o or three days of constantrain, snow, and sleet, during which time the thermometerhad been at the freezing point." I myself have seen parrotsfeeding on the seeds of the winter's bark, south of latitude55°.Although the limit of an almost tropical vegetation extendsthus far southward, yet the dearth of living things, both vegetableand animal, on the islands situated even far withoutthe antarctic circle, is surprising, compared with the correspondingparallels in the northern hemisphere. In SouthShetland in lat. 62° to 63° (same as Ferroee, or southern partof Norway) Weddell* states, ^^None of the islands afford anyvegetation save a short straggling grass, which is found invery small patches in places where there happens to be alittle soil. This, together with a moss similar to that whichis found in Iceland, appears in the middle of January, atwhich time the islands are partially clear of snow-InDeception Island, one of the same group. Lieutenant Kendall,saysjt " There was nothing in the shape of vegetationexcept a small kind of lichen." The island itself is partlycomposed of ice and volcanic ashes inter stratified. Anothercurious proof of the rigour of the climate is mentioned :Having observed a mound on the hill immediately abovethis cove, I opened it, and found a rude coffin, the rottenstate of which bespoke its having been long consigned to theearth ; but the body had undergone scarcely any decomposition.The legs were doubled up, and it was dressed in thejacket and cap of a sailor, but neither they nor the countenancewere similar to those of an Englishman."Sandwich Land, which is nearly three degrees further fromWeddell's Voyage, p. 133.f Geographical Journal, 1830, pp. 65 and 66.June, 1834. antarctic islands. 27-3the pole, is thus described by Captain Cook (February 1st,hottest time in the year, and in same latitude as north ofScotland) : " Every part was blocked or filled up withice, and the whole country, from the summits of the mountainsdown to the very brink of the cliffs which terminate thecoast, covered many fathoms thick with everlasting snow.The cliffs alone were all which was to be seen like land."Again he adds, talking of two islets, " These only were clearof snow, and seemed covered with a green turf." In Georgia,lat. 54° to 55°, the bays are terminated by ice cliffs of considerableheight, and, according to Cook, the country " in thevery height of summer, is in a manner wholly covered manyfathoms deep with frozen snow, but more especially on thesouth-west coast." The only vegetable is " a strong-bladedgrass growing in tufts, wild burnet, and a plant like moss."Although 96 miles long and about ten broad, it possesses notasingle quadruped, and only one land bird, namely a smalltitlark (an Xanthus), a specimen of which I procured in theFalklands. This bird, if undescribed, certainly well deservesthe name of antarcticiis, for although not living within thatcircle, it inhabits a more inhospitable region than any otherterrestrial animal. Anderson, in Cook's Voyage, says, evenin Kerguelen Land (an island 120 miles long by 60 broad,and situated in lat. 50°, corresponding to the extremesouthern point of England), " The whole catalogue of plantsdoes not exceed sixteen or seventeen, including some sortsof moss, and a beautiful species of lichen which growsupon the rocks higher up than the rest of the vegetable productions.Nor is there even the least appearance of a shrubin the whole country." It is doubtful whether there is asingle land bird ; and then he adds, " The hills are of amoderate height ; yet many of their tops were covered withsnow* at this time, though answering to our June." Thesestatements forcibly prove the intemperance of the climateeven far without the frozen limits of the antarctic circle.I have reason to believe, that icebergs are formed on the coast duringa part of the year.VOL. III. T274 TiERRA DEL FUEGO. June, 1834.There are no direct observations, by which to judge ofthe mean temperature of the year in these southern islands.But after reading the above accounts, it will readily be grantedthat it must be very low. Even in Georgia, in lat. 54°-55°,it is not improbable that the soil is perpetually frozenat a few feet beneath the surface. At Deception Island inlat. 62°- 63° from the preservation of the dead body alludedto, and the inter stratification of ice with the volcanic ashes,we may feel almost sure that such must be the case. In thenorthern hemisphere, it is only on the great continents thatso low a mean temperature is found in corresponding latitudes.In North America, according to Richardson,* northof lat. 56°, the thaw does not penetrate to, a greater depththan three feet. In the Steppes of Siberia, Humboldtstates that to the northward of 62°, the ground betweentwelve and fifteen feet below the surface is always frozen.In the space, however, between these two great northern continents,the line of perpetual congelation rises considerablytowards the north.It is a remarkable meteorological fact, that in thenorthern and southern hemispheres, a low mean temperature,in latitudes without the frigid zone, is the result of adirectly opposite condition of things. In the northern hemispherethe atmosphere is rendered extremely cold, from theradiation of a large extent of country during a long winter ; noris it moderated by the warmer currents of any neighbouringsea : hence the extreme cold of the winter more thancounterbalances the heat of summer. In the southernhemisphere, on the other hand, although the winter ismoderate, the summer is cold ; for a sky constantly cloudedrarely permits the rays of the sun to warm the surface (itselfa bad absorbent) of the great ocean : hence, the meantemperature of the year falls below the freezing point. Itwill at once be evident, that a kind of vegetation whichrequires an equable temperature, will approach much nearerAppendix to Back's Expedition,fragments Asiatiqiies, vol. ii., p. 386.June 1834. height of snow-line. 2^5the line of perpetual congelation in a climate such as this ofthe southern hemisphere, than m the opposite one subject toextremes.The height of the plane of perpetual snow in any country,seems chiefly to be determined by the extreme heat ofsummer, rather than by the mean of the year. As thesummer in Tierra del Fuego is so very wretched, we oughtnot to feel surprised at the fact stated by Capt. King,that in the Strait of Magellan, the line descends to about3500 or 4000 feet. In the northern hemisphere, we musttravel about fourteen degrees nearer the pole to meet withso low a limit, namely, between lat. 67^ and 70° on themountains of Norway.In the Cordillera of South America, between latitudes41° and 43° 30', the ruminant peaks have altitudes prettynearly equal. Several were measured by the officers of theBeagle with considerable care, by angles of elevation, the positionsof the mountains being accurately known. Osorno is7550 feet; mountain south of Osorno 5609; Minchinmadiva7046; northern end of same range 6862; Corcovado 7510;Yntales 6725. Not only these points, but a great part ofthe range* was thickly clothed with snow, in the beginningof February (answering to our August), which descendedsome way down the mountains, and presented to a distantbeholder a perfectly horizontal line. We were assured thatthe snow, which it appeared must inevitably be the case,remained throughout the year. On January 26th, after aweek of uncommonly fine weather, Mr. King measured witha pocket sextant, the angle of this line with the summitof the Corcovado ; and subtracting the result from the totalheight, the snow-line was found to descend to 4480 feet.It is possible that there may have existed some unknowncause of error ; but as the average height of the few highestMr. Sulivan, who surveyed this part of Chloe, informs me, thatbetween Osorno and Yntales, there are probably many mountains whichrise to a height of nearly 6000 feet. He says he does not recollect anyonesummit, which (during January) M'as not covered with snow.T 2276 TIERRA DEL, FUEGO. June, 1834.peaks in the snow-clad range is under 7000 feet, it is evidentthat the height of the snow-Hne cannot at most muchexceed 6000 feet.As this is a point of interest, I shall mention a few othercircumstances, by which I think we may come to a nearlydefinite conclusion. On February 2d (1835) I obtainedthe last view of the Cordillera ; on that day the lower Uneof the snow descended some way (so as to form a considerableangle with the summit, when viewed from adistance of 61 miles) on the mountain south of Osorno (lat.41° 20'), which stands by itself, and has a height of 5607feet. Since arriving in England I have received a letterfrom Mr. Douglas in Chloe, who, describing some volcanicphenomena, accidentally mentions the snow-line. He says,on February 20th (same year), on the volcano of Pinching(lat. 42° 48'), which has an elevation of 7046 feet,lava was ejected from a crater "just above the verge ofthe snow." Again, on February 27th, he alludes to thesummit of the Corcovado (7510 feet) being covered withsnow, as was Yn tales* (6725 feet) in lat. 43° 30'. AgainMr. Douglas, speaking of the Corcovado, says, " On the16th of March the snoAV appeared to cover one-fifth of itsvisible) perpendicular height." By this date the snow-linemust have attained its greatest height (if, indeed, freshsnow had not fallen) ; and, as the Corcovado rises in anunbroken slope close to the sea, the proportion coveredby snow might be judged of, with some degree of accuracy.The height of the Corcovado (7510 feet) was obtained bythree angular measurements, made by the officers on thesurvey, and the mean nearly agreed with the three separateresults. Reflecting on all these circumstances, we mayconclude with perfect safety, that the limit of perpetualsnow, between the latitudes 41° and 43°, cannot much, ifat all, exceed 6000 feet.Proceeding northward along the Cordillera we find a veryOn January 15th, Yntales, seen from the Northern Honos Islands,was entirely covered by snow.June;, 1834.HEIGHT OF SNOW-LINE.different condition of things. In the pass of the Portillo (tothe southward of 33°) Dr. Gillies determined geometricallythe height of the double range ; and he found the two ridgesto be respectively 13,210 and 14,365 feet. On March 21stand 22d (1835), shortly before fresh snow fell, I crossedthese mountains,* and although there were large masses ofsnow, there were much greater spaces at some height on eachside uncovered. Dr. Gillies f says, " the summit (of thevolcano of Peuquenes) is generally J covered with snow, andits elevation cannot be less than 15,000 above the level ofthe sea." From these statements, compared with my observations,the snow-line when I crossed certainly was considerablyabove 14,365, — we may assume 15,000 as aboutthe limit. From the results obtained by Humboldt, Pentland,Gillies, and King, we are enabled to draw up thefollowing table of the extraordinary range of the snow-lineon the Cordillera of South America :Latitude.Height in feetof Snow line.Observer.Equatorial region : }Mean result. )Bolivia, )Lat. 160-18° S. 5Central Chile, )Lat. 33° S. 5Chloe, )Lat. 410-43° S. 5Tierra del Fuego, )54° S. 515,74817,000r 14,300< to[15,0006,000f 3,500<: to4,000Humboldt.PentlandGillies.Officers of the Beagle.King. III crossed the Uspallata Pass on April 5th. The height, as given byMr. Pentland (Geographical Journal), is 12,434. In the ravines therewere some inconsiderable patches of snow, but the general surface wasquite bare.f The Edinburgh Journal of Natural and Geographical Science,August, 1830, p. 316.% I have reason to suspect that the snow-line in Chile is subject to TIERRA DEL FUEGO. JunCj 1834.In considering this table, and beginning from the south,we observe, that through the first twelve degrees, the heightof the snow-line rises only a little more than 2000 feet. Inthis space the climate and productions of the country are inmany respects very uniform. In the succeeding nine degreesthe rise is no less than nine thousand feet. Before any onepronounces this to be impossible, let him reflect well thatthe height of the snow-line very much depends on the heatof summer. In Chloe no fruit, excepting apples and strawberries,comes to perfection ; it is even oftentimes necessaryto carry the barley and corn into the houses to be ripened :*on the other hand, in central Chile, even the sugar-cane thas been cultivated out of doors, and during a long summerof seven months the sky is seldom clouded, and rain neverfalls. The island of Chloe, as well as the neighbouring main-treevariation. I was told, that during one remarkably dry and longsummer, all the snow disappeared from Aconcagua. Not being at thetime aware of the extraordinary elevation of this mountain (23,000), I didnot closely cross-question my informers. It must be remembered thateven in ordinary summers the sky is generally cloudless for six or sevenmonths, tl)at no fresh snow falls, and that the atmosphere is excessivelydry. It may be asked whether vast quantities of snow would not, under thiscondition of circumstances, be evaporated? so that it might he possiblethat all the snow should disappear from a mountain without the temperaturehaving risen above the freezing point. Mr. Miers (vol, i., p. 384)says he passed the Cordillera by the Cumbre Pass on May 30th, 1819,when not the smallest vestige of snow was observable in any part ofthe Andes." Yet Aconcagua is in full view in the approach to this pass.Mr. Miers, in another part (p. 383), makes a general assertion to thesame effect.§ See Mr. Pentland's most interesting paper in the Geograph. Journal,read March 1835.II Journal of Geograph. Soc, vol. i., p. 165.For this fact I may quote, as additional authority, Aguerros DescriptionHistorial de la Provincia de Chloe, 1791, p. 94.-)• Miers's Chile, vol. i., p. 415. It is said that the sugar-cane grew atIngenii, lat. 32°-33°, but not in sufficient quantity to make the manufactureprofitable. In the valley of Quillota, south of Ingenii, I sawsome large date palm-trees.June, 1834. glaciers. 279land, is concealed by one dense forest, dripping with moisture,and abounding with ferns and other plants that love a humidatmosphere : while the soil of central Chile, where not irrigated,is arid and nearly desert. These two countries, soremarkably opposed to each other in every character, blendtogether rather suddenly near Concepcion, in lat. 37°. I donot doubt, the plain of perpetual snow undergoes an extraordinaryflexure in the district where the forest ceases ; fortrees indicate a rainy climate, and hence a clouded state ofatmosphere.*From central Chile to Bolivia, a space of 16°, the rise ofthe snow-line is only 2000 feet. If Bolivia possessed anatmosphere as clear as that of Chile, the limit in all probabilitywould be even higher than the present 1 7,000. Thecause why the limit in the equatorial regions should be lowerthan in a latitude seventeen degrees to the southward, Ileave to those to explain, who have more means of informationrespecting the dryness and clouded state of the atmospherein the respective regions.The presence of glaciers depends on the accumulation of alarge mass of snow, subject to some variations of temperature,sufficient partially to thaw, and then consolidate theThe average degree of atmospheric transparency seems to be a mostimportant element in determining the climate of any place. Dr. Richardson(Report to Brit. Assoc, for 1836, p. 131) has remarked that ProfessorLeslie, from experimenting on the effects of radiation only in an insularclimate, deduced theoretical inferences respecting the mean temperatureof the year, extremely different from the results obtained under the clearatmosphere of the polar regions. I apprehend central Chile will bearcomparison with any part of the world for the clearness of its sky, andChloe, for one of an opposite condition : therefore we should not feelsurprised, if the effects of two such opposite climates at first appear andmalus. The remarkable difference in the height of the snow-line, on theopposite sides of the Himalaya, has been explained by Humboldt andJacquemont, on the same principle : and in a like manner, the differencebetween the heights on the Pyrenees and on Caucasus, the latter mountainsbeing characterized by a climate more excessive, than that of theformer.280 TIERRA DEL FUEGO. JuilC, 1834.mass in its downward course. They have been aptly comparedto gigantic icicles. The lower limit of glaciers, mustdepend on that of the parent snow, greatly affected by theform of the land : in Tierra del Fuego the snow-line descendsvery low, and the mountain sides are abrupt ; therefore wemight expect to find glaciers extending far down theirflanks.* Nevertheless, when on first beholding, in the middleof summer, many of the creeks on the northern side ofthe Beagle channel terminated by bold precipices of iceoverhanging the salt water, I felt greatly astonished. Forthe mountains from which they descended, were far frombeing very lofty. Captain FitzRoy from angular measurementsconsiders the general range to have an elevationrather under 4000 feet, with one point called Chain Mountainrising to 4300. Further inland, there is indeed a morelofty mountain of 7000 feet, but it is not directly connectedwith the glaciers to which I now allude. This range, whichexceeds by so little the height of some mountains in Britain,which yet sends down in the middle of summer its frozenstreams to the sea-coast, is situated in the latitude of theCumberland hills.I was much interested by observing the great differencebetween the matter brought doom by torrents and by glaciers.In the former case a spit of gravel is formed, but inthe latter a pile of boulders. On one occasion, the boatsbeing hailed on shore, within the distance of half a mile froma glacier, we were admiring the perpendicular cliff of blue ice,and wishing that some more fragments would fall off, likethose we saw floating on the water, at a distance of morethan a mile from their source. At last, down came a massIn the Alps, Saussure gives 8793 feet as the mean of the lowerlimit of the snow-line. At Mont Blanc the glacier of Controvert is said(Encyclo. Metropolis.) to descend 12,000 feet below the summit of themountain, and this will make its base 5160 feet lower than the line of"snow. In Norway (See Von Buch) where a glacier first comes downto the water's edge (lat. 67^^), it is 3800 below the same line : in Tierra delFuego the difference must be very nearly the same as in the last case.June, 1834. glaciers. 281with a roaring noise, and immediately we saw the smooth outlineof a wave travelling towards us. The men ran downas quickly as they could to the boats ; for the chance of theirbeing dashed to pieces was evident. One of the seamen justcaught hold of the bows, as the curling breaker reached it :he was knocked over and over but not hurt ; and the boats,though thrice lifted on high and let fall again, received nodamage. This was most fortunate for us, for we were ahundred miles distant from the ship, and we should have beenleft without provisions or fire-arms.I had previously observed that some large fragments ofrock on the beach had been lately displaced : but until seeingthis wave I did not understand the cause. The structure ofthe creek in which this happened was very curious. Oneside Meas formed by a spur of mica slate (of Which rock thesurrounding mountains were composed) ; the head by a cliffof ice about forty feet high ; and the other side by a promontorywhich was but up of huge rounded fragmentsof granite and mica slate, and was more than fifty feet inheight. To account for the present position of these blocks,where they must have long remained, for old trees weregrowing on the upper parts ; we must suppose, either thatthe glacier formerly advanced half a mile further outward, orthat the land stood at a rather different level. Whether weareable fully to account, or not, for the height and size of thispromontory of boulders, certainly it must have been the workof the glacier. One semi-rounded fragment of granite lyingjust above high-water mark, was of enormous dimensions.It projected six feet above the sand, and was buried toan unknown depth : its shape was oval with a circumferenceof thirty yards, so that the longer axis probably measuredabout ten or eleven. This fragment must have come fromthe higher parts of the range ; for the base of the mountainwas entirely composed of mica slate.The waves caused by the fall of the ice must be a mostpowerful agent in rounding and heaping together these hugefragments, and likewise in wearing away projecting points of282 TiERRA DEL FUEGO. June, 1834'the solid rock. In Georgia, situated in the very same latitude.Cook, speaking of the great ice-cliffs at the head ofevery harbour, says, " pieces were continually breaking off,and floating out to sea, and a great faU happened while wewere in the bay, which made a noise like cannon." He adds,It can hardly be doubted, that a great deal of ice is formedhere in winter, which in the spring is broken off, and dispersedover the sea, Mr. Sorrel, the boatswain of theBeagle, who has long been accustomed to these seas, informsme, that at this season he has seen small icebergs,with mud and gravel on them, floating from the shores. Ihave heard from another quarter of the same circumstance.Captain Hunter* says, he met numerous ice-islands in thisneighbourhood, and that " many were half black apparentlywith earth from the land, to which they had adhered, or elsewith mud from the bottom on which they had been formed."By the latter method large fragments might easily be transported,and unless the iceberg should be upset, they woiddnever be discovered. Nevertheless, the islands of ice floatingin the southern ocean, and especially those occurring farsouth, appear generally to be quite free from all impuritiesexcepting the dung of seafowl. Captain Biscoe, who extendedhis enterprising researches so far towards the antarcticpole, informs me in a letter that he never observed inasingle instances any mud or fragments of stone on thenumerous icebergs which he encountered during his voyage.Glaciers occur at the head of the sounds along the wholewestern coast of the southern part of South America. Lookingat the chart I find sixteen places mentioned: besidesthese I know of several others, such as those in the Beaglechannel and at the foot of Mount Sarmiento. The sounds,moreover, were not aU traced to the head, and it is in thispart that the glaciers most frequently occur. Of the sixteenreferred to, many include several frozen arms coming downHunter's Voyage to Port Jackson, p. 102.f Mr. Sorrel says, that he once saw an iceberg to the eastward ofSouth Shetland, with a considerable block of rock lying on it.June, 1834. glaciers. 283from one vast body of ice. In the Canal of the Mountains,for instance, no less than nine descend from a mountain, thewhole side of which, according to the chart, is covered by aglacier of the extraordinary length of twenty-one miles, andwith an average breadth of a mile and a half. It must notbe supposed that the glacier merely ascends some valley forthe twenty-one miles, but it extends apparently at the sameheight for that length, parallel to the sound; and hereand there sends down an arm to the sea-coast.* There areother glaciers having a similar structure and position, with alength of ten and fifteen miles.I will now specify a few of the more remarkable cases,taken from Captain King's paper, to which I have so oftenreferred. The canal of St. Andrew is said by LieutenantSaying to be " suddenly and boldly closed by tremendousand astonishing glaciers." The highest mountain in thispart (Mount Stokes) was ascertained during our ascent ofthe river of St. Cruz to be 6200 feet, and this certainlyexceeds considerably the height of the general range. Aboutninety miles to the northward. Sir G. Eyre's Sound, in thelatitude of Paris, has its several arms terminated by glaciers.Mr. Bynoe, the surgeon of the Beagle, who accompanied theboat when this part was surveyed, informs me that aboutmid-channel, and more than twenty miles from the head ofthe sound, there were great numbers of floating masses ofice. Standing in the boat he supposes he saw about fifty :he, together with four of the boat's crew, landed on one,which although only two or three feet above the surface ofthe water, felt quite steady, and easily supported theirweight. On the surface, in the central part, a mass ofgranite, of an angular form, was partly embedded ; and theI may remark that in the chart, the greater number of the creekswhich receive the glaciers, have crosses drawn in front, which signifyprojecting masses of rock. After what we have seen in the Beaglechannel, I suspect that they are detached masses brought down by theoverwhelming force of the glaciers.284 TIERRA DEL FUEGO. June, 1834.ice had thawed all round it, so as to form a shallow pool ofwater. It was a cube of nearly two feet ; and Mr. Bynoewith a maul knocked off, and brought away, a piece as largeas a man's head. The iceberg was still floating, and driftingoutwards : even if it had been stranded in the immediateneighbourhood, the block of granite would have rested on theclay-slate of the surrounding mountains. For the parent rockwe must look to the higher parts of the range, near the headof the sound.Again, a few miles to the northward I see in the chartan Iceberg Sound, which no doubt was so called from thenumber of floating masses of ice. It may be recollectedthat in this latitude, on the opposite side of the Cordillera,the plains of St. Cruz, at the distance of fifty and sixty milesfrom the mountains, were strewed with great fragments ofrock. Of these, one was sixty feet in circumference, andanother, which was angular, measured five yards square ; —both being partly buried in the gravel, so that their thicknesswas unknown. As it is probable that the plains werecovered by the sea within a period geologically recent, andas we absolutely know, that icebergs at the present day,both in the same latitude and even further northward, aretransporting angular blocks from the opposite side of theCordillera, the explanation of the St. Cruz case through thesame means of transport, is rendered so evidently probable,that we are not justified in doubting to receive it: moreespecially as the unbroken surface of those plains, and theterrace-formed valley, opposes a very great difficulty to theadmission of any violent debacle. The latitudes Whichwe have now been talking of, correspond to the southernextremity of Cornwall, and the northern provinces ofFrance.I will add only one other case ; namely, the occurrence ofglaciers at the level of the sea, in the gulf of Penas, latitude46° 40'. A glacier is represented in the charts as in onepart abutting on a flat swamp often inundated, and in anodyne,1834.GLACIERS.ther reaching to the head of Kelly Harbour, The accompanyingwood-cut is copied from the published charts.46° 40'.—50'.47° 00'.Captain King says its length is fifteen miles, and from thechart one part is seven broad ; it is also described as beinglofty ; so that we here have an enormous mountain, coveringa wide area, composed of ice. If we compare its situationwith countries in the northern hemisphere, the correspondingparallel crosses the Alps of Switzerland. Or we may state thecase stronger, by saying that glaciers here descend to the seawithin less than nine degrees of latitude, from where palmsgrow, less than two and a haK from arborescent grasses, and(looking to the westward in the same hemisphere) less thantwo from orchideous parasites, and within a single degree oftree-ferns ! In Norway, Von Buch found glaciers descendingto the sea at Runner in latitude 67° ; that is twenty degreesnearer the pole, than in this hemisphere; — a difference oflatitude rather greater than that between the snow-lines ofequal altitude in the same two countries.The survey of the inner coast terminated at the gulf ofPenas, so that I am far from knowing whether glaciers are not286 TiERRA DEL FUEGO. June, 1834.found much further northward : and considering the imiriensesize of the one just described, it is extremely improbablethat it should be the last. On the island of Chloe, whichfronts the Cordillera as the Jura does the Alps, many angularfragments of granite, of an enormous size, which appearto have crossed the inland arm of sea, he scattered atdifferent heights over the country. Although situated betweenthe parallels of 41° and 43°, I know of no soundobjection to the supposition that these might formerly havebeen floated across, on icebergs produced by the fall of glaciers.We are not bound to suppose that the latitude 46° 40' hasalways been the northern limit of such phenomena, even if itshould be so at present. We have endeavoured to show thatthe snow-line in the parallel of Chloe has an elevation ofabout 6000 feet ; and since on Mont Blanc the glaciers descend5160 feet beneath the line of perpetual snow, we mightat present expect to find them in front of Chloe at a verysmall altitude above the level of the sea.With respect to the position of the glaciers, they seemto occur only within the deep sounds which penetrate thecentral CordiUera. This may be attributed chiefly to thesubordinate elevation of the outer lines. When we considerthe vast dimensions and number of these glaciers, the effectproduced on the land must be very great. Every one hasheard of the mass of rubbish propelled by the glaciers ofSwitzerland, as they slowly creep onwards. In the samemanner in Tierra del Fuego, on a still night the cracking andgroaning the great moving mass may be distinctly heard. Thesame force, which is known to uproot whole forests of loftytrees, must, when grating over the surface, tear from theflanks of the mountain many huge fragments of rock. Beneatheach glacier, also, a roaring torrent drains the upperpart of the ice. To these effects, which are common to aUcases, there must be added, in this country, the wear andtear of the waves produced by each successive fall. Nor canthis agency be inconsiderable, when we remember that itgoes on night and day, century after century. We must lookJune, 1834. glaciers. 287at every portion of the mountain as having, during the gradualrising of the land, been successively exposed to the actionof these combined forces.It is, perhaps, useless to speculate on the effects of earthquakeswithout some positive data. But as we find in theimmediate neighbourhood of that great glacier, which standsin the latitude of the Alps, Byron* mentioning with surprisethe quantities of sea-shells lying on aU the hi-tops (a factwhich may be taken as a proof of recent continental elevations); and Bulkeley,t in his narrative, saying, " This daywe felt four great earthquakes, three of which were veryterrible ;" we may feel well assured, that the same power,which in Chile causes such vast masses of rock and soil to fallfrom the sea-cliffs, has oftentimes precipitated fragments farmore immense, of a mass traversed by great fissures, alreadyin motion, and resting on an inclined plane. I cannot imagineany scene of more terrific violence, than the waves producedby such a fall : we know that they are very bad from themere oscillation, consequent on the movements of the ground ;but in this case I can readily believe that the water would befairly beaten back out of the deepest inlet, and then returningwith an overwhelming force, would whirl about rocks ofvast size like so much chaff.In after ages, with a climate modified by the process ofsuch physical changes as are now going on throughout thegreater part of this continent, the effects which had been producedby these glaciers would appear inexplicable, to a personwho doubted the possibility of their occurrence in such latitudes.He would see in the most retired and protected valleys(the present channels) beaches composed of greatrounded boulders, such as those heaped up on the shore ofthe most turbulent ocean. Then perhaps he would speculate,either that the outer chain of mountains had been elevated• Byron's Narrative of the Shipwreck of the Wager.t Buliieley's and Cummin's Faithful Narratives thelossofthe Wager.1 .■ earthquake happened August 2.5, 1741.288 TIERRA DEL Lego. Julie, 1834.subsequently to the interior ones, so as to protect a coasthitherto exposed, or that overwhelming deluges had sweetdown the valleys, and in some manner produced, in one day,the effects of attrition which on ordinary occasions requirethe prolonged action of centuries.If we could at the present day submerge the greater partof Tierra del Fuego, or leave elevated that which we knowhas recently been gained, an island with a few small outlierswould be formed, similar to Georgia, and situated inexactly the same latitude. Have we in such case the slightestright to deny the probability that the snow-line would descendnearly to the waters edge, and that every valleywould be " terminated by a wall of ice,'^ and that " in wintermasses would be broken off and dispersed over the sea ?" — allof which circumstances are now happening in Georgia. Thecurrents, which always set from the westward towards theeast, would drift these floating masses through the channelstowards the eastern side. And as we know that icebergs atthe present day, in both hemispheres, occasionally transportfragments of rock, so we cannot deny that those of Tierra delFuego might formerly have done so. When the land waselevated, the fragments of rock would be found deposited onthe eastern side of the continent, in bands representing theancient channels. Whether or not the hypothesis of theirtransport be true, such is the position of the erratic blocksin Tierra del Fuego.With respect to the general theory of the transport bygreat fragments of ice, especially of such as are angular, Imay add a few remarks. Humboldt having observed thatnone occurred over the vast intertropical plains of the easternside of South America, believed that they were entirelyabsent from the whole continent. As far as I am able todiscover from the works of travellers, and from what 1 havemyseK seen, the remark holds good in the countries on bothsides of the Cordillera as far south as central Chile. Azara hasparticularly stated such to be the case in Chaco. Withrespect to the tributaries of the Amazons, nothing can moreJune, 1834. erratic blocks, 289strongly prove it than La Contains's* story. He says,Below Bora even for four or five hundred leagues, a stone,even a single flint, is as great a rarity as a diamond wouldbe. The savages of those countries don't know what a stoneis, and have not even a notion of it. It is diversion enoughto see some of them when they come to Bora, and first meetwith stones, express their admiration at them with signs, andbe eager to pick them up, loading themselves therewith aswith a valuable merchandise." It is therefore a remarkablecircumstance that as soon as we reach the colder latitudes inthe southern hemisphere (from 41° to Cape Horn), the samephenomenon occurs, almost on as grand a scale and withsimilar limits, as in the northern parts both of the Old andNew World. Neither in the southern nor in the northernhemisphere do the fragments, coming from the polar regions,or from other mountain groups, arrive within a considerabledistance of the lines of the tropics.We must couple the absence of erratic blocks along thatpart of the Andes which is situated under a warmer climate,with the similar non-occurrence, as I am informed by ProfessorBoyle, in Northern India round the flanks of theHimalaya ; — those loftiest pinnacles on the face of the globe.With regard to Southern Africa, from lat. 35° to the tropic.Dr. Andrew Smith, who has visited as a naturalist so large aportion of the interior, assures me he has never seen anythingof the kind. Nor do I recollect meeting with anymention of them, in the works of the numerous travellers inthe equatorial regions of the same continent. The sameremark certainly holds good with Australia in the parallel ofSydney, but perhaps is more doubtful with respect to VanDiemen's Lands To my mind these negative facts haveLa Contains's Voyage (English translation), p. 24.-|- I will here put together all the (apparent?) exceptions which I havemet with to the supposed law that erratic blocks are absent in the intertropicalregions of the world. First, iii the Bulletin de la Societe Geological,1837, p. 234, there is an account of some erratic blocks nearMacao (lat. 22" N.) ; but as it is distinctly stated they are all of granite,VOL. in. u290 TiERRA DEL FUEGO. June, 1834.very great weight in support of the mass of positive evidencewhich Mr. Lyell* has brought to bear upon the question.and the greater number of even the same coloured variety, as the graniticrock, on which they rest, the case need not be considered. Secondly, in alate number of the Madras Journal, Dr. Senza has described some erraticblocks lying on a plain between the Neilgherries (lat. 12° N.) and Madras.He states that the foundation-rock of the country is gneiss, " while thegranite clusters are more elevated, and affect either a prismatic form, orare piled up one on the other, like logging stones." Dr. Senza had thekindness to inform me that these masses are very large, and that severalare piled one upon the other. Again, Brongniart says (Tableau deTerrains, p. 83), " On cite aussi dans I'lnde, au pays hyderabad(lat. 17° N.), des blocs comes de granite, amonceles les uns sur lesautres" (Deluc neveu). Every one must draw his own conclusions fromthese accounts, regarding the probability of erratic blocks being heapedup, one upon the other, like logging stones. The same doubt likewisepartly applies to the Macao case. With respect to the boulders of Hyderabad,Dr. T. Christie has distinctly stated (Eden. New Phil. Jour., Oct. 1828,p. 102), that they are in situ, and has explained their origin. For myown part, I cannot forget that whole granitic hills at the Cape ofGood Hope, which, from weathering, have assumed a boulder-like form,were once described as transported masses. The two next cases do notproperly come under consideration, for they refer to masses lying in thevalleys of lofty mountains. We must not overlook such accidents asbursting of lakes, earthquakes, and the action of former coast-lines. Helms,in his Travels (English translation, p. 45), states he was astonished tofind the highest snow-capped mountains near Potosi (20° N.) coveredwith a stratum of rounded granitic stones. He supposes they must havecome from Truman, which is several hundred miles distant ; yet at p. 53he says, at locally (a few leagues only from Potosi), "a mass of granitemany miles in length, rises in huge weatherbeaten rocks :" the wholeaccount is to me quite unintelligible. Lastly, M. Gay (Annales desSciences, 1833) describes granitic boulders within the valley of Cauquenes(lat. 33°-34° S.), in the Cordillera. I visited this place : the boulders andpebbles are not large, and those beyond the mouth of the valley are small.The case did not appear to me nearly so extraordinary as it seems to havestruck M. Gay. I cannot agree with his assertion that this rock is notfound in that part of the Cordillera : but this is a subject which I shalldiscuss in a future work.J The absence of great embedded fragments in the formations of thesecondary epoch, when we know that the climate was of a more tropicalcharacter, is a fact of the same kind.June, 1834. recapitulation. 291The circumstance of a luxuriant vegetation with a tropicalcharacter so largely encroaching on the temperate zones,under the same kind of climate that allows of a limit ofperpetual snow of little altitude, and consequent descent ofthe glaciers into the sea, is very important ; because it hasbeen argued, with great apparent truth, that as there is thestrongest presumptive evidence of a gradual cooling down ofthe climate (or rather of a less favourable state for tropicalproductions) in Europe, it is most unphilosophical to imaginethat formerly glaciers could have acted where they do not nowoccur. It may be asked ; what are the circumstances in thesouthern hemisphere that produce such results ? Must wenot attribute them to the large proportional area of water ; anddo not plain geological inferences compel us to allow, thatduring the epoch anterior to the present, the northern hemispheremore closely approached to that condition, than itnow does ?We are all so much better acquainted with the position ofplaces in our own, than in any other quarter of the globe,that T will recapitulate what is actually taking place in thesouthern hemisphere,! only transporting in imagination eachpart to a corresponding latitude in the north. On this supposition,in the southern provinces of France, magnificentforests, entwined by arborescent grasses, and the trees loadedwith parasitical plants, would cover the face of the country. Inthe latitude of Mont Blanc, but on an island as far eastwardas central Siberia, tree-ferns and parasitical orchideae wouldthrive amidst the thick woods. Even as far north as centralDenmark, humming-birds might be seen fluttering aboutdelicate flowers, and parrots feeding amidst the evergreenwoods, with which the mountains would be clothed down tothe water's edge. Nevertheless, the southern part of Scot-anniversaryAddress to the Geological Society, Feb. 19, 1836, p. 30 ;and Principles of Geology, vol. i., p. 269, and vol. iv., p. 47, fifth edition.t It is in the southern hemisphere that we find elephants, rhinocerose.^,hippopotamus, and lions, as far south as lat. 34° 35'. In South Americathe jaguar occurs in 42°, and the puma in 53°.u 2292 TiERRA DEL FUEGO. June 1834.land (only removed twice as far to the westward) would presentan island " almost wholly covered with everlasting snow,"and having each bay terminated by ice-clifFs, from whichgreat masses yearly detached, would sometimes bear withthem fragments of rock. This island would only boast ofone land bird, a little grass and moss ; yet in the samelatitude the sea might swarm with living creatures. Achain of mountains, which we will call the Cordillera, runningnorth and south through the Alps (but having analtitude much inferior to the latter), would connect themwith the central part of Denmark. Along this whole linenearly every deep sound would end in " bold and astonishingglaciers." In the Alps themselves (with their altitudereduced by about half) we should find proofs of recentelevations, and occasionally terrible earthquakes would causesuch masses of ice to be precipitated into the sea, thatwaves tearing all before them, would heap together enormousfragments, and pile them up in the corners of thevalleys. At other times, icebergs, " charged with no inconsiderableblocks of granite"* would be floated from theflanks of Mont Blanc, and then stranded on the outlyingislands of the Jura. Who then will deny the possibility ofthese things having actually taken place in Europe during aformer period, and under circumstances known to be differentfrom the present, when on merely looking to the other hemisphere,we see they are among the daily order of events ?To the northward of our new Cape Horn, we shouldonly have certain knowledge of a few island groups, situatedin the latitude of the south part of Norway, and others inthat of Ferroee. These, in the middle of summer, would beburied under snow, and surrounded by walls of ice ; so thatscarcely a living thing of any kind would be supported onthe land. If some bold navigator attempted to penetratebeyond these islands towards the pole, he would run a• Geographical Journal. Capt. King uses these words when alludingto the case in Sir G. Eyre's Sound, which I have more fully describedfrom the information of Mr. Bynoe.June, 1834. animals preserved in ice. 293thousand dangers, and only meet an ocean strewed withmountain-masses of ice.At the Ferroee islands (or we may say a little to the southwardof the Wiljui, where Pallas found (in lat. 64° N.) thefrozen rhinoceros), a body buried under the surface of thesoil would undergo so little decomposition, that years afterwards(as in the instance mentioned at South Shetland,62°-63° Sel, every feature might be recognised perfect andunchanged. I particularly allude to this circumstance,because the case of the Siberian animals preserved withtheir flesh in the ice, offers the same apparent difficultywith the glaciers ; namely, the union in the same hemisphereof a climate in some senses severe, with one allowingof the life of those forms which at present, althoughabounding without the tropics, do not approach the frozenzones.The perfect preservation of the Siberian animals, perhapspresented, till within a few years, one of the most difficultproblems which geology ever attempted to solve. On theone hand it was granted, that the carcasses had not beendrifted from any great distance by any tumultuous deluge, andon the other it was assumed as certain, that when the animalslived, the climate must have been so totally different, thatthe presence of ice in the vicinity was as incredible, as wouldbe the freezing of the Ganges. Mr. Lyell in his " Principlesof Geology'* has thrown the greatest light on this subject,by indicating the northerly course of the existing rivers withthe probability that they formerly carried carcasses in thesame direction ; by showing (from Humboldt) how far theinhabitants of the hottest countries sometimes wander ; byinsisting on the caution necessary in judging of habits betweenanimals of the same genius, when the species are not identical ;and especially by bringing forward in the clearest manner theprobable change from an insular to an extreme climate, as theIn the fourth and subsequent editions.94 TiERRA DEL FUEGO. June, 1834.consequence of the elevation of the land, of which proofs havelately been brought to light.*In a former part of this volume, I have endeavouredto prove, that as far as regards the quantity of food,there is no difficulty in supposing that these large quadrupedsinhabited sterile regions, producing but a scantyvegetation. With respect to temperature, the woolly coveringboth of the elephant and the rhinoceros seems atonce to render it at least probable (although it has beenargued that some animals living in the hottest regions arethickly clothed) that they were fitted for a cold climate.I suppose no reason can be assigned why, during a formerepoch, when the pachydermata abounded over the greaterpart of the world, some species should not have been fittedfor the northern regions, precisely as now happens withdeer and several other animals If, then, we believe thatthe climate of Siberia, anteriorly to the physical changesabove alluded to, had some resemblance with that of thesouthern hemisphere at the present day — a circumstancewhich harmonizes well with other facts as I think hasVVrangel's Voyage in the ley Sea in the years 1821, 1822, and 1823.Edited by Professor Parrot, of Dorpat, Berlin, 1826.•J" Dr. Fleming first brought this notion forward in two papers publishedin the Edinburgh Philosoph. Mourn. (April, 1829, and Jan. 1830).He adduces the case of allied species of the bear, fox, hare, and ox, livingunder widely different climates.X Since writing the above, I have been much interested by reading anaccount by Professor Esmark, which proves that formerly, glaciers inNorway descended to a lower altitude than at present ; and therefore,that they came down to the level of the sea in a lower latitude. This,according to generally-received ideas, would indicate a colder climate, andso it was considered to do by Professor Esmark ; for he argues from it infavour of Whiston's hypothesis, that the " earth in its aphelion was coveredwith ice and snow." Professor Esmark describes a glacier-dike, in lat.58° 57', as " lying close to the level of the sea, in a district, where you findonly a few heaps of perpetual snow in the hollows of the mountains." Hesays, " Not only the dike itself, but the whole horizontal surface, exhibitsproofs that there has been a glacier here, for the plain exactly resemblesJune, 1834. animals preserved in ice. 295been shown by the imaginary case, when we transportedexisting phenomena from one to the other hemisphere, — thefollowing conclusions may be deduced as probable : First,that the degree of cold formerly was not excessive ; secondly,that snow did not for a long time together cover the ground(such not being the case at the extreme parts 55°-56° ofS. America) ; thirdly, that the vegetation partook of a moretropical character than it now does in the same latitudes ;and lastly, that at but a short distance to the northward of thecountry thus circumstanced (even not so far as where Pallasfound the entire rhinoceros), the soil might be perpetuallycongealed : so that if the carcass of any animal should oncebe buried a few feet beneath the surface, it would be preservedfor centuries.Both Humboldt* and Lyell have remarked, that at thepresent day, the bodies of any animals, wandering beyondthe line of perpetual congelation which extends as far southas 62°, if once embedded by any accident a few feet beneath thesurface, would be preserved for an indefinite length of time :the same would happen with carcasses drifted by the rivers ;and by such means the extinct mammalia may have beenentombed. There is only one small step wanting, as it appearsto me, and the whole problem would be solved witha degree of simplicity verj'^ striking, compared with theseveral theories first invented. From the account given bythose which I found adjoining the glaciers presently existing betweenLongford and Lomb." (See Ed. New Phil. Journal, p. 117, October1826.) These facts afford a very strong and admirable confirmation ofthe view, that the climate of Europe has been gradually changing, from acharacter resembling that of the southern hemisphere, to its present condition.For on this hypothesis, we might have anticipated, that proofswould have been discovered, that glaciers formerly descended to a loweraltitude than they now do ; and yet, that the organic remains of thatepoch, instead of a former period of refrigeration, would have indicated aclimate of a more tropical character ; — a conclusion, which may be deducedfrom plain geological evidence.See Humboldt, Fragments Antiques, vol. ii., pp. 385 — 395.296 TIERRA DEL FUEGO. June, 1834.Mr. Lyell of the Siberian plains with their innumerable fossilbones, the relics of many successive generations, there canbe little doubt that the beds were accumulated either in ashallow sea, or in an estuary. From the description givenin Beechey's voyage of Eschscholtz Bay, the same remark isapplicable to the north-west coast of America : the formationthere appears identical with the common littoral deposits*recently elevated, which I have seen on the shores of thesouthern part of the same continent. It seems also wellestablished, that the Siberian remains are only exposedwhere the rivers intersect the plain. With this fact, andthe proofs of recent elevation, the whole case appears to beprecisely similar to that of the Pampas: namely, that thecarcasses were formerly floated into the sea, and the remainscovered up in the deposits which were then accumulating.These beds have since been elevated; and as the riversexcavate their channels the entombed skeletons are exposed.Here then, is the difficulty : how were the carcasses preservedat the bottom of the sea ? I do not think it has beensufficiently noticed, that the preservation of the animal withits flesh was an occasional event, and not directly consequenton its position far northward, Cuvier refers to the voyageof Billing as showing that the bones of the elephant, buffalo,and rhinoceros, are nowhere so abundant as on the islandsbetween the mouths of the Lena and Indigirska. It is evensaid that excepting some hills of rock, the whole is composedof sand, ice, and bones. These islands lie to the northwardof the place where Adams found the mammoth with its fleshpreserved, and even ten degrees north of the Wiljui, wherethe rhinoceros was discovered in a like condition. In thecase of the bones we may suppose that the carcasses wereSee some remarks by Dr. Buckland on the similarity of this formationwith the deposits so commonly found over a great part of Europe.Appendix to Beechey's Voyage, p. 609.t Ossemens Fossiles, vol. i., p. 151.June, 1834. edible fungus. 297drifted into a deeper sea, and there remaining at thebottom, the flesh decomposed.* But in the second andmore extraordinary case, where putrefaction seems to havebeen arrested, the body probably was soon covered up bydeposits which were then accumulating. It may be asked,whether the mud a few feet deep, at the bottom of a shallowsea which is annually frozen, has a temperature higher than32° ? It must be remembered how intense a degree of coldis required to freeze salt water ; and that the mud at somedepth below the surface, would have a low mean temperature,precisely in the same manner as the subsoil on the landisfrozen in countries which enjoy a short but hot summer.If this be possible the entombment of these extinct quatre -Under these circumstances of slow decomposition, the surroundingdeposits would probably be impregnated with much animal matter ; andthus the peculiar odour perceived in the neighbourhood of the strata containingfossil bones at Eschscholtz Bay, may be accounted for. See Appendixto Beechey's Voyage.t With respect to the possibility of even ice accumulating at the bottomof the sea, I shall only refer to the following passage taken from theEnglish translation of the Expedition to the East Coast of Greenland, hyCaptain W. Graal, Danish Royal Navy. " Nor is this the only danger tobe apprehended : the ice oiF this blink, even to a considerable distancefrom it, being said to shoot up from the bottom of the sea in such amanner, and in such masses, as in many years to make it utterly impassable.How to account for the phenomenon to which I have just advertedI know not, unless by supposing that the bottom of the sea itself ishereabouts like the dry land covered with a thick crust of ice. Butwhether this crust is formed upon the spot, or is the remains of icebergsand the heavy drift-ice frozen to the bottom during severe winters, or aportion of the land-ice, which loaded with stones and fragments of thecrumbling hill has protruded itself into the sea, is a problem impossible,perhaps to solve." Again he says : " We passed it without any accident,and without having observed any thing of that upheaving of the ice off it,to which allusion has been made, though the fact of its occurrence cannotbe doubted, the very name of the place, Puisortok, being thence derived.'It seems fully established on excellent testimony (see Mourn. of Geograph,Soc , vol. v., p. 12, and vol. vi., p. 416; also a collection of notices inEdinburgh Journal of Nat. and Geograph. Soc, vol. ii., p. 53), that freshwaterrivers in Russia and Siberia, and even in England, often freeze at298 Tierra DEL FUEGO. June, 1834.pets is rendered very simple ; and with regard to the conditionsof their former existence, the principal difficultieshave, I think, already been removed.Having concluded this long discussion on the analogieswhich may be drawn from the existing climate of thesouthern parts of America, together with its productions, wewill return to the description of Tierra del Fuego.There is one vegetable production in this country which isworthy of mention, as it affords a staple article of food to theaborigines. It is a globular fungus of a bright yellow colour,and of about the size of a small apple, which adheres in vastnumbers to the bark of the beech-trees. It probably formsa new genus, allied to the morel. In the young state itis elastic and turgid, from being charged with moisture. Theexternal skin is smooth, yet slightly marked with small circularpits, like those from the smallpox. When cut in two,the inside is seen to consist of a white fleshy substance,which viewed under a high power resembles, from the numerousthread-like cylinders, vermicelli. Close beneath thesurface, cup-shaped balls, about one-twelfth of an inch indiameter, are arranged at regular intervals. These cups arefilled with a slightly adhesive, yet elastic, colourless, quitetransparent matter; and from the latter character they atfirst appeared empty. These little gelatinous balls cotdd beeasily detached from the surrounding mass, except at theupper extremity, where the edge divided itseK into threads,which mingled with the rest of the vermicelli-like mass.The external skin directly above each of the balls is pitted,and as the fungus grows old, it is ruptured, and the gelatinousmass, which no doubt contains the sparkles, is disseminated.the bottom, and that the flakes of ice when they rise to the surface, oftenbring with them large stones," All that seems to be required in producingground-ice, is, that there should be sufficient movement in thefluid, so that the whole is cooled down to the freezing point, and then thewater crystallizes, wherever there is a point of attachment.June, 1834. edible fungus. 299After this process of fructification has taken place, thewhole surface becomes honeycombed, with empty cells (asrepresented in the accompanying woodcut), and the fungusshrinks, and grows tougher. In this state it is eaten by theFuegians, in large quantities, uncooked, and when wellchewed has a mucilaginous and slightly sweet taste, togetherwith a faint odour like that of a mushroom. Excepting afew berries of a dwarf arbutus, which need hardly be takeninto the account, these poor savages never eat any othervegetable food besides this fungus.*I have already mentioned the sombre and dull characterof the forests in which two or three species oftrees grow, to the exclusion of all others. Above the forestland, there are many dwarf alpine plants, which all springfrom the mass of peat, and help to compose it. The centralpart of Tierra del Fuego, where the clay-slate formationIn New Zealand, before the introduction of the potato, the root ofthe fern was consumed in large quantities. At the present day I shouldthink Tierra del Fuego was the only country in the world, where a cryptogamicplant afforded a staple article of food.t Captain FitzRoy informs me that in April (our October) the leaves ofthose trees which grow near the base of the mountains change colour, butnot those in the more elevated parts. I remember having read some observationsshowing, that in England the leaves fall earlier in a warm and fineautumn, than in a late and cold one. This change in the colour beingretarded in the more elevated and therefore colder situations, must beowing to the same general law of vegetation. The trees of Tierra delFuego during no part of the year entirely shed their leaves.300 TiERRA DEL FUEGO. June, 1834.occurs, is most favourable to the growth of trees ; on theouter coast the poorer granitic soil, and a situation moreexposed to the violent winds, do not allow of their attainingany great size. Near Port Famine I have seen more largetrees than any where else : I measured a winter's barkwhich was four feet six inches in girth, and several of thebeech were thirteen feet. Captain King also mentions oneof the latter which was seven feet in diameter, seventeenfeet above the roots.The zoology of Tierra del Fuego, as might have been expectedfrom the nature of its climate and vegetation, is verypoor. Of mammalia, besides Cetacea and Pioche, there isone bat, a mouse with grooved front teeth {Reithrodon ofWaterhouse), and two other species, the tucutuco (thegreater number of these rodents are confined to the easternand dry part), a fox, sea-otter, guanaco, and one deer. Thelatter animal is rare, and is not, I believe, to be found southof the Strait of Magellan, as happens with the others.Observing the general correspondence of the cliffs of softsandstone, mud, and shingle, on the opposite sides of theStrait, together with those on some intervening islands, oneis strongly tempted to believe that the land was once joined,and thus allowed animals so delicate and helpless as thetucutuco, and Reithrodon, to pass over. The correspondenceof the cliffs is far from proving any junction ; because suchcliffs generally are formed by the intersection of slopingdeposits, which, before the elevation of the land, had beenaccumulated near the then existing shores. It is, however,a remarkable coincidence, that in the two large islands cutoffby the Beagle channel from the rest of Tierra del Fuego,one has cliffs composed of matter that may be called stratifiedalluvium, which front similar ones on the opposite side of thechannel, — while the other is exclusively bordered by the olderrocks : in the former, called Navarin Island, both foxes andguanacoes occur ; but in the latter, Hoste Island, althoughsimilar in every respect, and only separated by a channel alittle more than half a mile wide, I have the word of JemmyJune, 1834. zoology. 301Button for saying that neither of these animals are found.I must confess to an exception to the rule, in the presenceof a small mouse, of a species occurring likewise in Patagonia.The gloomy woods are inhabited by few birds : occasionallythe plaintive note of a white tufted tyrant-flycatcher maybeheard, concealed near the summit of the most lofty trees ;and more rarely the loud strange cry of a black woodpecker,with a fine scarlet crest on its head. A little, dusky-colouredwren {Scytalopus fuscus) hops in a skulking manner amongthe entangled mass of the fallen and decaying trunks. Butthe creeper {Synallaxis Tupinieri) is the commonest bird iuthe country. Throughout the beech forests, high up and lowdoAvn, in the most gloomy, wet, and impenetrable ravines, itmay be met with. This little bird no doubt appears morenumerous than it really is, from its habit of following, withseeming curiosity, any person who enters these silent woods :continually uttering a harsh twitter, it flutters from tree totree, within a few feet of the intruder's face. It is far fromwishing for the modest concealment of the true creeper{Certhia familiars), nor does it, like that bird, run up anddown the trunks of trees ; but industriously, after the mannerof a willow wren, hops about, and searches for insects onevery twig and branch. In the more open parts three orfour species of finches, a thrush, a starling (or Icterus), twofurnarii, and several hawks and owls occur.The absence of any species whatever in the whole class ofReptiles is a marked feature in the zoology of this country, aswell as in that of the Falkland Islands. I do not ground thisstatement merely on my own observation, but I heard itfrom the Spanish inhabitants of the latter place, and fromJemmy Button with regard to Tierra del Fuego. On thebanks of the St. Cruz in 50'^ south, I saw a frog ; and it isnot improbable that these animals, as well as lizards, maybefound as far south as the Strait of Magellan, where thecountry retains the character of Patagonia ; but within the302 TiERRA DEL Lego. June, 1834.damp and cold limit not one occurs. That the climatewould not have suited some of the orders, such as lizards,might have been foreseen; but with respect to frogs, thiswas not so obvious.Coleopterous insects occur in very small numbers. UntilI had endeavoured by every means to find them, I could notbelieve, that a country as large as Scotland, covered withvegetable productions, and with a variety of stations, wouldever have been so unproductive. The greater part of my smallcollection consists of alpine insects [Harpalida. and Ceterofound beneath stones, above the limit of the forest.Lower down, with the exception of some few Curculionesscarcely any could be found. The Chrysomelidse, which areso pre-eminently characteristic of the Tropics, are here almostentirely absent.* This must depend on the climate ; for thequantity of vegetable matter is superfluously great. In thehottest part of the summer the mean of the maxima forthirty-seven successive days was 55°, and the thermometeron some of the days rose to 60° ; yet there were no orthoptera,very few litera, lepidoptera, or hymenoptera. In thepools of water I found but few aquatic beetles, and not anyfresh-water shells. Succinct at first appears an exception ;but here it must be called a terrestrial species, for it lives onthe damp herbage far from water. Land shells could onlybe procured in the same situations with the alpine beetles.I have already contrasted the climate, as well as the generalappearance of Tierra del Fuego with that of Patagonia; andthe difference is strongly exemplified in the entomology.I believe I must except one alpine Attica, and a single specimen ofa Melasoma. Mr. Waterhouse, who was good enough to look at my collectionfrom this place, tells me, that of the Harpalidse there are eight orne species, — the forms of the greater number being very peculiar ; ofHeteromera, four or five species ; of Rliyncophora six or seven ; and ofthe following families one species in each : Staphylinidae, Elateridae, ,Melolonthidse The species in the other orders, were evenfewer. In all the orders, the scarcity of the individuals was even moreremarkable than that of the species.June, 1834. zoology. 303I do not believe they have a species in common ; certainlythe general character of the insects is widely different.If we turn from the land to the sea, we shall find the latteras abundantly stocked with living creatures as the former ispoorly so. In all parts of the world a rocky and partiallyprotected shore perhaps supports, in a given space, a greaternumber of individual animals than any other kind of station.Here, under every stone, numerous crawling creaturesswarmed, and especially Crustacea of the family of Cymo-shades. The number of Spheroid was truly wonderful : asthese animals, when coiled up, have some resemblance toTrilobites, they were an interesting sight to a geologist. Onthe tidal rocks patelliform shells of large size were veryabundant. Even at the depth of forty or fifty fathoms, thebottom of the sea was far from sterile, as was shown by theabundance of small strong corallines.There is one marine production, which from its importanceis worthy of a particular history. It is the kelp or Fuciisgigantic of Solander. This plant grows on every rock fromlow-water mark to a great depth, both on the outer coast andwithin the channels. I believe, during the voyages of theAdventure and Beagle, not one rock near the surface wasdiscovered, which was not buoyed by this floating weed.The good service it thus affords to vessels navigating nearthis stormy land is evident ; and it certainly has saved many aone from being wrecked. I know few things more surprisingthan to see this plant growing and flourishing amidst thosegreat breakers of the western ocean, which no mass of rock,let it be ever so hard, can long resist. The stem is round,slimy, and smooth, and seldom has a diameter of so muchas an inch. A few taken together are sufficiently strong tosupport the weight of the large loose stones to which in theinland channels they grow attached ; and some of these stonesare so heavy, that when drawn to the surface they can scarcelybe lifted into a boat by one person.Captain Cook, in his second voyage, says, that at KerguelenLand " some of this weed is of a most enormous304 TiERRA DEL FUEGO. June, 1834.length, though the stem is not much thicker than a man'sthumb. I have mentioned, that on some of the shoals uponwhich it grows, we did not strike ground with a line oftwenty-four fathoms. The depth of water, therefore, musthave been greater. And as this weed does not grow in aperpendicular direction, but makes a very acute angle withthe bottom, and much of it afterwards spreads many fathomson the surface of the sea, I am well warranted to say thatsome of it grows to the length of sixty fathoms and upwards."Certainly at the Falkland Islands, and about Tierradel Fuego, extensive beds frequently spring up from ten andfifteen fathom water. I do not suppose the stem of anyother plant attains so great a length as 360 feet, as stated byCaptain Cook. Its geographical range is very considerable ;it is found from the extreme southern islets near CapeHorn, as far north, on the eastern coast (according to informationgiven me by Mr. Stokes), as lat. 43°, — and on thewestern it was tolerably abundant, but far from luxuriant, atChloe, in lat. 42°. It may possibly extend a little furthernorthward, but is soon succeeded by a different species. Wethus have a range of fifteen degrees in latitude ; and as Cook,who must have been well acquainted with the species, foundit at Kerguelen Land, no less than 140° in longitude.The number of living creatures of all orders, whose existenceintimately depends on the kelp, is wonderful. A greatvolume might be written, describing the inhabitants of one ofthese beds of sea-weed. Almost every leaf, excepting thosethat float on the surface, is so thickly incrusted with corallines,as to be of a white colour. We find exquisitely delicatestructures, some inhabited by simple hydra-like polypi,others by more organized kinds, and beautiful compoundAscidise.* On the flat surfaces of the leaves various patellashells, Trochi, uncovered molluscs, and some bivalvesare attached. Innumerable Crustacea frequent every part ofI have reason to believe that many of these animals are exclusivelyconfined to this station.June, 1834. fucus giganteus. 305the plant. On shaking the great entangled roots, a pile ofsmall fish, shells, cuttle-fish, crabs of all orders, sea-eggs, starfish,beautiful Holuthuriee (some taking the external form ofthe nudibranch molluscs), Planariee, and crawling nereidousanimals of a multitude of forms, all faU out together. Oftenas I recurred to a branch of the kelp, I never failed to discoveranimals of new and curious structures. In Chloe,where, as I have said, the kelp did not thrive very well, thenumerous shells, corallines, and Crustacea were absent ; butthere yet remained a few of the flustracese, and some compoundAscidise ; the latter, however, were of different speciesfrom those in Tierra del Fuego. We here see the fucus possessinga wader range than the animals which use it as anabode.I can only compare these great aquatic forests of thesouthern hemisphere with the terrestrial ones in the intertropicalregions. Yet if the latter should be destroyed inany country, I do not believe nearly so many species ofanimals would perish, as, under similar circumstances, wouldhappen with the kelp. Amidst the leaves of this plantnumerous species of fish live, which nowhere else would findfood or shelter ; with their destruction the many cormorants,divers, and other fishing birds, the otters, seals, and porpoises,would soon perish also ; and lastly, the Fuegiansavage, the miserable lord of this miserable land, wouldredouble his cannibal feast, decrease in numbers, and perhapscease to exist.June 8th. — We weighed anchor early in the morning,and left Port Famine. Captain FitzRoy determined to leavethe Strait of Magellan by the Magdalen channel, which hadnot long been discovered. Our course lay due south, downthat gloomy passage which I have before alluded to, as appearingto lead to another and worse world. The wind wasfair, but the atmosphere was very thick ; so that we missedmuch curious scenery. The dark ragged clouds were rapidlydriven over the mountains, from their summits nearly totheir bases. The glimpses which we caught through theVOL. III. X306 TiERRA DEL FUEGO. June, 1834.dusky mass were highly interesting : jagged points, cones ofsnow, blue glaciers, strong outlines marked on a lurid sky,were seen at different distances and heights. In the midst ofsuch scenery we anchored at Cape Turn, close to Mount Sar-pimiento,which was then hidden in the clouds. At the baseof the lofty and almost perpendicular sides of our little cove,there was one deserted wigwam, and it alone reminded usthat man sometimes wandered in these desolate regions.But it would be difficult to imagine a scene where he seemedto have less claims, or less authority. The inanimate worksof nature — rock, ice, snow, wind, and water — all warring witheach other, yet combined against man — here reigned inabsolute sovereignty.June 9th. — In the morning we were delighted by seeingthe veil of mist gradually rise from Sarmiento, and displayit to our view. This mountain, which is one of the highestin Tierra del Fuego, has an elevation of 6800 feet. Its base,for about an eighth of its total height, is clothed by duskywoods, and above this a field of snow extends to the summit.These vast piles of snow, which never melt, and seemdestined to last as long as the world holds together, presenta noble and even sublime spectacle. The outline of themountain was admirably clear and defined. Owing to theabundance of light reflected from the white and glitteringsurface, no shadows are cast on any part ; and those lineswhich intersect the sky can alone be distinguished : hencethe mass stood out in the boldest relief. Several glaciers descendedin a winding course, from the snow to the sea-coast :they may be likened to great frozen Niagara; and perhapsthese cataracts of blue ice are to the full as beautifulas the moving ones of water. By night we reached thewestern part of the channel; but the water was so deepthat no anchorage could be found. We were in consequenceobliged to stand off and on, in this narrow arm ofthe sea, during a pitch-dark night of fourteen hours long.June 10th. — In the morning we made the best of ourway into the open Pacific. The Western coast generallyJune, 1834. tierra del fuego. 307consists of low, rounded, quite barren, hills of granite andgreenstone. Sir John Marlborough called one part SouthDesolation, because it is " so desolate a land to behold ;"and well indeed might he say so. Outside the main islandsthere are numberless scattered rocks, on which the longswell of the open ocean incessantly rages. We passed outbetween the East and West Furies, and a little furthernorthward there are so many breakers that the sea is calledthe Milky Way. One sight of such a coast is enough tomake a landsman dream for a week about shipwreck, peril,and death ; and with this sight, we bade farewell for ever toTierra del Fuesro.x2CHAPTER XIV.Valparaiso — Excursion to base of Andes — Structure of land — AscendBell of Quillota — Shattered masses of greenstone — Immense valleys —Mines — State of miners — Santiago — Hot baths of Cauquenes — Goldmines — Grinding mills — Perforated stones — Habits of puma — El turcoand tapacolo — Humming-birds.CENTRAL CHILE.July 23d. — The Beagle anchored late at night in thebay of Valparaiso, the chief seaport of Chile. Whenmorning came, every thing appeared delightful. After Tierradel Fuego, the climate felt quite delicious — the atmosphereso dry, and the heavens so clear and blue, with the sunshining brightly, that all nature seemed sparkling withlife. The view from the anchorage is very pretty. Thetown is built at the very foot of a range of hills, about 1 600feet high, and rather steep. From its position, it consistsof one long, straggling street, which runs parallel to the beach,and wherever a ravine comes down, the houses are piled uponeach side of it. The rounded hills, being only partiallyprotected by a very scanty vegetation, are worn into numberlesslittle gullies, which expose a singularly bright red soil.From this cause, and from the low whitewashed houseswith tile roofs, the view reminded me of St. Cruz inTeneriife. In a north-easterly direction there are some fineglimpses of the Andes : but these mountains appear muchgrander when viewed from the neighbouring hills ; the greatdistance at which they are situated can then more readily beperceived. The volcano of Aconcagua is particularly magnificent.This huge and irregularly conical mass has anelevation greater than that of Chimborazo ; for, from measurementsmade by the officers in the Beagle, its height is noless than 23,000 feet. The Cordillera, however, viewed fromAus;. 1834. Valparaiso. 309*t5this points owe the greater part of their beauty to the atmospherethrough which they are seen. When the sun was settingin the Pacific, it was admirable to watch how clearlytheir rugged outlines could be distinguished, yet how variedand how delicate were the shades of their colour.I had the good fortune to find living here Mr. RichardCornfield, an old schoolfellow and friend, to whose hospitalityand kindness I was greatly indebted, in having afforded meamost pleasant residence during the Beagle's stay in Chile.The immediate neighbourhood of Valparaiso is not veryproductive to the naturahst. The surrounding hills consistof a granitic formation, which sometimes assumes the characterof gneiss, and sometimes of granite. Their summitsare flat-topped, and their flanks rounded. I have before stated,that forests cover that side of the Cordillera which fronts theprevailing winds. Here, during the summer, which forms thelonger portion of the year, the winds blow steadily from thesouthward, and a little off shore, so that rain never falls :during the three winter months it is however sufficientlyabundant. The vegetation in consequence is very scanty.Except in some deep valleys, trees nowhere occur, and only alittle grass and a few low bushes are scattered over the lesssteep parts of the hills. When we reflect that, at the distanceof 350 miles to the southward, this side of the Andesis completely hidden by one impenetrable forest, the contrastis very remarkable.I took several long walks while collecting objects of naturalhistory. The country is pleasant for exercise. Thereare many very beautiful flowers, and as in most other dryclimates, the plants and shrubs possess strong and peculiarodours ; even one's clothes by brushing through them becamescented. I did not yet cease from wonder, at finding eachsucceeding day as fine as the foregoing. What a differencedoes climate make in the enjoyment of life ! How oppositeare the sensations when viewing black mountains half-envelopedin clouds, and seeing another range through the light310 CHILE. Aug. 1834.&•blue haze of a fine day ! The one for a time may be verysubHme ; the other is all gaiety and happy life.August 14th. — I set out on a riding excursion, for the purposeof apologising the basal parts of the Andes, which alone atthis time of the year were not shut up by the winter snow.Our first day's ride was northward along the sea-coast. Afterdark we reached the Hacienda of Quintero, the estate whichformerly belonged to Lord Cochrane. My object in cominghere was to see the great beds of shells, which are elevatedsome yards above the level of the sea. They nearly all consistof one species of Erycina; and these shells at the presentday live together in great numbers, on the sandy flats. Sowonderfully numerous are those forming the beds, that foryears they have been quarried, and burnt for the lime, withwhich the large town of Valparaiso is supplied. As anychange of level, even in this neighbourhood, has often beendisputed, I may add, that I saw dead barnacles adhering topoints of solid rock which were now so much elevated, thateven during gales of wind they would scarcely be wetted bythe spray.15th. — We returned towards the vaUey of Quillota. Thecountry was exceedingly pleasant ; just such as poets wouldcal pastoral : green open lawns, separated by small valleyswith rivulets, and the cottages, we will suppose of the shepherds,scattered on the hill-sides. We were obliged to crossthe ridge of the Chilecauquen. At its base there were manyfine evergreen forest-trees, but these only flourished in theravines, where there was running water. Any person whohad seen only the country near Valparaiso, would neverhave imagined that there had been such picturesque spots inChile. As soon as we reached the brow of the Sierra, the valleyof Quillota was immediately under our feet. The prospectwas one of remarkable artificial luxuriance. The valley is verybroad and quite flat, and is thus easily irrigated in all parts.The little square gardens are crowded with orange and olivetrees, and every sort of vegetable. On each side huge baremountains rise, and this from the contrast renders the patch-aug.1834. CHILE. 311work valley the more pleasing. Whoever called " Valparaiso"the " Valley of Paradise'" must have been thinkingof Quillota. We crossed over to the Hacienda de San Isidore,situated at the very foot of the Bell mountain.Chile, as may be seen in the maps, is a narrow strip ofland between the Cordillera and the Pacific ; and this strip isitself traversed by several mountain-lines, which in this partrun parallel to the great range. Between these outer lines,and the main Cordillera, a succession of level basins, generallyopening into each other by narrow passages, extend farto the southward. In these the principal towns are situated,as San Feline, Santiago, S. Fernando. These basins or plains,together with the transverse flat valleys (like that of Quillota)which connect them with the coast, I have little doubt, are thebottoms of ancient inlets and deep bays, such as at the presentday intersect every part of Tierra del Fuego, and the westcoast of Patagonia. Chile must formerly have resembled thelatter country, in the configuration of its land and water.This resemblance was occasionally seen with great force,when a level fog-bank covered, as with a mantle, all thelower parts of the country : the white vapour curling into theravines, beautifully represented little coves and bays ; andhere and there a solitary hillock peeping up, showed that ithad formerly stood there as an islet. The contrast of theseflat valleys and basins with the irregular mountains, gave thescenery a character which to me was novel and very interesting.From the natural slope to seaward of these plains, theyare very easily irrigated, and in consequence singularlyfertile. Without this process the land would producescarcely any thing ; for during the whole summer the skyis cloudless. The mountains and hills are dotted overwith bushes and low trees, and excepting these, the vegetationis very scanty. Each landowner in the valley possessesa certain portion of hill-country, where his half-wildcattle, in considerable numbers, manage to find sufficientpasture. Once every year there is a grand " rode,"312 CHILE. Aug. 1834.when all the cattle are driven down, counted, and marked,and a certain number separated to be fattened in the irrigatedfields. Wheat is extensively cultivated, and also a good dealof Indian corn : a kind of bean is, however, the staple articleof food for the common labourers. The orchards producean overflowing abundance of peaches, figs, and grapes. Withallthese advantages, the inhabitants of the country ought tobe much more prosperous than they are.August 16th. — The mayor-domo of the Hacienda wasgood enough to give me a guide and fresh horses; and inthe morning we set out to ascend the Campania, or Bellmountain, which is 6400 feet high. The paths were verybad, but both the geology and scenery amply repaid thetrouble. We reached, by the evening, a spring called theAgua del Guanaco, which is situated at a great height. Thismust be an old name, for it is very many years since aguanaco has drunk its waters. During the ascent I noticedthat nothing grew on the northern slope but bushes, whilston the southern there was a sort of bamboo, about fifteen feethigh. In a few places there were palms, and I was surprisedto see one at an elevation of at least 4500 feet. These palmsare, for their family, ugly trees. Their stem is very large, andof a curious form, being thicker in the middle than at thebase or top. They are excessively numerous in some parts ofChile, and valuable on account of a sort of treacle made fromthe sap. On one estate near Pectora, they tried to countthem, but failed, after having numbered several hundred thousand.Ever}'^ year in August (early spring time) very manyare cut down, and when the trunk is lying on the ground,the crown of leaves is lopped off. The sap then immediatelybegins to flow from the upper end, and continues so doingfor some months : it is, however, necessary that a thin shoeshould be shaved off from that end every morning, so as toexpose a fresh surface. A good tree will give ninety gallons,and all this must have been contained in the vessels of theapparently dry trunk. It is said that the sap flows much morequickly on those days when the sun is powerful ; and likewise.Aug. 1834. BELL OF QIIILLOTA. 313that it is absolutely necessary to take care, in cutting down thetree, that it should fall with its head upwards on the side ofthe hiU ; for if it falls down the slope, scarcely any sap willflow ; although in that case, one would have thought that theaction would have been aided, instead of checked, by theforce of gravity. The sap is concentrated by boiling, and isthen called treacle, which it very much resembles in taste.We unsaddled our horses near the spring, and prepared topass the night. The evening was fine, and the atmosphereso clear, that the masts of the vessels at anchor in the bay ofValparaiso, although no less than twenty-six geographicalmiles distant, could be distinguished clearly, as little blackstreaks. A ship doubling the point under sail appeared as abright white speck. Anson expresses much surprise, in hisvoyage, at the distance his vessels were discovered from thecoast ; but he did not sufficiently allow for the height of theland, and the great transparency of the air.The setting of the sun was glorious ; the valleys beingblack, whilst the snowy peaks of the Andes yet retained aruby tint. When it was dark, we made a fire beneath alittle arbour of bamboos, fried our chaque (or dried strips ofbeef), took our mate, and were quite comfortable. There isan inexpressible charm in thus living in the open air. Theevening was calm and still ; — the shrill noise of the mountainbizcacha, and the faint cry of the goatsucker, were onlyoccasionally to be heard. Besides these, few birds, or eveninsects, frequent these dry, parched mountains.August 17th. — In the morning we climbed up the roughmass of greenstone which crowns the summit. This rock,as frequently happens, was much shattered and brokeninto huge angular fragments. I observed, however, oneremarkable circumstance, namely, that many of the surfacespresented every degree of freshness — some appearing as ifbroken the day before, whilst on others lichens had eitherjust become, or had long grown, attached. I so fully believedthat this was owing to the frequent earthquakes, thatI felt inclined to hurry from beneath every pile of the loose314 CHILE. Aug. 1834.masses. As this is an observation in which one would bevery apt to be deceived, I doubted its accuracy, until ascendingMount Wellington, near Hobart Town. The summitof that mountain is similarly composed, and similarly shattered; but all the blocks appeared as if they had been hurledinto their present position thousands of years ago.We spent the day on the summit, and I never enjoyedone more thoroughly. Chile, bounded by the Andes andthe Pacific, was seen as in a map. The pleasure from thescenery, in itself beautiful, was heightened by the manyreflections which arose from the mere view of the grandrange, with its lesser parallel ones, and of the broad valleyof Quillota directly intersecting the latter. Who canavoid admiring the wonderful force which has upheavedthese mountains, and even more so the countless ages whichit must have required, to have broken through, removed, andlevelled whole masses of them ? It is well in this case tocall to mind the vast shingle and sedimentary beds of Patagonia,which, if heaped on the Cordillera, would increaseby so many thousand feet its height. When in thatcountry, I wondered how any mountain-chain could havesupplied such masses, and not have been utterly obliterated.We must not now reverse the wonder, and doubt whetherall-powerful time can grind down mountains — even thegigantic Cordillera — into gravel and mud.The appearance of the Andes was different from that whichI had expected. The lower line of the snow was of coursehorizontal, and to this line the even summits of the rangeseemed quite parallel. Only at long intervals a mass ofpoints, or a single cone, showed where a volcano had existed,or does now exist. Hence the range resembled a great solidwall, surmounted here and there by a tower, and thus madea most complete barrier to the country.Almost every part of the hill has been drilled by attemptsto open gold-mines. I was surprised to see, on the actualsummit, which could only be reached by climbing, asmall pit, where some yellowish crystals of hypersthene hadAug. 1834. Glass AND GAUCHOS, 315induced somebody to throw away his labour. The rage formining has left scarcely a spot in Chile unexamined. I spentthe evening as before, talking round the fire with my twocompanions. The Guasos of Chile, which correspond to theGauchos of the Pampas, are, however, a very different set ofbeings. Chile is the more civilized of the two countries, andthe inhabitants, in consequence, have lost much individualcharacter. Gradations in rank are much more stronglymarked : the Guaso does not by any means consider everyman his equal; and I was qviite surprised to find that mycompanions did not like to eat at the same time with myself.This feeling of inequality is a necessary consequence of theexistence of an aristocracy of wealth. It is said that somefew of the greater landowners possess from five to tenthousand pounds sterling per annum : an inequality ofriches which I believe is not met with in any of the cattle-breedingcountries to the eastward of the Andes. A travellerdoes not here meet that unbounded hospitality whichrefuses all payment, but yet is so kindly offered that noscruples can be raised in accepting it. Almost every housein Chile will receive you for the night, but a trifle isexpected to be given in the morning ; even a rich man willaccept two or three shillings. The Gaucho, although hemay be a cut-throat, is a gentleman ; the Guaso is in fewrespects better, but at the same time a vulgar, ordinaryfellow. The two men, although employed much in the samemanner, are different in their habits and attire ; and thepeculiarities of each are universal in their respective countries.The Gaucho seems part of his horse, and scorns to exerthimself excepting when on its back ; the Guaso may behired to work as a labourer in the fields. The former livesentirely on animal food ; the latter almost wholly on vegetable.We do not here see the white boots, the broaddrawers, and scarlet philip ; the picturesque costume of thePampas. Here, common trousers are protected by black andgreen worsted leggings. The poncho, however, is commonto both. The chief pride in the Guaso lies in his spurs;316 CHILE. Aug. 1834.Which are absurdly large. I measured one which was sixinches in the diameter of the rowel, and the rowel itself containedupwards of thirty points. The stirrups are on thesame scale, each consisting of a square, carved block ofwood, hollowed out, yet weighing three or four pounds.The Guaso is perhaps more expert with the lazo than theGaucho ; but, from the nature of the country, he does notknow the use of the bolas.August 18th. — We descended the mountain, and passedsome beautiful little spots, nth rivulets and fine trees. Havingslept at the same hacienda as before, we rode during thetwo succeeding days up the valley, and passed throughQuillota, which is more like a collection of nursery-gardensthan a town. The orchards were beautiful, presenting onemass of peach-blossoms. I saw also in one or two places thedate-palm. It is a most stately tree ; and I should think agroup of them in their native Asiatic and African desertsmust be superb. We passed likewise San Feline, a prettystraggling town like Quota. The valley in this part expandsinto one of those great bays or plains, reaching tothe foot of the Cordillera, Which have been mentioned asforming so curious a part of the scenery of Chile.In the evening we reached the mines of Jajuel, situated inaravine at the flank of the great chain. I staid here fivedays. My host, the superintendent of the mine, was a shrewdbut rather ignorant Cornish miner. He had married aSpanish woman, and did not mean to return home; buthis admiration for the mines of Cornwall remained unbounded.Amongst many other questions, he asked me,Now that George Rex is dead, how many more of thefamily of Sexes are yet alive ?" This Rex certainly must bearelation of the great author Finis, who wrote all books !These mines are of copper, and the ore is all shipped toSwansea, to be smelted. Hence the mines have an aspectsingularly quiet, as compared to those in England : here nosmoke, furnaces, or great steam-engines, disturb the solitudeof the surrounding mountains.Aug. 1S34. Civilian MINES. 317The Chilian government, or rather the old Spanish law,encourages by every method the searching for mines. Thediscoverer may work a mine on any ground, by paying fiveshillings; and before paying this he may try, even in thegarden of another man, for twenty days.It is now well known that the Chihan method of mining isthe cheapest. My host says the two principal improvementsintroduced by foreigners have been, first, reducing by previousroasting the copper pyrites — which, being the commonore in Cornwall, the English miners were astoundedon their arrival to find thrown away as useless : secondly,stamping and washing the scoriae from the furnaces — bywhich process particles of metal are recovered in abundance.I have actually seen mules carrying to the coast, fortransportation to England, a cargo of such cinders. Butthe first case is much the most curious. The Chilian minerswere so convinced that copper pyrites contained not a particleof copper, that they laughed at the Englishmen fortheir ignorance, who laughed in turn, and bought their richestveins for a few dollars. It is very odd that, in a countrywhere mining had been extensively carried on for manyyears, so simple a process as gently roasting the ore, toexpel the sulphur previous to smelting it, had never beendiscovered. A few improvements have likewise been introducedin some of the simple machinery ; but even tothe present day, water is removed from some mines by mencarrying it up the shaft in leathern bags !The labouring men work very hard. They have Httle timeallowed for their meals, and during summer and winter theybegin when it is light, and leave off at dark. They are paidone pound sterling a month, and their food is given them : thisfor breakfast consists of sixteen figs and two small loaves ofbread ; for dinner boiled beans ; for supper broken roastedwheat grain. They scarcely ever taste meat; as, with the twelvepounds per annum, they have to clothe themselves, and supporttheir families. The miners who work in the mine itself,have twenty-five shillings per month, and are allowed a little318 CHILE. Au. 1834o"chaque. But these men come down from their bleak habitationsonly once in every fortnight or three weeks.During my stay here I thoroughly enjoyed scramblingabout these huge mountains. The geology, as might havebeen expected, was very interesting. The shattered andbaked rocks, traversed by innumerable dykes of greenstone,showed what commotions had formerly taken place there.The scenery was much the same as that near the Bell ofQuillota, — dry barren mountains, dotted at intervals by busheswith a scanty foliage. The cactuses, or rather opuntias, werehere very numerous. I measured one of as spherical figure,which, including the spines, was six feet and four inchesin circumference. The height of the common cylindrical,branching kind is from twelve to fifteen feet, and the girth(with spines) of the branches between three and four.A heavy fall of snow on the mountains prevented me, duringthe last two days, from making some interesting excursions.I attempted to reach a lake, which the inhabitants,from some unaccountable reason, believe to be an arm of thesea. During a very dry season, it was proposed to attemptcutting a channel from it, for the sake of the water ; but thepadre, after a consultation, declared it was too dangerous, asall Chile would be inundated, if, as generally supposed, thelake was connected with the Pacific. We ascended to a greatheight, but becoming involved in the snoAV-drifts, failed inreaching this wonderful lake, and had some difficulty in returning.I thought we should have lost our horses ; for therewas no means of guessing how deep the drifts were, and theanimals, when led, could only move by jumping. The blacksky showed that a fresh snow-storm was gathering, and wetherefore were not a little glad when we escaped. By thetime we reached the base, the storm commenced, and it waslucky for us that this did not happen three hours earlier inthe day.August 26th. — We left Jajuel and again crossed thebasin of S. Fehpe. The day was truly Chilian: glaringlybright, and the atmosphere quite clear. The thick and uni-aug.1834. SANTIAGO. 319oform covering of newly-fallen snow rendered the view of thevolcano of Aconcagua and the main chain quite glorious.We were now on the road to Santiago, the capital of Chile.We crossed the Cerro del Talguen, and slept at a littlerancho. The host, talking about the state of Chile as comparedto other countries, was very humble : " Some see withtwo eyes, and some with one, but for my part I do not thinkthat Chile sees with any."August 27th. — After crossing many low hills, we descendedinto the small land-locked plain of Citron. In thebasins, such as this one, which are elevated from 1000 to2000 feet above the sea, two species of acacia, which arestunted in their forms, and stand wide apart from each other,grow in large numbers. These trees are never found nearthe sea-coast ; and this gives another characteristic feature tothe scenery of these basins.We crossed a low ridge which separates Citron from thegreat plain on which Santiago stands. The view was herepre-eminently striking: the dead level surface, covered inparts by woods of acacia, and with the city in the distance,abutting horizontally against the base of the Andes, whosesnowy peaks were bright with the evening sun. At the firstglance of this view it was quite evident that the plain representedthe extent of a former inland sea. As soon as wegained the level road we pushed our horses into a gallop,and reached the city before it was dark.I staid a week in Santiago, and enjoyed myself very much.In the morning I rode to various places on the plain, andin the evening dined with several of the English merchants,whose hospitality at this place is well known. A never-failingsource of pleasure, was to ascend the little pap ofrock (fort St. Lucia) which projects in the middle of thecity. The scenery certainly is most striking, and as I havesaid, very peculiar. I am informed that this same characteris common to the cities on the great Mexican platform.Of the town I have nothing to say in detail : it is not sofine or so large as Buenos Ayres, but is built after the same320 CHILE. Aug. 1834.model. I arrived here by a circuit to the north; so Iresolved to return to Valparaiso, by a rather longer excursion,to the southward of the direct road.September 5th. — By the middle of the day we arrivedat one of the suspension bridges, made of hide, which crossesthe Maypo, a large turbulent river, a few leagues south ofSantiago. These bridges are very poor affairs. The road,following the curvature of the suspending ropes, is made ofbundles of sticks placed close together. It vas full ofholes, and oscillated rather fearfully, even from the weightof a man leading his horse. In the evening we reached acomfortable farm-house, where there were several verypretty signoritas. They were much horrified at my havingentered one of their churches out of mere curiosity. Theyasked me, " Why do you not become a Christian — for ourreligion is certain ?" I assured them I was a sort ofChristian; but they would not hear of it — appealing to myown words, " Do not your padres, your very bishops,marr)" ?" The absurdity of a bishop ha-song a yviie, particularlystruck them : they scarcely knew whether to be mostamused or horror-struck at such an enormity.6th. — ^W^e proceeded due south, and slept at Rancagua.The road passed over the level but narrow plain, boundedon one side by lofty hills, and on the other by the Cordillera.The next day we turned up the valley of the RioCachapual, in which the hot-baths of Cauquenes, longcelebrated for their medicinal properties, are situated. Thesuspension bridges, in the less frequented parts, are generallytaken down during the inter, when the rivers are low.Such was the case in this valley, and we were thereforeobliged to cross the stream on horseback. This is ratherdisagreeable, for the foaming water, though not deep, rushesso quickly over the bed of large rounded stones, that one'shead becomes quite confused, and it is difficult even to perceivewhether the horse is moving onward, or standing still.In summer, when the snow melts, the torrents are quiteimpassable : their strength and fury is then extremely great ;Sept. 1834. HOT SPRINGS OF CAUQUENES..321as might be plainly seen, by the marks which they had left.We reached the baths in the evening, and staid there fivedays, being confined the two last by heavy rain. The buildingsconsist of a square of miserable little hovels, each with asingle table and bench. They are situated in a narrow deepvalley, just without the central Cordillera. It is a quiet,solitary spot, with a good deal of wild beauty.The mineral springs of Cauquenes burst forth on a line ofdislocation, crossing a mass of stratified rock, the whole ofwhich betrays the action of heat. A considerable quantityof gas is continually escaping from the same orifices with thewater. Though the springs are only a few yards apart, theyhave very different temperatures ; and this appears to be theresult of an unequal mixture of cold water : for those with thelowest temperature have scarcely any mineral taste. After thegreat earthquake of 1822, the springs ceased, and the waterdid not return for nearly a year. It is said that they havenot since regained their former volume or temperature.*These springs were also much affected by the earthquake of1835 ; the temperature being suddenly changed from 118° to92°. t It seems probable that mineral waters rising deepfrom the bowels of the earth, would always be more derangedby subterranean disturbances, than those nearer the surface.The man who had charge of the baths assured me, that insummer the water is hotter and more plentiful than inwinter. The former circumstance I should have expected,from the less mixture, during the dry season, of cold water ;but the latter statement appears very strange and contradictory.The periodical increase during the summer whenWhen I doubted the change of temperature, in this case as well asin the one mentioned a few lines lower down, the inhabitants maintainedthat they knew it well. Their thermometer, however, was an odd one :it is the common custom in this country to scald a fowl before plucking it,in the same manner as we treat a pig, and then the feathers come off veryeasily : they judged from the comparative facility with which this operationcould be performed during the two periods.t Caldcleugh's Philosoph. Transact, for 1836.VOL, III. Y322 CHILE. Sept. 1834.rain never falls, can, I think, only be accounted for by themelting of the snow : yet the mountains which are coveredby snow during that season are three or four leagues distantfrom the springs. I have no reason to doubt the accuracyof my informer, who having lived on the spot for severalyears, ought to be well acquainted with the circumstance, —which, if true, certainly is very curious : for, we must supposethat the water, being conducted through porous stratato the regions of heat, is again thrown up to the surfaceby the line of dislocated and injected rock at Cauquenes ;and the regularity of the phenomenon would seem to indicatethat in this district heated rock occurred at a depthnot excessively great.One day I rode up the valley to the furthest inhabitedspot. Shortly above that point, the Cachapual divides intotwo deep tremendous ravines, which penetrate directly intothe great range. I scrambled up a peaked mountain, probablymore than six thousand feet high. Here, as indeedevery where else, scenes of the highest interest presentedthemselves. It was by one of these ravines that Pincheiraentered Chile, and ravaged the neighbouring country. Thisis the same man whose attack on an estancia at the RioNegro I have described. He was a renegade half-castSpaniard, who collected a great body of Indians together, andestablished himself by a stream in the Pampas, which placenone of the forces sent after him could ever discover. Fromthis point he used to sally forth, and crossing the Cordilleraby passes hitherto unattempted, he ravaged the farm-houses,and drove the cattle to his secret rendezvous. Pincheirawas a capital horseman, and he made all around him equallygood, for he invariably shot any one who hesitated to followhim. It was against this man, and other wandering Indiantribes, that Rosas waged the war of extermination.September 13th. — We left the baths of Cauquenes, andrejoining the main road, slept at the Rio Claro. From thisplace we rode to the town of S. Fernando. Before arrivingthere, the last basin had expanded into a great plain, whichSept. 1834. FLOATING ISLANDS. .323extended so far to the south, that the snowy summits of themore distant Andes were seen, as if above the horizon of thesea. S. Fernando is forty leagues from Santiago ; and it was myfurthest point southward ; for we here turned at right anglestowards the coast. We slept at the gold-mines of Yaquil,which are worked by Mr. Nixon, an American gentleman,to whose kindness I was much indebted during the four daysI staid at his house.September 14th. — This morning we rode to the mines,which are situated at the distance of some leagues, near thesummit of a lofty hill. On the way we had a glimpse of thelake Tagua-tagua, celebrated for its floating islands, whichhave been described by M. Gay.* They are composed ofthe stalks of various dead plants intertwined together, andon the surface of which other having ones take root. Theirform is generally circular, and their thickness from four tosix feet, of which the greater part is immersed in the water.As the wind blows they pass from one side of the lake to theother, and often carry cattle and horses as passengers.Alien we arrived at the mine, I was struck by the paleappearance of many of the men, and inquired from Mr, Nixonrespecting their condition. The mine is 450 feet deep, andeach man brings up about 200 pounds weight of stone.With this load they have to climb up the alternate notchescut in the trunks of trees, placed in a zigzag line up theshaft. Even beardless young men, eighteen and twenty yearsold, with little muscular development of their bodies (theyare quite naked excepting drawers) ascend with this greatload from nearly the same depth, A strong man, who is notaccustomed to this labour, perspires most profusely, withmerely carrying up his own body. With this very severelabour, they live entirely on boiled beans and bread. TheyAnnales des Sciences Naturelles, March, 1833. M. Gay, a zealousand able naturalist, is now occupied in studying every branch of naturalhistory throughout the kingdom of Chile.f In another mine, as will hereafter be mentioned, I picked out aload by hazard, and weighed it : it was 1 97 pounds.V 2324 CHILE. Sept. 1834.would prefer having the latter alone ; but their masters, findingthey cannot work so hard upon this, treat them likehorses, and make them eat the beans. Their pay is hererather more than at the mines of Jajuel, being from 24 to28 shillings Yer month. They leave the mine only once inthree weeks ; when they stay with their families for twodays.* One of the rules in this mine sounds very harsh,but answers pretty well for the master. The only methodof stealing gold, is to secrete pieces of the ore, and take themout as occasion may offer. Whenever the major-domo findsa lump thus hidden, its full value is stopped out of the wagesof all the men ; who thus, without they all combine, areobliged to keep watch over each other.When the ore is brought to the mill, it is ground into animpalpable powder ; the process of washing removes all thelighter particles, and amalgamation finally secures the golddust The washing, when described, sounds a very simpleprocess ; but it is beautiful to see how the exact adaption ofthe current of water to the specific gravity of the gold, soeasily separates the powdered matrix from the metal. Themud which passes from the mills is collected into pools,where it subsides, and every now and then is cleared out, andthrown into a common heap. A great deal of chemical actionthen commences, salts of various kinds florence on the surface,and the mass becomes hard. In the heap which Iexamined, an angelo-concretionary structure was also superinduced,and what was very remarkable, these as all the above treatment appears, it is gladly accepted of by theminers ; for the condition of the labouring agriculturists is much worse.The wages of the latter are lower, and they live almost exclusively onbeans. This poverty must be chiefly owing to the feudal-like system onwhich the land is tilled. The landowner gives a small plot of ground tothe labourer, for building and cultivating, and in return has his services(or that of a proxy) for every day of his life, without any wages. Until afather has a grown up son who can by his labour pay the rent, there is noone, except on chance days, to take care of the patch of ground. Henceextreme poverty is very common among the labouring classes in thiscountry.Sept. 1834. INDIAN RUINS. 325merits possessed an even and well-defined slaty structure ;but the laminae were not inclined at any uniform angle. Themud, after having been left for a year or two, and thenrewashed, yields gold ; and this process may be repeated evensix or seven times ; but the gold each time becomes less inquantity, and the intervals required (as the inhabitants sayto generate the metal) are longer. There can be no doubtthat the chemical action, already mentioned, each time liberatesfresh gold from some combination. The discovery ofa method to effect this before the first grinding, would withoutdoubt raise the value of gold ores many fold.It is curious to find how the minute particles of gold, afterbeing scattered about, and from not corroding, at last accumulatein some quantity. A short time since a few miners,being out of work, obtained permission to scrape the groundround the house and mill : they washed the earth thus gottogether, and so procured thirty dollars' worth of gold.This is an exact counterpart of what takes place in nature.Mountains suffer degradation and wear away, and with themthe metallic veins which they contain. The hardest rock isworn into impalpable mud, the ordinary metals oxide,and both are removed ; but gold, platina, and a few others,are nearly indestructible, and from their weight, sinking tothe bottom, are left behind. After whole mountains havepassed through this grinding mill, and have been washedby the hand of nature, the residue becomes metalliferous,and man finds it worth his while to complete the task ofseparation.There are some old Indian ruins in this neighbourhood,and I was shown one of the perforated stones which Molina*mentions, as being found in many places in considerablenumbers. They are of a circular flattened form, from fiveto six inches in diameter, and with a hole passing quitethrough the centre. It has generally been supposed, thatMolina, Compendious de la Historia, &c. del Regno de Chile, vol. i.,p. 81.326 CHILE. Sept. 1834.they were used as heads to clubs, although their form doesnot appear at all well adapted for that purpose. Burchell*states that some of the tribes in Southern Africa dig uproots,by the aid of a pointed stick, the force and weight ofwhich is increased by a round stone with a hole, into whichthe stick is firmly wedged. It appears probable that theIndians of Chile formerly used some such rude agriculturalinstrument.One day, a German collector in natural history, of thename of Renous, called, and nearly at the same time an oldSpanish lawyer. I was amused by afterwards hearing theconversation which took place between them. Renous speaksSpanish so well, that the old lawyer mistook him for a fellow-countryman.Renous, alluding to myself, asked him what hethought of the King of England sending out a collector to theircountry, to pick up lizards and beetles, and to break stones ?The old gentleman thought seriously for some time, andthen said, " It is not well, — hay un goto encerrado aqiii (thereis a cat shut up here). No man is so rich as to send outpeople to pick up such rubbish. I do not like it : if oneof us were to go and do such things in England, do not youthink the King of England would very soon send us out ofhis country ?" And this old gentleman, from his profession,belongs to the better informed and more intelligent classes !Renous himself, two or three years before, left in a house atS. Fernando some caterpillars, under charge of a girl to feed,that they might turn into butterflies. This was rumovu-edthrough the town, and at last the Padres and Governorconsulted together, and agreed it must be some heresy. Accordingly,when Renous returned, he was arrested.September 19th. — We left Yaquil, and followed theflat valley, formed like that of Quillota, in which the RioTinderidica flows. Even at these few miles south of Santiagothe climate is much damper ; in consequence there were finetracks of pasturage, which were not irrigated. (20th.) We fol-purcell'sTravels, vol. ii., p. 43.Sept. 1834. THE PUMA. '327lowed this valley till it expanded into a great plain, wliiclireaches from the sea to the mountains west of Rancagua. Weshortly lost all trees and even bushes ; so that the inhabitantsare nearly as badly off for firewood as those in the Pampas.Never having heard of these plains, I was much surprised atmeeting with such scenery in Chile. The plains belong to morethan one series of different elevations, and they are traversedby broad flat-bottomed valleys ; both of which circumstances,as in Patagonia, bespeak the gentle retreat of the ocean.In the steep cliffs bordering these valleys, there are somelarge caves, which no doubt were formed by the waters ofthe ancient bays and channels. One of these which I visitedis celebrated under the name of Cueva del Obispo ; havingformerly been consecrated. During the day I felt veryunwell, and from that time till the end of October did notrecover.September 22d. — We continued to pass over greenplains without a tree. The next day we arrived at a housenear Navedad, on the sea-coast, where a rich Haciendagave us lodgings. I stayed here the two ensuing days, andalthough very unwell, managed to collect from the tertiaryformation some marine shells, many of which turn out to bequite new forms. 24th. Our course was now directed towardsValparaiso, which with great difficulty I reached onthe 27th, and was there confined to my bed till the end ofOctober. During this time I was an inmate in Mr. Cor-field'shouse, whose kindness to me I do not know how toexpress.I will here add a few observations on some of the animalsand birds of Chile. The Puma, or South American Lion, isnot uncommon. This animal has a wide geographical range ;being found from the equatorial forests, throughout thedeserts of Patagonia, as far south as the damp and coldlatitudes (53° to 54°) of Tierra del Fuego. I have also seenits footsteps in the Cordillera of central Chile, at an elevationof at least 10,000 feet. In I/a Plata the puma chiefly preyson deer, ostriches, bizcacha, and other small quadrupeds ; it32S While. Sept. 1834.there seldom attacks cattle or horses, and except in mostrare cases, as a female having young, is never dangerous toman.In Chile, however, it destroys many young horsesand cattle, owing probably to the scarcity of other quadrupeds: I heard, likewise, of two men and a woman whohad been kiUed by them. It is asserted that the puma alwayskills its prey by springing on the shoulders, and then drawingback the head with one of its paws, until the vertebraebreak: I have seen in Patagonia, the skeletons of guana-does, with their necks thus dislocated.The puma, after eating its fill, covers the carcass withmany large bushes, and lies down to watch it. This habitis often the cause of its being discovered ; for the condorswheeling in the air, every now and then descend to partakeof the feast, and being angrily driven away, rise aU togetheron the wing. The Chilenono Guaso then knows there is alion watching his prey — the word is given — and men anddogs hurry to the chase. Sir F. Head says that a Gauchoin the Pampas, upon merely seeing some condors wheelingin the air, cried " A lion ! " I could never myself meetwith any one who pretended to such powers of discrimination.It is asserted, that if a puma has once been betrayedby thus watching the carcass, and has then been hunted,it never resumes this habit ; but that having gorged itself,it wanders far away.The puma is easily kiUed. In an open country, it is firstentangled with the bolas, then lasted, and dragged along theground till rendered insensible. At Handel (south of thePlata), I was told, that within three months one hundredwere destroyed. In Chile they are generally driven upbushes or trees, and are then either shot, or baited to deathby dogs. The dogs employed in this chase belong to a particularbreed, called Leoneros. They are weak, slight animals,like long-legged terriers, but are born with a particular instinctfor this sport. The puma is described as being very, crafty :when pursued it often returns on its former track, and thensuddenly making a spring on one side, waits there till theSept. 1834. ORNITHOLOGY. 329dogs have passed by. It is a very silent animal, uttering nocry even when wounded, and only rarely during the breedingseason.Of birds, two species of the genus Pteroptochos [megapo-this and albicollis of Kittlitz) are perhaps the most conspicuous.The former, called by the Chilenos " el Turco,^' is aslarge as a fieldfare, to which bird it has some alliance ; but itslegs are much longer, tail shorter, and beak stronger : its colouris a reddish brown. The turco is not uncommon. It lives onthe ground, sheltered among the thickets which are scatteredover the dry and sterile hills. With its tail erect, and stilt-likelegs, it may be seen every now and then, popping fromone bush to another, with uncommon celerity. It really requireslittle imagination to believe the bird is ashamed ofitself, and is aware of its most ridiculous figure. On firstseeing it, one is tempted to exclaim, " A vilely stuffedspecimen has escaped from some museum, and has come tolife again !" It cannot be made to take flight without thegreatest trouble, nor does it run, but only hops. The variousloud cries which it utters when concealed amongst thebushes, are as strange as its whole appearance. It is said tobuild its nest in a deep hole beneath the ground. I dissectedseveral specimens : the gizzard, which was very muscular,contained beetles, vegetable fibres, and pebbles. From thischaracter, from the length of legs, scratching feet, membranouscovering to the nostrils, short and arched wings, this birdseems to a certain degree to connect the thrushes with thegallinaceous order.The second species (or Pt. albicollis) is allied to the first inits general form. It is called Tapacolo, or " cover your posterior;" and well does the shameless little bird deserve its name ;for it carries its tail more than erect, that is, inclined backwardstowards its head. It is very common, and frequentsthe bottoms of hedge-rows, and the bushes scattered overthe barren hills, where scarcely another bird can exist.Hence the tapacolo is conspicuous in the ornithology ofChile. In its general manner of feeding, of quickly hopping330 CHILE. Sept. 1834.out of the thickets and back again, in its desire of concealment,unwillingness to take flight, and nidification, it bearsa close resemblance to the turco ; but its appearance is notquite so ridiculous. The tapacolo is very crafty: whenfrightened by any person, it will remain motionless at thebottom of a bush, and will then, after a little whUe, try withmuch address to crawl away on the opposite side. It is alsoan active bird, and continually making a noise : these noisesare various and strangely odd ; some are like the cooing ofdoves, others like the bubbling of water, and many defy allsimiles. The country people say it changes its cry five timesin the year — according to some change of season I suppose.I believe these two species of Pteroptochos are only" foundin central Chile. To the southward, within the damp forestregion, two other species supply the place of these loversof a more sterile land ; and a fifth species is common to bothdistricts. On the Patagonia coast a bird allied to them,both in structure and habits, represents this Chilian genus.*Two species of humming-birds are common, and I haveseen a third kind within the Cordillera, at an elevation ofabout 10,000 feet. Mellisiiga Kingii is found over a spaceof 2500 miles on the west coast, from the hot dry country ofLima, to the forests of Tierra del Fuego — where it has beendescribed as flitting about in a snow-storm. In the woodedisland of Chloe, which has an extremely humid climate, thislittle bird, skipping from side to side amidst the drippingfoliage, is perhaps more abundant than almost any otherkind. It there very commonly frequents open marshy ground,where a kind of bromelia grows: hovering near the edge ofthe thick beds, it every now and then dashed in close to theIt is a remarkable fact, that Molina, though describing in detail allthe birds and animals of Chile, never once mentions this genus, the speciesof which are so common, and so remarkable in their habits. Washe at a loss how to classify them, and did he consequently think thatsilence was the more prudent course? It is one more instance of thefrequency of omission by authors, on those very subjects where it wouldbe least expected.Sept. 1834. HUMMING-birds. 331ground ; but I could not see whether it ever actually alighted.At the time of year I refer to, there were very few flowers,and none whatever near the beds of brome. Hence I wasquite sure they did not hve on honey; and on opening thestomach and upper intestine, by the aid of a lens I coiddplainly distinguish, in a yellow fluid, morsels of the wings oflitera — probably tipulidee. It is evident that these birdssearch for minute insects in their winter-quarters under thethick foliage. I opened the stomachs of several specimens,which were shot in different parts of the continent ; and inaU, remains of insects were so numerous, as often to presenta black comminuted mass, as in the stomach of a creeper.In central Chile these birds are migratory : they make theirappearance there in autumn, and in the latter end of themonth corresponding to our October, they were very common.In the spring they began to disappear, and on the12th of what would correspond to our March, in the courseof a long walk, I saw only one individual. As this speciesmigrates to the southward, it is replaced by the arrival of alarger kind, which will be presently described. I do notbelieve the small kind breeds in Chile ; for, during the summer,their nests were common to the south of that country.The migration of the humming-birds on both the east* andwest coast of North America exactly corresponds to whattakes place in this southern continent. In both cases theymove towards the tropic during the colder parts of the year,and retreat northward before the returning heat. Some, however,remain during the whole year in Tierra del Fuego ; andin Northern California, — which in the northern hemispherehas the same relative position which Tierra del Fuego has inthe southern, — some, according to Beechey, likewise remain.The second species [Trochilus gigs) is a very large bird,for the delicate family to which it belongs. In the neighbourhoodof Valparaiso, during this year, it had arrived inHumboldt's Pers. Narr., vol. v., part i., p. 332 ; Cook's Third Voyage,vol. ii. ; and Beechey's Voyage.332 CHILE. Sept. 1834.numbers, a little before the vernal equinox. It comes fromthe parched deserts of the north, probably for the purposeof breeding in Chile. When on the wing, the appearance ofthis bird is singular. Like others of the genus, it movesfrom place to place with a rapidity which may be comparedto that of Surplus amongst litera, and Sphinx amongmoths ; but whilst hovering over a flower, it flaps its wingswith a very slow and powerful movement, totally differentfrom that vibratory one common to most of the species,which produces the humming noise. I never saw any otherbird, where the force of its wings appeared (as in a butterfly)so powerful in proportion to the weight of its body. Whenhovering by a flower, its tail is constantly expanded andshut like a fan, the body being kept in a nearly vertical position.This action appears to steady and support the bird,between the slow movements of its wings. Although flyingfrom flower to flower in search of food, its stomach generallycontained abundant remains of insects, which I suspect aremuch more the object of its search than honey is. The noteof this species, Uke that of nearly the whole family, is extremelyshrill.CHAPTER XV.Chloe — General aspect — Boat excursion — Native Indians — Castro — •Large leaves of Gunnera scabra — Tame fox — Ascend San Pedro —Honos Archipelago — Peninsula of Tres Montes — Granitic range —Lowe's Harbour — Wild potato — Forest — Formation of peat — Myopota-mus, otter and mice — Cheucau and barking-bird — Furnarius — Singularcharacter of ornithology — Petrels.Chloe AND CHONOS ISLANDS.November 10th. — The Beagle sailed from Valparaiso tothe southward, for the purpose of surveying the southernpart of Chile, the island of Chloe, and the broken landcalled the Honos Archipelago, as far south as the Peninsulaof Tres Montes. On the 21st we anchored in the bay ofS. Carlos, the capital of Chloe.This island is about ninety miles long, with a breadth ofrather less than thirty. The land is hilly, but not mountainous,and is every where covered by one great forest, exceptinga few scattered green patches, which have been clearedround the thatched cottages. From a distance the viewsomewhat resembles Tierra del Fuego; but the woods,when seen nearer, are incomparably more beautiful. Manykinds of fine evergreen trees, and plants with a tropical character,here take the place of the gloomy beech of the southernshores. In winter the climate is detestable, and in summerit is only a little better. I should think there are few partsof the world, within the temperate regions, where so muchrain falls. The winds are very boisterous, and the skyalmost always clouded : to have a week of fine weather issomething wonderful. It is even difficult to get a singleglimpse of the Cordillera : during our first visit only oneopportunity occurred, and that was before sunrise, when theVolcano of Osorno stood out in bold relief ; and it was curious334 CHiLOE. Nov. 1834.to watch, as the sun rose, the outline gradually fading awayin the glare of the eastern sky.The inhabitants, from their complexion and low stature,appear to have three-fourths of Indian blood in their veins.They are an humble, quiet, industrious set of men. Althoughthe fertile soil, resulting from the decomposition ofvolcanic rocks, supports a rank vegetation, yet the climateis not favourable to any production which requires muchsunshine to ripen it. There is very little pasture for thelarger quadrupeds ; and in consequence, the staple articles offood are pigs, potatoes, and fish. The people all dress instrong woollen garments, which each family makes for itself,and dyes with indigo of a dark blue colour. The arts, however,are in the rudest state ; — as may be seen in their strangefashion of ploughing, their method of spinning, grindingcorn, and in the construction of their boats.The forests are so impenetrable, that the land is nowherecultivated except near the coast, and on the adjoining islets.Even where roads exist, they are scarcely passable from thesoft and swampy state of the soil. The inhabitants, likethose of Tierra del Fuego, chiefly move about on the beach,or in boats : in some cases the latter afford the only meansof getting from one house to another. Although with plentyto eat, the people are very poor: there is no demand forlabour, and consequently the lover orders cannot scrape togethermoney sufficient to purchase even the smallest luxuries.There is also a great deficiency of a circulating medium. Ihave seen a man bringing on his back a bag of charcoal, withwhich to buy some trifle, and another a plank to exchangefor a bottle of wine. Hence every tradesman must also beamerchant, and again sell the goods which he takes in exchange.November 24th. — the yawl and whale-boat were sentunder the command of Mr. Sulivan, to survey the eastern orinland coast of Chloe ; and with orders to meet the Beagleat the southern extremity of the island ; to which point shewould proceed by the outside, so as thus to circumnavi-Nov. 1834. CHiLOE. 335gate the island. I accompanied this expedition, but insteadof going in the boats the first day, I hired horses to takeme to Cacao, at the northern extremity of the island. Theroad followed the coast ; ever' now and then crossing promontoriescovered by fine forests. In these shaded paths itis absolutely necessary that the whole road should be made oflogs of wood, which are squared and placed by the side of eachother. From the rays of the sun never penetrating the evergreenfoliage, the ground is so damp and soft, that except bysuch means, neither man nor horse would be able to passalong. I arrived at the village of Cacao, shortly after thetents belonging to the boats had been pitched for the night.The land in this neighbourhood had been extensivelycleared, and there were many quiet and most picturesquenooks in the forest. Cacao was formerly the principal port ;but many vessels having been lost, owing to the dangerouscurrents and rocks in the straits, the Spanish governmentburnt the church, and thus arbitrarily compelled the greaternumber of inhabitants to migrate to S. Carlos. In a shorttime the barefooted son of the governor came down to reconnoitreus. Seeing the English flag hoisted at the yawl'smast-head, he asked, with the utmost indifference, whether itwas always to fly at Cacao. In several places, the inhabitantswere much astonished at the appearance of men-of-war'sboats, and hoped and believed it was the forerunner ofa Spanish fleet, coming to recover the island from the patriotgovernment of Chile. All the men in power had, however,been informed of our intended visit, and were exceedingly civil.While we were eating our supper, the governor paid us a visit.He had been a Lieutenant-colonel in the Spanish service, butnow was miserably poor. He gave us two sheep, and acceptedin return two cotton handkerchiefs, some brass trinkets,and a little tobacco.25th. — Torrents of rain : we managed, however, to rundown the coast as far as Huapi-lenou. The whole of thiseastern side of Chloe has one aspect : it is a plain, brokenby valleys, and divided into little islands, and the whole336 CHiLOE. Nov. 1834.thickly covered with one impervious blackish-green forest.On the margins there are some cleared spaces, surroundingthe high-roofed cottages.26th. — The day rose splendidly clear. The volcano ofOsorno was spouting out volumes of smoke. This mostbeautiful mountain, formed like a perfect cone, and whitewith snow, stands out in front of the Cordillera. Anothergreat volcano, with a saddle-shaped summit, also emittedfrom its immense crater little jets of steam. Subsequentlywe saw the lofty-peaked Corcovado — well deserving the nameof " el famoso Corcovado." Thus we beheld, from one pointof view, three great active volcanoes, each of which had anelevation of about seven thousand feet. In addition to this,far to the south, there were other very lofty cones coveredwith snow, which although not known to be active, musthave been in their origin volcanic. The line of the Andes isnot, in this neighbourhood, nearly so elevated as in Chile ;neither does it appear to form so perfect a barrier between theregions of the earth. This great range, although running in adirect north and south line, owing to an optical deception,always appeared more or less semicircular ; for the extremepeaks being seen standing above the same horizon togetherwith the nearer ones, their much greater distance was not soeasily recognised.When landing on a point to take observations, we saw afamily of pure Indian extraction. The father was singularlylike York Minster; and some of the younger boys, withtheir ruddy complexions, might have been mistaken forPampas Indians. Every thing I have seen convinces me ofthe close connexion of the different tribes, who neverthelessspeak quite distinct languages. This party could muster butlittle Spanish, and talked to each other in their own tongue.It is a pleasant thing to see the aborigines advanced to thesame degree of civilization, however low that may be, whichtheir white conquerors have attained. More to the south wesaw many pure Indians : indeed, some of the islands, such asCheques, &c., have no other inhabitants than such as retainNov. 1834. INDIAN INHABITANTS. 337the Indian surname. In the census of 1832, there were inChloe and its dependencies, forty two thousand souls. Thegreater number of these appear to be little copper-colouredmen, of mixed blood. Eleven thousand actually retain theirIndian surname ; but it is probable that not nearly all of themare of pure blood. Their manner of life is the same with thatof the other poor inhabitants, and they are all Christians : butit is said that they yet retain some strange superstitious ceremonies,and that they pretend to hold communication with thedevil in certain caves. Formerly, every one convicted of thisoffence was sent to the Inquisition at Lima. Many of thosepeople who are not included in the eleven thousand, cannot bedistinguished by their appearance from Indians. Gomezthe governor of Lemuy, is descended from noblemen ofSpain on both sides, but by constant intermarriages withnatives, the present man is an Indian. On the other hand,the governor of Quinchao boasts much of his pure Spanishblood.We reached at night a beautiful little cove, north of theisland of Caucasus. The people here complained of wantof land. This is partly owing to their own negligencein not clearing the woods, and partly to restrictions of thegovernment, which makes it necessary before buying ever sosmall a piece, to pay two shillings to the surveyor, for measuringeach quatre (150 yards square), together with whateverprice he fixes for the value of the land. After his valuation,the land must be put up three times to auction, and if no onebids more, the purchaser can have it at that rate. All theseexactions must be a serious check to clearing the ground,where the inhabitants are so extremely poor. In mostcountries, forests are removed without much difficulty, bythe aid of fire ; but in Chloe, from the damp nature of theclimate, and the sort of trees, it is necessary first to cutthem down. This is a heavy drawback to the prosperity ofChloe. In the time of the Spaniards the Indians coidd nothold land; and a family, after having cleared a piece ofground, might be driven away, and the property seized byVOL. III. Z338 CHiLOE. Nov. 1S34.the government. The Chihan authorities are now performingan act of justice, by making retribution to these poorIndians ; giving to each man, according to his grade of life,a certain portion of land. The value of uncleared ground isvery little. The government gave Mr. Douglas (the presentsurveyor, who informed me of these circumstances) eightand a half square miles of forest near S. Carlos, in lieu of adebt; and this he sold for 350 dollars, or about seventypounds sterling.The two succeeding days were fine, and at night wereached the island of Quinchao. This neighbourhood is themost cultivated part of the Archipelago ; for a broad strip ofland on the coast of the main island, as well as on many ofthe smaller adjoining ones, is almost completely cleared.Some of the farm-houses seemed very comfortable. I wascurious to ascertain how rich any of these people might be, butMr. Douglas says that no one can be considered as possessing aregular income. One of the richest landowners might possiblyaccumulate, in a long industrious life, as much as a thousandpounds sterling ; but should this happen, it would all bestowedaway in some secret corner ; for it is the custom ofalmost every family to have a jar or treasure-chest buried inthe ground.November 30th. — Early on Sunday morning we reachedCastro, — the ancient capital of Chloe, but now a mostforlorn and deserted place. The usual quadrangular arrangementof Spanish towns could be traced, but the streets andplaza were coated with fine green turf, on which sheep werebrowsing. The church, which stands in the middle, isentirely built of plank, and has a picturesque and venerableappearance. The poverty of the place may be conceivedfrom the fact, that although containing some hundreds ofinhabitants, one of our party was unable any where to purchaseeither a pound of sugar, or an ordinary knife. Noindividual possessed either a Watch or a clock ; and an oldman, who was supposed to have a good idea of time, wasemployed to strike the church bell by guess.Dec. 1834. castro. 339The arrival of our boats was a rare event in this quiet,retired corner of the world ; and nearly all the inhabitantscame down to the beach to see us pitch our tents. Theywere very civil, and offered us a house ; and one man evensent us a cask of cider as a present. In the afternoon wepaid our respects to the governor ; — a quiet old man, who, inhis appearance and manner of life, was scarcely superior toan English cottager. At night heavy rain set in, which washardly sufficient to drive away from the tents the largecircle of lookers on. An Indian family, who had come totrade in a canoe from Caylen, bivouacked near us. Theyhad no shelter during the rain. In the morning, I askeda young Indian, who was wet to the skin, how he had passedthe night. He seemed perfectly content, and answered, " Muybien, senor."December 1st. — We steered for the island of Lemuy. Iwas anxious to examine a reported coal-mine, which turnedout to be lignite of little value, in the sandstone (probably ofan ancient tertiary epoch) of which these islands are composed.When we reached Lemuy we had much difficulty infinding any place to pitch our tents, for it was spring tide,and the land was wooded down to the water's edge. In ashort time we were surrounded by a large group of thenearly pure Indian inhabitants. They were much surprisedat our arrival, and said one to the other, " This is the reasonwe have seen so many parrots lately ; the cheucau (an oddred-breasted little bird, which inhabits the thick forest, andutters very peculiar noises) has not cried 'beware' fornothing." They were soon anxious for barter. Money wasscarcely worth any thing, but their eagerness for tobacco wassomething quite extraordinary. After tobacco indigo camenext in value ; then capsicum, old clothes, and gunpowder.The latter article was required for a very innocent purpose :each parish has a public musket, and the gunpowder waswanted for making a noise on their saint or feast days.The people here live chiefly on shell-fish and potatoes.At certain seasons they catch also, in " comrades" or hedgesz 2340 CHiLOE. Dec. 1834.under water, many fish which are left on the mud-banks asthe tide falls. They occasionally possess fowls, sheep, goats,pigs, horses, and cattle ; the order in which they are herementioned expressing their respective frequency. I neversaw any thing more ohhging and humble than the mannersof these people. They generally began with stating, thatthey were poor natives of the place, and not Spaniards, andthat they were in sad want of tobacco and other comforts.At Caylen, the most southern island, we bought with a stickof tobacco of the value of three-halfpence, two fowls — oneof which, the Indian stated, had skin between its toes, andturned out to be a fine duck ; and with some cotton handkerchiefs,worth three shillings, we procured three sheep,and a large bunch of onions. The yawl at this place wasanchored some way from the shore, and we had fears for hersafety during the night. Our pilot, Mr. Douglas, accordinglytold the constable of the district, that we always placedsentinels with loaded arms, and not understanding Spanish,if we saw any person in the dark, we should assuredlyshoot him. The constable, with much humility, agreedto the perfect propriety of this arrangement, and promisedus that no one should stir out of his house during thatnight.During the four succeeding days we continued sailingsouthward. The general features of the country remainedthe same, but it was much less thickly inhabited. On thelarge island of Tanqui there was scarcely one cleared spot ;the trees on every side extending their branches over thesea-beach. I one day noticed some very fine plants of thepane gunners scabra), which somewhat resembles the rhubarbon a gigantic scale, growing on the sandstone cliffs.The inhabitants eat the stalks, which are suljacid, and tanleather with the roots, and prepare a black die from them.The leaf is nearly circular, but deeply indented on its margin :I measured one which had a diameter of nearly eight feet,and therefore a circumference of no less than twenty-four !The stalk is rather more than a yard high, and each plantDec. 1834. SAN PEDRO. 341sends out four or five of these enormous leaves — presentingtogether a very noble appearance.December 6th. — We reached Caylen, called "el fin delCristiandad.^' In the morning we stopped for a few minutesat a house on the northern end of Laylec, which was theextreme point of South American Christendom, and a miserablehovel it was. The latitude is 43° 10, which is twodegrees further south than the Rio Negro on the Atlanticcoast. These extreme Christians were very poor, and, underthe plea of their situation, begged some tobacco. As a proofof the poverty of these Indians, I may mention that, shortlybefore this, we had met a man who had travelled three daysand a half on foot, and had as many to return, for the sake ofrecovering the value of a small axe, and a few fish. Howvery difficult it must be to buy the smallest article, whensuch trouble is taken to recover so small a debt !In the evening we reached the island of S. Pedro, wherewe found the Beagle at anchor. In doubling the point, twoof the officers landed to take a round of angles with thetheodolite. A fox, of a kind said to be peculiar to theisland, and very rare in it, and which is an undescribedspecies, was sitting on the rocks. He was so intently absorbedin watching their manoeuvres, that I was able, byquietly walking up behind, to knock him on the head withmy geological hammer. This fox, more curious or morescientific, but less wise, than the generality of his brethren,is now mounted in the museum of the Zoological Society.We staid three days in this harbour ; on one of whichCaptain FitzRoy, with a party, attempted to ascend to thesummit of San Pedro. The woods here had rather a differentaspect from those on the northern parts of the island.The rock also being micaceous slate, there was no beach, butthe steep sides dipped directly beneath the water. The generalaspect in consequence was more like that of Tierra delFuego than of Chloe. In vain we tried to gain the summit :he forest was so impenetrable that no one, who has not beheldit, can imagine so entangled a mass of dying and dead342 CHiLOE. Dec. 1834.trunks. I am sure that often, for more than ten minutestogether, our feet never touched the ground, and we were frequentlyten or fifteen feet above ; it so that the seamen as a jokecalled out the soundings. At other times we crept one afteranother on our hands and knees, under the rotten trunks.In the lower part of the mountain, noble trees of the winter'sbark, and a laurel like the sassafras with fragrant leaves,and others, the names of which I do not know, were mattedtogether by a trailing bamboo or cane. Here we were morelike fishes struggling in a net than any other animal. On thehigher parts, brushwood takes the place of larger trees, withhere and there a red cedar or an alerce pine. I was alsopleased to see, at an elevation of a little less than 1000 feet,our old friend the southern beech. They were, however, poorstunted trees ; and I should think this must be nearly theirnorthern limit. We ultimately gave up the attempt in despair.December 10th. — The yawl and whale-boat, with Mr.Sulivan, proceeded on their survey, but I remained on boardthe Beagle, which the next day left S. Pedro for the southward.On the 1 3 th we ran into an opening in the southernpart of Guayatecas, or the Honos Archipelago ; and it wasfortunate we did so, for on the following day a storm, worthyof Tierra del Fuego, raged with its wonted fury. White massiveclouds were piled up against a dark blue sky, and acrossthem black ragged sheets of vapour were rapidly driven. Thesuccessive mountain-ranges appeared like dim shadows ; andthe setting sun cast on the woodland a yellow gleam, muchlike that produced by the flame of spirits of wine on a man'scountenance. The water was white with the flying spray;and the wind lulled and roared again through the rigging.It was a most ominous, sublime scene. During a few minutesthere was a bright rainbow, and it was curious to observe theeffect of the spray, which, being carried along the surface ofthe water, changed the ordinary semicircle into a ring. Aband of prismatic colours was continued from both feet ofthe common arch, across the bay, close to the vessel's side 5thus forming a distorted, but very nearly entire circle.Dec. 1834. tres montes. 343We staid here three days. The weather continued bad ;but this did not much signify, for the surface of the land inall these islands is all but impassable. The coast is so veryrugged, that to attempt to walk in that direction requirescontinued scrambling up and down, over the sharp rocks ofmica slate ; and as for the woods — our faces, hands, and shinbonesall bore witness to the maltreatment we received inmerely attempting to penetrate their forbidden recesses.December 18th. — We stood out to sea. On the 20thwe bade farewell to the south, and with a fair wind turnedthe ship's head northward. From Cape Tres Montes wesailed pleasantly along the lofty weather-beaten coast ; whichis remarkable for the bold outline of its hills, and the thickcovering of forest — even on the almost precipitous flanks.The next day a harbour was discovered, which on this dangerouscoast might be of great utility to a distressed vessel.It can easy be recognised by a hill 1600 feet high, which iseven more perfectly conical than the famous sugar-loaf at Riode Janeiro. The next day, after anchoring, I succeeded inreaching the summit of this hill. It was a laborious undertaking,for the sides were so steep, that in some parts it wasnecessary to use the trees as ladders : there were also severalextensive brakes of the Fuchsia covered with its beautifuldrooping flowers, but very difficult to crawl through. Inthese wild countries it gives much delight, to gain the summitof any mountain. There is an indefinite expectation ofmeeting something very strange, which, however often it maybebalked, never failed with me to recur on each successiveattempt. Every one must know the feeling of triumph andpride which a grand viev/ from a height communicates to themind. In these little frequented countries there is alsojoined to it some vanity, that you perhaps are the first manwho ever stood on this pinnacle or admired this view.A strong desire is always felt to ascertain, whether anybodyhas previously visited the place. A bit of wood with anail in it is picked up and studied, as if it were covered withhieroglyphics. Possessed with this feeling, I was much in-344 TRES MONTES. Dec. 1834.treated by finding, on a wild part of the coast, a bed madeof grass beneath a ledge of rock. Close by it there had beena fire, and the man had used an axe. The fire, bed, andsituation, showed the dexterity of an Indian ; but he couldscarcely have been an Indian ; for the race is in this partextinct, owing to the Catholic desire of making at one blowChristians and Slaves. I had at the time some misgivings(though they afterwards were proved to have been groundless)that the solitary man, who had made his bed on thiswild spot, must have been some poor shipwrecked sailor,who, in trying to travel up the coast, had here lain himselfdown for his dreary night.December 28th. — The weather continued very bad, butit at last permitted us to proceed with the survey. The timehung heavy on our hands, as it always did when we weredelayed from day to day by successive gales of wind. In theevening another harbour was discovered, where we anchored.Directly afterwards a man was seen waving his shirt ; and aboat was sent which brought back two seamen. A party ofsix had run away from an American whaling vessel, and hadlanded a little to the southward in a boat, which was shortlyafterwards knocked to pieces by the surf. They had nowbeen wandering up and down the coast for fifteen months,without knowing which way to go, or where they were.What a singular piece of good fortune it was that this harbourwas now discovered! Had it not been for this onechance, they might have wandered till they had grown oldmen, and at last have perished on this wild coast. Theirsufferings had been very great, and one of their party had losthis life, by falling from the cliffs. They were sometimesobUged to separate in search of food, and this explained thebed of the solitary man. Considering what they had undergone,I think they had kept a very good reckoning of time ;though they had lost four days, by making this the 24thinstead of the 28th.December 30th. — We anchored in a snug little cove atthe foot of some high hills, near the northern extremity ofJan, 1835. tres montes. 345Tres Montes. After breakfast the next morning, a partyascended one of these mountains, which had an altitude of2400 feet. The scenery was remarkable. The chief part ofthe range was composed of grand, solid, abrupt masses ofgranite, which appeared as if they had been coeval with thebeginning of the world. The granite is capped with slatygneiss, and this in the lapse of ages has been worn intostrange finger-shaped points. These two formations, thusdiffering in their outlines, agree in being almost destitute ofvegetation. This barrenness had to our eyes a still strangerappearance, from our having been so long accustomed to thesight of an almost universal forest of dark green trees. Itook much delight in examining the structure of these mountains.The complicated and lofty ranges bore a noble aspectof durability, — equally profitless, however, to man and to allother animals. Granite to the geologist is classic ground :from its widespread limits, and its beautiful and compacttexture, few rocks have been more early recognised. Granitehas given rise, perhaps, to more discussion concerning itsorigin than any other formation. We generally see it constitutingthe fundamental rock, and, however formed, weknow it is the deepest layer in the crust of this globe, towhich man has been able to penetrate. The limit of man'sknowledge in any subject possesses a high interest, which isperhaps increased by its close neighbourhood to the realmsof imagination.January 1st, 1835. — The new year is ushered in, withthe ceremonies proper to it in these regions. She lays outno false hopes ; a heavy N. W. gale, with steady rain,bespeaks the rising year. Thank God, we are not destinedhere to see the end of it, but hope then to be in the Pacific,where a blue sky tells one there is a heaven — a somethingbeyond the clouds above our heads.The N. W. winds prevailing for the next four days, weonly managed to cross a great bay, and then anchored inanother secure harbour. I accompanied the captain in aboat to the head of a deep creek. On the way the number346 CHONOS ARCHIPELAGO. Jan. 1835.of seals which we saw was quite astonishing ; every bit of flatrock, and parts of the beach, were covered with them.They appeared to be of a loving disposition, and lay huddledtogether, fast asleep, like so many pigs ; but even pigswould be ashamed of their dirt, and of the foul smell whichcame from them. Each herd was watched by the patientbut inauspicious eyes of the turkey-buzzard. This disgustingbird, with its bald scarlet head, formed to wallow inputridity, is very common on the west coast, and theirattendance on the seals shows that they are dependant ontheir mortality. We found the water (probably only that ofthe surface) nearly fresh ; this was caused by the number oftorrents, which, in the form of cascades, came tumbling overthe bold granite mountains into the sea. The fresh waterattracts the fish, and these bring many terns, gulls, and twokinds of cormorant. We saw also a pair of the beautifulblack-necked swans, and several small sea-otters, the fur ofwhich is held in such high estimation. In returning we wereadam amused by the impetuous manner in which the heapof seals, old and young, tumbled into the water as the boatpassed. They did not remain long under, but rising, followedus with outstretched necks, expressing great wonder andcuriosity.7th. — Having run up the coast, we anchored near thenorthern end of the Honos Archipelago, in Lowe's Harbour,where we remained a week. The islands were here, as inChloe, composed of a stratified littoral deposit of softsandstone with shingle ; and the vegetation in consequencewas beautifully luxuriant. The woods came down to thesea-beach, just in the same manner as an evergreen shrubberyover a gravel walk. We also enjoyed from theanchorage a splendid view of four great snowy cones ofthe Cordillera, beginning with the saddle-topped volcano,next " el famoso Corcovado," and then two others to thesouthward. The range itself had in this latitude so Uttleelevation, that few parts of it appeared above the line of theneighbouring islets. We found here a party of five menJan. 1835. wild potatoes, 347from Caylen, " el fin del Christiana," who had most adventurouslycrossed the open space of sea which separatesHonos from Chloe, in their miserable boat-canoe, for thepurpose of fishing. These islands will, in all probability, inashort time become peopled, like those adjoining the coastof Chloe.Humboldt,* in his Essay on the Kingdom of New Spain,has given a most interesting discussion on the history of thecommon potato. He believes that the plant described byMoUna,t under the name of maglia, is the original stock ofthis useful vegetable, and that it grows in Chile in its nativesoil. He supposes that thence it was transported by theIndian population to Peru, Quito, New Granada, and thewhole Cordillera, from 40° south to 5° north. He observesthat it is a remarkable circumstance, and in accordance withaU records respecting the course of the stream of Americanpopulation, that previously to the Spanish conquest, it wasunknown in Mexico. Among the Honos Islands, a wildpotato grows in abundance, which in general habit is evenmore closely similar to the cultivated kind than is the angliaof Molina.These potatoes grow near the sea-beach, in thick beds,on a sandy, shelly soil, wherever the trees are not too closetogether. In the middle of January they were in flower,but the tubers were small, and few in number ; especially inthose plants which grew in the shade, and had the mostluxuriant foliage. Nevertheless, I found one which was ofan oval form, with one diameter two inches in length.The raw bulbs had precisely the smell of the commonpotato of England, but when cooked they shrunk, andbecame watery and insipid. They had not a bitter taste, as,according to Molina, is the case with the Chilian kind ; andthey could be eaten with safety. Some plants measuredHumboldt's New Spain, book iv., chap. ix.f Molina's Chile, Spanish edition, vol. i., p. 136.348 ciiONOS Archipelago. Jan. 1835.from the ground to the tip of the upper leaf, not less thanfour feet.So very close is the general resemblance with the cultivatedspecies, that it is necessary to show that they havenot been imported. The simple fact of their growth on theislands, and even small rocks, throughout the HonosArchipelago, which has never been inhabited, and veryseldom visited, is an argument of some weight. But thecircumstance of the wildest Indian tribes being well acquaintedwith the plant, is stronger. Mr. Lowe, a veryintelligent and active sealer, informs me, that on showingsome potatoes to the naked savages in the Gulf of Trinidad(lat. 50°), they immediately recognised them, and callingthem " Aquinas," wanted to take them away. The savagesalso pointed to a place where they grew; which fact wassubsequently verified. The Indians of Chloe, belonging toanother tribe, also give them a name in their own language.The simple fact of their being known and named by distinctraces, over a space of four or five hundred miles on a mostunfrequented and scarcely known coast, almost proves theirnative existence. Professor Henslow, who has examined thedried specimens which I brought home, says that theyare the same with those described by Mr. Sabine* fromValparaiso, but that they form a variety which by somebotanists has been considered as specifically distinct. Itis remarkable that the same plant should be found on thesterile mountains of central Chile, where a drop of raindoes not fall for more than six months, and within thedamp forests of the southern islands. From what we knowof the habits of the potato, this latter situation wouldappear more congenial than the former, as its birthplace.In the central parts of the Honos Archipelago, in lat.45° 30', the forest has assumed very much the same charadeTransact., vol. v., p. 249. Mr. Caldcleugh sent hometwo tubers, which being well manured, even the first season producednumerous potatoes and an abundance of leaves.Jan. 1835. formation of peat. 349ter which is found along the whole west coast for 600 milesto Cape Horn. The arborescent grass of Chloe has hereceased to exist ; while the beech of Tierra del Fuego bothgrows to a good size, and forms a considerable proportion ofthe wood ; not, however, in the same exclusive manner as itdoes further to the southward. Cryptogamic plants here finda most congenial climate. In the neighbourhood of the Straitof Magellan, I have before remarked that the country appearstoo cold and wet to allow of their arriving at perfection ; butinthese islands, within the forest, the number of species, andgreat abundance of mosses, lichens, and small ferns, is quiteextraordinary.* In Tierra del Fuego trees grow only on thehill sides ; every level piece of land being invariably coveredby a thick bed of peat ; but in Chloe the same kind of situationsupports the most luxuriant forest. Here, within theHonos Archipelago, the nature of the climate more closelyapproaches that of the southern, than that of the northern, ofthese two countries. Nearly every patch of level groundis covered by two species of plants [Asteliapumila of Brownsand Dciiatia magellanica), which by their joint decay composea thick bed of elastic peat.In Tierra del Fuego, above the region of woodland, theformer of these eminently sociable plants is the chief agentin the production of peat. Fresh leaves are always succeedingone to the other, round the central tap root; the lowerones soon decay ; and in tracing a root downward in thepeat, the leaves (yet holding their position) can be observedpassing through every stage of decomposition, till thewhole becomes blended in one confused mass. The Ameliais assisted by few other plants ; here and there a small creepingone {Myrtus numiaularia), with a woody stem like ourBy sweeping with my insect-net, I procured from these situations aconsiderable number of minute insects of the family of Staphylinidse, andothers allied to Pselaphus, and minute Hymenoptera. But the mostcharacteristic family in number of both individuals and species, throughoutthe more open parts of Chloe and Honos, is that of the Telephoridae.•)■ Anthericum trifar'mm of Solander.350 CHONOS ARCHIPELAGO. Jan. 1835.cranberry, but with a sweet bent ; another {Empetntm ru-brun)like our heath, and a third junius grandiflorus) arush ; are nearly the only ones that grow on the swampy surface.These plants, though possessing a very close generalresemblance to the English kinds, are botanically different.In the more level parts of the country, the surfaceof the peat is broken up into little pools of water, whichstand at different heights, and appear as if artificially excavated.Small streams of water, flowing under ground, completethe disorganization of the vegetable matter, and consolidatethe whole.The climate of the southern part of America appears particularlyfavourable to the production of peat. In the FalklandIslands, almost every kind of plant, even the coarsegrass which covers the whole surface of the island, becomesconverted into this substance. I was at first at a loss toimagine how so much peat had been formed ; but the conversionof the grass at once explains it. I observed that evensome bones of cattle, strewed on the surface, were nearlycovered up by the decaying matter at the foot of the bladesof withered grass. Scarcely any situation checks itsgrowth; it overhangs the banks of running streams, andencroaches on the piles of loose angular fragments of quartzrock. Some of the beds are of considerable thickness, evenas much as twelve feet : the peat in the lower part is earthy,and completely altered, and when dry, becomes so solidthat it ignites with difficulty. No doubt, although everyplant lends its aid in the process, yet the Amelia is themost efficient. It is rather a singular circumstance, asbeing so very different from what occurs in Europe, that nokind of moss forms by its decay any portion of the peat inSouth America.With respect to the northern limit at which the climateallows of that peculiar kind of slow decomposition which isnecessary for the production of peat, 1 believe that inChloe (lat. 41° to 42°), although there is much swampyground, no well-characterized substance of this natureJan. 1835. zoology. 351occurs. But in the Honos Islands, three degrees furthersouthward, we have seen that it is abundant. On the easterncoast in La Plata (lat. 35°), I was told by a Spanish resident(who had visited Ireland), that he had often sought forthis substance, but had never been able to find any. Heshowed me, as the nearest approach to it which he had discovered,a black peaty soil, so penetrated with roots as toallow of an extremely slow and imperfect combustion.The zoology of these broken islets of the Honos Archipelago,is, as might have been expected, very poor. Ofquadrupeds, two aquatic kinds are common. The Myopo-tames Corpus (like a beaver, but with a round tail) is wellknown from its fine fur, which is an object of trade, throughoutthe tributaries of La Plata. It here, however, exclusivelyfrequents salt water; which same circumstance hasbeen mentioned, as sometimes occurring with the greatrodent, the Capybara. A small sea-otter is very numerous.This animal does not feed exclusively on fish, but, like theseals, draws a large supply from a small red crab, whichswims in shoals near the surface of the water. Mr. Bynoesaw one in Tierra del Fuego eating a cuttle-fish; and atLowe's Harbour another was killed, in the act of carrying toits hole a large volute ; and this was the only specimen ofthat shell which was procured. At one place I caught in atrap a singular little mouse ; it appeared common on severalof the islets, but the Chilotans at Lowe's Harbour said thatit was not found in all. What a succession of chances,* orwhat changes of level, must have been brought into jDlay, thusto spread these small animals throughout this broken archipelago!In all parts of Chloe and Honos, two very strange birdsoccur, which have many points of affinity with the TurcoMany rapacious animals bring their prey alive to feed their young.Are there any instances on record of such a habit among owls or hawks ?If so, in the course of centuries, every now and then, one might escapefrom the young birds. Some such agency is wanted, to account for thedistribution of the smaller gnawing animals on islands near to each other.352 CHONOS ARCHIPELAGO. Jan. 1835.and Tapacolo. One is called by the inhabitants " Cheucau "{Pteroptochos rubecula). It frequents the most gloomyand retired spots within the damp forests. Sometimes,although its cry may be heard close at hand, let a personwatch ever so attentively, he will not see the cheucau j atother times, let him stand motionless, and the red-breastedlittle bird will approach within a few feet, in the mostfamiliar manner. It then busily hops about the entangledmass of rotting canes and branches, with its little tailcocked upwards. I opened the gizzard of some specimens :it was very muscular, and contained hard seeds, buds ofplants, and vegetable fibres, mixed with small stones. Thecheucau is held in superstitious fear by the ChUotans, onaccount of its strange and varied cries. There are threevery distinct kinds, — one is called "' chiduco,^' and is anomen of good ; another, " huitreu," which is extremely unfavourable; and a third, which I have forgotten. Thesewords are given in imitation of its cries, and the natives arein some things absolutely governed by them. The Chilotansassuredly have chosen a most comical little creature for theirprophet.An allied species, but rather larger, is called by the nativesGuid-guid" {Hylactes Tarnish of King, and Pteroptochos ofKittlitz), and by the English the barking-bird. This lattername is well given ; for I defy any one at first to feel certainthat a small dog is not yelping somewhere in the forest. Justas with the cheucau, a person will sometimes hear the barkclose by, but in vain may endeavour, by watching, and withhtiU less chance by beating the bushes, to see its author ; yetat other times the guid-guid fearlessly comes near. Its mannerof feeding and its general habits are very similar tothose of the cheucau. Both species are said to build theirnests close to the ground, amongst the rotten branches.The ground being so extremely wet, is a good reason whythey do not burrow holes, like the northern species. Besidesthe cheucau and guid-guid, there is another species, but it isnot very common. Moreover, the bird which has been men-jan.1835. ornithology. 353toned in Tierra del Fuego, under the title of a black wren{Scytalopus fuscus of Gould), appears, in its skulkinghabits, odd cries, and place of resort, and likewise in somepoints of structure, to be closely related to this singulargenus.On the coast,* a small dusky-coloured bird (a Fiirnariusallied to J'uliginosus) is very common. Tt is remarkable fromits quiet and very tame habits. It lives entirely on the sea-beach,and there (as well as sometimes on the floating kelp),picks up small sea-shells and crabs ; thus supplying the placeof a sandpiper. Besides these birds, only a few others inhabitthis broken land. In my rough notes I describe thestrange noises, which although frequently heard within thesegloomy forests, yet scarcely disturb the general silence.The yelping of the guid-guid, and the sudden whew-whew ofthe cheucau, sometimes come from afar, and sometimes fromclose at hand ; — the little wren occasionally adds its cry ; —the creeper follows the intruder, screaming and twittering ; —the humming-bird may be seen every now and then dartingfrom side to side, and emitting, like an insect, its shrill chirp ;lastly, from the top of some lofty tree, the indistinct butplaintive note of the white-tufted tyrant-flycatcher may benoticed.From the great preponderance in most countries of certainkinds of birds, such as the finches, one feels at first surprisedat meeting with such peculiar forms, above enumerated, asthe commonest birds in any district. In central Chile twoof them, namely the Synallaxis and Catalogus, occur, althoughmost rarely. When finding, as in this case, any animalwhich seems to play so insignificant a part in the greatscheme of nature, one is apt to wonder why a distinct speciesI may mention as a proof of how great a difference there is betweenthe seasons of the wooded and the open parts of the coast, that on September20th, in lat. 34*^, these birds had young ones in the nest, while amongthe Lions Islands, three months later in the summer, they were only laying; the difference in latitude between these two places being about 700miles.VOL. III. 2 A354 CHONOS ARCHIPELAGO. Jan. 1835.should have been created. But it should always be recollected,that in some other country perhaps it is an essentialmember of society, or at some former period may have beenso. If America south of 37° should be sunk beneath thewaters of the ocean, the Synallaxis and Catalogus mightcontinue to exist in central Chile for a long period, but it isvery improbable that their numbers would increase. Weshould then see a case, which must inevitably have happenedwith very many animals.These southern seas are frequented by several species ofPetrels. The largest kind, Cancellaria gigantic, or nelly,(quebrantahuesos, or break-bones, of the Spaniards) is acommon bird, both in the inland channels and on the opensea. In its habits and manner of flight there is a veryclose resemblance with the albatross, and as with the latterbird, a person may watch it for hours together without seeingon what it feeds, so is it with this petrel. The " break-bones"is, however, a rapacious bird,* for it was observed bysome of the officers at Port St. Antonio chasing a diver. Thebird tried to escape both by diving and flying, but was continuallystruck down, and at last killed by a blow on its head.At Port St. Julian, also, these great petrels were seen killingand devouring young gulls.A second species [Puffing cinereous), which is common toEurope, Cape Horn, and the coast of Peru, is of a muchsmaller size than the gigantic, but, like it, of a dirty blackcolour. It generally frequents the inland sounds in very largeflocks : I do not think I ever saw so many birds of any othersort together, as I once saw of these behind the island ofChloe. Hundreds of thousands flew in an irregular line, forseveral hours in one direction. When part of the flocksettled on the water, the surface was blackened, and a noiseproceeded from them, as of human beings talking in the dis-theSpaniards who named it were probably aware of this, for " "means properly an osprey.f I am indebted to Mr. Gould for naming these birds, and for kindlyfurnishing me with much information respecting them.Jan. 1835. ornithology. 355tance. At this time the water was in parts coloured byclouds of small Crustacea. At Port Famine, every morningand evening, a long band of these birds continued to fly, withextreme rapidity, up and down the central parts of thechannel. I opened the stomach of one (which I shot withsome difficulty, for they were rather wary), and it contained asmall fish, and seven good-sized, prawn-like crabs.There are several other species of petrels, but I will onlymention one other kind, the Puffinuria Berardii, whichoffers one more example of those extraordinary cases, ofa bird evidently belonging to one well-marked family, yetboth in its habits and structure allied to a very distincttribe. This bird never leaves the quiet inland sounds. Whendisturbed it dives to a distance, and on coming to the surface,with the same movement takes wing. After flying foraspace in a direct course, by the rapid movement of itsshort wings, it drops, as if struck dead, and dives again.The form of the beak and nostrils, length of foot, and evencolouring of the plumage, show that this bird is a petrel:at the same time, its short wings and consequent little powerof flight, its form of body and shape of tail, its habits ofdiving, and the absence of a hind toe to its foot, and itschoice of situation, make it doubtful whether its relationshipis not equally close with the auks as with the petrels. Itwould undoubtedly be mistaken for one of the former, whenseen either on the wing, or when diving and quietly swimmingabout the retired channels of Tierra del Fuego.A 235 GCHAPTER XVI.San Carlos, Chloe — Osorno in eruption — Ride to Castro and Cucao —Impenetrable forests— Valdivia — Apple-trees — Ride to Llanos — Indians— Earthquake — Concepcion — Great earthquake — Effects of waveRocks fissured — Appearance of the former towns — Water in the bay-blackand boiling — Direction of vibration — Stones displaced — Cause ofgreat waves — Permanent elevation of land — Great lake of fluid rockbeneath crust of the globe — Connexion of volcanic phenomena — Slowelevation of mountain chain, cause of earthquakes.Chloe AND Conception.On January the 15th we sailed from Lowe's harboursand three days afterwards anchored a second timein the bay of S. Carlos in Chloe. On the night of the 19ththe volcano of Osorno was in activity. At midnight thesentry observed something like a large star ; from which statethe bright spot gradually increased in size till about threeo'clock, when a very magnificent spectacle was presented.By the aid of a glass, dark objects, in constant succession,were seen, in the midst of a great red glare of light, to bethrown upwards and to fall down again. The light wassufficient to cast on the water a long bright reflection. Bythe morning the volcano* had resumed its tranquillity.Large masses of molten matter seem very commonly to becast out of the igneous vents, in this part of the Cordillera.I was assured, that when the Corcovado is in eruption, greatmasses projected upwards are seen to burst in the air, andto assume fantastical forms, such as trees and other bodies.One may form an idea of the immense size of these bodies,when it is stated that they have been seen from the high landIn another work I shall have occasion to refer to this eruption, whichis connected with one of the grandest series of volcanic phenomena onrecord.IJan. 1835, chloe. 357behind S. Carlos which is distant no less than ninety-threemiles from the Corcovado.Captain FitzRoy being anxious that some bearings shouldbe taken on the outer coast of Chloe it was planned thatMr. King and myself should ride to Castro, and thence acrossthe island to the Capella de Cacao, situated on the west coast.Having hired horses and a guide, we set out on the morningof the 22d. We had not proceeded far, before we werejoined by a woman and two boys, who were bent on thesame journey. Every one on this road acts on a " hailfellow well met," fashion; and one may here enjoy the privilege,so rare in South America, of travelling without firearms.At first, the country consists of a succession of hills andvalleys. Nearer to Castro it becomes very level, but is stillsome height above the sea. The road itself is a curiousaffair : it consists in its whole length, with the exception ofvery few parts, of great logs of wood, which are either broadand placed longitudinally, or narrow and transversely. Insummer the road is not very bad : but in winter, when thewood is rendered slippery from rain, travelling is exceedinglydifficult. At that time of the year, the ground on each sidebecomes a morass, and is often overflowed : hence it is necessarythat the longitudinal logs should be fastened down bytransverse poles, which are pegged on each side into theearth. These pegs render a fall from a horse dangerous ;as the chance of alighting on one of them is not small.It is remarkable, however, how active custom has made theChilotan horses. In crossing bad parts, where the logs havebeen displaced, they skipped from one to the other, almostwith the quickness and certainty of a dog. On either handthe road is bordered by the lofty forest-trees, with their basesmatted together by the canes. When occasionally a longreach of this avenue could be observed, it presented a curiousscene of uniformity: the white line of logs, narrowing in perspective,became hidden by the gloomy forest, or it terminatedin a zigzag which ascended some steep hill.358 Chloe. Jan. 1835.Although the distance from S. Carlos to Castro is onlytwelve leagues in a straight line, the formation of the roadmust have been a great labour. I was told that several peoplehad formerly lost their lives in attempting to cross theforest. The first who succeeded was an Indian, who cut hisway through the canes in eight days, and reached S. Carlos.He was rewarded by the Spanish government with a grant ofland. During the summer, many of the Indians wanderabout the forests (but chiefly in the higher parts, where thewoods are not quite so thick) in search of the half wild cattlewhich live on the leaves of the cane, and certain trees. It wasone of these huntsmen who by chance discovered, a few yearssince, an English vessel, which had been wrecked on the outercoast. The crew were beginning to fail in provisions, and itis not probable that, without the aid of this man, they wouldhave been able to have extricated themselves from thesescarcely penetrable woods. As it was, one seaman died onthe march, from fatigue. The Indians in these excursionssteer by the sun ; so that if there is a continuance of cloudyweather, they cannot travel.The day was beautiful, and the number of trees whichwere in full flower perfumed the air ; yet even this couldscarcely dissipate the effect arising from the gloomy dampnessof the forest. Moreover, the many dead trunks thatstand like skeletons, never fail to give to these primevalwoods a character of solemnity which is wanting in those ofcountries long civilized. Shortly after sunset we bivouackedfor the night. Our female companion, who was rather good-looking,belonged to one of the most respectable families inCastro : she rode, however, astride, and without shoes orstockings. I was surprised at the total want of pride shownby her and her brother. They brought food with them, butat aU our meals sat watching Mr. King and myself whilsteating, till we were fairly shamed into feeding the wholeparty. The night was cloudless ; and while lying in ourbeds, we enjoyed the sight (and it is a high enjoyment) ofthe multitude of stars which illumined the darkness of theforest.Jan. 1835. chloe. 359January 23d. — We rose early in the morning, andreached the pretty quiet town of Castro by two o'clock. Theold governor had died since our last visit, and in his place aChdeno was acting. We had a letter of introduction to DonPedro. We found him exceedingly hospitable and kind, andwith a degree of disinterestedness which is more common inLa Plata than on this side of the continent. The next dayDon Pedro procured us fresh horses, and offered to accompanyus himself. We proceeded to the south; generallyfollowing the coast, and passing through several hamlets,each with its large barn-Uke chapel, built of wood. NearCastro we saw a remarkably pretty waterfall : it was verysmall, but the water feU in a single sheet into a large circularbasin, around which stately trees, from 100 to 120 feet high,cast a dark shade. At VilipiUi, Don Pedro asked the commandantto give us a guide to Cucao. The old gentlemanoffered to come himself ; but for a long time he would notbelieve that any thing could induce two Englishmen to go tosuch an out of the way place as Cucao. We thus wereaccompanied by the two greatest aristocrats in the country ;as was plainly to be seen in the manner of all the poorerIndians towards them.At Conch, we struck off across the island, and followedintricate winding paths, sometimes passing through magnificentforests, and then opening into pretty cleared spots,abounding with corn and potato crops. In this undulatingwoody country, partially cultivated, there was somethingwhich reminded me of the wilder parts of England, andtherefore had to my eye a most fascinating aspect. AtVilinco, which is situated on the borders of the lake of Cucao,only a few fields are cleared ; and all the inhabitants appearto be Indians. This lake is twelve miles long, and runs in aneast and west direction. From local circumstances, the sea-breezeblows very regularly during the day, and during thenight it falls calm. This has given rise to strange exaggerations: for the phenomenon, as described to us at S. Carlos,was quite a prodigy.360 CHiLOE. Jan. 1835.The road to Cucao was so very bad, that we determinedto embark in a periagua. The commandant, in the mostauthoritative manner, ordered six Indians to get ready topull us over, without deigning to tell them whether theywould be paid. The periagua is a strange rough boat, butthe crew were still stranger ; I doubt if six uglier little menever got into a boat together. They pulled, however, verywell and cheerfully : the stroke-oar gabbled Indian, anduttered strange cries, much after the fashion of a pig-driverwhen driving his pigs. We started with a light breezeagainst us, but yet reached, before late at night, the Capellade Cucao. The country on each side of the lake was one unbrokenforest.In the same periagua with us, a cow was embarked. Toget so large an animal into a small boat appears at first a difficulty; but the Indians managed it in a minute. Theybrought the cow alongside the boat, which was heeled towardsher ; then placing two oars under her belly, with theirends resting on the gunwale, by the aid of these levers theyfairly tumbled the poor beast, heels over head, into the bottomof the boat, and then lashed her down with ropes. AtCucao, we found an uninhabited hovel (which is the residenceof the padre when he pays this Capella a visit), where,lighting a fire, we cooked our supper, and were very comfortable.The district of Cucao is the only inhabited part on thewhole west coast of Chloe. It contains about thirty orforty Indian families, who are scattered along four or fivemiles of the shore. They are very much secluded from the restof Chloe, and have scarcelyany sort of commerce, exceptsome-times in a little oil, which they get from seal-blubber. Theyare pretty well dressed, in clothes of their own manufacture, andthey have plenty to eat. They seemed, however, discontented,yet humble to a degree which it was quite painful to witness.The former feeling is, I think, chiefly to be attributed to theharsh and authoritative manner in which they are treated bytheir rulers. Our companions, although so very civil to us.Jan. 1835, chloe. 361behaved to the poor Indians as if they had been slaves, ratherthan free men. They ordered provisions and the use oftheir horses, without ever condescending to say how much,or indeed whether the owners should be paid at all. In themorning, being left alone with these poor people, v/e soon ingratiatedourselves by presents of cigars and mate. A lump ofwhite sugar was divided between all present, and tasted withthe greatest curiosity. The Indians ended all their complaintsby saying, " and it is only because we are poor Indians,and know nothing; but it was not so when we had aking'sThe next day, after breakfast, we road to Punta Huantamo,a few miles to the northward. The road lay along a verybroad beach, on which, even after so many fine days, a terriblesurf was breaking. I was assured that after a heavygale, the roar can be heard at night even at Castro, a distanceof no less than twenty-one sea miles, across a hilly and woodedcountry. We had some difficulty in reaching the point,owing to the intolerably bad paths ; for every where in theshade the ground soon becomes a perfect quagmire.The point itself is a bold rocky hill. It is covered by aplant allied, I believe, to Bromelia, and called by the inhabitantsChepones. In scrambling through the beds, our handswere very much scratched. I was amused by observing theprecaution our Indian guide took, in turning up his trousers,thinking that they were more delicate than his own hardskin. This plant bears a fruit, in shape like an artichoke,in which a number of seed-vessels are packed; thesecontain a pleasant sweet pulp, here much esteemed. Isaw at Lowe's Harbour, the Chilotans making chilli, orcider, with this fruit : so true is it, as Humboldt remarks,that almost every where man finds means of preparing somekind of beverage from the vegetable kingdom. The savages,however, of Tierra del Fuego, and I believe of AustraUa,have not advanced thus far in the arts.The coast to the northward of Punta Huantamo is exceedinglyrugged and broken, and is fronted by many breakers,362 CHiLOE. Feb. 1835.on which the sea is eternally roaring. Mr. King and myselfwere anxious to return, if it had been possible, on foot alongthis coast; but even the Indians said it is quite impracticable.We were told that men have crossed by strikingdirectly through the woods from Cucao to S. Carlos, butnever by the coast. On these expeditions, the Indians carrywith them only toasted corn, and of this they eat sparinglytwice a day.26th. — Re-embarking in the periagua, we returned acrossthe lake, and then mounted our horses. The whole ofChloe took advantage of this week of unusually fine weather,to clear the ground by burning. In every direction volumesof smoke were curing upwards. Although the inhabitantswere so assiduous in setting fire to every part of the wood,yet I did not see a single fire which they had succeeded inmaking extensive. We dined with our friend the commandant,and did not reach Castro till after dark.The next morning we started very early. After havingridden for some time, we obtained from the brow of a steephill an extensive view (and it is a rare thing on this road) ofthe great forest. Over the horizon of trees, the volcano ofCorcovado, and the great flat-topped one to the northwardstood out in proud pre-eminence ; scarcely another peak inthe long range showed its snowy top. I hope it will belongbefore I forget this farewell view of the magnificentCordillera of Chloe. At night we bivouacked under acloudless sky, and the next morning reached S. Carlos.We arrived on the right day, for before evening heavy raincommenced.February 4th. — Sailed from Chloe. During the lastweek I made several short excursions. One was to examinea great bed of oyster and Venus shells, of the same kindnow living in the neighbouring bay, but elevated 350 feet(measured by the barometer) above the level of the sea.From among these shells large forest-trees were growing.Another ride was to P. Huechucucuy. I had with me aguide who knew the country far too well; for he wouldFeb. 1835. valdivia. 363pertinaciously tell me the Indian name for every little point,rivulet, and creek. In the same manner as in Tierra delFuego, the Indian language appears singularly well adaptedfor attaching hames to the most trivial divisions of the land.I believe every one was glad to say farewell to Chloe. Yetif we could forget the gloom and ceaseless rain of winter,Chloe might pass for a charming island. There is, also,something very attractive in the simplicity and humble politenessof all the poor inhabitants.We steered along shore to the northward, but owing tothick weather, did not reach Valdivia till the night of theeighth. The external features of the whole line of countrywere the same with the central parts of Chloe. The forestwas nowhere cleared away. On the sea-coast bold rockypoints projected, but further inland the older formationswere covered up by plains, belonging to geological periodsof no great antiquity. The next morning, after anchoringin the fine harbour of Valdivia, the boat proceeded to thetown, which is distant about ten miles. We followed thecourse of the river, occasionally passing a few hovels, andpatches of ground cleared out of the otherwise unbrokenforest; and sometimes meeting a canoe with an Indianfamily. The town is situated on the low banks of thestream, and is so completely buried in a wood of apple-trees,that the streets are merely paths in an orchard.I have never seen any country where apple-trees appearedto thrive so well as in this damp part of South America.On the borders of the roads there were many young treeswhich had evidently planted themselves. In Chloe, theinhabitants possess a marvellously short method of makingan orchard. At the lower part of almost every branch, small,conical, brown, wrinkled points project: these are alwaysready to change into roots, as may sometimes be seen,where any mud has been accidentally splashed against thetree. A branch as thick as a man's thigh is chosen, and iscut off just beneath a group of these points; all the smallerbranches are lopped off, and it is then placed about two feet364 VALDiviA. Feb. 1835.deep in the ground : the operation is performed in the earliestpart of the spring. During the succeeding summer, thestump throws out very long shoots, and sometimes evenbears fruit. I was shown one which had produced as manyas twenty-three apples, but this was thought very unusual.The ensuing summer, the first year shoots throw out others,and by the third season the stump is changed (as I havemyself seen) into a well-wooded tree, loaded with anabundance of fruit. I understand there is one kind of apple-treein England, which can be treated in a similar manner ;but I believe the rapidity of growth, and at the same timeproduction of fruit, is very inferior to that of the trees inChloe. An old man near Valdivia illustrated his motto,Necessitate es la madre del invention," by giving an accountof the several useful things he manufactured from hisapples. After making cider, he extracted from the refuse awhite and very finely-flavoured spirit : by another process heprocured a sweet treacle, or, as he called it, honey. He likewiseshowed us wine derived from the same fruit. Thechildren and pigs seemed almost to live, during this season ofthe year, in the orchards.February 11th. — I set out with a guide on a short ride,in which, however, I managed to see singularly little, eitherof the geology of the country, or of its inhabitants. Thereis not much cleared land near Valdivia : after crossing a riverat the distance of a few miles, we entered the forest, and thenpassed only one miserable hovel, before reaching our sleeping-placefor the night. The short difference in latitude, of 150miles, has given another aspect to the forest, compared tothat of Chloe. This is owing to a slightly different proportionin the kinds of trees. The evergreens do not appearto be quite so numerous ; and the forest in consequence iscoloured by a brighter and more lively green. In the samemanner as in Chloe, the lower parts are matted together bycanes. Here also another kind of the same family (resemblingthe bamboo of Brazil, and about twenty feet in height), growsin clusters, and ornaments the banks of some of the streamsFeb. 1835. vALDiviA. 365in a very pretty manner. It is with this plant that the Indiansmake their chuzos, or long tapering spears. Our resting-housewas so dirty that I preferred sleeping outside. Thefirst night on these journeys is generally an uncomfortableone, because one's body is not accustomed to the ticklingand biting of the fleas. I am sure, in the morning, therewas not a space on my legs of the size of a shilling, whichhad not its little red mark, where the flea had feasted.12th. — We continued to ride through the uncleared forest ;only occasionally meeting an Indian on horseback, or a troopof fine mules bringing alerce planks and corn from thesouthern plains. In the afternoon one of the horses knockedup : we were then on the brow of a hill, which commandeda fine view of the Llanos. The view of these open plainswas very refreshing, after being hemmed in and buriedamongst a wilderness of trees. The uniformity of a forestsoon becomes very wearisome. This west coast makes meremember with pleasure the free, unbounded plains of Patagonia;yet with the true spirit of contradiction, I cannotforget how sublime is the silence of the forest. The Llanosare the most fertile and thickly-peopled parts of the country ;as they possess the immense advantage of being nearly freefrom trees. Before leaving the forest we crossed some flatlittle lawns, around which single trees encroached, in thesame manner as in an English park. It is curious how frequentlya plain seems hostile to the growth of trees. Humboldtfound much difficulty in endeavouring to account fortheir presence in certain parts of South America, and theirabsence in other parts. It appears to me, that the levelstate of the surface very frequently determines this point ;but the cause of its doing so I do not know. In the case ofTierra del Fuego, the deficiency of trees on level groundis probably owing to the accumulation of too much moisturein such situations. But to the northward of Maldonado,in Banda Oriental, where we have a fine undulating country,with streams of water (which are themselves fringed with366 vALDiviA. Feb. 1835.woods), the circumstance appears to me, as I have beforestated, of very difficult explanation.On account of the tired horse, I determined to stop closeby, at the Mission of Cudico ; to the friar of which I had aletter of introduction. Cudico is an intermediate districtbetween the forest and the Llanos. There are a good manycottages, with patches of corn and potatoes, nearly all belongingto Indians. The tribes dependant on Valdivia are"reduces y christians." The Indians further northward,about Arauco and Imperial, are still very wild and notconverted ; but they all have much intercourse with theSpaniards. The padre said that the Christian Indians didnot much like coming to mass, but that otherwise theyshow respect for religion. The greatest difficulty is inmaking them observe the ceremonies of marriage. Thewild Indians take as many wives as they can support ; anda cacique will sometimes have more than ten. On enteringhis house, the number may be told by that of the separatefires. This plan must be a good one to prevent quarrelling.Each wife lives a week in turn with the cacique ; but allare employed in weaving ponchos, &c., for his advantage.To be the wife of a cacique is an honour much sought afterby the Indian women.The men of all the tribes wear a coarse woolen poncho ;but those south of Valdivia wear short trousers, and thosenorthward a petticoat, like the philip of the Gauchos. Allhave their long hair bound by a scarlet fillet round theirheads; but otherwise they are uncovered. These Indiansare good-sized men ; their cheek-bones are very prominent,and in general appearance they resemble the great Americanfamily to which they belong; but their physiognomy seemedto me to be slightly different from that of any other tribewhich I had before seen. Their expression is generallygrave and even austere, and possesses much character:this may pass either for honest bluntness, or fierce determination.The long black hair, the grave and much-linedfeatures, and the dark complexion, called to my mind oldFeb. 1835. Indians. 367portraits of James the First ; but very likely the resemblancemay be imaginary. On the road we met with none ofthat humble politeness so universal in Chloe. Some gavetheir " mari mari" (good morning) with promptness, but thegreater number did not seem inclined to offer any salute.This independence of manners is probably a consequenceof their long wars, and the repeated victories which theyalone of all the tribes in America have gained over theSpaniards.I spent the evening very pleasantly, talking with the padre.He was exceedingly kind and hospitable ; and coming fromSantiago, had contrived to surround himself with some fewcomforts. Being a man of some little education, he bitterlycomplained of the total want of society. With no particularzeal for religion, no business or pursuit, how completelymust this man's life be wasted ! Finding nothing whichtempted me either to stay or to proceed, the next day we setout on our return through the forest. We met on the roadseven very wild Indians. Amongst them were some caciques,who had been receiving a yearly stipend, which is paid tosome who have long remained faithful. They were fine-lookingmen, and they rode one after the other, with mostgloomy faces. An old cacique, who headed them, had been,I suppose, more excessively drunk than the rest, for heseemed both extremely grave and very crabbed. Shortlybefore this, two Indians joined us, who were travelling froma distant mission to Valdivia, concerning some lawsuit. Onewas a good-humoured old man, but from his wrinkledbeardless face looked more like an old woman than a man.I frequently presented both of them with cigars ; andthough ready to receive them, and I dare say grateful, theywould hardly condescend to thank me. A Chilotan Indianwould have taken off his hat and given his " Dies lepage !" (May God repay you !) — The travelling was verytedious, both from the badness of the roads, and from thenumber of great fallen trees, which it was necessary eitherto leap over, or to avoid by making long circuits. We slept368 vALDiviA. Feb. 1835.on the road, and next morning reached Valdivia, whence Iproceeded on board.A few days afterwards I crossed the bay with a party ofofficers, and landed near the fort called Niebla. The buildingswere in a most ruinous state, and the gun-carriagesquite rotten. Mr. Wickham remarked to the commandingofficer, that with one discharge they would certainly all fallto pieces. The poor man, trying to put a good face uponit, gravely replied, " No, I am sure, sir, they would standtwo ! " The Spaniards must have intended to have madethis place impregnable. There is now lying in the middleof the courtyard a little mountain of mortar, which rivalsin hardness the rock on which it is placed. It was broughtfrom Chile, and cost seven thousand dollars. The revolutionhaving broken out, prevented its being applied to anypurpose, and now it remains a monument of the fallengreatness of Spain.I wanted to go to a house about a mile and a half distant ;but my guide said it was quite impossible to penetrate thewood in a straight line. He offered, however, to lead me, byfollowing obscure cattle-tracks, the shortest way ; the walk,nevertheless, took no less than three hours ! This man isemployed in hunting strayed cattle ; yet, well as he mustknow the woods, he was not long since lost for two wholedays, and had nothing to eat. These facts convey a goodidea of the impracticability of the forests of these countries.A question often occurred to me — How long does anyvestige of a fallen tree remain ? This man showed me onewhich a party of fugitive royalists had cut down fourteenyears ago ; and taking ,this as a criterion, I should think abole a foot and a half in diameter would in thirty yearspresent a mere ridge of mould.February 20th. — The day has been memorable in theannals of Valdivia, for the most severe earthquake experiencedby the oldest inhabitant. I happened to be on shore,and was lying down in the wood to rest myself. It came onsuddenly, and lasted two minutes; but the time appearedFeb. 1835. GREAT EARTHQUAKE. 369much longer. The rocking of the ground was most sensible.The undulations appeared to my companion and myself tocome from due east ; whilst others thought they proceededfrom south-west ; which shows how difficult it is in all casesto perceive the direction of these vibrations. There was nodifficulty in standing upright, but the motion made me almostgiddy. It was something like the movement of a vessel in alittle cross ripple, or still more like that felt by a person skatingover thin ice, which bends under the weight of his body.A bad earthquake at once destroys the oldest associations: the world, the very emblem of all that is solid,has moved beneath our feet like a crust over a fluid ; — onesecond of time has conveyed to the mind a strange idea ofinsecurity, which hours of reflection would never have created.In the forest, as a breeze moved the trees, I onlyfelt the earth tremble, but saw no consequences from it.Captain FitzRoy and the officers were at the town duringthe shock, and there the scene was more awful ; for althoughthe houses, from being built of wood, did not fall, yet theywere so violently shaken that the boards creaked and rattled.The people rushed out of doors in the greatest alarm. I feellittle doubt that it is these accompaniments which cause thathorror of earthquakes, experienced by all those who havethus seen as well as felt their effects. Within the forestit was a deeply interesting, but by no means an awe-excitingphenomenon. The tides were very curiouslyaffected. The great shock took place at the time of lowwater ; and an old woman who was on the beach told me,that the water flowed very quickly, but not in big waves,to high-water mark, and then as quickly returned to its properlevel ; this was also evident by the line of wet sand.This same kind of quick but quiet movement in the tidehappened a few years since at Chloe, during a slight earthquake,and created much causeless alarm. In the course ofthe evening there were other weaker shocks, all of whichseemed to produce in the harbour the most complicated currents,and some of great strength.VOL. III. 2 B370 CONCEPCION. March, 1835.22d. — We sailed from ValdiA-ia, and on the 4th of March,entered the harbour of Concepcion. While the ship wasbeating up to the anchorage, which is distant several miles, Iwas landed on the island of Quiriquina. The mayor-domo ofthe estate quickly rode down to tell us the terrible news ofthe great earthquake of the 20th ; — " that not a house inConcepcion, or Talcuhano, (the port) was standing; thatseventy villages were destroyed ; and that a great wave hadalmost washed away the ruins of Talcuhano." Of this latterfact I soon saw abundant proof; the whole coast beingstrewed over with timber and furniture, as if a thousandgreat ships had been wrecked. Besides chairs, tables, bookshelves,&c., in great numbers, there were several roofs ofcottages, which had been drifted in an almost entire state.The storehouses at Talcuhano had thirst open, and greatbags of cotton, yerba, and other valuable merchandise, werescattered about on the shore. During my walk round theisland, I observed that numerous fragments of rock, which,from the marine productions adhering to them, mustrecently have been lying in deep water, had been cast uphigh on the beach. One of these was a slab six feet bythree, and about two feet thick.The island itseK as plainly showed the overwhelming powerof the earthquake, as the beach did that of the consequentgreat wave. The ground was fissured in many parts, in northand south Unes ; which direction perhaps was caused by theyielding of the parallel and steep sides of the narrow island.Some of the fissures near the cliffs were a yard wide : manyenormous masses had already fallen on the beach ; and theinhabitants thought, that when the rains commenced, evenmuch greater slips would happen. The effect of the vibrationon the hard primary slate, which composes the foundation ofthe island, was still more curious : the superficial parts ofsome narrow ridges were as completely shivered, as if theyhad been blasted by gunpowder. This effect, which wasrendered very evident by the fresh fractures and displacedsoil, must, during earthquakes, be confined to near the sur-march,1835. effects of earthquake. 371face, for otherwise there would not exist a block of solid rockthroughout Chile. This limited action is not improbable, asit is certain, that the surface of any body, when vibrating, isin a different condition from the central parts. It is, perhaps,owing to this same reason, that earthquakes do not cause quitesuch terrific havoc within deep mines, as would at first havebeen expected. I believe this convulsion has been moreeffectual in lessening the size of the island of Quinquina,than the ordinary wear and tear of the weather and the seaduring the course of an entire century.The next day I landed at Talcuhano, and afterwards rodeto Concepcion. Captain FitzRoy has given so detailed andaccurate an account of the earthquake, that it is almost uselessfor me to say any thing on the subject ; but I will extracta few passages from my journal. Both towns presented themost awful yet interesting spectacle I ever beheld. To aperson who had formerly known the places, it possibly mighthave been still more impressive ; for the ruins were somingled together, and the whole scene possessed so little theair of a habitable place, that it was scarcely possible toimagine its former appearance or condition. The earthquakecommenced at half-past eleven in the forenoon. If ithad happened in the middle of the night the greater numberof the inhabitants (which in this one province amount tomany thousands,* instead of less than a hundred, must haveperished. In Concepcion, each house, or row of houses, stoodby itself, a heap or line of ruins ; but in Talcuhano, owing tothe great wave, little more than one layer of bricks, tiles, andtimber, with here and there part of a wall left standing, couldbe distinguished. From this circumstance, Concepcion, althoughnot so completely desolated, was a more terrible, and ifI may so call it, picturesque sight. The first shock was verysudden. The invariable practice among the residents inMiers estimates them at 40,000 ; but the towns in some of the otherprovinces were Likewise overthrown.2 B 2372 conception. March, 1835.these provinces, of running out of doors at the first tremblingof the ground, alone saved them. The mayor-domo atQuiriquina told me, that the first notice he received of theearthquake, was finding both the horse he rode, and himself,rolling together on the ground. Rising up, he was againthrown down He also told me that some cows, M'hich werestanding on the steep sides of the island, were rolled into thesea. The great wave, however, was far more destructive inthis respect : on one low island near the head of the bay,seventy animals were washed off and drowned. It is generallythought that this has been the M^orst earthquake everrecorded in Chile ; but as the very bad ones occur only afterlong intervals, this cannot easily be known ; nor indeed woulda much more severe shock have made any great difference,for the ruin is now complete.After vicAving Concepcion, I cannot understand how thegreater number of inhabitants escaped unhurt. The housesin many parts fell outwards ; thus forming in the middle ofthe streets little hillocks of brickwork and rubbish. Mr.Rous, the English consul, told us that he was at breakfastwhen the first movement warned him to run out. He hadscarcely reached the middle of the courtyard, when one sideof his house came thundering down. He retained presenceof mind to remember, that if he once got on the top of thatpart which had already fallen, he should be safe. Notbeing able, from the motion of the ground, to stand, hecrawled up on his hands and knees ; and no sooner had heascended this little eminence, than the other side of the housefell in, the great beams sweeping close in front of his head.With his eyes blinded, and his mouth choked with the cloudof dust which darkened the sky, at last he gained the street.As shock succeeded shock, at the interval of a few minutes,no one dared approach the shattered ruins ; and no one knewwhether his dearest friends and relations might not be perishingfrom the want of help. The thatched roofs fell over thefires, and flames burst forth in all parts. Hundreds knewMarch 1835. effects of earthquake. 3^3themselves to be ruined, and few had the means of providingfood for the day. Can a more miserable and fearful scene beimagined ?Earthquakes alone are sufficient to destroy the prosperityof any country. If, for instance, beneath England, the nowinert subterranean forces should exert those powers whichmost assuredly in former geological ages they have exerted,how completely would the entire condition of the country bechanged ! What would become of the lofty houses, thickly-packedcities, great manufactures, the beautiful public andprivate edifices ? If the new period of disturbance were firstto commence by some great earthquake in the dead of thenight, how terrific would be the carnage ! England would atonce be bankrupt; all papers, records, and accounts wouldfrom that moment be lost. Government being unable tocollect the taxes, and failing to maintain its authority, thehand of violence and rapine would go uncontrolled Inevery large town famine would be proclaimed, pestilence anddeath following in its train.Captain FitzRoy has given an account of the great wave,which, travelling from seaward, burst over Talcuhano. Inthe middle of the bay it was seen as one unbroken swell ofthe water ; but on each side, meeting with resistance, itcurled over, and tore up cottages and trees as it swept onwardswith overwhelming force. At the head of the bay it iseasy to imagine the fearful hne of white breakers which threetimes rushed over, and almost obliterated, the ruins of theformer town. Pools of salt water yet remained in thestreets ; and children, making boats with old tables andchairs, appeared as happy as their parents were miserable.It was, however, exceedingly interesting to observe howactive and cheerful all appeared, after their heavy misfortune.It was remarked with much truth, that from the destructionbeing universal, no one individual was humbled more thananother, or could suspect his friends of coldness; and thislatter effect is perhaps the most grievous one of the loss ofwealth. Mr. Rous, and a large party whom he kindly took374 CONCEPCION. March, 1835.under his protection, lived for the first week in a gardenbeneath some apple-trees. At first they were as merry as ifit had been a picnic ; bat soon afterwards heavy rain causedmuch discomfort, for they were absolutely without shelter.In Captain FitzRoy's paper it is said that two explosions,one like a column of smoke, and another Uke the blowing ofa great whale, were seen in the bay of Concepcion. Thewater also appeared every where to be boiling ; and it " becameblack, and exhaled a most disagreeable sulphureoussmell." I am informed by Mr. Arson, that during the earthquakeof 1822 these last-mentioned circumstances occurredin the bay of Valparaiso. The two great explosions in thefirst case must no doubt be connected with deep-seatedchanges ; but the bubbling water, its black colour and fetidsmell, the usual concomitants of a severe earthquake, may, Ithink, be attributed to the disturbance of mud containingorganic matter in decay. In the bay of Callao, during acalm day, I noticed, that as the ship dragged her cableover the bottom, its course was marked by a Une of bubbles.The lower orders in Talcuhano thought that the earthquakewas caused by some old Indian women, who twoyears ago having been offended, stopped the volcano ofAntuco. This silly belief is curious, because it shows thatexperience has taught them to observe the constant relationbetween the suppressed activity of volcanoes, and the tremblingof the ground. It Meas necessary to apply the witchcraftto the point where their knowledge stopped ; and thiswas the closing of the volcanic vent. This saying is themore odd in this particular instance, because the result ofCaptain FitzRoy's investigation was to discountenance thebeef that Antuco (whatever might have been the case withthe volcanoes further northward) was any way affected.The town of Concepcion was built in the usual Spanishfashion, with all the streets running at right angles to eachother. One set ranged S.W. by W. and Nee. by E., andthe other N.W. by N. and S.E. by S. The walls in theformer direction certainly stood better than those in theMarch, 1835. direction of vibration. 375other. Captain FitzRoy* has Ukewise remarked, that thegreater number of the masses of brickwork were throwndown towards the Nee. Both these circumstances perfectlyagree with the general idea of the undulation havingcome from the S.W. ; in which quarter subterranean noiseswere also sometimes heard. It is evident on this supposition,that the N.W. and S. E. walls, being nearly coincidentwdth the hne of undulation (or wdth the crests ofthe successive waves), would be much more likely to fallthan those which had their extremities presented towardsthe point whence the vibration proceeded ; for, in the firstcase, the whole wall would be thrown at the same momentout of its perpendicular. This may be illustrated by placingbooks edgewise on a carpet, and then, after the mannersuggested by Mitchell, imitating the undulations of anearthquake : it will be found, that they fall with more orless readiness, according to their direction. The fissures inthe ground, though not uniform, generally had a S.E. andN.W. direction 5 1 and therefore they corresponded to thelines of principal flexure. Bearing in mind all these circumstances,which so clearly point to the S.W. as the chieffocus of disturbance, it is a very interesting fact that theisland of S. Maria situated in that quarter, was during thegeneral uplifting of the land (to which I shall presentlyrefer) raised to nearly three times the altitude of any otherpart of the coast.The different resistance offered by the walls, according totheir direction, was well exemplified in the case of the cathedral.The side which fronted the Nee. presented a grandpile of ruins, in the midst of which door-cases and masses oftimber stood up, as if floating in a stream. Some of theangular blocks of brickwork were of great dimensions ; andthey had been rolled to a distance on the level plaza, likefragments of rock round the base of some high mountof Surveying Voyages of Adventure and Beagle by CaptainFitzRoy, Royal Geography Journal, vol. vi., p. 320.f Ditto, p. 327, ft passim.376 CONCEPCION. March, 1835.tain. The side walls, though exceedingly fractured, yet remainedstanding ; but the vast buttresses (at right angles tothem, and therefore parallel to the walls that fell) were inmany cases cut clean off, as if by a chisel, and hurled to theground.Some square ornaments on the coping of these samewalls were moved by the earthquake into a diagonal position.The buttresses of the church of La Mercer, at Valparaiso,and some heavy pieces of furniture in the rooms, weresimilarly affected by the shock of 1822.* Mr. Lyell fhas also given a drawing of an obelisk in Calabria, of whichthe separate stones were partially turned round. In theseinstances, the displacement at first appears to be owing to avortices movement beneath each point thus affected ; butsuch can hardly be the case. May it not be caused by atendency in each stone to arrange itself in some particularposition, with respect to the lines of vibration, — in amanner somewhat similar to pins on a sheet of paper, oron a board, when it is shaken ? Generally speaking, archeddoorways or windows stood much better than any other kindof building. Nevertheless, a poor lame old man, who hadbeen in the habit, during trifling shocks, of crawling to acertain doorway, was this time crushed to pieces.I have not attempted to give any detailed description ofthe appearance of Concepcion, for I feel it is quite impossibleto convey the mingled feelings with which one beholds sucha spectacle. Several of the officers visited it before me, buttheir strongest language failed to communicate a just idea ofthe desolation. It is a bitter and humiliating thing to seeworks, which have cost men so much time and labour, overthrownin one minute ; yet compassion for the inhabitants isalmost instantly forgotten, from the interest excited in findingthat state of things produced in a moment of time, which oneis accustomed to attribute to a succession of ages. In myMiers's Chile, vol. i., p. 392.f Lyell's Principles of Geology, chap, xv., book ii.March, 1835. earthquake waves. 377opinion, we have scarcely beheld since leaving England, any-othersight so deeply interesting.In almost every severe earthquake which has been described,the neighbouring waters of the sea are said to havebeen greatly agitated. The disturbance seems generally,as in the case of Concepcion, to have been of two kinds :first, at the instant of the shock, the water swells high up onthe beach, with a gentle motion, and then as quietlyretreats ; secondly, some little time afterwards, the wholebody of the sea retires from the coast, and then returnsin great waves of overwhelming force. The first and lessregular movement seems to be an immediate consequence ofthe earthquake differently affecting a fluid and a solid, so thattheir respective levels are slightly deranged. But the secondcase is a far more important phenomenon, and at first appearsof less easy explanation. In reading accounts ofearthquakes, and especially of those on the west coastof America, as collated from various authors by Sir W.Parish,* it is certain that the first great movement ofthe waters has been that of retiring. Several hypotheseshave been invented to explain this fact. Some have supposedit owing to a vertical oscillation in the land, the waterretaining its level : but this can hardly happen, even on amoderately shoal coast; for the water near the land mustpartake of the motion of the bottom. Moreover, asMr. Lyell has urged, a change of level in the land will notaccount for movements in the sea, of a similar nature, affectingislands distant from the line of uplifted coast. This occurredat Madeira during the famous Lisbon earthquake. JuanFernandez also offers a parallel instance ; for the sea wasdisturbed there much in the same manner as on the coastof Chile.The whole phenomenon, it appears to me, is due to a commonundulation in the water, proceeding from a line or point ofSir W. Parish had the kindness to lend me the original manuscript,which was read before the Geological Society, March eth, 1833.■f Lyell's Geology, book ii., ch. xvi.378 CONCEPCION. March, 1835.disturbance, some little way distant. If the waves sent oflFfrom the paddles of a steam-vessel be watched breaking onthe sloping shore of a still river, the water will be seen firstto retire two or three feet, and then to return in little breakers,precisely analogous to those consequent on an earthquake.From the oblique direction in which the waves are sent offfrom the paddles, the vessel has proceeded a long way ahead,before the undulation reaches the shore ; and hence it is atonce manifest, that this movement bears no relation to theactual displacement of the fluid from the bulk of the vessel.Indeed, it seems a general circumstance, that in all caseswhere the equilibrium of an undulation is thus destroyed,the water is drawn from the resisting surface to form theadvancing breaker,* Considering then a wave produced byan earthquake as an ordinary undulation proceeding fromsome point or line in the offing, we can see the cause, firstof its occurrence some time after the shock ; secondly, ofits affecting the shores of the mainland and of outlying isletsin a uniform manner — namely, the water retiring first, andthen returning in a mountainous breaker ; and lastly, of itssize being modified (as appears to be the case) by theform of the neighbouring coast. For instance Talcuhanoand Callao are situated at the head of great shoaling bays,and they have always suffered from this phenomenon ;whereas, the town of Valparaiso, which is seated close on theborder of a profound ocean, though shaken by the severestearthquakes, has never been overwhelmed by one of theseterrific deluges. On this view, we have only to imagine, inthe case of Concepcion, a point of disturbance in the bottomof the sea in a south-west direction, whence the wave wasseen to travel, and where the land was elevated to a greaterheight than any other part, — and the whole phenomenon willbe explained.It is probable that near every coast, the chief line of disham indebted to Mr. Wheel for explaining to me the probablemovements on the shore, of an undulation of which the equilibrium hasbeen destroyed.March 1835. volcanic phenomena. 379turbaned would be situated at that distance in the offing,where the fluid which was most agitated, from overlying theshallow bottom near the land, joined on to that part whichcovered the depths (but slightly moved) of the ocean. Inall distant parts of the coast the small oscillations of thesea, both at the moment of the great shock, and during thelesser following ones, would be confounded with the undulationpropagated from the focus of disturbance, and hencethe series of movements would be undistinguishable.The most remarkable effect (or perhaps speaking more correctly,cause) of this earthquake was the permanent elevationof the land. Captain FitzRoy having twice visited the islandof Santa Maria, for the purpose of examining every circumstancewith extreme accuracy, has brought a mass of evidencein proof of such elevation, far more conclusive thanthat on which geologists on most other occasions place implicitfaith. The phenomenon possesses an uncommondegree of interest, from this particular part of the coast ofChile having previously been the theatre of several earthquakesof the worst class. It is almost certain, from thealtered soundings, together with the circumstance of thebottom of the bay near Pence, consisting of hard stone,that there has been an uplifting to the amount of four fathoms,since the famous convulsion of 1751. With this additionalinstance fresh before us, we may assume as probable, accordingto the principles laid down by Mr. Lyell,* other small successiveelevations, and may fearlessly maintain that the problemof the raised shells recorded by Ulloa, is explained.Some of the consequences which may be deduced from thephenomena connected with this earthquake are most importantin a geological point of view ; but in the present work Icannot do more than simply allude to the results. Althoughit is known that earthquakes have been felt over enormousLyell's Geology, book ii., chap. xvi.t I saw these shells in very great quantities on the flanks of the islandof Quinquina.380 CONCEPCION. March 1835.spaces, and strange subterranean noises likewise heard overnearly equal areas, yet few cases are on record of volcanoes,very far distant from each other, bursting out at the samemoment of time. In this instance, however, at the samehour when the whole country around Concepcion waspermanently elevated, a train of volcanoes situated in theAndes, in front of Chloe, instantaneously spouted out adark column of smoke, and during the subsequent yearcontinued in uncommon activity. It is, moreover, a veryinteresting circumstance, that, in the immediate neighbourhood,these eruptions entirely relieved the trembling ground,although at a little distance, and in sight of the volcanoes,the island of Chloe was strongly affected. To the northward,a volcano burst out at the bottom of the sea adjoiningthe island of Juan Fernandez, and several of the great chimneysin the Cordillera of central Chile commenced a freshperiod of activity. We thus see a permanent elevation ofthe land, renewed activity through habitual vents, and asubmarine outburst, forming parts of one great phenomenon.The extent of country throughout which the subterraneanforces were thus unequivocally displayed, measures 700 by400 geographical miles. From several considerations, whichI have not space here to enter on, and especially from thenumber of intermediate points whence liquefied matter wasejected, we can scarcely avoid the conclusion, howeverfearful it may be, that a vast lake of melted matter, of anarea nearly doubling in extent that of the Black Sea, isspread out beneath a mere crust of solid land.The elevation of the land to the amount of some feetduring these earthquakes, appears to be a paroxysmal movement,in a series of lesser and even insensible steps, bywhich the whole west coast of South America has beenraised above the level of the sea. In the same manner,the most violent explosion from any volcano is merely onein a series of lesser eruptions : and we have seen that boththese phenomena, which are in so many ways related, areparts of one common action, only modified by local circum-march,1835. volcanic phenomena. 381stances. With respect to the cause of the paroxysmalconvulsion in particular portions of the great area whichis simultaneously affected, it can be shown to be extremelyprobable, that it is owing to the giving way of the superincumbentstrata, (and this giving way probably is a consequenceof the tension from the general elevation) and theirinterjection by fluid rock — one step in the formation of amountain chain. On this view we are led to conclude, thatthe unstratified mass forming the axis of any mountain,has been pumped in when in a fluid state, by as manyseparate strokes as there were earthquakes. For instance,in the case of Concepcion, during the few months subsequentto the great shock, upwards of three hundredtremors of the ground were felt, each of which indicated afresh fracture, and injection of the fluid stone. It is a caseprecisely analogous to what happens in all bad eruptions,which are invariably followed by a succession of smallerones : the difference is, that in the volcano the lava isejected, while in the formation of a mountain chain it isinjected. This view of the extremely gradual elevation ofa line of mountains, will alone explain the difficulty (which,as far as I am aware, has never been attempted to be solved)of the axis consisting of rock which has become solid underthe pressure of the superincumbent strata, while yet thesesame strata, in their present inclined and vertical positions,cannot possibly cover more than a small portion of thataxis.CHAPTER XVII.Valparaiso — Passage of Andes by Portillo pass — Sagacity of mules —Mountain torrents — Mines, how discovered — Marine alluvium in valleys— Effect of snow on surface — Geology, fossil shells, double range,two periods of elevation — Red snow — Winds on the crest — Snow thawingin pinnacles — Dry and clear atmosphere — Electricity — Pampas —Zoology of opposite sides of Andes — Uniformity of Patagonia — LocustsGreat bugs — Mendoza — Uspallata — Silicified trees in vertical position— Indian ruins — Change of climate — Earthquake arching bed ofriver — Cumbre — Valparaiso.PASSAGE OF CORDILLERA.March 7th, 1835. — We staid only three days at Concepcion,and then sailed for Valparaiso. The wind beingnortherly, we only reached the mouth of the harbour of Conceptionbefore it was dark. Being very near the land, anda fog coming on, the anchor was dropped. Presently a largeAmerican whaler appeared close alongside of us ; and weheard the Yankee swearing at his men, to make them keepquiet, whilst he listened where the breakers were. CaptainFitzRoy hailed him in a loud clear voice, to anchor wherehe then was. The poor man must have thought the voicecame from the shore : such a Babel of cries issued at oncefrom the ship — every one hallooing out, " Let go theanchor ! veer cable ! shorten sail \" It was the most laughablething I ever heard. If the ship's crew had been allcaptains, and no men, there covdd not have been a greateruproar of orders. We afterwards found that the matestuttered. I suppose aU hands were assisting him in givinghis orders.On the 11th we anchored at Valparaiso; and two daysafterwards I set out on an excursion to cross the Cordillera.I proceeded to Santiago, where Mr. Caldcleugh most kindlyMarch, 1835. portico pass. 383assisted me in every possible way, in making the little preparationswhich were necessary. In this immediate part ofChile there are two passes across the Andes to Mendoza,and the plains on the opposite side. The one most commonlyused, namely, that of Aconcagua, or Uspallata, issituated some way to the northward of the capital : the other,called the Portillo, is to the southward, and less distant.The latter is, however, rather more lofty, and from the doublechain, more dangerous during a snow-storm. For thesereasons it is but little used, especially late in the season.March 18th. — We set out for the Portillo pass. LeavingSantiago we crossed the wide burnt-up plain on which thatcity stands, and in the afternoon arrived at the Maypo, oneof the principal rivers in Chile. The valley, at the pointwhere it enters the first Cordillera, is bounded on each sideby lofty barren mountains; and although not broad, it isvery fertile. Numerous cottages were surrounded by vines,and by orchards of apple, nectarine, and peach trees ; theboughs of the latter breaking with the weight of the beautifulripe fruit.In the evening we passed the custom-house, where ourluggage was examined. The frontier of Chile is better guardedby the Cordillera, than by the waters of the sea. There arevery few valleys which lead to the central ranges, and, exceptby these, the mountains are far too steep and loftyfor any beast of burden to pass over them. The customhouseofficers were very civil; which was perhaps partlyowing to the passport which the President of the republichad given me; but I must also express my admiration atthe natural politeness of almost every Chilenono. In thisinstance the contrast with the same class of men in mostother countries was strongly marked. I may mention ananecdote with which I was much pleased at the time. Wemet near Mendoza a little and very fat negress, riding astrideon a mule. She had a goitre so enormous, that it wasscarcely possible to avoid gazing at her for a moment ; butmy two companions almost instantly, by way of apology,384 PASSAGE OF CORDILLERA. March, 1835.made the common salute of the country, by taking off theirhats. Where would one of the lower classes in Europehave shown such feeling politeness to a poor and miserableobject of a degraded race?At night we slept at a cottage. Our manner of travellingwas delightfully independent. In the inhabited partswe bought a little firewood, hired pasture for the animals,and bivouacked in the corner of the same field with them.Carrying an iron pot, we cooked and ate our supper underthe cloudless sky, and knew no trouble. My companionswere Marian Gonzales, who had formerly accompanied me,and an '' arriero," with his ten mules and a '^ marina."The madrina (or godmother) is a most important personage.She is an old steady mare, with a little bell round herneck ; and wheresoever she goes, the mules, like good children,follow her. If several large troops are turned into onefield to graze, in the morning the muleteer has only to leadthe madras a little apart, and tinkle their bells ; and, althoughthere may be two or three hundred mules together,each immediately knows its own bell, and separates itselffrom the rest. The affection of these animals for theirmadras saves infinite trouble. It is nearly impossible tolose an old mule ; for if detained for several hours by force,she will, by the power of smell, like a dog, track out hercompanions, or rather the madrina; for, according to themuleteer, she is the chief object of affection. The feeling,however, is not of an individual nature ; for I believe I amright in saying, that any animal with a beU will serve asmadrina. In a troop each animal carries, on a level road, acargo weighing 416 pounds (more than twenty-nine stone);but in a mountainous country a hundred pounds less.* Yetwith what delicate slim limbs, without any proportional bulkof muscle, these animals support so great a burden! TheThroughout Chile, except between Santiago and Valparaiso, everythingis conveyed on mules. This is an expensive method of transport,but unavoidable without good roads and improved waggons. In a troopof mules, there is generally a muleteer to each six animals.March, 1835. mountain torrents. 385mule always appears to me a most surprising animal. Thata hybrid should possess more reason, memory, obstinacy,social affection, and powers of muscular endurance, thaneither of its parents, seems to indicate that art has here out-masterednature. Of our ten animals, six were intendedfor riding and four for carrying cargoes, each taking turnabout.We carried a good deal of food, in case we shouldbe snowed up, as the season was rather late for passing thePortillo.March 19th. — We rode during this day to the last, andtherefore most elevated house in the valley. The number ofinhabitants became scanty; but wherever water could bebrought on the land, it was very fertile. All the valleys inthe Cordillera agree in the same kind of structure. Anirregularly-stratified mass of well-rounded shingle, togetherwith a Uttle mud and sand, fills up the bottom to the depthof some hundred feet. This deposit follows the course ofthe valley, sloping upwards with a most gradual and gentleinclination. The rivers have removed a large part in thecentre; thus leaving a terrace of equal height, but varyingwidth, on each side. This narrow space between the cliffsbordering the bed of the river, and the foot of the mountains,is the only part fit for cultivation, and on it likewisethe road is carried.The rivers, such as the Maypo, which flow in thesevalleys, should rather be called mountain torrents. Theirinclination is very great, and their water the colour of mud.The roar which the Maypo made, as it rushed over the greatrounded fragments, was like that of the sea. Amidst thedin of rushing waters, the noise from the stones, as theyrattled one over another, was most distinctly audible evenat a distance. This rattling noise, night and day, may beheard along the whole course of the torrent. The soundspoke eloquently to the geologist : the thousands and thousandsof stones, which, striking against each other, makethe one dull uniform sound, are all hurrying in one direction.It is like thinking of time, where the minute thatVOL. III. 2 c386 PASSAGE OF CORDILLERA. March, 1835.now glides past is irrecoverable. So is it with these stones;the ocean is their eternity, and each note of that wild musictells of one other step towards their destiny.It is not possible for the mind to comprehend, exceptby a slow process, any effect which is produced by a causerepeated so often, that the multiplier itself ceases to conveyany more definite idea, than the savage receives when hepoints to the hairs of his head. As often as I have seen bedsof mud, sand, and shingle, accumulated to the thickness ofmany thousand feet, I have felt inclined to exclaim thatcauses, such as the present rivers and the present beaches,could never have ground down such masses. But, on theother hand, when listening to the rattling noise of thesetorrents, and calling to mind that whole races of animalshave passed away from the surface of the globe, duringthe period throughout which, night and day, these stoneshave gone rattling onwards in their course, I have thoughtto myself, can any mountains, any continent, withstand suchwaste ?In this part of the valley, the mountains on each side arefrom about three to six or eight thousand feet high : theiroutline is rounded, but with steep and bare flanks. Thegeneral colour of the rock is a dullish purple, and thestratification very distinct. If the scenery is not beautiful,it is remarkable and grand. We met during the day severalherds of cattle, which men were driving down from thehigher valleys in the Cordillera. This sign of the approachingwinter hurried our steps, more than was convenient forgeological purposes. The house where we slept was situatedat the foot of a mountain, on the summit of which arethe mines of S. Pedro de Nolasko.Sir F. Head wonders how mines have been discoveredin situations so extraordinary, as the bleak summitof the mountain of S. Pedro de Nolasko. In thefirst place, metallic veins in this country are generallyharder than the surrounding strata : hence, during thegradual degradation of the hills, they project above theMarch, 1835. discovery of mines. 387surface of the ground. Secondly, almost every labourer,especially in the northern parts of Chile, understands somethingabout the appearance of ores. In the great miningprovinces of Coquimbo and Copiapopo, firewood is very scarce,and men are employed in searching for it over every hill anddale; and by this means nearly all the richest mines havethere been discovered. Chanuncillo, from which silver, tothe value of many hundred thousand pounds has beenraised in the course of a few years, was thus discovered :a man having thrown a stone at his loaded donkey, afterwardsthought that it was very heaves, and picking it upagain, he found it was full of pure silver. The vein occurredat no great distance, standing up like a wedge of silver.The miners also, on Sundays, taking a crowbar with them,often set out on such discoveries. In the south part ofChile, the men who drive cattle into the Cordillera, and whofrequent every ravine where there is a little pasture, are theusual agents.March 20th. — ^As we ascended the valley, the vegetation,with the exception of a few pretty alpine flowers, becameexceedingly scanty ; and of birds, animals, or insects, scarcelyone could be seen. The lofty mountains, their summitsmarked with a few patches of snow, stood well separatedfrom each other; the valleys being filled up with an immensethickness of stratified alluvium. I may here brieflyremark, without detailing the reasons on which the opinionis grounded, that in all probability this matter was accumulatedat the bottoms of deep arms of the sea, whichrunning from the inland basins, penetrated to the axis ofthe Cordillera, — in a similar manner to what now happensin the southern part of this same great range. This fact,in itself most curious, as preserving a record of a veryancient state of things, possesses a high theoretical interest,when considered in relation to the kind of elevation bywhich the present great altitude of these mountains has beenattained.2 c 2388 PASSAGE OF CORDILLERA. March, 1835.The features in the scenery of the Andes which struck memost, as contrasted with the few other mountain chains withwhich I am acquainted, were, — the flat fringes sometimesexpanding into narrow plains on each side the valleys, — thebright colours, chiefly red and purple, of the utterly bareand precipitous hills, — the grand and continuous wall-likedikes, — the strongly-marked strata which, when nearly vertical,form the most picturesque and wild pinnacles, butwhere less inclined, great massive mountains ; the latteroccupying the outskirts of the range, and the former themore lofty and central parts, — lastly, the smooth conicalpiles of fine and brightly-coloured detritus, which slope ata high angle from the flanks of the mountains to their bases,some of the piles having a height of more than two thousandfeet.I frequently observed both in Tierra del Fuego, andwithin the Andes, that where the rock was covered duringthe greater part of the year with snow, it was shivered inavery extraordinary manner into small angular fragments.Scoresbyby* has observed the same fact in Spitsbergen: hesays, " The invariably broken state of the rocks appeared tohave been the effect of frost. On calcareous rocks, someof which are not impervious to moisture, the effect is suchas might have been expected ; but how frost can operate inthis way on quartz is not so easily understood." The wholephenomenon appears to me rather obscure : for that part ofthe mountain which is covered during many months by amantle of snow, must be less subject to repeated and greatchanges of temperature than any other, yet it is the mostaffected. I have sometimes thought, that the earth andfragments of stone lying on the surface, were perhaps lesseffectually removed by means of slowly percolating snow-watersthan by the agency of rain, and therefore that theScoresbyby's Arctic Regions, vol. i., p. 122.t I have heard it remarked in Shropshire, that the water, when theSevern is flooded from long-continued rain, is much more turbid, thanwhen it proceeds from the snow melting on the Welsh mountains. TheMarch, 1835. passage of Cordillera. 389appearance of a quicker decay of the solid rock may bedeceptive. Whatever the cause may be, the quantity ofcrumbling stone on the Cordillera is very great. Occasionallyin the spring, masses of such matter slide downthe mountains, and cover the snow-drifts in the valleys ;thus forming natural ice-houses. We rode over one, theelevation of which was far below the limit of perpetualcongelation.As the evening drew to a close, we reached the Vale delYes. This is a very singular basin, which must have oncebeen a very deep and large lake : the barrier is formed by ahuge mountain of alluvium, on one side of which the riverhas cut a gorge. The plain is covered by a little dry pasture,and amidst the surrounding rocky deserts we had thepleasant sight of a herd of cattle. The valley takes its nameof Yes from a great bed, I should think at least two thousandfeet thick, of white, and in some parts quite pure,gypsum. We slept with a party of men, who were employedin loading mules with this substance, which is usedin the manufacture of wine.March 21st. — We set out early in the morning, andcontinued to follow the course of the river, which by thistime had become small, till we arrived at the foot of theridge that separates the waters flowing into the Pacific andAtlantic oceans. The road, which as yet had been good,with a steady but very gradual ascent, now changed into asteep zigzag track. The Cordillera in this part consists oftwo principal ranges ; the passes across which attain respectivelyan elevation of 13,210 and 14,365 feet.* Thefirst great line (consisting of course of many subordinateones) is called Peuquenes. It divides the waters, and there-floodsalso, in the former case, are said to be more destructive to theland. D'Orbigny (vol. i., p. 184), in explaining the cause of the variouscolours of the rivers in South America, remarks that those vrith blue orclear water, have their source in the Cordillera, where the snow melts.Measurements made by Dr. Gillies ; Edinburgh Journal of Nat.and Geograph. Science, August, 1830.390 PASSAGE OF CORDILLERA. March, 1835.fore likewise the republics of Chile and Mendoza. To theeastward, a mountainous and elevated region separates itfrom the second range (called the Portillo) overlooking thePampas. The streams from the intermediate tract find apassage a little way to the southward through this secondline.I will here give a very brief sketch of the geologicalstructure of these mountains : first, of the Peuquenes, orwestern line ; for the constitution of the two ranges istotally different. The lowest stratified rock is a dull red orpurple claystone porphyry, of many varieties, alternatingwith conglomerates, and breccia composed of a similarsubstance : this formation attains a thickness of more thanamile. Above it there is a grand mass of gypsum, whichalternates, passes into, and is replaced by, red sandstone,conglomerates, and black calcareous clay-slate. I hardlydare venture to guess the thickness of this second division ;but I have already said some of the beds of gypsum aloneattain a thickness of at least two thousand feet. Even atthe very crest of the Peuquenes, at the height of 13,210feet, and above it, the black clay-slate contained numerousmarine remains, amongst which a grypheea is the most abundant,Ukewise shells, resembling turritellee, terebratulae, andan ammonite. It is an old story, but not the less wonderful,to hear of shells, which formerly were crawling aboutat the bottom of the sea, being now elevated nearly fourteenthousand feet above its level. The formation probablyie of the age of the central parts of the secondary series ofEurope.These great piles of strata have been penetrated, upheaved,and overturned, in the most extraordinary manner,by masses of injected rock, equalling mountains in size. Onthe bare sides of the hills, complicated dikes, and wedgesof variously-coloured porphyries and other stones, are seentraversing the strata in every possible form and direction ;proving also by their intersections, successive periods ofviolence. The rock which composes the axis of these greatMarch, 1835. geology. 391lines of dislocation, at a distance very closely resemblesgranite, but on examination, it is found rarely to containany quartz ; and instead of ordinary felspar, albite.The metamorphic action has been very great, as mighthave been expected from the close proximity of such grandmasses of rock, which were injected when in a liquefiedstate from heat. When it is known, first, that the stratifiedporphyries have flowed as streams of submarine lava underan enormous pressure, and that the mechanical beds separatingthem owe their origin to explosions from the samesubmarine craters ; secondly, that the whole mass in thelower part has generally been so completely fused into onesolid rock by metamorphic action, that the lines of divisioncan only be traced with much difficulty ; and thirdly, thatmasses of porphyry, undistinguishable by their mineralogicalcharacters from the two first kinds, have been subsequentlyinjected; — the extreme complication of the whole will readilybe believed.We now come to the second range, which is of evengreater altitude than the first. Its nucleus in the sectionseen in crossing the Portillo pass, consists of magnificentpinnacles of coarsely-crystallized red granite. On the easternflank, a few patches of mica slate still adhere to the unstratifiedmass ; and at the foot a stream of basaltic lava hasburst forth at some remote period, — perhaps when the seacovered the wide surface of the Pampas. On the westernside of the axis, between the two ranges, laminated fine sandstonehas been penetrated by immense granitic dikes proceedingfrom the central mass, and has thus been converted intogranular quartz rock. The sandstone is covered by othersedimentary deposits, and these again by a coarse conglomerate,the vast thickness of which I will not attempt even toestimate. All these coarse mechanical beds dip from thered granite directly towards the Peuquenes range, as ifthey passed beneath it ; though such is not the case.On examining the pebbles composing this conglomerate(which, to my surprise, betrayed no signs of metamorphic392 PASSAGE OF CORDILLERA. March, 1835.action), I was astonished to find perfectly rounded massesof the black calcareous clay-slate with organic remains, — thesame rock which I had just crossed 171 situ on the Peuquenes.These phenomena compel us to arrive at the following conclusion: — that the Peuquenes existed as dry land for a longperiod anterior to the formation of the second range, andthat, during this period, immense quantities of shingle wereaccumulated at its submarine flank. The action of a disturbingforce then commenced : these more modern depositswere injected by dikes, altered by heat, and tilted towardsthe line whence, in the form of sediment and pebbles, theyhad originally proceeded, — thus making the offspring at firstappear older than its parent. This second, grand, and subsequentUne of elevation is parallel to the first and moreancient one.I will only make one other geological observation: thePortio chain in the neighbourhood of the pass is rathermore elevated than the Peuquenes, yet the waters of theintermediate district have burst a passage through it. Onthe supposition of a subsequent and gradual elevation of thesecond line, this can be understood ; for a chain of isletswould at first appear, and as these were lifted up, the tideswould always be working out deeper and broader channelsbetween them. At the present day, even in the most retiredsounds on the southern coast, the currents in the transversebreaks which connect the longitudinal channels, is so strong,that I have heard of one instance where a small vessel undersail was whirled round and round.Mr. Pentland,* when describing an hydrographical phenomenonof a nearly similar kind, but on an infinitelygrander scale, which occurs in Bolivia, says, ^'This verycurious fact, of rivers escaping through such an immensemountain-mass as the Bolivian Cordillera, is perhaps one ofthe most important points connected with the physicalgeography of this portion of the Andes, and deserves to beJournal of the Royal Geograph. Society for 1835.March, 1835. passage of Cordillera. 393noticed at greater length." It would be extremely rash toaffirm that the eastern chain in Bolivia, like that of centralChile, must be of subsequent origin to the western one, orthat nearer to the Pacific : but excepting through the explanationabove offered, the circumstance that rivers flowing froma less elevated chain, should penetrate one far more lofty,appears to me quite inexplicable.About noon we began the tedious ascent of the Peuquenes,and then for the first time experienced some little difficulty inour respiration. The mules would halt every fifty yards, andthen the poor willing animals after a few seconds started oftheir own accord again. The short breathing from the rarefiedatmosphere is called by the Chilenos " puna ;" and they havemost ridiculous notions concerning its origin. Some say,all the waters here have puna ;" others that " where thereis snow there is puna ;" — and this no doubt is true. It isconsidered a kind of disease, and I was shown the crossesover the graves of some who had died " punado." Exceptingperhaps in the case of a person suffering from some organicdisease of the heart or chest, I should think this must be anerroneous conclusion. A person near death, would probablyat this elevation experience a more unusual difficulty inbreathing than others ; and hence the effect might be assumedas the cause. The only sensation I felt was a slight tightnessover the head and chest ; a feeling which may be experiencedby leaving a warm room and running violently ona frosty day. There was much fancy even in this; forupon finding fossil shells on the highest ridge, I entirelyforgot the puna in my delight. Certainly the exertion ofwalking was extreme, and the respiration became deep andlaborious. It is incomprehensible to me, how Humboldtand others were able to ascend to the elevation of 19,000feet. No doubt a residence of some months in the loftyregion of Quito would prepare the constitution for such anexertion ; yet I am told that in Potosi (about 13,000 feet),strangers do not become quite accustomed to the atmospherefor an entire year. The inhabitants all recommend onions394 PASSAGE OF CORDILLERA. March, 1835.for the puna ; as this vegetable has sometimes been given inEurope for pectoral complaints, it may possibly be of realservice : — for my part, I found nothing so good as the fossilshells !When about halfway up we met a large party with seventyloaded mules. It was interesting to hear the wild cries ofthe muleteers, and to watch the long string descending ; theyappeared so diminutive, there being nothing but the bleakmountains with which they could be compared. When nearthe summit, the wind, as generally happens there, was impetuousand extremely cold. On each side of the ridge wehad to pass over broad bands of snow, which perpetually liethere, and were now soon to be covered by a fresh layer.When we reached the crest and looked backwards, a glorious/ view was presented. The atmosphere resplendently clear;/ the sky an intense blue ; the profound valleys ; the wildbroken forms ; the heaps of ruins, piled up during the lapseof ages ; the bright-coloured rocks, contrasted with the quietmountains of snow ; all these together produced a scene Inever could have figured to my imagination. Neither plantnor bird, excepting a few condors wheeling around the higherpinnacles, distracted the attention from the inanimate mass.I felt glad I was alone : it was like watching a thunderstorm,or hearing a chorus of the Messiah in full orchestra.On several of the patches of perpetual snow, I found theProtococcus nivalis, or red snow, so well known from theaccounts of Arctic navigators. My attention was called tothe circumstance by observing the footsteps of the mulesstained a pale red, as if their hoofs had been slightly bloody.I at first thought it was owing to dust blown from thesurrounding mountains of red porphyry ; for from the magnifyingpower of the crystals of snow, the groups of theseatom-like plants appeared like coarse particles. The snowwas coloured only where it had thawed very rapidly, or hadbeen accidentally crushed. A small portion of it rubbed onpaper communicated a faint rose tinge, mingled with a littlebrick red. I placed some of the snow between the leaves ofMarch, 1835. red snow. 395my pocket-book, and a month afterwards examined with carethe pale discoloured patches on the paper. The specimens,when scraped off, were of a spherical form, with a diameterof the thousandth of an inch. The central part consists of ablood-red substance, surrounded by a colourless bark. Whenliving on the snow they are collected in groups, many lyingclose together; I overlooked, however, the thin couch ofgelatinous matter on which they are said to rest.* The driedspecimens placed in any fluid, as water, spirits of wine, ordilated sulphuric acid, were acted on in two different ways :sometimes an expansion was caused, at others a contraction.The central part after immersion invariably appeared as adrop of red oily fluid, containing a few most minute granules ;and these probably are the germs of new individuals.As I before remarked, the wind on the crest of the is generally impetuous and very cold. It is said toblow steadily from the westward or Pacific side : a circumstancewhich is likewise mentioned by Dr. Gillies Asthese observations apply chiefly to the summer season (whenthe passes are frequented), we must consider this wind, asan upper and return current. The Peak of Teneriffe, with aless elevation, and situated in lat. 28°, in like manner fallswithin the return stream. At first it appears rather surprising,that the trade-wind along the northern parts of Chile,and on the coast of Peru, should blow in so very southerlya direction as it does ; but when we reflect, that the Cordillera,running in a north and south line, intercepts, like a great wall,the entire depth of the lower atmospheric current, we caneasily see, that the trade-wind must be drawn northward,following the line of mountains, towards the equatorialregions, and thus lose part of that easterly movement whichit otherwise would have gained from the rotation of theworld. At Mendoza, on the eastern foot of the Andes, theclimate is said to be subject to long calms, and to frequentGreville's Scottish Cryptogamia. Flora, vol. iv., p. 231.t Journal of Natural and Geographical Science, August, 1830.396 PASSAGE OF CORDILLERA. March, 1835.though false appearances of gathering rain-storms : we mayimagine that the wind, which coming from the eastward isthus banked up by the line of mountains, would becomestagnant and irregular in its movements.Having crossed the Peuquenes, we descended into themountainous country, intermediate between the two ranges,and then took up our quarters for the night. The elevationwas probably not much under 1 1,000 feet, and the vegetationin consequence exceedingly scanty. The root of a smallscrubby plant served as fuel, but it made a miserable fire,and the wind was piercingly cold. Being quite tired withmy day's work, I made up my bed as quickly as I could, andwent to sleep. About midnight I observed the sky becamesuddenly clouded : I awakened the arriero to know if therewas any danger of bad weather ; but he said that withoutthunder and lightning there was no risk of a heavy snowstorm.The peril is imminent, and the difficulty of subsequentescape great, to any one overtaken by bad weatherbetween the two Cordillera. A certain cave offers the onlyplace of refuge : Mr. Caldcleugh, who crossed on this sameday of the month, was detained there for some time by aheavy fall of snow, as is related in his travels. Casuchas,or houses of refuge, have not been built in this pass as inthat of Uspallata, and therefore, during the autumn, thePortillo is little frequented. I may here remark, that withinthe main Cordillera rain never falls, for during the summer,the sky is cloudless, and in wanter snow-storms alone occur.At the place where we slept, water necessarily boiled, fromthe diminished pressure of the atmosphere, at a much lowertemperature than it does in a less elevated country ; the casebeing the converse of that of a Pain's digester. In consequenceof this, the potatoes, after remaining for some hoursin the boring water, were nearly as hard as ever. The potwas left on the fire all night, and next morning it was boiledagain, but yet the potatoes were not cooked. I found outthis, by overhearing my two companions discussing thecause; they had come to the simple conclusion, " that theMarch, 1835. passage of cordillera. 397cursed pot (which was a new one) did not choose to boilpotatoes."March 22d. — After eating our potato-less breakfast, wetravelled across the intermediate tract, to the foot of the Porticorange. In the middle of summer cattle are brought uphere to graze ; but they had now all been removed ; eventhe greater number of the guanacoes had decamped, knowingwell, that, if overtaken by a snow-storm, they would becaught in a trap. We had a fine view of a mass of mountainscalled Tupungato, the whole clothed with unbrokensnow. From one peak my arriero said he had once seensmoke proceeding ; and I thought I could distinguish theform of a large crater. In the maps Tupungato figures asasingle mountain ; this Chilenono method of giving one nameto a tract of mountains is a fruitful source of error. In theregion of snow there was a blue patch, which no doubt wasa glacier ; — a phenomenon that has been said not to occurin these mountains.Now commenced a heavy and long climb, similar to thatup the Peuquenes. Bold conical hiUs of red granite rose oneach hand; and in the valley there were several broadfields of perpetual snow. These frozen masses, during theprocess of thawing, had in some parts assumed the form ofpinnacles or columns, which, as they were high and closetogether, caused some difficulty on account of the cargomules. This structure in frozen snow was long sinceobserved by Scoresbyby in the icebergs near Spitsbergen, andlately, with more care, by Colonel Jackson* on the Neva.On one of these columns of ice a frozen horse was exposed,sticking as on a pedestal, but with its hind legs straight upin the air. To account for its strange position, we mustJournal of Geograph. See, vol. v., p. 12. Mr. Lyell (vol. iv., p- 360)has compared the fissures, by which the columnar structure seems to bedetermined, to the joints that traverse nearly all rocks, but which are bestseen in the non-stratified masses. I may observe, in the case of the frozensnow, the columnar structure must be owing to a " metamorphic" actionand not to a process during deposition.398 PASSAGE OF Cordillera. March, 1835.suppose that the animal fell with its head downward intoa hole, when the stratum was continuous, and that afterwardsthe surrounding parts were removed by the thaw.When nearly on the crest of the Portillo, we were envelopedin a cloud which was falling, under the form ofminute frozen spicula. This was very unfortunate, as it continuedthe whole day, and quite intercepted our view. Thepass takes its name of Portillo from a narrow cleft or doorwayon the highest ridge, through which the road passes.From this point, on a clear day, those vast plains whichextend from the base of the mountains towards the Atlanticcan be see a. We descended to the upper limit of vegetation,and found good quarters for the night under the shelter ofsome large fragments of rock. We here met some passengers,who made anxious inquiries about the state of theroad. Shortly after it was dark, the clouds suddenlycleared away ; and the effect was quite magical. The greatmountains, bright with the full moon, seemed impending-overus on all sides, as if we had been buried at the bottomof some deep crevice. One morning also, very early, I witnessedthe same striking effect. As soon as the clouds weredispersed, it froze severely; but as there was no wind, weslept very comfortably.The increased brilliancy of the moon and stars at this elevation,owing to the perfect transparency of the atmosphere,was very remarkable. Travellers having observed the difficultyof judging heights and distances amidst lofty mountains,have generally attributed it to the absence of objects ofcomparison. It appears to me that it is fully as much owingto this transparency, confounding different distances, andpartly, likewise, to the novelty of an unusual degree of fatiguearising from a little exertion, — habit being thus opposedto the evidence of the senses. I am sure that thisextreme clearness of the air gives a peculiar character to thelandscape ; all objects appearing to be brought nearly intoone plane, as in a drawing or panorama. The transparencyis, I presume, owing to the equable and nearly perfectMarch, 1835. passage of Cordillera. 399state of atmospheric dryness. The latter quality was shownby the manner in which woodwork shrunk (as I soon foundby the trouble my geological hammer gave me) ; by articlesof food, such as bread and sugar, becoming extremely hard ;and by the preservation of the skin and parts of the flesh ofthe beasts, which perish on the road. To the same cause wemust attribute the singular facility with which electricity isexcited. My flannel-waistcoat, when rubbed in the dark,appeared as if it had been washed with phosphorus ; — everyhair on a dog's back crackled ; — even the linen sheets, andleathern straps of the saddle, when handled, emitted sparks.March 23d. — The descent on the eastern side of the Cordillerais much shorter or steeper than on the Pacific side ;in other words, the mountains rise more abruptly from theplains, than from the alpine country of Chile. A level andbrilliantly white sea of clouds was extended beneath our feet,and thus shut out the view of the equally level Pampas.We soon entered the band of clouds, and did not againemerge from it that day. About noon, finding pasture forthe animals and bushes for firewood, in a part of the valleycalled Los Annales, we stopped for the night. This wasnear the uppermost limit of bushes, and the elevation, Isuppose, was between seven and eight thousand feet.I was very much struck with the marked difference betweenthe vegetation of these eastern valleys and that of the oppositeside : yet the climate, as well as the kind of soil, is nearlyidentical, and the difference of longitude very trifling. Thesame remark holds good with the quadrupeds, and in a lesserdegree with the birds and insects. We must except certainspecies which habitually or occasionally frequent elevatedmountains ; and in the case of the birds, certain kinds, whichhave a range as far south as the Strait of Magellan. Thisfact is in perfect accordance with the geological history ofthe Andes ; for these mountains have existed as a greatbarrier, since a period so remote that whole races of animalsmust subsequently have perished from the face of the earth.Therefore, unless we suppose the same species to have been400 PASSAGE OF CORDILLERA. Match, 1835.created in two different countries, we ought not to expect anycloser similarity between the organic beings on opposite sidesof the Andes, than on shores separated by a broad strait ofthe sea. In both cases we must leave out of the questionthose kinds which have been able to cross the barrier, whetherof salt water or solid rock.*A great number of the plants and animals were absolutelythe same, or most closely alec with those of Patagonia.We here have the agouti, bizcacha, three species of armadillo,the ostrich, certain kinds of partridges, and other birds, noneof which are ever seen in Chile, but are the characteristicanimals of the desert plains of Patagonia. We have likewisemany of the same (to the eyes of a person who is not a botanist)thorny stunted bushes, withered grass, and dwarfplants. Even the black slowly-crawling beetles are closelysimilar, and some, I believe, on rigorous examination, absolutelyidentical. It had always been a subject of regret tome,that we were unavoidably compelled to give up theascent of the St. Cruz river before reaching the mountains.I always had a latent hope of meeting with some greatchange in the features of the country ; but I now feel sure,that it would only have been following the plains of Patagoniaup an ascent.March 24th. — Early in the morning I climbed up amountain on one side of the valley, and enjoyed a fare-extendedview over the Pampas. This was a spectacle to which I hadalways looked forward with interest, but I was disappointed.At the first glance there was a strong resemblance to a distantview of the ocean, but in the northern parts many irregularitiesin the surface were soon distinguishable. Themost striking feature in the scene consisted of the rivers,This is merely an illustration of the admirable laws first laid downby Mr. Lyell of the geographical distribution of animals as influenced bygeological changes. The whole reasoning, of course, is founded onthe assumption of the immutability of species. Otherwise the changesmight be considered as superinduced by different circumstances in thetwo regions during a length of time.March, 1835. passage of cordillera. 401which, facing the rising sun, gUttered like silver threads, tilllost in the immensity .of the distance.In the middle of the day, we descended the valley, andreached a hovel, where an officer and three soldiers wereposted to examine passports. One of these men was athorough-bred Pampas Indian. He was kept much for thesame purpose as a bloodhound, to track out any person whomight pass by secretly, either on foot or horseback. Someyears ago, a passenger had endeavoured to escape detection,by making a long circuit over a neighbouring mountain; butthis Indian, having by chance crossed his track, followed itfor the whole day, over dry and very stony parts, tiU at lasthe came on his prey hidden in a gully. We here heard thatthe silvery clouds, which we had admired from the bright regionabove, had covered down torrents of rain. The vaUeyfrom thiUs point gradually opened, and the hiUs became merewater-worn hillocks compared to the giants behind. It thenexpanded into a gently-sloping plain of shingle, covered withlow trees and bushes. This talus, although it looked of littlebreadth, must be nearly ten ides wide, before it blends intothe apparently dead level Pampas. We had already passedthe only house in this neighbourhood, the Estancia of Chaquaio ;and at sunset we pulled up in the first snug corner, andthere bivouacked.March 25th. — I was reminded of the Pampas of BuenosAyres, by seeing the disk of the rising sun, intersected by anhorizon, level as that of the ocean. During the night aheavy dew had fallen, a fact we did not experience withinthe Cordillera. The road proceeded for some distance due eastacross a low swamp ; then meeting the dry plain, it turnedto the north towards Mendoza. The distance is two very longdays' journey. Our first day's journey was called fourteenleagues to Estacado, and the second seventeen to Lucan,near Mendoza. The whole distance is over a level desertplain, with not more than two or three houses. The sunwas exceedingly powerful, and the ride devoid of all interest.There is very little water in this " traverse," and in ourVOL. III. 2 D402 PASSAGE OF CORDILLERA. March, 1835.second day's journey, we found only one little pool. Thewater flowing from the mountains is small in quantityand soon becomes absorbed by the dry and porous soil;so that, although we travelled at the distance of only ten orfifteen miles from the outer range, we did not cross a singlestream. In many parts the ground was incrusted with asaline efflorescence ; hence we had the same salt-lovingplants, common near Bahia Blanc. The landscape has onecharacter from the Strait of Magellan along the whole easterncoast of Patagonia to the Rio Colorado ; and it appears thatthe same kind of country extends northerly in a sweepingline as far as San Luis, and perhaps even further. To theeastward of this line, lies the basin of the comparatively dampand green plains of Buenos Ayres. The former country,including the sterile traverse of Mendoza and Patagonia,consists of a bed of shingle, worn smooth, and accumulatedby the waves of a former sea ; while the formation of thePampas (plains covered by thistles, clover, and grass) is dueto the estuary mud of the Plata, deposited under a differentcondition of circumstances.After our two days' tedious journey, it was refreshing tosee in the distance the rows of poplars and willows growingaround the village and river of Luxan. Shortly before wearrived at this place, we observed to the southward a raggedcloud of a dark reddish-brown colour. For some time, wehad no doubt but that it was thick smoke proceeding fromsome great fire on the plains. Soon afterwards we found itwas a pest of locusts.* The insects overtook us, as theywere travelling northward, by the aid of a light breeze, at therate, I should suppose, of ten or fifteen miles an hour. Themain body filled the air from a height of twenty feet, to that,as it appeared, of two or three thousand above the ground.The noise of their approach was that of astrongbreezef passThe species is identical with, or resembles most closely, the famousGryllus migratory of eastern countries.f " And the sound of their wings was as the sound of chariots of manyhorses running to battle." — Repeat. ix. 9.March, 1835. swarm of locusts. . 403ingthrougli the rigging of a ship. The sky seen through theadvanced guard appeared like a mezzo tinto engraving, but themain body was impervious to sight ; they were not, however,so thick, but that they could escape from a stick movedbackward and forward. When they alighted they were morenumerous than the leaves in a field, and changed the greeninto a reddish colour : the swarm having once alighted, theindividuals flew from side to side in any direction. Thelocusts are not an uncommon pest in this country : alreadyduring the season, several smaller swarms had come up fromthe sterile plains* of the south ; and many trees had beenentirely stripped of their leaves. Of course this swarm cannoteven be compared to those of the eastern world, yet it wassufficient to make the well-known descriptions of their ravagesmore intelligible. I have omitted, perhaps, the most strikingpart of the scene, — the vain attempts of the poor cottagers toturn the stream aside. Many lighted fires and with the smoke,with shouts and waving of branches, they endeavoured toavert the attack.We crossed the Luxan, which is a river of considerablesize, though its course towards the sea-coast is very imperfectlyknown. It is even doubtful whether, in passingover the plains, it is evaporated, or whether it forms a tributaryof the Sauce or Colorado. We slept in the village,which is a small place surrounded by gardens, and forms themost southern part, that is cultivated, of the province ofMendoza ; it is five leagues south of the capital. At night Iexperienced an attack (for it deserves no less a name) of theBenchuca (a species of Reduvius) the great black bug of thePampas. It is most disgusting to feel soft wingless insects,about an inch long, crawling over one's body. Before suckingthey are quite thin, but afterwards become round andbloated with blood, and in this state they are easily crushed.Swarms of locusts sometimes overrun the more central plains of thiscontinent. In these cases, and likewise as it appears in all parts of theworld, the locusts are bred in desert plains, and thence migrate towardsa more fertile country.2 » 2404 PASSAGE OF CORDILLERA, March, 1835,They are also found in the northern parts of Chile and inPeru. One which I caught at Iquique was very empty.When placed on the table, and though surrounded by people,if a finger was presented, the bold insect would immediatelydraw its sucker, make a charge, and if allowed, draw blood.No pain was caused by the wound. It was curious to watchits body during the act of sticking, as it changed in less thanten minutes, from being as flat as a wafer to a globular form.This one feast, for which the benchuca was indebted to oneof the officers, kept it fat during four whole months ; but, afterthe first fortnight, the insect was quite ready to have anothersuck.March 27th, — We rode on to Mendoza. The countrywas beautifully cultivated, and resembled Chile. Thisneighbourhood is celebrated for its fruit ; and certainlynothing could appear more flourishing than the vineyards andthe orchards of figs, peaches, and olives. We bought watermelonsnearly twice as large as a man's head, most deliciouslycool and well-flavoured, for a halfpenny apiece ; and for thevalue of threepence, half a wheelbarrowful of peaches. Thecultivated and enclosed part of this province is very small ;there is little more than that which we passed through betweenLuxan and the capital. The land, as in Chile, entirelyowes its fertility to artificial irrigation ; and it is really wonderfulto observe how abundantly productive a barren traverseis rendered by this simple process.We staid the ensuing day in Mendoza. The prosperity ofthe place has much declined of late years. The inhabitantssay " it is good to live in, but very bad to grow rich in."The lower orders have the lounging, reckless manners of theGauchos of the Pampas ; and their dress, riding-gear, andhabits of life, are nearly the same. To my mind the townhad a stupid forlorn aspect. Neither the boasted alameda,nor the scenery, is at all comparable to that of Santiago ; butto those who have just crossed the unvaried savannahs ofgrass, on their road from Buenos Ayres, the gardens andorchards must appear delightful. Captain Head, speaking ofMarch, 1835. mendoza. 405the inhabitants, says, " They eat their dinners, and it is sovery hot, they go to sleep — and could they do better ?" Iquite agree with Captain Head: the happy doom of theMendozinos is to eat, sleep, and be idle.March 29th. — We set out on our return to Chile by theUspallata pass to the northward of Mendoza. We had tocross a long and most sterile traverse of fifteen leagues. Thesoil in parts was absolutely bare, in others covered by numberlessdwarf cacti, armed with formidable spines, and calledby the inhabitants " little Bons." There were also a few lowbushes. Although the plain is elevated about three thousandfeet above the sea, the sun was very powerful ; this, and theclouds of impalpable dust, rendered the travelling extremelyirksome. Our course during the day lay nearly parallel tothe mountains, but gradually approaching them. Beforesunset we entered one of the wide valleys, or rather bays,which open on the plain : this soon narrowed into a ravine,and a little higher up the house of the Villa Vicencio wassituated. As we had ridden all day without a drop of water,both ourselves and our animals were very thirsty, and welooked out anxiously for the stream which flows down thisvalley. It was curious to observe how gradually the watermade its appearance : on the plain the course was quite dry ;by degrees it became a little damper ; then puddles of waterwere formed; these soon became connected, and at VillaVicencio there was a nice little rivulet.30th. — The solitary hovel which bears the imposing nameof Villa Vicencio, has been mentioned by every traveller whohas crossed the Andes. I staid here, and at some neighbouringmines, during the two succeeding days. The geologyof the surrounding country is very curious. The Us-pallasrange is separated from the true Cordillera by a longnarrow plain or basin, like those so often mentioned in Chile,but with an altitude of about six thousand feet. The rangeconsists of various kinds of submarine lava, alternating withvolcanic sandstones and other remarkable sedimentary deposits; the whole having a very close resemblance to some of406 PASSAGE Of CORDILLERA. March, 1835.the newer horizontal beds on the shores of the Pacific. Fromthis resemblance I expected to find silicified wood, which isgenerally characteristic of those formations. I was gratifiedin a very extraordinary manner. In the central part of therange, at an elevation probably of seven thousand feet, on abare slope, I observed some snow-white projecting columns.These were petrified trees, eleven being signified, and fromthirty to forty converted into coarsely-crystallized white calcareousspar. They were abruptly broken ofi"; the uprightstumps projecting a few feet above the ground. The trunksmeasured from three to five feet each in circumference. Theystood a little way apart from each other, but the whole formedone district group. Mr. Robert Brown has been kind enoughto examine the wood : he says it is coniferous, and that itpartakes of the character of the Arcadian tribe (to whichthe common South Chilian pine belongs), but with somecurious points of affinity with the yew. The volcanic sandstonein which they were embedded, and from the lower partof which they must have sprung, had accumulated in successivethin layers around their trunks ; and the stone yet retainedthe impression of the bark.It required little geological practice to interpret the marvellousstory, which this scene at once unfolded ; though Iconfess I was at first so much astonished that I could scarcelybelieve the plainest evidence of it. I saw the spot where acluster of fine trees had once waved their branches on theshores of the Atlantic, when that ocean (now driven back700 miles) approached the base of the Andes. I saw thatthey had sprung from a volcanic soil which had been raisedabove the level of the sea, and that this dry land, with its uprighttrees, had subsequently been let down to the depths ofthe ocean. There it was covered by sedimentary matter, andthis again by enormous streams of submarine lava — one suchmass alone attaining the thickness of a thousand feet ; andthese deluges of melted stone and aqueous deposits had beenfive times spread out alternately. The ocean which receivedsuch masses must have been deep ; but again the subterraneous1835. signified trees. 407mean forces exerted their power, and I now beheld the bed ofthat sea forming a chain of mountains more than seven thousandfeet in altitude. Nor had those antagonist forces beendormant, which are always at work to wear down the surfaceof the land to one level: the great piles of strata had been intersectedby many wide valleys ; and the trees now changedinto silex were exposed projecting from the volcanic soil nowchanged into rock, whence formerly in a green and buddingstate they had raised their lofty heads. Now, all is utterlyirreclaimable and desert; even the lichen cannot adhere to thestony casts of former trees. Vast, and scarcely comprehensibleas such changes must ever appear, yet they have all occurredwithin a period recent when compared with the history of theCordillera ; and that Cordillera itself is modern as comparedwith some other of the fossiliferous strata of South America.April 1st. — We crossed the Uspallata range ; and atnight slept at the custom-house — the only inhabited spot onthe plain. Shortly before leaving the mountains, there wasa very extraordinary view : red, purple, green, and quitewhite sedimentary rocks, alternating with black lavas, werebroken up and thrown into all kinds of disorder, by massesof porphyry, of every shade, from dark brown to thebrightest lilac. It was the first view I ever saw, whichreally resembled those pretty sections which geologists makeof the inside of the earth.The next day we crossed the plain, and followed thecourse of the same great mountain-stream which flows byLuxan. Here it was a furious torrent, quite impassable,and appearing larger than in the low country ; as was theease with the rivulet of Villa Vincencio. On the evening ofthe succeeding day we reached the Rio de las Vacas, whichis considered the worst stream in the Cordillera to cross.As all these rivers have a rapid and short course, and aredue to the snow melted by the suns heat, the hour of theday makes a considerable difference in their volume. Inthe evening the stream is muddy and full, but about daybreakit becomes both clearer and much less impetuous.408 PASSAGE OF CORDILLERA. April, 1835.This we found to be the case with the Rio Vacas, and inthe morning we crossed it with little difficulty.The scenery thus far was very uninteresting, compared withthat of the Portillo pass. Little can be seen beyond thebare walls of the one grand, flat-bottomed valley, which theroad follows up to the highest crest. The valley and thehuge rocky mountains were extremely barren : during thetwo previous nights the poor mules had absolutely nothingto eat ; for excepting a few low resinous bushes, scarcely aplant could be seen. We went over in the course of thisday some of the worst passes in the Cordillera. The degreeof exaggeration concerning their danger and difficulty is verygreat. In Chile J was even told, that if I attempted to passon foot my head would turn giddy, that there was no roomto dismount, &c., but I did not see a place where any onemight not have walked over backwards, or got off his muleon either side. One of the bad passes called las Animas (theSouls), I had crossed, and did not find out till a day afterwardsthat it was one of the awful dangers. No doubt thereare many parts in which, if the mule should stumble, therider would be hurled down a great precipice ; but of sucha catastrophe there is much less chance than with a manon foot. 1 dare say, in the spring, the " lateral," or roads,which each year are formed anew across the piles of fallendetritus, are very bad ; but from what I have seen, I suspectthe real danger is nothing, and the apparent very Uttle.With cargo mules the case is rather different ; for the loadsproject so far, that the animals occasionally running againsteach other, or against a point of rock, lose their balance andare thrown down the precipice. With regard to crossingthe rivers, I can well believe that the difficulty amounts toevery degree, till they are impracticable. At this seasonthere was Uttle trouble, but in the summer they must bevery bad. I can quite imagine, as Captain Head describes,the different expressions of those who have passed the gulf,and those who are passing. I never heard of any manbeing drowned, but with loaded mules this is of frequentApril, 1835. INDIAN RUINS. 409occurrence. The arriero tells you to show your mule thebest Une, and then allow her to cross as she chooses ; thecargo mule takes a bad Une, and is often lost.April 4th. — From the Rio de las Vacas to the Puentedel Inca, half a day's journey. As there was pasture for themules, and geology for me, we bivouacked for the night.When one hears of a natural bridge, one pictures to oneselfsome deep and narrow ravine, across which a bold mass ofrock has fallen ; or a great arch hollowed out like the vault ofa cavern. Instead of this, the Inca's bridge consists of acrust of stratified shingle, cemented together by the depositsof the neighbouring hot springs. It appears as if the streamhad scooped out a channel on one side, leaving an overhangingledge, which was at last met by the earth and stonesfalling down from the opposite cliff. Certainly an obliquejunction, as would happen in such case, was very distinct onone side. The bridge of the Incas is by no means worthy ofthe great monarchs whose name it bears.Close by, there were some ruins of Indian buildings.These occur in several other places ; the most perfect, whichI saw, being the Ruins de Tambillos. Small square roomswere there huddled together, but placed in distinct groups.Some of the doorways were yet standing : they were formedby a cross slab of stone, but only raised about three feethigh. UUoa, in his " Notices Americans," remarks onthe lowness of the doors in the ancient Peruvian dwellings.These houses, when perfect, must have been capable of containinga considerable number of persons. Tradition says,they were used as halting-places for the Incas, when theycrossed these mountains. Traces of Indian habitations havebeen discovered in many parts of the Cordillera, where itdoes not appear probable, that they were constructed asmere resting-places; but yet where the land is as utterlyunfit for any kind of cultivation as it is near the Tambillosor Puente del Inca. In the Portillo pass I saw one group ofsuch ruins. In the ravine of Jajuel, near Aconcagua, wherethere is no pass, I heard of numerous remains situated410 PASSAGE OF CORDILLERA. April, 1835.at a great elevation, where it is both cold and extremelysterile. At first I imagined, that these houses were placesof refuge built by the Indians on the first arrival of theSpaniards ; but subsequently I have been almost inclinedto speculate on the possibility of a small change of climate.In the northern parts of Chile, within the Cordillera ofCopiapopo, old Indian houses are found in very many parts :by digging amongst the ruins, bits of woollen articles, instrumentsof precious metals, and heads of Indian corn, arenot unfrequently discovered. I had likewise in my possessionthe head of an arrow, made of agate, of precisely thesame figure as those now used in Tierra del Fuego. I amaware that the Peruvian Indians* frequently inhabit mostlofty and bleak situations ; but in these cases, I was assuredby men, who had spent their lives in travelling the Andes,that very many {muchisimas) houses were found at elevationsso great as almost to border on the perpetual snow, and inparts where there exist no passes, and where the land producesabsolutely nothing, and what is still more extraordinary,where there is no water. Nevertheless it is theopinion of the people of the country (although they are muchpuzzled by the circumstance), that, from the appearance ofthe houses, the Indians must have used them as places ofresidence. In the Despoblado (uninhabited vaUey), nearCopiapopo, at a spot called Punta Gorda, I saw the remainsof seven or eight square little rooms, which were of asimilar form with those at the TambiUos, but but chieflyof mud (which the present inhabitants cannot by any meansimitate in durability) instead of with stone. They weresituated in the most conspicuous and defenceless position,Mr. Pentland even considers, that the love of an elevated situation ischaracteristic of the constitution of this race. — Geograph. Jowrn.f Ulloa (Notices Americans, p. 302) remarks on the same circumstancein Peru. He adds, when speaking of the mud bricks, "which givesroom to think that they had some particular method of working them,that they should become hard, without cracking, the secret of which thepresent inhabitants are ignorant of."April, 1835. INDIAN RUINS. 411at the bottom of a flat broad valley. There was no waternearer than three or four leagues, and that only in verysmall quantity, and bad : the soil was absolutely sterile ; —I looked in vain even for a lichen adhering to the rocks.At the present day, with the advantage of beasts of burden,a mine, unless it were very rich, could scarcely be workedthere with profit. Yet the Indians formerly chose it as aplace of residence ! If at the present time two or threeshowers of rain were to fall annually, instead of one duringas many years, as now is the case, a small rill of waterwould in all probability be formed in this great valley,draining a mountainous country; and then, by irrigation(the method of which was formerly so well understood bythe Indians), the soil might easy be rendered sufficientlyproductive to support a few familles.I have certain proofs that this part of the continent of SouthAmerica has been elevated, near the coast, at least from fourto five hundred feet, since the epoch of existing shells ; andfurther inland the rise possibly may have been greater. Asthe peculiarly arid character of the climate is evidently aconsequence of the height of the great range of mountains,we may feel almost sure, that prior to the latter elevations,the atmosphere was not so completely drained of its moistureas at the present day. At a remote geological era, it isprobable that the Andes consisted of a chain of islands,which were covered by luxuriant forests ; and many of thetrees, in a silicified state, may now be seen embedded inthe upper conglomerates. Of these I measured one whichwas cylindrical, with a circumference of fifteen feet. As itis nearly certain that the mountains have risen slowly, sowould the climate likewise become deteriorated slowly.We need not feel greatly surprised at walls of stone andhardened mud here lasting for many ages, when we rememberhow many centuries the Druidical mounds have withstoodeven the climate of England. The only question is, whetherthe amount of change, since the introduction of man intoSouth America, has been sufficient to cause a sensible412 PASSAGE OF Cordillera. April, 1835.effect on the atmospheric moisture, and therefore on thefertility of the valleys in the upper Cordillera. From theextreme slowness with which there is reason to believe thecontinent is rising, the longevity of man as a species,required to allow of sufficient change, is the most validobjection to the above speculations : for on the easternshores of this continent, we have seen that several animals,belonging to the same class of mammalia with man, havepassed away, while the change of level between land andwater, in that part at least, has been so small, that it canscarcely have caused any sensible difference in the climate.I may add, however, that at Lima, the elevation, within thehuman epoch, certainly has amounted to between seventyand eighty feet.When at Lima, I conversed on this subject* with Mr. Gill,a civil engineer, who had seen much of the interior country.He told me that a conjecture of a change of climate hadsometimes crossed his mind ; but that he thought that thegreater portion of land now incapable of cultivation, butcovered with Indian ruins, had been reduced to that condition,by neglect and subterranean movements injuringthe water conduits, which the Indians formerly constructedon so wonderful a scale. I may here just mention thatthese people actually carried tunnels through hills of soldrock, when such were necessary to conduct the irrigatingstreams. Mr. Gill told me, he had been employed professionallyto examine one; he found the passage low,narrow, crooked, and not of uniform breadth, but of veryconsiderable length. Is it not most wonderful that anypeople should have attempted such operations without theaid of iron or of gunpowder !Temple, in his travels through upper Peru or Bolivia, in going fromPotosi to Truro, says, " I saw many Indian villages or dwellings inruins, up even to the very tops of the mountains, attesting a former populationwhere now all is desolate." He makes similar remarks in anotherplace, but it is not possible to judge, whether this desolation is owingmerely to a want of population, or to an altered condition of the land.April, 1835. jos del ague. 413Mr. Gill mentioned to me a most interesting, and as far asI am aware, quite unparalleled case, of the effect of subterraneandisturbances in altering the drainage of a country.Travelling from Casa to Huaraz (not very far distant fromLima), he found a plain covered with ruins and marks ofancient cultivation, but now quite barren. Near it was thedr^'^ course of a considerable river, whence the water for irrigationhad formerly been conducted. There was nothing inthe appearance of the watercourse to indicate that the riverhad not flowed there a few years previously : in some partsbeds of sand and gravel were scattered, and in others thesolid rock had been worn into a broad channel.* It is self-evidentthat a person following up the course of a stream,win always ascend at a greater or less inclination. Mr. Gillwas therefore very much astonished, when walking up thebed of this ancient river, to find himself suddenly goingdoom hill. He imagined that the slope had a fall of aboutforty or fifty feet perpendicular. We here have the mostunequivocal evidence, that a ridge or line of hiUs has beenuplifted directly across the bed of a stream, which must havebeen flowing for many centuries. From the moment theriver-course was thus arched, the water would necessarily bethrown back ; and a new channel would be formed on oneside some way above. From that time, also, the neighbouringplain would lose its fertilizing stream, and becomeconverted into the desert which it now remains.April 5th. — We had a long day's ride across the centralridge, from the Inca's bridge to the Jos del Agua, whichis situated near the lowest casucha on the western slope.These casuchas are little round towers, with steps outsideto reach the floor, which is elevated some feet above theground on account of the snow-drifts. They are eight innumber; and under the Spanish government, were keptMr. Gill said he recollected that one part, which had been cut outof the solid rock, was about forty yards wide and eight feet deep. This issufficient to give some idea of the size of the former stream.414 PASSAGE OF CORDILLERA. April, 1835.during the winter well stored with food and charcoal, andeach courier had a master-key. Now they only answer thepurpose of caves, or rather dungeons. Seated on somelittle eminence, they are not, however, ill suited to thesurrounding scene of desolation. The zigzag ascent of theCumbre, or the partition of the waters, was very steep andtedious. The height, according to Mr. Pentland,* is 12,454feet. The road did not pass over any perpetual snow,although there were patches on either hand. The wind onthe summit was exceedingly cold, but it was impossible notto stop a few minutes to admire, again and again, the colourof the heavens, and the brilliant transparency of the atmosphere.The scenerj'^, moreover, was grand. To the westwardthere was a fine chaos of mountains, divided byprofound ravines. Generally some snow has fallen beforethis period of the season, and it has even happened thatthe Cordillera has been finally closed by this time. Butwe were most fortunate. The sky, by night and by day,was cloudless, excepting perhaps a few round Uttle massesof vapour, that floated over the highest pinnacles. I haveoften seen these islets in the sky, marking the positionof the Cordillera, when the mountains themselves have beenhidden beneath the horizon.April 6th. — In the morning we found some thief hadstolen one of our mules, and the bell of the madrina. Wetherefore rode only two or three miles down the valley, andstaid there the ensuing day in hopes of recovering the mule,which the arriero thought had been hidden in some ravine.The scenery in this part had assumed a ChiUan character :the lower parts of the mountains, dotted over with the paleevergreen Quills tree, and nth the great candlestick cactus,certainly are more to be admired than any thing in the bareEastern valleys ; but I cannot quite agree with the admirationexpressed by some travellers. The extreme pleasure,I suspect, is chiefly owing to the prospect of a good fire,Geographical Journal. Notice on Bolivian Cordillera, March, 1835.April, 1835. PASSAGE OP CORDILLERA. 415after escaping from the cold regions above : and I am sureI most heartily participated in such feelings.8th. — We left the valley of the river of Aconcagua, bywhich we had descended, and reached in the evening acottage near the Villa de St. Rosa. The fertility of theplain was extremely delightful. The autumn being welladvanced, the leaves of many of the fruit-trees were falling ;and of the labourers — some were busy in drying figs andpeaches on the roofs of their cottages ; while others weregathering the grapes from the vineyards. It was a prettyscene ; but that pensive stillness was absent, which makesthe autumn in England indeed the evening of the year.On the 10th we reached Santiago, where I experienceda very kind and hospitable reception from Mr. Caldcleugh.My excursion only cost me twenty-four days, and never didI more deeply enjoy an equal space of time. A few daysafterwards I returned to Mr. Cornfield's house at Valparaiso.CHAPTER XVIII.Bell mountain — Miners — Great loads carried by the Apires — CoquimboEarthquake — Geology — Terraces — Excursion up valley — Road toGuasco — Desert country — Valley of Copiapopo — train and earthquakes,meteorolites — Hydrophobia — Copiapopo — Excursion to Cordillera —Dry valley — Cold gales of wind — Noises from a hill — Iquique, completedesert — Salt alluvium — Nitrate of soda — Lima — Unhealthycountry — Ruins of Callao, overthrown by earthquake — Elevated shellson island of San Lorenzo — Plain with embedded fragments of pottery.NORTHERN CHILE AND PERU.April 27th. — I set out on a journey to Coquimbo, andthence through Guasco to Copiapopo, where Captain FitzRoykindly offered to pick me up in the Beagle. The distancein a straight line along the shore northward is only 420miles ; but my mode of travelling caused me to find it avery long journey. I bought four horses and two mules,the latter carrying the cargo on alternate days. The sixanimals together only cost the value of twenty-five poundssterling, and at Copiapopo I sold them again for twenty-three.We travelled in the same independent manner as before,cooking our own meals, and sleeping in the open air. Aswe rode towards the Vino del Mar, I took a farewell view ofValparaiso, and admired its picturesque appearance. Forgeological purposes I made a detour from the high road tothe foot of the BeU mountain. We passed through a highlyauriferous district to the neighbourhood of Limache, wherewe slept. The country is covered with much alluvium, andby the side of each little rivulet it has been washed forgold. This employment supports the inhabitants of numerousscattered hovels ; but, like all those who gain bychance, they are unthrifty in their habits.28th. — In the afternoon we arrived at a cottage at thefoot of the Bell mountain. The inhabitants were free-may,1835. northern chile. 417holders, which is not very usual in Chile. They supportedthemselves on the produce of a garden and a little field, butwere very poor. Capital is so deficient in this part, that thepeople are obliged to sell their green corn while it is standingin the field, in order to buy necessaries for the ensuingyear. Wheat in consequence was dearer in the very districtof its production, than at Valparaiso, where the contractorslive. The next day we joined the main road to Coquimbo.At night there was a very light shower of rain : this was thefirst drop that had fallen since the heavy rain of September11th and 12th, which detained me a prisoner at the bathsof Cauquenes. The interval was seven and a half months ;but the rain this year in Chile was rather later than usual.The Andes Avere now covered by a thick mass of snow ; andthey presented, in the distance, a very glorious sight.May 2d. — The road continued to follow the coast, at nogreat distance from the sea. The few trees and bushes whichare common in central Chile, decreased rapidly in numbers,and were replaced by a tall plant, something like a yucca inappearance. The surface of the country, on a small scale,was singularly broken and irregular ; abrupt little peaks ofrock rising out of small plains or basins. The indentedcoast, and the bottom of the neighbouring sea, studded withbreakers, would if converted into dry land, present similarforms ; and such a conversion without doubt has taken placein the part over which we rode.3d. — Quilimari to Concealed. The country became moreand more barren. In the valleys there was scarcely sufficientwater for any irrigation ; and the intermediate land was quitebare, not supporting even goats. In the spring, after thewinter showers, a thin pasture rapidly springs up, and cattleare then driven down from the Cordillera to graze for a shorttime. It is curious to observe how the seeds of the grassseem to know, as if by an acquired instinct, what quantity ofrain to expect. One shower far northward at Copiapopo producesas great an effect on the vegetation, as two at Guasco,and as three or four in this district. At Valparaiso a winterVOL. III. 2 E418 NORTHERN CHILE. May, 1835.so dry as to injure most seriously the pasture, would atGuasco produce the most unusual abundance. Travellingnorthward the quantity of rain does not appear to decreasein strict proportion to the distance. At Concealed, which isonly halfway between Valparaiso and Coquimbo (being 67miles north of the former) rain is not expected till the end ofMay; whereas, at Valparaiso some generally falls early inApril. The annual quantity is Ukewise small in proportionto the lateness of the season at which it commences.May 4th. — Finding the coast-road devoid of interest ofevery kind, we turned inland towards the mining district ofIllapel. The town of that name is very regular and pretty.Its flourishing condition depends on numerous mines,chiefly of copper, which occur in its immediate vicinity.This valley, like every other in Chile, is level, broad, andvery fertile : it is bordered on each side, either by cliffs ofstratified shingle, or by bare rocky mountains. Above thestraight line of the uppermost irrigating ditch, all is brownas on a high road ; while all below, is of as bright a green asverdigris, from the beds of alfarfa, a kind of clover.We proceeded to Los Horns, another mining district,where the principal hiU was drilled with holes, like a greatants nest. The Chihan miners are in their habits apeculiar race of men. Living for weeks together in themost desolate spots, when they descend to the villages onfeast-days, there is no excess or extravagance into which theydo not run. They sometimes gain a considerable sum, andthen, Uke sailors with prize-money, they try how soon theycan contrive to squander it. They drink excessively, buyquantities of clothes, and in a few days return penniless totheir miserable abodes, there to work harder than beasts ofburden. This thoughtlessness, as with sailors, is evidentlythe result of a similar manner of life. Their daily food isfound them, and they acquire no habitual care as to the meansof subsistence : moreover, at the same moment that temptationis offered, the means of enjoying it is placed in theirpower. On the other hand, in Cornwall, and some otherMay, 1835. miners. 419parts of England, where the system of selling part of thevein is followed, the miners, from being obliged to act forthemselves, and to judge with clearness, are a singularly intelligentand well-conducted set of men.The dress of the Chilian miner is peculiar and rather picturesque.He wears a very long shirt, of some dark-colouredbaize, with a leathern apron ; the whole being fastened roundhis waist by a brightly-coloured sash. His trousers are verybroad, and his small cap of scarlet cloth is made to fit thehead closely. We met a party of these miners in full costume,carrying the body of one of their companions to beburied. They marched at a very quick trot, four men supportingthe corpse. One set having run as hard as theycould for about two hundred yards, were relieved by fourothers, who had previously dashed on ahead on horseback.Thus they proceeded, encouraging each other by wild cries :altogether the scene formed a most strange funeral.We continued travelling northward, in a zigzag line ; sometimesstopping a day to geologist. The country was sothinly inhabited, and the track so obscure, that we often haddifficulty in finding our way. On the 12th I stayed at somemines. The ore in this case was not considered particularlygood, but from being abundant it was supposed the minewould sell for about thirty or forty thousand dollars (that is6000 or 8000 pounds sterling) ; yet it was bought by one ofthe English Associations for an ounce of gold (3/. 8s.).The ore is yellow pyrites, which as I have already remarked,before the arrival of the English, was not supposed tocontain a particle of copper. On a scale of profits, nearlyas great as in the above instance, piles of scoriae aboundingwith minute globules of metallic copper were purchased; yet with these advantages, the mining associations,as is well known, contrived to lose immense sums of money.The folly of the greater number of commissioners and shareholders,amounted to infatuation : — a thousand pounds perannum given in some cases to entertain the authorities;libraries of well-bound geological books ; bringing out miners2 E 2420 NORTHERN CHILE. May, 1835.for particular metals (as tin) which were soon found not toexist in the country; contracts to supply the miners withmilk, in parts where there were no cows ; machinery,where such could not possibly be used; and a hundredsimilar arrangements, bore witness to our absurdity, and tothis day afford amusement to the natives. Yet there can beno doubt, that the same capital well employed in these mineswould have yielded an immense return : a confidential manof business, a practical miner and assayer, would have beenall that was required.Captain Head has described the wonderful load which theApires," truly beasts of burden, carry up from deep mines.I confess I thought the account exaggerated ; so that I wasglad to take the opportunity of weighing one of the loads,which I picked out by hazard. It required considerable exertionon my part, when standing directly over it, to lift it fromthe ground. The load was considered under weight whenfound to be 197 pounds. The aspire had carried this up eightyperpendicular yards, — part of the way by a steep passage, butthe greater part up notched poles, placed in a zigzag line inthe shaft. According to the general regulation, the aspire isnot allowed to halt for breath, except the mine is sixhundred feet deep. The average load is considered as rathermore than 200 pounds, and I have been assured that one of300 pounds (twenty-two stone and a haK) by way of a trialhas been brought up from the deepest mine ! At this timethe spires were bringing up the usual load twelve times in theday ; that is, 2400 pounds from eighty yards deep ; and theywere employed in the intervals in breaking and picking ore.These men, excepting from accidents, are healthy, andappear cheerful. Their bodies are not very muscular. Theyrarely eat meat once a week, and never oftener, and thenonly the hard dry chaque. Although with a knowledge thatthe labour is voluntary, it was nevertheless quite revolting tosee the state in v;hich they reached the mouth of the mine ;their bodies bent forward, leaning with their arms on the steps,their legs bowed, the muscles quivering, the perspirationMay, 1835. coquimbo. 421streaming from their faces over their breasts, their nostrilsdistended, the corners of their mouth forcibly drawn back,and the expulsion of their breath most laborious. Eachtime, from habit, they utter an articulate cry of " ay-ay,"which ends in a sound rising from deep in the chest, but shrilllike the note of a fife. After staggering to the pile of ores,they emptied the " carpacho ;" in two or three secondsrecovering their breath, they wiped the sweat from theirbrows, and apparently quite fresh descended the mine againat a quick pace. This appears to me a wonderful instanceof the amount of labour which habit (for it can be nothingelse), will enable a man to endure.In the evening, talking with the mayor-domo of thesemines, about the number of foreigners now scattered overthe whole country, he told me that, though quite a youngman, he remembers when a boy at school at Coquimbo, aholiday being given, to see the captain of an English ship,who was brought to the city to speak to the governor.He believes that nothing would have induced any boy in theschool, himself included, to have gone close to the Englishman; so deeply had they been impressed with an idea ofthe heresy, contamination, and evil to be derived from contactwith such a person. To this day they relate theatrocious actions of the buccaneers ; and especially of oneman, who took away the figure of the Virgin Mary, andreturned the year after for that of St. Joseph, saying it was apity the lady should not have a husband. I heard also ofan old lady who, at a dinner in Coquimbo, remarked howwonderfully strange it was that she should have lived todine in the same room with an Englishman ; for she rememberedas a girl, that twice, at the mere cry of " LosAnglesey," every soul, carrying what valuables they could,had taken to the mountains.May 14th. — We reached Coquimbo, where we staid afew days. The town is remarkable for nothing but itsextreme quietness. It is said to contain from 6000 to 8000inhabitants. On the morning of the l7th it rained lightly422 NORTHERN CHILE. May, 1835.(the first time this year) for about five hours. With thisshower, the farmers, who plant corn near the sea-coastwhere the atmosphere is more humid, would break up theground; with a second, put the seed in: and if a thirdshould fall, they would reap in the spring a good harvest.It was interesting to watch the effect of this trifling amountof moisture. Twelve hours afterwards the ground appearedas dry as ever ; yet after an interval of ten days, all the hillswere faintly tinged with green patches ; the grass beingsparingly scattered in hair-like fibres a full inch in length.Before this shower every part of the surface was bare as on ahigh road.In the evening. Captain FitzRoy and myself were diningwith Mr. Edwards, an English resident well known for hishospitality by all who have visited Coquimbo, when a sharpearthquake happened. I heard the foregoing rumble, butfrom the screams of the ladies, the running of servants, andthe rush of several of the gentlemen to the doorway, I couldnot distinguish the motion. Some of the women afterwardswere crjdng with terror, and one person said he should not beable to sleep all night, or if he did, it would only be to dreamof falling houses. The father of this gentleman had lately lostaU his property at Talcahuano, and he himself only just escapeda falling roof at Valparaiso, in 1822. He mentioned acurious coincidence which then happened: he was playingat cards, when a German, one of the party, got up, and saidhe would never sit in a room in these countries with the doorshut, since, owing to his having done so, he had nearly losthis ife at Copiapopo. Accordingly he opened the door ; and nosooner had he done this, than he cried out, " Here it comesagain ?' and the famous shock commenced. The whole partyescaped. The danger in an earthquake is not from the timelost in opening a door, but from the chance of its becomingjammed by the movement of the walls.It is impossible to be much surprised at the fear whichnatives and old residents, though some of them known to bemen of great command of mind, so generally experience duringMay, 1835. parallel terraces. 423earthquakes. I think, however, this excess of panic may bepartly attributed to a want of habit in governing their fears ;the usual restraint of shame being here absent. Indeed, thenatives do not like to see a person indifferent. I heard of twoEnglishmen who, sleeping in the open air, during a smartshock, knowing there was no danger, did not rise. Thenatives cried out indignantly, " Look at those heretics, theywill not even get out of their beds ! "I spent two or three days in examining the step-formedterraces of shingle first described by Captain Basil Hall, in hiswork, so full of spirited descriptions, on the west coast ofAmerica. Mr. Lyell concluded from the account, that theymust have been formed by the sea during the gradual risingof the land. Such is the case : on some of the steps whichsweep round from within the valley, so as to front the coast,shells of existing species both lie on the surface, and areembedded in a soft calcareous stone. This bed of the mostmodern tertiary epoch passes downward into another, containingsome living species associated with others now lost.Amongst the latter may be mentioned shells of an enormouspena and an oyster, and the teeth of a gigantic shark, closelyallied to, or identical with the Zacharias Megalodon of ancientEurope ; the bones of which, or of some cetaceous animal,are also present, in a silicified state, in great numbers. AtGuasco, the phenomenon of the parallel terraces is verystrikingly seen: no less than seven perfectly level, butunequally broad plains, ascending by steps, occur on one orboth sides the vaUey. So remarkable is the contrast of thesuccessive horizontal lines, corresponding on each side, withthe irregular outline of the surrounding mountains, that itattracts the attention of even those who feel no interest regardingthe causes, which have modelled the surface of theland. The origin of the terraces of Coquimbo is preciselythe same, according to my view, with that of the plains ofPatagonia ; the only difference is that the plains are ratherbroader than the terraces, and that they front the Atlanticocean instead of a valley, — which valley, however, was Northern CHILE. May, 1835.merely occupied by an arm of the sea, but now by a fresh-waterriver. In every case it must be remembered, that the successivecliffs do not mark so many distinct elevations, buton the contrary, periods of comparative repose during thegradual and perhaps scarcely sensible rise of the land. Inthe valley of Guasco we have the record of seven such nightsof rest, in the action of the subterranean powers.May 21 ST. — I set out in company with Don JoseEdwards to the silver-mine of Arqueros, and thence up thevalley of Elque or Coquimbo. Passing through a mountainouscountry, we reached by nightfall the mines belonging toMr. Edwards. I enjoyed my night's rest here from a causewhich will not be fully understood in England, namely, theabsence of fleas ! The rooms in Coquimbo swarm with them ;but they will not hve at the elevation of three or four thousandfeet, even if brought there, as is constantly occurring atthese mines. It can scarcely be the trifling diminution oftemperature, but some other cause which is here destructiveto these troublesome insects. I spent the greater part of theensuing day in examining the mines. The veins occurabundantly scattered over several miles of hilly country ; yetit is only a few years since that they were discovered by awood-cutter. The mines are now in a bad state, though theyformerly yielded about 2000 pounds in weight of silver a year.It has been said " a person with a copper-mine wdl gain ;with silver he may gain ; but with gold he is sure to lose."This is not true : all the large ChiUan fortunes have beenmade by mines of the more precious metals. A short timesince an English physician returned to England from Copiapopo,taking with him the profits of one share in a silver-mine,which amounted to about 24,000 pounds sterling. Nodoubt a copper-mine with care is a sure game, whereas theother is gambling, or rather taking a ticket in a lottery.The owners lose great quantities of rich ores ; for no precautionscan prevent robbery. I heard of a man laying a bet withanother that one of his men should rob him before his face.The ore when brought out of the mine is broken into pieces.June, 1835. valley of coauiMBO. 425and the useless stone thrown on one side. A couple of theminers who were thus employed, pitched, as if by accident,two fragments away at the same moment, and then cried outfor a joke, " Let us see which rolls furthest." The owner,who was standing by, bet a cigar with his friend on therace. The miner by this means watched the very pointamongst the rubbish where the stone lay. In the eveninghe picked it up and carried it to his master, showing him arich mass of silver ore, and saying, " This was the stone onwhich you won a cigar by its rolling so far."May 23d. — We followed up the fertile valley, till wereached an Hacienda, belonging to a relation of Don Jose,where we stayed the ensuing day. I then rode one day^sjourney further, to see what were declared to be some petrifiedshells and beans. The former turned out to be so ; thelatter were small quartz pebbles. We passed through severalsmall villages ; and the valley was beautifully cultivated, andthe whole scenery very grand. We were here near the mainCordillera ; and the surrounding hills were very lofty. In aUparts of northern Chile, fruit-trees produce much moreabundantly at a considerable elevation near the Andes thanin the lower country. The figs and grapes of this part arefamous for their superiority, and are cultivated to a greatextent. This valley is, perhaps, the most productive onenorth of Quillota : I believe it contains, including Coquimbo,25,000 inhabitants. The next day I returned to the Hacienda,and thence, together with Don Jose, to Coquimbo.June 2d. — We set out for the Valley of Guasco, followingthe coast-road, which was considered rather lessdesert than the other. Our first day's ride was to a solitaryhouse, called Yerba Buena, where there was pasture for ourhorses. The shower mentioned as having fallen a fortnightago, only reached about halfway to Guasco ; we had, therefore,in the first part of our journey a most faint tinge ofgreen, which soon faded away. Even where brightest, itwas scarcely sufficient to remind one, of the fresh turf andbudding flowers during the spring of other countries. While426 NORTHERN CHILE. June, 1835.travelling through these deserts one feels like a prisonershut up in a gloomy courtyard, longing to see somethinggreen and to smell a moist atmosphere.June 3d. — Yerba Buena to Carizal. During the first partof the day we crossed a mountainous rocky desert ; and afterwardsa long deep sandy plain, scattered over with brokenmarine shells. There was very little water, and that littlesaline ; hence the few streamlets were bordered on each sideby white incrustations, amongst which succulent salt-lovingplants grew. The whole country, from the coast to the Cordillera,is desert and uninhabited. I saw traces only of oneliving animal in abundance : this was a Buhmus, the shells ofwhich were collected together in extraordinary numbers onthe driest spots. In the spring, one humble little plantsends out a few leaves, and on these the snails feed. Asthey are seen only very early in the morning, when theground is slightly damp from the dew, the Guasos believethey are born from it. I have observed in other places, thatextremely dry and sterile districts, where the soil is calcareous,are most favourable to an extraordinary increase ofland-shells. At Carizal there were a few cottages, somebrackish water, and a trace of cultivation : but it was withdifficulty that we purchased a Uttle corn and straw forour horses.4th. — Carizal to Sauce. We continued to ride over desertplains, tenanted by large herds of guanaco. We crossedalso the valley of Chaneral ; which, although the most fertileone between Guasco and Coquimbo, is very narrow, andproduces so little pasture, that we could not purchase anyfor our horses. At Sauce we found a very civil old gentlemansuperintending a copper-smelting furnace. As an especialfavour, he allowed me to purchase at a high price, anarmful of dirty straw, which was all the poor horses had forsupper after their long day's journey. Very few smelting furnacesare now at work in any part of Chile ; it is found moreprofitable, on account of the extreme scarcity of firewood,and of the loss from the clumsy Chilian method of reduction,to ship the ore for Swansea.June, 1835. guasco. 427The next day, we crossed some mountains to Freyrinain the valley of Guasco. During each day^s ride furthernorthward, the vegetation became more scanty; eventhe great candlestick cactus was here replaced by a differentand much smaller species. During the winter months, bothin northern Chile and in Peru, a uniform stratum of cloudshangs (at no great height) over the Pacific. From thesemountains we had a very striking view of the great white andbrilliant field, which sent arms up the valleys ; leaving islandsand promontories in the same manner, as the sea now intersectsthe Honos archipelago, or the west coast of Tierra delFuego.We staid two days at Freyrina. In the valley of Guascothere are four small towns. At the mouth, there is the portaspot entirely desert, and without any water in the immediateneighbourhood. Five leagues higher up standsFreyrina, a long straggling village, with decent whitewashedhouses. Again, ten leagues further up, BaUenar is situated,and above this Guasco Alto, a horticultural village, famousfor its dried fruit. On a clear day, the view up the valley isvery fine ; the straight opening is terminated at a great distanceby the outline of the snowy CordiUera ; on each sidean infinity of crossing lines blend together in a beautifulhaze. The foreground is singular, from the number of paralleland extensive terraces ; and the included strip of greenvaUey, with its willow bushes, is contrasted on both handsby the naked hills. That the surrounding country was mostbarren, will be readily believed, from the circumstance of ashower of rain not having fallen during the last thirteenmonths. The inhabitants heard with the greatest envy of therain in Coquimbo ; from the appearance of the atmospherethey had strong expectations of equally good fortune, which,a fortnight afterwards, was realized. I was at Copiapopo at thetime ; and there the people, with equal envy, talked of theabundant rain at Guasco. After two or three very dry years,perhaps with not more than one shower during the wholetime, a rainy year generally follows; and this does more428 N0R1 HERN CHILE. June, 1835.harm than even the drought. The river swells, and coverswith gravel and sand the narrow strip of ground, which aloneis fit for cultivation. The flood also injures the irrigatingditches. Great devastation had thus been caused threeyears ago.June 8th. — We rode on to Ballenar. As the rockymountains on each hand were concealed by clouds, theterrace-like plains gave the valley an appearance similar tothat of Santa Cruz, in Patagonia. I staid the followingday in the town, which is as large as Coquimbo and wellbuilt. It has only lately sprung up, and entirely owes itsprosperity to some silver-mines. Ballenar takes its namefrom Ballenagh, in Ireland, the birthplace of the familyof Higgins, who, under the Spanish government, werepresidents and generals in Chile.10th. — Instead of going direct to the town of Copiapopo, Idetermined to fall into the valley higher up and nearer theCordillera. We rode all day over an uninteresting country ;I am tired of repeating the epithets barren and sterile.These words, however, as commonly used, are comparative :I have always applied them to the plains of Patagonia; yetthe vegetation there can boast of spiny bushes and sometufts of grass, which is absolute fertility to any thing that canbe seen here. And here again there are not many spaces oftwo hundred yards square, where some little bush, cactus orlichen, may not be discovered by careful examination ; andin the soil seeds lie dormant ready to spring up during thefirst rainy winter. In Peru real deserts occur, over widetracts of country. In the evening we arrived at a valley,in which the bed of the streamlet was damp : following it up,we came to tolerably good water. During the night, thestream, before it is evaporated and absorbed, flows a leaguelower doom than during the day. Sticks were plentiful forfirewood, so that it was a good place of bivouac for us :but for the poor animals there was not a mouthful for themto eat.June 11th. — We rode without stopping for twelve hours.June, 1835. guasco to copia. 429till we reached an old smelting furnace, where there waswater and firewood ; but our horses again had nothing to eat,being shut up in an old courtyard. The line of road washilly, and the distant views interesting from the splendidweather, and the varied colours of the bare mountains. Itis a pity to see the sun shining constantly over so uselessa country ; such days should brighten a prospect of fieldsand gardens. The next day we reached the valley ofCopiapopo. I was heartily glad of it; for the whole journeywas a continued source of anxiety ; it was most disagreeableto hear, whilst eating our own supper, our horses gnawingthe posts to which they were tied, and to have no nxeans ofrelieving their hunger. To all appearance, however, theanimals were quite fresh ; and no one could have told thatthey had eaten nothing for the last fifty-five hours.I had a letter of introduction to Mr. Single, who receivedme very kindly at the Hacienda of Potrero Sect. Thisestate is between twenty and thirty miles long; but it isvery narrow, having generally a width of only two fields,one on each side the river. In some parts, the estate is ofno width, that is to say, the land cannot be irrigated, andtherefore is valueless, like the surrounding rocky desert.The small quantity of cultivated land in the whole line ofvalley, does not however so much depend on its inequality,or its unfitness for irrigation, as on the small supply ofwater. The river this year was remarkably fuU; in this partitreached as high as the horse's belly, and was about fifteenyards wide, and rapid. It gradually decreases in volume tillreaching the sea. This latter circumstance, however, rarelyhappens ; and once for a period of thirty years not a dropentered the Pacific. The inhabitants watch a storm overthe Cordillera with great interest; as one good fall of snowprovides them with water for the ensuing year. This is ofinfinitely more consequence than rain in the lower country.The latter, as often as it occurs, which is about once inevery two or three years, is a great advantage, because the430 NORTHERN CHILE. June, 1835.cattle and mules can for some time afterwards find pasturein the mountains. But without snow in the Andes, desolationextends throughout the valley. It is on record, thatthree times nearly all the inhabitants have been obliged toemigrate to the south. This year there was plenty of water,and every man irrigated his ground as much as he chose ;but it has frequently been necessary to post soldiers at thesluices, to see that each estate took only its proper allowanceduring so many hours in the week. The valley is saidto contain 12,000 souls, but its produce is sufficient onlyfor three months in the year; the rest of the supplybeing drawn from Valparaiso and the south. Before thediscovery of the famous silver-mines of Chanuncillo, Co-pianowas in a rapid state of decay; but now it is in avery thriving condition; and the town, which was completelyoverthrown by an earthquake, has been rebuilt.The valley of Copiapopo, forming a mere ribbon of green inadesert, runs in a very southerly direction ; so that it isof considerable length to its origin in the Cordillera. Thevalleys of Guasco and Copiapopo may both be considered asislands to the northward of ChUe, separated by deserts insteadof salt water. Beyond these, there is one other verymiserable valley, called Paposo, which contains about 200people ; and then there extends the real desert of Atacamaa barrier far worse than the most turbulent ocean.After staying a few days at Potrero Sect, I proceeded upthe valley to the house of Don Benito Cruz, to whom I hada letter of introduction. I found him most hospitable ; indeedit is impossible to bear too strong testimony to the kindnesswhich travellers receive in almost every part of SouthAmerica. The next day I hired some mules to take meby the ravine of Jolquera into the central Cordillera. Onthe second night the weather seemed to foretel a storm ofsnow or rain, and whilst lying in our beds we felt a triflingshock of an earthquake. The connexion between the latterphenomena and the weather has often been a disputedJune, 1835. Earthquakes. 431point: it appears to me to be one of very great interest,and not well understood. Humboldt* has remarked, "Itwould be difficult for a person, who has lived a long time inNew Andalusia, or in the low regions of Peru, to deny thatthe season, the most to be dreaded from the frequency ofearthquakes, is that of the beginning of the rains, which is,however, the time of thunder-storms. The atmosphere, andthe state of the surface of the globe, seem to have an influenceunknown to us, on the changes produced at greatdepths." In Northern Chile, from the extreme infrequencyof rain, or even of weather foreboding rain, the probabilityof accidental coincidences between the two phenomena necessarilybecomes very small ; yet the inhabitants in that partare most firmly convinced of some connexion between thestate of the atmosphere and the trembling of the ground.I was much struck by this, when mentioning to somepeople at Copiapopo that there had been a sharp shock atCoquimbo : they immediately cried, " How fortunate ! therewill be plenty of pasture there this year." To their mindsan earthquake foretold rain, as surely, as rain foretoldabundant pasture. Certainly it did so happen that on thevery day of the earthquake, that shower of rain fell, which Ihave described as in ten days producing a thin sprinklingof grass.Mr. Scope has put forth an ingenious idea, that theperiod of subterranean disturbance, where the force is just ona balance with the resistance, may be determined by a suddendecrease in atmospheric pressure, which over a wideextent of country might produce a considerable effect.According to this explanation, the earthquake comes on atthe given period from that state of the weather, which isgenerally accompanied by rain. But there is another classof phenomena, where the state of the weather evidentlyPersonal Narrative, vol. iv., p. 11. In the fourth chapter of thesecond volume, p. 217, Humboldt, however, appears to think that suchconnexion is fanciful.432 NORTHERN CHILE, june, 1835.appears a consequence (and not the determining cause) ofthe earthquake. I allude to those cases, when rain falls ata period of the year, at which it is a greater prodigy thanthe earthquake itself: I may instance the rain after theshock of November, 1822, at Valparaiso. A person mustbe somewhat habituated to these climates, to understandthe excessive improbability of rain falling at such seasons,except as a consequence of some law quite unconnected withthe ordinary course of the weather. In the case of greatvolcanic eruptions, as that of Coseguina, where torrents ofrain fell at a time of year most unusual for it, and " almostunprecedented in Central Americans* it is not difficult tounderstand that the volumes of vapour and clouds of ashes,might have disturbed the atmospheric equilibrium. Humboldtextends this view to the case of earthquakes ; butfor my part, I cannot conceive it possible, that the smallquantity of aeriform fluid which at such times escapes fromthe fissured ground, can produce such remarkable effects.Humboldt J has stated that, " on the days when the earthis shaken by violent shocks, the regularity of the horaryvariations of the barometer is not disturbed under the tropics.I have verified this observation at Guiana, at Lima, and atRiobamba ; and it is so much the more worthy of fixing theattention of natural philosophers, as at St. Domingo, at thetown of Cape Francois, it is asserted, that a water barometerwas observed to sink two inches and a half immediatelyCaldcleugh. Philosoph. Transact. 1835.+ Personal Narrative, vol. ii., p. 219. J Ibid., p. 217.§ Courrejolles, in the Journal de Phys., tome liv., p. 106. This depressionanswers only to two lines of mercury. The barometer remainedmotionless at Pignerol, in April, 1808. —ibid., t. Lxvii., p. 292.) [I mayadd that the earthquake alluded to by Courrejolles at p. 106, wasaccompanied bv a " trees-violent coup de vent ;" which explains the fall ofhis water barometer. More lately, Mr. Williams, in his Narrative ofMissionary Enterprise (p. 442), has given an account of a hurricanewhich devastated the Austral islands (S. W. of the Society Archipelago),and which at the Navigator Islands was accompanied by an earthquake.C. D.]June, 1S35. meteorological phenomena. 433before the earthquake of 1770- In the same manner it isrelated, that, at the destruction of Oran, a druggist fled withhis family, because observing accidentally a few minutesbefore the earthquake, the height of the mercury in his barometer,he perceived that the column sunk in an extraordinarymanner. I know not whether we can give credit to thisassertion." Mr. Alison, in a letter dated Valparaiso, informsme, that just before the earthquake of November, 1822, themercury in the tube of the barometer standing in his store,sank beneath the graduated part. The tube was a bentone ; nineteen inches being exposed, and the lowest graduatedpart corresponded to twenty-six English inches. Withthis third case, and more especially considering the unquestionablefact of rain so frequently following severeearthquakes, even at the most unusual seasons, I cannot concludeotherwise, than that there exists some connexion betweenthe subterranean and atmospheric disturbances, ofwhich we are at present quite ignorant.Mr. Miers,t in his account of the Valparaiso earthquake,November 19th, 1822, has added one more to the list ofcoincidences between luminous meteors and earthquakes.He says " one of very considerable size, in apparent dimensionslittle less than the moon, was observed in the southward,at no very great elevation. It traversed a considerablearch of the heavens, leaving behind it a long train of light ;and when it disappeared, it seemed to do so from explosion— as it leaped in the same manner as those which ejectmeteoric stones ; but in this instance no noise was heard toattend its extinction, nor was it known that any stonesfell. This occurred about half-past two o'clock in themorning after the earthquake." The earthquake itselfhappened at half-past ten o'clock. Mr. Miers then adds,that a friend of his 'travelling on the night of the 4th ofNovember, about a fortnight preceding the great earthquake,observed at a little past eleven o'clock in the northern sky,Miers 's Travels, vol. i., p. 395.VOL. III. 2 F434 NORTHERN CHILE. June, 1835.a large meteor of great splendours' It is remarkable thaton this same day, according to the Journal of Science,*Copiapopo to the northward was visited by a severe earthquake,which on the fifth was followed by a much moreviolent shock. Molina t states that the first shock whichannounced the great earthquake at midnight on the 24th ofMay, 1751, "was accompanied by a ball of fire, whichprecipitated itself from the Andes toward the sea." It issaid in the Encyclo. Metropolis. — (art. Meteorology) — " AtKingston, in Jamaica, in November 1812, a large meteorappeared a few minutes previous to some alarming andtremendous concussions." AguerrosJ states, on the authorityof Ovale, that in the morning of May 14th, 1633,Carelmapu (north of Chloe) was overthrown by a badearthquake, accompanied by a great noise ; and that whilethe people were considering the cause, they saw over ahigh hill near the village a globe of fire, which appearedto threaten the last day. It rose and quickly proceeded soas to fall in the sea, disturbing the neighbouring waters.This was accompanied by a great tempest, darkness, anda hail storm, in which pieces of ice fell as large asmusket-balls.I have copied the foregoing notices, because under anypoint of view, it is remarkable that in one quarter of theglobe there should have been so many coincidences betweenphenomena of not very common occurrence. It must, however,be observed, that the coincidence is not precise ; theVol. xvii.•f- Molina (Spanish edition), vol. i., p. 33. At six o'clock in the eveningof the 26th of May of the same year, that is about thirty-seven hoursafter the Concepcion earthquake, two meteoric stones fell near Agram inCroatia. They were seen coming ^o»2 the west, which is in an oppositedirection to the course of the Chilian meteor. This near coincidence oftime was of course only accidental.X Description Historial de Chloe, p. 104. " Heron sobre un monteo cerro alto immediate al pueblo, un globe de fuego que marcia amendsla ultima desgracia. Elevo se y sue lego a caer al mar, alterandoinmediatamente sus agues."June, 1835. meteors and earthquakes. 435meteors having been seen in some cases a little before,in others a Httle after the earthquake. From the accountgiven in Aguerros of the dilaters of the sea having beendisturbed, and from that by Miers of an apparent explosion,it vrould appear that these meteors must be thesame with those that accompany the fall of meteoric stones.This perhaps alone, is an argument that they are accidentalaccompaniments of earthquakes ; for there seems to be norational method of explaining the origin of meteoroliteson any hypothesis directly connected with our world. Itis however very singular, that all their constituent partsshould be of the same nature as those found on this earth,that the metals should be chiefly those most subject tomagnetic influence,^and that olivine should frequently bepresent; a mineral* which is exclusively confined to acertain class of volcanic products.To return to the valley of Copiapopo. Finding little ofinterest in this part of the ravine, we retraced our steps tothe house of Don Benito, where I staid two days collectingfossil shells and silicified wood. The latter was present inthe most extraordinary quantity: it was here that I founda cylindrical trunk, fifteen feet in circumference, projectingfrom the side of a hill. It was amusing to hear discussionsconcerning the nature of the fossil shells, — whether or notthey had been thus "born by nature," — carried on almostin the same terms as were used a century before in Europe.My geological examination of the country generally createda good deal of surprise amongst the Chilenos : it was longbefore they would be convinced that I was not hunting formines. This was sometimes troublesome. I found the mostOlivine is known to accompany basaltic in opposition to limestonerocks. Gmelin says, " Natron and potash characterize limestone ; ironand magnesia, basalt'' " Magnesia and iron show a great tendency toenter into combination with each other." These two latter substance sare main constituents of meteoric stones, while the alkalies are generallypresent in very small quantities. Gmelin on Limestone, EdinburghNew Philosoph. Journal, April, 1829.2 F 2436 NORTHERN CHILE. June, 1835,ready way of explaining my employment, was to ask themhow it was that they themselves were not curious concerningearthquakes and volcanoes ? — why some springs were hotand others cold ? — why there were mountains in Chile, andnot a hill in La Plata? These bare questions at oncesatisfied and silenced the greater number; some, however(like a few in England who are a century behindhand),thought that all such inquiries were useless and impious ;and that it was quite sufficient that God had thus made themountains.An order had recently been issued that all stray dogsshould be killed, and we saw many carcasses lying on thehio-h road. A great number had lately been affected withhydrophobia, and several men had been bitten, and had diedin consequence. On other occasions hydrophobia has prevailedin this valley. It is remarkable thus to find so strangeand dreadful a disease appearing time after time in the sameisolated spot. It has been remarked that certain villages inEngland are in like manner much more subject to this visitationthan others. Hydrophobia must be extremely rare onthe eastern side of the Andes, for Azara thought it was unknownin America ; and UUoa says the same with respect toQuito. I could not hear of a case having occurred in VanDiemen' s Land, or in Australia ; and Burchell says, duringthe five years he was at the Cape of Good Hope, he neverheard of an instance of it. Webster again asserts that at theAzores, hydrophobia has never occurred; and the sameobservation has been made with respect to Mauritius and St.Helena.* In so strange a disease, some information mightpossibly be gained by considering the circumstances underwhich it originates in distant climates.At night, a stranger arrived at the house of Don Benignantasked permission to sleep there. He said he had beenAzara's Travels, vol. i., p. 381. — Ulloa's Voyage, vol. ii., p. 28. —Burchell's Travels in Southern Africa, vol. ii., p. 524. — Webster's Descriptionof the Azores, p. 124.- — Voyage a I'lsle de France par un Officierdu Roi, tome i., p. 248. — Description of St. Helena, p. 123.June, 1835. copia. 43?wandering about the mountains for seventeen clays, havinglost his way. He started from Guasco, and being accustomedto the mountains, did not expect any difficulty infollowing the track to Copiapopo ; but he soon became involvedin a labyrinth of mountains, whence he could not escape.Some of his mules had fallen over precipices, and he hadbeen in great distress. His chief difficulty arose from notknowing where to find water in the lower country, so thathe was obliged to keep bordering the central ranges.We returned down the valley, and on the 22d reached thetown of Copiapopo. The lower part of the valley is broad,forming a fine plain like that of Aconcagua or Quillota.The town covers a considerable space of ground, each housepossessing a garden : but it is an uncomfortable place, andthe dwellings are poorly furnished. Every one seems bentonthe one object of making money, and then migratingas quickly as possible. All the inhabitants are more or lessdirectly concerned with mines ; and mines and ores are thethe sole subjects of conversation. Necessaries of all sortsare very dear ; as the distance from the town to the port iseighteen leagues, and the land carriage very expensive. Afowl costs five or six shillings ; meat is nearly as dear as inEngland ; firewood, or rather sticks, are brought on donkeysfrom a distance of two and three days' journey within theCordillera ; and pasturage for animals is a shilling a day rall this for South America is wonderfully exorbitant.June 26th. — I hired a guide and eight mules to take meinto the Cordillera by a different line from my last expedition.As the country was utterly desert, we took a cargoand a half of barley mixed with chopped straw. About twoleagues above the town, a broad valley called the " Despoiled,"or uninhabited, branches off from the one by whichwe had descended. Although a valley of the grandest dimensions,and leading to a pass across the Cordillera, yet it iscompletely drj^, excepting perhaps, for a few days duringsome very rainy winter. The bottom of the main valley wasnearly flat, and the sides of the crumbling mountains were438 NORTHERN CHILE. June, 1835.but little furrowed by ravines. No considerable river couldever have poured its waters over the bed of shingle, withouthaving excavated a channel similar to those occurring in thesouthern valleys. I feel little doubt that it was left in thestate we now see it, by the gradually retiring sea. The dryvalleys mentioned by travellers in Peru, probably owe theirorigin to a similar agency, and not to the running streams ofany former period. I observed in one place, where a ravine(which amongst any other mountains would have been calleda grand valley), joined the Despoblado, that the bed of thelatter, though composed merely of sand and gravel, was higherthan that of its tributary. A mere rivulet of water, in thecourse of an hour, would have cut a channel for itself; but itwas evident that centuries had passed away, and no suchrivulet had drained these great valleys. It was curious tobehold this machinery (if such a term may be used) for thedrainage, all, with the last trifling exception, perfect, yetwithout any signs of activity. Every one must have remarkedhow mud-banks, left by the retiring tide, imitate in miniaturea country with hill and dale : and here we find a model,only on a grander scale, formed by the waves of a retiringocean. Let thousands of years replace minutes of the tidalchange, and the difference between soft mud and hard rockwill barely modify the result. If a shower of rain falls on themud-bank, when left dry, it deepens the shallow lines of excavation: and so will it be with the rain of successive centurieson the bank of rock and soil, which we call a continent.We rode on after it was dark, till we reached a sideravine, with a small well called " Agua amarga." The waterdeserved its name, for besides being saline it was mostoffensively putrid and bitter; so that we could not forceourselves to drink either tea or mate. I suppose the distancefrom the river of Copiapopo to this spot was at leasttwenty-five or thirty English miles ; in the whole space therewas not a single drop of water, the country almost deservingthe name of desert in the strictest sense. Yet about halfwaywe passed the old Indian ruins near Punta Gorda, which IJune, 1835. valley of despoiled. 439have already mentioned. I noticed also in front of some ofthe valleys, which branch off from the Despoblado, twopiles of stones placed a little distance apart, and directed so asto point up the mouth of the small valley. My companionsknew nothing about them, and only answered my queries bytheir imperturbable " queen same ?"June 27th. — We set out early in the morning, and bymid-day reached the ravine of Maypole, where there is atiny rill of water, with a little vegetation, and even a fewalgarroba (a mimosa) trees. On this latter account a smeltingfurnace had formerly been built here. We found a solitaryman in charge of it, whose sole employment was huntingguanacoes. At night it froze sharply; but having plenty offirewood, we kept ourselves warm.28th. — We continued gradually ascending as we followedthe valley, which now had assumed the character of a ravine.During the day we saw several guanacoes, and the track ofthe closely-allied species, called the Vicuna. This latteranimal is pre-eminently alpine in its habits ; it seldomdescends much below the limit of perpetual snow, andtherefore haunts even a more lofty and sterile situation thanthe guanaco. The only other animal Which we saw in anynumber was a small fox. I suppose this animal preys onthe mice and other small rodents, which, as long as there isthe least vegetation subsist in considerable numbers in verydesert places. In Patagonia, even on the borders of theSalinas, where a drop of fresh water can never be found,these little animals swarm. Next to lizards, mice appear tobe able to support existence on the smallest and driestportions of the earth, — even on islets in the midst of greatoceans. I believe it will be found, that several islands, whichpossess no other warm blooded quadruped, have small rodentspeculiar to themselves.The scenery on all sides showed desolation, brightened,and made palpable, by a clear, unclouded sky. Custom excludesthe feeling of sublimity, and when this is wanting,such scenery is rather the reverse of interesting. We440 NORTHERN CHILE. June, 1835.bivouacked at the " primer linea," or the first Une of the partitionof the waters. The streams, however, on the east side donot flow to the Atlantic, but into an elevated district, inthe middle of which there is a large salina, or salt lake ; —thus forming a little Caspian sea at the elevation, perhaps, oftenthousand feet. Where we slept, there were some considerablepatches of snow, but they do not remain throughoutthe year. The winds in these lofty regions obey very regularlaws : everyday a fresh breeze blows up the vaUey, and at night,an hour or two after sunset, the air from the cold regionsabove descends, as through a funnel. This night it blew agale of wind, and the temperature must have been considerablybelow the freezing-point, for water in a short time becamea block of ice. No clothes seemed to oppose anyobstacle to the air ; I suffered very much from the cold, sothat I could not sleep, and in the morning rose with mybody quite dull and benumbed.In the Cordillera further southward, people lose their livesfrom snow-storms ; here, this sometimes happens fromanother cause. My guide, when a boy of fourteen years old,was passing the Cordillera with some others, in the month ofMay ; and while in the central parts, a furious gale of windarose so that the men could hardly stick on their mules,and stones were flying along the ground. The day wascloudless and not a speck of snow fell, but the temperaturewas low. It is probable that the thermometer would nothave stood very many degrees below the freezing-point, butthe effect on their bodies, ill protected by clothing, would bein proportion to the rapidity of the current of cold air. Thegale lasted for more than a day ; the men began to lose aUtheir strength, and the mules would not move onwards.My guldens brother tried to return, but he perished, and hisbody was found two years afterwards, lying by the side of hismule near the road, with the bridle still in his hand. Twoother men in the party lost their fingers and toes, and out oftwo hundred mules and thirty cows, only fourteen of theformer escaped ave. Many years ago the whole of a largeJuly, 1835. Copia. 441party are supposed to have perished from a similar cause,but their bodies to this day have never been discovered. Theunion of a cloudless sky, low temperature, and a furiousgale of wind, must be I should think, in all parts of the world,an unusual occurrence.June 29th. — We gladly travelled down the valley to ourformer night's lodging, and thence to near the Agua amarga.On July 1st, we reached the valley of Copiapopo. The smell ofthe fresh clover was quite delightful, after the scentless air ofthe dry sterile Despoblado. Whilst staying in the town, Iheard an account from several of the inhabitants of a hill inthe neighbourhood, which they called " El Bramador,"—the roarer or blower. I did not at the time pay sufficientattention to the account ; but as far as I understood, the hillwas covered by sand, and the noise was produced only whenpeople, by ascending it, put the sand in motion. Uponreading an article in the Edinburgh Journal,* I was surprisedto find the same circumstances, described in detail on theauthority of Sweeten and Ehrenbergh, as the cause ofthe sounds, which have been heard by many travellers onMount Sinai near the Red Sea. One person with whom Iconversed had himself heard the noise; he described it asvery surprising ; and he distinctly stated, that although hecould not understand how it was effected, yet it was necessaryto set the sand rolling down the acclivity. I canvouch for the quantity of loose sand lying on the bare granitemountains in this neighbourhood. From the position of thehill, and from the account which I received, the phenomenoncertainly does not appear to have any direct connexion withvolcanic causes. I may remark that a horse walking overdry and coarse sand, causes a peculiar chirping noise fromthe friction of the particles : a fact which I have severaltimes noticed on the coast of Brazil.Three days afterwards I heard of the Beagle's arrival atEdinburgh Philosophical Journal, January, 1830, p. 74. Also, anotherarticle in the number for April in the same year, p. 238. See alsoDaubed on Volcanoes, p. 438.442 PERU. July, 1835.the port, which is distant eighteen leagues. There is verylittle land cultivated below the town. The ide expanse ofthe valley supports a wretched wiry grass, which even thedonkeys can hardly eat. This poorness of the vegetation isowing to the quantity of saline matter with which the soil isimpregnated. Layers of sulphate and carbonate of soda,even several inches thick, occur in some parts. The portconsists of an assemblage of miserable little hovels, situatedat the foot of some sterile plains and hills. At present, fromthe river reaching the sea, the inhabitants enjoy the advantageof having fresh water within a mile and a half. On thebeach there were large piles of merchandise, and the littleplace had an air of activity. In the evening I gave my adioswith a hearty good will, to my companion Marian Gonzales,with whom I had ridden so many leagues in Chile. The nextmorning the Beagle sailed for Iquique, lat. 20° 12' on thecoast of Peru.July 12th. — We anchored in the port of Iquique. Thetown contains about a thousand inhabitants, and stands on alittle plain of sand at the foot of a great wall of rock, 2000feet in height, which here forms the coast. The whole isutterly desert. A light shower of rain falls only once invery many years ; and hence the ravines are filled with detritus,and the mountain sides covered by piles of fine whitesand, even a thousand feet high. During this season of theyear, a heavy bank of clouds extending parallel to the ocean,seldom rises above the wall of rocks on the coast. Theaspect of the place was most gloomy ; the little port, with itsfew vessels, and small group of wretched houses, seemedoverwhelmed and out of all proportion with the rest of thescene.The inhabitants live like persons on board a ship ; everynecessary coming from a distance. Water is brought inboats from Pisagua, about forty miles to the northward andis sold at the rate of nine reals (4s. 6d.) an eighteen-galloncask: I bought a wine-bottle full for threepence. In likeJuly, 1835, iQUiQUE. 443manner firewood, and of course every article of food, isimported. Very few animals can be maintained in such aplace : on the ensuing morning I hired, with difficulty at theprice of four pounds sterling, two mules and a guide to takeme to the saltpetre works. These are the present support ofIquique. During one year the value of one hundred thousandpounds sterling was exported to France and England.This saltpetre does not properly deserve to be so called ; forit consists of nitrate of soda, and not of potash, and is thereforeof much less value. It is said to be principally used inthe manufacture of nitric acid. Owing to its deliquescentproperty it will not serve for gunpowder. Formerly therewere two exceedingly rich silver-mines in this neighbourhood,but they now produce very little.Our arrival in the offing caused some little apprehension.Peru was in a state of anarchy ; and each party havingdemanded a contribution, the poor town of Iquique was intribulation, thinking the evil hour was come. The peoplehad also their domestic troubles ; a short time before, threeFrench carpenters had broken open the two churches, duringthe same night, and stolen all the plate : one of the robbers,however, subsequently confessed, and the plate was recovered.The convicts were sent to Arequipa, which, thoughthe capital of this province, is 200 leagues distant : thegovernment there thought it a pity to punish such usefulworkmen, who could make all sorts of furniture ; and accordinglyliberated them. Things being in this state, thechurches were again broken open, but the plate this timewas not recovered. The inhabitants became dreadfullyenraged, and declaring that none but heretics would thuseat God Almighty," proceeded to torture some Englishmen,with the intention of afterwards shooting them. Atlast the authorities interfered, and peace was established.July 13th. — In the morning I started for the saltpetreworks, a distance of fourteen leagues. Having ascended thesteep coast mountains by a zigzag sandy track, we soon camein view of the mines of Guantajaya and St. Rosa. These444 PERU. July, 1835.two small villages are placed at the very mouths of the mines.If the town of Iquique appeared desolate, these, perched uponhills, had a still more unnatural aspect. We did notreach the saltpetre works till after sunset, having ridden allday across an undulating country, a complete and utter desert.The road was streamed with the bones and dried skins of themany beasts of burden, which had perished on it from fatigue.Excepting the Vultur aura, which preys on the carcasses,I saw neither bird, quadruped, reptile, or insect. On the coastmountains, at the elevation of about 2000 feet, where duringthis season the clouds generally hang, a very few cacti Averegrowing in the clefts of rock ; and the loose sand was strewedover with a simple lichen, which lies on the surface quiteunattached. This plant belongs to the genus Laconia,and somewhat resembles the reindeer Lichen. In someparts it was in sufficient quantity to tinge the sand, asseen from a distance, of a pale yellowish colour. Furtherinland, during the whole ride of fourteen leagues, Isaw only one other vegetable production, and that was amost minute yellow lichen, growing on the bones of the deadmules. This was the first true desert which I had seen :the effect on me was not impressive ; but I believe this wasowing to my having become gradually accustomed to suchscenes, as I rode northward from Valparaiso, throughCoquimbo to Copiapopo. The appearance of the countrywas remarkable, from being covered by a thick crust ofcommon salt, and of a saliferous sandstone, which properlydeserves the name of alluvium. The salt is white, veryhard, and compact. It occurs in water-worn nodules, whichproject from the agglutinated sand or soft sandstone.The appearance of this superficial mass, very closely resembledthat of a country after snow, before the last dirtypatches have thawed. The rocks of which the mountains arecomposed are sahferous ; and I imagine, the very small quantityof rain that falls, is sufficient only to wash the salt from thehigher strata, and that afterwards it concretes in nodules andpatches, in the sandy soil of the valleys. Whatever its originJuly, 1835. IQUIQUE. 445may be, the existence of a crust of a soluble substance over thewhole face of the country, shows how extraordinarily dry theclimate must have been for a period long antecedent.At night I slept at the house of the osier of one of thesaltpetre mines. The country is here equally unproductivewith that near the coast ; but water, though having rather abitter and brackish taste, can be procured by digging. Thewell at this house was thirty six yards deep. As scarcelyany rain falls, it is evident the water is not derived fromthat source ; indeed if it were, it could not fail to be as saltas brine, for the whole surrounding country is incrustedwith various saline substances. We must therefore concludethat it percolates from some distant and more humidregion, probably the mountains of the higher Cordillera. Inthat direction there are a few small villages, such as Tarapaca,where the inhabitants, having more water, are enabled toirrigate some little land, and produce hay, on which themules and asses employed in carrying the saltpetre are fed.The nitrate of soda is sold at the ships side at fourteenshillings per hundred pounds. The chief expense is the transportto the sea-coast. The mine itself consists of a stratumbetween two and three feet thick, of the hard and nearly puresalt, lying close beneath the surface. The stratum follows themargin of a grand basin or plain, which manifestly must oncehave been either a lake or inland sea : the elevation at presentis 3300 feet above the level of the Pacific. On our return wemade a detour by the mines of Guantajaya. The villageconsists solely of the houses of the miners, and the place isutterly destitute of every necessary ; — even water beingbrought thirty miles on the backs of animals. At presentthe mines yield little ; though formerly they were very productive.One has a depth of four hundred yards, and out ofit masses of silver were taken so pure, that it was only requiredto melt them in order to run them into bars. Wereached Iquique after sunset : I went on board, and then theBeagle weighed for Lima. I Alas very glad to have seen446 PERU. July? 1835.this place, as I understand it is a good type of the greaterpart of the coast of Peru.July 19th. — We anchored in the bay of Callao, the seaportof Lima, the capital of Peru. We staid here six weeks,but from the troubled state of public affairs, I saw verylittle of the country. During our whole visit the climatewas far from being so delightful as it is generally represented.A dull heavy bank of clouds constantly hung over the land,so that during the first sixteen days I had only one view ofthe Cordillera behind IJma. These mountains, seen instages, one above the other, through openings in the clouds,had a very grand appearance. It has almost become a proverb,that rain never falls in the lower part of Peru. Yetthis can hardly be considered correct; for during almostevery day of our visit there was a thick drizzling mist,which was sufficient to make the streets muddy and onesclothes damp : this the people are pleased to call Peruviandew. That much rain does not fall is very certain, for thehouses are covered only vnth. flat roofs vide of hardenedmud ; and on the mole, ship-loads of wheat were piled up,and are thus left for weeks together without any shelter.I cannot say I liked the very little I saw of Peru : in summer,however, it is said that the climate is much pleasant.In all seasons, both inhabitants and foreigners suffer fromsevere attacks of ague. This disease is common on thewhole coast of Peru, but is unknown in the interior. Theattacks of illness which arise from miasma never fail toappear most mysterious. So difficult is it to judge from theaspect of a country, whether or not it is healthy, that if aperson had been told to choose within the tropics a situationappearing favourable for health, very probably he wouldhave named this coast. The plain round the outskirts ofCallao is sparingly covered with a coarse grass, and in someparts there are a few stagnant, though very small, pools ofwater. The miasma, in all probability, arises from these :IJuly, 1835. LIMA. 447for the town of Arica was similarly circumstanced, and itshealthiness was much improved by the drainage of thewater. The miasma is not always produced by a luxuriantvegetation with an ardent climate ; for many parts of Brazil,even where there are marshes and a rank vegetation, aremuch more healthy than this sterile coast of Peru. Thedensest forests in a temperate climate, as in Chloe, do notseem in the slightest degree to affect the healthy conditionof the atmosphere.The island of St. Jago, at the Cape de Herds, offersanother strongly-marked instance of a country which anyonewould have expected to find most healthy, being verymuch the contrary. I have described the bare and openplains as supporting, during a few weeks after the rainyseason, a thin vegetation, which directly withers awayand dries up : at that period the air appears to becomepoisonous; both natives and foreigners often becomingaffected with violent fevers. On the other hand, theGalapagos Archipelago, in the Pacific, with a similar sod,and periodically subject to the same process of vegetation,is perfectly healthy. Humboldt has observed, that, " underthe torrid zone, the smallest marshes are the most dangerous,being surrounded, as at Vera Cruz and Cartagena,with an arid and sandy soil, which raises the temperatureof the ambient airs'* I must observe, however,that on the coast of Peru the temperature is not hot to anyexcessive degree; and perhaps in consequence, the intermittentfevers are not of the most malignant order.In all unhealthy countries the greatest risk is run bysleeping on shore. Is this owing to the state of the bodyduring sleep, or to a greater abundance of miasma at suchtimes ? It appears certain that those who stay on board avessel, though anchored at only a short distance from thecoast, generally suffer less than those actually on shore. OnPolitical Essay on the Kingdom of New Spain, vol. iv., p. 199.448 PERU. July, 1835.the other hand, I have heard of one remarkable case wherea fever broke out among the crew of a man-of-war somehundred miles off the coast of Africa, at the very same timethat one of those fearful periods of death commenced atSierraLeone. It maybe remarked, that of the most destructivediseases, which bear an evident relation to climate, and which(as if by the addition of some direct poison) affect bothnatives and strangers, nearly all originate in the hotterregions of the earth. As geological induction shows that theclimate, during the periods antecedent to the present, hadan extra-tropical character, so, in all probability, there Avouldbe an extra tendency to disease, and we can therefore seethat the introduction of man being, as generally supposed,recent, is an adaptation to the existing condition of theworld.No state in South America, since the declaration of independence,has suffered more from anarchy than Peru. Atthe time of our visit there were four chiefs in arms contendingfor supremacy in the government : if one succeededin becoming for a time very powerful, the others coalescedagainst him ; but no sooner were they victorious, thanthey were again disunited, and hostile to each other.The other day, at the Anniversary of the Independence,high mass was performed, the President partaking of thesacrament : during the Te Deem laxidamus, instead of eachregiment displaying the Peruvian flag, a black one withdeath's head was unfurled. Imagine a government underwhich such a scene could be ordered, on such anoccasion, to be typical of their determination of fighting tothe death ! This state of affairs happened at a time veryunfortunately for me, as I was precluded from taking anyexcursions much beyond the limits of the towns. Thebarren island of S. Lorenzo, which forms the harbour, wasnearly the only place where one could walk securely. Theupper part, which is about 1200 feet in height, during thisseason of the year, (winter) comes within the lower limit ofJuly, 1835. LIMA. 449the clouds ; and in consequence of this, an abundant cryptogamicvegetation, and a few flowers, covered the summit.On the hills near Lima, at an elevation but little greater,the ground was carpeted with moss, and beds of beautifulyellow lilies, called Amancaes. This indicates a verymuch greater degree of humidity than at a correspondingaltitude at Iquique. Travelling northward, the climate becomesdamper, till on the banks of the Guayaquil, nearlyunder the equator, we find the most luxuriant forests. Thechange, however, from the sterile coast of Peru to that fertileland, is described as taking place rather abruptly, in thelatitude of Cape Blancoo, two degrees south of Guayaquil.Callao is a filthy, ill-built, small seaport. The inhabitants,both there and at Lima, present every imaginable shade ofmixture, between European, Negro, and Indian blood. Theyappear a depraved, drunken set of people. The atmospherewas loaded with foul smells, and that peculiar one, whichmay be perceived in almost every town within the tropics, washere very strong. The fortress, which withstood Lord Cochrane'slong siege, has an imposing appearance. But the President,during our stay, sold the brass guns, and proceededto dismantle parts of it. The reason assigned was, that hehad not an officer to whom he could trust so important acharge. He himself had good reasons for knowing this, ashehad obtained the presidentship by rebelling while incharge of this same fortress. After we left South America,he paid the penalty in the usual way, by being conquered,taken prisoner, and shot.Lima stands on a plain in a valley, formed during thegradual retreat of the sea. It is distant seven miles fromCallao, and is elevated 500 feet above it ; but from the slopebeing very gradual, the road appears absolutely level; sothat when at Lima it is difficult to believe one has ascendedsome hundred feet. Humboldt has remarked on this singularlydeceptive case. Steep, barren hills rise like islandsfrom the plain, which is divided, by straight mud-walls, intolarge green fields. In these scarcely a tree grows excepting aVOL. III. 2 G450 PERU. July, 1835.few willows ; and the presence of an occasional clump of bananasand of oranges, alone reminded one that the landscape ofa country in latitude 12° might have boasted of a far moresplendid vegetation. The city of Lima is now in a wretchedstate of decay : the streets are nearly unpaved, and heapsof filth are piled up in all directions ; where the black galli-naxos,tame as poultry, pick up bits of carrion. The houseshave generally an upper story, built, on account of the earthquakes,of plastered woodwork ; but some of the old ones,which are now used by several families, are immensely large,and would rival in suites of apartments the most magnificentin any place. Lima, the City of the Kings, must formerlyhave been a splendid town. The extraordinary number ofchurches, even at the present day, gives it a peculiar andstriking character, especially when viewed from a short distance.One day I went out with some merchants to hunt in theimmediate vicinity of the city. Our sport was very poor ;but I had an opportunity of seeing the ruins of one of theancient Indian villages, with its hill-like mound in thecentre. The remains of houses, enclosures, irrigating streams,and burial mounds, scattered over this plain, cannot fail togive one a high idea of the condition and number of theancient population. When their earthenware, woollen clothes,utensils of elegant forms cut out of the hardest rocks, toolsof copper, ornaments of precious stones, palaces and hydraulicworks, are considered, it is impossible not to respectthe considerable advance made by them in the arts of civilization.The burial mounds, called Huacas, are really stupendous; although in some places it is only a natural hillwhich appears to have been incased and modelled.There is also another and very different class of ruins,which possesses some interest, namely, those of old Callao,overwhelmed by the great earthquake of 1746, and its accompanyingwave. The destruction must have been more completeeven than at Concepcion. Quantities of shingle almostconceal the foundations of the walls, and vast masses ofJuly, 1835. RUINS op callao. 451brickwork appear to have been whirled about by the retiringwaves like pebbles. It has been stated that the land subsidedduring this memorable shock: I could not discoverany proof of this ; yet it seems far from improbable, for theform of the coast must certainly have undergone somechange since the foundation of the old town ; as no peoplein their senses would willingly have chosen for their buildingplace the narrow spit of shingle on which the ruins now stand.On the island of San Lorenzo, there are very satisfactoryproofs of elevation within the recent period : this of coursewould not contravene the belief of a small subsidence, if anysigns of such movement could be discovered. The side ofthe mountain fronting the bay on that island, is worn intothree obscure terraces, which are covered by masses ofshells many hundred tons in weight, of species now existingon the beach. Several of the univalves had serpuleeand small balani attached on their insides; proving that theymust have remained some time, after the animal had died, atthe bottom of the sea. In such cases we may feel sure thatthey had not been carried up, as has sometimes been believed,either by birds or men for food.When examining the beds of shells, which have beenraised above the level of the sea, on other parts of the coast,I often felt curious to trace their final disappearance fromdecay. On the island of San Lorenzo, this could be donein the most satisfactory manner : at a small height the shellswere quite perfect ; on a terrace, eighty-five feet above thesea, they were partially decomposed and coated by a soft scalysubstance ; at double this altitude a thin layer of calcareouspowder beneath the soil, without a trace of organic structure,was all that could be discovered. This highly curious andsatisfactory gradation of change, it is evident could be tracedonly under the peculiar conditions of this climate, where rainnever falls so as to wash away the particles of shells in theirlast stage of decomposition. I was much interested by findingembedded, together with pieces of sea-weed in the massof shells, in the eighty-five foot bed, a bit of cotton-thread,2 G 2452 PERU. July, 1835plaited rush, and the head of a stalk of Indian corn.This fact, coupled nth another, which vnW he mentioned,proves I think the amount of eighty-five feet elevation sinceman inhabited this part of Peru. On the coast of Patagoniaand La Plata, where perhaps the movements havebeen slower, there is evidence, as we have seen, that severalmammalia have become extinct during a smaller change oflevel. At Valparaiso, where there exist abundant proofs ofrecent elevation to a greater altitude than in this part ofPeru, I can show that the greatest possible change duringthe last 220 years, has not exceeded the small measure offifteen feet.On the mainland in front of San Lorenzo, near Bellavista,there is an extensive and level plain, at the height of abouta hundred feet. The section on the coast shows that thelower part consists of alternating layers of sand and impureclay, together with some gravel ; and the surface, to the depthof from three to six feet, of a reddish loam, containing a fewscattered sea-shells, and numerous small fragments of coarsered earthenware. At first I was inclined to believe that thissuperficial bed must have been deposited beneath the sea ; butI afterwards found in one spot, that it covered an artificialfloor of round stones. The conclusion which then seemedmost probable was, that at a period when the land stood at aless height, there was a plain very similar to the one nowsurrounding Callao, which being protected by a shingle beach,is raised but very little above the level of the sea. On thisplain, with its clay beds, I imagine the Indians manufacturedtheir earthen vessels ; and that, during some violent earthquake,the sea broke over the beach and converted the plaininto a temporary lake, as happened in 1713* around Callao.The water would then deposit mud, containing fragments ofpottery from the kilns, and shells from the sea. This bedwith fossil earthenware occurring at about the same altitudewith the terrace on San Lorenzo, confirms the supposedamount of elevation within the human period.Fresher's Voyage.CHAPTER XIX.Islands volcanic — Number of craters — Leafless bushes — Colony at CharlesIsland — James Island— Salt-lake in crater —-character of vegetation —Ornithology, curious finches — Great tortoises, habits of, paths to thewells — Marine lizard feeds on sea-weed — Terrestrial species, burrowinghabits, herbivorous — Importance of reptiles in the Archipelago — Fewand minute insects — American type of organization — Species confined tocertain islands — Tameness of birds — Falkland Islands — Fear of manan acquired instinct.GALAPAGOS ARCHIPELAGO.September 15tii. — The Beagle arrived at the southernmostof the Galapagos islands. This archipelago consistsof ten principal islands, of which five much exceed the othersin size. They are situated under the equatorial line, andbetween five and six hundred miles to the westward of thecoast of America. The constitution of the whole is volcanic.With the exception of some ejected fragments of granite,which have been most curiously glazed and altered by theheat, every part consists of lava, or of sandstone resultingfrom the attrition of such materials. The higher islands,(which attain an elevation of three, and even four thousandfeet) generally have one or more principal craters towardstheir centre, and on their flanks smaller orifices. I have noexact data from which to calculate, but I do not hesitate toaffirm, that there must be, in all the islands of the archipelago,at least two thousand craters. These are of twokinds ; one, as in ordinary cases, consisting of scoriae andlava, the other of finely-stratified volcanic sandstone. Thelatter in most instances have a form beautifully symmetrical :their origin is due to the ejection of mud, — that is, fine volcanicashes and water, — without any lava.Considering that these islands are placed directly underthe equator, the climate is far from being excessively hot ; a454 GALAPAGOS ARCHIPELAGO. Sept. 1835.circumstance which, perhaps, is chiefly owing to the singularlylow temperature of the surrounding sea. Exceptingduring one short season, very little rain fais, and even thenit is not regular : but the clouds generally hang low. Fromthese circumstances the lower parts of the islands are extremelyarid, whilst the summits, at an elevation of a thousandfeet or more, possess a tolerably luxuriant vegetation.This is especially the case on the windward side, which firstreceives and condenses the moisture from the atmosphere.In the morning (l7th,) we landed on Chatham Island,which, like the others, rises with a tame and rounded outline,interrupted only here and there by scattered hillocks — theremains of former craters. Nothing could be less invitingthan the first appearance. A broken field of black basalticlava is every where covered by stunted brushwood, whichshows little signs of life. The dry and parched surface,having been heated by the noonday sun, gave the air a closeand sultry feeling, like that from a stove : we fancied eventhe bushes smelt unpleasantly. Although I diligently triedto collect as many plants as possible, I succeeded in gettingonly ten kinds ; and such wretched-looking little weeds wouldhave better become an arctic, than an equatorial Flora.The thin woods, which cover the lower parts of all theislands, excepting where the lava has recently flowed, appearfrom a short distance quite leafless, like the deciduous treesof the northern hemisphere in winter. It was some timebefore I discovered, that not only almost every plant was infuU leaf, but that the greater number were now in flower.After the period of heavy rains, the islands are said to appearfor a short time partially green. The only other country, inwhich I have seen a vegetation with a character at all approachingto this, is at the volcanic island of FernandoNoronha, placed in many respects under similar conditions.The natural history of this archipelago is very remarkable :it seems to be a little world within itself; the greater numberof its inhabitants, both vegetable and animal, being foundSept. 1835. VOLCANOES. 455nowhere else. As I shall refer to this subject again, I willonly here remark, as forming a striking character on firstlanding, that the birds are strangers to man. So tame andunsuspecting were they, that they did not even understandwhat was meant by stones being thrown at them ; and quiteregardless of us, they approached so close that any numbermight have been killed with a stick.The Beagle sailed round Chatham Island, and anchored inseveral bays. One night I slept on shore, on a part of theisland where some black cones — the former chimneys of thesubterranean heated fluids — were extraordinarily numerous.From one small eminence, I counted sixty of these truncatedhillocks, which were all surmounted by a more or lessperfect crater. The greater number consisted merely ofa ring of red scoria?, or slags, cemented together : and theirheight above the plain of lava, was not more than from fiftyto a hundred feet. From their regular form, they gave thecountry a workshop appearance, which strongly reminded meof those parts of Staffordshire where the great iron-countriesare most numerous.The age of the various beds of lava was distinctly markedby the comparative growth, or entire absence, of vegetation.Nothing can be imagined more rough and horrid than thesurface of the more modern streams. These have been aptlycompared to the sea petrified in its most boisterous moments :no sea, however, would present such irregular undulations,or would be traversed by such deep chasms. All the cratersare in an extinct condition ; and although the age of the differentstreams of lava could be so clearly distinguished, it isprobable they have remained so for many centuries. Thereis no account in any of the old voyagers of any volcano on thisisland having been seen in activity; yet since the time ofDampier (1684), there must have been some increase in thequantity of vegetation, otherwise so accurate a person wouldnot have expressed himself thus : — " Four or five of the easternmostislands are rocky, barren, and hilly, producing neither456 GALAPAGOS ARCHIPELAGO. Sept. 1835.tree, herb, nor grass, but a few dildoe (cactus) trees, except bythe sea-side"* This description is at present applicable onlyto the western islands, where the volcanic forces are infrequentactivity.The day, on which I visited the little craters, was glowinghot, and the scrambling over the rough surface, and throughthe intricate thickets, was very fatiguing ; but I was wellrepaid by the Cyclopian scene. In my walk I met twolarge tortoises, each of which must have weighed at leasttwo hundred pounds. One was eating a piece of cactus,and when I approached, it looked at me, and then quietlywalked away : the other gave a deep hiss and drew in itshead. These huge reptiles, surrounded by the black lava,the leafless shrubs, and large cacti, appeared to my fancylike some antediluvian animals.September 23d. — The Beagle proceeded to CharlesIsland. This archipelago has long been frequented, first bythe Buccaneers, and latterly by whalers, but it is only withinthe last six years, that a small colony has been establishedon it. The inhabitants are between two and three hundredin number : they nearly all consist of people of colour, whohave been banished for political crimes from the Republicof the Equator (Quito is the capital of this state) to whichthese islands belong. The settlement is placed about fourand a half miles inland, and at an elevation probably of athousand feet. In the first part of the road we passedthrough leafless thickets, as in Chatham Island. Higherup, the wood gradually became greener ; and immediatelywe had crossed the ridge of the island, our bodies werecooled by the fine southerly trade-wind, and our sensesrefreshed by the sight of a green and thriving vegetation.The houses are irregularly scattered over a flat space ofground, which is cultivated with sweet potatoes andbananas. It will not easily be imagined how pleasant theDampier's Voyage, vol. i.j p. 101.Sept. 1835. GxVLAPAGOS ARCHIPELAGO. 457sight of black mud was to us, after having been so long accustomedto the parched soil of Peru and Chile.The inhabitants, although complaining of poverty, gain,without much trouble, the means of subsistence from thefertile soil. In the woods there are many wild pigs andgoats, but the main article of animal food is derived from thetortoise. Their timbers in this island have of course beengreatly reduced, but the people yet reckon on two days huntingsupplying food for the rest of the week. It is said thatformerly single vessels have taken away as many as sevenhundred of these animals, and that the ship's company ofa frigate some years since brought down two hundred tothe beach in one day.We staid at this island four days, during which time I collectedmany plants and birds. One morning I ascended thehighest hill, which has an altitude of nearly 1800 feet. Thesummit consists of a broken-down crater, thickly clothedwith coarse grass and brushwood. Even in this one island,I counted thirty-nine hills, each of which was terminated bya more or less perfect circular depression.September 29th. — We doubled the south-west extremityof Albermarle Island, and the next day were nearly becalmedbetween it and Marlborough Island. Both are coveredwith immense streams of black naked lava ; which, havingeither flowed over the rims of the great caldrons, or havingburst forth from the smaller orifices on the flanks, have intheir descent spread over miles of the sea-coast. On bothof these islands eruptions are known occasionally to takeplace ; and in Albermarle we saw a small jet of^smoke curlingfrom the summit of one of the more lofty craters. Inthe evening we anchored in Bank's Cove, in AlbermarleIsland.When morning came, we found that the harbour inwhich we were at anchor was formed by a broken-downcrater, composed of volcanic sandstone. After breakfast Iwent out walking. To the southward of this first crater,there was another of similar composition, and beautifully458 GALAPAGOS ARCHIPELAGO. Oct. 1835.symmetrical. It was elliptic in form ; the longer axis beingless than a mile, and its depth about 500 feet. The bottomwas occupied by a shallow lake, and in its centre a tiny craterformed an islet. The day was overpoweringly hot, and thelake looked clear and blue. I hurried down the cinderyslope, and choked with dust eagerly tasted the water — but tomy sorrow I found it salt as brine.The rocks on the coast abounded with great black lizards,between three and four feet long ; and on the hills, anotherspecies was equally common. We saw several of the latter,some clumsily running out of our way, and others shufflinginto their burrows. I shall presently describe in moredetail the habits of both these reptiles.October 3d. — We sailed round the northern end ofAlbermarle Island. Nearly the whole of this side is coveredwith recent streams of dark-coloured lavas, and is studdedwith craters. I should think it would be difficult to findin any other part of the world, an island situated withinthe tropics, and of such considerable size (namely 'J5 mileslong), so sterile and incapable of supporting life.On the 8th we reached James Island.* Captain FitzRoyput Mr. Bynoe, myself, and three others on shore, leavingwith us a tent and provisions, to wait there till the vesselreturned from watering. This was an admirable plan for thecollections, as we had an entire week of hard work. Wefound here a party of Spaniards, who had been sent fromCharles Island to dry fish, and to salt tortoise-meat.At the distance of about six miles, and at the height ofnearly 2000 feet, the Spaniards had erected a hovel in whichtwo men lived, who were employed in catching tortoises,whilst the others were fishing on the coast. I paid this partytwo visits, and slept there one night. In the same manneras in the other islands, the lower region is covered by nearlyleafless bushes : but here many of them grow to the size of• Both Charles and James Islands take their names from the Stuart.See Cowley's Voyage in 1684.Oct. 1835. SALT LAKE. 459trees. I measured several which were two feet in diameter,and some even two feet nine inches. The upperregion being kept damp, from the moisture of the condensedclouds, supports a green and flourishing vegetation.So damp was the ground, that there were largebeds of a coarse carex, in which great numbers of a verysmall water-rail lived and bred. While staying in thisupper region, we lived entirely upon tortoise-meat. Thebreastplate roasted (as the Gaudiios do came con cuero),with the flesh attached to it, is very good; and the youngtortoises make excellent soup; but otherwise the meat tomy taste is very indifferent.During another day we accompanied a party of theSpaniards in their whale-boat to a salina, or lake fromwhich salt is procured. After landing, we had a very roughwalk over a rugged field of recent lava, which has almostsurrounded a sandstone crater, at the bottom of which thesalt-lake is situated. The water was only three or fourinches deep, and rested on a layer of beautifully crystallizedwhite salt. The lake was quite circular, and fringedwith a border of brightly green succulent plants : the precipitouswalls of the crater were also clothed with wood,so that the scene was both picturesque and curious. Afew years since, the sailors belonging to a sealing-vesselmurdered their captain in this quiet spot; and we sawhis skull lying among the bushes.During the greater part of our week on shore, the sky wascloudless, and if the trade-wind failed for an hour, the heatbecame very oppressive. On two days, the thermometerwithin the tent stood for some hours at 93°; but in theopen air, in the wind and sun, at only 85°. The sandwas extremely hot; the thermometer placed in some of abrown colour immediately rose to 137°, and how muchhigher it would have risen, I do not know, for it was notgraduated above that number. The black sand felt muchhotter, so that even in thick boots it was disagreeable, onthis account, to walk over it.460 • GALAPAGOS ARCHIPELAGO. Oct. 1835.I will now offer a few general observations on the naturalhistory of these islands. I endeavoured to make as nearly aperfect collection in every branch as time permitted. Theplants have not yet been examined but Professor Henslow,who has kindly undertaken the description of them informsme that there are probably many new species, and perhapseven some new genera. They all have an extremely weedycharacter, and it would scarcely have been supposed, thatthey had grown at an inconsiderable elevation directly underthe equator. In the lower and sterile parts, the bush, whichfrom its minute brown leaves chiefly gives the leafless appearanceto the brushwood, is one of the Euphorbiacese. In thesame region an acacia and a cactus [Opuntia Galapageia*),with large oval compressed articulations, springing froma cylindrical stem, are in some parts common. These arethe only trees which in that part afford any shade. Nearthe summits of the different islands, the vegetation has avery different character ; ferns and coarse grasses are abundant;and the commonest tree is one of the Composite.Tree-ferns are not present. One of the most singular charactersof the Flora, considering the position of this archipelago,is the absence of every member of the palm family.Cocos Island, on the other hand, which is the nearest pointof land, takes its name from the great number of cocoa-nuttrees on it. From the presence of the Opuntias and someother plants, the vegetation partakes more of the characterof that of America than of any other country.Of mammalia a large kind of mouse forms a well-markedspecies. From its large thin ears, and other characters, itapproaches in form a section of the genus, which is confinedto the sterile regions of South America. There isalso a rat which Mr. Waterhouse believes is probably distinctfrom the English kind ; but I cannot help suspectingthat it is only the same altered by the peculiar conditionsof its new country.Magazine of Zoology and Botany, vol. i., p. 466.Oct. 1835. ORNITHOLOGY. • 461In my collections from these islands, Mr. Gould considersthat there are twenty-six different species of land birds.With the exception of one, all probably are undescribedkinds, which inhabit this archipelago, and no other part ofthe world. Among the waders and waterfowl it is moredifficult, without detailed comparison, to say what are new.But a water-sail which lives near the summits of the mountains,is undescribed, as perhaps is a Tetanus and a heron.The only kind of gull which is found among these islands,is also new ; when the wandering habits of this genus areconsidered, this is a very remarkable circumstance. Thespecies most closely allied to it, comes from the Strait ofMagellan. Of the other aquatic birds, the species appearthe same with well-known American birds.The general character of the plumage of these birds isextremely plain, and like the Flora possesses little beauty.Although the species are thus peculiar to the archipelago,yet nearly all in their general structure, habits, colour offeathers, and even tone of voice, are strictly American.The following brief list will give an idea of their kinds.1st. A buzzard, having many of the characters of Polyborusor Caracara ; and in its habits not to be distinguishedfrom that peculiar South American genus ; 2d. Two owls •.Sd. Three species of tyrant-flycatchers — a form strictlyAmerican. One of these appears identical with a commonkind {Miiscicapa coronet ? Lath), which has a very widerange, from La Plata throughout Brazil to Mexico ; 4th. Asylvicola, an American form, and especially common inthe northern division of the continent ; 5th. Three speciesof mocking-birds, a genus common to both Americas ;6th. A finch, with a stiff tail and a long claw to its hindertoe, closely allied to a North American genus; 7th. Aswallow belonging to the American division of that genus ;8th. A dove, like, but distinct from, the Chilian species;9th. A group of finches, of which Mr. Gould considersthere are thirteen species ; and these he has distributed intofour new sub-genera. These birds are the most singular of462 ■ GALAPAGOS ARCHIPELAGO. Oct. 1835.any in the archipelago. They all agree in many points ;namely, in a peculiar structure of their bill, short tails,general form, and in their plumage. The females are grayor brown, but the old cocks jet-black. All the species, exceptingtwo, feed in flocks on the ground, and have verysimilar habits. It is very remarkable that a nearly perfectgradation of structure in this one group can be traced in theform of the beak, from one exceeding in dimensions that ofthe largest gros-beak, to another differing but little from thatof a warbler. Of the aquatic birds I have already remarkedthat some are peculiar to these islands, and some common toNorth and South America.We will now turn to the order of reptiles, which forms,perhaps, the most striking feature in the zoology of theseislands. The species are not numerous, but the number ofindividuals of each kind, is extraordinarily great. There isone kind both of the turtle and tortoise ; of lizards four ;and of snakes about the same number.I will first describe the habits of the tortoise testudo In-decus) which has been so frequently alluded to. Theseanimals are found, I believe, in all the islands of the Archipelago; certainly in the greater number. They frequent inpreference the high damp parts, but Ukewise inhabit thelower and arid districts. I have already mentioned* proofs,from the numbers which have been taken in a single day,how very numerous they must be. Some individuals growto an immense size: Mr. Lawson, an Englishman, who hadat the time of our visit charge of the colony, told us that he hadseen several so large, that it required six or eight men to liftthem from the ground ; and that some had afforded as muchas two hundred pounds of meat. The old males are thelargest, the females rarely growing to so great a size. Themale can readily be distinguished from the female by theDampier says, "The land-turtles are here so numerous, that five orsix hundred men might subsist on them for several months without anyother sort of provisions. They are so extraordinarily large and fat, andso sweet, that no pullet eats more pleasantly." — Vol. i., p. 1 10.Oct, 1835. TORTOISE. . 463greater length of its tail. The tortoises which live on thoseislands where there is no water, or in the lower and aridparts of the others, chiefly feed on the succulent cactus.Those which frequent the higher and damp regions, eat theleaves of various trees, a kind of berry (called guayavita)which is acid and austere, and likewise a pale greenfilamentous lichen, that hangs in tresses from the boughsof the trees.The tortoise is very fond of water, drinking large quantities,and wallowing in the mud. The larger islands alonepossess springs, and these are always situated towards thecentral parts, and at a considerable elevation. The tortoises,therefore, which frequent the lower districts, when thirsty,are obUged to travel from a long distance. Hence broad andwell-beaten paths radiate off in every direction from thewells even down to the sea-coast; and the Spaniards byfollowing them up, first discovered the watering-places.When I landed at Chatham Island, I could not imaginewhat animal travelled so methodically along the well-chosentracks. Near the springs it was a curious spectacleto behold many of these great monsters ; one set eagerlytravelling onwards with outstretched necks, and anotherset returning, after having drunk their fill. When thetortoise arrives at the spring, quite regardless of any spectator,it buries its head in the water above its eyes, andgreedily swallows great mouthfuls, at the rate of about ten inaminute. The inhabitants say each animal stays three orfour days in the neighbourhood of the water, and then returnsto the lower country; but they differed in their accountsrespecting the frequency of these visits. The animal probablyregulates them according to the nature of the foodwhich it has consumed. It is, however, certain, thattortoises can subsist even on those islands where there isno other water, than what falls during a few rainy daysin the year.I believe it is well ascertained, that the bladder of the frog464 GALAPAGOS ARCHIPELAGO. Oct. 1835.acts as a reservoir for the moisture necessary to its existence :such seems to be the case with the tortoise. For some timeafter a visit to the springs, the urinary bladder of theseanimals is distended with fluid, which is said gradually todecrease in volume, and to become less pure. The inhabitants,when walking in the lower district, and overcome withthirst, often take advantage of this circumstance, by killinga tortoise, and if the bladder is full, drinking its contents.In one I saw killed, the fluid was quite limpid, and had onlya very slightly bitter taste. The inhabitants, however,always drink first the water in the pericardium, which isdescribed as being best.The tortoises, when moving towards any definite point,travel by night and day, and arrive at their journey's endmuch sooner than would be expected. The inhabitants, fromobservations on marked individuals, consider that theycan move a distance of about eight miles in two or threedays. One large tortoise, which I watched, I found walkedat the rate of sixty yards in ten minutes, that is 360 in thehour, or four miles a day, — allowing also a little time for itto eat on the road.During the breeding season, when the male and femaleare together, the male utters a hoarse roar or bellowing, whichit is said, can be heard at the distance of more than a hundredyards. The female never uses her voice, and the maleonly at such times ; so that when the people hear this noise,they know the two are together. They were at this time(October) laying their eggs. The female, where the soil issandy, deposits them together, and covers them up withsand ; but where the ground is rocky she drops them indiscriminatelyin any hollow. Mr. Bynoe found seven placedin a line in a fissure. The egg is white and spherical ; onewhich I measured was seven inches and three-eighths incircumference. The young animals, as soon as they arehatched, fall a prey in great numbers to the buzzard, withthe habits of the Caracara. The old ones seem generallykOct. 1835. TORTOISE. 46.5to die from accidents as from falling down precipices. Atleast several of the inhabitants told me, they had neverfound one dead without some such Apparent cause.The inhabitants believe that these animals are absolutely-deaf;certainly they do not overhear a person walking closebehind them. I M'as always amused, when overtaking one ofthese gi'eat monsters as it was quietly pacing along, to seehow suddenly, the instant I passed, it would draw in itshead and legs, and uttering a deep hiss fall to the groundwith a heavy sound, as if struck dead. I frequently got ontheir backs, and then, upon giving a few raps on the hinderpart of the shell, they would rise up and walk away ; — butI found it very difficult to keep my balance.The flesh of this animal is largely employed, both freshand salted ; and a beautifully clear oil is prepared from thefat. When a tortoise is caught, the man makes a slit in theskin near its tail, so as to see inside its body, whether thefat under the dorsal plate is thick. If it is not, the animal isliberated; and it is said to recover soon from this strangeoperation. In order to secure the tortoises, it is notsufficient to turn them like turtle, for they are often ableto regain their upright position.It was confidently asserted, that the tortoises coming fromdifferent islands in the archipelago were slightly different inform; and that in certain islands they attained a larger averagesize than in others. Mr. Lawson maintained that he couldat once tell from which island any one was brought. Unfortunately,the specimens which came home in the Beaglewere too small to institute any certain comparison. Thistortoise, which goes by the name of Testudo Lidicus, is atpresent found in many parts of the world. It is the opinionof Mr, Bell, and some others who have studied reptiles, thatit is not improbable that they all originally came from thisarchipelago. When it is known how long these islandshave been frequented by the buccaneers, and that they constantlytook away numbers of these animals alive, it seemsvery probable that they should have distributed them inVOL. III. 2 II466 GALAPAGOS ARCHIPELAGO. Oct. 1S35.different parts of the world. If this tortoise does notoriginally come from these islands, it is a remarkableanomaly ; inasmuch as nearly all the other land inhabitantsseem to have had their birthplace here.Of lizards there are four or five species ; two probablybelong to the South American genus Leiocephalus, and twoto Amblyrhyncus. This remarkable genus was characterizedby Mr. Bell,* from a stuffed specimen sent fromMexico, but which I conceive there can be little doubtoriginally came through some whaling ship from theseislands. The two species agree pretty closely in generalappearance ; but one is aquatic and the other terrestrial inits habits. Mr. Bell thus concludes his description of Ami.cristatus: "On a comparison of this animal with the trueIguanas, the most striking and important discrepancy is inthe form of the head. Instead of the long, pointed, narrowmuzzle of those species, we have here a short, obtuselytruncated head, not so long as it is broad, the mouth consequentlyonly capable of being opened to a very shortspace. These circumstances, with the shortness and equalityof the toes, and the strength and curvature of the claws,evidently indicate some striking peculiarity in its food andgeneral habits, on which, however, in the absence of allcertain information, I shall abstain from offering any conjecture."The following account of these two lizards, will,I think, show with what judgment Mr. Bell foresaw avariation in habit, accompanying change in structure.First for the aquatic kind lamb. cristatus). This lizard isextremely common on all the islands throughout the Archipelago.It lives exclusively on the rocky sea-beaches, andis never found, at least I never saw one, even ten yardsinshore. It is a hideous-looking creature, of a dirty blackcolour, stupid and sluggish in its movements. The usuallength of a full-grown one is about a yard, but there aresome even four feet long : I have seen a large one whichZoological Journal, July, 1833.Oct. 1835. MARINE LIZARD. 46?weighed twenty pounds. On the island of Albemarle theyseem to grow to a greater size than on any other. Theselizards were occasionally seen some hundred yards from theshore swimming about ; and Captain Collect, in his Voyage,says, "they go out to sea in shoals to fish." With respectto the object, I believe he is mistaken ; but the factstated on such good authority cannot be doubted. Whenin the water the animal swims with perfect ease andquickness, by a serpentine movement of its body andflattened tail, — the legs, during this time, being motionlessand closely collapsed on its sides. A seaman on board sankone, with a heavy weight attached to it, thinking thus to killit directly ; but when an hour afterwards he drew up theline, the lizard was quite active. Their limbs and strongclaws are admirably adapted for crawling over the ruggedand fissured masses of lava, which every where form thecoast. In such situations, a group of six or seven ofthese hideous reptiles may oftentimes be seen on the blackrocks, a few feet above the surf, basking in the sun withoutstretched legs.I opened the stomach of several, and in each case foundit largely distended with minced sea-weed, of that kindwhich grows in thin foHaceous expansions of a bright greenor dull red colour. I do not recollect having observed thissea-weed in any quantity on the tidal rocks ; and I havereason to believe it grows at the bottom of the sea, at somelittle distance from the coast. If such is the case, theobject of these animals occasionally going out to sea isexplained. The stomach contained nothing but the seaweed.Mr. Bynoe, however, found a piece of a crab inone ; but this might have got in accidentally, in the samemanner as I have seen a caterpillar, in the midst of someLichen, in the paunch of a tortoise. The intestines werelarge, as in other herbivorous animals.The nature of this lizard's food, as well as the structure ofits tail, and the certain fact of its having been seen volumeH 2463 GALAPAGOS ARCHIPELAGO. Oct. 183.5.tartly swimming out at sea, absolutely prove its aquatichabits ; yet there is in this respect one strange anomaly ;namely, that when frightened it will not enter the water.From this cause, it is easy to drive these lizards down toany little point overhanging the sea, where they will soonerallow a person to catch hold of their tail than jump into thewater. They do not seem to have any notion of biting ; butwhen much frightened they squirt a drop of fluid from eachnostril. One day I carried one to a deep pool left by theretiring tide, and threw it in several times as far as I wasable. It invariably returned in a direct line to the spotwhere I stood. It swam near the bottom, with a verygraceful and rapid movement, and occasionally aided itselfL ver the uneven ground with its feet. As soon as it arrivednear the margin, but still being under water, it either tried toconceal itself in the tufts of sea-weed, or it entered somecrevice. As soon as it thought the danger was past, itcrawled out on the dry rocks, and shuffled away as quicklyas it could. I several times caught this same lizard, bydriving it down to a point, and though possessed of suchperfect powers of diving and swimming, nothing wouldinduce it to enter the water ; and as often as I threw it in,it returned in the manner above described. Perhaps thissingular piece of apparent stupidity may be accounted for bythe circumstance, that this reptile has no enemy whatever onshore, whereas at sea it must often fall a prey to the numeroussharks. Hence, probably urged by a fixed and hereditaryinstinct that the shore is its place of safety, whateverthe emergency may be, it there takes refuge.During our visit (in October) I saw extremely few smallindividuals of this species, and none I should think under ayear old. From this circumstance it seems probable thatthe breeding season had not commenced. I asked severalof the inhabitants if they knew where it laid its eggs :they said, that although well acquainted with the eggsof the other kind, they had not the least knowledge of theOct. 1835. TERRESTRIAL AMBLYRHYNCUS. 469manner in which this species is propagated ; — a fact consideringhow common an animal this Heard is, not a littleextraordinary.We will now turn to the terrestrial species lamb. sub-statusof Gray.* This species, differently from the last,is confined to the central islands of the Archipelago, namelyto Albemarle, James, Barrington, and Indefatigable. Tothe southward, in Charles, Hood, and Chatham islands, andto the northward, in Towers, Bundles, and Abingdon, Ineither saw nor heard of any. It would appear as if thisspecies had been created in the centre of the Archipelago,and thence had been dispersed only to a certain distance.In the central islands they inhabit both the higher anddamp, as well as the lower and sterile parts ; but in the latterthey are much the most numerous. I cannot give a moreforcible proof of their numbers, than by stating, that when wewere left at James Island, we could not for some time find aspot free from their burrows, on which to pitch our tent.These lizards, like their brothers the sea-kind, are uglyanimals ; and from their low facial angle have a singularlystupid appearance. In size perhaps they are a little inferiorto the latter, but several of them weighed between ten andfifteen pounds each. The colour of their belly, front legs,and head (excepting the crown which is nearly white), is adirty yellowish-orange : the back is a brownish-red, whichin the younger specimens is darker. In their movementsthey are lazy and half torpid. When not frightened, theyslowly crawl along with their tails and bellies dragging on theground. They often stop, and doze for a minute with closedeyes, and hind legs spread out on the parched soil.Briefly characterized by Mr. Gray in die Zoological Miscellany, froma specimen badly stuffed ;' from which cause one of its most importantcharacters (the rounded tail, compared to the flattened one of the aquatickind) was overlooked. Captain FitzRoy has presented some fine specimensof both species to the British Museum. I cannot omit here returning mythanks to Mr. Gray, for the kind manner in which he has afforded mcevery facility £is often as I have visited the British Museum.470 GALAPAGOS ARCHIPELAGO. Oct. 1835.They inhabit burrows ; which they sometimes excavatebetween fragments of lava, but more generally on levelpatches of the soft volcanic sandstone. The holes do notappear to be very deep, and they enter the ground at a smallangle ; so that when walking over these lizard warrens, thesoil is constantly giving way, much to the annoyance of thetired walker. This animal when excavating its burrow, alternatelyworks the opposite sides of its body. One front legfor a short time scratches up the soil, and throws it towardsthe hind foot, which is well placed so as to heave it beyondthe mouth of the hole. This side of the body being tired,the other takes up the task, and so on alternately. I watchedone for a long time, till half its body was buried ; I thenwalked up and filled it by the tail ; at this it was greatlyastonished, and soon shuffled up to see what was the matter;and then stared me in the face, as much as to say, " Whatmade you pull my tail ?"They feed by day and do not wander far from theirburrows ; and if frightened they rush to them with a mostawkward gait. Except when running down hill, they cannotmove very fast; which appears chiefly owing to thelateral position of their legs.They are not at all timorous : when attentively watchingany one, they curl their tails, and raising themselves on theirfront legs, nod their heads vertically, with a quick movement,and try to look very fierce : but in reality they are not at allso ; if one just stamps the ground, down go their tails, andoff they shuffle as quickly as they can. I have frequently observedsmall muscivorous lizards, when watching any thing,nod their heads in precisely the same manner ; but I do notat all know for what purpose. If this Amblyrhyncus is held,and plagued with a stick, it will bite it very severely ; but Icaught many by the tail, and they never tried to bite me. Iftwo are placed on the ground and held together, they willfight and bite each other till blood is drawn.The individuals (and they are the greater number) whichinhabit the lower country, can scarcely taste a drop of waterOct. ]S35. TERRESTRIAL AMBLYRUYNCUS. 471throughout the year ; but they consume much of the succulentcactus, the branches of which are occasionally brokenoff by the wind. I have sometimes thrown a piece to twoor three when together ; and it was amusing enough to seeeach trying to sieze and carry it away in its mouth, like somany hungry dogs with a bone. They eat very deliberately,but do not chew their food. The little birds are aware howharmless these creatures are : I have seen one of the thick-billedfinches picking at one end of a piece of cactus (whichis in request among all the animals of the lower region),whilst a heard was eating at the other ; and afterwards thelittle bird with the utmost indifference hopped on the backof the reptile.I opened the stomachs of several, and found them fuU ofvegetable fibres, and leaves of different trees, especially of aspecies of acacia. In the upper region they live chiefly onthe acid and astringent berries of the guayavita, under whichtrees I have seen these lizards and the huge tortoises feedingtogether. To obtain the acacia-leaves, they crawl up the lowstunted trees ; and it is not uncommon to see one or a pairquietly browsing, whilst seated on a branch several feet abovethe ground.The meat of these animals when cooked is white, and bythose whose stomachs rise above all prejudices, it is relishedas very good food. Humboldt has remarked that in intertropicalSouth America, all lizards which inhabit dry regionsare esteemed delicacies for the table. The inhabitants say,that those inhabiting the damp region drink water, butthat the others do not travel up for it from the sterilecountry like the tortoises. At the time of our visit, thefemales had within their bodies numerous large elongatedeggs. These they lay in their burrows, and the inhabitantsseek them for food.These two species of. Amblyrhyncus agree, as I havealready stated, in general structure, and in many of theirhabits. Neither have that rapid movement, so characteristicof true Lacerta and Iguana. They are both herbivorous,»4/2 GALAPAGOS ARCHIPELAGO. Oct. 1S35.although the kind of vegetation consumed in each case is sovery different. Mr. Bell has given the name to the genus fromthe shortness of the snout : indeed, the form of the mouthmay almost be compared to that of the tortoise. One istempted to suppose this is an adaptation to their herbivorousappetites. It is very interesting thus to find a well-characterizedgenus, having its aquatic and terrestrial species, belongingto so confined a portion of the world. The formerspecies is by far the most remarkable, because it is the onlyexisting Saurian, which can properly be said to be a maritimeanimal. I should perhaps have mentioned earlier, that inthe whole archipelago, there is only one rill of fresh waterthat reaches the coast; yet these reptiles frequent the searches,and no other parts in all the islands. Moreover,there is no existing lizard, as far as I am aware, exceptingthis Amblyrhyncus, that feeds exclusively on aquatic productions.If, however, we refer to epochs long past, weshall find such habits common to several gigantic animals ofthe Saurian race.To conclude with the order of reptiles. Of snakes there areseveral species, but all harmless. Of toads and frogs thereare none. I was surprised at this, considering how well thetemperate and damp woods in the elevated parts appearedadapted for their habits. It recalled to my mind the singularstatement made by Bory St. Vincent,* namely, thatnone of this family are to be found on the volcanic islandsin the great oceans. There certainly appears to be somefoundation for this observation ; which is the more remarkable,when compared with the case of lizards, which aregenerally among the earliest colonists of the smallest islet.It may be asked, whether this is not owing to the differentfacilities of transport through salt-water, of the eggs of thelatter protected by a calcareous coat, and of the slime spawnof the former ?As I at first observed, these islands are not so remarkableVos-age aux quatre Hes d'Ariir|iie.Oct. 1835. NUMBER OF REPTILES. 473for the number of species of reptiles, as for that of individuals; when we remember the well-beaten paths made bythe many hundred great tortoises — the warrens of the terrestrialAmblyrhyncus — and the groups of the aquatic speciesbasking on the coast-rocks — we must admit that there is noother quarter of the world, where this order replaces the herbivorousmammalia in so extraordinary a manner. It isworthy of observation by the geologist (who will probablyrefer back in his mind to the secondary periods, when theSyrians were developed with dimensions, which at thepresent day can be compared only to the cetaceous mammalia),that this archipelago, instead of possessing a humidclimate and rank vegetation, cannot be considered otherwisethan extremely arid, and for an equatorial region, remarkablytemperate.To finish with the zoology : I took great pains in collectingthe insects, but I was surprised to find even in the high anddamp region, how exceedingly few they were in number.The forests of Tierra del Fuego are certainly much morebarren ; but with that exception I never collected in so poora country. In the lower and sterile land I took seven speciesof Heteromera, and a few other insects ; but in the finethriving woods towards the centre of the islands, althoughI perseveringly swept under the bushes during all kinds ofweather, I obtained only a few minute Litera and Hymenoptera.Owing to this scarcity of insects, nearly all thebirds live in the lower country ; and the part which any onewould have thought much the most favourable for them, isfrequented only by a few of the small tyrant-flycatchers. Ido not believe a single bird, excepting the water-rail, is confinedto the damp region. Mr. Waterhouse informs me thatnearly all the insects belong to European forms, and thatthey do not by any means possess an equatorial character.I did not take a single one of large size, or of bright colours.This last observation applies equally to the birds andflowers. It is worthy of remark, that the only land-birdwith bright colours, is that species of tyrant-flycatcher, which474 GALAPAGOS ARCHIPELAGO. Oct. 1835.seems to be a wanderer from the continent. Of shells,there are a considerable number of land kinds, all of which,I believe are confined to this archipelago. Even of marinespecies, a large proportion were not known, before the collectionmade by Mr. Coming on these islands Alas broughtto England.I will not here attempt to come to any definite conclusions,as the species have not been accurately examined;but we may infer, that, with the exception of a few wanderers,the organic beings found on this archipelago are peculiar toit; and yet that their general form strongly partakes of anAmerican character. It would be impossible for any oneaccustomed to the birds of Chile and La Plata to be placedon these islands, and not to feel convinced that he was,as far as the organic world was concerned, on Americanground. This similarity in type, between distant islandsand continents, while the species are distinct, has scarcelybeen sufficiently noticed. The circumstance would be explained,according to the views of some authors, by sayingthat the creative power had acted according to the samelaw over a wide area.It has been mentioned, that the inhabitants can distinguishthe tortoises, according to the islands whence they arebrought. I was also informed that many of the islandspossess trees and plants which do not occur on the others.For instance the berry-bearing tree, called Guyavita, whichis common on James Island, certainly is not found on CharlesIsland, though appearing equally well fitted for it. Unfortunately,I was not aware of these facts till my collection wasnearly completed : it never occurred to me, that the productionsof islands only a few miles apart, and placed under thesame physical conditions, would be dissimilar. I thereforedid not attempt to make a series of specimens from theseparate islands. It is the fate of every voyager, when hehas just discovered what object in any place is more particularlyworthy of his attention, to be hurried from it.In the case of the mocking-bird, I ascertained (and haveOct. 1835. TAMENESS OF BIRDS. 475brought home the specimens) that one species [Orpheustrifasciatus, Gould) is exclusively found in Charles Island ;a second [O. paulus) on Albemarle Island ; and a third[O. melanotus) common to James and Chatham Islands.The two last species are closely allied, but the first wouldbe considered by every naturahst as quite distinct. Iexamined many specimens in the different islands, and ineach the respective kind was alone present. These birdsagree in general plumage, structure, and habits ; so thatthe different species replace each other in the economy ofthe different islands. These species are not characterizedby the markings on the plumage alone, but likewise by thesize and form of the bill, and other differences. I havestated, that in the thirteen species of ground-finches, anearly perfect gradation may be traced, from a beak extraordinarilythick, to one so fine, that it may be compared tothat of a warbler. I very much suspect, that certain membersof the series are confined to different islands ; therefore,if the collection had been made on any one island, it wouldnot have presented so perfect a gradation. It is clear, thatif several islands have each their peculiar species of thesame genera, when these are placed together, they will have awide range of character. But there is not space in thiswork, to enter on this curious subject.Before concluding my account of the zoology of theseislands, I must describe more in detail the tameness of thebirds. This disposition is common to all the terrestrial species;namely, to the mocking-birds, the finches, sylvicolee,tyrant-flycatchers, doves, and hawks. There is not onewhich will not approach sufficiently near to be killed with aswitch, and sometimes, as I have myself tried, with a capor hat. A gun is here almost superfluous; for with themuzzle of one I pushed a hawk off the branch of a tree.One day a mocking-bird alighted on the edge of a pitcher(made of the shell of a tortoise), which I held in my handwhilst lying down. It began very quietly to sip the water,and allowed me to lift it with the vessel from the ground.476 GALAPAGOS ARCHIPELAGO. Oct. 1835.I often tried, and very nearly succeeded, in catching thesebirds by their legs. Formerly the birds appear to havebeen even tamer than at present. Cowley* (in the year1684) says that the " Turtle-doves were so tame that theywould often alight upon our hats and arms, so as that wecould take them alive : they not fearing man, until such timeas some of oar company did fire at them, whereby they wererendered more shy." Dampier (in the same year) also saysthat a man in a morning's walk might kill six or seven dozenof these birds. At present, although certainly very tame,they do not alight on people's arms ; nor do they suffer themselvesto be killed in such numbers. It is surprising thatthe change has not been greater ; for these islands during thelast hundred and fifty years, have been frequently visited bybuccaneers and whalers ; and the sailors, wandering throughthe woods in search of tortoises, always take delight inknocking down the Uttle birds.These birds, although much persecuted, do not becomewild in a short time : in Charles Island, which had then beencolonized about six years, I saw a boy sitting by a wellwith a switch in his hand, with which he killed the dovesand finches as they came to drink. He had already procureda little heap of them for his dinner ; and he said hehad constantly been in the habit of waiting there for thesame purpose. We must conclude that the birds, nothaving as yet learnt that man is a more dangerous animalthan the tortoise, or the amblyrhyncus, disregard us, inthe same manner as magpies in England do the cows andhorses grazing in the fields.The Falkland Islands offer a second instance of this dispositionamong its birds. The extraordinary tameness of thedark-coloured Furnarius has been remarked by Pernety,Lesson, and other voyagers. It is not, however, peculiarto that bird : the Caracara, snipe, upland and lowlandCowley's Voyage, p. 10, in Dampier's Collection of Voyages,f Dampier's Voyage, vol. i., p. 103.Oct. 1835. TAMENESS OF BIRDS. 477goose, thrush, Emberiza, and even some true hawks, areall more or less tame. Both hawks and foxes are present ;and as the birds are so tame, we may infer that the absenceof all rapacious animals at the Galapagos, is not the cause oftheir tameness there. The geese at the Falklands, by theprecaution they take in building on the islets, show thatthey are aware of their danger from the foxes ; but they arenot by this rendered wild towards man. This tameness of thebirds, especially the waterfowl, is strongly contrasted withthe habits of the same species in Tierra del Fuego, whereforages past they have been persecuted by the wild inhabitants.In the Falklands, the sportsman may sometimeskill more of the upland geese in one day, than he is able tocarry home; whereas in Tierra del Fuego, it is nearly asdifficult to kill one, as it is in England of the commonwild species.In the time of Pernety* (1763), aU the birds appear tohave been much tamer than at present. Pernety states thatthe Furnarius would almost perch on his finger ; and that witha wand he kiUed ten in half an hour. At that period, thebirds must have been about as tame as they now are at theGalapagos. They appear to have learnt caution morequickly at the Falklands than at the latter place, and theyhave had proportionate means of experience; for besidesfrequent visits from vessels, the islands have been at intervalscolonized during the M'hole period.Even formerly, when all the birds were so tame, byPernety's account it was impossible to kill the blackenedswan. It is rather an interesting fact, that this is abird of passage, and therefore brings with it the wisdomlearnt in foreign countries.I have not met with any account of the hud birds being sotame, in any other quarter of the world, as at the Galapagosand Falkland Islands. And it may be observed that of thefew archipelagoes of any size, which when discovered werePernety, voyage aux lies Malouines, volsci., p. 20.478 GALAPAGOS ARCHIPELAGO. Oct. 1835.uninhabited by man, these two are among the most important.From the foregoing statements we may, I think, conclude; first, that the wildness of birds with regard to man, isa particular instinct directed against him, and not dependenton any general degree of caution arising from other sourcesof danger ; secondly, that it is not acquired by them in ashort time, even when much persecuted; but that in thecourse of successive generations it becomes hereditary. Withdomesticated animals we are accustomed to see instinctsbecoming hereditary ; but with those in a state of nature, itis more rare to discover instances of such acquired knowledge.In regard to the wildness of birds towards men, thereis no other way of accounting for it. Few young birds inEngland have been injured by man, yet all are afraid ofhim : many individuals, on the other hand, both at the Galapagosand at the Falklands, have been injured, but yet havenot learned that salutary dread. We may infer from thesefacts, what havoc the introduction of any new beast of preymust cause in a country, before the instincts of the aboriginesbecome adapted to the stranger's craft or power.CHAPTER XX.Tahiti — Aspect — Vegetation on the slope of the mountains — View ofEimeo — Excursion in the interior — Profound ravines — Succession ofwaterfalls — Number of wild useful plants — Temperance of inhabitantsTheir moral state — Parliament convened — New Zealand — Bay ofislands — Hippahs — Absence of all government — Excursion to WaiteMissionary establishment — English weeds now run wild — Waiomio —Funeral service — Sail from New Zealand.TAHITI AND NEW ZEALAND.October 20th. — The survey of the Galapagos Archipelagobeing concluded, a course was steered towards Tahiti ;and we commenced our long passage of .3200 miles. In thecourse of a few days we sailed out of the gloomy and cloudedregion, which extends during the winter far from the coast ofSouth America. We then enjoyed bright and clear weather,while running pleasantly along at the rate of 150 or 160 milesa day before a steady trade-wind. The temperature in thismore central part of the Pacific, is higher than near theAmerican shore. The thermometer in the poop cabin, bothby night and day, ranged between 80° and 83°, which to myfeelings was quite delightful; but with one degree higher,the effect became oppressive. We passed through theDangerous or Low Archipelago, and saw several of thosemost curious rings of land, just rising above the edge of thewater, which have been called Lagoon Islands. A long andbrilliantly-white beach is capped by a margin of green vegetation; and this strip appears on both hands rapidly to narrowaway in the distance, and then sinks beneath the horizon.From the mast-head a wide expanse of smooth water can beseen within the annular margin of land. These low islandsbear no proportion to the vast ocean out of which theyabruptly rise ; and it seems wonderful, that such weak in-480 TAHITI. Nov. 1835.traders are not overwhelmed, by the all-powerful and never-tiringwaves of that great sea, miscalled the Pacific.November 15th. — At daylight, Tahiti, an island whichmust for ever remain as classical to the voyager in the SouthSea, was in view. At this distance the appearance wasnot very inviting. The luxuriant vegetation of the lowerparts was not discernible, and as the clouds rolled past, thewildest and most precipitous peaks showed themselves towardsthe centre of the island. As soon as we came to ananchor in Matavai Bay, we were surrounded by canoes.This was our Sunday, but the Monday of Tahiti: if thecase had been reversed, we should not have received a singlevisit ; for the injunction not to launch a canoe on the sabbathis rigidly obeyed. After dinner we landed to enjoy allthe delights of the first impressions produced by a newcountry, and that country the charming Tahiti. A crowd ofmen, women, and children, was collected on the memorablepoint Venus, ready to receive us with laughing, merry faces.They marshalled us towards the house of Mr. Wilson, themissionary of the district, who met us on the road, and gaveus a very friendly reception. After sitting a short time inhis house, we separated to walk about, but returned there inthe evening.The land capable of cultivation is scarcely in any partmore than a fringe of low alluvial soil, accumulated roundthe base of the mountains, and protected from the waves ofthe sea by a coral reef, which encircles at a distance theentire line of coast. The reef is broken in several parts sothat ships can pass through, and the lake of smooth waterwithin thus affords a safe harbour, as well as a channel forthe native canoes. The low land which comes down to thebeach of coral sand, is covered by the most beautiful productionsof the intertropical regions. In the midst ofbananas, orange, cocoa-nut, and breadfruit trees, spots arecleared where yams, sweet potatoes, sugar-cane, and pineapples,are cultivated. Even the brushwood is a fruit-tree,namely, the guava, which from its abundance is as noxiousNov. 1S35. TAHITI. 4S1as a weed. In Brazil I have often admired the contrast ofvaried beauty in the banana palm, and orange tree : herewe have in addition the bread-fruit, conspicuous from itslarge, glossy, and deeply digitated leaf. It is admirable tobehold groves of a tree, sending forth its branches withthe force of an English oak, loaded with large and mostnutritious fruit. However little on most occasions utilityexplains the delight received from any fine prospect, in thiscase it cannot fail to enter as an element in the feeling.The Httle winding paths, cool from the surrounding shade,led to the scattered houses ; and the owners of these everywheregave us a cheerful and most hospitable reception.I was pleased with nothing so much as with the inhabitants.There is a mildness in the expression of their countenances,which at once banishes the idea of a savage ; and anintelligence, which shows they are advancing in civilization.Their dress is as yet incongruous ; no settled costume havingtaken the place of the ancient one. But even in its presentstate, it is far from being so ridiculous as it has beendescribed by travellers of a few years' standing. Thosewho can afford it wear a white shirt, and sometimes ajacket, with a Trapper of coloured cotton round theirmiddles ; thus making a short petticoat, like the chUipa ofthe Gauchos. This dress appears so general with the chiefs,that it will probably become the settled fashion. No one,even to the queen, wears shoes or stockings ; and only thechiefs have a straw hat on their heads. The commonpeople, when working, keep the upper part of their bodiesuncovered; and it is then that the Tahitians are seen toadvantage. They are very tall, broad-shouldered, athletic,and with well-proportioned limbs. It has been somewhereremarked, that it requires little habit to make a darker tintof the skin more pleasing and natural, even to the eye of anEuropean, than his own colour. To see a white man bathingby the side of a Tahitian, was like comparing a plantbleached by the gardener's art, with one growing in theopen fields. Most of the men are tattooed ; and the orna-vol.III. 2 I482 TAHITI. Nov. 1835.ments follow the curvature of the body so gracefully, thatthey have a very pleasing and elegant effect. One commonfigure, varying only in its detail, branches somewhat like atuft of palm-leaves* from the line of the backbone, andcurls round each side. The simile may be a fanciful one,but I thought the body of a man thus ornamented, was likethe trunk of a noble tree embraced by a delicate creeper.Many of the older people had their feet covered withsmall figures, placed in order so as to resemble a sock.This fashion, however, is partly gone by, and has beensucceeded by others. Here, although each man must foreverabide by the whim which reigned in his early days, yetfashion is far from immutable. An old man has thus hisage for ever stamped en his body, and he cannot assume theairs of a young dandy. The women are also tattooed in thesame manner as the men, and very commonly on theirfingers. An unbecoming fashion in one respect is nowalmost universal : it is that of cutting the hair, or rathershaving it, from the upper part of the head, in a circularform, so as to leave only an outer ring of hair. Themissionaries have tried to persuade the people to changethis habit: but it is the fashion, and that is sufficientanswer at Tahiti as well as at Paris. I was much disappointedin the personal appearance of the women ; theyare far inferior in every respect to the men. The customof wearing a flower in the back of the head, or through asmall hole in each ear, is pretty; the flower is generallyeither white or scarlet, and Uke the Camelia Japonica.They wear also a sort of crown of woven cocoa-nut leaves,as a shade to their eyes. The women appear to be ingreater want of some becoming costume, even than themen.Nearly aU understand a little EngUsh ; — that is, theyknow the names of common things, and by the aid of this.The similarity is not closer than between the capital of a Corinthiancolumn and a tuft of acanthus.Nov. 1835. TAHITI. ' 483together with signs, a lame sort of conversation could becarried on. In returning in the evening to the boat, westopped to witness a very pretty scene ; numbers of childrenwere playing on the beach, and had lighted bonfires, whichilluminated the placid sea and surrounding trees. Others,in circles, were singing Tahitian verses. We seated ourselveson the sand, and joined their party. The songswere impromptu, and I believe related to our arrival : onelittle girl sang a line, which the rest took up in parts,forming a very pretty chorus. The whole scene made usunequivocally aware that we were seated on the shores of anisland in the South Sea.November 17th. — This day is reckoned in the log-bookas Tuesday the l7th instead of Monday the 16th, owing toour, so far successful, chase of the sun. Before breakfastthe ship was hemmed in by a flotilla of canoes, and whenthe natives were allowed to come on board, I suppose theirnumbers could not have been under two hundred. It wasthe opinion of every one, that it would have been difficultto have picked out an equal number from any other nation,who woidd have given so little trouble. Every bodybrought something for sale : shells were the main article oftrade. The Tahitians now fully understand the value ofmoney, and prefer it to old clothes or other articles. Thevarious coins, however, of English and Spanish denominationpuzzle them, and they never seemed to think the smallsilver quite secure until changed into dollars. Some ofthe chiefs have accumulated considerable sums of money.One not long since offered eight hundred dollars (about160 pounds sterling) for a small vessel; and frequently theypurchase whale-boats and horses, at the rate of from fiftyto a hundred dollars.After breakfast I went on shore, and ascended the slopeof the nearest part of the mountain, to an elevation betweentwo and three thousand feet. The form of the land israther singular, and may be understood by explaining itshypothetical origin. 1 believe the interior mountains once2 I 2TAHITI. Nov. 1835.stood as a smaller island in the sea ; and that around theirsteep flanks, streams of lava and beds of sediment wereaccumulated under water, in a conical mass. This, afterbeing raised, has been cut by numerous profound ravines,which all diverge from the common centre ; the interveningridges being flat-topped, and belonging to one slope. Havingcrossed the narrow girt of inhabited and fertile land, Ifollowed the line of one of these ridges; having on eachhand, very steep and smooth-sided valleys. The vegetationis singular, consisting almost exclusively of small dwarfferns, which, higher up, are mingled with coarse grass.The appearance was not very dissimilar from that on someof the Welsh hills; and this being so close above theorchard of tropical plants on the coast, was very surprising.At the highest point which I reached, trees again appeared.Of these three zones of comparative luxuriance, the lowerone owes its moisture, and therefore fertility, to its extremeflatness ; for being scarcely raised above the level of the sea,the water, which it receives from the higher land, drainsaway slowly. The upper zone extends into a moister atmosphere;whilst the intermediate part, not being benefitedby either of these advantages, is barren. The wood in theupper part was very pretty ; tree-ferns hating replaced thecocoa-nuts of the coast. It must not, however, be supposedthat these woods at all equal the forests of Brazil. In anisland, that vast number of productions which characterizesa continent, cannot be expected to occur.From the point which I attained, there was a good viewof the distant island of Eimeo, dependant on the samesovereign with Tahiti. On the lofty and broken pinnacles,white massive clouds were piled up, which formed an islandin the blue sky, as Eimeo itself did in the blue ocean.The island, with the exception of one small gateway iscompletely encircled by a reef. At this distance, a narrowbut well-defined Une of brilliant white was alone visible,where the waves first encountered the wall of coral. Theglassy water of the lagoon was included within this line;Nov. 1835. TAHITI. 485and out of it the mountains rose abruptly. The effect wasvery pleasing, and might aptly be compared to a framedengraving, where the frame represented the breakers, themarginal paper the lagoon, and the drawing the island itself.When in the evening I descended from the mountain, aman, whom I had pleased with a trifling gift, met me,bringing with him hot roasted bananas, a pine-apple, andcocoa-nuts. After having walked under a burning sun, Ido not know any thing more delicious than the milk of ayoung cocoa-nut. Pine-apples are here so abundant, thatthe people eat them in the same wasteful manner as wemight turnips. They are of an excellent flavour, — perhapseven better than those cultivated in England; and this Ibelieve is the highest compliment which can be paid to afruit, or indeed to any thing else. Before going on boardI went to Mr. Wilson, who interpreted to the Tahitian, whohad paid me so adroit an attention, that I wanted himand another man to accompany me on a short excursioninto the mountains.November 18th. — In the morning I came on shoreearly, bringing with me some provisions in a bag, and twoblankets for myself and serv-ant. These were lashed toeach end of a pole, and thus carried by my Tahitian companions: from custom these men are able to walk for awhole day, with as much as fifty pounds at each end. Itold my guides to provide themselves with food andclothing : but for the latter, they said their skins were sufficient,and for the former, that there was plenty of foodin the mountains. The line of march was the valley ofTia-aura, in which the river flows that enters the sea byPoint Venus. This is one of the principal streams in theisland, and its source lies at the base of the loftiest pinnacles,which attain the elevation of about 7000 feet. Thewhole island may be considered as one group of mountains,so that the only way to penetrate the interior is to followup the valleys. Our road, at first, lay through the woodwhich bordered each side of the river; and the glimpses486 TAHITI. Nov. 1835.of the lofty central peaks, seen as through an avenue,with here and there a waving cocoa-nut tree on one side,were extremely picturesque. The vaUey soon began tonarrow, and the sides to grow lofty and more precipitous.After having walked between three and four hours, wefound the width of the ravine scarcely exceeded that of thebed of the stream. On each hand the walls were nearlyvertical; yet from the soft nature of the volcanic strata,trees and a rank vegetation sprung from every projectingledge. These precipices must have been some thousandfeet high : and the whole formed a mountain gorge, far moremagnificent than any thing which I had ever before beheld.Until the mid-day sun stood vertically over the ravine, theair had felt cool and damp, but now it became very sultry.Shaded by a ledge of rock, beneath a facade of columnarlava, we ate our dinner. My guides had already procureda dish of small fish and fresh-water prawns. They carriedwith them a small net stretched on a hoop ; and where thewater was deep and in eddies, they dived, and like otters,by their eyesight followed the fish into holes and corners,and thus secured them.The Tahitians have the dexterity of amphibious animalsin the water. An anecdote mentioned by Ellis shows howmuch they feel at home in that element. When a horsewas landing for Marre in 1817^ the slings broke, and itfell into the water : immediately the natives jumped overboard,and by their cries and vain efforts at assistance,almost drowned the animal. As soon, however, as itreached the shore, the whole population took to flight,and tried to hide themselves from the man-carrying-pig, asthey christened the horse.A little higher up, the river divided itself into three littlestreams. The two northern ones were impracticable, owingto a succession of waterfalls, which descended from thejagged summit of the highest mountain; the other to allappearance was equally inaccessible, but we managed toascend it by a most extraordinary road. The sides ofNov. 1835. EXCURSION INTO THE MOUNTAINS. 487the valley were here nearly precipitous ; but, as frequentlyhappens with stratified rocks, small ledges projected, whichwere thickly covered by wild bananas, liliaceous plants,and other luxuriant productions of the tropics. The Tahitians,by climbing amongst these ledges, searching for fruit,had discovered a track by which the whole precipice couldbe scaled. The first ascent from the valley was very dangerous: for it was necessary to pass the face of a naked rock,by the aid of ropes, which we brought with us. How anyperson discovered that this formidable spot was the onlypoint where the side of the mountain was practicable, Icannot imagine. We then cautiously walked along one ofthe ledges, till we came to the stream already alluded to.This ledge formed a flat spot, above which a beautifulcascade, of some hundred feet, poured down its waters, andbeneath it another high one emptied itself into the mainstream. From this cool and shady recess, we made acircuit to avoid the overhanging cascade. As before, wefollowed little projecting ledges, the apparent danger beingpartly hidden by the thickness of the vegetation. In passingfrom one of the ledges to another, there was a verticalwall of rock. One of the Tahitians, a fine active man,placed the trunk of a tree against this, combed up it, andthen by the aid of crevices reached the summit. He fixedthe ropes to a projecting point, and lowered them for us,then hauled up a dog which accompanied us, and lastlyour luggage. Beneath the ledge on which the dead treewas placed the precipice must have been five or six hundredfeet deep ; and if the abyss had not been partly concealedby the overhanging ferns and lilies, my head would haveturned giddy, and nothing shoidd have induced me to haveattempted it. We continued to ascend sometimes alongledges, and sometimes along knife-edged ridges, having oneach hand profound ravines. In the Cordillera, I have seenmountains on a far grander scale, but for abruptness, nopart of them at all comparable to this. In the evening wereached a flat little spot on the banks of the same stream,488 TAHITI. Nov. 1835.which I have mentioned as descending by a chain of waterfalls.Here we bivouacked for the night. On each side ofthe ravine there were great beds of the Eye, or mountain-banana,covered with ripe fi'uit. Many of these plants werefrom twenty to twenty-five feet high, and from three tofour in circumference. By the aid of strips of bark fortwine, the stems of bamboos for rafters, and the large leafof the banana for a thatch, the Tahitians in a few minutesbuilt an excellent house; and with the withered leavesmade a soft bed.They then proceeded to make a fire, and cook our eveningmeal. A fight was procured by rubbing a blunt-pointedstick in a groove made in another (as if with the intentionof deepening it), until by friction the dust became ignited.A peculiarly white and very light wood (the Hibiscustiliaceus) is alone used for this purpose : it is the samewhich serves for poles to carry any burden, and for thefloating outrigger to steady the canoe. The fire was producedin a few seconds: but, to a person who does notunderstand the art, it requires the greatest exertion; as Ifound, before at last, to my great pride, I succeeded inigniting the dust. The Gaucho in the Pampas uses adifferent method: taking an elastic stick about eighteeninches long, he presses one end on his breast, and the other(which is pointed) in a hole in a piece of wood, and thenrapidly turns the curved part, like a carpenter's centre-bit.The Tahitians hawking made a small fire of sticks, placed ascore of stones, of about the size of cricket-balls, on theburning wood. In about ten minutes' time the sticks wereconsumed and the stones hot. They had previously foldedup in small parcels of leaves, pieces of beef, fish, ripe andunripe bananas, and the tops of the wild arum. These greenparcels were laid in a layer between two layers of thehot stones, and the whole then covered up with earth, sothat no smoke or steam could escape. In about a quarterof an hour, the whole was most deliciously cooked. Thechoice green parcels were now laid on a cloth of banana-nov.1835. EXCURSION INTO THE Mountains. 489leaves, and with a cocoa-nut shell we drank the cool waterof the running stream ; and thus we enjoyed our rusticmeal.I could not look on the surrounding plants without admiration.On every side were forests of banana; the fruit ofwhich, though serving for food in various ways, lay in heapsdecaying on the ground. In front of us there was anextensive brake of wild sugar-cane ; and the stream wasshaded by the dark green knotted stem of the Ava, — sofamous in former days for its powerful intoxicating effects.I chewed a piece, and found that it had an acrid andunpleasant taste, which would have induced any one atonce to have pronounced it poisonous. Thanks be to themissionaries, this plant now thrives only in these deepravines, innocuous to every one. Close by I saw the wildarum, the roots of which, when well baked, are good toeat, and the young leaves better than spinach. There wasthe wdd yam, and a liliaceous plant called Ti, which growsin abundance, and has a soft brown root, in shape and sizelike a huge log of wood. This served us for dessert, for it isas sweet as treacle, and with a pleasant taste. There were,moreover, several other wild fruits, and useful vegetables.The little stream, besides its cool water, produced eels andcray-fish. I did indeed admire this scene, when I comparedit with an uncultivated one in the temperate zones. I feltthe force of the observation, that man, at least savage man,with his reasoning powers only partly developed, is thechild of the tropics.As the evening drew to a close, I strolled beneath thegloomy shade of the bananas up the course of the stream.My walk was soon brought to a close, by coming to a waterfallbetween two and three hundred feet high; and againabove this there was another. I mention all these waterfallsin this one brook, to give a general idea of the inclination ofthe land. In the little recess where the water fell, it did notappear that a breath of wind had ever entered. The leavesof the banana, damp with spray, possessed an unbroken edge,490 TAHITI. Nov. 1835.instead of being split, as generally is the case, into a thousandshreds. From our position, almost suspended on themountain-side, there were glimpses into the depths of theneighbouring valleys ; and the lofty points of the centralmountains, towering up within sixty degrees of the zenith,hid half the evening sky. Thus seated, it was a sublimespectacle to watch the shades of night gradually obscuringthe last and highest pinnacles.Before we laid ourselves down to sleep, the elder Tahitianfell on his knees, and with closed eyes repeated a long prayerin his native tongue. He prayed as a Christian should do,with fitting reverence, and without the fear of ridicule or anyostentation of piety. At our meals neither of the men wouldtaste food, without saying beforehand a short grace. Thosetravellers, who think that a Tahitian prays only when theeyes of the missionary are fixed on him, should have sleptwith us that night on the mountain-side. Before morningit rained very heavily ; but the good thatch of banana-leaveskept us dry.November 19th. — At daylight my friends, after theirmorning prayer, prepared an excellent breakfast in the samemanner as in the evening. They themselves certainly partookof it largely ; indeed I never saw any men eat nearly somuch. I should suppose such capacious stomachs must betheresult of a large part of their diet consisting of fruit andvegetables, which contain, in a given bulk, a comparativelysmall portion of nutriment. Unwittingly, I was the means ofmy companions breaking (as I afterwards learned) one of theirown laws and resolutions. I took with me a flask of spirits,which they could not resolve to refuse ; but as often as theydrank a little, they put their fingers before their mouths, anduttered the word " Missionaries About two years ago,although the use of the ava was prevented, drunkenness fromthe introduction of spirits became very prevalent. The missionariesprevailed on a few good men, who saw their countryrapidly going to ruin, to join with them in a TemperanceSociety. From good sense or shame all the chiefs and theNov. 1835. Temperance OF INHABITANTS. 491queen were at last persuaded to join it. Immediately a law waspassed that no spirits should be allowed to be introduced intothe island, and that he who sold and he who bought the forbiddenarticle, should be punished by a fine. With remarkablejustice, a certain period was allowed for stock in hand tobe sold, before the law came into effect. But when it did, ageneral search was made in which even the houses of themissionaries were not exempted, and all the ava (as thenatives call all ardent spirits) was poured on the ground.When one reflects on the effect of intemperance on the aboriginesof the two Americas, I think it will be acknowledged,that every well-wisher of Tahiti owes no common debt ofgratitude to the missionaries. As long as the little island ofSt. Helena remained under the government of the East IndiaCompany, spirits, ovidng to the great injury they had produced,were not allowed to be imported ; but wine was suppliedfrom the Cape of Good Hope. It is rather a striking,and not very gratifying fact, that in the same year that spiritswere allowed to be sold on that island, their use was banishedfrom Tahiti by the free will of the people.After breakfast we proceeded on our journey. As myobject was merely to see a little of the interior scenery, wereturned by another track, which descended into the mainvalley lower down. For some distance we wound, by a mostintricate path, along the side of the mountain which formedthe valley. In the less precipitous parts we passed throughextensive groves of the wild banana. The Tahitians, withtheir naked, tattooed bodies, their heads ornamented withflowers, and seen in the dark shade of the woods, would haveformed a fine picture of man, inhabiting some primevalforest. In our descent we followed the line of ridges ; thesewere exceedingly narrow, and for considerable lengths steepas a ladder ; but all clothed with vegetation. The extremecare necessary in poising each step rendered the walkfatiguing. I am never weary of expressing my astonishmentat these ravines and precipices : the mountains mayalmost be described, as rent by so many crevices. When492 TAHITI. Nov. 1835.viewing the surrounding country from the knife-edged ridges,the point of support was so small, that the effect wasnearly the same, I should think, as from a balloon. Inthis descent we had occasion to use the ropes only once, atthe point where we entered the main valley. We slept underthe same ledge of rock, where, the day before, we had dined :the night was fine, but from the depth and narrowness of thegorge, profoundly dark.Before actually seeing this country, I had difficulty inunderstanding two facts mentioned by Ellis ; namely, thatafter the murderous battles of former times, the survivors onthe conquered side retired into the mountains, where ahandful of men could resist a multitude. Certainly half-a-dozenmen, at the spot where the Tahitian reared the oldtree, could easily have repulsed thousands. Secondly, thatafter the introduction of Christianity, there were wild menwho Used in the mountains, and whose retreats were unknownto the more civilized inhabitants.November 20th. — In the morning we started early, andreached Matavai at noon. On the road we met a largeparty of noble athletic men, going for wild bananas. I foundthat the ship, on account of the difficulty in watering, hadmoved to the harbour of Papawa, to which place I immediatelywalked. This is a very pretty spot. The cove issurrounded by reefs, and the water as smooth as that in alake. The cultivated ground, with all its beautiful productions,and the cottages, comes close down to the water'sedge.From the varying accounts which I had read before reachingthese islands, I was very anxious to form, from my ownobservation, a judgment of their moral state — although suchjudgment would necessarily be very imperfect. A firstimpression at aU times very much depends on one's ideas. My notions were drawn from Ellis'sPolynesian Researches" — an admirable and most interestingwork, but naturally looking at every thing undera favourable point of view ; from Beechey's Voyage ; andNov. 1835. TAHITI. 493from that of Kotzebue, which is strongly adverse to thewhole missionary system. He who compares these threeaccounts, will, I think, form a tolerably accurate conceptionof the present state of Tahiti. One of my impressions,which I took from the two last authorities, was decidedlyincorrect ; viz., that the Tahitians had become a gloomy race,and lived in fear of the missionaries. Of the latter feeling Isaw no trace, unless, indeed, fear and respect be confoundedunder one name. Instead of discontent being a commonfeeling, it would be difficult in Europe to pick out of a crowdhalf so many merry and happy faces. The prohibition ofthe flute and dancing is inveighed against as wrong andfoolish ; — the more than presbyterian manner of keeping thesabbath, is looked at in a similar light. On these points Iwill not pretend to offer any opinion in opposition to menwho have resided as many years as I was days on the island.On the whole it appears to me, that the morality andreligion of the inhabitants is highly creditable. There aremany who attack, even more acrimoniously than Kotzebue,both the missionaries, their system, and the effects producedby it. Such reasoners never compare the present state withthat of the island only twenty years ago ; nor even-with thatof Europe at this day ; but they compare it with the highstandard of Gospel perfection. They expect the missionariesto effect that, which the Apostles themselves failed to do.In as much as the condition of the people falls short of thishigh order, blame is attached to the missionary, instead ofcredit for that which he has effected. They forget, or will notremember, that human sacrifices, and the power of an idolatrouspriesthood — a system of profligacy unparalleled in theworld, and infanticide a consequence on that system — bloodywars, where the conquerors spared neither women nor children— that all these have been abolished; and that dishonesty,intemperance, and licentiousness have been greatlyreduced by the introduction of Christianity. In a voyagerto forget these things is base ingratitude ; for should hechance to be at the point of shipwreck on some unknown494 TAHITI. Nov. 1835.coast, lie will most devoutly pray that the lesson of themissionary may be found to have extended thus far.In point of morality the virtue of the women, it has beenoften said, is most open to exception. But before they areblamed too severely, it will be well distinctly to call to mind thescenes described by Captain Cook and Mr. Banks, in whichthe grandmothers and mothers of the present race played apart. Those who are most severe, should consider how muchof the morality of the women in Europe is owing to thesystem early impressed by mothers on their daughters, andhow much in each individual case to the precepts of religion.But it is useless to argue against such reasoners: — I believethat disappointed in not finding the field of licentiousnessquite so open as formerly, they will not give credit to amorality which they do not wish to practice, or to a religionwhich they undervalue, if not despise.Sunday 22d. — The harbour of Papists, which may beconsidered as the capital of the island, is about seven milesdistant from Matavai, to which point the Beagle had returned.The queen resides there, and it is the seat of government,and the chief resort of shipping. Captain FitzRoy took aparty there to hear divine service, first in the Tahitian language,and afterwards in our own. Mr. Pritchard, the leadingmissionary in the island, performed the sere-ice, whichwas a most interesting spectacle. The chapel consisted of alarge airy framework of wood ; and it was filled to excess bytidy, clean people, of all ages and both sexes. I was ratherdisappointed in the apparent degree of attention ; but I believemy expectations were raised too high. At all eventsthe appearance was quite equal to that in a country church inEngland. The singing of the hymns was decidedly verypleasing ; but the language from the pulpit, although fluentlydelivered, did not sound well. A constant repetition ofwords, like " tata ta, mata mai," rendered it monotonous.After English service, a party returned on foot to Matavai.It was a pleasant walk, sometimes along the sea-beach andsometimes under the shade of the many beautiful trees.Nov. 1835. TAHITIAN PARLIAMENT. 495About two years ago, a small vessel under English colourswas plundered by the inhabitants of the Low Islands, whichwere then under the dominion of the Queen of Tahiti. Itwas believed that the perpetrators were instigated to thisact by some indiscreet laws issued by her majesty. TheBritish government demanded compensation ; which wasacceded to, and a sum of nearly three thousand dollars wasagreed to be paid on the first of last September. The commodoreat Lima ordered Captain FitzRoy, to inquire concerningthis debt, and to demand satisfaction if it were notpaid. Captain FitzRoy accordingly requested an interviewwith the queen : and a parliament was held to consider thequestion ; at which all the principal chiefs of the island andthe queen were assembled. I will not attempt to describewhat took place, after the interesting account given byCaptain FitzRoy. The money it appeared had not beenpaid. Perhaps the alleged reasons for the failure wererather equivocating : but otherwise I cannot sufficiently expressour general surprise, at the extreme good sense, thereasoning powers, moderation, candour, and prompt resolution,which were displayed on all sides. I believe every oneof us left the meeting with a very different opinion of theTahitians, from that which we entertained when entering.The chiefs and people resolved to subscribe and completethe sum which was wanting : Captain FitzRoy urged that itwas hard that their private property should be sacrificed forthe crimes of distant islanders. They replied, that they weregrateful for his consideration, but that Marre was theirQueen, and they were determined to help her in this herdifficulty. This resolution and its prompt execution (for abook was opened early the next morning), made a perfectconclusion to this very remarkable scene of loyalty and goodfeeling.After the main discussion was ended, several of the chiefstook the opportunity of asking Captain FitzRoy many intelligentquestions, concerning international customs and laws.These related to the treatment of ships and foreigners. On496 NEW ZEALAND. Dec. 1835.some points, as soon as the decision was made, the law wasissued verbally on the spot. This Tahitian parliament lastedfor several hours ; and when it was over Captain FitzRoyinvited the queen to pay the Beagle a visit.November 26th. — In the evening, with a gentle land-breeze,a course was steered for New Zealand, and as thesun set we took a farewell look at the mountains of Tahiti, —the island to which every voyager has offered up his tribute ofadmiration.December 19th. — In the evening we saw New Zealandin the distance. We may now consider ourselves as havingnearly crossed the Pacific ocean It is necessary to sail overthis great sea to understand its immensity. Moving quicklyonwards for weeks together we meet with nothing, but thesame blue, profoundly deep, ocean. Even within the Archipelagoes,the islands are mere specks, and far distant onefrom the other. Accustomed to look at maps, drawn on asmall scale, where dots, shading, and names are crowdedtogether, we do not judge rightly how infinitely small theproportion of dry land is to the water of this great sea. Themeridian of the Antipodes likewise has now been passed;and every league, thanks to our good fortune, which wetravel onwards, is one league nearer to England. TheseAntipodes call to mind old recollections of childish doubt andwonder. Only the other day, I looked forward to this airybarrier, as a definite point in our voyage homewards ; but nowI find it, and all such resting-places for the imagination, are likeshadows which a man moving onwards cannot catch. A galeof wind, which lasted for some days, has lately given us timeand inclination to measure the future stages in our longvoyage, and to wish most earnestly for its termination.December 2 1st. — Early in the morning we entered theBay of Islands, and being becalmed for some hours near themouth, we did not reach the anchorage till the middle of theday. The country is hilly, but with a smooth outline ; andit is deeply intersected by numerous arms, extending fromthe bay. The surface appears from a distance, as if clothedDec. 1835. bay of islands. 497with coarse pasture, but this in truth is nothing but fern.On the more distant hills, as well as in patches in some ofthe valleys, there is a good deal of wood-land. The generaltint of the landscape is not a bright green ; and it resemblesthe country a short distance to the southward of Concepcionin Chile. In several parts of the bay, little villagesof square tidy-looking houses were scattered close downto the water's edge. Three whaling ships were lying atanchor ; but with the exception of these, and of a few canoes,now and then crossing from one shore to the other, an air ofextreme quietness reigned over the whole district. Only asingle canoe came alongside. This, and the aspect of thewhole scene, afforded a remarkable, and not very pleasingcontrast, with our joj^'ul and boisterous welcome at Tahiti.In the afternoon we went on shore to one of the largergroups of houses, which yet hardly deserves the title of a village.Its name is Pahia : it is the residence of the missionaries;and with the exception of their servants andlabourers, there are no native residents. In the vicinity ofthe Bay of Islands, the number of Englishmen, includingtheir families, amounts to between two and three hundred.All the cottages, many of which are white washed, and lookas I have said very neat, are the property of the English.The hovels of the natives are so diminutive and paltry, thatthey can scarcely be perceived from any distance. At Pahia,it was quite pleasing to behold the English flowers in theplatforms before the houses ; there were roses of severalkinds, honeysuckle, jasmine, stocks, and whole hedges ofsweetbread.December 22d. — In the morning I went out walking;but I soon found, that the country was very impracticable.All the hills are thickly covered by tall fern, together with alow bush which grows like a cypress ; and very little groundhas been cleared or cultivated in this neighbourhood. I thentried the sea-beach ; but proceeding towards either hand,my walk was soon stopped short, by creeks and deep streamsof fresh water. The communication between the inhabitantsVOL. III. 2 K498 NEW ZEALAND. Dcc. 1835.of the different parts of the bay, is (as in Chloe) almostentirely kept up by boats. I was surprised' to find thatalmost every hill, which I ascended, had been at some formertime more or less fortified. The summits were cut into stepsor successive terraces, and they had been frequently protectedby deep trenches. I afterwards observed that theprincipal hills inland, in like manner showed an artificial outline.These are the Pas, so frequently mentioned by CaptainCook under the name of " hippah" ; the difference of soundbeing owing to the prefixed article.That the Pas had formerly been used, was evident fromthe piles of shells, and the pits in which, as I was informed,sweet potatoes were kept as reserved provisions. As therewas no water on these hills, the defenders could never haveanticipated a long siege, but only a hurried attack for plunder ;under which circumstances the successive terraces wouldhave afforded good protection. The general introduction offire-arms has changed the whole system of warfare ; and anexposed situation on the top of a hill would now be worsethan useless. The Pas in consequence, is at the present day,always built on a level piece of ground. It consists of adouble stockade of thick and tall posts, placed in a zigzagline, so that every part can be flanked. Within the stockadea mound of earth is thrown up, behind which the defenderscan rest in safety, or use their fire-arms over it. On thelevel of the ground, little archways sometimes pass throughthis breastwork, by which means the defenders can crawlout to the stockade, to reconnoitre their enemies. The Rev.W. Williams, who gave me this account, added, that in onePas he had noticed spurs or buttresses projecting from theinside of the mound of earth. On asking the chief the useof them, he replied, that if two or three of his men shouldbe shot their neighbours would not see the bodies, and sobe discouraged.These Pases are considered by the New Zealanders as veryperfect means of defence: for the attacking force is neverso well disciplined as to rush in a body to the stockade, cutDec. 1S35. NEW ZEALAND-199it down, and effect their entry. When a tribe goes to war,the chief cannot order one party to go here, and anotherthere ; but every man fights in the manner which best pleaseshimself; and for individuals to approach a stockade defendedby fire-arms, must appear certain death. I should thinka more warlike race of inhabitants could not be found inany part of the world, than the New Zealanders. Theirconduct on first seeing a ship, as described by CaptainCook, strongly illustrates this : the act of throwing volleysof stones at so great and novel an object, and their defiance,of " Come on shore and we will kill and eat youaU,'^ shows uncommon boldness. This warlike spirit isevident in many of their customs, and even in their smallestactions. If a New Zealander is struck, although but in joke,the blow must be returned ; and of this I saw an instancewith one of our officers.At the present day, from the progress of civilization, thereis much less warfare. When Europeans first traded here,muskets and ammunition far exceeded in value any otherarticle : now they are in little request, and are indeed oftenoffered for sale. Among some of the southern tribes, however,there is still much hostility. I heard a characteristicanecdote of what took place there some time ago. A missionary'found a chief and his tribe in preparation for war ; —their muskets clean and bright, and their ammunition ready.He reasoned long on the inutility of the war, and the littleprovocation which had been given for it. The chief was muchshaken in his resolution, and seemed in doubt : but atlength it occurred to him, that a barrel of his gunpowderwas in a bad state, and that it would not keep much longer.This was brought forward as an unanswerable argumentfor the necessity of immediately declaring war : the ideaof allowing so much good gunpowder to spoil was not to bethoughtof ; and this settled the point.I was told by the missionaries, that in the life of Shongi,the chief who visited England, the love of war was the oneand lasting spring of every action. The tribe in which he2 K 2500 NEW ZEALAND. DcC. 1835.was a principal chief, had at one time been much oppressed,by another from the Thames river. A solemn oath was takenby the men, that when their boys should grow up, and theyshould be powerful enough, they would never forget or forgivethese injuries. To fulfil this appears to have beenShongi's chief motive for going to England ; and when thereit was his sole object. Presents were valued only as theycould be converted into arms ; of the arts, those alone wereinteresting, which were concerned with the manufacture ofarms. When at Sydney, Shongi, by a strange coincidence,met the hostile chief of the Thames river at the house of Mr.Marten : their conduct was civil to each other ; but Shongitold him, that when again in New Zealand he would nevercease to carry war into his country. The challenge wasaccepted ; and Shongi on his return fulfilled the threat to theutmost letter. The tribe on the Thames river was utterlyoverthrown, and the chief to whom the challenge had beengiven, was himself killed. Shongi, although harbouring suchdeep feelings of hatred and revenge, is described as havingbeen a goodnatui-ed person.In the evening I went with Captain FitzRoy, and Mr.Baker, one of the missionaries, to pay a visit to Kororadika.This is the largest college, and will one day, no doubt increasetill it becomes the chief town : besides a considerable nativepopulation, there are many English residents. These latter aremenon themostworthless character: and among them are manyrunaway convicts from New South Wales. There are manyspirit-shops ; and the whole population is addicted to drunkennessand all kinds of vice. As this is the capital, a personwould be inclined to form his opinion of the New Zealandersfrom what he here saw ; but in this case his estimate of theircharacter would be too low. This little village is the verystronghold of vice. Although many tribes in other partshave embraced Christianity, here the greater part yet remainin heathenism. In such places the missionaries are held inlittle esteem : but they complain far more of the conduct oftheir countrymen, than of that of the natives. It is strange,Dec. 1835. NEW ZEALAND. 501but I have heard these worthy men say, that the only protectionwhich they need, and on which they rely, is from thenative chiefs against Englishmen.We wandered about the village, and saw and conversedwith many of the people, both men, women, and children.Looking at the New Zealander, one naturally compares himwith the Tahitian ; both belonging to the same family ofmankind. The comparison, however, tells heavily againstthe New Zealander. He may, perhaps, be superior inenergy, but in every other respect, his character is ofa much lower order. One glance at their respective expressions,brings conviction to the mind, that one is a savage, theother a civilized man. It would be vain to seek in the wholeof New Zealand, a person with the face and mien of the oldTahitian chief, Utamme. No doubt the extraordinary mannerin which tattooing is here practised, gives a disagreeableexpression to their countenances. The complicated butsymmetrical figures covering the whole face, puzzle and misleadan unaccustomed eye : it is moreover probable, that thedeep incisions, by destroying the play of the superficialmuscles, give an air of rigid inflexibility. But besides this,there is a twinkling in the eye, which cannot indicate anythingbut cunning and ferocity. Their figures are tall andbulky ; but in elegance are not comparable with those of theworking classes in Tahiti.Both their persons and houses are filthily dirty and offensive: the idea of washing either their bodies or their clothesnever seems to enter their heads. I saw a chief, who waswearing a shirt black and matted with filth ; and when askedhow it came to be so dirty, he replied, with surprise, " Donot you see it is an old one ?" Some of the men have shirts ;but the common dress is one or two large blankets, generallyblack with dirt, which are thrown over their shoulders in avery inconvenient and awkward fashion. A few of the principalchiefs have decent suits of EngUsh clothes ; but theseare only worn on great occasions.Considering the number of foreigners residing in New502 NEW ZEALAND. DcC. 1835.Zealand, and the amount of commerce carried on there, thestate of government of the country is most remarkable. Itis, however, incorrect to use the term government, whereabsolutely no such thing exists. The land is divided, bywell-determined boundaries, between various tribes, independentof each other. The individuals in each tribe consistof freemen, and slaves taken in war ; and the land iscommon to all the free born ; that is, each may occupy andtill any part that is vacant. In a sale, therefore, of land,every such person must receive part payment. Among thefreemen, there will always be some one, who from riches,from talents, or from descent from some noted character,will take the lead ; and in this respect he may be consideredas the chief. But if the united tribe should be asked, whowas their chief, no one would be acknowledged. Withoutdoubt, in many cases, individuals have obtained great influence;but as far as I can understand the system, theirpower is not legitimate. Even the authority of a master overhis slave, or a parent over his child, appears to be regulatedby no kind of ordinary custom. Proper laws of courseare quite unknown : certain lines of action are generallyconsidered right, and others wrong : if such customs areinfringed, the injured person and his tribe, if they havepower, seek retribution ; if not, they treasure up the recollectionof the injury till the day of revenge arrives. If thestate in which the Fuegians live should be fixed at zeroin the scale of government, I am afraid New Zealand wouldrank but a few degrees higher ; while Tahiti, even when firstdiscovered, would have occupied a respectable position.December 23d. — At a place called Waimate, aboutfifteen miles from the Bay of Islands, and midway betweenthe eastern and western coasts, the missionaries have purchasedsome land for agricultural purposes. I had been introducedto the Rev. W. Williams, who, upon my expressingthe wish, invited me to pay him a visit there. Mr. Bushy,the British Resident, offered to take me in his boat by a creek,where I should see a pretty waterfall, and by which means myDec. 1835. NEW ZEALAND. 503walk would be shortened. He likewise procured for me a guide.Upon asking a neighbouring chief to recommend a man, thechief himself ordered to go ; but his ignorance of the value ofmoney was so complete, that at first he asked how manypounds I would give him ; but, afterwards was well contentedwith two dollars. When I showed the chief a very smallbundle, which I wanted carried, it became absolutely necessaryto take a slave for that purpose. These feelings of prideare beginning to wear away; but formerly a leading manwould sooner have died than undergone the indignity ofcarrying the smallest burden. My companion was a lightactive man, dressed in a dirty blanket, and with his face completelytattooed. He had formerly been a great warrior. Heappeared to be on very cordial terms with Mr. Bushby ; butat various times they had quarrelled violently. Mr. Bushbyremarked that a little quiet irony would frequently silenceany one of these natives in their most blustering moments.This chief has come and harangued Mr. Bushby in a hectoringmanner, saying, " A great chief, a great man, a friend ofmine, has come to pay me a visit — you must give him somethinggood to eat, some fine presents, &c." Mr. Bushby hasallowed him to finish his discourse, and then has quietly re-pled by some such answer as, " What else shall your slavedo for you ?" The man would then instantly, with a verycomical expression, cease his braggadocio.Some time ago, Mr. Bushby suffered a far more seriousattack. A chief and a party of men tried to break into hishouse in the middle of the night, and not finding this soeasy, commenced a brisk firing with their muskets. Mr.Bushby was slightly wounded ; but the party was at lengthdriven away. Shortly afterwards it was discovered whowas the aggressor ; and a genera] meeting of the chiefs wasconvened to consider the case. It was considered by theNew Zealanders as very atrocious, inasmuch as it was anight attack, and that Mrs. Bushy was lying ill in the house :this latter circumstance, much to their honour, being constNEW ZEALAND. Dec, 1835.ordered in all cases as a protection. The chiefs agreed toconfiscate the land of the aggressor to the King of England.The whole proceeding, however, in thus trying and punishinga chief was entirely without precedent. The aggressor,moreover, lost cast in the estimation of his equals ; and thiswas considered by the British as of more consequence, thanthe confiscation of his land.As the boat was shoving off, a second chief stepped into her,who only wanted the amusement of the passage up and downthe creek. I never saw a more horrid and ferocious expression,than this man had. It immediately struck me, I hadsomewhere seen his likeness : it will be found in Retzsch'soutlines to Schiller's ballad of Fridolin, where two men arepushing Robert into the burning iron furnace. It is theman who has his arm on Robert's breast. Physiognomyhere spoke the truth ; this chief had been a notorious murderer,and was to boot an arrant coward. At the pointwhere the boat landed, Mr. Bushby accompanied me a fewhundred yards on the road : 1 could not help admiring thecool impudence of the hoary old villain, whom we left lyingin the boat, when he shouted to Mr. Bushby, " Do not youstay long, I shall be tired of waiting here."We now commenced our walk. The road lay along a well-beatenpath, bordered on each side by the tall fern, whichcovers the whole country. After travelling some miles, wecame to a little country village, where a few hovels were collectedtogether, and some patches of ground cultivated forpotato crops. The introduction of the potato, has beenthe most essential benefit to the island ; it is now much moreused, than any native vegetable. New Zealand is favouredby one great natural advantage ; namely, that the inhabitantscan never perish from famine. The whole country aboundswith fern ; and the roots of this plant, if not very palatable,yet contain much nutriment. A native can always subsiston these, and on the shells which are abundant on all partsof the sea-coast. The villages are chiefly conspicuous, byDec. 1835. EXCURSION to waite. 505the platforms which are raised on four posts ten or twelvefeet above the ground and on which the produce of thefields is kept secure from all accidents.On coming near one of the huts, I was much amused byseeing in due form the ceremony of rubbing, or as it shouldmore properly be called, pressing noses. The women, onour first approach, began uttering something in a mostdolorous voice; they then squatted themselves down andheld up their faces ; my companions standing over them,placed the bridge of their own noses at right angles totheirs, and commenced pressing. This lasted rather longerthan a cordial shake of the hand Avould with us ; and as wevary the force of the grasp of the hand in shaking, so do theyin pressing. During the process they uttered comfortablelittle grunts, very much in the same manner as two pigs do,when rubbing against each other. I noticed, that the slavewould press noses with any one he met, indifferently eitherbefore or after his master the chief. Although amongsavages the chief has absolute power of life and death overhis slave, yet there is an entire absence of ceremony betweenthem. Mr. Burchell has remarked the same thing inSouthern Africa with respect to the rude Bachapins. Wherecivilization has arrived at a certain point, as among theTahitians, complex formalities are soon instituted betweenthe different grades of society. For instance, in the aboveisland, formerly all were obliged to uncover themselves aslow as the waist in presence of the king.The ceremony of pressing noses having been completedwith all present, we seated ourselves in a circle in the frontof one of the houses, and rested there half-an-hour. All thenative hovels which I have seen, have nearly the same formand dimensions, and all agree in being filthily dirty. Theyresemble a cow-shed with one end open, but having a partitiona little way within, with a square hole in it, whichthus cuts off a part, and makes a small gloomy chamber. Inthis the inhabitants keep all their property, and when the506 NEW ZEALAND. Dec. 1835.weather is cold they sleep there. They eat, however, andpass their time in the open part in front.My guides having finished their pipes, we continued ourwalk. The path led through the same undulating country,the whole uniformly clothed as before with fern. On ourright hand, we had a serpentine river, the banks of whichwere fringed with trees, and here and there on the hill-sidesthere were clumps of wood. The whole scene, in spite of itsgreen colour, bore rather a desolate aspect. The sight of somuch fern impresses the mind with an idea of sterility.This, however, is not the case ; for wherever the fern growsthick and breast-high, the land by tillage becomes productive.Some of the residents, with much probability think thatall this extensive open country was originally covered withforests, and that it has been cleared by the aid of fire.It is said that by digging in the barest spots, lumps of thekind of resin which flows from the kauri pine, are frequentlyfound. The natives had an evident motive in thus clearingthe country ; for in such parts the fern, formerly so staple anarticle of food, flourishes best. The almost entire absence ofassociated grasses, which forms so remarkable a feature inthe vegetation of this island, may perhaps be accounted forbythe open parts being the work of man, while nature haddesigned the country for forest land.The soil is volcanic ; in several parts we passed overslaggy and vesicular lavas, and the form of a crater couldclearly be distinguished in several of the neighbouring hills.Although the scenery is nowhere beautiful, and only occasionallypretty, I enjoyed my walk. I should have enjoyedit more, if my companion, the chief, had not possessed extraordinaryconversational powers, I only knew three words ;good," " bad," and " yes:" and with these I answered allhis remarks, without of course having understood one wordhe said. This, however, was quite sufficient : I was a goodlistener, an agreeable person, and he never ceased talkingto me.Dec. 1835. waite. 507At length we reached Waimate. After having passedover so many miles of an uninhabited useless country thesudden appearance of an English farm-house, and its redressedfields, placed there as if by an enchanter's wand, wasexceedingly pleasing, Mr. Williams not being at home, Ireceived in Mr. Davies's house a cordial and pleasant welcome.After drinking tea With his family party, we took astroll about the farm. At Waimate there are three largehouses, where the missionary gentlemen Messrs. Williams,Davies, and Clarke, reside ; and near them are the huts of thenative labourers. On an adjoining slope fine crops of barleyand wheat in fuU ear were standing; and, in another part, fieldsof potatoes and clover. But I cannot attempt to describe allI saw ; there were large gardens, with every fruit and vegetablewhich England produces ; and many belonging to a warmerclime. I may instance, asparagus, kidney beans, cucumbers,rhubarb, apples, pears, figs, peaches, apricots, grapes, olives,gooseberries, currants, hops, gorse for fences, and Englishoaks ; also many different kinds of flowers. Around the farmyardthere were stables, a thrashing-barn with its winnowingmachine, a blacksmith's forge, and on the ground ploughsharesand other tools : in the middle was that happy mixtureof pigs and poultry, which may be seen so comfortablylying together in every English farm-yard. At the distanceof a few hundred yards, where the water of a little rill wasdammed up into a pool, a large and substantial water-milhad been erected.All this is very surprising, when it is considered, that fiveyears ago, nothing but the fern flourished here. Moreover,native workmanship,, taught by the missionaries, has effectedthis change : — the lesson of the missionary is the enchanter'swand. The house has been built, the windows framed, the fieldsploughed, and even the trees grafted, by the New Zealander.At the mil, a New Zealander may be seen powdered whitewith flovir, like his brother miller in England. When I lookedat this whole scene, I thought it admirable. It was notmerely that England was vividly brought before my mind ;508 NEW ZEALAND. Dec. 1835.yet, as the evening drew to a close, the domestic sounds, thefields of corn, the distant country with its trees now appearinglike pasture-land, all might M-ell be mistaken for somepart of it. Nor was it the triumphant feeling at seeing whatEnglishmen could effect, but it was something of far moreconsequence ; the object for which this labour had beenbestowed — the moral effect on the aborigines of this finecountry.The missionary system here appears to me different fromthat of Tahiti ; much more attention is there paid to religiousinstruction, and to the direct improvement of the mind ;here, more to the arts of civilization. I do not doubt that inboth cases, the same object is kept in view. Judging from thesuccess alone, I should rather lean to the Tahiti side ; probably,however, each system is best adapted to the countrywhere it is followed. The mind of a Tahitian is certainlyone of a higher order ; and on the other hand, the New Zealander,not being able to pluck from the tree that shades hishouse the bread-fruit and banana, would naturally turn hisattention with more readiness to the arts. When comparingthe state of New Zealand with that of Tahiti, it shouldalways be remembered, that from the respective forms ofgovernment of the two countries, the missionaries here havehad to labour at a task, many times more difficult. Thereviewer of Mr. Earle's travels in the Quarterly Journal, bypointing out a more advantageous line of conduct for themissionaries, evidently considers that too much attention hasbeen paid to religious instruction, in proportion to othersubjects. This opinion being so very different from the oneat which I arrived, any third person hearing the two sides,would probably conclude, that the missionaries had been thebest judges, and had chosen the right path.Several young men were employed about the farm, whohad been brought up by the missionaries ; having been redeemedby them from slavery. They were dressed in a shirt,jacket and trousers, and had a respectable appearance. Judgingfrom one trifling anecdote, I should think they must beDec. 1835. WAiMATE. 509honest. When walking in the fields, a young labourer cameup to Mr. Davies, and gave him a knife and gimlet, sayinghe had found them on the road, and did not know to whomthey belonged ! These young men and boys appeared verymerry and good-humoured. In the evening I saw a partyof them at cricket : when I thought of the austerity of whichthe missionaries have been accused, I was amused by observingone of their own sons taking an active part in the game.A more decided and pleasing change was manifested in theyoung women, who acted as servants within the houses.Their clean, tidy, and healthy appearance, like that of dairy-maidsin England, formed a wonderful contrast with thewomen of the filthy hovels in Kororadika. The wives ofthe missionaries tried to persuade them not to be tattooed ;but a famous operator having arrived from the south, theysaid, " We really must just have a few lines on our lips ; elsewhen we grow old our lips will shrivel, and we shall be sovery ugly'' Tattooing is not nearly so much practised asformerly ; but as it is a badge of distinction between thechief and the slave, it will not probably very soon be disused.So soon does any train of ideas become habitual,that the missionaries told me, that even in their eyes, aplain face looked mean, and not like that of a New Zealandgentleman.Late in the evening I went to Mr. Williams's house, whereI passed the night. I found there a very large party ofchildren, collected together for Christmas-day, and allsitting round a table at tea. I never saw a nicer or moremerry group : and to think, that this was in the centre ofthe land of cannibalism, murder, and all atrocious crimes !The cordiality and happiness so plainly pictured in the facesof the little circle, appeared equally felt by the older personsof the mission.December 24th. — In the morning, prayers were readin the native tongue to the whole family. After breakfast,I rambled about the gardens and farm. This was a market-day,when the natives of the surrounding hamlets bring510 NEW ZEALAND. Dec. 1835.their potatoes, Indian corn, or pigs, to exchange forblankets, tobacco, and sometimes, through the persuasionsof the missionaries, for soap. Mr. Davies eldest son, whomanages a farm of his own, is the man of business in themarket. The children of the missionaries, who came whileyoung to the island, understand the language better thantheir parents, and can get any thing more readily done bythe natives.A little before noon, Messrs. Williams and Davies walkedwith me to part of a neighbouring forest, to show me thefamous Kauri pines. I measured one of these noble trees,in a part which was not enlarged near the roots, and foundit to be thirty-one feet in circumference. There was anotherclose by, which I did not see, thirty-three ; and I heard ofone, no less than forty feet. The trunks are also veryremarkable from their smoothness, cylindrical figure, absenceof branches, and having very nearly the same girth througha length from sixty to even ninety feet. The crown of thistree, where it is irregularly branched, is small, and out ofproportion to the trunk ; and the foliage is likewise diminutiveas compared with the branches. The forest in this part wasalmost composed of the Kauri; and the largest, from theparallelism of their sides, stood up like gigantic columns ofwood. The timber of this tree is the most valuable productof the island : moreover, a quantity of resin oozesfrom the bark, which is collected and sold at a pennya pound to the Americans, but its use is kept secret.On the outskirts of the wood, I saw the New Zealandflax growing in the swamps : this is the second most valuableexport. This plant somewhat resembles (but not botanically)the common iris ; the under surface of the leaf is lined by alayer of strong silky fibres ; and the upper consists of greenvegetable matter, which is scraped off with a broken shell,and the hemp remains in the hand of the workwoman.In the forest, besides the kauri, there are some other finetimber trees. I saw numbers of beautiful tree-ferns, andwas told of palms. Some of the New Zealand forests mustDec. 1835. Climate. 511be impenetrable to an extraordinary degree. Mr. Matthewsgave me an account of one, which, although onlythirty-four miles wide, and separating two inhabited districts,like the central forest of Chloe, had never been passed untillately. He and another missionary, each with a party ofabout fifty men, undertook to open a road : but it cost themmore than a fortnight's labour ! In the woods I saw veryfew birds. With regard to animals, it is a most remarkablefact, that so large an island, extending over more than 700miles in latitude, and in many parts ninety broad, wdthvaried stations, a fine climate, and land of all heights, from14,000 feet downwards, with the exception of a small rat,should not possess one indigenous animal. It is moreoversaid, that the introduction of the common Norway kind,has annihilated from the northern extremity of the island,the New Zealand species, in the short space of two years.In many places I noticed several sorts of weeds, which, likethe rats, I was forced to own as countrymen. A leek,however, which has overrun whole districts, and will bevery troublesome, was imported lately by the favour of aFrench vessel. The common dock is widely disseminated,and will, I am afraid, for ever remain a proof of the rascalityof an Englishman, who sold the seeds for those of thetobacco-plant.On returning from our pleasant walk to the houses, Idined with Mr. Williams ; and then, a horse being lent me,I returned to the Bay of Islands. I took leave of themissionaries, with thankfulness for their kind welcome, andwith feelings of high respect for their gentleman like, useful,and upright characters. I think it would be difficult to finda body of men better adapted for the high office which theyfulfil.Christmas-day. — In a few more days, the fourth yearof our absence from England will be completed. Our firstChristmas-day was spent at Plymouth; the second at St.Martin's Cove, near Cape Horn ; the third at Port Desire,in Patagonia ; the fourth at anchor in a harbour in the512 NEW ZEALAND. DcC. 1835.Peninsula of Tres Montes ; this fifth here ; and the next, Itrust in providence, will be in England. We attended divineservice in the chapel of Pahia ; part of the service was readin English, and part in the New Zealand language.As far as I was able to understand, the greater numberof people in this northern part of the island professChristianity. It is curious, that the religion even of thosewho do not profess it, has been modified and is now partly-christian,partly heathen. Moreover, so excellent is theChristian faith, that the outward conduct even of the unbelieversis said to have been decidedly improved by thespread of its doctrines. It is beyond doubt, however, thatmuch immorality still exists ; — that there are many whowould not hesitate to kiU a slave for a trifling offence;and that polygamy is still common, — indeed, I believe,general.We did not hear of any recent act of cannibalism ; butMr. Stokes found burnt human bones, strewed round anold fireplace, on a small island near the anchorage : theseremains of some quiet banquet might, indeed, have beenlying there for several years. Notwithstanding the abovefacts, it is probable that the moral state of the people willrapidly improve. Mr. Bushby mentioned one pleasing anecdoteas a proof of the sincerity of some, at least, of thosewho profess Christianity. One of his young men left him,who had been accustomed to read prayers to the rest of theservants. Some weeks afterwards, happening to pass latein the evening by an outhouse, he saw and heard one of hismen reading the bible with difficulty, by the light of the fire,to the others. After this, the party knelt and prayed : intheir prayers they mentioned Mr. Bushby and his family, andthe missionaries, each separately in his respective district.December 26th. — Mr. Bushby offered to take Mr. Sullivanand myself in his boat, some miles up the river to Cawa-Cana ; and proposed afterwards to walk on to the village ofWaiomio, where there are some curious rocks. Followingone of the arms of the bay, we enjoyed a pleasant row.Dec. 1835. new zExVLAnd. 513and passed through pretty scenery, until we came to avillage, beyond which the boat could not proceed. Fromthis place a chief and a party of men volunteered to walkwith us to Waiomio, a distance ' of four miles. Thechief was at this time rather notorious, from having latelyhung one of his wives and a slave, for adultery. Whenone of the missionaries remonstrated with him, he seemedsurprised, and said he thought he was exactly followingthe English method. Old Shongi, who happened to be inEngland during the Queen's trial, expressed great disapprobationat the whole proceeding : he said he had five wives,and he would rather cut ois all their heads, than be somuch troubled about one. Leaving this village, we crossedover to another, seated on a hill-side at a little distance.The daughter of a chief, who was still a heathen, had diedhere five days before. The hovel in which she had expiredhad been burnt to the ground : her body being enclosedbetween two small canoes was placed upright on the ground,and protected by an enclosure bearing wooden images oftheir gods, and the whole was painted, bright red, so asto be conspicuous from afar. Her gown was fastened to thecoffin, and her hair being cut off was cast at its foot. Therelatives of the family had torn the flesh of their arms,bodies, and faces, so that they were covered with clottedblood ; and the old women looked most filthy, disgustingobjects. On the following day some of the officers visitedthis place, and found the women still howling and cuttingthemselves.We continued our walk, and soon reached Waiomio.Here there are some singular masses of limestone, resemblingruined castles. These rocks have long served forburial-places, and in consequence are held sacred. One ofthe young men cried out, " Let us all be brave'' and ran onahead ; but when within a hundred yards, the whole partythought better of it, and stopped short. With perfect indifference,however, they allowed us to examine the wholeplace. At this village we rested some hours, during whichVOL. III. 2 L514 NEW ZEALAND. Dec. 1835.time there was a long discussion with Mr. Bushby, concerningthe right of sale of certain lands. One old man, whoappeared a perfect genealogist, illustrated the successivepossessors by bits of stick driven into the ground. Beforeleaving the houses, a little basketftd of roasted sweet-potatoeswas given to each -M our party; and we all,according to the custom, carried them away to eat on theroad. I noticed that among the women employed in cooking,there was a man-slave : it must be an humiliating thingfor a man in this warlike country to be employed in doingthat which is considered as the lowest woman's work.Slaves are not allowed to go to war ; but this perhaps canhardly be considered as a hardship. I heard of one poorwretch who, during hostilities, ran away to the oppositeparty ; being met by two men, he was immediately seized ;but they not agreeing to whom he should belong, each stoodover him with a stone hatchet, and seemed determined thatthe other at least should not take him away alive. Thepoor man, almost dead with fright, was only saved by theaddress of a chief's wife. We afterwards enjoyed a pleasantwalk lack to the boat, but did not reach the ship till late inthe evening.December 30th. — In the afternoon we stood out of theBay of Islands on our course to Sydney. I believe we wereaU glad to lease New Zealand, It is not a pleasant place.Amongst the natives there is absent that charming simplicitywhich is found at Tahiti ; and the greater part of theEnglish are the very refuse of society. Neither is thecountry itself attractive. I look back but to one brightspot, and that is Waimate, with its Christian inhabitants.CHAPTER XXI.Sydney — Prosperity — Excursion to Bathurst — Aspect of woods —-partyof Natives — Gradual extinction of aborigines — ■ Blue Mountains —Weatherboard — View of a grand gulf-like valley — Sheep farm — Lion-ant— Bathurst, general civility of lower orders — State of society — VanDiemen's Land — Hobart Town — Aborigines all banished — MountWellington — King George's Sound — Cheerless aspect of country —Bald Head, calcareous casts like branches of trees — Party of natives —Leave Australia.AUSTRALIA.January 12th, 1836 — Early in the morning, a light aircarried us towards the entrance of Port Jackson. Insteadof beholding a verdant country scattered over with finehouses : a straight line of yellowish cliff brought to our mindsthe coast of Patagonia. A solitary lighthouse, built of whitestone, alone told us we were near a great and populouscity. Having entered the harbour, it appeared fine andspacious ; but the level country, showing on the clifF-formedshores bare and horizontal strata of sandstone, was coveredby woods of thin scrubby trees, that bespoke useless sterility.Proceeding further inland, the country improved ; beautifulvillas and nice cottages were here and there scattered alongbeach. In the distance stone houses, two and threestories high, and windmills, standing on the edge of a bank,pointed out to us the neighbourhood of the capital ofAustralia.At last we anchored within Sydney Cove. We foundthe little basin occupied by many large ships, and surroundedby warehouses. In the evening I walked through the town,and returned full of admiration at the whole scene. It is amost magnificent testimony to the power of the Britishnation. Here, in a less promising country, scores of yearshave effected many times more, than the same number ofcenturies have done in South America. My first feeling2 L 251G NEW SOUTH WALES. Jan. 1836.was to congratulate myself that I was born an Englishman.Upon seeing more of the town afterwards, perhaps my admirationfell a little ; but yet it is a fine town ; the streets areregular, broad, clean, and kept in excellent order ; the housesare of a good size, and the shops well furnished. It may befaithfully compared to the large suburbs, which stretch outfrom London and a few other great towns in England : butnot even near London or Birmingham is there an appearanceof such rapid growth. The number of large houses justfinished and others building was truly surprising ; nevertheless,every one complained of the high rents and difficultyin procuring a house. In the streets, gigs, phaetons, andcarriages with livery servants, were driving about ; and of thelatter, many were extremely well equipped. Coming fromSouth America, where in the towns every man of property isknown, no one thing surprised me more than not being ableto ascertain readily to whom this or that carriage belonged.Many of the older residents say, that formerly they knewevery face in the colony, but now that in a morning's rideit is a chance if they know one. Sydney has a populationof twenty-three thousand, and is rapidly increasing : it mustcontain much wealth. It appears that a man of business canhardly fail to make a large fortune. I saw on aU sides finehouses, — one built from the profits of steam-vessels, —another from building, and so on. An auctioneer, who wasa convict, it is said, intends to return home, and will takewith him 100,000 pounds. Another has an income so largethat scarcely any body ventures to guess at it — the leastsum assigned being fifteen thousand a year. But the twocrowning facts are, — first, that the public revenue has increased60,000/. during this last year; and secondly, thatless than an acre of land within the town of Sydney sold for8000/. sterling.I hired a man and two horses to take me to Bathurst ; avillage about one hundred and twenty miles in the interior,and the centre of a great pastoral district. By this meansI hoped to get a general idea of the appearance of theJan. 1836. excursion to bathurst. 517country. On the morning of the 16th (January) I setout on my excursion. The first stage took us to Paramatta,a small country-town, the second to Sydney in importance.The roads were excellent, and made upon theMacAdam principle : whetstone having been brought for thepurpose from the distance of several miles. The road appearedmuch frequented by all sorts of carriages ; and I mettwo stage-coaches. In all these respects there was a closeresemblance to England ; perhaps the number of alehouseswas here in excess. The iron gangs, or parties of convicts,who have here committed some trifling offence, appeared theleast like England ; they were working in chains, under thecharge of sentries with loaded arms. The power, which thegovernment possesses, by means of forced labour, of at onceopening good roads throughout the country, has been, Ibelieve, one main cause of the early prosperity of thiscolony.I slept at night at a very comfortable inn at Emu ferry,thirty-five miles from Sydney, and near the ascent of theBlue Mountains. This line of road is the most frequented,and has been longest inhabited of any in the colony. Thewhole land is enclosed with high railings, for the farmershave not succeeded in rearing hedges. There are manysubstantial houses and good cottages scattered about; butalthough considerable pieces of land are under cultivation,the greater part yet remains as when first discovered.Making allowances for the cleared parts, the country hereresembled all that I saw during the ten succeeding days.The extreme uniformity of the vegetation is the mostremarkable feature in the landscape of the greater part ofNew South Wales. Every where we have an open woodland; the ground being partially covered with a very thinpasture. The trees nearly all belong to one family; andmostly have the surface of their leaves placed in a vertical,instead of as in Europe, a nearly horizontal position : thefoliage is scanty, and of a peculiar, pale green tint, withoutany gloss. Hence the woods appear light and shadowless : this.518 NEW SOUTH WALES. Jan. 1836.although a loss of comfort to the traveller under the scorchingrays of summer, is of importance to the farmer, as itallows grass to grow where it otherwise could not. Theleaves are not shed periodically : this character appearscommon to the entire southern hemisphere, namely. SouthAmerica, Australia, and the Cape of Good Hope. Theinhabitants of this hemisphere and of the intertropicalregions, thus lose perhaps one of the most glorious, thoughto our eyes common, spectacles in the world, — the firstbursting into full foliage of the leafless tree. They may,however, say that we pay dearly for our spectacle, by havingthe land covered with mere naked skeletons for so manymonths. This is too true ; but our senses thus acquire a keenrelish for the exquisite green of the spring, which the eyes ofthose living within the tropics, sated during the long year withthe gorgeous productions of those glowing climates, can neverexperience. The greater number of the trees, with the exceptionof some of the blue gums, do not attain a large size ; but theygrow tall and tolerably straight, and stand well apart. Thebark of some falls annually, or hangs dead in long shreds,which swing about with the wind ; and hence the woodsappear desolate and untidy. Nowhere is there an appearanceof verdure, but rather that of arid sterility. I cannot imaginea more complete contrast in every respect than between theforests of Valdivia, or Chloe, and the woods of Australia.Although this colony flourishes so remarkably, the appearanceof infertility is to a certain degree real. The soilwithout doubt is good, but there is so great a deficiencyboth of rain and running water, that it cannot produce much.The agricultural crops, and often those in gardens, areestimated to fail once in three years ; and this has evenhappened on successive years. Hence the colony cannotsupply itself with the bread and vegetables, which its inhabitantsconsume. It is essentially pastoral, and chieflyso for sheep, and not the larger quadrupeds. The alluvialland near Emu ferry was some of the best cultivated whichI saw; and certainly the scenery on the banks of theJan. 1836. aborigines. 519Nepean, bounded to the west by the Blue Mountains, waspleasing even to the eye of a person thinking of England.At sunset, a party of a score of the black aboriginespassed by, each carrying, in their accustomed manner, abundle of spears and other weapons. By giving a leadingyoung man a shilling, they were easily detained, and threwtheir spears for my amusement. They were all partlyclothed, and several could speak a little English ; theircountenances were good humoured and pleasant ; and theyappeared far from being such utterly degraded beings asthey are usually represented. In their own arts they areadmirable : a cap being fixed at thirty, yards distance, theytransfixed it with a spear, delivered by the throwing stick,with the rapidity of an arrow from the bow of a practisedarcher. In tracking animals or men they show most wonderfulsagacity ; and I heard of several of their remarks whichmanifested considerable acuteness. They will not, however,cultivate the ground, or build houses and remain stationary,or even take the trouble of tending a flock of sheep whengiven to them. On the whole they appear to me to standsome few degrees higher in the scale of civilization than theFuegians.It is very curious thus to see in the midst of a civilizedpeople, a set of harmless savages wandering about withoutknowing where they shall sleep at night, and gaining theirlivelihood by hunting in the woods. As the white man hastravelled onwards, he has spread over the country belongingto several tribes. These, although thus enclosed by onecommon people, keep up their ancient distinctions, andsometimes go to war with each other. In an engagementwhich took place lately, the two parties most singularly chosethe centre of the village of Bathurst, for the field of battle.This was of service to the defeated side, for the runawaywarriors took refuge in the barracks.The number of aborigines is rapidly decreasing. In mywhole ride, with the exception of some boys brought upin the houses, I saw only one other party; these were rather520 NEW SOUTH WALES. Nati. 1836.more numerous than the first, and not so well clothed. Thisdecrease, no doubt, must be partly owing to the introductionof spirits, to European diseases (even the milder ones ofwhich, as the measles,* prove very destructive), and to thegradual extinction of the wild animals. It is said that numbersof their children invariably perish in very early infancyfrom the effects of their wandering life. As the difficulty ofprocuring food increases, so must their wandering habits ;and hence the population, without any apparent deaths fromfamine, is repressed in a manner extremely sudden comparedto what happens in civilized countries, where the fathermay add to his labour, without destroying his offspring.Besides these several evident causes of destruction, thereappears to be some more mysterious agency generally atwork. Wherever the European has trod, death seems topursue the aboriginal. We may look to the wide extent ofthe Americas, Polynesia, the Cape of Good Hope, andAustraUa, and we shall find the same result. Nor is it thewhite man alone, that thus acts the destroyer ; the Polynesianof Malay extraction has in parts of the East Indian archipelago,thus driven before him the dark-coloured native. Thevarieties of man seem to act on each other ; in the same wayas different species of animals — the stronger always extirpatingthe weaker. It was melancholy at New Zealand tohear the fine energetic natives saying, they knew the landwas doomed to pass from their children. Every one has heardof the inexplicable reduction of the population in the beautifuland healthy island of Tahiti since the date of Captain Cook'svoyages : although in that case we might have expected itwould have been otherwise ; for infanticide, which formerlyIt is remarkable how the same disease is modified in different climates.At the little island of St. Helena, the introduction of scarlet fever isdreaded as a plague. In some countries, foreigners and natives are asdifferently affected by certain contagious disorders, as if they had been differentanimals ; of which fact some instances have occurred in Chile ;and, according to Humboldt, in Mexico. (Polit. Essay on Kingdom ofJew Spain, vol. iv.)Jan. 1836. extinction of aborigines. 521prevailed to so extraordinary a degree, has ceased, and themurderous wars have become less frequent.The Rev. J. Williams, in his interesting work,* says, thatthe first intercourse between natives and Europeans, " is invariablyattended with the introduction of fever, dysentery,or some other disease, which carries off numbers of the people."Again he affirms, " It is certainly a fact, which cannotbe controverted, that most of the diseases which haveraged in the islands during my residence there, have beenintroduced by ships ;t and what renders this fact remarkableis, that there might be no appearance of disease among thecrew of the ship, which conveyed this destructive importation."This statement is not quite so extraordinary as it atfirst appears ; for several cases are on record of the mostmalignant fevers having broken out, although the partiesthemselves, who were the cause, were not affected. In theearly part of the reign of George III., a prisoner who hadbeen confined in a dungeon, was taken in a coach withfour constables before a magistrate ; and, although the manhimself was not ill, the four constables died from a shortputrid fever ; but the contagion extended to no others.Narrative of Missionary Enterprise, p. 282.t Captain Beechey (chap, iv., vol. i.) states that the inhabitants ofPitcairn Island, are firmly convinced that after the arrival of every shipthey suffer cutaneous and other disorders. Captain Beechey attributesthis to the change of diet during the time of the visit. Dr. MaccuUoch(Western Isles, vol. ii., p. 32) says, " It is asserted, that on the arrival ofa stranger (at St. Kilda) all the inhabitants, in the common phraseology,catch a cold." Dr. MaccuUoch considers the whole case, although oftenpreviously affirmed, as ludicrous. He adds, however, that " the questionwas put by us to the inhabitants who unanimously agreed in the story."In Vancouver's Voyage, there is a somewhat similar statement with respectto Otaheite : nor are these (as I believe) the only instances. Humboldt(Polit. Essay on King, of New Spain, vol. iv.) says, that the great epidemicsat Panama and Callao are " marked" by the arrival of ships from Chile, becausethe people from that temperate region, first experience the fataleffects of the torrid zones. I may add, that I have heard it stated inShropshire, that sheep, which have been imported from vessels, althoughthemselves in a healthy condition, if placed in the same fold with others,frequently produce sickness in the flock.522 NEW SOUTH WALES. Jan. 1836.From these facts it would almost appear as if, the effluviumof one set of men shut up for some time together, was poisonouswhen inhaled by others (and perhaps more so, if themen be of different races). Mysterious as this circumstanceappears to be, it is not more surprising than that thebody of one's fellow-creature, directly after death, and beforeputrefaction has commenced, should often be of so deleteriousa quality, that the mere puncture from an instrument used inits dissection should prove fatal.January 17th. — Early in the morning we passed theNepean in a ferry-boat. The river, although at this spotboth broad and deep, had a very small body of runningwater. Having crossed a low piece of land on the oppositeside, we reached the slope of the Blue Mountains. Theascent is not steep, the road having been cut with muchcare on the side of a sandstone cliff. At no great elevationan almost level plain extends, which, rising imperceptiblyto the westward, at last attains a height of more than threethousand feet. From so grand a title as Blue Mountains,and from their absolute altitude, I expected to have seena bold chain of mountains crossing the country ; but insteadof this, a sloping plain presents merely an inconsiderablefront to the low land of the coast. From this first slope, theview of the extensive woodland to the eastward, was striking,and the surrounding trees grew bold and lofty. But whenonce on the sandstone platform, the scenery becomes exceedinglymonotonous ; each side of the road is borderedby scrubby trees of the never-failing Eucalyptus family; andwith the exception of two or three small inns, there are nohouses, or cultivated land : the road, moreover, is solitary ;the most frequent object being a bullock-waggon, piled upwith bales of wool.In the middle of the day we baited our horses at a Httleinn, called the Weatherboard. The country here is elevated2800 feet above the sea. About a mile and a half from thisplace, there is a view exceedingly well worth visiting. Byfollowing down a little valley and its tiny rill of water, anJan. 1836. blue mountains. 523immense gulf is unexpectedly seen through the trees whichborder the pathway, at the depth of perhaps 1500 feet.Walking on a few yards one stands on the brink of a vastprecipice, and below is the grand bay or gulf (for I know notwhat other name to give it), thickly covered vnth. forest.The point of view is situated as if at the head of a bay, theline of cliff diverging on each side, and showing headlandbehind headland, as on a bold sea-coast. These cliffs arecomposed of horizontal strata of whitish sandstone ; and soabsolutely vertical are they, that in many places, a personstanding on the edge, and throwing down a stone, can see itstrike the trees in the abyss below. So unbroken is theline, that it is said, in order to reach the foot of the waterfall,formed by this little stream, it is necessary to go a distanceof sixteen miles round. About five miles distant in front,another line of cliff extends, which thus appears completelyto encircle the valley; and hence the name of bay is justified,as applied to this grand amphitheatrical depression. If weimagine a winding harbour, with its deep water surroundedby bold cliff-like shores, laid dry, and a forest sprung up onits sandy bottom, we should then have the appearance andstructure here exhibited. This kind of view was to me quitenovel, and extremely magnificent.In the evening, we reached the Blackheath. The sandstoneplateau has here attained the elevation of 3400 feet ;and is covered, as before, with the same kind of scrubbywood. From the road there were occasional glimpses into aprofound valley, of the same character as the one described ;but from the steepness and depth of its sides, the bottomwas scarcely ever to be seen. The Blackheath is a verycomfortable inn, kept by an old soldier ; and it reminded meof the small inns in North Wales. I was surprised to findthat here, at the distance of more than seventy mUes fromSydney, fifteen beds could be made up for travellers.January 18th. — Very early in the morning, I walkedabout three miles to see Govett^s Leap : a view of a similarbut even perhaps more stupendous character than that near524 NEW SOUTH WALES. Jan. 1836.the Weatherboard. So early in the day the gulf was filedwith a thin blue haze, which, although destroying the generaleffect, added to the apparent depth at which the forest wasstretched below the country on which we were standing.Soon after leaving the Blackheath, we descended from thesandstone platform by the pass of Mount Victoria. Toeffect this pass, an enormous quantity of stone has been cutthrough ; the design, and its manner of execution, wouldhave been worthy of any line of road in England, — even thatof Holyhead. We now entered upon a country less elevatedby nearly a thousand feet, and consisting of granite. Withthe change of rock, the vegetation improved ; the trees wereboth finer, and stood further apart ; and the pasture betweenthem was a little greener, and more plentiful.At Hassan's Walls, I left the high road, and made a shortdetour to a farm called Walerawang ; to the superintendentof which, I had a letter of introduction from the owner inSydney. Mr. Browne had the kindness to ask me to staythe ensuing day, which I had much pleasure in doing. Thisplace offers an example of one of the large farming, orrather sheep-grazing, establishments of the colony. Cattleand horses are, however, in this case, rather more numerousthan usual, owing to some of the valleys being swampy, andproducing a coarser pasture. The sheep were 15,000 innumber, of which the greater part were feeding under thecare of different shepherds, on unoccupied ground, at thedistance of more than a hundred miles, and beyond thelimits of the colony. Mr. Browne had just finished, thisday, the last of the shearing of seven thousand sheep ; therest being sheared in another place. I believe the profit ofthe average produce of wool from 15,000 sheep, would bemore than 5000/. sterling. Two or three flat pieces ofground near the house were cleared and cultivated withcorn, which the harvest men were now reaching: but nomore wheat is sown than sufficient for the annual supportof the labourers employed on the establishment. Theusual number of assigned convict servants here is aboutJan. 1836. new south wales. 525forty, but at the present time there were rather more.Although the farm was well stocked with every requisite,there was an apparent absence of comfort; and not evena single woman resided here. The sunset of a fine daywill generally cast an air of happy contentment on anyscene ; but here, at this retired farm-house, the brightesttints on the surrounding woods could not make me forgetthat forty hardened, profligate men, were ceasing from theirdaily labours, like the slaves from Africa, yet without theirjust claim for compassion.Early on the next morning, Mr. Archer, the joint superintendent,had the kindness to take me out Kangaroo-hunting.We continued riding the greater part of the day,but had very bad sport, not seeing a kangaroo, or even awild dog. The greyhounds pursued a kangaroo rat into ahollow tree, out of which we dragged it : it is an animal asbig as a rabbit, but with the figure of a kangaroo. A fewyears since, this country abounded with wild animals ; butnow the emu is banished to a long distance, and the kangaroois become scarce ; to both, the English greyhound is utterlydestructive. It may be long before these animals are altogetherexterminated, but their doom is fixed. The nativesare always anxious to borrow the dogs from the farm-houses:the use of them, the ofFal when an animal is killed, andmilk from the cows, are the peace-offerings of the settlers,who push further and further towards the interior. Thethoughtless aboriginal, blinded by these trifling advantages,is delighted at the approach of the white man, who seemspredestined to inherit the country of his children.Although having bad sport, we enjoyed a pleasant ride.The woodland is generally so open that a person on horsebackcan gallop through it. It is traversed by a few flat-bottomedvalleys, which are green and free from trees : insuch spots the scenery was like that of a park, and pretty.In the whole country I scarcely saw a place without themarks of fire ; whether these had been more or less recent —whether the stumps were more or less black, was the greatestchange which varied the uniformity, so wearisome to the526 NEW SOUTH WALES. Jan. 1S36.traveller's eye. In these woods there are not many birds ;I saw, however, some large flocks of the white cockatoofeeding in a corn-field, and a few most beautiful parrots ;crows like our jackdaws were not uncommon, and anotherbird something like the magpie. The English have notbeen very particular in giving names to the productions ofAustralia ; trees of one genus (Casuarina) are called oaksfor no one reason that I can discover, without it is thatthere is no one point of resemblance. Some quadrupedsare called tigers and hyenas, simply because they are carnivorous,and so on in many other cases.In the dusk of the evening I took a stroll along a chain ofponds, which in this dry country represented the course ofa river, and had the good fortune to see several of thefamous Platypus, or Ornithorhi/nciis paradoxes. They werediving and playing about the surface of the water, butshowed so little of their bodies that they might easily havebeen mistaken for water-rats. Mr. Browne shot one : certainlyit is a most extraordinary animal ; the stuffed specimensdo not at all give a good idea of the recent appearanceof its head and beak ; the latter becoming hard andcontracted.A little time before this I had been lying on a sunnybank, and was reflecting on the strange character of theanimals of this country as compared with the rest of theworld. An unbeliever in every thing beyond his owfxreason might exclaim, '^ Two distinct Creators must havebeen at work; their object, however, has been the same,and certainly the end in each case is complete." Whilethus thinking, I observed the hollow conical pitfall of thehon-ant : first a fly fell down the treacherous slope and immediatelydisappeared ; then came a large but unwary ant ;its struggles to escape being very violent, those curious littlejets of sand, described by Kirby * as being flirted by theinsects tail, were promptly directed against the expectedKirby's Entomology, vol. i., p. 425. The Australian pitfall is onlyabout half the size of the one made by the European species.Jan. 1836. new south wales. 527victim. But the ant enjoyed a better fate than the fly, andescaped the fatal jaws which lay concealed at the base of theconical hollow. There can be no doubt but that this predaciouslarva belongs to the same genus with the Europeankind, though to a different species. Now what would thesceptic say to this ? Would any two workmen ever have hitupon so beautiful, so simple, and yet so artificial a contrivance? It cannot be thought so : one Hand has surelyworked throughout the universe.January 20th. — A long day's ride to Bathurst. Beforejoining the high road we followed a mere path through theforest ; and the country, with the exception of a few squatters'huts, was very solitary. A " squatter" is a freed, or " ticketof leave" man, who builds a hut with bark on unoccupiedground, buys or steals a few animals, sells spirits withouta licence, receives stolen goods, — and so at last becomesrich and turns farmer: he is the horror of all his honestneighbours. A " crawler" is an assigned convict, who runsaway, and lives how he can, by labour and petty theft. The'' bush ranger " is an open villain, who subsists by highwayrobbery and plunder: generally he is desperate, and willsooner be killed than taken alive. In the country it isnecessary to understand these three names, for they are incommon use.This day we experienced the sirocco-like wind of Australia,which comes from the parched deserts of the interior.Clouds of dust were travelling in every direction ; and thewind felt like that which has passed over a fire. I afterwardsheard that the thermometer out of doors stood at 119°,and in a room in a closed house at 96°. In the afternoon wecame in view of the downs of Bathurst. These undulating,but nearly level plains are very remarkable in this country,from being absolutely destitute cf a single tree. They supportonly a very thin brown pasture. We rode some milesacross this kind of country, and then reached the townshipof Bathurst, which is seated in the middle of what may becalled either a very broad valley or narrow plain.528 NEW SOUTH WALES. Jan. 1836.Bathurst has a singular and not very inviting appearance.Groups of small houses and a few large ones are scatteredrather thickly over two or three miles of a bare country,which is divided into numerous fields by lines of rails. Agood many gentlemen live in the neighbourhood, and somepossess very comfortable houses. A hideous little red brickchurch stands by itself on a hill ; and barracks and governmentbuildings occupy the centre of the township. I wastold not to form too bad an opinion of the country by judgingfrom that on the road-side, nor too good a one from Bathurst ;in this latter respect I did not feel myself in the least dangerof being prejudiced. It must be confessed that the seasonhad been one of great drought, and that the country didnot wear a favourable aspect ; although I understand it wasincomparably worse two or three months before. The secretof the rapidly growing prosperity of Bathurst is, that thebrown pasture which appears to the stranger's eye sowretched is excellent for sheep-grazing.The town stands on the banks of the Macquarie : thisis one of the rivers whose waters flow into the vast andscarcely known interior. The Une of watershed, whichdivides the inland streams from those of the coast, has anelevation of about 3000 feet (Bathurst is 2200), and runsin a north and south direction at the distance of about eightyor a hundred miles from the sea-side. The Macquarie figuresin the map as a respectable river, and is the largest of thosethat drain this part of the inland slope ; yet to my surpriseI found it a mere chain of ponds, separated from each otherby spaces almost dry. Generally a small stream is running,and sometimes there are high and impetuous floods. Scantyas the supply of the water is throughout this district, itbecomes still scantier further inland.January 22d. — I commenced my return, and followed anew road, called Lockyer's Line, in which the country israther more hilly and picturesque. This was a long day'sride ; and the house where I wished to sleep was some wayoff the road, and not easily found. I met on this, and in-Jan. 1836. new south wales. 529deed on all other occasions, a very general and ready civilityamong the lower orders ; which, when one considers whatthey are, and what they have been, would scarcely have beenexpected. The farm where I passed the night was ownedby two young men who had only lately come out, and werebeginning a settler's life. The total want of almost everycomfort was not very attractive ; but future and certainprosperity was before their eyes, and that not far distant.The next day we passed through large tracts of countryin flames, volumes of smoke sweeping across the road.Before noon we joined our former track, and ascendedMount Victoria. I slept at the Weatherboard, and beforedark took another walk to the amphitheatre. On the roadto Sydney I spent a very pleasant evening with Captain Kingat Dunheved : and thus ended my little excursion in the colonyof New South Wales.Before arriving here the three things which interested memost were, — the state of society amongst the higher classes,the condition of the convicts, and the degree of attractionssufficient to induce persons to emigrate. Of course, after scvery short a visit one's opinion is worth scarcely anything;but it is as difficult not to form some opinion, asit is to form a correct judgment. On the whole, fromwhat I heard, more than from what I saw, I was disappointedin the state of society. The whole community israncorously divided into parties on almost every subject.Among those, who from their station in life ought to bethebest, many live in such open profligacy, that respectablepeople cannot associate with them. There is muchjealousy between the children of the rich emancipate andthe free settlers ; the former being pleased to consider honestmen as interlopers. The whole population, poor and rich,are bent on acquiring wealth; amongst the higher orderswool and sheep-grazing form the constant subject of conversation.The very low ebb of literature is strongly markedby the emptiness of the booksellers' shops ; for they are inferioreven to those in the smaller country-towns of England.VOL. III. 2 M530 NEW SOUTH WALES. Jan. 1836.There are many serious drawbacks to the comforts offamilies ; the chief of which, perhaps, is being surroundedby convict servants. How thoroughly odious to every feelingto be waited on by a man, who the day before, perhaps, wasflogged, from your representation, for some trifling misdemeanor.The female servants are of course much worse ;hence children learn the vilest expressions, and it is fortunateif not equally vile ideas.On the other hand, the capital of a person without anytrouble on his part, produces him treble interest to what itwill in England ; and with care he is sure to grow rich. Theluxuries of life are in abundance and very little dearer, andmost articles of food cheaper, than in England. The climateis splendid and quite healthy ; but to my mind its charmsare lost by the uninviting aspect of the country. Settlerspossess a great advantage in finding their sons of service,when very young. At the age of from sixteen to twentythey frequently take charge of distant farming stations ; this,however, must happen at the expense of their boys associatingentirely with convict servants. I am not aware thatthe tone of society has assumed any peculiar character ; butwith such habits, and without intellectual pursuits, it canhardly fail to deteriorate. My opinion is such, that nothingbut rather severe necessity should compel me to emigrate.The rapid prosperity and future prospects of this colonyare to me, not understanding these subjects, very puzzling.The two main exports are wool and whale-oil ; and to bothof these productions there is a limit. The country is totallyunfit for canals ; therefore there is a line not very distant,beyond which the land carriage of wool will not repay theexpense of shearing and tending sheep. Pasture every whereis so thin, that settlers have already pushed far into theinterior : moreover the country further inland becomes extremelypoor. I have before said that agriculture can neversucceed on a very extended scale ; therefore so far as I cansee, AustraUa must ultimately depend upon being the centreof commerce for the southern hemisphere, and perhaps onJan. 1836. new south wales. 531her future manufactories. Possessing coal she always has themoving power at hand. From the habitable country extendingalong the coast, and from her English extractionshe is sure to be a maritime nation. I formerly imaginedthat Australia would rise to be as grand and powerful a countryas North America; but now it appears to me such futuregrandeur is rather problematical.With respect to the state of the convicts, I had stillfewer opportunities of judging than on other points. Thefirst question is, whether their condition is at all one ofpunishment : no one will maintain that it is a very severeone. This, however, I suppose is of little consequence as longas it continues to be an object of dread to criminals at home.The corporeal wants of the convicts are tolerably well supped;their prospect of futile liberty and comfort is notdistant, and after good conduct certain. A " ticket of leave,"which, as long as a man keeps clear of suspicion as wellas of crime, makes him free within a certain district, is givenupon good conduct after years proportional to the lengthof the sentence. For life, eight years is the time of probation; for seven years, four, &c. Yet with all this, andoverlooking the previous imprisonment and wretched passageout, I believe the years of assignment are passed away withdiscontent and unhappiness. As an intelligent man remarkedto me, the convicts know no pleasure beyond sensuality,and in this they are not gratified. The enormous bribewhich government possesses in offering free pardons, togetherwith the deep horror of the secluded penal settlements,destroys confidence between the convicts, and so preventscrime. As to a sense of shame, such a feeling doesnot appear to be known, and of this I witnessed some verysingular proofs. Though it is a curious fact, I was universallytold, that the character of the convict populationis one of arrant cowardice : not unfrequently some becomedesperate and quite indifferent of life, yet a plan requiringcool or continued courage is seldom put into execution.The worst feature in the whole case is, that although there2 M 2532 NEW SOUTH WALES. Jan. 1836.exists what may be called a legal reform, and comparativelylittle which the law can touch is committed, yet that any moralreform should take place appears to be quite out of the question.I was assured by well-informed people, that a man whoshould try to improve, could not while living with otherassigned servants : — his life would be one of intolerablemisery and persecution. Nor must the contamination of theconvict ships and prisons both here and in England be forgotten.On the whole, as a place of punishment the object isscarcely gained ; as a real system of reform it has failed, asperhaps would every other plan : but as a means of makingmen outwardly honest, — of converting vagabonds most uselessin one hemisphere into active citizens of another, andthus giving birth to a new and splendid country — a grandcentre of civilization — it has succeeded to a degree perhapsunparalleled in history.VAN DIEMEN's land.January 30th. — the Beagle sailed for Hobart Town inVan Diemen's Land. On the 5th of February, after a sixdays' passage, of which the first part was fine, and the lattervery cold and squally, we entered the mouth of Storm Bay :the weather justified this awful name. The bay should ratherbe called an estuary, for it receives at its head the waters ofthe Derwent. Near the mouth there are some extensive basalticplatforms ; but higher up, the land becomes mountainousand is covered by a light wood. The lower parts of thehills which skirt the bay are cleared ; and the bright yellowfields of corn, and dark green ones of potatoes appeared veryluxuriant. Late in the evening we anchored in the snugcove, on the shores of which stands the capital of Tasmania,as Van Diemen's Land is now called. The first aspect of theplace was very inferior to that of Sydney ; the latter mightbe called a city, this only a town. ,In the morning I walked on shore. The streets are fineFeb. 1836. aborigines. 533and broad ; but the houses rather scattered : the shops appearedgood. The town stands at the base of Mount Wellington,a mountain, 3100 feet high, but of very little picturesquebeauty : from this source, however, it receives a good supplyof water. Round the cove there are some fine warehouses,and on one side a small fort. Coming from the Spanish settlements,where such magnificent care has generally been paidto the fortifications, the means of defence in these coloniesappeared very contemptible. Comparing the town to Sydney,I was chiefly struck with the comparative fewness of the largehouses, either built or building. This circumstance must indicatethat fewer people are gaining large fortunes. The growth,however, of small houses has been most abundant ; and thevast number of little red brick dwellings, scattered on the hillbehind the town, sadly destroys its picturesque appearance.Hobart Town, from the census of this year, contained 13,826inhabitants, and the whole of Tasmania 36,505.All the aborigines have been removed to an island inBass's Straits, so that Van Diemen's Land enjoys the greatadvantage of being free from a native population. This mostcruel step seems to have been quite unavoidable, as theonly means of stopping a fearful succession of robberies,burnings, and murders, committed by the blacks ; but whichsooner or later must have ended in their utter destruction.I fear there is no doubt that this train of evil and its consequences,originated in the infamous conduct of some of ourcountrymen. Thirty years is a short period, in which tohave banished the last aboriginal from his native island, —and that island nearly as large as Ireland. I do not know amore striking instance of the comparative rate of increase ofa civilized over a savage people.The correspondence to show the necessity of this step,which took place between the government at home andthat of Van Diemen's Land, is very interesting : it is publishedin an appendix to BischofF's History of Van Diemen'sLand. Although numbers of natives were shot and takenprisoners in the skirmishing which was going on at intervals534 VAN diemen's land. Feb. 1836.for several years ; nothing seems fully to have impressedthem with the idea of our overwhelming power, until thewhole island, in 1830, was put under martial law, and byproclamation the whole population desired to assist in onegreat attempt to secure the entire race. The plan adoptedwas nearly similar to that of the great hunting-matches inIndia : a line reaching across the island was formed, withthe intention of driving the natives into a cul-de-sac onTasman's peninsula. The attempt failed ; the natives, havingtied up their dogs, stole during one night through the lines.This is far from surprising, when their practised senses, andaccustomed manner of crawling after wild animals is considered.I have been assured that they can conceal themselveson almost bare ground, in a manner which until witnessedis scarcely credible. The country is every where scatteredover nth blackened stumps, and the dusky natives are easilymistaken for these objects. I have heard of a trial betweena party of Englishmen and a native who stood in fuU view onthe side of a bare hill. If the Englishmen closed their eyesfor scarcely more than a second, he would squat down, andthen they were never able to distinguish the man from thesurrounding stumps. But to return to the hunting-match ;the natives understanding this kind of warfare, were terriblyalarmed, for they at once perceived the power and numbersof the whites. Shortly afterwards a party of thirteen belongingto two tribes came in; and, conscious of their unprotectedcondition, delivered themselves up in despair. Subsequentlyby the intrepid exertions of Mr. Robinson, anactive and benevolent man, who fearlessly visited by himselfthe most hostile of the natives, the whole were induced toact in a similar manner. They were then removed to GunCarriage Island, where food and clothes were provided them.I fear from what I heard at Hobart Town, that they are veryfar from being contented : some even think the race vnU. soonbecome extinct.The Beagle staid here ten days, and in this time I madeseveral pleasant little excursions, chiefly with the object ofFeb. 1836. mount Wellington. 535examining the geological structure of the immediate neighbourhood.The main points of interest consist, first in thepresence of certain basaltic rocks which evidently have flowedas lava ; secondly, in some great unstratified masses of greenstone; thirdly, in proofs of an exceedingly small rise of theland ; fourthly, in some ancient fossiliferous strata, probablyof the age of the Silurian system of Europe ; and lastly, in aa solitary and superficial patch of yellowish limestone ortravertin, which contains numerous impressions of leaves oftrees and plants, not now existing. It is not improbable thatthis one small quarry, includes the only remaining record ofthe vegetation of Van Diemen's Land during one former epoch.Mr. Franklin, the surveyor-general, was kind enough togive me much interesting information, and to take me severalpleasant rides. The climate here is damper than in NewSouth Wales, and hence the land is more fertile. Agricultureflourishes here : the cultivated fields looked well, andthe gardens abounded with thriving vegetables and fruit-trees.Some of the farm-houses, situated in retired spots, had a verytempting appearance. The general aspect of the vegetationis similar to that of Australia : perhaps it is a little more greenand cheerful ; and the pasture between the trees rather moreabundant. One day I took a long walk on the side of thebay opposite to the town : I crossed in a steam-boat, two ofwhich are constantly plying backwards and forwards. Themachinery of one of these vessels was entirely manufacturedin this colony, which, from its very foundation then numberedonly three and thirty years ! If I was obliged toemigrate, I think I would choose this place in preference toSydney : the climate and aspect of the country alone wouldalmost determine me. Moreover, I suspect society is hereona pleasant footing; certainly it is free from the contaminationof rich convicts, and the dissensions consequent onthe existence of two classes of wealthy residents. The colonyappeared extremely well governed ; the streets at night beingkept even more orderly than those of an English town.On another day I ascended Mount Wellington ; I took536 VAN diemen's land. Feb. 1836.with me a guide, for I failed in a first attempt, from thethickness of the wood. My guide, however, was a stupidfellow, and conducted us to the southern and damp side ofthe mountain, where the vegetation was very luxuriant, andthe labour of the ascent, from the number of rotten trunks,almost as great as on a mountain in Tierra del Fuego or inChloe. It cost us five and a half hours of hard climbingbefore we reached the summit. In many parts the gum-treesgrew to a great size, and the whole composed anoble forest. In some of the dampest ravines, tree-fernsflourished in an extraordinary manner ; I saw one whichmust have been, at least, twenty feet high to the base ofthe fronds, and was in girth exactly six feet. The foliage ofthese trees, forming so many most elegant parasols, createda gloomy shade, like that of the first hour of night. Thesummit of the mountain is broad and flat, and is composedof huge angular masses of naked greenstone. Its elevationis 3100 feet above the level of the sea. The day wassplendidly clear, and we enjoyed a most extensive view ; tothe northward the country appeared a mass of wooded mountains,of about the same elevation and tame outline with theone on which we were standing : to the south, the outline ofthe broken land and water, forming many intricate bays, wasmapped with clearness before us. After staying some hourson the summit, we found a better way to descend, but did notreach the Beagle till eight o'clock, after a severe day's work.February 17th. — The Beagle sailed from Tasmania,and, on the 6th of the ensuing month, reached King George'sSound, situated near the S.W. corner of Australia. We staidthere eight days ; and I do not remember, since leavingEngland, having passed a more dull, uninteresting time.The country, viewed from an eminence, appears a woodyplain, with here and there rounded and partly bare hills ofgranite protruding. One day I went out with a party, in hopesof seeing a kangaroo hunt, and walked over a good manymiles of country. Every where we found the soil sandy, andvery poor ; it either supported a coarse vegetation of thin.March, 1836. king george's sound. 537low brushwood and wiry grass, or a forest of stunted trees.The scenery resembled the elevated sandstone platform ofthe Blue Mountains ; the Casuarina (a tree somewhat re-sembUng a Scotch fir) is, however, here in greater number,as the Eucalyptus is in rather less. In the open parts therewere many grass-trees ; — a plant which, in appearance, hassome affinity with the palm; but, instead of being surmountedby a crown of noble fronds, it can boast merely ofa tuft of coarse grass. The general bright green colour of thebrushwood and other plants, viewed from a distance, seemedto bespeak fertility. A single walk, however, will quite dispelsuch an illusion ; and he who thinks with me, will never wishto walk again in so uninviting a country.One day I accompanied Captain FitzRoy to Bald Head ;the place mentioned by so many navigators, where someimagined they saw coral, and others petrified trees, standingin the position in which they grew. According to our view,the rock was formed by the wind heaping up calcareous sand,during which process, branches and roots of trees, and land-shellswere enclosed ; the mass being afterward consolidatedby the percolation of rain-water. When the wood had decayed,lime was washed into the cylindrical cavities, and becamehard, sometimes even like that in a stalactite. The weatheris now wearing away the softer rock, and in consequence thecasts of roots and branches project above the surface : theirresemblance to the stumps of a dead shrubbery was so exact,that, before touching them, we were sometimes at a loss toknow which were composed of wood, and which of calcareousmatter.A large tribe of natives, called the White Cockatoo men,happened to pay the town a visit while we were there.These men, as well as those of the tribe belonging to KingGeorges Sound, being tempted by the offer of some tubs ofrice and sugar, were persuaded to hold a " corrobery," orgreat dancing-party. As soon as it grew dark, small fireswere lighted, and the men commenced their toilet, whichconsisted in painting themselves white in spots and lines.As soon as all was ready, large fires were kept blazing.538 KING George's sound, March, 1836.round vdiich the women and children were collected asspectators ; the Cockatoo and King George's men formedtwo distinct parties, and danced generally in answer to eachother. The dancing consisted in the whole set runningeither sideways or in Indian file, into an open space, andstamping the ground with great force as they marchedtogether. Their heavy footsteps were accompanied by akind of grunt, and, by beating their clubs and weapons,and various other gesticulations, such as extending theirarms, and wriggling their bodies. It was a most rude, barbarousscene, and, to our ideas, without any sort of meaning ;but we observed that the women and children watched thewhole proceeding with the greatest pleasure. Perhaps thesedances originally represented some scenes, such as wars andvictories ; there was one called the Emu dance, in whicheach man extended his arm in a bent manner, so as to imitatethe neck of that bird. In another dance, one mantook off the movements of a kangaroo grazing in the woods,whilst a second crawled up, and pretended to spear him.When both tribes mingled in the dance, the ground trembledwith the heaviness of their steps, and the air resounded withtheir wild cries. Every one appeared in high spirits, andthe group of nearly naked figures, viewed by the light of theblazing fires, all moving in hideous harmony, formed a perfectrepresentation of a festival amongst the lowest barbarians.In Tierra del Fuego, we have beheld many curious scenesin savage life, but never, I think, one where the natives werein such high spirits, and so perfectly at their ease. Afterthe dancing was over, the whole party formed a great circleon the ground, and the boiled rice and sugar was distributed,to the delight of all.After several tedious delays from clouded weather, on the14th of March, we gladly stood out of King George's Soundon our course to Keeling Island. Farewell, Australia ! youare a rising infant and doubtless some day will reign a greatprincess in the south : but you are too great and ambitiousfor affection, yet not great enough for respect. I leave yourshores without sorrow or regret.CHAPTER XXII.Keeling Island — Singular appearance — Scanty Flora — Transport of seedsBirds and insects — Ebbing and flowing springs — Coral formations resistingpower of ocean — Fields of dead coral — Stones transported byroots of trees — Great crab — Stinging corals — Structure of lagoon islandsEncircling and Barrier reefs — General proofs of subsidence in thePacific — Theory of lagoon islands caused by subsidence of the land —Pacific and Indian oceans divided into alternate areas of elevation andsubsidence — Points of eruption lie within the areas of elevation.CORAL FORMATIONS.April 1st. — We arrived in view of the Keeling or CocoIslands, situated in the Indian ocean, and about six hundredmiles distant from the coast of Sumatra. This is oneof the lagoon islands of coral formation, similar to those wepassed in the Dangerous Archipelago. An excellent idea ofthe general appearance of these extraordinary rings of land,which rise out of the depths of the ocean, may be obtainedfrom the characteristic sketch of Whitsunday Island, inBeechey's Voyage.When the ship was in the channel at the entrance, Mr.Lieskk, an English resident, came off in his boat. The historyof the inhabitants of this place, in as few Avoids as possible,is as follows. About nine years ago, a Mr. Hare, avery worthless character, brought from the East Indianarchipelago a number of Malay slaves, which now, includingchildren, amount to more than a hundred. Shortly afterwards.Captain Ross, who had before visited these islands inhis merchant ship, arrived from England, bringing with himhis family and goods for settlement. Along with him cameMr. Lieskk, who had been a mate in his vessel. The Malayslaves soon ran away from the island on which Mr. HareAlas settled, and joined Captain Ross's party. Mr. Hareupon this was ultimately obliged to leave these islands.540 KEELING ISLAND. April, 1836.The Malays are now nominally in a state of freedom, andcertainly are so, as far as regards their personal treatment ;but in most other points they are considered as slaves. Fromthe discontented state of the people, the repeated removals,and, perhaps, also from a little mismanagement, things are notvery prosperous. The island has no quadruped, exceptingthe pig, and no vegetable in any quantity excepting thecocoa-nut. On the latter the whole prosperity of the placedepends. The only exports are oil from the nut, and thecocoa-nut* itself. On it the pigs, which are loaded with fat,almost entirely subsist, as likewise do the sultry and ducks.Even a huge land-crab is furnished by nature with a curiousinstinct and form of legs to open and feed on this samefruit.The annular reef of this lagoon island is surmounted in thegreater part of its length by linear islets. On the northernor leeward side there is an opening, through which vesselsreach the anchorage. On entering, the scene was very curiousand rather pretty ; its beauty, however, being solely dependanton the brilliancy of the surrounding colours. The shallow,clear, and still water of the lagoon, resting in its greater partonwhite sand, is, when illuminated by a vertical sun, of amost vivid green. This brilliant expanse, several miles inwidth, is on all sides divided, either from the dark heavingwater of the ocean by a line of snow-white breakers, or fromthe blue vault of heaven by the strips of land, crowned atan equal height by the tops of the cocoa-nut trees. As awhite cloud here and there affords a pleasing contrast withthe azure sky, so in the lagoon, dark bands of living coralappear through the emerald green water.The next morning after anchoring, I went on shore onDirection Island. The strip of dry land is only a few hundredyards wide ; on the lagoon side we have a white calcareousbeach, the radiation from which in such a climate isThe nuts are carried to Singapore and to Mauritius; the whitepart being grated into a pulp, is used in making curries, and is said greatlyto improve that dish.April, 1836. VEGETATION, 541very oppressive ; and on the outer coast, a solid broad flat ofcoral rock, which serves to break the violence of the opensea. Excepting near the lagoon where there is some sand, theland is entirely composed of rounded fragments of coral. Insuch a loose, dry, stony soil, the climate of the intertropicalregions alone could produce a vigorous vegetation. Onsome of the smaller islets, nothing could be more elegant,than the manner in which the young and full-grown cocoanuttrees, without destroying each other's symmetry, weremingled into one wood. A beach of glittering white sandformed a border to these fairy spots.I will now give a sketch of the natural history of theseislands, which, from its very paucity, possesses a peculiarinterest. The cocoa-nut tree, at the first glance, seems tocompose the whole wood; there are, however, five or sixother kinds. One of these grows to a very large size, but,from the extreme softness of its wood, is useless ; anothersort affords excellent timber for ship building. Besidesthe trees, the number of plants is exceedingly limited, andconsists of insignificant weeds. In my collection, whichincludes, I believe, nearly the perfect Flora, there aretwenty species, without reckoning a moss, lichen, andfungus. To this number two trees must be added ; one ofwhich was not in flower, and the other I only heard of.The latter is a solitary tree of its kind in the whole group,and grows near the beach, where, without doubt, the oneseed was thrown up by the waves. I do not include in theabove list, the sugar-cane, banana, some other vegetables,fruit-trees, and imported grasses. As these islands consistentirely of coral, and at one time probably existed as amere water-washed reef, all the productions now livinghere, must have been transported by the waves of the sea.In accordance to this, the Flora has quite the character of arefuge for the destitute : Professor Henslow informs me, thatof the twenty species, nineteen belong to different genera,and these again to no less than sixteen orders !542 KEELING ISLAND. April, 1836.In Holman's* Travels, an account is given on the authorityof Mr. A. S. Beating, who resided twelve months onthese islands, of the various seeds, and other bodies, whichhave been known to have been washed on shore. '^ Seedsand plants from Sumatra and Java have been driven up bythe surf on the windward side of the islands. Among themhave been found the Rimini, native of Sumatra and thepeninsula of Malacca ; the cocoa-nut of Balci, known by itsshape and size ; the Dadass, which is planted by the Malayswith the pepper-wane, the latter inclining round its trunk,and supporting itself by the prickles on its stem ; the soap-tree; the castor-oil plant ; trunks of the sago palm ; andvarious kinds of seeds unknown to the Malays who settledon the islands. These are all supposed to have been drivenon shore by the N.W. monsoon to the coast of N.WHolland, and thence to these islands by the S.E. trade-wind.Large masses of Java teak, and yellow wood, havealso been found, besides immense trees, of red and whitecedar, and the blue gum-wood of New Holland, in a perfectlysound condition. All the hardy seeds, such ascreepers, retain their germinating power, but the softerkinds, among which is the mangostin, are destroyed in thepassage. Fishing-canoes, apparently from Java, have attimes been washed on shore." It is interesting thus todiscover how numerous the seeds are, which, coming fromseveral countries, are drifted over the wide ocean. ProfessorHenslow tells me, he believes that nearly all theplants which I brought from this island, are common littoralspecies in the East Indian archipelago. From the direction,however, of the winds and currents, it seems scarcelypossible that they can have come here in a direct line. If, assuggested with much probability by Mr. Beating, they havefirst been carried towards the coast of New Holland, andthence drifted back again, together with the productions ofHolman's Travels, vol. iv., p. 378.April, 1836. transport of seeds. 543that country, the seeds, before germinating, must havetravelled between 1800 and 2400 miles.Chamisso,* when describing the Radack Archipelago,situated in the central part of the Western Pacific, statesthat, " The sea brings to these islands the seeds and fruitsof many trees, most of which have yet not grown here.The greater part of these seeds appear to have not yet lostthe capability of growing." It is also said that trunks ofnorthern firs are washed on shore, which must have beenfloated from an immense distance. These facts are highlyinteresting. It cannot be doubted, if there were land-birdsto pick up the seeds when first cast on shore, and a soilmore adapted for their growth than the loose blocks ofcoral, that such islands, although so isolated, would soonpossess a more abundant Flora.The list of land-animals is even poorer than that of plants.Some of the islets are inhabited by rats ; and their origin isknown to be due to a ship from the Mauritius, which waswrecked here. These rats have rather a different appearancefrom the English kind ; they are smaller and much morebrightly coloured. There are no true land-birds ; for a snipeand a rail [Gallus philippines), though living entirely amongthe dry herbage, belong to the order of Waders. Birds ofthis order are said to occur on several of the low islandsin the Pacific. At Ascension a rail {Porphj/riol) was shotnear the summit of the mountain ; and it was evidently asolitary straggler. From these circumstances, I believe,the waders are the first colonists of any island, after the innumerableweb-footed species. I may add, that whenever Ihave noticed birds, which were not pelagic, very far out atsea, they always belonged to this order ; and hence theywould naturally become the earliest colonist of any distantpoint.Of reptiles, I saw only one small Heard. Of insects, I tookpains to collect every kind. Exclusive of spiders, whichKotzebue's First Voyage, vol. iii., p. 155.544 KEELING ISLAND. April, 1836.were numerous, there were thirteen species.* Of these, oneonly was a beetle. A small species of ant, swarmed by thousandsunder the loose dry blocks of coral, and was the onlytrue insect which was abundant. Although the productions ofthe land are thus scanty ; if we look to the waters of the surroundingsea, the number of organic beings is indeed infinite.Chamissof has described the natural history of Ronianzoff,a lagoon island in the Radack Archipelago. The numberand kind of productions there is very nearly the same withthose here. One small lizard was seen : wading birds(Numerous and Scolopax) were numerous, and very tame.Of plants, he states there were nineteen species (includingone fern) ; and some of them are the same species withthose I collected here, although on an island situated in adifferent ocean.These strips of land are raised only to that height, towhich the surf can throw fragments, and the wind heap upsand. Their protection is due to the outward and lateralincrease of the reef, which thus breaks the sea. Theaspect and constitution of these islets at once call up theidea, that the land and the ocean are here struggling formastery : although terra-firma has obtained a footing, thedenizens of the other element think their claim at leastequal. In every part one meets hermit-crabs of more thanone species carrying on their backs the houses they havestolen from the neighbouring beach. Overhead, the treesare occupied by numbers of gannets, frigate-birds, and terns.The thirteen species belong to the following orders. Cleopatra, aspecies of minute Elater ; Orthoptera, a Gryllus and Blatta ; Hemiptera,one ; Hemiptera, two ; Neuroptera, a Chrysopa ; Hymenoptera, two ants ;Lepidoptera Nocturnal, a Diopffia, and a Pterophorus (?). Litera, two.f Kotzebue's First Voyage, vol. iii., p. 222.X The large claws or pincers of some of these crabs, are roost beautifullyadapted, when drawn back, to form an operculum to the shell,which is nearly as perfect as the proper one that belonged to the originalmolluscous animal. I was assured, and as far as my observation went itwas confirmed, that there are certain kinds of these hermits, which alwaysuse certain kinds only of old shells.April, 1836, ebbing wells. 545From the many nests and smell of the atmosphere, thismight be called a sea-rookery. The gannets, sitting on theirrude nests, Ibok at an intruder with a stupid, yet angry air.The noddies, as their name expresses, are silly little creatures.But there is one charming bird ; it is a small andsnow-white tern, which smoothly hovers at the distance ofan arm's length from your head ; its large black eye scanningwith quiet curiosity your expression. Little imagination isrequired to fancy, that so light and delicate a body must betenanted by some wandering fairy spirit.Sunday, April 3d. — After service I accompanied CaptainFitzRoy to the settlement, situated at the distance of somemiles, on a point thickly scattered over with tall cocoa-nuttrees. Captain Ross and Mr. Lieskk live in a large barn-likehouse open at both ends, and Heed with mats made ofwoven bark. The houses of the Malays are arranged alongthe shore of the lagoon. The whole place had rather adesolate aspect, because there were no gardens to show thesigns of care and cultivation. The natives belong to differentislands in the East Indian Archipelago, but all speakthe same language : we saw inhabitants of Borneo, Celebes,Java, and Sumatra. In the colour of their sldn they resemblethe Tahitians, nor do they widely differ from themin form of features. Some of the women, however, showeda good deal of the Chinese character. I liked both theirgeneral expression and the sound of their voices. Theyappeared poor, and their houses were destitute of furniture ;but it was evident, from the plumpness of the little children,that cocoa-nuts and turtle afford no bad sustenance.On this island the wells are situated from which shipsobtain water. At first sight it appears not a Httle remarkablethat the fresh water should regularly eli and flow withthe usual tide.* We must believe that the compressed sandThese ebbing and flowing wells are common in parts of the WestIndies. The simple fact, that in low islands of small extent, and composedof porous materials, the rain-water can have no tendency to sinklower than the level of the surrounding sea, and must therefore accumulateVOL. III. 2 N546 KEELING ISLAND. April, 1836.or porous coral rock acts like a sponge ; and that the rainwaterwhich falls on the ground being specifically lighterthan the salt merely floats on its surface, and is subject tothe same movements. There can be no actual attractionbetween salt and fresh water, and the spongy texture musttend to prevent all admixture from slight disturbances. On theother hand, where the foundation consists only of loose fragments,upon a well being dug, salt or brackish water enters ;of which fact we saw an instance on this same island.After dinner we stayed to see a half superstitious sceneacted by the Malay women. They dress a large woodenspoon in garments, carry it to the grave of a dead man, andthen at the full of the moon they pretend it becomes inspired,and will dance and jump about. After the properpreparations, the spoon held by two women became convulsed,and danced in good time to the song of the surroundingchildren and women. It was a most foolish spectacle,but Mr. I/iesk maintained that many of the Malays believedin its spiritual movement. The dance did not commencetill the moon had risen, and it was well worth remainingto behold her bright globe so quietly shining through thelong arms of the cocoa-nuts, as they waved in the eveningbreeze. These scenes of the tropics are in themselves sodelicious, that they almost equal those dearer ones to whichwe are bound by each best feeling of the mind.The next day I employed myself in examining the veryinteresting yet simple structure and origin of these islands.The water being unusually smooth I waded in as far asthe living mounds of coral, on which the swell of the opensea breaks. In some of the gullies and hollows there werebeautiful green and other coloured fishes, and the forms andtints of many of the zoophytes were admirable. It is excusableto grow enthusiastic over the infinite numbers oforganic beings with which the sea of the tropics, so prodigalnear the surface, having been overlooked ; it has been supposed that sandpossesses the power of filtering the salt which is dissolved in the sea-water.April, 1836. keeling island. 547of life, teems ; yet I must confess I think those naturalistswho have described in well-known words the submarinegrottoes decked with a thousand beauties, have indulged inrather exuberant language.April 6th. — I accompanied Captain FitzRoy to an islandat the head of the lagoon : the channel was exceedinglyintricate, winding through fields of delicately branched coi-als.We saw several turtle, and two boats were then employedin catching them. The method is rather curious : the wateris so clear and shallow, that although at first a turtle quicklydives out of sight, yet in a canoe, or boat under sail, thepursuers after no very long chase come up to it. A manstanding ready in the bows, at this moment dashes throughthe water upon the turtle's back ; then changing with bothhands by the shell of its neck, he is carried away till theanimal becomes exhausted and is secured. It was quite aninteresting chase to see the two boats thus doubling about,and the men dashing into the water trying to seize theirprey.When we arrived at the head of the lagoon, we crossedthe narrow islet and found a great surf breaking on the windwardcoast. I can hardly explain the cause, but there is tomy mind a considerable degree of grandeur in the view ofthe outer shores of these lagoon islands. There is a simplicityin the barrier-like beach, the margin of green bushesand tall cocoa-nuts, the solid flat of coral rock, strewed hereand there with great fragments, and the line of furious breakers,all rounding away towards either hand. The ocean throwingits waters over the broad reef appears an invincible, all-powerfulenemy, yet we see it resisted and even conqueredby means which at first seem most weak and inefficient.It is not that the ocean spares the rock of coral ; thegreat fragments scattered over the reef, and accumulated onthe beach, whence the tall cocoa-nut springs, plainly bespeakthe unrelenting power of its waves. Nor are there anyperiods of repose granted. The long swell, caused by thegentle but steady action of the trade-wind always blowing in2 N 2548 KEELING ISLAND. April, 183 6one direction over a wide area, causes breakers, which evenexceed in violence those of our temperate regions, and whichnever cease to rage. It is impossible to behold these waveswithout feeling a conviction that an island, though built ofthe hardest rock, let it be porphyry, granite, or quartz,would ultimately yield and be demolished by such irresistibleforces. Yet these low, insignificant coral islets stand and arevictorious : for here another power, as antagonist to the former,takes part in the contest. The organic forces separate the atomsof carbonate of lime one by one from the foaming breakers,and unite them into a symmetrical structure. Let the hurricanetear up its thousand huge fragments ; yet what willthis tell against the accumulated labour of myriads of architectsat work night and day, month after month. Thus dowe see the soft and gelatinous body of a polypus, through theagency of the vital laws, conquering the great mechanicalpower of the waves of an ocean, which neither the art ofman, nor the inanimate works of nature could successfullyresist.We did not return on board till late in the evening, as westaid some time in the lagoon collecting specimens of the giantCham, and looking at the coral fields. Near the head ofthe lagoon I was much surprised to find a wide area, considerablymore than a mile square, covered with a forest ofbranching coral, which though standing upright was all deadand rotten. At first I was quite at a loss to understand thecause ; afterwards it occurred to me that it was owing tothe following rather curious combination of circumstances.It should, however, first be stated, that corals are never ableto survive even a short exposure in the air to the sun's rays,so that their upward limit of growth is determined by thatof lowest water at spring tides. It appears from some oldcharts, that the long island to windward was formerly separatedby wide channels into several islets ; this fact is likewiseindicated by the less age of the trees in certain portions.Under this former condition of the reef, a strong breeze,by throwing more water over the barrier, Avould tend to raiseApril, 1836. FIELDS of dead coral. 549the level of the lagoon. Now it acts in a directly contrarymanner ; for the water, not only is not increased by currentsfrom the outside, but is blown outwards by the force of thewind. Hence, it is observed, that the tides near the headof the lagoon do not rise so high during strong breezes ason ordinary occasions. This difference of level, although nodoubt very small, has I believe caused the death of thosecoral groves, which under the former condition of thingshad attained the utmost possible limit of upward growth.A few miles north of Seeing there is another smalllagoon island, the centre of which is nearly filled up. CaptainRoss found in the conglomerate of the outer coast awell rounded fragment of greenstone, rather larger than aman's head ; he and the men with him were so much surprisedat this, that they brought it away and preserved itas a curiosity. The occurrence of this one stone, whereevery other particle of matter is calcareous, certainly is verypuzzling. The island has scarcely ever been visited, nor isit probable that a ship 'had been wrecked there. From theabsence of any better explanation, I came to the conclusionthat it must have come there entangled in the roots ofsome large tree: when, however, I considered the greatdistance from the nearest land, the combination of chancesagainst a stone thus being entangled, the tree washed intothe sea, floated so far, then landed safely, and the stonefinally so embedded as to allow of its discovery, 1 was almostashamed of imagining a means of transport so improbable.It was therefore with great interest that I found Chamisso,*the justly distinguished naturalist who accompanied Kot-zebue, stating that the inhabitants of the Radack Archipelago,Kotzebue's first voyage, vol. iii., p. 155. It is said, " The sea throwsup on the reefs of Radack the trunks of northern firs (!) and trees of thetorrid zone (palms, bamboos). It provides the inhabitants not only withtimber for boats, but it also brings them in wrecks of European ships, theiron which they want." — " They receive, in a similar manner, anothertreasure, hard stones' fit for whetting. They are sought for in the rootsand hollows of the trees which the sea throws up."550 KEELING ISLAND. April, 1836.a group of lagoon islands in the midst of the Pacific, obtainedstones for sharpening their instruments by searchingthe roots of trees which are cast up on the beach. It willbe evident that this must have happened several times, sincelaws have been established that such stones belong to thechief, and a punishment is inflicted on any one who attemptsto defraud him of this right. When the isolated positionof these small islands in the midst of a vast ocean — theirgreat distance from any land excepting that of coral formation,a fact well attested by the value which the inhabitants,who are such bold navigators, attach to a stone of any kind,*and the slowness of the currents of the open sea are allconsidered, the occurrence of pebbles thus transported doesappear wonderful. Stones may often be thus transported ;and if the island on which they are stranded is constructedof any other substance besides coral, they would scarcelyattract attention, and their origin at least would never havebeen guessed. Moreover this agency may long escape discoveryfrom the probability of trees, especially those loadedwith stones, floating beneath the surface. In the channelsof Tierra del Fuego large quantities of drift timber are castupon the beach, yet it is extremely rare to meet a treeswimming on the water. It is easy to conceive that waterloggedwood might be transported, when floating close tothe bottom, and occasionally even just touching it. Theknowledge of any result which (with sufficient time allowed)can be produced by causes, though appearing infinitely improbable,is valuable to the geologist, for he by his creeddeals with centuries and thousands of years as others do withminutes. If a few isolated stones are discovered in a massof fine sedimentary strata, it cannot, after the above facts, beconsidered as very improbable that they may have been driftedthere by the floating timber of a former epoch.During another day I visited Hapsburg and West Island.Some natives carried by Kotzebue to Kamtschatka collected stonesamong other valuable articles to take back to their country.April, 1836. Burgos latro. 551In the latter, the vegetation was perhaps more luxuriant thanin any other part. The cocoa-nut trees generally growseparate, but here the young ones flourished beneath theirtall parents, and formed with their long and curved frondsthe most shady arbours. Those alone who have tried it knowhow delicious it is to be seated in such shade, and drinkthe cool pleasant fluid of the cocoa-nut, which hangs ingreat bunches close by. In this island there is a large bayor little lagoon, composed of the finest white sand : it isquite level, and is only covered by the tide at high water ;from this large bay smaller creeks penetrated the surroundingwoods. To see a field of glittering sand, representing water,and around the border of which the cocoa-nut trees extendedtheir tall and waving trunks, formed a singular and verypretty view.I will now briefly mention a few zoological observationswhich I made during our stay at these islands. I have beforealluded to a crab which lives on the cocoa-nuts ; it is verycommon on all parts of the dry land, and grows to a monstroussize. It is closely allied or identical with Birgos latro.This crab has its front pair of legs terminated by verystrong and heavy pincers, and the last pair by others whichare narrow and weak. It would at first be thought quiteimpossible for a crab to open a strong cocoa-nut coveredwith the husk ; but Mr. Lieskk assures me he has repeatedlyseen the operation effected. The crab begins by tearingthe husk, fibre by fibre, and always from that end underwhich the three eye holes are situated; when this is completed,the crab commences hammering with its heavy clawson one of these eye holes, till an opening is made. Thenturning round its body, by the aid of its posterior andnarrow pair of pincers, it extracts the white albuminoussubstance. I think this is as curious a case of instinct asever I heard of, and likewise of adaptation in structurebetween two objects apparently so remote from each otherin the scheme of nature as a crab and a cocoa-nut tree. TheBirgos is diurnal in its habits, but every night it is said to pay552 KEELING ISLAND. April, 1836.a visit to the sea, no doubt for the purpose of moisteningits branchiae. The young are likewise hatched, and live forsome time, on the coast. These crabs inhabit deep burrows,which they excavate beneath the roots of trees ; and herethey accumulate surprising quantities of the picked fibresof the cocoa-nut husk, on which they rest as on a bed.The Malays sometimes take advantage of their labour bycollecting the course fibrous substance and using it as junk.These crabs are very good to eat ; moreover under the tail ofthe larger ones there is a great mass of fat, which when meltedsometimes yields as much as a quart bottle full of limpid oil.It has been stated by some authors that the Birgos latrocrawls up the cocoa-nut trees for the purpose of stealing thenuts : I very much doubt the possibility of this ; but withthe Pandanus"^- the task would be very much easier. I understoodfrom Mr. Lieskk that on these islands the Birgos livesonly on the nuts which fall to the ground.I was a good deal surprised by finding two species of coralof the genus Millepora, possessed of the property of stinging.The stony branches or plates when taken fresh from thewater have a harsh feel and are not slimy, although possessinga strong and disagreeable odour. The stinging propertyseems to vary within certain limits in different specimens :when a piece was pressed or rubbed on the tender skin of theface or arm, a pricking sensation was generally caused, whichcame on after the interval of a second, and lasted only forashort time. One day, however, by merely touching myface with one of the branches the pain was instantaneous ;it increased as usual after a few seconds, and remainingsharp for some minutes, was perceptible for half an hourafterwards. The sensation was as bad as that from a nettle,but more like that caused by the Portuguese man-of-war{Physalia). Little red spots were produced on the tenderskin of the arm, which appeared as if they would have formedwatery pustules, but did not. The circumstance of this sting-seeProceedings of Zoological Society, 1832, p. 17.April, 1836. coral-eating fish. 553ing property is not new, though it has scarcely been sufficientlyremarked on. M. Qaoy* mentions it, and I haveheard of stinging corals in the West Indies. In the EastIndian sea a stinging sea-weed also is found.There was another and quite distinct kind of coral, M^hichwas remarkable from the change of colour, which it underwentshortly after death ; when alive it was of a honey-yellow,but some hours after being taken out of water, itbecame as black as ink. I may just mention, as partly connectedwith the above subjects, that there are here twospecies of fish, of the genus Spares, which exclusively feedon coral. Both are coloured of a splendid bluish-green,one living invariably in the lagoon, and the other amongstthe outer breakers. Mr. Lieskk assured us that he hadrepeatedly seen whole shoals grazing with their strong bonyjaws on the tops of the coral branches.! I opened the intestinesof several, and found them distended with a yellowishcalcareous matter. These fish, together with the lithopha-goes shells and nereidous animals, which perforate everyblock of dead coral, must be very efficient agents in producingthe finest kind of mud, and this, when derived fromsuch materials, appears to be the same with chalk.April 12th. — In the morning, we stood out of the Lagoon.I am glad we have visited these islands : such formationssurely rank high amongst the wonderful objects of thisworld. It is not a wonder, which at first strikes the eye ofthe body, but rather, after reflection, the eye of reason. Wefeel surprised, when travellers relate accounts of the vastextent of certain ancient ruins ; but how utterly insignificantare the greatest of these, when compared to the pile of stonehere accumulated by the work of various minute animals.Throughout the whole group of islands, every single atom, JFreycinet's Voyage, vol. i., p. 597.t It has sometimes been thought vide Quoy in Freycinet's Voyage),that coral-eating fish were poisonous ; such certainly was not the case withthese Spare.I I exclude, of course the soil which has been brought here in vessels554 CORAL FORMATIONS. April, 1836.even from the smallest particle to large fragments of rock,bears the stamp of having been subjected to the power oforganic arrangement. Captain FitzRoy, at the distance ofbut little more than a mile from the shore, sounded with aline, 7200 feet long, and found no bottom. This island is,therefore, a lofty submarine mountain, which has a greaterinclination than even those of volcanic origin on the land.I will now give a sketch* of the general results at which Ihave arrived, respecting the origin of the various classes ofreefs, which occur scattered over such large spaces of theintertropical seas.The first consideration to attend to, is, that every observationleads to the conclusion that those lameUiforra corals,which are the efficient agents in forming a reef, cannot live atany considerable depth. As far as I have personally seen, Ijudge of this from carefully examining the impressions onthe soundings, which were taken by Captain FitzRoy atSeeing Island, close outside the breakers, and from someothers which I obtained at the Mauritius. At a depth underten fathoms, the arming came up as clean as if it had beendropped on a carpet of thick turf ; but as the depth increased,the particles of sand brought up became more and morenumerous, until, at last, it was evident the bottom consistedof a smooth layer of calcareous sand, interrupted only atintervals by shelves, composed probably of dead coral rock.To carry on the analogy, the blades of grass grew thinner andthinner, till, at last, the soil was so sterile, that nothing sprungfrom it.As long as no facts, beyond those relating to the structureof lagoon islands were known, so as to establish somemore comprehensive theory, the belief that corals constructedtheir habitations, or, speaking more correctly, theirskeletons, on the circular crests of submarine craters, wasfrom Malacca and Java, and the small fragments of pumice, drifted here,together with the seeds of East Indian plants. The one block of greenstone,moreover, on the Northern Lagoon must be excepted.Tills sketch was read before the Geological Society, May, 1837.April, 1836. encircling reefs. 555both ingenious and very plausible. Yet the sinuous marginof some as in the Radack Islands of Kotzebue, one of whichis fifty-two miles long, by twenty broad, and the narrownessof others, as in Bow Island (of which there is a chart on alarge scale, forming part of the admirable labours of CaptainBeechey), must have startled every one who considered thissubject.The very general surprise of aU those who have beheldlagoon islands, has perhaps been one chief cause why otherreefs, of an equally curious structure have been almost overlooked:* I allude to the encircling reefs. We will take, as aninstance, Vanikoro, celebrated on account of the shipwreckof La Peruse. The reef there runs at the distance ofnearly two, and in some parts three miles from the shore,and is separated from it by a channel having a general depthbetween thirty and forty fathoms, and, in one part, no lessthan fifty, or three hundred feet. Externally, the reef risesfrom an ocean profoundly deep. Can any thing be more singularthan this structure ? It is analogous to that of a lagoon,but with an island standing, like a picture in its frame, in themiddle. A fringe of low alluvial land in these cases generallysurrounds the base of the mountains ; this, covered by themost beautiful productions of a tropical land, backed by theabrupt mountains and fronted by a lake of smooth water, onlyseparated from the dark waves of the ocean hj a line ofbreakers, form the elements of the beautiful scenery of Tahiti— so well called the Queen of Islands. We cannotsuppose these encircling reefs are based on an externalcrater, for the central mass sometimes consists of primaryrock, or on any accumulation of sedimentary deposits, for thereefs follow indifferently the island itself, or its submarineprolongation. Of this latter case there is a grand instanceMr. De la Biche, however, seems to have been fully aware of thedifficulty. He says, " there are certain situations, where coral reefs run,as it were, in a line with the coast, but separated from it by deep water,which would seem to require a different explanation." — GeologicalManual, p. 142.556 CORAL FORMATIONS. April, 1836.in New Caledonia, where the reefs extend no less than 140miles beyond the island.The great Barrier which fronts the Nee. coast of Australia,forms a third class of reef. It is described by Flinders as.having a length of nearly one thousand miles, and as runningparallel to the shore, at a distance of between twenty andthirty miles from it, and, in some parts, even of fifty andseventy. The great arm of the sea thus included, has ausual depth of between ten and twenty fathoms, but thisincreases towards one end to forty and even sixty. Thisprobably is both the grandest and most extraordinary reefnow existing in any part of the world.It must be observed, that the reef itself in the threeclasses, namely, lagoon, encircling, and barrier, agrees instructure, even in the most minute details : but these I havenot space here even to allude to. The difference entirelylies in the absence or presence of neighbouring land, and therelative position which the reefs bear to it. In the two last-mentionedclasses, there is one difficulty in undertaking theirorigin, which must be pointed out. Since the time of Dampierit has been remarked, that high land and deep seas gotogether. Now when we see a number of mountainousislands coming abruptly down to the sea shore, we mustsuppose the strata of which they are composed, are continuedwith nearly the same inclination beneath thewater. But, in such cases, where the reef is distant severalmiles from the coast, it will be evident upon a little consideration,that a line drawn perpendicularly from its outeredge down to the solid rock on which the reef must bebased, very far exceeds that small limit at which the efficientlamelliform corals exist.In some parts of the sea, as we shall hereafter mention,reefs do occur which fringe rather than encircle islands — thedistance from the shore being so small, where the inclinationof the land is great, that there is no difficulty in understand-thegrowth of the coral. Even in these " fringing" reefs, as Ishall call them in contradistinction to the " encircling," theApril, 1836. theory of subsidence. 557reef is not attached quite close to the shore. This appearsto be the result of two causes : namely, first, that the waterimmediately adjoining the beach is rendered turbid by thesurf, and therefore injurious to all zoophytes ; and, secondly,that the larger and efficient kinds only flourish on the outeredge amidst the breakers of the open sea. The shallow spacebetween the skirting reef and the shore has, however, avery different character from the deep channel, similarlysituated with respect to those of the encircling order.Having thus specified the several kinds of reefs, whichdiffer in their forms and relative position with regard to theneighbouring land, but which are most closely similar in allother respects (as I could show if I had space), it will,I think, be allowed that no explanation can be satisfactorywhich does not include the whole series. The theory whichI would offer, is simply, that as the land with the attachedreefs subsides very gradually from the action of subterraneancauses, the coral-building polypi soon raise again their solidmasses to the level of the water : but not so with the land ;each inch lost is irreclaimably gone ; — as the whole graduallysinks, the water gains foot by foot on the shore, till the lastand highest peak is finally submerged.Before I explain this view more in detail, I must enter ona few considerations, which render such changes of level notimprobable. Indeed, the simple fact of a large portion ofthe continent of South America, still rising under our eyes,and abounding with proofs of similar elevations on a granderscale during the recent period, takes away any excessiveimprobability of a movement similar in kind, but in anopposite direction. Mr. Lyell, who first suggested the ideaof a general subsidence with reference to coral reefs, hasremarked that the existence of so small a portion of land inthe Pacific, where so many causes both aqueous and igneoustend to its production, renders such sinking of the foundationprobable. There is, however, another argument ofmuch greater weight, which may be inferred from the inconsiderabledepth at which corals grow. We see large extents558 CORAL FORMATIONS. April, 1836.of ocean, of more than a thousand miles in one direction andseveral hundreds in another, scattered over with islands,none of which rise to a greater height than that to whichwaves can throw fragments, or the wind heap up sand.Now if we leave out of the question subsidence, thefoundation on which these reefs are built, must in everycase come to the surface within that small limit (we maysay twenty fathoms) at which corals can live. This conclusionis so extremely improbable that it may at once berejected : for in what country can there be found a broad andgrand range of mountains of the same height within a hundredand twenty feet ? But on the idea of subsidence, thecase is at once clear: as each point, one after the otheraccording to its altitude, was submerged, the coral grewupwards, and formed the many islets now standing at onelevel.Having endeavoured on general grounds not only to removeany extreme degree of improbability in the belief ofa general subsidence, but likewise to show that it is almostnecessary to account for the existence of a vast number ofreefs on one level, we will now see how far the same ideawill apply to the peculiar configuration in the several classes.Let us imagine an island merely fringed by reefs extendingto a short distance from the shore ; in which case, as we havebefore remarked, there is no difficulty in understanding theirstructure. Now let this island subside by a series of movementsof extreme slowness, the coral at each interval growingup to the surface. Without the aid of sections it is notvery easy to follow out the result, but a little reflection willshow that a reef encircling the shore at a greater or less distance,according to the amount of subsidence, would beproduced. If we suppose the sinking to continue, theencircled island must, by the submergence of the centralland but upward growth of the ring of coral, be convertedinto a lagoon island. If we take a section of some encircledisland on a true scale, as for instance Gambler, which hasbeen so well described by Captain Beechey, we shall not findApril, 1836. theory of lagoon islands. 559the amount of movement very great, which would be necessaryto change a well-characterized encircling reef, into ascharacteristic a lagoon island.It will at once be evident that a coral reef, closely skirtingthe shore of a continent, would, in like manner aftereach subsidence, rise to the surface ; the water, however,always encroaching on the land. Would not a barrier reefnecessarily be produced, similar to the one extending parallelto the coast of Australia ? It is indeed but uncoiling oneof those reefs which encircle at a distance so many islands.Thus the three great classes of reef, lagoon, encircling,and barrier, are connected by one theory. It will perhapsbe remarked, if this be true, there ought to exist everyintermediate form between a closely-encircled and a lagoonisland. Such forms actually occur in various parts of theocean : we have one, two, or more islands encircled in onereef; and of these some are of small proportional size to thearea enclosed by the coral formation ; so that a series ofcharts might be given, showing a gradation of characterbetween the two classes. In New Caledonia, where thedouble line of reef projects 140 miles beyond the island, wemay imagine we see this change in progress. At thenorthern extremity, reefs occur, some of which are of theencircling kind, and others almost with the character of truelagoon islands. The line of reef which fronts the whole westcoast of this great island, has by some been called a barrier.It is four hundred miles long ; and may be said thus to formalink between an ordinary encircling reef and the greatAustralian barrier.I should perhaps have entered before into the considerationof one apparent difficulty in the origin of lagoonislands. It may be said, granting the theory of subsidence,a mere circular disc of coral would be formed, and not acup-shaped mass. In the first place, even in reefs closelyfringing the land (as before remarked), the coralsdo not grow on the shore itself, but leave a shallowchannel. Secondly, the strong and vigorous species which560 CORAL FORMATIONS. April, 1836.alone build a solid reef, are never found within thelagoon ; they only flourish amidst the foam of the never-tiringbreakers. Nevertheless, the more delicate corals,though checked by several causes, such as strong tides anddeposits of sand, do constantly tend to fill up the lagoon ;but the process must become slower and slower, as the waterin the shallow expanse is rendered subject to accidentalimpurities. A curious instance of this happened at KeelingIsland, where a heavy tropical storm of rain killed nearlyall the fish. When the coral at last has filled up the lagoonto the height of lowest water at spring-tides, which is theextreme limit possible, — how, afterwards, is the work to becompleted ? There is no high land whence sediment can bepoured down; and the dark-blue colour of the oceanbespeaks its purity. The wind, carrying calcareous dustfrom the outer coast, is the only agent which can finallyconvert the lagoon island into solid land, and how slow mustthis process be !Subsidence of the land must always be most difficult todetect, excepting in countries long civilized, — for the movementitself tends to conceal all evidence of it. Nevertheless,at Keeling Island, tolerably conclusive evidence of suchmovement could be observed. On every side of the lagoon,in which the water is as tranquil as in the most shelteredlake, old cocoa-nut trees were undermined and falling.Captain FitzRoy likewise pointed out to me on the beachthe foundation-posts of a storehouse, which the inhabitantssaid had stood, seven years before, just above high-watermark, but now was daily washed by the tide. Upon askingthe people whether they ever experienced earthquakes, theysaid, that lately the island had been shaken by a very badone ; and that they remembered two others during the lastten years. I no longer doubted concerning the cause whichmade the trees fall, and the storehouse to be washed by thedaily tide.At Vanikoro, the encircled island already mentioned, Igathered from Captain Dillon's account, that the alluvialApril, 1836. theory of lagoon island. 561land at the foot of the mountain was very small in quantity,the channel extremely deep, and the islets on the reef itself,which result from the gradual accumulation of fragments,singularly few in number; all of which, together with thewall-like structure of the reef both inside as well as outside,indicated to my mind, that, without doubt, the movementsof subsidence had lately been rapid. At the end of thechapter, it is stated that this island is shaken by earthquakesof extreme violence.I may here mention a circumstance, which to my mindhad the same weight as positive evidence, though bearing onanother part of the question. M. Quoy, when discussing ingeneral terms the nature of coral reefs, gives a descriptionwhich is applicable only to those which, sitting the shore,do not require a foundation at any greater depth than thatfrom which the coral-building polypi can spring. I was at .first astonished at this, as I knew he had crossed both thePacific and Indian oceans, and must, as I thought, have seenthe class of widely-encircling reefs, which indicate a subsidingland. He subsequently mentions several islands asinstances of his description of the general structure; by asingular chance, the whole can be shown, by his own words,in different parts of his account, to have been recently elevated.Therefore, that which appeared so adverse to thetheory, became as strong in its confirmation.Continental elevations, as observed in South America andother parts, seem to act over wide areas with a veryuniform force ; we may therefore suppose that continentalsubsidence act in a nearly similar manner. On thisassumption, and taking on the one hand, lagoon islands,encircling and barrier reefs, as indications of subsidence;and on the other, raised shells and corals, together withmere skirting reefs, as our proof of elevation, we may testthe truth of the theory, — that their configuration has beendetermined by the kind of subterranean movement, — byobserving whether any uniform results can be obtained. Ithink it can be shown that such is the case in a veryVOL. III. 2 o562 CORAL FORMATIONS. April, 1836.remarkable degree ; and that certain laws may be inferredfrom the examination, of far more importance than themere explanation of the origin of the circular or other kindsof reef.If there had been space, I should have made a few generalremarks, before entering into any detail. I may, however,just notice the remarkable absence of the reef-buildingpolypi over certain wide areas within the tropical sea :for instance, on the whole west coast of America, and, as Ibelieve, of Africa (?), and round the eastern islands in theAtlantic ocean. Although certain species of lamelliformzoophytes are found on the shores of the latter islands, andthough calcareous matter is abundant to excess, yet reefsare never formed. It would appear that the effective speciesdo not occur there ; of which circumstance I apprehend noexplanation can be given, any more than why it hasbeen ordained that certain plants, as heaths, should beabsent from the New World, although so common in theOld.Without entering into any minute geographical details,I must observe, that the usual direction of the island groupsin the central parts of the Pacific, is N.W. and S.E. Thismust be noticed, because subterranean disturbances areknown to follow the coast lines of the land. Commencingon the shores of America, there are abundant proofs that thegreater part has been elevated within the recent period,but as coral reefs do not occur there, it is not immediatelyconnected with our present subject. Immediately adjoiningthe continent there is an extent of ocean remarkablyfree from islands, and where of course there exists no possibleindication of any change of level. We then come to a N. W.by W. line dividing the open sea from one strewed withlagoon islands, and including the two beautiful groups ofencircled islands the Society and Georgian Archii^elagoes.This great band having a length of more than four thousandmiles by six hundred broad must, according to our view, be anarea of subsidence. We will at present for convenience sakeApril, 1836. areas of alternate movements, 563pass over the space of ocean immediately adjoining it, andproceed to the chain of islands including the New Hebrides,Solomon, and Nev Ireland, Any one who examines thecharts of the separate islands in the Pacific, engraved on alarge scale, will be struck with the absence of all distant orencircling reefs round these groups : yet it is known thatcoral occurs abundantly close in shore. Here, then, accordingto the theory, there are no proofs of subsidence ; and inconformityto this we find in the works of Forster, Lesson,Labillardiere, Quoy, and Bennett, constant allusion to themasses of elevated coral. These islands form, therefore, awell-determined band of elevation : between it and the greatarea of subsidence first mentioned there is a broad space ofsea irregularly scattered with islets of all classes ; some withproofs of recent elevation and merely fringed by reefs ; othersencircled; and some lagoon islands. One of the latter isdescribed by Captain Cook as a grand circle of breakerswithout a single spot of land ; in this case we may believethat an ordinary lagoon island has been recently submerged.On the other hand, there are proofs of other lagoon islandshaving been lifted up several yards above the level of the sea,but which still retain a pool of salt water in their centres.These facts show an irregular action in the subterraneanforces ; and when we remember that the space lies directlybetween the well-marked area of elevation and the enormousone of subsidence, an alternate and irregular movement seemsalmost probable.To the westward of the New Hebrides line of elevationwe have New Caledonia, and the space included between itand the Australian barrier, which Flinders, on account of thenumber of reefs, proposed to call the Cornelian Sea. It isbounded on two sides by the grandest and most extraordinaryreefs in the world, and is likewise terminated to thenorthward by the coast of Louisiana, — most dangerous onaccount of its distant reefs. This, then, according to ourtheory, is an area of subsidence. I may here remark, thatas the Barrier is supposed to be produced by the subsidence2 o 25G4 CORAL FORMATIONS. April, 1836.of the coast of the mainland, it may be expected that any outlyingislands would have formed lagoon islands. Now Blighand others distinctly state that some of the islands there areprecisely similar to the wel-known lagoon islands in thePacific; there are also encircled islands, so that the threeclasses supposed to be produced by the same movement arethere found in juxtaposition ; as likewise happens, but in aless evident manner, at New Caledonia and in the SocietyArchipelago.The New Hebrides line of islands, may be observed to bendabruptly at New Britain, thence to run nearly east and west ;and, lastly, to resume its former north-west direction inSumatra and the peninsula of Malacca. The figure may becompared to the letter S laid obliquely, but the line is oftendouble. We have shown that the southern part, as far northas New Ireland, abounds with proofs of elevation, so is itwith the rest. Since the time of Bougainville every voyageradduces some fresh instance of such changes throughout agreat part of the East Indian archipelago. I may specifyNew Guinea, Wageeoo, Ceram, Timor, Java, and Sumatra.Coral reefs are abundant in the greater part of these seas, butthey merely skirt the shores. In the same manner as wehave followed the curved line of elevation, so may we thatof subsidence. At Keeling Island, I have already mentionedthat there exist proofs of the latter movement : and it is a veryinteresting circumstance, that during the last earthquake, bywhich that island was affected, Sumatra, though distantnearly 600 miles, was violently shaken. Bearing in mindthat there is evidence of recent elevation on the coast of thelatter, one is strongly tempted to believe that as one end ofthe lever goes up, the other goes down : that as the EastIndian archipelago rises, the bottom of the neighbouring seasinks and carries with it Keeling Island, which would havebeen submerged long ago in the depths of the ocean, had it notbeen for the wonderful labours of the reef-building polypi.As I have remarked, the islands in this great archipelagoare only skirted with reefs ; and it appears from the state-april,1836. AREAS of alternate movements. 565ments of those who have visited them, as well as from anexamination of the charts, that lagoon islands are not foundthere. This in itself is remarkable, but it becomes far moreso when it is known, that according to all accounts (anddistinctly stated by Mr. De la Biche*) they are likewise absentin the West Indian sea, where coral is most abundant :now every one is aware of the numerous proofs of recentelevation in most parts of that archipelago. Again, Ehren-berg has observed that lagoon islands do not occur in theRed Sea : in LyelPs Geology, and in the Geographical Journal,proofs are given of recent elevation on the shores of alarge part of that sea. Excepting on the theory of the formof reefs being determined by the kind of movement to whichthey have been subjected ; it is a most anomalous circumstance,and which has never been attempted to be solved, thatthe lagoon structure being universal and considered as characteristicin certain parts of the ocean, should be entirelyabsent in others of equal extent.I may here also just recal to mind the cases of skirtingreefs mentioned by M. Quoy (to which number several othersmight be added), where proofs of elevation occurred. Somegeneral law must determine the marked difference betweenreefs merely skirting the shore, and others rising from a deepocean in the form of distant rings. We have endeavoured toshow that with a subsiding movement, the first and simpleclass must necessarily pass into the second, and more remarkablestructure.To proceed with our examination : to the westward of theprolongation of the line of subsidence, of which KeelingIsland is the index, we have an area of elevation. For onthe northern end of Ceylon and on the eastern shores ofIndia, elevated shells and corals, such as now exist in theneighbouring sea, have been observed. Again in the middleof the Indian ocean, the Lucrative, Maldive, and Chaosline of atolls or lagoons show a line of subsidence. TheGeological Manual, p. 141.566 CORAL FORMATIONS. April, 1836.best characterized of these, namely, the Maldive islands, extendin length for 480 miles, with an average breadth of sixty.These atolls agree in most respects with the lagoons of thePacific; they differ, however, in several of them beingcrowded together — such little groups being separated fromother groups by profoundly deep channels. Now if we lookina chart, at the prolongation of the reef towards the northernend of New Caledonia, and then complete the work of subsidence,so as to continue producing the same results ; weshould have the original reef broken up into many patches ;each of which, from the vigorous growth of coral on the outside,would have a constant tendency to assume a roundedform. Every accidental break in the continuity of the firstline would determine a fresh circle. In the case, therefore,of the Low or Dangerous Archipelago in the Pacific, I believethat the lagoon islands were moulded round the flanks of somany distinct islands ; but in the Maldives, that one singlemountainous island, bordered by reefs, and very nearly of thesame actual figure and dimensions with New Caledonia, formerlyoccupied that part of the ocean.Lastly, to the extreme westward, the coast of Africa isclosely skirted by coral reefs, and according to facts stated inCaptain Owen's voyage, has probably been uplifted within arecent period. The same remark applies to the northernpart of Madagascar, and, judging from the reefs likewise atthe Seychelles, situated on the submarine prolongation ofthat great island. Between these two, N.N.E. and S.S.W.lines of elevation, some lagoon and widely-encircled islandsindicate a band of subsidence.When we consider the absence both of Maidenly-encirclingreefs and lagoon islands in the several archipelagoes andwide areas, where there are proofs of elevations ; and on theother hand the converse case of the absence of such proofwhere reefs of those classes do occur; together with the juxtapositionof the different kinds produced by movements ofthe same order, and the symmetry of the whole, I think itwill be difficult (even independently of the explanation itApril, 1836. coral formations. 567offers of the peculiar configuration of each class) to denya great probability to this theory. Its importance, if true, isevident ; because we get at one glance an insight into thesystem by which the surface of the land has been broken up,in a manner somewhat similar, but certainly far less perfect,to what a geologist would have done who had lived his tenthousand years, and kept a record of the passing changes.We see the law almost established, that linear areas of greatextent undergo movements of an astonishing uniformity, andthat the bands of elevation and subsidence alternate. Suchphenomena at once impress the mind with the idea of a fluidmost gradually propelled onwards, from beneath one part ofthe solid crust to another.I cannot at present do more than allude to some of theresults which may be deduced from these views. If weexamine the points of eruption over the Pacific and Indianoceans, we shall find that all the active volcanoes occurwithin the areas of elevation. (The Asiatic band must beexcepted ; inasmuch as we are entirely in want of informationof all kinds respecting it.) On the other hand, in the greatspaces supposed to be now subsiding, between the Radackand Dangerous Archipelagoes, in the Horatian sea, and amongthe atolls which front the west coast of India, not one occurs.If we look at the changes of level as a consequence of thepropulsion of fluid matter beneath the crust, as before suggested,then the area to which the force is directed might beexpected to yield more readily than that whence it was graduallyretiring. I am the more convinced that the above lawis true, because, if we look to other parts of the world, proofs ■of recent elevation almost invariably occur, where there areactive vents : I may instance the West Indies, the Cape deHerds, Canary Islands, southern Italy, Sicily, and otherplaces. But in answer to this, those geologists, who, judgingfrom the history of the isolated volcanic mounds of Europe,were inclined to believe that the level of the ground was constantlyoscillating up and down, might maintain that on thesesame areas, the amount of subsidence had been equal to that568 CORAL FORMATIONS. April, 1836.of elevation, but that we possessed no means of knowing it.I conceive it is by eliminating this source of doubt, that thealternate bands of opposite movement, deduced from theconfiguration of the reefs, directly bear on this law. I neednot do more than simply state, that we thus obtain (if theview is correct) a means of forming some judgment of theprevailing movements, during the formation of even the oldestseries, where volcanic rocks occur inter stratified with sedimentarydeposits.Any thing which throws Light on the movements of theground is well worthy of consideration ; and the history ofcoral reefs may, in another manner, elucidate such changesin the older formations. As there is every reason to believethat the lamelliform corals grow only abundantly at a smalldepth, we may feel sure, where a great thickness of corallimestone occurs, that the reefs on which the zoophytesflourished, must have been sinking. Until we are enabled tojudge by some means what were the prevailing movementsat different epochs, it will scarcely ever be possible tospeculate with any safety on the circumstances underwhich the complicated European formations, composed ofsuch different materials and in such different states, wereaccumulated.Nor can I quite pass over the probability of the aboveviews illustrating those admirable laws first brought forwardby Mr. Lyell, — of the geographical distribution of plants andanimals, as consequent on geological changes. M. Lessonhas remarked on the singular uniformity* of the Indio-Poly-nesian Flora throughout the immense area of the Pacific ; —the dispersion of forms having been directed against thecourse of the trade-wind. If we believe that lagoon islands,those monuments raised by infinite numbers of minutearchitects, record the former existence of an archipelagoor continent in the central part of Polynesia, whence thePerhaps this is stated rather too strongly ; but M. Lesson, of course,had grounds for his assertion.April, 1836. coral formations. 569germs could be disseminated, the problem is rendered farmore intelligible. Again, if the theory should hereafter beso far established, as to allow us to pronounce that certaindistricts fall within areas either of elevation or subsidencej'itwill directly bear upon that most mysterious question, —whether the series of organized beings peculiar to someisolated points, are the last remnants of a former population,or the first creatures of a new one springing into existence.Briefly to recapitulate. In the first place, reefs are formedaround islands, or on the coast of the mainland, at thatlimited depth at which the efficient classes of zoophytes canlive; and where the sea is shallow, irregular patches maylikewise be produced. Afterwards from the effects of a seriesof small subsidence, encircling reefs, grand barriers, or lagoonislands, are mere modifications of one necessary result. Secondly,it can be shown on the above views, that the intertropicalocean, throughout more than a hemisphere, may bedivided into linear and parallel bands, of which the alternateones have undergone, within a recent period, the oppositemovements of elevation and subsidence. Thirdly, that thepoints of eruption seem invariably to fall within areas subjectto a propulsion from below. The traveller who is aneyewitness of some great and overwhelming earthquake, atonemoment of time loses aU former associations of the landbeing the type of solidity, so will the geologist, if he believein these oscillations of level (the deeply-seated origin of whichis betrayed by their forms and vast dimensions), perhaps bemore deeply impressed with the never-ceasing mutability ofthe crust of this our World.CHAPTER XXIII.Mauritius, beautiful appearance — Hindoo — Cape of Goo Hope — St.Helena —-geology — History of changes in vegetation, probable causeof extinction of land-shells — Ascension — Green Hill — Curious incrustationsof calcareous matter on tidal rocks — Bahia — Brazil — Splendourof tropical scenery — Pernambuco — Singular reef — Azores — Supposedcrater — Hints to collectors — Retrospect of the most impressive parts ofthe voyage.MAURITIUS TO ENGLAND.April. 29th. — In the morning we passed round thenorthern extremity of the Isle of France. From this pointof view the aspect of the island equalled the expectationsraised by the many well-known descriptions of its beautifulscenery. The sloping plain of the Pamplemousses, scatteredover with houses, and coloured bright green from the largefields of sugar-cane, composed the foreground. The brilliancyof the green was the more remarkable, because it isa colour which generally is only conspicuous from a veryshort distance. Towards the centre of the island, groups ofwooded mountains rose out of this highly-cultivated plain ;their summits, as so commonly happens with ancient volcanicrocks, being jagged into the sharpest points. Massesof white clouds were collected around their pinnacles, as iffor the sake of pleasing the stranger's eye. The whole island,with its sloping border and central mountains, was adornedwith an air of perfect elegance : the scenery, if I may usesuch an expression, appeared to the senses harmonious.I spent the greater part of the next day in walking aboutthe town, and visiting different people. The town is ofconsiderable size, and is said to contain 20,000 inhabitants ;the streets are very clean and regular. Although the islandhas been so many years under the English government, thegeneral character of the place is quite French : EnglishmenMay, 1336. Mauritius, 571speak to their servants in French, and the shops are allFrench ; indeed I should think that Calais or Bologna wasmuch more Anglefied. There is a very pretty little theatre,in which operas are excellently performed, and are muchpreferred by the inhabitants to plays. We were also surprisedat seeing large booksellers' shops, with well-stored shelves ; —music and reading bespeak our approach to the old world ofcivilization ? for in truth both Australia and America may beconsidered as new worlds.One of the most interesting spectacles in Port Louis,is to observe the various races of men which may be metin walking the streets. Convicts from India are banishedhere for life ; at present there are about 800, and they areemployed in various public works. Before seeing thesepeople, I had no idea that the inhabitants of India weresuch noble-looking figures. Their skin is extremely dark,and many of the older men had large mustaches and beardsof a snow-white colour ; this, together with the fire of theirexpressions, gave them quite an imposing aspect. Thegreater number have been banished for murder and theworst crimes ; others for causes which can scarcely be consideredas moral faults, such as for not obeying, from superstitiousmotives, the English laws. These men are generallyquiet and well-conducted ; from their outward conduct, theircleanness and faithful observance of their strange religiousenactments, it was impossible to look at them with the sameeyes as on our wretched convicts in New South Wales.Besides these prisoners, large numbers of free people areyearly imported from India: for the planters were afraidthat the negroes, when emancipated, would not work. Fromthese causes the Indian population is here very considerable.May 1st. — Sunday. I took a quiet walk along the seacoastto the northward of the town. The plain in that partisquite uncultivated ; it consists of a field of black lava,smoothed over with coarse grass and bushes, the latterbeing chiefly mimosas. Captain FitzRoy, before arrivinghere, said he expected the island would have a character572 MAURITIUS. May, 1836.intermediate between that of the Galapagos and Tahiti.This is a very exact comparison ; but it will convey a definiteidea to few, excepting to those who were on board the Beagle.It is a very pleasant country, but it has not the charmsof Tahiti, or the grandeur of a Brazilian landscape.The next day I ascended La Pounce, a mountain so calledfrom a thumb-like projection, which rises close behind thetown to a height of 2600 feet. M. Lesson, in the voyageof the Coquille, has stated, that the central plain of theisland appeared like the basin of a grand crater, and that LaPounce and the other mountains once formed parts of aconnected waU. From our elevated position we enjoyed anexcellent view over this great mass of volcanic matter. Thecountry on this side of the island appears pretty well cultivated,the whole being divided into fields, and studdedwith farm-houses. I was however assured, that of the wholeland not more than half is yet in a productive state ; if suchis the case, considering the present great export of sugar,this island, at some future period when thickly peopled, willbe of very great value. Since England has taken possessionof it, a period of only twenty-five years, the export of sugaris said to have increased seventy-five fold.One great cause of this prosperity is due to the excellentroads and means of communication throughout the island.At the present day, in the neighbouring Isle of Bourbon,which remains under the French government, the roads arein the same miserable state as they were only a few yearspast in this place. The Macadamizing art has, perhaps,been of even greater advantage to the colonies, than to themother country. Although the French residents must havelargely profited by the increased prosperity of their island,yet the English government is far from popular. It isunfortunate that there appears to exist scarcely any intercourseamong the higher orders of French and English.May 3d. — In the evening Captain Lloyd, the Surveyor-general,so well known from his examination of the Isthmusof Panama, invited Mr. Stokes and myself to his country-may,1836. Mauritius. 573house, which is situated on the edge of Wilhelm plains, andabout six miles from the port. We staid at this delightfulplace two days : being elevated nearly 800 feet above thesea, the air was pleasantly cool and fresh, and on every sidethere were delightful walks. Close by there is a grandravine, which is worn to a depth of about 500 feet throughthe slightly inclined streams of lava which have flowed fromthe central platform.5th. — Captain Lloyd took us to the River Noire, whichis several miles to the southward, in order that I mightexamine some rocks of elevated coral. We passed throughpleasant gardens, and fine fields of sugar-cane growingamidst huge blocks of lava. The roads were bordered byhedges of mimosa, and near many of the houses there whereavenues of the mango. Some of the views, where the peakedhills and the cultivated farms were seen together, were exceedinglypicturesque ; and we were constantly tempted toexclaim, " How pleasant it would be to pass one's life insuch a quiet abode !" Captain Lloyd possessed an elephant ;he sent it half way with us on the road, that we might enjoya ride in true Indian fashion. I should think, as is commonlysaid to be the case, that the motion must be fatiguingfor a long journey. The circumstance which surprised memost, was the quite noiseless step ; a ride on so wonderfulan animal was extremely interesting. This elephant is theonly one at present on the island ; but it is said others willbe sent for.May 9th. — We sailed from Port Louis, on our way tothe Cape of Good Hope, and on the evening of the 31stanchored in Simon's Bay. The little town offers but acheerless aspect to a stranger's eye. About a couple ofhundred, square, whitewashed houses, with scarcely a singletree in the neighbourhood, and very few gardens, arescattered along the beach, at the foot of a lofty, steep,bare wall, of horizontally-stratified sandstone.The next day I set out for Cape Town, which is twentymiles distant. Both towns are situated within the CAPE OF GOOD HOPE. June, 1836.lands, but at the opposite extremities of a range of mountains,which extending parallel to the mainland, is joinedto it by a low sandy flat. The road skirted the base of thesemountains : for the first fourteen miles the country is verydesert, and with the exception of the pleasure which thesight of an entirely new vegetation never fails to communicate,there was very little of interest. The view however ofthe mountains on the opposite side of the flat, brightenedby the declining sun, was fine. Within seven miles of CapeTown, in the neighbourhood of Wynberg, a great improvementwas visible, and here the country-houses of the morewealthy residents of the capital are situated. The numerouswoods of young Scotch firs and stunted oak-trees form thechief attraction of this locality. There is, indeed, a greatcharm in shade and retirement, after the unconcealed bleaknessof so open a country as this. The houses and plantationsare backed by a grand wall of mountains, which givesthe scene a degree of uncommon beauty. I arrived latein the evening in Cape Town, and had a good deal of difficultyin finding quarters. In the morning several ships fromIndia had arrived at this great inn on the great highway ofnations, and they had disgorged on shore a host of passengers,all longing to enjoy the delights of a temperateclimate. There is only one good hotel, so that strangersgenerally live in boarding-houses ; — a very uncomfortablefashion to which I was obliged to conform, although I wasfortunate in my quarters.In the morning I walked to a neighbouring hill to look atthe town. It is laid out with the rectangular precision of aSpanish city : the streets are in good order, and Macadamized,and some of them have rows of trees on eachside ; the houses are all whitewashed, and look clean. Inseveral trifling particulars the town had a foreign air, butit is daily becoming more English. There is scarcely a resident,excepting amongst the lowest order, who does not speaksome English. In this facility in becoming Anglefied, thereappears to exist a wide difference between this colony andJune, 18S6. cape of good hope. 575that of the Mauritius. It does not, however, arise from thepopularity of the EngUsh; for the Dutch as well as theFrench, although they have profited to an immense degreeby the English government, yet thoroughly dislike ourwhole nation.All the fragments of the civilized world which we havevisited in the southern hemisphere, appear to be flourishing: little embryo England are springing into life in manyquarters. Although the Cape colony possesses only amoderately fertile country, it appears in a very prosperouscondition. In one respect it suffers like New South Wales,namely, in the absence of water communication, and in theinterior being separated from the coast by a high chain ofmountains. This country does not possess coal ; and thereis no timber, excepting at a considerable distance. Hides,tallow, and wine are the chief exports, and latterly a considerablequantity of corn. The farmers are beginning alsoto pay attention to sheep-grazing, — a hint taken from Australia.It is no small triumph to Van Diemen's Land,that live sheep have been exported from a colony of thirty-threeyears standing, to this which was founded in 1651.In Cape Town it is said that the present number of inhabitantsis about 15,000, and in the whole colony, includingcoloured people, 200,000. Many different nations are heremingled together ; the Europeans consist of Dutch, French,and English, and scattered people from other parts. TheMalays, descendants of slaves brought from the East Indianarchipelago, form a large body. They are a fine set of men,and can always be distinguished by a conical hat, like the roofof a circular thatched cottage, or by a red handkerchief ontheir heads. The number of negroes is not very great ; andthe Hottentots, the ill-treated aborigines of the country, are,I should think, in a still smaller proportion. The firstobject in Cape Town which strikes the eye of a stranger, isthe number of bullock-waggons. Several times I saweighteen, and I heard of twenty-four oxen being allyoked together in one team. Besides these, waggons with576 CAPE ov GOOD HOPE. June, 1836.four, six, and eight horses in hand, go trotting aboutthe streets. I have as yet not mentioned the well-knownTable Mountain. This great mass of horizontally stratifiedsandstone rises quite close behind the town to a height of3500 feet : the upper part forms an absolute wall, oftenreaching into the region of the clouds. I should think sohigh a mountain, not forming part of an extensive platform,and yet being composed of horizontal strata, must be a rarephenomenon. It certainly gives the landscape a very peculiar,and from some points of view, a grand character.June 4th. — I set out on a short excursion to see theneighbouring country, but I saw so very little, that I havescarcely any thing to say. I hired a couple of horses, and ayoung Hottentot groom to accompany me as a guide. Hespoke English very well, and was most tidily dressed ; he worea long coat, beaver hat, and Avhite gloves ! The Hottentots,or Hodmadods aS old Dampier calls them, to my eye looklike partially bleached negroes. They are of a small stature,and have most singularly-formed heads and faces : thetemple and cheek-bones project so much, that the Avholeface is hidden from a person standing in the same sideposition in which he would l)e enabled to see part of thefeatures of a European. Their hair is very short andcurly.Our first day's ride was to the village of the Pearl,situated between thirty and forty miles to the Nee. of CapeTown. After leaving the neighbourhood of the town, wherewhite houses stand as if picked out of a street and then bychance dropped on the open country, we had to cross awide level sandy flat, totally unfit for cultivation. In thehopes of finding some hard materials for making a road, thesands had been bored along the whole line to the depth offorty feet, but without any success. Leaving the flat, wecrossed a low undulating country, thinly clothed with aslight green vegetation. It was not the flowering season,but even at this time of the year there were some verypretty realises and mesembryanthemums, and on the sandyJune, 1836, cape of good hope. 577spots fine tufts of heaths. There were also several beautifullittle birds : — if a person could not find amusement inobserving the animals and plants, there was very littleelse during the whole day to interest him : only here andthere we passed a solitary farm-house.Directly after arriving at the Pearl, I ascended a singulargroup of rounded granite hiUs, which rise close behind thevillage. From the summit I enjoyed a fine view of the lineof mountains which I had to cross on the following morning.Their colours were gray or partly rusty red, and their outlinesirregular, but far from picturesque : the general tint ofthe lower country was a pale brownish green, and the wholeentirely destitute of woodland.* From the naked state ofthe mountains, seen likewise through a very clear atmosphere,I was reminded of Northern Chile ; but the rocksthere, possess at least a brilliant colouring. Immediatelybeneath the hill, the long village of the Pearl extended ; allthe houses were whitewashed, and appeared very comfortable;and there was not a single hovel. Each house hadits garden and a few trees planted in straight rows ; and therewere many vineyards of considerable size, which at this timeof year were destitute of leaves. The whole village possessedan air of quiet and respectable comfort.June 5th. — After riding about three hours, we came nearto the French Hock pass. This is so called from a numberof emigrant protestant Frenchmen, who formerly settled in aflat valley at the foot of the mountain : it is one of the prettiestplaces I saw in my excursion. The pass is a considerablework, an inclined road having been cut along the steep sideWhen the extreme southern part of Africa was first colonized,rhinoceroses (as I am informed by Dr. Andrew Smith) abounded overthe whole of this district, and especially in the wooded valleys at the baseof Table Mountain, where Cape Town now stands. I mention this incorroboration of the statement (p. 98), that a luxuriant vegetation is notat all necessary for the support of the larger quadrupeds. Having myselfseen this district, which was formerly frequented by the huge rhinoceros,I am fully impressed with the truth of those views.VOL. III. 2 P578 CAPE OF GOOD HOPE. June, 1836.of the mountain : it forms one of the principal roads fromthe low land of the coast, to the mountains and great plainsof the interior. We reached the foot of the mountains onthe opposite, or S. E. side of the pass, a little after noon.Here, at the toll-bar, we found comfortable lodgings for thenight. The surrounding mountains were destitute of trees,and even of brushwood ; but they supported a scatteredvegetation of rather a brighter green than usual : the quantity,however, of white siliceous sandstone, every whereprotruding itself uncovered, gave to the country a bleak anddesolate aspect.6th. — My intention was to return by Sir Lo\<Ty Cole'spass, over the same chain of mountains as before, but alittle further to the south. Following unfrequented paths,we crossed an irregular hilly country until we joined theother line of road. During the whole long day, I metscarcely a single person, and saw but few inhabited spots,or any number of cattle. A few roebuck were grazing onthe sides of the hiUs, and some large dirty white vultures,like the condors of America, slowly wheeled over the placewhere probably some dead animal was lying. There was noteven a tree to break the monotonous uniformity of the sandstonehills : I never saw a much less interesting country.At night we slept at the house of an English farmer ; andat an early hour the next day we descended by Sir Lowry'spass, which, like that of the French Hock, has been cut, ata great expense, along the flank of a steep mountain. Fromthe summit, there was a noble view of the whole of FalseBay, and of the Table Mountain, and, immediately below,of the cultivated country of Hottentot Holland. The flat,covered with sand-dunes did not appear, when viewed fromthis height, of the tedious length which we found it beforewe reached in the evening Cape Town.June 18th.' — We put to sea, and, on the 29th, crossedthe Tropic of Capricorn for the sixth and last time. On the8th of July, we arrived ofi" St. Helena. This island, the forbiddingaspect of which has been so often described, risesJuly, 1836. ST. HELENA. 579like a huge castle from the ocean. A great wall, built ofsuccessive streams of black lava, forms around the wholecircuit a bold coast. Near the town, as if in aid of thenatural defence, small forts and guns are every where builtup, and mingled with the rugged rocks. The town extendsup a flat and very narrow valley ; the houses look respectable,and they are interspersed with a very few green trees.When approaching the anchorage there is one striking view :an irregular castle perched on the summit of a lofty hill, andsurrounded by a few scattered fir-trees, boldly projectsagainst the sky.The next day I obtained lodgings within a stone's throw ofNapoleon's tomb.* I confess, however, this had littleattraction for me : but it was a capital central situation,whence I could make excursions in every direction. Duringthe four days I staid here, from morning to night I wanderedover the island, and examined its geological history. Thehouse was situated at an elevation of about 2000 feet ; herethe weather was cold and very boisterous, with constantshowers of rain ; and every now and then the whole scenewas veiled in thick clouds.Near the coast the rough lava is entirely destitute ofvegetation : in the central and higher parts, a different seriesof rocks have from extreme decomposition produced a clayeysoil, which, where not covered by vegetation, is stained inbroad bands of many bright colours. At this season theland, moistened by constant showers, produces a singularlybright green pasture ; this lower and lower down, graduallyfades away, and at last disappears. In latitude 16°, and atthe trifling elevation of 1500 feet, it is surprising to beholda vegetation possessing a character decidedly English. Thehills are crowned with irregular plantations of Scotch firs ;After the volumes of eloquence which have poured forth on thissubject, it is dangerous even to mention the tomb. A modern travellerin twelve lines, burdens the poor little island with the following titles, —it is a grave, tomb, pyramid, cemetery, sepulchre, catacomb, sarcophagus,minaret, and mausoleum !2 P 2580 ST. HELENA. July, 1836.and the sloping banks are thickly scattered over with thicketsof gorse, covered with its bright yellow flowers. Weeping-willowsare common along the course of the rivulets, andthe hedges are made of the blackberry, producing its well-knownfruit. When we consider that the number of plantsnow found on the island is 746, and that out of these, fifty-twoalone are native species, the rest being imported, andmany of them from England, we see a good reason for thisEnglish character in the vegetation. The numerous specieswhich have been so recently introduced can hardly havefailed to have destroyed some of the native kinds. Ibelieve there is no accurate account of the state of thevegetation at the period when the island was covered withtrees ; such would have formed a most curious comparisonwith its present sterile condition, and limited Flora. ManyEnglish plants appear to flourish here better than in theirnative country ; some also from the opposite quarter ofAustralia succeed remarkably well. It is only on thehighest and steepest ridges, where the native Flora is stillpredominant.The English, or rather the Welsh character of the scenery,is preserved by the numerous cottages and small whitehouses ; some buried at the bottom of the deepest valleys,and others stuck up on the crests of the lofty hills. Someof the views are very striking ; I may instance that from nearSir W. Moreton's house, where the bold peak called Lost isseen over a dark wood of firs, the whole being backed bythe red water-worn mountains of the Southern shore.On viewing the island from an eminence, the first circumstancewhich strikes one, is the very great number of roads,and forts : the labour bestowed on the public works, if oneforgets its character as a prison, seem out of all proportion toits extent or value. There is so little level or useful land,that it seems surprising how so many people (about 5000)can subsist here. The lower orders, or the emancipatedslaves, are I believe extremely poor : they complain of wantof work, a fact which is likewise shown by the very cheapjuly, 1836. ST. HELENA. 581labour. From the reduction in the number of publicservants owing to the island having been given up by theEast India Company, and the consequent emigration ofmany of the richer people, the poverty probably will increase.The chief food of the working class is rice with alittle salt meat ; as neither of these articles are the productsof the island, but must be purchased with money, the lowwages tell heavily on the poor people. The fine times, asmy old guide called them, when " Bony' was here, cannever return again. Now that the people are blessed withfreedom, a right which I believe they value fully, it seemsprobable that their numbers will quickly increase : if so,what is to become of the little state of St. Helena ?My guide was an elderly man, who had been a goatherdwhen a boy, and knew every step amongst the rocks. Hewas of a race many times mixed, and although with a duskyskin, he had not the disagreeable expression of a mulatto.He was a very civil, quiet old man, and such appears the characterof the greater number among the lower classes. Itwas strange to my ears to hear a man, nearly white, and respectablydressed, talking with indifference of the times whenhe was a slave. With my companion who carried our dinnerand a horn of water, which latter is quite necessary as all inthe lower valleys is saline, I every day took long walks.Beneath the limits of the elevated and central green circle,the wild valleys are quite desolate and untenanted. Heretothe geologist, there are scenes of high interest, whichshow the successive changes, and complicated disturbanceswhich have in past times happened. According to my views,St. Helena has existed as an island from a very remoteepoch : some obscure proofs, however, of the elevation of theland are still extant. I believe that the central and highestpeaks form parts of the rim of a great crater ; the southernhalf of which has been removed by the waves of the sea.There is, moreover, an external margin of black volcanicrocks, which belong to an anterior condition of things.These have been dislocated and broken up by forces acting582 ST. HELENA. July? 1836.from below, so that the confusion in structure from these differentcauses is extreme. On the higher parts of the islandconsiderable numbers of shells occur embedded in the soil,which have always been supposed to be of marine origin :and the fact has been adduced as a proof of the retreat of thesea. The shell turns out to be a Bulimus, or terrestrial species.It is however very remarkable, that it is not now found in aliving state : a circumstance which in all probability may beattributed to the entire destruction of the woods, and consequentloss of food and shelter, which occurred during theearly part of the last century.The history of the changes, which the elevated plains ofLogwood and Deadwood have undergone, as given inGeneral Beatson's account of the island, is extremely curious.It is said the plain in former times was covered with wood,and was therefore called the Great Wood. So late as the year17I6 there were many trees upon it, but in 1724 the old treeshad mostly fallen ; and as goats and hogs were at that timesuffered to range about, all the young trees had been devoured.It appears also from the official records, that the trees were unexpectedly,some years afterwards, succeeded by indigenouswire grass, which now spreads over its whole extent.* He thenadds, " These are curious facts, since they trace the changeswhich this remarkable spot of land has undergone, for nowthis formerly naked plain (after the trees had fallen) is coveredwith fine sward, and is become the finest piece of pasture onthe island." The extent of surface, which was probablycovered by wood at a former period is estimated at no lessthan two thousand acres ; at the present day scarcely a treecan be found there. It is said, that in 1709 there were quantitiesof dead wood in Sandy Bay: this place is now soutterly desert, that nothing but so well-attested an accountcould make me believe that trees had ever existed there.The fact, that the goats and hogs destroyed all the youngtrees as they sprung up, and that in the course of timeBeatson's St. Helena. Introductory diaper, p. iv.July, 1836. CHANGES IN VEGETATION. 583the old ones, which were safe from their attacks, perishedfrom age, seems clearly made out. Goats were introducedin the year 1502 ; eighty-six years afterwards, in the timeof Cavendish, it is known they were exceedingly numerous.More than a century afterwards, in 1731, when the evil wascompleted and found irretrievable, an order was issued thatall stray animals should be destroyed.When at Valparaiso, I heard it positively affirmed, thatthe Sandal-wood tree had been found on the island of JuanFernandez in considerable numbers, but that all without exceptionwere standing dead. At the time, I thought it wassome mysterious case of the natural death of a species ; butwhen it is remembered, that goats for very many years haveabounded on that island, it seems most probable that theyoung trees were prevented growing, and that the old onesperished from age. It is a very interesting fact, to observethat the arrival of animals at St. Helena in 1501 did notchange the whole aspect of the island, until a period of twohundred and twenty years had elapsed : for they were introducedin 1502, and in 1724 it is said "the old trees hadmostly fallen." There can be no doubt, this change affectednot only the Bulimus and probably some other land shells (ofwhich I obtained specimens from the same bed), but likewisea multitude of insects.St. Helena, situated so remote from any continent, in themidst of a great ocean, and possessing a unique Flora, — thislittle world within itself, — excites our curiosity. Birds andinsects,* as might have been expected, are very few in number ;Among these few insects, I was surprised to find a small Aphodiiis(nov. spec.) and an Oryctes,both extremely common under dung. Whenthe island was discovered it certainly possessed no quadruped, exceptingperhaps a mouse : it becomes, therefore, a difficult point to ascertain,whether these stertorous insects have since been imported by accident,or if aborigines, on what food they formerly subsisted. On the banks ofthe Plata, where, from the vast number of cattle and horses, the fineplains of turf are richly manured, it is vain to seek the many kinds ofdung-feeding beetles, which occur so abundantly in Europe. I observedonly an Orestes (the insects of this genus in Europe generally feed584 ST. HELENA. July, 1836.indeed I believe all the birds have been introduced withinlate years. Partridges and pheasants are tolerably abundant :the island is much too EngUsh, not to be subject to strictgame-laves. I was told of a more unjust sacrifice to such ordinances,than I ever heard of even in England. The poorpeople formerly used to burn a plant, which grows on thecoast rocks, and export soda ; but a peremptory order cameout prohibiting this practice, and giving as a reason, that thepartridges would have nowhere to build !In my walks, I passed more than once over the grassy plain,bounded by deep valleys, on which Logwood stands. Viewedfrom a short distance, it appears like a respectable gentleman'scountry-seat. In front there are a few cultivated fields, andbeyond them, the hill of coloured rocks called the Flagstaff",on decayed vegetable matter) and two species of Phases, common insuch situations. On the opposite side of the Cordillera in Chloe,another species of this genus is exceedingly abundant, and it buries thedung of cattle in large earthen balls beneath the ground. There isreason to believe that the genus Phases, before the introduction ofcattle acted as scavengers to man. In Great Britain those beetles, whichfind support in the matter, which has already contributed towards the lifeof other and larger animals, are so numerous, that I suppose there are atleast one hundred different kinds. Considering this, and observing whata quantity of food is thus lost on the plains of La Plata, I imagined I sawan instance where man had disturbed that chain, by which so many animalsare linked together in their native country. To this view, however. VanDiemen's Land offers an exception (in the same manner as St. Helenadoes in a much lesser degree), for I found there four species of Oesophagus,two of Aphodius, and one of a third genus, very abundantunder the dung of cows ; yet these latter animals had then been introducedonly thirty-three years. Previously to that time, the Kangaroo and someother small animals were the only quadrupeds ; and their dung is of avery different quality from that of their successors introduced by man.In England the greater number of stertorous beetles are confined intheir appetites ; that is, they do not depend indifferently on any quadrupedfor the means of subsistence. The change, therefore, in habits, whichmust have taken place in Van Diemen's Land, is the more remarkable. —I am indebted to the Rev. F. W. Hope, who, I hope, will permit me tocall him my master in Entomology, for information respecting the foregoing,and other insects.July, 1836. ST. HELENA. 585and the square black mass of the Barn. On the whole theview is rather bleak and uninteresting.The scrupulous degree to which the coast must formerlyhave been guarded, is quite extraordinary : there are alarmhouses, alarm guns, and alarm stations on every peak. Iwas much struck with the number of forts and picket houses,on the line leading down to Prosperous Bay. One wouldhave supposed that this at least was an easy descent: Ifound it however a mere goat-path, and in one spot the useof ropes, which were fixed into rings in the cliff, were almostindispensable. At the present day two artillery-men arekept there; for what use it is not easy to conjecture. ProsperousBay, although with so flourishing a name, hasnothing more attractive than a wild sea-beach, and blackutterly barren rocks. The only inconvenience I suffered inmy walks, was from the impetuous winds. One day Inoticed a curious circumstance : standing on the edge of aplain, terminated by a great cliff of about a thousand feet indepth, I saw at the distance of a few yards right to windward,some tern, struggling against a very strong breeze,whilst, where I stood, the air was quite calm. Approachingclose to the brink, I stretched out my arm, which immediatelyfelt the full force of the wind : an invisible barrier oftwo yards wide, separated a strongly agitated from a perfectlycalm air. The current meeting the bold face of thecliff, must have been reflected upwards at a certain angle,within which plane there necessarily would be either aneddy or a calm.I so much enjoyed my rambles among the rocks andmountains of St. Helena, that I felt almost sorry on themorning of the 14th to descend to the town. Before noonI was on board, and the Beagle made sail for Ascension.We reached the anchorage of the latter place on the eveningof the 19th (July). Those who have beheld a volcanicisland, situated within an arid climate, will be able at once topicture to themselves the aspect of Ascension. They willimagine smooth conical hills of a bright red colour, with586 ASCENSION. July, 1836.their summits generally truncated, rising distinct out of alevel surface of black rugged lava. A principal mound inthe centre of the island, seems the father of the lesser cones.It is called Green Hill ; its name is taken from the faintesttinge of that colour, which at this time of the year wasbarely perceptible from the anchorage. To complete thisdesolate scene, the black rocks on the coast are lashed bya wild and turbulent sea.The settlement is near the beach; it consists of severalhouses and barracks placed irregularly, but well built ofwhite freestone. The only inhabitants are marines, andsome negroes liberated from slave-ships, who are paid andvictualled by government. There is not a private personon the island. Many of the marines appeared well contentedwith their situation ; they think it better to servetheir one-and-twenty years on shore, let it be what it may,than in a ship : in which choice, if I were a marine, I wouldmost heartily agree.The next morning I ascended Green Hi, 2840 feet high,and thence walked across the island to the windwardpoint. A good cart-road leads from the coast settlement tothe houses, gardens, and fields, placed near the summit ofthe central mountain. On the roadside there are milestones,and likewise cisterns, where each thirsty passer-by, candrink some good water. Similar care is displayed in eachpart of the establishment, and especially in the managementof the springs, so that a single drop of water shall not belost : indeed the whole island may be compared to a hugeship kept in first-rate order. I could not help, when admiringthe active industry which had created such effects outof such means, at the same time regretting that it waswasted on so poor and trifling an end. M. Lesson hasremarked with justice, that the English nation alone wouldhave thought of making the island of Ascension a productivespot ; any other people would have held it withoutany further views, as a mere fortress in the ocean.Near the coast nothing grows ; a little inland an occa-July, 1836. ASCENSION. 587signal green castor-oil plant, and a few grasshoppers (truefriends of the desert), may be met with. Some grass isscattered over the surface of the central elevated region, andthe whole much resembles the worse parts of the Welshmountains. But scanty as the pasture appears, about sixhundred sheep, many goats, a few cows and horses, all thrivewell on it. Of native animals, rats and land-crabs swarm innumbers : of native birds, there are none ; but the guinea-fowl,imported from the Cape de Verd Islands, is abundant,and the common fowl has likewise run wild. Some cats,which were originally turned out to destroy the rats andmice, have increased so as to become a great plague. Theisland is entirely destitute of trees, in which, and in everyother respect, it is very far inferior to St. Helena. Mr.Dring tells me, that the witty people of the latter place say,we know we live on a rock, but the poor people of Ascensionlive on a cinder :" the distinction in truth is very just.On the succeeding days, I took long walks and examinedsome rather curious points in the mineralogical compositionof some of the volcanic rocks, to which I was guided by thekindness of Lieut. Evans. On the basaltic masses, which aredaily washed by the tide, most curious calcareous incrustationshave been deposited. They resemble in form certaincryptogamic plants, especially the Merchandise ; their surface isperfectly smooth and glossy, and their colour black, whichseems owing to animal matter. I have shown these incrustationsto several geologists, and not one guessed their trueorigin. Any one would suppose that they had been theproduct of fire, rather than of a deposition of calcareousmatter, now constantly undergoing a round of decay andrenovation from the action of the breakers. Near thesettlement where these incrustations occur, there is a largebeach of calcareous sand, entirely composed of comminutedand rounded fragments of shells and corals. The lower partof this, from the percolation of water containing calcareousmatter in solution, soon becomes consolidated, and is used588 ASCENSION. July, 1836.as a building stone ; but some of the layers are too hard forfreestone, and when struck by the hammer ring like flint.The main line of beach is directed Nee. and S.W. ;Lieutenant Evans informs me, that during the six monthsincluded between the 1st of April and the 1st of October,the sand accumulates towards the Nee. extremity, andduring the other six it travels back again towards the S.W.end. This periodical movement is due to a change in thedirection of the swell, which is influenced by the generaldirection of the trade-wind, during the two periods of theyear. Lieutenant Evans also informs me that during thesix years he has resided on this island, he has alwaysobserved, that in the months of October and November,when the sand commences travelling towards the S.W., therocks which are situated at that end of the long beach,become coated by a white, thick, and very hard calcareouslayer. I saw portions of this remarkable deposit, which hadbeen protected by an accumulation of sand. In the year1831 it was much thicker than during any other period.It would appear that the water, charged with calcareousmatter by the disturbance of a vast mass of calcareousparticles, only partially cemented together, deposits this substanceon the first rocks against which it impinges. Butthe most singular circumstance is, that in the course of acouple of months this layer is either abraded or redissolved,so that after that period, it entirely disappears. It iscurious thus to trace the origin of a periodical incrustationon certain isolated rocks, to the motion of the earth withrelation to the sun; for this determines the atmosphericcurrents, which give the direction to the swell of the ocean,and this acts on the arrangement of the sea-beach, and thisagain on the quantity of calcareous matter held in solutionby the waters of the neighbouring sea.One of my excursions took me towards the S.W. extremityof the island. The day was clear and hot, and I sawthe island, not smiling with beauty, but staring with nakedAug. 1836. Bahia — BRAZIL. 589hideousness. The lava streams are covered with hummocks,and are rugged to a degree, which, geologically speaking, isnot of easy explanation. The intervening spaces are concealedwith layers of pumice, ashes, and volcanic tvift. Insome parts rounded volcanic bombs, which must haveassumed this form, when projected red-hot from the crater,lie strewed on the surface. Whilst passing at sea this endof the island, I could not imagine what was the nature ofthe white patches, with which the whole plain was mottled ;I now found they were seafowl, which were sleeping in suchfull confidence, that even in midday a man could walk upto,and seize hold of them. These birds were the onlyliving creatures I saw during the day. On the beach agreat surf, although the breeze was light, was tumbling overthe broken lava rocks.Upon leaving Ascension the ship's head was directedtowards the coast of South America, and on August 1st, weanchored at Bahia or San Salvador. We staid here fourdays, in which time I took several long walks. I was gladto find my enjoyment of tropical scenery had not decreasedeven in the slightest degree, from the want of novelty. Theelements of the scenery are so simple, that they are worthmentioning, as a proof on what trifling circumstances exquisitenatural beauty depends.The country may be described as a level plain of aboutthree hundred feet in elevation, which in every part hasbeen worn into flat-bottomed valleys. This structure isremarkable in a granitic land, but is nearly universal inall those softer formations, of which plains usually are composed.The whole surface is covered by various kinds ofstately trees, interspersed with patches of cultivated ground,out of which houses, convents, and chapels arise. It mustbe remembered that within the tropics, the wild luxurianceof nature is not lost even in the vicinity of large cities ; for thenatural vegetation of the hedges and hill-sides, overpowers inpicturesque effect the artificial labour of man. Hence, there590 BAHIA — BRAZIL. Aug. 1836.are only a few spots where the bright red soil affords a strongcontrast with the universal clothing of green. From theedges of the plain there are distant glimpses either of theocean, or of the great bay bordered by low wooded shores,and on the surface of which numerous boats and canoesshow their white sails. Excepting from these points, therange of vision is very limited: following the level pathways,on each hand alternate peeps into the wooded valleysbelow can alone be obtained. Finally, T may add that thehouses, and especially the sacred edifices, are built in apeculiar and rather fantastic style of architecture. Theyare all whitewashed; so that when illuminated by thebrilliant sun of midday, and as seen against the pale bluesky of the horizon, they stand out more like shadows thansubstantial buildings.Such are the elements of the scenery, but to paint theeffect is a hopeless endeavour. Learned naturalists describethese scenes of the tropics by naming a multitude of objects,and mentioning some characteristic feature of each.To a learned traveller, this possibly may communicate somedefinite ideas : but who else from seeing a plant in anherbarium can imagine its appearance when growing in itsnative soil ? Who from seeing choice plants in a hothousecan magnify some into the dimensions of forest trees, andcrowd others into an entangled jungle? Who when examiningin the cabinet of the entomologist the gay exoticbutterflies, and singular cicada, will associate with theseobjects, the ceaseless harsh music of the latter, and thelazy flight of the former, — the sure accompaniments ofthe still, glowing, noonday of the tropics. It is, when thesun has attained its greatest height, that such views shouldbe beheld: then the dense splendid foliage of the mangohides the ground with its darkest shade, whilst the upperbranches are rendered from the profusion of light of themost brilliant green. In the temperate zones, as it appearsto me, the case is different, the vegetation there is not so darkAug. 1836. PERNAMBUCO. - 591or so rich, and hence the rays of the declining sun, tingedof a red, purple, or yellow colour, add most to the beautiesof the scenery of those climes.When quietly walking along the shady pathways, and admiringeach successive view, one wishes to find language toexpress one's ideas. Epithet after epithet is found too weakto convey to those, who have not visited the intertropicalregions, the sensation of delight which the mind experiences.I have said the plants in a hothouse fail to communicate ajust idea of the vegetation, yet I must recur to it. The landisone great wild, untidy, luxuriant hothouse, which naturemade for her menagerie, but man has taken possession of it,and has studded it with gay houses and formal gardens. Howgreat would be the desire in every admirer of nature to behold,if such were possible, another planet; yet to everyonein Europe, it may be truly said, that at the distance ofa few degrees from his native soil, the glories of another worldare open to him. In my last walk, 1 stopped again andagain to gaze on these beauties, and endeavoured to fix foreverin my mind an impression, which at the time I knew,sooner or later must fail. The form of the orange-tree, thecocoa-nut, the palm, the mango, the tree-fern, the banana, willremain clear and separate ; but the thousand beauties whichunite these into one perfect scene must fade away ; yet theywill leave, like a tale heard in childhood, a picture fuU of indistinct,but most beautiful figures.August 6th. — In the afternoon we stood out to sea, withthe intention of making a direct course to the Cape de VerdIslands. Unfavourable winds, however, having delayed us,on the 12th we ran into Pernambuco, — a large city on thecoast of Brazil in latitude 8° south. We anchored outsidethe reef; but in a short time a pilot came on board, andtook us into the inner harbour, where we lay close to thetown.Pernambuco is built on some narrow and low sandbanks,which are separated from each other by shoal channels of saltwater.The three parts of the town are connected together592 PERNAMBUCO. Aus:. 1836.■»•by two long bridges built on wooden piles. The town is inall parts disgusting, the streets being narrow, ill-paved, andfilthy ; the houses are very tall and gloomy. The numberof white people, which during the morning may be met withinthe streets, bears about the proportion of foreigners inany other nation ; all the rest are black or of a dusky colour.The latter, as well as the Brazilians, are far from prepossessingin their appearance. The poor negroes, whereverthey may be, are cheerful, talkative, and boisterous. Therewas nothing in the sight, smell, or sounds thin this largetown, which conveyed to my mind any pleasing impressions.The season of heavy rains had hardly come to an end,and hence the surrounding country, which is scarcelyelevated above the level of the sea, was flooded with water.I failed in all my attempts to take any long walks. I was,however, enabled to observe that many of the country-housesin the outskirts, had like those of Bahia a gay appearance,which harmonized well with the luxuriant character of thevegetation.The flat swampy land on which Pernambuco stands, issurrounded at the distance of a few miles, by a semicircle oflow hills, or rather by the edge of a country elevated perhapstwo hundred feet above the sea. The old city of Olindastands on one extremity of this range. One day I took acanoe, and proceeded up one of the channels to visit it ; Ifound the old town from its situation both sweeter andcleaner than that of Pernambuco. I must here commemoratewhat happened for the first time during the years we have been wandering about, namely, having metwith a want of politeness amongst any class of people : Iwas refused in a sullen manner at two different houses, andobtained with difficulty from a third, permission to passthrough their gardens, to an uncultivated hill, for the purposeof taking a view of the country. I feel quite glad that thishappened in the" land of the " Brava Gente," for I bearthem no good will — a land also of slavery, and therefore ofmoral debasement. A Spaniard would have been ashamedAus;. 1836. pernambuco. 593'^&at the thought of refusing such a request, or of behaving toa stranger with rudeness. The channel by which we wentto, and returned from Ohnda, was bordered on each side bymangroves, which sprang Uke a miniature forest out of thegreasy mud-banks. The bright green colour of these bushesalways reminded me of the rank grass in a churchyard :both are nourished by putrid exhalations; the one speaksof death past, and the other too often of death to come.The most curious thing which I saw in this neighbourhood,was the reef that forms the harbour. It runs for a lengthof several miles in a perfectly straight line, parallel to, andnot far distant from, the shore. It varies in width fromthirty to sixty yards ; it is dry at low water, has a levelsmooth surface, and is composed of obscurely-stratifiedhard sandstone. Hence, at first sight, it is difficult to creditthat it is the work of nature, and not of art. Its utility isgreat ; close within the inner wall there is a good depth ofwater, and ships lie moored to old guns, which are fixedin holes on its summit. A lighthouse stands on oneextremity, and around it the sea breaks heavily. In enteringthe harbour, a ship passes within thirty yards of thispoint, and amidst the foam of the breakers ; close by,on the other hand, are other breakers, which thus form anarrow gateway. It is almost fearful to behold a ship running,as it appears, headlong into such dangers.With respect to the origin of the reef,' I believe a barcomposed of sand and pebbles formerly existed beneath thewater (a circumstance no ways improbable) when the lowland,on which the town now stands, was occupied by a largebay; and that this bar was first consolidated, and thenelevated. These two processes are of such frequent occurrencein South America, that there can be no objection tousing them in accounting for any remarkable structure in theland. There is another and slightly different explanationwhich possesses equal probability, namely, that a long spitof sand, like some that now run parallel to parts of theneighbouring coast, had its central part consolidated, andVOL. III. 2 Q594 AZORES. Sept. 1836.then by a slight change in the set of currents, the loosematter removed, so that the hard nucleus alone was left.Although the swell of the open ocean breaks heavily on theoutside of this narrow and insignificant line of reef, yetthere is no record of its decay. This durability is much themost curious circumstance in its history. Its protectionappears due to a layer of calcareous matter, formed by thesuccessive growth of several kinds of organic bodies, chieflyserpulee, balani, nulliporee, but no true corals. It is aprocess strictly analogous to the formation of peat ; and likethat substance, its effects are to preserve from degradationthe matter on which it rests. In true coral reefs, when theupper extremities of the living mass are killed by the raysof the sun, they become enveloped and protected by anearly similar process. It is probable, that if a breakwater,such as that at Plymouth, was built in these tropical seas, itwould be imperishable ; that is, as imperishable as any partof the solid land, all of which must some day suffer decayand renovation.On the 17th we took our final leave of the coast of SouthAmerica, and on the last day of the month anchored atPorto Prayaa. We staid there only five days, and on the 5 thof September steered for the Azores. On the 19th weanchored off the town of Angra, the capital of Terceira.This island is moderately lofty, and has a rounded outline,with detached conical hills evidently of volcanic origin. Theland is well cultivated, and is divided into a multitude ofrectangular fields by stone walls, extending from the water'sedge to high up on the central hiUs. There are few or notrees, and the yellow stubble land at this time of the yeargave a burnt-up and unpleasant character to the scenery.Small hamlets and single whitewashed houses are scatteredin all parts. In the evening a party went on shore : wefound the city a very clean and tidy little place, containingabout 10,000 inhabitants, which includes nearly the fourthpart of the total number on the island. There are no goodshops, and there is little appearance of actiAatv, exceptingSept. 1836. TERCEiRA. 595the intolerable creaking of an occasional bullock-waggon.The churches are very respectable, and there were formerlya good many convents ; but Dom Pedro destroyed several.He levelled three nunneries to the ground, and gave permissionto the nuns to marry, which, except by some veryold ones, was gladly received.Angra was formerly the capital of the whole Archipelago,but it has now only one division of the islands under itsgovernment, and its glory has departed. The city is defendedby a strong castle on Mount Brazil, and by a line ofbatteries encircling the base of this extinct volcano, whichoverlooks the town. Terceira was the first place that receivedDom Pedro, and from this beginning he conqueredthe other islands, and finally Portugal. A loan was scrapedtogether in this one island of no less than 400,000 dollars,of which sum not one farthing has ever been paid to thesefirst supporters of the present right royal and honourablefamily.The next day the Consul kindly lent me his horse, andfurnished me with guides to proceed to a spot in the centreof the island, which was described as an active crater. Ascendingin deep lanes, bordered on each side by high stonewalls,for the three first miles we passed many houses andgardens. We then entered on a very irregular country,consisting of more recent streams of hammocks basaltic lava.The rocks are covered in some parts by a thick brushwoodabout three feet high, and in others by heath, fern, and shortpasture : a few broken down old stone walls completed theresemblance with the mountains of Wales. I saw, moreover,some old English friends amongst the insects ; and of birds,the starling, water wagtail, chaffinch, and blackbird. Thereare no houses in this elevated and central part, and theground is only used for the pasture of cattle and goats. Onevery side besides the ridges of more ancient lavas, therewere cones of various dimensions, which still partly retainedtheir crater-formed summits ; and where broken down, showeda pile of cinders, such as those from an iron-foundry.596 AZORES. Sept. 1836.When we reached the so-called crater, I found it consistedof a slight depression, or rather of a short valley abuttingagainst a higher range and without any exit. The bottomwas traversed by several large fissures, out of which, in nearlya dozen places, small jets of steam issued as from the cracksin the boiler of a steam engine. The steam close to theirregular orifices was far too hot for the hand to endure it.It had but little smell, yet from every thing made of ironbeing blackened, and from a peculiar rough sensation communicatedto the skin, the vapour cannot be pure ; I imagineit contains some muriatic acid. The effect on the surroundingtrachytic lava was singular, the solid stone being entirelyconverted either into pure snow-white porcelain clay, or intoa kind of the brightest red, or the two colours were marbledtogether. The steam has thus been emitted during manyyears ; and it is said that flames once issued from the cracks.During rain, the water from each bank must flow into thesecracks ; and it is probable that this same water tricklingdown to the neighbourhood of some heated subterraneanlava, causes the above effects. Throughout the island, thepowers from below have been unusually active during thelast year; several small earthquakes have been felt, andduring a few days a jet of steam issued from a bold precipice(part of Mount Brazil) overhanging the sea, not far from thetown of Angra.I enjoyed my day's ride, though I did not find much worthseeing. It was pleasant to meet the peasantry ; I do notrecollect ever having beheld a set of handsomer young men,with more good humoured expressions. The greater numberwhom we met, were employed in the mountains gatheringslices for firewood. A whole family, from the father to theleast bojj^, might be seen, each carrying his bundle on hishead to sell in the town. Their burdens were very hea^'y;this hard labour and the ragged state of their clothesplainly bespoke poverty ; yet I am told it is not that theywant food, but there is an absence of all luxuries, — a caseparallel to that of Chloe. Hence, although the whole landSept. 1836. TERCEiBA. 597is not cultivated, numbers are emigration to Brazil, wherethe contract to which they are bound differs but little fromslavery. It seems a great pity that so fine a populationshould be compelled to leave a land of plenty, where everyarticle of food — meat, vegetables, and fruit — is exceedinglycheap and most abundant : but the labourer finds his labourof proportionally little value.Another day I set out early in the morning to visit thetown of Prayaa situated towards the Nee. extremity of theisland. The distance is about fifteen miles ; the road randuring the greater part of the way, not far from the coast.The country is all cultivated, and scattered over with housesand small villages. I noticed in several places, that the solidlava, which in part formed the road, was worn into ruts ofthe depth of twelve inches from the long traffic of the bullock-waggons.This circumstance has been noticed with surprisein the ancient pavement of Pompeii, for it does not occur inany of the present towns of Italy. The waggon-wheelshere have a tire surmounted by singularly large knobs of iron;perhaps the old Roman wheels were thus furnished. Thecountry during our mornings ride was not interesting ; exceptingalways when enlivened by the pleasant sight of thehealthy peasantry. The harvest was lately over, and nearthe houses, the fine yellow heads of the Indian corn weretied in large bundles, to be dried, to the poplar-trees ; andthese, seen from a distance, appeared weighed down by somebeautiful fruit, — the very emblem of fertility.One part of the road crossed a broad stream of lava,which from its rocky and black surface seemed to be of comparativelyrecent origin : indeed, the crater, whence it hadflowed, could be distinguished. The industrious inhabitantshave turned this space into vineyards ; but for this purposeit was necessary to clear away the loose fragments, and topile them up into a multitude of walls, which enclose littlepatches of ground a few yards square, thus covering thecountry with a network of black lines.The town of Prayaa is a quiet, forlorn, little place : many598 ADVICE TO Collectors. Oct. 1836.years since a large city was here overwhelmed by an earthquake.It is asserted that the land then subsided, and awall of a convent now bathed by the sea, is shown as a proofof it : the fact is probable, but the supposed proof not conclusive.I returned home by another road, which first ledalong the northern shore, and then crossed the central partof the island. This north-eastern extremity is particularlywell cultivated, and produces a large quantity of fine wheat.The square open fields, and small villages with whitewashedchurches, gave to the view, as seen from the heights, anaspect resembling the less picturesque parts of centralEngland. We soon reached the region of clouds, whichduring our whole visit hung very low and concealed thetops of the mountains. For a couple of hours we crossedthis central and elevated part, which is not inhabited andhas a desolate appearance. When we descended from theclouds to the city, I heard the good news that astronomicalobservations had been obtained, and that we should go tosea the same evening.On the 25 th we called at the island of St. Michael forletters, and then steered a direct course for England. OnOctober 2d the Beagle anchored at Falmouth, where I lefther, having lived on board the little vessel very nearly fiveyears.As this volume may possibly fall into the hands of someoneabout to undertake a similar expedition, I will ofiier afew pieces of adAace, some of which I observed with muchadvantage, but others, to my cost, neglected. Let thecollector's motto be, " Trust nothing to the memory ;" forthe memory becomes a fickle guardian when one interestingobject is succeeded by another still more interesting. Keepa list with the date of the ships by which every box ofspecimens, or even a letter, is transmitted to England ; letthe receiver do the same : it will afterwards save muchanxiety. Put a number on every specimen, and every fragmentof a specimen ; and during the very same minute let it beOct. 1836. ADVicE TO COLLECTORS. 599entered in the catalogue, so that if hereafter its locality bedoubted, the collector may say in good truth, " Every specimenof mine was ticketed on the spot." Any thing whichis folded up in paper, or put into a separate box, ought tohave a number on the outside (with the exception perhaps ofgeological specimens), but more especially a duplicate numberon the inside attached to the specimen itself. A seriesof small numbers should be printed from to 5000 ; a stopmust be added to those numbers which can be read upsidedown (as 699. or 86.). It is likewise convenient to have thedifferent thousands printed on differently coloured paper, sothat when unpacking, a single glance tells the approximatenumber.For specimens in spirits of wine, I found the followingplan answered admirably : Get a set of steel dies from to 9,a small punch, and some sheets of trebly-t\\\c\L tinfoil. Thenumbers may at any time be stamped in a line, with a holepunched in front of each, and then cut off with a pair ofscissors as wanted. These tickets cost little trouble inmaking, and do not corrode. Each specimen in spiritsshould be loosely folded up in very open gauze, or somesuch stuff; the string which ties up the corners may likewisesecure the number. Use nothing but glass jars ; but theseare difficult to be obtained of any size out of Europe. Jarsof earthenware, and wooden casks, either leak, or allow ofevaporation ; and when such are used, it is not easy to knowwhether the specimens are too much crowded (a very commonfault), or in what state the spirit is in, which throughglass can be judged of by its colour. Bear in mind, that innine out of ten specimens which are spoiled, it is owing tothe spirit being too weak. The jars should be closed witha bung covered by bladder, twice by common tinfoil, andby bladder again ; let the bladder soak till half putrid. Ifound this plan quite worth the trouble it cost.Few, excepting those who have travelled in ships, knowthe extreme inconvenience of want of room ; and on this muchdepends : but if it be practicable, keep three or four sets of600 ADVICE TO COLLECTORS. Oct. 1836.bottles open at the same time, so that one may serve forCrustacea, another for animals for dissection, another forminute specimens, another for fish, always putting the latterinto the strongest spirit. Any how it is absolutely necessaryto keep a couple of receiving bottles in which everythingcan at first be put, and afterwards transferred to thepermanent bottles with fresh spirits. Without assistancefrom government, and plenty of room, it is most dishearteningwork to attempt to bring home many specimens inspirits,although without doubt in such a state they are veryfar the most valuable. I should recommend any onecircumstanced as T was to preserve the skins only of largefish and reptiles. But with room and means at command,let the collector place no limit to the number of his glassjars.With respect to the catalogues it is inconvenient to havemany ; but there must at least be two, one for the tin labelsor specimens in spirits, and another for the paper numbers,which should be applied indiscriminately to every kind ofspecimen. If the observer has any particular branch towhich he devotes much attention, a third catalogue exclusivelyfor such specimens is desirable : I kept a third forgeological specimens and fossils. In a like manner notesshould be as simple as possible : I kept one set for geology,and another for zoological and all other observations. It iswell to endeavour to write upon separate pages remarks ondifferent specimens ; for much copying Mill thus be saved.My journal was likewise kept distinct from the other subjects.I found an arrangement carried thus far very useful:a traveller by land would, I suppose, be obliged to adopt astill more simple plan.Use arsenical soap* for all skins, but do not neglect tobrush the legs and beak with a solution of corrosive sublimate.♦ Seeds must not be sent home in the same case with skins preparedwith poison, camphor, or essential oils ; scarcely any of mine germinated,and Professor Henslow thinks they were thus killed.Oct. 1836. ADVICE TO COLLECTORS. 601Likewise slightly brush over all dried plants with the solution.For collecting insects use a plain strong sweeping-net,and pack the specimens of all orders, excepting lepidoptera,between layers of rag in pill-boxes, placing at the bottoma bit of camphor ; this costs scarcely any trouble, and theinsects, especially thousands of unknown minute ones, arrivein an excellent state. Take a good stock of chip pill-boxes —a simple plain strong microscope, such as that long agodescribed by Ellis — a good stock of lace-needles, with glasstubes and sealing wax, for the purpose of making dissectinginstruments. I need not mention small collecting bottlescovered with leather, tin boxes, dissecting scissors, blowpipecase, compasses, mountain barometer, &c. I should recommenda sort of work-box fitted up to hold watch-glasses,glass micrometers, pins, string, printed numbers, &c.; and Ifound a small cabinet with drawers, some lined with cork,and others with cross partitions, most useful as a temporarystorehouse. ^ ■Pack up for shipment every specimen of exiery kind inboxes lined with tinned plates, and soldered together : if thecase be large the specimens should further i^e packed intolight pasteboard or other boxes, for by long pressure evenskins of quadrupeds are injured. On no account whateverput bottles with spirits of wine, though ever so well packed,in the same case with other specimens, for if one shouldbreak every thing near it will be spoiled, as I found to mycost in one instance.When limited either in time, funds, or space, let not thecollector crowd too many specimens either into one bottle,or into one case. For he should constantly bear in mind ashis second motto, that " It is better to send home a fewthings well preserved, than a multitude in a bad condition .^^As long as due steps are taken that the harvest may not bespoiled, let him not be disheartened, because he may for along time be labouring by himseK; let him work hard frommorning to night, for every day and every hour is precious602 CONCLUSION. Oct. 1836.in a foreign clime ; and then most assuredly his own satisfactionwill one day well repay him.Our voyage having come to an end, I will take a short retrospectof the advantages and disadvantages, the pains andpleasures, of our five years' wandering. If a person shouldask my advice, before undertaking a long voyage, my answerwould depend upon his possessing a decided taste for somebranch of knowledge, which could by such means be improved.No doubt it is a high satisfaction to behold variouscountries, and the many races of mankind, but the pleasuresgained at the time do not counterbalance the evils. It isnecessary to look forward to a harvest, however distant itmay be, when some fruit will be reaped, some good effected.Many of the losses which must be experienced are obvious ;such as that of the society of all old friends, and of thesight of those places, with which every dearest remembranceis so intimately connected. These losses, however, are at thetime partly relieved by the exhaustless delight of anticipatingthe long wished-for day of return. If, as poets say, life is adream, I am sure in a voyage these are the visions which servebest to pass away the long night. Other losses, although notat first felt, tell heavily after a period ; these are, the want ofroom, of seclusion, of rest ; — the fading feeling of constanthurry; — the privation of small luxuries, the comforts ofcivilization and domestic society, and, lastly, even of musicand the other pleasures of imagination. When such triflesare mentioned, it is evident that the real grievances (exceptingfrom accidents) of a sea life are at an end. Theshort space of sixty years has made an astonishing differencein the facility of distant navigation. Even in the time ofCook, a man who left his comfortable fireside for suchexpeditions, underwent severe privations. A yacht now withevery luxury of life might circumnavigate the globe. Besidesthe vast improvements in ships and naval resources, thewhole western shores of America are thrown open, andOct. 1836. CONCLUSION. 605Australia has become the metropolis of a rising continent.How different are the circumstances to a man shipwreckedat the present day in the Pacific, to what they were in thetime of Cook ! since his voyage a hemisphere has been addedto the civilized world.If a person suffer much from sea-sickness, let him weighit heavily in the balance, I speak from experience : it is notrifling evil which may be cured in a week. If, on the otherhand, he takes pleasure in naval tactics, he will assuredlyhave full scope for his taste. But it must be borne inmind, how large a proportion of the time, during a longvoyage, is spent on the water, as compared with the days inharbour. And what are the boasted glories of the illimitableocean ? A tedious waste, a desert of water, as theArabian calls it. No doubt there are some delightful scenes.A moonlight night, with the clear heavens and the darkglittering sea, and the white sails filled by the soft air of agently-blowing trade wind ; — a dead calm, with the heavingsurface polished like a mirror, and all still, except theoccasional flapping of the sails. It is well once to behold asquall with its rising arch and coming fury, or the heavygale of wind and mountainous waves. I confess, however,my imagination had painted something more grand, moreterrific in the full-grown storm. It is an incomparablyfiner spectacle when beheld on shore, where the wavingtrees, the wild flight of the birds, the dark shadows andbright lights, the rushing of the torrents, all proclaim thestrife of the unloosed elements. At sea the albatross andpetrel fly as if the storm were their proper sphere, thewater rises and sinks as if fulfilling its usual task, the shipalone and its inhabitants seem the objects of wrath. On aforlorn and weather-beaten coast, the scene is indeed different,but the feelings partake more of horror than of wilddelight.Let us now look at the brighter side of the past time.The pleasure derived from beholding the scenery and thegeneral aspect of the various countries we have visited, has604 CONCLUSION. Oct. 1836.decidedly been the most constant and highest source ofenjoyment. It is probable that the picturesque beauty ofmany parts of Europe exceeds any thing we have beheld.But there is a growing pleasure in comparing the characterof scenery in different countries, which to a certain degree isdistinct from merely admiring its beauty. It depends moreon an acquaintance with the individual parts of each view.I am strongly induced to believe that, as in music, theperson who understands every note will, if he also possessesa proper taste, more thoroughly enjoy the whole,so he who examines each part of a fine view, may alsothoroughly comprehend the full and combined effect.Hence, a traveller should be a botanist, for in all viewsplants form the chief embellishment. Group masses ofnaked rock even in the wildest forms, and they may foratime afford a sublime spectacle, but they will soon growmonotonous. Paint them with bright and varied colours,they will become fantastic ; clothe them with vegetation,they must form at least a decent, if not a most beautifulpicture.When I said that the scenery of Europe was probablysuperior to any thing which we have beheld, I excepted,as a class by itself, that of the intertropical regions. Thetwo classes cannot be compared together ; but 1 havealready often enlarged on the grandeur of these climates.As the force of impressions generally depends on preconceivedideas, I may add, that all mine were taken from thevivid descriptions in the Personal Narrative of Humboldt,which far exceed in merit any thing I have read on thesubject. Yet with these high-wrought ideas, my feelingswere far from partaking of any tinge of disappointmenton first landing on the shores of Brazil.Among the scenes which are deeply impressed on mymind, none exceed in sublimity the primeval forests unde-facedby the hand of man ; whether those of Brazil, wherethe powers of Life are predominant, or those of Tierra delFuego, where Death and Decay prevail. Both are templesOct. 1836. CONCLUSION. 605filled with the varied productions of the God of Nature : — noone can stand in these solitudes unmoved, and not feel thatthere is more in man than the mere breath of his body. Incalling up images of the past, I find the plains of Patagoniafrequently cross before my eyes : yet these plains are pronouncedby all most wretched and useless. They arecharacterized only by negative possessions ; without habitations,without water, without trees, without mountains,they support merely a few dwarf plants. Why then, andthe case is not peculiar to myself, have these arid wastestaken so firm possession of the memory ? Why have notthe still more level, the greener and more fertile Pampas,which are serviceable to mankind, produced an equalimpression ? I can scarcely analyze these feelings : but itmust be partly owing to the free scope given to theimagination. The plains of Patagonia are boundless, forthey are scarcely practicable, and hence unknown : theybear the stamp of having thus lasted for ages, and thereappears no limit to their duration through future time. If,as the ancients supposed, the flat earth was surroundedby an impassable breadth of water, or by deserts heatedto an intolerable excess, who would not look at these lastboundaries to man's knowledge with deep but ill-definedsensations ?Lastly, of natural scenery, the views from lofty mountains,though certainly in one sense not beautiful, are very memorable.When looking down from the crest of the highestCordillera, the mind undisturbed by minute details, was filledwith the stupendous dimensions of the surrounding masses.Of individual objects, perhaps no one is more certain tocreate astonishment than the first sight in his native haunt ofa real barbarian, — of man in his lowest and most savagestate. One's mind hurries back over past centuries, and thenasks, could our progenitors have been such as these ? Men,whose very signs and expressions are less intelligible to usthan those of the domesticated animals ; men, who do notpossess the instinct of those animals, nor yet appear to boast of606 conclusion. Oct. 1836.human reason, or at least of arts consequent on that reason.I do not behave it is possible to describe or paint the differencebetween savage and civilized man. It is the differencebetween a wild and tame animal : and part of the interest inbeholding a savage, is the same which would lead every oneto desire to see the lion in his desert, the tiger tearing hisprey in the jungle, the rhinoceros on the wide plain, or thehippopotamus wallowing in the mud of some African river.Among the other most remarkable spectacles which wehave beheld, may be ranked the stars of the southern hemisphere— the water-spout — the glacier leading its blue streamof ice in a bold precipice overhanging the sea — a lagoonisland raised by the coral-forming polypi — an active volcano— and the overwhelming effects of a violent earthquake.The three latter phenomena, perhaps, possess for me apeculiar interest, from their intimate connexion with thegeological structure of the world. The earthquake musthowever, be to every one a most impressive event: theearth, considered from our earliest childhood as the typeof solidity, has oscillated like a thin crust beneath ourfeet ; and in seeing the most beautiful and laboured worksof man in a moment overthrown, we feel the insignificanceof his boasted power.It has been said, that the love of the chase is an inherentdelight in man — a relic of an instinctive passion. If so, Iam sure the pleasure of living in the open air, with the skyfor a roof, and the ground for a table, is part of the samefeeling: it is the savage returning to his wild and nativehabits. I always look back to our boat cruises, and my landjourneys, when through unfrequented countries, with a kindof extreme delight, which no scenes of civilization could havecreated. I do not doubt that every traveller must rememberthe glowing sense of happiness he experienced, from thesimple consciousness of breathing in a foreign came, wherethe civilized man has seldom or never trod.There are several other sources of enjoyment in a longvoyage, which are, perhaps, of a more reasonable nature.Oct. 1836. CONCLUSION. 607The map of the world ceases to be a blank ; it becomes apicture full of the most varied and animated figures. Eachpart assumes its true dimensions : continents are not lookedat in the light of islands, or those islands considered as merespecks-which are, in truth, larger than many kingdoms ofEurope, Africa, or North and South America, are well-soundingnames, and easily pronounced ; but it is not tillhaving sailed for some weeks along small portions of theircoasts that one is thoroughly convinced how large a portionof our immense world these names imply.From seeing the present state, it is impossible not tolook forward with high expectation to the future progress ofnearly an entire hemisphere. The march of improvement,consequent on the introduction of Christianity throughoutthe South Sea, probably stands by itself on the records ofhistory. It is the more striking when we remember thatonly sixty years since, Cook, whose most excellent judgmentnone will dispute, could foresee no prospect of such change.Yet these changes have now been effected by the philanthropicspirit of the British nation.In the same quarter of the globe Australia is rising, orindeed may be said to have risen, into a grand centre ofcivilization, which at some not very remote period, will rule asempress over the southern hemisphere. It is impossiblefor an Englishman to behold these distant colonies, withouta high pride and satisfaction. To hoist the British flag,seems to draw with it as a certain consequence, wealth,prosperity, and civilization.In conclusion, it appears to me that nothing can be moreimproving to a young naturalist, than a journey in distantcountries. It both sharpens, and partly Ukewise allays thatwant and craving, which, as Sir J. Herschel* remarks, a manexperiences although every corporeal sense is fully satisfied.The excitement from the novelty of objects, and the chanceof success, stimulate him to increased activity. Moreover asDiscourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy.608 CONCLUSION. Oct. 1836.a number of isolated facts soon become uninteresting, thehabit of comparison leads to generalization. On the otherhand, as the traveller stays but a short space of time in eachplace, his descriptions must generally consist of mere sketches,instead of detailed observation. Hence arises, as I havefound to my cost, a constant tendency to fill up the widegaps of knowledge, by inaccurate and superficial hypotheses.But I have too deeply enjoyed the voyage, not to recommendany naturahst, although he must not expect to be sofortunate in his companions as I have been, to take allchances, and to start, on travels by land if possible, if otherwiseon a long voyage. He may feel assured, he will meetwith no difficulties or dangers (excepting in rare cases)nearly so bad as he beforehand anticipated. In a moralpoint of view, the effect ought to be, to teach him good-humouredpatience, freedom from selfishness, the habit ofacting for himself, and of making the best of every thing,or in other words contentment. In short he should partakeof the characteristic qualities of the greater number ofsailors. Traveling ought also to teach him distrust ; but atthe same time he will discover, how many truly goodnaturedpeople there are, with whom he never before had, or everagain will have any further communication, who yet are readyto offer him the most disinterested assistance.INDEXMR. DARWIN'S JOURNAL.Aborigines banished from Van Diemen'sLand, 533.of New South Wales, 519.■ ■ extermination of, 520.Absence of coral formations in certainseas, 562.■ of trees in Pampas, 53.Aconcagua, river of, 415.volcano of, 308.Advice to collectors, 598.Africa, Southern part desert, yet supportslarge animals, 98.Agouti, habits of, 81.Albemarle Island, 457.Alcedo Americana, 162.Alluvium stratified in Andes, 387.Amblyrhyncus suhcristatus, 469.cristatus, 466.Anas hrachyptera, 457.Animal, extinct, allied to the Amelia*,208.Animalcule, pelagic, 16.Angra, capital of Terceira, 594.Antarctic islands, 272.Antipodes, 496.Ants of Brazil, 37,Apires, or miners, 420.Aplysia, 5.Apple-trees, 363.Aptetiodytes genera, 256.Areas of alternate movements in the Pacificand Indian oceans, 563.Armadillo-like covering of fossil animalsin South America, 181.Armadillo, habits of, 113.Arrow-head found in Pampas, 123.Ascension, 586.Australia, 515.Australian barrier, 556.Azores, 594.VOL. HI, 2Bahia Blanc, 89— IfS.Bahia, Brazil, 11.scenery of, 589.Bald Head, Australia. 537.Ballenar, Chile, 428.Banda Oriental, 169.Barking bird, 352.Basaltic platform of Santa Crus, 216.Bathurst, Australia, 528.Bay of Islands, New Zealand, 496.Beagle Channel, Tierra del Fuego, 337.scenery of, 240.Beetles alive in sea, 186.Beetles, dung-feeders, 583.Bell ofQuillota, 312.Berkeley Sound, 245.Birds, species peculiar to certain islsnin the Galapagos Archipelago, 475.Birds, tameness of, 475.Birgos Intro, 551.Bizcacha, habits of, 143.Bolas, manner of using, 50.Bones, of the guanaco collected in certainspots, 197.Boulders of Tierra del Fuego, 267.Bravado, El, 441.Brazil, great area of granite, 12.Buenos Ayres, 140.Bug of Pampas, 4lBulimus, on desert places, 426.extinct species of, 582.Burchell, Mr., travels of, 101.Butterflies, flocks of, 185.Butterfly producing clicking sound, 38.Bynoe, Mr,, account of floating ice,283.Cacti, 318.Calasoma, on wit's out ai iea, 185.RINDEX.Calcareous casts of branches and roots oftrees at King George's Sound, 537.Calcareous incrustations on rocks of Ascension,587.Callao, 446.Calomel hizcacha, 143.Carmelite, fossil animal allied to, 210.Cape of Good Hope, 573.Capybara, or carpincho, 57.Caracara, or Carrancha, 64.Zacharias negation. 423.Cartoon, beds of, 138.Carrion hawks, 63.Casuchas, 413.Castro, Chloe, 338.Cathartics aratus, 68.Cattle, effects of their grazing on the vegetation,137.Cattle wild at the Falkland Islands, 247.Cauqueues, hot springs of, 3'Jl.Cause of extinction of species amongmammalia, 210.of discoloured sea, 18.Cavia Patagonia, 81.Cervus cajnpestris, 51.Cacao, Chloe, 335.Chalk, formation of, 553.Charles Island, Galapagos Archipelago,456.Ciieucau, 351.Chile, 308.features of country, 311.Chloe, 333, 356.forests of, 358.roads of, 357.Honos Archipelago, 342.vegetation of, 349.ornithology of, 353.Chupat, Rio, 125.Clearness of atmosphere within Andes,398.Clouds of vapour after rain, 27.on Corcovado, 33.Colias medusa, flocks of, 185.Collectors, advice to, 598.Concluding remarks, 602.Colonia del Sacraraienio, 169.Compound animals, 261.Concepcion, Chile, 370.Condor, habits of, 219.Conserves, pelagic, 14.Convicts, condition of in New SouthWales, 531.Copia, river of, 429.valley of, 430.town of, 437.Coquimbo, 421.Coral formations, 539.stinging species of, 552.dead, 549.Cordillera, passage of, S83.-, different productions on eastand weft side, Superstructureof, 389.geology of, 390.rivers of, 407.Comrades, where animals are slaughteredat Buenos Ayres, 140.Countries, unhealthy, 446-Crabs, hermit species of, 544.at Keeling Island, 551.Craters, number of at the GalapagosArchipelago, 453.Crustacea, like trilobites, 303.pelagic, 189.Ctenomys Braziliensis, 58.Cucao, Chloe, 359.Cuckoo-like habits of IMolothrus, 60.Cumbre of Cordillera, 414.Cuttle-fish, habits of, 6.Daceto Jagoensis, 2.Dasypus, three species of, 113.Deer, with strong odour, 56.Degradation of coral reefs, 547.Deserts of Peru, 444,Despoblado, valley of, 437.Diodon, habits of, 13.Discoloured sea, 18.Dogs, shepherd, 174.D'Orbigny, travels in South America, 110.Doris, eggs of, 258.Droughts, periodical, 157.great in Pampas, 155.Dung-feeding beetles, 533.Dust, falling from atmosphere, 4.Earthenware fossil, 452.Earthquake at Concepcion, 370.effects of on hard rock, 370.effects of on sea, 373, 377.Hue of vibration of, 375.accompanied by an elevation ofthe coast, 379.causes of, 380.at Valdivia, 369.effects of on the tides, 369.at Coquimbo, 422.effects of on a river-bed, 413.of Callao, 450.accompanied by rain, 431.Eggs of Doris, 258.Elater, springing powers of, 35.Electricity of atmosphere, within Andes,399.Elevated shells near Lima, 451.at Chloe, 362.Elevation of coast of Chile, 310, 417.INDEX.Elevation within human em, 451.Entomology of the Galapagos Archipelago,473.of Brazil, 37.Entre Rios, geology of, 149.Epeira, habits of, 40.Erratic blocks, how transported, 288.absent in intertropical countries,288.on plains of Santa Cruz. 224.of sierra del Fuego, 267.Estancia, value of, 170.Extermination of aborigines in Australia,520.Extinction of species, causes of, 210.of wild animals in New SouthWales, 525.Extinct quadrupeds in South America, 95,104, 146. 149, 152. 180. 210.Falkland Islands, 246.birds tame at, 476.Fennel, 138.Fern-trees, 536.Fernando Noronha, 10.Fields of dead coral, 459.Fire, ait of making, 251, 488.Fish, eating coral, 553.emitting harsh sound, 160.Fleas, 424.Forests of Tierra del Fuego, 228, 300.Fossil Mammalia, 95, 104, 146, 149,152, 180, 210.earthenware, 452.Fox, of the Falkland Islands, 249.of Chloe, 341.Frogs, noises of, 34.and toads, not found on volcanicislands, 472.Fruit trees, southern limit of, 268.Fuciis gif^aiiteiis, 303.Fuegians, 227, 234, 239, 240, 242.Favourites, 69.Fungus, edible, 298.Ftirnaritis fuligiiwsus, 353.V«/iis, 112.Galapagos Archipelago, 453.belongs to American Zoologicalprovince, 474.Gallinazo, 68.Gauchos, 48character of, 182.■ live on meat, 136.Gay, M., on floating islands, 323.Geese at the Falkland Islands, 257.Geology of La Plata, 52.of Patagonia, 201,Geology of Cordillera, 390.Glaciers, 279, 283, .306.eRects of, 280, 283.in lat. 46° 40', 285.Glow worms, 34.Goats, destructive to vegetation at St.Helena, 582.Goeree Roads, 237.Good Success Bay, 227.Gossamer spider, 187.Granite mountains, Tres Monies, 345.Gravel, how transported, 201 to 206.Greenstone, fragments of, 313.Gryllus migratory, 412.Guanaco, habits of, 195.Guantajaya, mines of, 444.Guardia del Monte, 137.Guasos of Chile, 315.Guasco, 427.Gunnera scabra, 340.Gypsum, great beds of, 389.Hailstorm, 134.Hall, Capt. Basil, on terraces of Coquim-bo, 423.Height of snow-line on Cordillera, 275.Hermit crab?, .544.Himantopits melanura, 133.Horse, powers of swimming of, 168.wild at the Falkland Islands, 248.fossil, 149.Horsemanship of the Gauchos, 175.Hot springs of Cauquenes, 321.Humming-birds of Rio de Janeiro, 37.of Chile, 330.Hunting party in Pampas, 131.Hyb'^rnation of animals, 115.Hydrochicrus capybura, 57.Hydrophobia, 436.Hymenophallus, 37.Jaguar, habits of, 159.James Island, Galapagos Archipelago, 458.Ibis melnnops, 194.Ice at bottom of sea, 297.prismatic structure of, 397.Icebergs, 280, 282, 283.Inca's bridge, 409.Incrustations, calcareous on rocks of Ascension,587.of phosphate of lime, 8.Indians, 118.grave of, 199.of the Pampas, 84.ruins of houses, 409, 438.of Valdivia, 366.antiquities of, in Chile, 325,decrease in numbers, 122.INDEX.InsectSifirstcolonistsofSi.Paul's rocks, 10.blown out to sea, 186.Iquique, 442.Rater's peak, 233.Kauri pine, 510.Keeling Island, 539.birds of, 543.entomology of, 544.• Flora of, 541.Kelp, or sea-weed, 303.King George's Sound, 536.Labourers, condition of, in Chile, 317,324, 417.Lagoon islands, 540, 553.Lakes of brackish water in Brazil, 24.Lavipyi-is occidentalis, 34.Lao, manner of using, 50.Lepvs magellanicus, 248.Lichen on loose sand at Iquique, 444.Lightning storms, 72.tubes, 69.Lima, 446.Lime changed by lava into crystallinerock, 5.phosphate of, 90.Lion-ant in Australia, 526.Lizard, marine species of, 466.Llama or Guanaco, habits of, 195.fossil species, allied to, 210.Locusts, swarms of, 4(i2.Longevity of species in Molluscs, 97.Lorenzo, San, island of, 451.Luxuriant vegetation not necessary tosupport large animals, 98.Lyell, Mr., on terraces of Coquimbo, 423.on longevity of Molluscs, 97.on Siberian animals preserved inice, 293.on transportation of boulders byice, 287.on subsidence in the Pacific, 557.Marina, or the godmother of a troop ofmules, 384.Magdalen Channel, 305.Magellan. Strait of, 263.Maldonado, 45.Mammalia fossil, 95, 104, 146, 149, 152,180, 210.Mandioca, 25.Mares, killed for their hides, 179.Mare's flesh, eaten by the troops, 83.Marine Saurian, 466.Mastodon anguslidens, 152.Mauritius, 570.Maypo river, 385.Melisiiga Kiiigii, 330.Meteorolites, 433.Mendoza, 404.Miasmita, 446.Mice, inhabit sterile places, 439.Millepora, stinging property of, 552.Mills for grinding ores, 324.Milvuhis fortunatus, 163.Mines, 424.how discovered, 486.Miners, 418, 420.condition of, 323.Mining system in Chile, 317.Missionary system at Tahiti, 493.at New Zealand, 508.Mocking bird, 62.Molothrus, habits of, 60.Monte Video, 167.Mount Sarmiento, 306.Tarn, 265.Mules, 384.Murthison, Mr., on rocks from FalklandIslands, 253.Myopotamus Corpus, 351.New Zealand, 496.Caledonia, 559.Notitia cwticularia, 145.Noises from hill at Copiapopo, 441.Noses, ceremony of pressing, 505.Octopus, habits of, 6.Oily coating on sea, 19.Ophryessa, 115.Opuntia Ga'Uipageia, 460.Darwiniiii, 194.Ores, gold, 324.Ornithology of the Galapagos Islands,461.Orpheus modulator, 62.Osorno, volcano of, 356.Ostrich, habits of, 105.eggs of, 132.Otaheite, 480.Otter, Honos Archipelago, 351.Owl of Pampas, 145.Palm-trees, sap from, 312.Pampas, number of embedded remains in,155.Papitioferonia, 38.Parana, Rio, 146.islands in, 158.Parrots, 163.Partridges, how caught, 51.Pas, fortresses of New Zealand, 498.INDEX.Passes in Cordillera, 408.Pasture, altered from grazing of cattle,137.Patagonia, geology of, 201.Peat, formation of, 349.Pebbles perforated, 173.■ transported in roots of trees, 549.Pelagic animals in southern ocean, 190.Penas, Gulf of, 284.Penguin, habits of, 256.Pentland, Mr., on Bolivian Andes, 392.Pepsin, habits of, 40.Pernambuco, 591.reef of, 593.Petrels, habits of, 354.Peuquenes, pass of, 389.Phosphate of lime incrusting rocks, 8.Phosphorescence of sea, 191.Plains at foot of Andes in Chile, 402.round the Sierra Ventana, 126.almost horizontal near St. Fe, 146.PlanariEB, terrestrial species of, 30.Plover, long-legged, 133.Polished rocks, Brazil, 12.Polyborus chicago, 66.KoviE ZelandiB, 67.Polyborus Braziliensis, 64.Ponsonby Sound, 240.Porto Prayaa, 1.Port Desire, 193.river of, 198.St. Julian, 199.-, entomology of, 200.Famine, 264.Portillo pass, 383, 398.Potato, wild, 347.Cancellaria gigantic, habits of, 354.Protococcus nivalis, 394.Pteroptochos, two species of, 329.three species of, 351.Puffing cinereous, 354.Puffinuria Berardii, 355.Puma, habits of, 327.flesh of, 135.Puna, or short respiration, 593.Punta Alta, Bahia Blanc, 95.Gorda, 438.Phosphorus luminous, 35.Quillota, 310.valley of, 314.rabbit, wild, at the Falkland Islands, 248.Rain at Coquimbo, 422, 425.in Chile, effects on vegetation, 417.Rat, only aboriginal animal of NewZealand, 511.Red snow, 394.Reef at Pernambuco, 590.Reefs, encircling, 555.barrier, 556fringing, ib.Remedies of the Gauchos, 148.Reptiles absent in Terrace Fuego, 301.at Galapagos, 472.Respiration, difficult in Andes, 393.Revolution of October, 1833, at BuenosAyres, 165.Rhinoceroses, live in desert countries,100, 103, 577.Rhyncops nigra, 161.Rio de Janeiro, 21.Plata, 44.Negro, 73.Colorado, 82.Rocks burnished with ferruginous matter,12.Rosas, General, 85.Ruins of Callao, 450.of Indian buildings in Cordillera,409.Ruts worn in lava rocks, 597.St. Helena, 578.Fe, 147.Jago, trade. wind, 3.Paul's rocks, 7.Salado, Rio, 137.Salinas at the Galapagos Archipelago, 459.at the Rio Negro, 75,Saline efflorescence, 91.Salt-lakes, 75.Sandal-wood trees, dead at Juan Fernandez,583.San Pedro, forests of, 341.Sand, hot from sun's rays, at GalapagosArchipelago, 459.Santa Cruz, river of, 213.Santiago, Chile, 319.Sauce, Rio, 124.Sarcophagus sutiihureus, 62.Scenery of Andes, 388, 394.Scissors-tail, 163.Scissors-beak, habits of, 161.Sea-pen, habits of, 117,Shells, land, species,in great numbers, 426.Shepherd dogs, 174.Shingle-beds, how deposited, 201, to206.Siberian animals, how preserved in ice,293.preserved in ice, foodnecessary during their existence, 103.Silicified trees in vertical position, 406.Silurian formations at Falkland Islands,253.Silures, habits of, 160.Slavery, 27.Smelling power of carrion hawks, 222.INDEX.Smith, Dr. Andrew, on the support oflarge quadrupeds, 99.on perforated pebbles,173.Snake, venemous, 114.Snow-line, on Cordillera, 275.Snow, eft'ectsof OQ rocks, 388.red, 394Soda, nitrate of, 443.sulphate of, 91.Southern islands, "171.Spares, coral-eating fish, 553.Spawn on surface of sea, 18.Spiders, habits of 40.gossamer, 187.Stalactites o*' sulphate of lime. 9.Steam issuing from fissures iu ground atthe .Azores, 596.Stinging; coral, 552.Streams of stones at Falkland Islands,254.Struthio Rhea, 105.Darwiniiii, 108.Subsidence in Pacific Ocean, 557.at Keeling Island, 560.Sulphate of soda incrusting the ground, 91.Sidney, 515.Tabanus, 200.Tahiti (Otabeite), 480.three zones of fertility, 484.Tail, fossil, gigantic size of, 181.Talcabuano, 370.'lameness of birds, 475.Tapocolo and Turco, 329.Tapalgaen, Sierra, flat hills of quartz, 135.Tasmania, 532.Tattooing, 482, 501.Temperance of the Tahitians, 490.Teru-tero, habits of, 133.Tercero Rio, fossil remains, in banks of146.Terraces in valleys of Cordillera, 385.of Coquirabo, 423.of Patagonia, how formed, 202.Testudo Indicus, habits of, 462.Theory of lagoon islands, 553.Thistle beds, 138, 143, 172.Tierra del Fuego, 227, 263.of, 268.climate and vegetation• , geology of, 266.deep channels in, t67.zoology of, 300., entomology of, 302.Tinamus rufescens, 51.Titwchorus Eschscholtzii, 110.Toad, habits of, 115.not hound in volcanic islands, 472.Tortoise, habits of, 462.Torrents, effects of, in Cordillera, 385.Toxodon, 180.teeth of, 146.Transport of seeds, 541.of boulders, 280, to 292.of stones in roots of trees, 549.of fragments of rock on banksof the St. Cruz river, 216.Travertin nigh leaves of trees, VanDiemen's Land, 535.Tree-ferns, southern limits of, 271.Trees, absence of, in Pampas, 53.solidified': .vertical, 406.Tres Montes, 343.Trioonocephalus, or Copies, 114.Trochilus gigs, 331.Tropical scenery, 590.Tubes, siliceous, formed by lightning,69.Tucutuoo, habits of, 58.Turkey' buzzard, 68.I'upungato, volcano of, 397.Turtle, manner of catching, 547.Types of organization in different countries,constant, 209.Uruguay, Rio, 171.Uspallata range, 406.Valdivia, 363.forests of, 364, 368.Valley of St. Cruz, how excavated,217.-, dry, at Copia, 438.Valleys, excavation of, in Chile, 314, 438.of Tahiti, 486.in Cordillera, 385.Valparaiso, 308.Vampire bat, 25.Van Diemen's Land, 532.Vanellus Caifaneiisis, 133.Vanikoro, encircled island, 555.Vegetation of ^t. Helena, 580, '82.changes of, at ditto, 579.of New South Wales, 517.on opposite sides of Cordillera,399.luxuriant, not necessary toAsupport large animals, 99.Ventana, Sierra, 125.Villa Vicencio, 405.Virgularia Patagonica, 117.Volcanic phenomena, 380.Volcanoes near Chloe, 336.occur within the areas ofelevation, 567.Viiltur aura, 68.INDEX.Waders, first colonists amongst birds ofdistant isUwids, 543.Waimate, New Zealand, 507.Walleecliu tree, 79.Wasps preying on spiders, 40.Water-hog, 57.Water, sold at Iquique, 442.Waves, caused by fall of ice, 281.from earthquakes, 377.Weatber-boaid, iSJ. S. Wales. 522.Weeds, English, in New Zealand, 511.Weight of large quadrupeds, 101.Wellington, Mount, 536.Wells at Iquique, 445.Wells, ebbing and flowing, 545.Wigwams of Fuegians, 234.Winds, cold on Cordillera, 440.on Cordillera, 395.Zoological provinces of N. and S.America, 153.Zoophytes, Falkland Islands, 258.Zorillo, or skunk, 94.THE END.\VMtTiNd, BEAUf'onr hoi'be, btranDiADDENDA.Page 76.I HAVE said that crystals of sulphate of magnesia, called by the Spanishinhabitants, madre del sal, are scattered on the borders of the Salinas inPatagonia. By a mistake a wrong bottle was examined; and the crystals,I now find, are the sulphate of soda ; but it appears that some sulphate ofmagnesia is dissolved in the underlying fetid mud.Page 96.In enumerating the fossils, which I collected at Bahia Blanc, I mentiona tusk like that of a boar, and some very flat grinders. These are nowfound to belong to the lower jaw of Toxodon Platensis. For an admirabledescription of this wonderful animal, and likewise of the great fossilMacrauchenia PatachonicaJ, mentioned at p. 208, which in some respectsis allied to the Camelidaa, I must refer to the first part of the Zoology ofthe Voyage of the Beagle by Mr. Owen.Page 97.The remains just referred to, are said to be embedded with existingspecies of shells. This expression requires some qualification ; the detailsare given in my geological introduction to Mr. Owen's account of the FossilMammalia, above mentioned.Page 150.With reference to what I have said, about the bones of horses havingbeen several times brought to this country from North America, withthose of the Mastodon, I see Mr. Rogers, in his Report to the BritishAssociation (vow. iii, p- 24) says, " It is possible that the horse ought toVOL.111. 2q*610 ADDENDA.be added to this list of animals as indigenous to America ;" and it is evidentfrom a previous passage, that the bones have been found fossil. Mr.Rogers states, that the remains of two kinds of elephant and three kindsof oxen have been discovered there ; as have, on two occasions, partsof the Megatherium. At Big Bone Lick, where the remains of the elephant,mastodon, and ox, are so extraordinarily numerous, the megalonyxhas been found ; and this is a parallel case to the contemporaneous embodiment,in the southern hemisphere, of the mastodon, horse, megatherium,and the other Edentata. The more I reflect on the geographicaldistribution in the Old and New World of these giganticmammifers, during the period antecedent to the present, in relationto the existing faunas of North and South America, now so strongly contrastedwith each other, the more pregnant with interest the case appearsto be. I know of no other instance, in which we can thus almost markthe period of the splitting up of one great region into two well characterizedzoological provinces. With respect to the ancient range of thegenus Eques, I may add to what has already been said, that its remainshave been found from England in the west, to the Himalaya in the east,(BucldancSs Reliques DiluviancE, p. 222,) and from the western coast ofNorth America, to the eastern plains of America in the southern hemisphere.We may, therefore, suspect that a very little research would discoverthe remains of the horse, embedded in the frozen soil of Kamtschatka,with those of the fossil ox and elephant ; and thus render complete theevidence, that we there see the ancient, but perhaps temporary line ofjunction, since interrupted, between the fauna of what we call the NewWorld with that of the Old. But I doubt not, that the snow-clad heights ofChimborazo, Illimani and Aconcagua have seen as many, and as strangeforms of animals, pass by and become extinct, as ever did the Alpine pinnacles,or those loftiest ones of the Himalaya.Page 2()8.When contrasting the productions of the eastern coast of South America,with those of the western, and likewise with those of the correspondingparallels of latitude in Europe, I should have added (line 15) after thegrape and fig, as flourishing in lat. 41°, the peach, and the nectarine (bothof course standards), water and musk melons, bananas dulce (Convolvulusbananas), the olive and the orange ; the latter, however, had only beenlately introduced, but it promised to succeed well.Page 272.I have spoken of the low latitudes in which tropical forms of vegetationADDENDA. 611are found in the southern hemisphere, and likewise of some mammaliaand of birds. With respect to the parrot of the Strait of Magellan, Mac-quarriesIsland in lat. 55° S. and long 160° E. offers an analogous instance,in possessing a species of this genus. I am, however, now enabled tobring forward a more important observation, as directly bearing on theevidence by which geologists have chiefly judged of the climate of ancientEurope, namely, on the character of the marine productions of the southernhemisphere. In my journal I have remarked that the southern seasteem with life, under innumerable forms ; and the truth of this remark isamply attested by the vast herds of great unwieldy seals with which theshores of Patagonia, the Falkland and the Antarctic islands, were, accordingto the narratives of all the early navigators, almost covered.Having mentioned these facts to Mr. George B. Sowerbyby, he informs me,that the shells of the southern part of the southern hemisphere have someaffinity in general character with those of the intertropical seas, or ratherthat they are of much larger size and of more vigorous growth than theanalogous species (excepting the britons of California) under correspondingzones in the northern hemisphere. Thus the immense size of thePatellae, Fissurellae, Britons, and Barnacles of the Strait of Magellan, andthe large size of the former at the Cape of Good Hope, may be taken asinstances. On the east coast of South America (in lat. 39°) three speciesof Oliva (one of large size), a Voluta (and perhaps a second species),and a Vertebra, are amongst the most abundant shells on the mud-banks ofBahia Blanc. Another species of Voluta is found as far south as 45°,and there is some reason to believe, even much further. Oliva, Voluta,and Vertebra are amongst the best-characterized tropical forms, that is,both the individuals and species of these genera are extremely abundantin the intertropical seas, whilst they are very rare, or do not exist, on theshores of temperate countries. It is doubtful even if one small species ofthese three genera, an Oliva, inhabits the southern shores of Europe ;whilst in a higher latitude, on the coast of South America, species of allthree are the most abundant kinds.At Bahia Blanc many of these shells are embedded in gravel, and havebeen raised above the level of the sea. Now let us suppose that theclimate of South America and of the surrounding seas were to undergosome change, so as to become in every respect like that of Europe ; itcan, I think, scarcely be doubted, that the shells of the abovementionedgenera would gradually become extinct, and be replaced by others betteradapted to the new climate. What, then, would a geologist say, whoentertained the generally-received opinions on the distribution of organicbeings in accordance with our knowledge of the northern hemisphere (or,rather, in this imaginary case of both hemispheres), when he foundthese gravel beds abounding with Olives, Volumes, and Cerebral? — such2 g 2 *612 ADDENDA.shells not existing there. We may also suppose that he had discoveredthat the limits of the more tropical forms, both animal and vegetable, ofthe productions of the land, had likewise during this former periodextended further south: vifhat, then, would he say? Would he not atonce infer, with the strongest appearance of truth, that the climate formerlyhad a more tropical character, properly so called, and therefore had a higherannual mean temperature than at present? Nevertheless, we know suchan inference would have been absolutely erroneous. To put the case inanother point of view : should a geologist find, in lat. .39°, on the coastof Spain, a tertiary deposit, abounding with Olives, Voluntas, and Cerebral ;or in lat. 43^, on the coast of France, other beds, containing a largeVoluta, and numerous Patellae, Fissurellte, Britons, and Balani, largerand of stronger growth than the existing species, would he be justified,after what is now known, in pronouncing thiit the climate formerly hada higher mean temperature ? I think it may be safely asserted thathe would not be so justified, but rather would be bound to search forother evidence. In the actual case of Europe, we have knowledge (as willbe shown in a following note*) of another element in the problem,namely of the lower descent during former times of the snow-line, — as isinferred from the former low descent of glaciers, on the same mountains,where they now occur only at great heights, and likewise fromthe congelation during this same period of the soil in a low latitude — andthis new element, I believe, gives the key to the solution of the problem,which is, that the climate of Europe was formerly more equable, but sofarfrom being strictly more tropical, that it probably even had a lowermean annual temperature than it now possesses. I need scarcely saythat I here refer only to the later tertiary periods : in the more ancientepochs, the plainest analogies tell us of an equatorial climate, whilst onthe other hand, we are very far from having the smallest reason to supposethat the snow-line then descended low ; and this is the key, as Havecalled it, to the problem of later times.Page 282.With respect to ice transporting fragments of rock in the Antarcticregions, M. Cordier, in his instructions institut, 1837, p. 28.S^ to thevoyage of the Astrolabe and the Zelee, has this passage : " Les relationsde Expedition anglo-american de decouverte execute en 1830, nous ontAs these notes are appended to the Journal, I have found it scarcelypossible to classify them properly. I have been obliged to allude to thelower descent of the glaciers in Europe during former periods — facts whichare first brought forward in a succeeding note to p. 294.ADDENDA. (USfait connaitre que les pities des Nouvelles-Shetland sont couvcrtes degrands blocs erratiqiies formes de granite, et par consequent d'une naturedifferent des autres roches du pap's. M. James Eights, naturaliste deExpedition, n'hesite pas a considerer ces blocs comme ayant ete apportespar les glaces, qui viennent annuellement s'echouer et se fondre sur lesplages dont il s'agit et comme cant les indices de terres inconnues sitiieesplus pres du pole que la terre la Trinity." I have not been able to tintany account of this expedition. Lieutenant Kendall describes fGeograjik.Journal, 1830^' pinnacles of syenite in Smith's Island, one of the SouthShetland group; so that the inferences regarding the distances, from whichthe blocks are supposed to have come, probably are erroneous.In speaking (p. 272) of the rigour of the climate of Deception Islandin South Shetland, I might have mentioned that Lieut. Kendall says(Geograi^h. Journal, 1830, p. 66), that on March the 8th, " We took thehint of the freezing over of the cove (lat. 62° 55') and effected our retreat."This is the same as if, in the northern hemisphere, the harbour ofCliristiansund in Norway, were to fi-eeze on the 8th of September !Page 285.I have described the dimensions of the great glacier which inlat. 46° 50', sends down an arm to Kelly Harbour, and another to a flatswamp ; I now find from information communicated to me by CaptainFitzRoy, that it must communicate with the channels and bays northward,which extend behind the peninsula of Tres Montes. Agues, ingiving an account of an expedition of the missionaries (Description Huto-rial de la Provincia de Chloe, p. 227), says, they encountered in the Lagunade San Rafael (lat. 46° 33' to 46° 48') " many icebergs (muchosfarallones de nievej, some great, some small, and others middle sized."This was on the 22d of November, 1778. Captain FitzRoy also tells me,that in the account of another missionary voyage, it is said that the boatshad difficulty, on account of the islands of ice, in passing through the Canode Person, a strait connecting the Laurina de San Rafael, with the otherbays behind Tres iVIontes. Transposing in imagination, as I have doneat p. 291, the places in the southern hemisphere to corresponding ones inEurope, these facts are the same as if, in a channel of the sea stretchingfrom the Mediterranean between the Alps and the Jura, a boat shouldencounter in the latitude of the lake of Geneva, and on the 22rf of June, (butnot on one occasion only,) so many icebergs, and of such dimensions, thatthe historian of the voyage should describe them as being " some great,some small, and others middle sized" !Having insisted so strongly, in this part of my Journal, that it is in diesouthern hemisphere, where tropical forms encroach on the temperate614 ADDENDA.zones, that solid glaciers descend to the sea in low latitudes ; I might haveadded that it is in this same hemisphere, that the icebergs, which havebeen formed in the Polar Regions, are drifted furthest from their birthplace,pittsburgh f Philosoph. Transact., 1830) describes several great icebergsseen by a ship, in her passage to India, in 35° 50' S. : that is, far tothe northward of the latitude, where tree-ferns, arborescent grasses, parasiticalorchideous plants, and even palm-trees grow ; and within sixty milesof the land, where the rhinoceros, elephant, hippopotamus, lion, and hyena,are very numerous.Page 289.Until lately I was not aware that there were sufficient data to speakwith some precision of the southern limits of erratic blocks in the northernhalf of the New World. In Canada, and in the northern parts of theUnited States, innumerable great scattered fragments of rocks have beendescribed by Hatfield, Bigsly, Hitchcock, and others. In parts of Massachusetts,according to Professor Hitchcock (Report on the Geology of J,boulders seem to cover the whole face of the country. Further southwardwe hear from Mr. Rogers {Sejjorl to Brit. Assoc, vol. iii.) that bouldersare common over the great valley which crosses Pennsylvania, Maryland,and Virginia (lat. 36° 30' to 42°). and likewise in the states of Ohio,Kentucky, and Indiana, which are in nearly the same latitude. Mr.Rogers having described some blocks of sandstone at Washington and onthe Susquehanna, which must have come from some distance northward,adds that " Drake in his picture of Cincinnati (39° 10') mentions largemasses of granite in that part of the Ohio, resting on the ordinary finerdiluvium. The nearest granite to the north is at least one hundred leaguesdistant; while no primary rock occurs south or east, within even a muchgreater limit." He then proceeds, " We are reminded here of the greatdetached blocks, which strew the plains of northern Europe, and the explanationsuggested, that they have beta carried there upon floating ice ;"and concludes with the important remark, that Mr. Conrad, who has exploredthe state of Alabama (30° to 33°) was never once able to perceivea boulder upon its surface. It would hence appear that 36° 30' is thesouthern limit of the dispersion of erratic blocks in the United States ;and these are spoken of, as having come from the north. Therefore, thereis no occasion to suppose that the ice, in which by the theory they arebelieved to have been embedded, was formed in so low a latitude as thathere mentioned ; and at present, in the southern hemisphere, icebergs aredrifted to latitudes, though not formed in them, nearer the tropic than36° 30'. In Europe I cannot hear of erratic blocks having been foundfurther south than the southern flanks of the Alps, in lat. 45°; and Hum-addenda.615bold has said (see Cinders Theory of the Earth, translated by ProfessorJameson, p. 346) that they do not occur in Lombardy. I may here remark,that care should be taken to separate the phenomenon of greatsingular blocks, from that of rounded ones, although of considerablesize ; for torrents, and more especially the waves of the sea, duringits slow oscillation of level, are agents sufficiently powerful to producegreat effects. The lowest latitude in South America, in which I foundlarge angular fragments, which must have been transported by ice thereformed, or by some unknown means, was in latitude 41°. But as I didnot examine the country immediately north of it, I am not prepared tosay that this is their extreme limit ; but between latitude 27° and 33°, Ifound no appearance, on either side of the Cordillera, which indicated apower of transportation of the kind required to remove boulders from adistance. Thus, we find that the limit of their dispersion in the twoAmericas is nearly the same; although they approach the warmer zonesrather more closely in the northern than in the southern division of thecontinent, and in both, probably, more so than in Europe.In the note, in which I have considered the apparent exceptions to thelaw, that erratic boulders are not found in the intertropical regions, Ihave said that the internal evidence of the Macao case led me to doubt itsreality, and I now find it is distinctly stated by M. Chevalier that therounded blocks result from the secular disintegration of the fundamentalrock fL'Institiit, 1838, p. 151 — Analysis of the Voyage of the Bonite). Imay here add, that M. Pillow Boblaye, in his description of Bone andConstantine on the northern coast of Africa ( L' Institut, 1838, p. 248,says, " Je n'ai rien vu que put undique le phenomena des blocs critiques."My statement that erratic boulders are not found in Australia, is fullyborne out by information communicated to me by Major Mitchell, who,in his repeated expeditions, has traversed so much of the south-east divisionof that continent. With the several facts given here and in theJournal (p. 289), I can scarcely doubt that the law of the distribution oferratic blocks is finally determined ; and it is needless to specify the great,not to say conclusive, importance of this law on the theory of the meansof their transportation, — a problem which has so long perplexedgeologists.Page 294.In my discussion on the climate of the southern hemisphere, I haveshown that a low altitude of the line of perpetual snow, and consequentlythe descent of glaciers to the level of the sea in latitudes relatively low towhat occurs in the northern hemisphere, and likewise the perpetual congelationof the soil a little beneath the surface in countries without the616 ADDENDA.frigid zone, are the results of a climate which appears favourable to thepassage of tropical forms beyond their proper limits, and to a vigorousnative vegetation. The climate is one of an equable nature ; and thismust, to a considerable degree, be the effect of the great area of oceancompared with the land of the southern hemisphere. In the northern hemispherewe have proofs, that the productions both of the land and water,during the period antecedent to the present, had a more tropical characterthan they now have, and there is, also, a high degree of probability thatthe proportional area of water was much greater.If then we judge from the analogy of the southern hemisphere, thefirst and simple inference from these facts, is, that the temperature of Europewas formerly more equable, though perhaps with a lower mean, than itnow is. It may be asked, as a test of this inference, did the snow-lineformerly descend lower than it now does ? Was the soil formerly frozena little beneath the surface in a low latitude ? The congealed carcassesof the great Pachydermata of Siberia answer the second question ; and inmy journal, I have indirectly considered the first one as answered, by thefact of the many erratic boulders of Europe having travelled from mountains,situated in regions where great bodies of ice do not at present descendto the level of the sea. For on the theory that these boulders were transportedby icebergs from glaciers, which formerly descended into the sea inlatitudes where perpetual snow is not now found, or if so, only at greatheights, the problem receives so simple a solution, that I did not hesitate,having the other data, to assume, that the snow-line in Europe formerlydid descend much lower than it does at present. But, had I studied mysubject more attentively, I might have taken a higher ground : in a note,indeed (p. 294), I have stated that according to Professor Esmark, it iscertain, that the glaciers of Norway formerly descended to a lower level ;and I now found that some time since, Messrs. Tenets and Charpentier,and more lately M. Agassiz, have incontestably shown, from the presenceof glacier-dikes or moraines, and from the polished and scratched surfaceof the rocks, that in the Alps enormous bodies of ice formerly descendedto the borders even of the lake of Geneva, and therefore much lower thanthe line of present lowest descent.* With these several facts it mighthave been boldly asserted, that the climate of Europe formerly was likeNo doubt if much more snow fell formerly than at present, theglaciers would formerly have descended somewhat lower; but as Europenow has a moderately humid climate, it is improbable in the highestdegree (if indeed possible) that a difference of that kind could havecaused the former extremely low descent of the ancient glaciers of theAlps : therefore we are compelled to attribute the difference to a changeof temperature of some kind.ADDENDA. 617that of the southern hemisphere as it now is ; and consequently, as weknow, that the sea within recent tertiary periods stood at a higher levelover a large portion of our continent, it might have been affirmed, hadthere been no record of the existence of erratic blocks on this side of theglobe, that it would bean anomaly, difficult of explanation, should therenot be found around the eminences of central and northern Europe greatunrolled fragments, scattered at long distances from their parent sources,and often separated from them by profound valleys.M. Agassiz has lately address to the Helvetic Society, July 1837,translated in Davison's New PhilosojjhicnlJournal,vo\. xxiii., p. 364, and inseveral communications in the French periodical Institut) written on thesubject of the glaciers and boulders of the Alps. He clearly proves, asIt appears to me, that the presence of the boulders on the Jura cannot beexplained by any debacle, or by the power of ancient glaciers drivingbefore them moraines, or by the subsequent elevation of the surface onwhich the boulders now lie. M. Agassiz also denies that they weretransported by floating ice, but he does not fully state his objections to thistheory ; nor does he oppose it, by the argument of the apparent anomaly ofa low descent of glaciers, with the generally-received opinion of the moretropical character of the productions of the antecedent periods, — which wasphilosophical, until the effects of a temperate and equable climate wereconsidered.* On the contrary, he assumes that, during the gradual coolingof the earth, there have been periods of excessive refrigeration. It isneedless to state that such an hypothesis is not supported by a singlefact — without, indeed, the assumed sudden renewal of life on the surface ofthe world at successive periods be considered such. During this imaginedperiod of excessive refrigeration, the Alps and the greater part of Europe,and even of Asia, are supposed to have been covered by one immensesheet of ice, and during the assumed sudden elevation of the Alps, fragmentsof rocks are supposed to have been shot over the frozen surface,and, when the ice melted, to have dropped on the surface where they nowlie. M. Agassiz considers that this view explains the position of theboulders on pinnacles, and their absence in the valleys. I confess Ishould have thought, after the flexure and elevation of the ice, thesewould have been the least probable situations : but neither this, or someM. Charpentier (in his account of M. Tenets's investigations on theGlaciers of the Palais — Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal, vol. xxi., p.213) was fully aware of this difficulty. His explanation rests on a supposedenormous oscillation of level in the Alps,— an assumption which isunsupported by other facts, and is not applicable to the general case ofEurope.618 ADDENDA.other facts (p. 381), are quite intelligible to me from the briefness, withwhich they are alluded to. M. Agassiz says (p. 375), " The erraticblocks of the Jura every where repose on polished surfaces, all those atleast which have not been carried beyond the crest of our mountains, andwhich have not fallen to the bottom of our longitudinal valleys, as may beseen throughout the valleys of the Creux du Vent. But they do notrepose immediately upon these polished surfaces. Wherever the roundedpebbles which accompany the great blocks have not been removed bysubsequent influences, it is remarked that small blocks, in other wordspebbles of different sizes, form a bed of some inches, and sometimes evenof many feet, upon which the great angular blocks repose. These pebblesare also much rounded, even polished, and are heaped up in such a waythat the larger are above the smaller, and that the last often pass belowinto a fine sand, lying immediately over the polished surfaces. Thisorder of superposition, which is constant, is opposed to all idea of atransport by currents ; for in this latter case the order of the superpositionof the pebbles would have been precisely reversed." Further on(p. 379) he remarks that the action of the glaciers is immense ; " forthese masses, continually moving upon each other, and on the surface,bruise and grind down every thing moveable, and polish the solid surfaceson which they repose ; at the same time that they push before them allthat they encounter, with a force which is irresistible. It is to thesemovements (of the great stratum of ice) we must attribute the strangesuperposition of the rolled pebbles, and of the sand, which immediatelyreposes upon the polished surfaces ; and it is unquestionably to thegrating of this sand upon these surfaces that the fine lines which we find(previously compared to the scratches made by a diamond on glass) areowing, and which would never have existed, if the sand had been actedupon by a current of water." Now it may be demanded, by what possiblemeans can such violent action arrange the large pebbles above thesmaller ones, and these again above the sand? The fact appears to meutterly inexplicable on this view. Again it is said, that the surface ofthe rock is marked by furrows and gibbosities, as well as by scratches, andthat these " never follow the direction of the slope of the mountain, butare oblique and longitudinal (that is, in the line of the mountain, andtherefore nearly horizontal), a direction which excludes every idea of astream of water being the cause of these erosions." What explanationwill it be believed is offered for this fact? — It is, that the fine lines andfurrows " must have resulted from the much greater facility which the icehad in dilating itself in the direction of the great Swiss valley, than transversely,confined as it were between the Jura and the Alps." !ADDENDA. 619I will now endeavour to show how far these very curious facts, whichwe owe to M. Agassiz's observation, can be explained by the theory offloating ice : and the theory, I may add, if applicable to this case, solvesthat which presents far greater difficulties, than any other of the kindin Europe. I should first state that I make two assumptions, and if thesebe rejected, the theory is not applicable to the case of the erratic blocksof the Alps : — first, that an arm of the sea extended between the Jura andthe Alps, during that period in which, as I have before shown, it improbable,that the proportional area of water in Europe was greater, and certain,that the productions of the land and water had a more tropical character,at the same time that the snow-line descended lower. The age of theMolasse, which occupies this area, between the Jura and Alps, has notbeen accurately determined ; but it is supposed to be miocene, and issaid to contain leaves of the Chambers, a genus of palms, at presentfound further from the equator than any other kind. It is not, however,evident that the Molasse was deposited by the sea during the latestperiod, when it occupied a confined limit between the Alps and Jura ;but even if this should be found to be the case, it would be rash in anyonepositively to conclude that glaciers could not have descended to theshores of a sea, on which the Chamasrops flourished, after that we knowthey descend in the southern hemisphere so near the limits of severaltropical forms.My second assumption is, that the elevation of this much of Switzerland,whenever it took place, was slow and gradual : this is supported bythe strongest analogies of South America, Scandinavia, and other parts ofthe world ; whilst on the other hand, the assumption that it had been sudden,would be unsupported by a single ascertained fact in nature. Now, asthe numerous masses of ice, which fall from the glaciers at the head of thesounds on the South American coast, are slowly drifted outwards (owingto the fresh water flowing in from the foot of the glaciers), and in the moreopen channels are left to be acted on by the winds and currents; so mustsit have been with the icebergs from the glaciers of the Alps, situated inthe same latitude, and under similar conditions. These icebergs would inmostcases be driven on some part of the surrounding shore ; but fromfloating deep they would ground a little way from the beach, and thenbeing packed together, and driven to and fro, as the winds changed, and asthe tides rose and fell, would they not, like a glacier on the land, thoughin a lesser degree, "bruise and grind down every thing and polish the solidsurface, on which they reposed?" In the rapids of the North Americanrivers, over which large bodies of ice are driven, carrying with them pebblesand fragments of rocks, I am informed by Dr. Richardson, that theprimitive rocks are scooped and hollowed, and have their surfaces polishedand glossy. Dr. Richardson, however, is not prepared to say, whether this620 ADDENDA.is caused by the passage of the ice or of the pebbles.* Although the icebergsmight be drifted from side to side of the sound, if they were movedafter having grounded, it would be along the shore by the set of the currentsor wind, and perhaps slightly up and down by the tidal changes.Would not the necessary effect of this be, that the scratches formed bythe sand grating between the rocks and the bottom of the icebergs shouldbe, with some irregularities, longitudinal, or (from the effect of the tidalmovement) oblique? And as the mountains slowly emerged during ages,every part would be thus acted on ; and consequently the whole surfacewould be marked by longitudinal scratches.The icebergs on the South American coast sometimes transport angularfragments of rock, to the distance of many miles from the glacier whencethey were detached ; and as the winds and currents generally have sufficientsteadiness to drive any floating object soon on shore, (as is knownto be the case with a capsized boat, a barrel, or floating carcass, &c.), sothe blocks of rock would be generally landed on the shores of the chantmust be remembered, that I am here considering the effect of icebergs,in inland and protected sounds. Dr. Richardson tells me, that thegreat icebergs in the Arctic sea are packed together, and are driven withsuch force against the shore, that they push up before them, to the heightof several feet, every pebble and boulder which lies on the bottom ; andconsequently the submarine ledges of rock are kept absolutely bare. If afragment were to be wedged beneath one of these mountain-masses of ice,when forced upward with such overwhelming power, it is impossible todoubt that the underlying surface of solid rock would be deeply scored.As it is known that the shingle on most beaches has a tendency to travelin one direction, so must the icebergs ; and hence we may conjecture,that the grooves, would generally be slightly oblique to the line of coast,and parallel to each other.-j- We might expect that they would sometimes be launched into thedeep, whilst on their passage. M. Charpentier (Edinburgh New Phil.Journal, vol. xxi., p. 217) observes, speaking of another theory, "Thisview is equally insufficient to account for the extraordinary position ofimmense single blocks, which we sometimes find planted vertically in thesoil, in the valleys, as on the sides of a mountain, and split up throughouttheir whole extent from top to bottom, — a phenomenon which wouldforce us to believe that these blocks, had fallen perpendicularly from acertain height on the very spots where we now see them, and had beenrent asunder by the fall, into the several fragments lying near one another."M. Charpentier considers this owing to the fragments'having fallenthrough fissures in the enormous glaciers, which, as he believes, extendedfrom the Alps, across the lake of Geneva, and up the Jura. The explanationabove suggested is, at least, as simple as this.ADDENDA. 621news between the Alpine ranges, and not dropped in the interveningspaces. If any pointed rock came so near the surface that a floatingmass of ice, thus charged, grounded on it, the block would, when theice melted, be there left. But it may be asked, would the blocks usuallybe deposited on the bare surface of the rocky bottom off the shore, or onan intervening layer of gravel or sediment ? From what I have observedwhen passing in boats through the channels of Tierra del Fuego, and fromfrequent examinations of the arming of the lead used in sounding, I feelnearly sure that absolutely bare submarine rock is not very common.Moreover, where matter is depositing near a shore, the finer the particlesare, the further they are drifted : in approaching a coast I have actuallytraced every step in the series, from the finest sand to large pebbles. Butwas the land in any case is slowly elevated, the same forces which carriedthe large pebbles to a certain distance from the beach, and the smallerones to a still further distance, will, after each little elevation, carry themsomewhat further : — a layer of little pebbles thus covering the sand, anda layer of large pebbles the smaller ones. Hence, when the part near theshore is converted into dry land, a section of the bed which was originallythe bottom of the sea will necessarily show solid rock covered bysand, this by fine pebbles, and these again by others, gradually increasingin size. Such then, I conclude, must have been the nature of the sub-literaldeposits of the Alps, during their assumed slow elevation. Finally,as icebergs of large size would seldom be driven up on the beach of a sheetof water, if, like the channel between the Jura and the Alps, it were protectedfrom the open sea, any fragments of rock transported by them wouldhave been dropped some way outside, and therefore when upraised withthe whole country, they would be found in most cases reposing on beds(where the loose matter had not been subsequently removed), characterizedby the order of superposition just described.Such is the explanation I would suggest of the very curious factsobserved by M. Agassiz. I make no assumptions which are not supportedby strong analogies and the foundation of the theory — namely, achange of climate of a peculiar kind — can be shown by reasoning, independentof the existence of erratic blocks, to be probable in a highdegree : whether this is the case with the theory of M. Agassiz, I leavethe reader to decide.Having said thus much on the scratched rocks of the Alps, I amtempted to make a few remarks on those of Scotland, described by SirJames Hall* in his celebrated paper edinburgh Phil Transact., vol. vii.)Sir James Hall believes that erratic boulders were transported bydebauches, when embedded in ice. lie seems to have been led to thisopinion, by a clear perception of the difficulty of supposing the existenceCi22 ADDENDA.on the Revolutions of the Earth's Surface : — a case which has alwaysappeared to me to be the strongest ever adduced in favour of the theoryof an overwhelming debacle having rushed, at least in that country, overhill and valley. The furrows and scratches in the same district areparallel to each other, and hence run in the same direction : — thus, nearEdinburgh, they extend in a line a little north of west and south of east,that is parallel to the valley of the estuary ; but both to the eastward andwestward they deviate from this line by more than half a right angle ; andon the south-west part of Scotland they have no uniform direction.In the north of Scotland, however, near Bora, Mr. Hutchison geology.Transact, ^d Series, vol. ii., p. 357) found the hills marked in parallellines, directed north-west and south-east. The furrows and scratchesnear Edinburgh seem generally to traverse the less inclined surfaces, butSir James, speaking of one part, says " the perpendicular face as well asthe rest is covered with lines, which are horizontal, or nearly so." Inthese respects the case appears very similar to that of the Alps : therocks, however, are not polished ;* but this may be owing to their nature,sandstone and trap, and not to any difference in the cause ; for Dr.Richardson tells me that in the same rivers in North America, in whichthe granitic rocks are much polished, those of laminated limestone arenot at all so. Near Edinburgh, where the lines extend west and east,the western face of the hills (of which the highest mentioned is fourhundred and seventy feet above the sea) is chiefly marked, whilst on theopposite or protected side, a long tail of (so called) diluvium extends,which consists of blue clay, with large erratic boulders embedded in it.These boulders, as I am informed by Mr. James Hall, and by Mr. Smithof Jordanliill, are themselves marked with parallel lines, having onedirection, which shows that they were held fast whilst drifted across thecountry, and not rolled over and over, like a pebble in a stream. It isof glaciers in the Alps and in other regions of central Europe, exceptingat great altitudes ; and from such situations a debacle was absolutelyrequisite to transport fragments on ice. Sir James rejects the belief ofM, Brede (given on the authority of De Luc), that the boulders of theBaltic may have been brought into their present place by ice, acting,during a steady and slow change in the level of the ocean. M. Brede,therefore, appears to have been the originator of the theory advocated inthis volume ; and no country was more likely than Sweden to have givenbirth to such a theory.It is, however, said in Professor Buckland's Reliquiae DiiuviaiKe,p. 202, that Colonel Imrie found the surface of some trap-rocks in thesouthern parts of Stirlingshire, having " a considerable degree of polish;and this polish is almost always seen marked by long linear scratches."ADDENDA. 623admitted by all that the grooves on the solid rock were formed by thepassage of these boulders over it. Although the minor inequalities ofthe surface of the land appear to have had no influence whatever on theaction which produced the scratches, yet the larger features, as thegeneral bearing of the main valleys, appear to have determined theirdirection. Sir James distinctly states that the scooping and furrows haveprecisely that form which the long action of torrents tends to produce ona solid rock ; but he adds, and I believe most truly, that the furrowedsurface produced by such means is smooth, and not deeply scored andscratched. It is indeed utterly inconceivable that large stones should becarried along as if " independently of their gravities" by any ordinary means,with such velocity, as to mark with horizontal lines the perpendicularface of a rock. From these facts, — from the presence of great erraticblocks, from the steepness of one face of the grooved hills, and thetail of sediment stretching out from the other, Sir James Hall, havingin his mind the recorded cases of the great waves consequent on earthquakes,inferred that a vast deluge had burst over the country from thewestward.M. Brongniart, and lately M. Sefstrcirn {U Institut, February 22d, 1837),have described phenomena in Sweden almost identical with those of Scotland.The rocks are there grooved and scratched,* even to the height of1500 feet, in north and south lines, parallel to the valley of the Baltic andof the Gulf of Bothnia ; but they are considerably deflected by thelarger inequalities of surface. The north side of the hills are most affected,whilst from the southern side, long ridges, called oasars, stretch out ; theyare composed of sand and waterworn materials, and appear to be similar,but on a much larger scale, to the lads of diluvium in Scotland. InSweden, however, the erratic blocks always lie on the surface of theseridges, and are not embedded within them : but M. Sefstrom says, thatat the time when the grooves were formed, enormous masses of rock weretorn from the mountains. In the United States, the phenomenon of thegrooved rocks appears to be developed in an extraordinary manner. Prom.Lyell, moreover, describes (PMlosoph. Transact., 1835, p. 18),the rocks of gneiss on the beach near Foreground in Sweden, as being sosmooth and polished, that it is difficult to walk on them." Further on(p. 21), he describes the large bodies of ice, which are annually packedon this coast, so as to be eighteen feet thick ; here then we have thesame phenomena as in the Alps ; and great icebergs in movement, insteadof solid glaciers. More lately M. Berzelius has sent specimens of theserocks, " polished as if by emery in a constant rectilinear direction" (Edinb.New Phil. Journal, vol. 1., p. 313), to Paris, accompanied by a letter toM. Else de Beaumont.624 ADDENDA.lessor Hitchcock (Report on the Geology. of Massachusetts, p. 167) describesa tract about two hundred miles in width, over which nearly allthe bare rock on the hills, even to the height of three thousand feet, isscored by parallel lines. In some parts boulders, weighing from fifty toone hundred tons, are yet lying on the surfaces, which bear the marks oftheir passage. The furrows are generally directed a little west of north,but in the western part of Massachusetts, and in the eastern of New York,they extend in a north-west and south-east line, and in one part even toW. 20° N. M. Sefstrom and Professor Hitchcock explain these appearancesin their respective countries by the same agency, as Sir James Halldoes in Scotland.The theory of a great debacle is in these cases based on the unitedpresence of erratic boulders, ridges of waterworn materials, forming tailsto scarped hills, and parallel furrows and scratches on the surface of therocks. 1st. With respect to the boulders, it would be superfluous torepeat the arguments in favour of the idea of their transportation by ice :and in the case of Sweden, it would be pre-eminently superfluous, as weknow (see Lyell on the Rising of the Land in Sweden, Phil. Transact., 1835)that blocks are there transported yearly by this means. 2d. Every onewho has examined a great estuary, or a channel where the tides runstrongly, is aware that linear banks are formed behind any obstacle.Therefore these tails of diluvium might have been formed, as far as regardstheir external form, by ordinary means ; and with respect to their internalstructure, which appears extremely irregular, and without any stratification,it must be difficult for any one to speak with certainty, until the jointeffects of ice transporting coarse fragments and gentle currents of water,fine mud, are better known. Mr, Lyell, indeed phil. Transacted 1835,p. 15) has advanced strong reasons, showing from the structure and compositionof the oasars that they could not have been formed by any suddendebacle. Whilst such linear banks were depositing on one side of thehills, the other, or exposed front, would almost necessarily become scarped.3d. We have the admission of Sir James Hall, that the scooping andgrooves resemble those produced by the slow action of running water :therefore the scratches appear to be the only part of the phenomenonwhich remains unexplained.In the Alps, we are told, that scratches are formed on rocks by glaciersgrinding over them. According to the theory of floating ice, we haveevidence in the erratic blocks near Edinburgh, that ice was formerly inactionthere ; and, from the analogies given in this volume, it might wellhave been so, since the scene of supposed action lies two degrees nearerthe Pole than Georgia, in the southern ocean, " almost wholly coveredwith everlasting snow." VVhat then would be the effect of the tides andgales of wind, driving packed icebergs with irresistible force, through chang625news, and over rocky shoals ; — each part of the surface being exposed forcenturies, as the country was elevated, to this action ? Would not thefragments of rock embedded in the ice grate in a direct path over thesurface, regardless of ininor inequalities? and would not the fragmentsthemselves be grooved and scored in one direction? Can we for onemoment believe it possible that boulders, either in water or in thethickest mud, could be driven over a rugged surface, or along a perpendicularface of solid rock, with such enormous velocity as with theirpoints to groove and scratch it, and nevertheless not to be rolled over andover,like a stone descending a mountain, but to be marked with parallellines of abrasion, equally with the fixed, underlying mass ? It appears tomethat we assuredly can make no such admission. Travellers in theArctic regions tell us that the drift-ice, with its irresistible power, canforce up the gravel and sand into mounds (see Geograph. Journal, vol.viii., p. 221), and drive before it great boulders, and even ships, andmasses of ice, high and dry on the beach. What then would be the effectof a few pebbles, or a single fragment, between such masses of ice and asteep coast wall of rock ? Would not scratches " horizontal, or nearly so"be formed, " indicating (to use Sir James Hall's words) that grinders hadbeen pressed against the rock;" as if" independently of their gravity" ?In this explanation only vers causes are introduced, and reasonscan be assigned, for the belief that these causes have been in actionin these districts. On the theory of debauches, it still remains to beproved that rocks can be thus scooped and furrowed, or hills scarped ;although I am far from affirming they cannot, — and scratched, I presume,they certainly would be. With respect to Sweden, where the land isnow rising, and where ice even still is a transporting agent, it is undoubtedlythe part of the geologist, to endeavour by long and laborious researchto account for the phenomena by these real agencies. For to introduce,before it is absolutely forced on us, the hypothesis of a deluge of mudarid stones, fifteen hundred feet deep in Sweden, or three thousand inNorth America, which rushing over the country, rounded the northernfronts of the hills, and rolling by their eastern and western flanks, left themmarked with oblique furrows, is to violate, as it appears to me, every ruleof inductive philosophy.Page 297.With reference to the embodiment of the Siberian animals with theirflesh, I have mentioned in a note, the case of ice described as rising fromthe bottom of the sea, off the coast of Greenland. Messrs. Ease andSimpson, during their late memorable journey along the shores of theArctic ocean, speaking of one part {Geograph, Journal., vol. viii., p. 218)VOL. III. 2 Q**626 ADDENDA.say, " The ice lay much closer here ; and numerous masses adhered to thebottom, under the water, which obliged us to search a passage out fromthe shore." Further on (p. 220) they say, " But nowhere had the thawpenetrated more than two inches beneath the surface (of the land), whileunder wat' • along the shore, the bottom was still impenetrably frozen."This was on the second of August. It should, however, be observed,that the sea along this part of the American coast is extremely shallow.Page 321.I have given my reasons for believing that the temperature of themineral springs of Cauquenes, was permanently changed by the earthquakeof 1822. This inference is altogether false, for I find thatSchmidtmeyer, in his Travels in Chile during the years 1820 and 1821,says (p. 31 1) that the temperature of the different springs was 83°, 103°,106°,. 112°, 117° and 118° of Fahrenheit. Now Mr. Caldcleugh says,after the earthquake of February, 1835, the temperature fell from 118° to92°. Previously, therefore, to this shock, it had regained the temperaturewhich it had in 1820,Page 377.When I offered my views on the cause of the great waves, which followearthquakes on certain coasts, I was not aware of the paper on this subjectby Sir James Hall in the Edinburgh Royal Transactions, vol. vii., p. 154.I cannot, however, perceive the necessity of a sudden elevation of the bottom,to produce the observed effects, as supposed by that distinguishedphilosopher. Having read the abstract of a Notice on the Resistance ofWater, by Mr. Russell, I perceive the subject is far more intricate, thanI was at the time aware.Page 381.I have said that during the few months subsequently to the great shockof February, 1835, at Concepcion, upwards of three hundred tremors werefelt, but I should have said, within twelve days. (See Geograph. Journal,vol. vi., p. 322. Sketch of Surveying Voyage of the Adventure and Beagle,by Captain FitzRoy), From some additional informal-which I havemet with since finishing this chapter, I find the train ot volcanic phenomena,which followed this earthquake, affected a larger area than thatmentioned (seven hundred by four hundred miles), and affected it in amanner which gives great additional weight to the argument that SouthAmerica is in that part a mere crust resting over a sheet of fluid rock ;ADDENDA. 627and likewise to the generalization that the action of volcanoes, and thepermanent elevation of the land (and consequently, as I believe, the elevationof mountain chains) are parts of the same phenomenon, and due tothe same cause.Page 446.When I put together the few and exceedingly imperfect remarks on thesubject of Miasmata, I did not know of Dr. Ferguson's remarkable dissertation— the result of his investigations in Holland, Spain, Portugal, andthe West Indies — on the Nature and History of Marsh Poison (EdinburghRoyal Transact., vol. ix., p. 273). He there clearly proves the fact,which had struck me with so much surprise, namely, that the driest districts,which, according to common notions, would be considered as themost healthy, are often singularly the contrary. In his concluding remarks.Dr. Ferguson says (p. 290), " One only condition, then,-33Pms tobe indispensable to the production of the marsh poison, on all surfacescapable of absorption, and that is the paucity of water, where it has previouslyor recently abounded. To this there is no exception in climatesof high temperature ; and from thence we may justly infer, that the poisonis produced at a highly advanced stage of the drying process And,from facts previously stated, it would appear that even in barren hilly countries,the banks of mountain torrents, which had been overflowed, sometimesbecame extremely insalubrious. In another place, Dr. Fergusonsays, " It is from these (the dried and half-dried margins of lakes andmarshes) that the poison uniformly emanates, and never from the bodyof the lake or pool ; and I think it may be fairly presumed, that water, aslong as it can preserve the figure of its particles above the surface, is innoxious,and that it must first be absorbed into the soil, and disappearfrom the eye, before it can produce any mischievous effects. Whoeverin malarious countries waits for the evidence of putrefaction will, in allthe most dangerous places, wai t too long, as every one can testify who has seenpestilence teem forth, to the paralyzation of armies, — from the bare barrensands of the Alentejo in Portugal, the arid burnt plains of Estremadurain Spain, and the recently flooded table-lands of Barbadoes." I cannotforbear quoting here a remarkable fact, mentioned by Humboldt, thoughinterpreted in a different manner by that illustrious traveller. Speakingof the intermit*' oii fevers which are so common near the great cataracts, orraudales, of the" Orinoco, he says (pers. Nar., vol. v., p. 17) the causesare violent heats, joined with the excessive humidity of the air, bad nutriment,and, if we may believe the natives (as well as the missionaries),the pestilent exhalations that arise from the bare rocks of the raudales."Further on (p. 83), he says, " many examples are adduced of persons, who628 ADDENDA.having passed the night on these black and naked rocks, have awakenedin the morning with a strong paroxysm of fever." Humboldt thinks thatthese cases may be explained by the effect produced on the body by thehigh temperature, which the black rocks, coated with a layer of the oxidesof manganese and iron, retain during the night. But it appears to methat the relation is too remarkable to be thus explained, between thisfact and those mentioned by Dr. Ferguson, in which the desiccation ofnearly bare rock in Spain, and of a very thin bed of earth overlying drycoral-rock in the West Indies, has given rise to the most pestiferousexhalations.Page 461.The sixth bird, mentioned as an inhabitant of the Galapagos, Mr.Gould now finds is not like the rest, peculiar to these islands, but is aknown North American species of Ammodramus.Page 405.I have given my reason for believing that the Testudo, inappropriatelycalled Indicus, is an aboriginal species of the Galapagos. I now find kerr'sVoyages, vol. X., p. 373) that as far back as 1708, Woods, Rogers, andCourtney, in their voyage round the world, speaking of the tortoises ofthese islands, say that it is the opinion of the Spaniards that there is noother in these seas, except at the Galapagos : it is, however, then added,that they are common in Brazil, — a mistake which may be attributed totwo different species not having been distinguished. It has been saidthat the bones of Testudo Indicus were found in numbers in the Isleof France, with some fragments of those of the Dodo ; but M. Bibron —one of the best authorities in Europe on reptiles — informs me that hehas reason to believe that a second species has been confounded underthis name.In the same page I remark that there is every reason for believing thatseveral of the islands possess their own peculiar varieties or species oftortoise, but that my specimens were too small to decide this question.M. Bibron now informs me, that he has seen full-grown animals, broughtfrom this Archipelago, which he considers undoubtedly to be distinctspecies. At p. 467, I have observed that the specimens of the AmUy-rhyncus cristatus — that extraordinary marine herbivorous lizard — werelarger from Albemarle, than from any other island. In this case, also,M. Bibron tells me, he has seen what he considers two species of theaquatic Amblyrhyncus, besides the terrestrial species. Doubtless theseveral islands have their own representatives of the Amblyrhyncus, likeADDENDA. 629they have of some of the birds, and of the tortoises. With respect to theplants from this Archipelago, Professor Henslow writes to me, thatalthough he has not yet examined them attentively, he finds that " thereare several instances of distinct species of the same genus, sent from oneisland only : that is, whilst the genus is common to two or three islands,the species are often different in the different islands. In some cases thespecies seem to run very close to each other, but are, I believe, distinct."I may observe that, from my ignorance of botany, I collected moreblindly in this department of natural history than in any other ; so thatcertainly it was not intentionally that I brought the different species fromdifferent islands. If, indeed, I at all noticed their resemblance, I probablycollected the second and third species as duplicate specimens of the first.It is useless to repeat here my regrets at not having procured a perfect seriesin every order of nature from the several islands : my excuse must be, theentire novelty of the fact, that islands in sight of each other should becharacterized by peculiar faunas : I ought, perhaps, rather to think itfortunate, that sufficient materials were obtained to establish so remarkablea circumstance in the geographical distribution of organic beings,although they are insufficient to determine to what extent the fact holdsgood.Page 477.To the two cases of land-birds being extremely tame in islands onlylately inhabited by man, I might have added Tristan da Acunha.Captain D. Carmichael (Linn. Transact., vol. xii., p. 496), speaking ofthe thrush and bunting — the only true land-birds— says, " they fly aboutthe cantonment, and are so tame as to suffer themselves to be caughtwith a hand-net."Page 532.One of the species of Millepora, which is mentioned as having theproperty of stinging, is the M. complaint ; and the other, I believe, isM. alcicornis. In the Voyage of the Astrolabe (vol. iv., p. 19), anActinia is said to have this property, and even to infect the water, whichit squirts from its mouth. A flexible coralline, allied to Sertularia, wasobserved (p. 337) at New Ireland to haVe the same stinging power.VOL. III. Q***