VOLUME II.ProceedingsTHE SECOND EXPEDITION,1831- 1836,UNDER THE COMMAND OFCAPTAIN ROBERT Fits-ROY, Ren./IF y iE 'S Q A S^ .(tapoo tekeeitica)T'onLrr-LO-ti COTSPtQiKftheatfy Henry ColiTurr Great. SdarTbarou^ Street. 16b8.NAE RAT I VESURVEYING VOYAGESOF HIS MAJESTY'S SHIPSADVENTURE AND BEAGLE,BETWEENTHE YEARS 1826 AND 1836,DESCRIBING THEIREXAMINATION OF THE SOUTHERN SHORESOPSOUTH AMERICA,ANDTHE BEAGLE'S CIRCUMNAVIGATION OF THE GLOBE.IN THREE VolumepalLONDON :HENRY Colour, GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.1839.LONDON:Printed by J. L. Cox and Sons. 75, Great Queen Street,Lincoln's-inn Fields.CONTENTS.VOLUME II.CHAPTER I.Explanation — Natives of Tierra del Fuego, or Fuegians — Passagesacross theEqimtor (Atlantic) — Letters — Small-poxHospital — Boat — Memory — Fuegians in London — AtWalthamstow — At St. James's — Beagle re-commissioned— Correspondence with Mr. Wilson — Fuegians re-embarkCHAPTER n.Hydrographer's Opinion — Continuation of Survey — Chainof Meridian Distances — Efficient Arrangements — Repairand raise Deck — Outfit — Boats — Lightning-Conductorsrudder — Stove — Windlass — Chronometers — Mr. Darwin— Persons on board — Changes — List of those whoreturned — Supplies — Admiralty Instructions — Memorandum— Hydrographer's Memorandum 17CHAPTER HLReady for sea — Detained — Sail from England — swell provided— Bay of Biscay — Compasses — Local attraction —Eight Stones — Madeira — Deception — Squall — TenerifFeSanta Cruz — Quarantine — Squalls — Cape Verde IslandsPort Prayaa — Produce — Orchilla — Bad season — St. PaulRocks — Cross Equator — Fernando de Noronha — Bahia —Slavery — Abrolhos — Cape Frio 42Vil Contents.CHAPTER IV.Loss of the Thetis — Causes of her-wreck — Approach to Riode Janeiro — Owen Glendower — Disturbance in RioHarbour — Observations — Chronometers — Return to Bahia— Deaths — Macacu — Malaria — Return to Rio deJaneiro — Meridian Distances — Regatta — Fuegians —Lightning — Leave Rio — Equipment — Santa Martha —Weather — Santa Catharina — Santos — River Plata — Pam-heroes— Gales off Buenos Ayres — Monte Video — PointPiedras — Cape San Antonio — River Plata — Currents —Tides — Barometer — Absence of Trees — Cattle 67CHAPTER V.Eastern Pampa Coast — Point Medanos — Mar-chiquito —Ranges of His — Direction of Inlets, Shoals, and RiversCape Corrientes — Tosca Coast — Blancoo Bay — MountHermoso — Port Belgrano — Mr. Harris — Ventana Mountain— View — Argentine — Commandant — Major — Situation— Toriano — Indians — Fossils — Animals — Fish — Climate— Pumice — Ashes — Conway — deliberations — ConsequentDecision — Responsibility incurred — Paz — Liebre —Gale — Hunger — Fossils at Hermoso — Fossils at PointAlta — Express sent to Buenos Ayres — Suspicions andabsurd alarm — Rodriguez 97CHAPTER VI.Beagle sails with Paz and Liebre — Part company — Beaglevisits Buenos Ayres — Nautical remarks on the Plata — Sailfrom Monte Video for San Bias — Lieut. Wickham and for Tierra del Fuego— Whitewater — Icebergs —Rocks — Cape San Sebastian — Opensmen — Cape San Diego — Good Success Bay — Natives —Guanacoes — Cape Horn — St. Martin Cove — Gales —Heavy Seas — Nassau Bay — Goreee Road — Prepare to landMatthews and the Fuesrians 114DIRECTIONS TO THE BINDERFOR PLACING THE PLATES.VOLUME II.Chart of Tierra del Fuego •• •• •• Loose.Chart of Chil6e •• •• •• Loose.Fuegian (Yapoo Tekeenica) Frontispiece.Panoramic View of Madeira to face page 46Crossing the Line •- •- .• 57San Salvador, Bahia •• fiPatagonians at Gregory Bay . . . . . . . . . . 136Fuegians — Yacana, Pecheray, &c. •• 141Fuegians going to trade in Apollos with the Patagonians 171Woollyaa 208Berkeley Sound — Falkland Islands 248Bivouac at the Head of Port Desire Inlet . . . . . . 316Button Island, near Woollyaa •• 323Fuegians — York Minster, &c. . - . . • . . . • . 324Cove in Beagle Channel, &c. .- 326Beagle laid ashore in Santa Cruz . . . . • . . . • . 336Santa Cruz — Plan of Port and River . . . . . . . . 339Basalt Glen — River Santa Cruz . . . . . . . . • . 348Santa Cruz River — distant view of Andes . . • . • . 351Mystery Plain, near the Santa Cruz 352Mount Sarmiento, from Warp Bay . . . . . . . • 359Valdivia . . •• 398Remains of the Cathedral at Concepcion 405Albemarle Island, &c. . . . . . - . . . . ■ . 498Otaheite, or Tahiti . . . . . . . . . . . . 509Otaheite, Eimeo, Matavai, Chapel . . . . . , . . 517New Zealanders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 568Note. — The loose Plates are to be folded into pockets in the covers ofthe volumes.CONTENTS, XIsageCHAPTER XVI.Soundings — Anchor in Santa Cruz — Lay Beagle ashore forrepair — Prepare to ascend river — Set out — View of surroundingcountry — Rapid stream — Cold — Ostriches —Guanacoes — Indians — Fish — Cliffs — Firewood — LavaCliffs — Difficulties — Chalia — See Andes — FarthestWest — View rovuid — Return — Danger — Guanaco huntersPuma — Cat — tides — Sail from Santa Cruz 336CHAPTER XVII.Beagle and Adventure sail from Port Famine through Magdalenand Cockburn Channel — Enter Pacific — Death ofMr. Rowlett — Chil6e — Chil6e — Government — Adventuresold — Consequent changes — Plans — Mr. Low — HonosLieut. Sulivan's party — Moraledada — LadrUleros — DeVea — Sharp — San Andres — ^VaUenar — Mr. Stokes — SanEstevan — Distressed sailors — Anna Pink Bay — Port LowPotatoes — Indian names — Huff o — Volcano — ChosesAborigines — Militia — Freebooters — Climate — DocksTides — Witchcraft — Alerse — Calbucanos — CesareSearch for men — Meteors 359CHAPTER XVIII.Leave Chloe — valdivia — Earthquake — Aborigines — Traditions— Words — Convicts — Tolten — Boroa — Imperial —Mocha — Shocks of Earthquake — Anchor off TalcahuanoRuins — Account of a great Earthquake, which destroyedthe cityof Concepcion; and was felt from Chloe toCopi-apo ; from Juan Demanded to Mendoza 396CHAPTER XIX.Mocha — Movement of Land — Penco — UUoa — Shells — CoalMaule — Topocalma — Aconcagua — Valparaiso — HortonPapudo — Pichidanque — Conchali — Herradura — CollCOiVTENTS,PAGEquinto — wreck — Challenger — Blonde — Ride — Estate —Colcura — ViUagran — Arauco — Former caciques — Coloco-lo — Caupolican — Scenery — Quiapo — Night traveling —Leiibu — Tucapel — Valdivia — Lautaro — Challenger 419CHAPTER XX.Challenger sails — Sounds off Mocha — Wrecked on the mainland— Crew saved — Stores landed — Camp formed — Greatexertions, and excellent conduct — Mr. Consul Rouse —Leiibu — Plague of mice — Curious rats — Return to BlondeUlpu — Araucanian dress — Arauco — 'Boroanos ' — Tubalbar rivers — Apples — Ferry — Blonde sails — Seek for theLeiibu — Schooner Carmen — Errors and delay — EmbarkChallenger's crew — Rescue the Carmen — Talcahuano —New Concepcion — Valparaiso — Coquimbo — Challenger'ssail in Conway — Reflections 451CHAPTER XXLAndes — Aconcagua — Villarica — I slay — Powder — Callao —Rejoin Beagle — Constitucion — Plans — Wilson — Carrack' Galapagos ' — Iguanas — Lava Rocks — Land-tortoises —Craters — Turtle — Shells — Dye — Volcanoes — SettlementAlbemarle Island — Cyclopian Scene — Tagus Cove —Tide Ripples — Settlers — Climate — Salt — Dampier — BirdsTransportation of Tortoises — Currents — Temperatureof Water 481CHAPTER XXII.Dangerous Archipelago of the Low Islands — KrusensternSqualls — Discoveries — Otaheite — Matavai — Natives —Houses — Point Venus — Theft — Singing — Pomare — SugarPapiete — Church — Mr. Pritchard — ^Thierry — Shells —Mr. Nottt — Bible — Paamuto Natives — Falkner — 'Ua' —Papawa — Relics — Divine Service — Hitote — Henry — Audience— Queen — Missionaries — Roman Catholics — Form-contents.XinPAGEing head — Meeting at Papiete — Dress — Behaviour — Eloquenceof natives — Honourable feelings — Interesting discussion— Venilia 506CHAPTER XXIII.Continuation of the Meeting at Papiete — Questions — Explanation— Meeting ends — Pilotage — Mr. Wilson — Queen'sVisit — Fireworks — School — Intelligence — Letters — Inhabitants— Dress — Conduct — Abolition of Spirits — Defectin Character — Domestic Scene — Aura Island — Newton atBow Island — Pearl Oyster Shells — Divers — Steering —Queen's Letter — Collection — Sail from Otaheite — — Flight of Birds — Navigators — Friendly — Fee-seeIslands — English Chief — Precautions — LaPerouse 540CHAPTER XXIV.New Zealand — Bay of Islands — Kororareka — Fences — FlagPaihia — Natives — Features — Tattoo — Population —Colour — Manner — War-Canoes — Prospects — MackintoshFern — Church — Resident — Vines — Villages — HousesPlanks — Cooking — Church — Marae — First Mission —Settlers — Pomare — Marion — Cawa-Cawa — Meeting —Chiefs — Rats — Spirits — Wine — Nets — Burial — DivineService — Singing — Causes of Disturbances — Reflectionsand Suggestions — Polynesian Interests — Resources forShips in the Pacific 564CHAPTER XXV.Waimate — Cultivation — Flax — Apteryx — Gardens — Mis -visionaries — Farm — Barn — Mill — Grave of Shunghi —Horses — Kauri Pine — Keri-keri — Children — WaripoakaLa Favorite — Political condition — Relics — Images, orAmulets — Mats — Leave New Zealand — Remarks — Intercourse— Convicts — Effects of Missionary exertion — IrregularSettlements — Trade — Residents and Consuls —xiv CONTENTS.PAGEMissionary Embarrassments — Society's Lands — Discontentof Settlers — Purchase of Land — Influence of Missionaries— Their sphere of action 598CHAPTER Xxvi >North Cape of New Zealand — Superstitions — Cook's greatLizard — Traditions — Currents — Thermometer — SydneyDr . Darwin — Drought — Aqueduct — Position — Disadvantages— Ill-acquired wealth of Convicts, or Emancipate— Hobart Town — Advantages of Van Diemen's LandKing George Soit — Natives — Dance — Keeling Islandstides — Soundings — Coral formations — Malays — FishWeather — Mauritius — Cape of Good Hope — St. HelenaAscension — Bahia — Pemambuco — Cape Verde IslandsAzores — Arrive in England 619CHAPTER XXVII.Remarks on the early migrations of the human race 640CHAPTER XXVIII.A very few Remarks vdth reference to the Deluge 657CONTENTS. IXPAGECHAPTER VII.Southern Aborigines of South America 129CHAPTER VIII.Horse Indians of Patagonia: — Head — Physiognomy — Stature— wanderings — Clothing — Armour — Arms — Food —Chase — Property — Huts — Wizards — Marriage — ChildrenHealth — less — Death — Burial — war — Horsemanship— Gambling — Caciques — Superstitions — Warfare —Morality — Disposition — Chups — ^ZapaUos 144CHAPTER IX.Fuegians — Form — Paint — Disposition — Food — Doctor —Religious ideas — Superstitions — Marriage — Death — burial— Cannibalism — Weapons — Women's occupation —Training — Obtaining food — Fire — Language — Sagacityand local knowledge — Battles — Ceremony — Natives inTrinidad Gulf — Obstruction Sound — Potatoes — Dogs 175CHAPTER X.Set out to land Matthews and the Fuegians — Their meetingwith Natives — Supposed Volcano — Dream — Opens-men —Scene — Arrival at WooUya — Encampment — Concourse ofNatives — Jemmy's Family — Wigwams — Gardens — Distrust— Experiment — Westward Exploration — RemoveMatthews — Revisit WooUya — Gale — Sail for the FalklandIslands 202CHAPTER XI.Historical Sketch of the Falkland Islands 228CHAPTER XII.First Appearance of Falklands — Tides — Currents — Winds —Seasons — temperature — Rain — Health — Dangers — CauxCONTENTS.PACEtons — View — Settlement — Animals — Foxes — VarietiesSeal — Whales — Fish and Fishery — Birds — BrushwoodPeat — Pasture — Potash — Orchilla — Grazing — ComFruit — Vegetables — Trees — Plants — Land — Situationof principal Settlement — Prospective advantages — Suggestions— Vemet's Establishment — Reflections 24 1CHAPTER XIII.Anchor in Berkeley Sound — Le Magellan — British flag hoistedRuined Settlement — Mr. Hellyer drowned — Burial —French Whalers — Union — Adventure — Squab — Flashes—Fossils— Killing Wild Cattle— Sail from Falklands—River Negro — Maldonado — Constitucion — Heave down,copper, and refit Adventure — Signs of weather — Soundbanks — Los Cesaress — Settle with Harris, and part company— Blancoo Bay — Return to Maldonado — Monte Video 269CHAPTER XIV.Paz and Liebre begin work — Chronometers — Fish — AnimalsSan Bias — wrecks — River Negro — Del Carmen — Inhabitants— Indians — Trade — Williams drowned — Port Desire— Gale — Salinas — Lightning — Bones in Tomb — treesDangers — New Bay — Cattle — Seal — Soil — River Chu-pat—Drift Timber — Fertility — wild Cattle— Valdes CreekImminent danger — Tide Races — Bar of the Negro —Hunting — attack of Indians — VUlarino — Falkner 295CHAPTER XV.Beagle and Adventure sail from Monte Video — Port DesireBellacoco Rock — Refraction — Port San Julian — Viedma —Drake — Magalhaens — Patagonians — Port Famine — SanSebastian Bay — Woollyaa — Jemmy — Story — TreacheryOens men — Improvement — Gratitude — Falklands —Events — Capt. Seymour — Search for Murderers — Lieut.Smith — Brisbane — Wreck — Sufferings — Lieutenant CaveSail from Falklands 316SURVEYING VOYAGESOPTHE BEAGLE.1831—1836.#.CHAPTER I.Explanation — Natives of Tierra del Fuego, or Fuegians — Passages acrossthe Equator (Atlantic)— Letters— Small-pox — Hospital — Boat Memory— Fuegians in London — At Waltharastow — At St. James's —Beagle recommissioned— Correspondence with Mr. Wilson — Fuegiansre-embark.As the following narrative of the Beagle's second voyage toSouth America is a sequel to the " Surveying Voyages of theAdventure and the Beagle," which are related in the precedingvolume, it may be advisable that this chapter should containa sketch of some few incidents intimately connected with theorigin and plan of the second Expedition.Captain King has already mentioned that the two shipsunder his orders sailed from Rio de Janeiro, on their homewardpassage, early in August 1830.During the time which elapsed before we reached England,I had time to see much of my Fuegian companions ; and dalybecame more interested about them as I attained a furtheracquaintance with their abilities and natural inclinations. Far,VOL. II. B2 FUEGIANS. 1830.very far indeed, were three of the number from deserving tobe called savages — even at this early period of their residenceamong civilized people — though the other, named YorkMinster, was certainly a displeasing specimen of uncivilizedhuman nature.The acts of cannibalism occasionally committed by theircountrymen, were explained to me in such terms, and with suchsigns, that I could not possibly misunderstand them ; and a stillmore revolting account was given, though in a less explicitmanner, respecting the horrible fate of the eldest women oftheir own tribes, when there is an unusual scarcity of food.This half-understood story I did not then notice much, forI could not believe it ; but as, since that time, a familiaritywith our language has enabled the Fuegians to tell other persons,as well as myself, of this strange and diabolical atrocity ;and as Mr. Low (of whom mention will often be made in thefollowing pages) was satisfied of the fact, from the concurrenttestimony of other Fuegians who had, at different times, passedmonths on board his vessel, I no longer hesitate to state myfirm belief in the most debasing trait of their character whichAvill be found in these pages.At the sea-ports which the Beagle visited in her way fromTierra del Fuego to England, animals, ships, and boats seemedto engage the notice of our copper-coloured friends far morethan human beings or houses. When any thing excited theirattention particularly, they would appear, at the time, almoststupid and unobservant ; but that they were not so in realitywas shown by their eager chattering to one another at the veryfirst subsequent opportunity, and by the sensible remarksmade by them a long time afterwards, when we fancied theyhad altogether forgotten unimportant occurrences which tookplace during the first few months of their sojourn among us.A large ox, with unusually long horns, excited their wonderremarkably ; but in no instance was outward emotionnoticed, to any great degree, excepting when they saw a steam-vesselgoing into Falmouth Harbour. What extraordinarymonster it Meas, they could not imagine. Whether it was a1830. FUEGIANS — PASSAGES. 3huge fish, a land animal, or the devil (of whom they have anotion in their country), they could not decide ; neither couldthey understand the attempted explanations of our sailor?,who tried to make them comprehend its nature : but, indeed,I think that no one who remembers standing, for the first time,near a railway, and witnessing the rapid approach of a steam-engine,with its attached train of carriages, as it dashed along,smoking and snorting, will be surprised at the effect which alarge steam-ship, passing at full speed near the Beagle, in adark night, must have had on these ignorant, though ratherintelligent barbarians.Before relating occurrences subsequent to our arrival inEngland, I must ask permission to make the first of a fewnautical remarks that will be found in this volume, some ofwhich, I hope, may be useful to young sailors.Our passage across the Atlantic, from Rio de Janeiro toFalmouth, was unusually long. In order to sail within sightof the Cape Verd Islands, for a particular purpose, we steeredeastward from the coast of Brazil, and crossed the equator fareast. This course, unavoidable in our case, carried us into thattract of ocean, between the trade-winds, which in August andSeptember is subject to westerly winds — sometimes extremelystrong — and we encountered a very heavy gale, although sonear the equator. Afterwards, when close to our own shores, wewere unfortunate enough to be delayed by what seamen call ahard-hearted easterly wind ; and not until the middle of Octoberwere we moored in a British port.As a remarkable contrast, a Falmouth packet, which sailedfrom Rio de Janeiro some time after our departure, steerednorthward, as soon as she had cleared the coast of Brazil,crossed the line far to the west, and arrived in England a fortnightbefore us.My own humble opinion, with respect to crossing the equator,is, that an outward-bound ship ought to cross near twenty-five—and that one homeward-bound may go even beyondthirty degrees of west longitude — but should not attempt topass eastward of twenty-five. Ships crossing the line betweenB 24* PASSAGES. FUEGIANS. 1830.twenty-five and thirty degrees west, are, I believe, far lesssubject to detention— taking the year through— than thosewhich adopt easterly courses.Cape St. Roque, St. Paul Rocks, Fernando Noronha, andthe Roccas, ought not to be thought of too lightly ; but inavoiding them, and the lee current near St. Roque, many shipshave encountered the tedious calms, extremely hot weather,frequent torrents of rain, and violent squalls, which are moreor less prevalent between the longitudes of twenty and tendegrees west.To return to the Fuegians. While on our passage homeI addressed the following letter to my commanding officer andkind friend, Captain King.« Sir, Beagle, at sea, Sept. 12, 1830.I have the honour of reporting to you that there are nowon board of his Majesty's sloop, under my command, fournatives of Tierra del Fuego.oTheir names and estimated ages are,York Minster 26Boat Memory 20James Button 14Fuegia Basket (a girl) 9I have maintained them entirely at my own expense, andhold myself responsible for their comfort while away from,and for their safe return to their own country : and I havenow to request that, as senior officer of the Expedition, youwill consider of the possibility of some public advantage beingderived from this circumstance ; and of the propriety of offeringthem, with that view, to his Majesty's Government.If you think it proper to make the offer, I will keep themin readiness to be removed according to your directions.I am now to account for my having these Fuegians onboard,and to explain my future views with respect to them.In February last, the Beagle being moored in ' TownshendHarbours on the south-west coast of Tierra del Fuego,I sent Mr. Matthew Murray (master), with six men, in awhale-boat, to Cape Desolation ; the projecting part of a small.1830. Letter FUEGIAXS. 5but high and rugged island, detached from the main land, andtwelve miles distant from Townshend Harbour.Mr. Murray reached the place, and secured his party andthe boat in a cove near the cape : but during a very darknight, some Fuegians, whose vicinity was not at all suspected,approached with the dexterous cunning peculiar to savagesand stole the boat.Thus deprived of the means of returning to the Beagle,and unable to make their situation known, Mr. Murray and hisparty formed a sort of canoe, or rather basket, with thebranches of trees and part of their canvas tent, and in thismachine three men made their way back to the Beagle, by hisdirections : yet, although favoured by the only fine day thatoccurred during the three weeks which the Beagle passed inTownshend Harbour, this basket was twenty hours on itspassage.Assistance was immediately given to the master and theother men, and a chase for our lost boat was begun, whichlasted many days, but was unsuccessful in its object, althoughmuch of the lost boat's gear was found, and the women andchildren of the families from whom it was recovered, werebrought on board as hostages. The men, excepting one ofthem, escaped from us, or were absent in our missing boat.At the end of February the Beagle anchored in ChristmasSound ; but before this time all our prisoners had escaped, exceptthree little girls, two of whom we restored to their own tribe,near ' Whale-boat Sound,' and the other is now on board.From the first canoe seen in Christmas Sound, one manwas taken as a hostage for the recovery of our boat, and tobecome an interpreter and guide. He came to us with littlereluctance, and appeared unconcerned.A few days afterwards, traces of our boat were found atsome wigwams on an island in Christmas Sound, and from thefamilies inhabiting those wigwams I took another young man,for the same purpose as that above-mentioned. No usefulinformation respecting our lost boat was, however, gained fromthem, before we were obliged to leave that coast, and sheremained the prize of their companions.6 Letter FUEGIANS. 1830.Afterwards, when in Nassau Bay, our captives informedus that the natives of that part of the coast, and all to theeastward, were their enemies, and that they spoke a differentlanguage. This intelligence was extremely disappointing, andmade me anxious to persuade one of this eastern tribe to comeon board and stay with us ; but I had then no hopes of doingso, and gave up the idea : however, some time afterwards,accidentally meeting three canoes, when away in my boat exploringthe Beagle Channel, I prevailed on their occupants toput one of the party,, a stout boy, into my boat, and in returnI gave them beads, buttons, and other trifles. Whether theyintended that he should remain with us permanently, I do notknow ; but they seemed contented with the singular bargain,and paddled again towards the cove from which they hadapproached my boat. We pulled on along shore, attended byother canoes, which had been endeavouring to barter with uswhenever we stopped ; but at dusk they ceased following, usand went ashore.When about to depart from the Fuegian coast, I decidedto keep these four natives on board, for they appeared to bequite cheerful and contented with their situation ; and I thoughtthat many good effects might be the consequence of their livinga short time in England. They have lived, and have beenclothed like the seamen, and are now, and have been always,in excellent health and very happy. They understand whythey were taken, and look forward with pleasure to seeing ourcountry, as well as to returning to their own.Should not his Majesty's Government direct otherwise, Ishall procure for these people a suitable education, and, aftertwo or three years, shall send or take them back to their country,with as large a stock as I can collect of those articles mostuseful to them, and most likely to improve the condition oftheir countrymen, who are now scarcely superior to the brutecreation.I have, &c.Phillip Parker King, Esq. Robert Fits-Roy,Commander H.M.S. Adventure, Commander."Senior officer of the Expedition."1830. FUEGIANS. 7This letter was forwarded to the Adniirahy by CaptainKing, as soon as he arrived in England ; and a few days afterwardsthe following answer was received.« Sir, Admiralty Office, 19th Oct. 1830.Having laid before my Lords Commissioners of the Admiraltyyour letter and its enclosure from Commander Fits-Roy,of the Beagle, relative to the four Indians whom he hasbrought from Tierra del Fuego under the circumstancestherein stated ; I am commanded to acquaint you that theirLordships will not interfere with Commander Fits-Roy "'s personalsuperintendence of, or benevolent intentions towardsthese four people, but they will afford him any facilitiestowards maintaining and educating them in England, and willgive them a passage home again.I am, &c.To Commander King, (Signed) John Barrow""H.M.S.V. Adventure."I was, of course, anxious to protect the Fuegians, as far aspossible, from the contagion of any of those disorders, sometimesprevalent, and which unhappily have so often provedfatal to the aboriginal natives of distant countries when broughtto Europe ; and, immediately after our arrival in England,they landed with me, after dark, and were taken to comfortable,airy lodgings, where, next day, they were vaccinated, forthe second time.Two days afterwards they were carried a few miles intothe country, to a quiet farm-house, where I hoped they wouldenjoy more freedom and fresh air, and, at the same time,incur less risk of contagion than in a populous sea-port town,where curiosity would be excited.Meanwhile, the Beagle was stripped and cleared out ; andthe Adventure went to Woolwich for a similar purpose, preparatoryto being paid off. On the 27th of October, the Beagle'spendant was hauled down ; and on the 15th of November, theAdventure was put out of commission.8 FUEGIANS SMALL-POX. 1830Both vessels' crews were dispersed, as usual, unfortunately ;and of those who had passed so many rough hours together,but few were likely to meet again. I much regretted the separationfrom my tried and esteemed shipmates, and from ourexcellent little vessel.Soon afterwards, Captain King and Lieutenant Sayingwere promoted : a gratifying proof of the good opinion of theirexertions and conduct, which was entertained by the LordsCommissioners of the Admiralty.Early in November I received the sad intelligence that theyoung man, called Boat Memory, was taken ill ; and that thesymptoms of his disorder were like those of the small-pox.Dr. Armstrong, of the Royal Hospital at Plymouth, whoseadvice I solicited, suggested that he and the other three Fuegiansshould be received immediately into the hospital, withthe view of preventing further infection, and ensuring the besttreatment for the poor sufferer. Dr. Armstrong applied tothe physician. Dr. Dickson (now Sir David Dickson), as wellas Sir James Gordon, the superintendent, and by their adviceand permission the Fuegians were removed into the hospitalwithout delay ; and an application was made to the Admiralty,of which the following is a copy.Sir, " Devonport, 7th Nov. 1830.I have the honour of addressing you to request that thefour Fuegians, whom I brought to England in the Beagle,may be received into the Royal Naval Hospital.The Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty have statedin a letter to Commander King, dated 19th Oct. 1830, thattheir Lordships will not interfere with Commander Fits-Roy'spersonal superintendence of, or benevolent intentions towardsthese four people, but they will afford him any assistance inmaintaining and educating them in England, and will givethem a passage home again.'In consequence of this assurance, I now beg that you willdraw their Lordships' attention to the circumstance of an eruptionhaving broken out upon one of the Fuegian men, since he1830. IN THE HOSPITAL. 9was vaccinated, which is supposed, by the medical officers ofthe hospital, to be the small-pox.As the other three individuals have been always in companywith him, it is to be feared that they also are affected ;and as the vaccination has not yet taken a proper effect, it isthe opinion of the medical officers that it would be safer toreceive them into the hospital, until the present critical periodis passed, than to allow them to remain in private care.I have further to request, that my late coxswain, JamesBennett, may be permitted to accompany, and remain with theFuegians, in order to attend upon them, in the event of theirLordships allowing them to be admitted into the hospital ; andI hope, Sir, that the peculiar nature of the case may be thoughtto justify this application.I have, &c.The Secretary Robert Fits-Roy, Commander""of the Admiralty.Sir, Admiralty-office, 10th Nov. 1830.I am commanded by my Lords Commissioners of theAdmiralty to acquaint you, in answer to your letter of thisday's date, that directions have been given for the admission ofthe four Fuegians therein alluded to, into the Naval Hospitalat Plymouth, and that James Bennett be allowed to attendthem, agreeably with your request.I am, Sir, &c.Commander Fits-Roy. (Signed) " John Barrow."The Admiralty having thus sanctioned the admission of theFuegians into one of the best hospitals, and assured thatthey could not be under better treatment than that of thewell-known gentlemen whom I have mentioned, I felt lessanxiety in leaving them for a time, as I was obliged to do, inorder to attend to duties connected with the survey ; but Ihad hardly reached London, when a letter from Dr. Dicksoninformed me of the untimely fate of Boat Memory. He hadbeen vaccinated four different times ; but the three first operasBOAT MEMORY. 1830.tons had failed, and the last had just taken effect, when thedisease showed itself. It was thought that the fatal contagionmust have attacked him previously.This poor fellow was a very great favourite with all whoknew him, as well as with myself. He had a good disposition,very good abilities, and though born a savage, had a pleasing,intelligent appearance. He was quite an exception tothe general character of the Fuegians, having good featuresand a well-proportioned frame. It may readily be supposedthat this was a severe blow to me, for I was deeply sensible ofthe responsibility which had been incurred ; and, however unintentionally,could not but feel how much I was implicated inshortening his existence. Neither of the others were attacked,the last vaccination having taken full effect ; but they wereallowed to remain in the hospital for some time longer, until Icould make satisfactory arrangements for them. While theywere under Dr. Dickson's care, in the hospital, his own childrenhad the measles ; and thinking that it would be a goodopportunity to carry the little Fuegian girl through that illness,he prepared her for it, and then took her into his house,among his own children ; where she had a very favourableattack, and recovered thoroughly.Of course, I was anxious that no time should be lost inarranging a plan for their education and maintenance ; anddeeming the Church Missionary Society to be in some measureinterested about the project I had in view, I applied to theirsecretary, through whose kindness I became acquainted withthe Rev. Joseph Wigram ; to whom I am under great obligationsfor the friendly interest taken at that time in my wisheswith respect to the Fuegians, and for introducing them and myselfto the notice of the Rev. William Wilson, of Walthamstow.Mr. Wilson at once relieved my mind from a load of uncertaintyand anxiety, by saying that they should be receivedinto his parish, and that he would talk to the master of theInfant School about taking them into his house, as boardersand pupils. In a short time, it was arranged that the .FUEGIANS IN LONDON. 11master should receive, and take entire charge of them, whilethey remained in England, and should be paid by me for theirboard and lodging, for his own trouble, and for all contingentexpenses.Mr. Wilson proposed to keep a watchful eye over themhimself, and give advice from time to time to their guardianand instructor. Mr. Wigram also lived at Walthamstow, andas he would have frequent opportunities of offering a usefulcaution, in case that the numerous calls upon Mr. Wilson'sattention should at any time render additional thoughts forthFuegians an unfair or unpleasant trouble to him — I didindeed think that no plan could be devised offering a betterprospect ; and immediately made arrangements for conveyingthem to London.The inside of a stage-coach was taken, and under theguidance of Mr. Murray (the Beagle's late master), attendedby James Bennett, they arrived in Piccadilly, and were immediatelycarried to Walthamstow, without attracting any notice.Mr. Murray told me that they seemed to enjoy their journeyin the coach, and were very much struck by the repeatedchanging of horses.I took them myself from the coach-office to Walthamstow ;they were glad to see me, but seemed bewildered by the multitudeof new objects. Passing Charing Cross, there was astart and exclamation of astonishment from York. ' Look ! 'he said, fixing his eyes on the lion upon NorthumberlandHouse, which he certainly thought alive, and walking there.I never saw him show such sudden emotion at any other time.They were much pleased with the rooms prepared for themat Walthamstow ; and the schoolmaster and his wife wereequally pleased to find the future inmates of their house verywell disposed, quiet, and cleanly people ; instead of fierce anddirty savages.At Walthamstow they remained from December 1830 tillOctober 1&31 ; and during all that time were treated with theutmost kindness by the benevolent men whose names I havementioned ; by their families, and by many others in the12 AT WALTHAMSXOW. 1830.neighbourhood, as well as casual visitors, who became muchinterested in their welfare, and from time to time gave themseveral valuable presents.The attention of their instructor was directed to teachingthem English, and the plainer truths of Christianity, as thefirst object ; and the use of common tools, a slight acquaintancewith husbandry, gardening, and mechanism, as thesecond. Considerable progress was made by the boy and girl ;but the man was hard to teach, except mechanically. He tookinterest in smith's or carpenter's work, and paid attention towhat he saw and heard about animals ; but he reluctantlyassisted in garden work, and had a great dislike to learning toread. By degrees, a good many words of their own languageswere collected (the boy's differed from that of the man and thegirl), and some interesting information was acquired, respectingtheir own native habits and ideas. They gave no particulartrouble ; were very healthy ; and the two younger onesbecame great favourites wherever they were known. SometimesI took them with me to see a friend or relation of my own,who was anxious to question them, and contribute somethingto the increasing stock of serviceable articles which I wascollecting for their use, when they should return to Tierra delFuego. My sister was a frequent benefactress ; and they oftentalked, both then and afterwards, of going to see ' HappenSister.'During the summer of 1831, his late Majesty expressed toColonel Wood a wish to see the Fuegians, and they weretaken to St. James's. His Majesty asked a great deal abouttheir country, as well as themselves ; and I hope I may bepermitted to remark that, during an equal space of time, noperson ever asked me so many sensible and thoroughly pertinentquestions respecting the Fuegians and their country alsorelating to the survey in which I had myself been engaged, asdid his Majesty. Her Majesty Queen Adelaide also honouredthe Fuegians by her presence, and by acts of genuine kindnesswhich they could appreciate, and never forgot. She left theroom, in which they were, for a minute, and returned with one1831. AT ST. James's. 13of hei own bonnets, which lie put upon the gifts head. HerMajesty then put one of her rings upon the girls finger,and gave her a sum of money to buy an outfit of clothes whenshe should leave England to return to her own country.I must now revert to matters more immediately connectedwith the Beagle's second voyage.My own official duties, relating to the survey, were completedin March 1831 ; when my late commanding officer,Captain King, addressed a letter to the Lords Commissionersof the Admiralty expressive of his approbation of the part Ihad taken, under his direction, and recommending me to theirLordships. *From various conversations which I had with Captain King,during the earlier period of my service under him, I had beenled to suppose that the survey of the southern coasts of SouthAmerica would be continued ; and to some ship, ordered uponsuch a service, I had looked for an opportunity of restoringthe Fueaians to their native land.Finding, however, to my great disappointment, that anentire change had taken place in the views of the Lords ofthe Admiralty, and that there was no intention to prosecutethe survey, I naturally became anxious about the Fuegians ;and, in June, having no hopes of a man-of-war being sent toTierra del Fuego, and feeling too much bound to thesenatives to trust them in any other kind of vessel, unless withmyself — because of the risk that would attend their beinglanded anywhere, excepting on the territories of their owntribes — I made an agreements with the owner of a smallmerchant-vessel, the John of London, to carry me and fiveother persons to such places in South America as I wished tovisit, and eventually to land me at Valparaiso.My arrangements were all made, and James Bennett, whowas to accompany me, had already purchased a number ofgoats, with Which I purposed stocking some of the islands ofTierra del Fuego — when a kind uncle, to whom I mentioned-t3^Appendix. t Ibid.14 LETTER MR. WIT,SOX. 1831.my plan, went to the Admiralty, and soon afterwards told methat I should be appointed to the command of the Chanticleer,to go to Tierra del Fuego.My agreement with the owner of the John was, however,in full force, and I could not alter it without paying a largeproportion of the whole sum agreed on for the voyage.The Chanticleer was not, upon examination, found quitefit for service ; and, instead of her, I was again appointed tomy well-tried little vessel, the Beagle. My commission wasdated the 27th of June, and on the same day two of my mostesteemed friends. Lieutenants Wickham and Sulivan, werealso appointed.While the Beagle was fitting out at Devonport, I receivedthe following: letter from Mr. Wilson.»Sir, Walthamstow, 5th Aug. 1831.I am informed that the Fuegians who have been latelyresident in this place are shortly to return to their nativecountry under your care. Will you permit me to ask whether,if two individuals should volunteer to accompany and remainwith them, in order to attempt to teach them such useful arts asmay be thought suited to their gradual civilization, you willgive them a passage in the Beagle .'' and whether, upon yourarrival on the coast of Tierra del Fuego, you will be able togive them some assistance in establishing a friendly intercoursewith, and settlement amongst the natives of that country ?Would these individuals be required to pay you for their passage,and maintenance on board ? or would his Majesty'sGovernment allow them to be maintained on board at thepublic expense .'' Do you think that you would be able to visitthem, after their first settlement, supposing so desirable anobject should be attained, in order to give them some encouragement,and perhaps assistance ; or to remove them if theyshould find it impracticable to continue their residence amongthe natives ?ISSl. MR. WILSON ANSWER. 16A subscription has been set on foot by gentlemen who areextremely desirous that this opportunity of extending thebenefits of civilization should not be lost ; and, in consequenceof their united wishes, I now take the liberty of asking thesequestions.I am, &c.(Signed) " William Wilson."To Captain Fits-Roy, Ren."After reading this communication, I wrote to the Secretaryof the Admiralty, and enclosed a copy of Mr. Wilson s letter.The answer is subjoined.Sir, Admiralty Office, 10th Aug. 1831.Having laid before my Lords Commissioners of the Admiraltyyour letter of yesterday's date, with the letter whichaccompanied it, from the Rev. William Wilson, respecting thenatives of Tierra del Fuego who were brought to England inhis Majesty's ship Beagle ; I am commanded to acquaint youthat their Lordships will give the necessary orders for the passageof these individuals, and of the two persons who are toaccompany them ; and that your request to be allowed to visitthese people, after their arrival, will be taken into considerationin preparing your instructions.I am, &c.(Signed) " John Barrow."To Commander Fits-Roy,H.M.S. Beagle."*&'In consequence of this reply, it was wished that two personsshould accompany the Fuegians, and endeavour to passsome time in their country : but it was not easy to find individualssufficiently qualified, and in whom confidence couldbe placed, who would willingly undertake such an enterprise.One young man was selected by Mr. Wilson, but acompanion for him could not be found in time to embark onboardthe Beagle.In October the party from Walthamstow arrived, in a16 FUEGIANS Re-embark. 1831.steam-vessel, at Plymouth, and not a few boats were requiredto transport to our ship the large cargo of clothes, tools,crockery-ware, books, and various things which the familiesat Walthamstow and other kind-hearted persons had given.In the small hold of the Beagle, it was not easy to find placesfor the stowage of so many extra stores ; and when dividing thecontents of large chests, in order to pack them differently,some very fair jokes were enjoyed by the seamen, at the expenseof those who had ordered complete sets of crockery-ware,without desiring that any selection of articles should bemade.Instructions were given, by the Secretary of the ChurchMissionary Society, to the young man who wished to accompanythe Fuegians, which will be found in the Appendix ;and although he was rather too young, and less experiencedthan might have been wished, his character and conduct hadbeen such as to give very fair grounds for anticipating thathe would, at least, sincerely endeavour to do his utmost inasituation so difficult and trying as that for which he volunteered.CHAPTER II.Hydrographer's Opinion— Continuation of Survey— Chain of MeridianDistances— Efficient Arrangements — Repair and raise Deck — Outfit —Boats— Lightning-Conductors— Rudder— Stove— Windlass— Chronometers— Mr. Darwin — Persons on board — Changes — List of those whoreturned — Supplies— Admiralty Instructions— Memorandum — Hydrographer'sMemorandum.When it was decided that a small vessel shoved be sent toTierra del Fuego, the Hydrographer of the Admiralty wasreferred to for his opinion, as to what addition she might maketo the yet incomplete surveys of that country, and other placeswhich she might visit.Captain Beaufort embraced the opportunity of expressinghis anxiety for the continuance of the South American Surveys,and mentioning such objects, attainable by the Beagle, as hethous-ht most desirable : and it was soon after intimated to methat the voyage might occupy several years. Desirous of addingas much as possible to a work in which I had a stronginterest, and entertaining the hope that a chain of meridian distancesmight be carried round the world if we returned toEngland across the Pacific, and by the Cape of Good Hope ;I resolved to spare neither expense nor trouble in making ourlittle Expedition as complete, with respect to material andpreparation, as my means and exertions would allow, whensupported by the considerate and satisfactory arrangements ofthe Admiralty : which were carried into effect (at that time)by the Navy Board, the Victualling Board, and the Dockyardofficers at Devonport.The Beagle was commissioned on the 4th of July 1831,and was immediately taken into dock to be thoroughly examined,and prepared for a long period of foreign service. Asshe required a new deck, and a good deal of repair about theupper works, I obtained permission to have the upper-deckVOL. II. c18 OUTFIT MR. Darwin.raised considerably,* which afterwards proved to be of thegreatest advantage to her as a sea boat, besides adding so materiallyto the comfort of all on board. While in dock, a sheathingof two-inch fir plank was nailed on the vessel's bottom, overwhich was a coating of felt, and then new copper. This sheathingadded about fifteen tons to her displacement, and nearlyseven to her actual measurement. Therefore, instead of 235tons, she might be considered about 242 tons burthen. The rudderwas fitted according to the plan of Captain Lihou : a patentwindlass supplied the place of a capstan : one of Frazer'sstoves, with an oven attached, was taken instead of a commongalley' fire-place ; and the lightning-conductors, invented byMr. Harris, were fixed in all the masts, the bowsprit, and evenin the flying jib-boom. The arrangements made in the fittings,both inside and outside, by the officers of the Dock-yard, leftnothing to be desired. Our ropes, sails, and spars, were thebest that could be procured ; and to complete our excellentoutfit, six superior boats-j- (two of them private property)were built expressly for us, and so contrived and stowed thatthey could all be carried in any weather.Considering the limited disposable space in so very .small aship, we contrived to carry more instruments and books thanone would readily suppose could be stowed away in dry andsecure places; and in a part of my own cabin twenty-twochronometers were carefully placed.Anxious that no opportunity of collecting useful information,during the voyage, should be lost ; I proposed to theHydrographer that some well-educated and scientific personshould be sought for who would willingly share such accommodationsas I had to offer, in order to profit by the opportunityof visiting distant countries yet little known. CaptainBeaufort approved of the suggestion, and wrote to ProfessorPeacock, of Cambridge, who consulted with a friend, ProfessorHenslow, and he named Mr. Charles Darwin, grandsonof Dr. Darwin the poet, as a young man of promising ability,• Eight inches abaft and twelve forward.+ Besides a dinghy carried astern.PERSONS ON BOARD. 19extremely fond of geology, and indeed all branches of naturalhistory. In consequence an offer was made to Mr. Darwin tobe my guest on board, which he accepted conditionally ; permissionwas obtained for his embarkation, and an order givenby the Admiralty that he should be borne on the ship's booksfor provisions. The conditions asked by Mr. Dai win were, thathe should be at liberty to leave the Beagle and retire from theExpedition when he thought proper, and that he should pay afair share of the expenses of my table.Knowing well that no one actively engaged in the surveyingduties on which we were going to be employed, would havetime — even if he had ability — to make much use of the pencil,I engaged an artist, Mr. Augustus Earle, to go out in a privatecapacity ; though not without the sanction of the Admiralty,who authorized him also to be victualled. And in order tosecure the constant, yet to a certain degree mechanical attendancerequired by a large number of chronometers, and to beenabled to repair our instruments and keep them in order, I engagedthe services of Mr. George James Stebbing, eldest son ofthe mathematical instrument-maker at Portsmouth, as a privateassistant.The established complement of officers and men (includingmarines and boys) was sixty-five : but, with the supernumerariesI have mentioned, we had on board, when the Beaglesailed from England, seventy-four persons, namely : —Robert Fits-Roy Commander and Surveyor.John Clements Wickham Lieutenant.Bartholomew James Sulivan Lieutenant.Edward Main Chaffers Master.Robert Mac-cornice Surgeon .George Rowlett Purser.Alexander Derbyshire Mate .Peter Benson Stewart Mate.John Lort Stokes Mate and Assistant Surveyor.Benjamin Bynoe Assistant Surgeon.Arthur Mellersh Midshipman .Philip Ridley King Midshipman .c 220 PERSONS ON BOARD Changes.Alexander Burns Usborne Master's Assistant.Charles Musters Volunteer 1 st Class.Jonathan May Carpenter.Edward H. Hellyer Clerk.Acting boatswain : sergeant of marines and seven privates : thirty-fourseamen and six boys.On the List of supernumeraries were —Charles Darwin Naturalist.Augustus Earle Draughtsman.George James Stebbing Instrument Maker.Richard Matthews and three Fuegians : my own steward : and Mr.Darwin's servant.Some changes occurred in the course of the five years' voyage,which it may be well to mention in this place.In April 1832, Mr. Mac-cornice and Mr. Derbyshirereturned to England. Mr. Bynoe was appointed to act asSurgeon. Mr. Mellersh received a Mate's warrant ; and Mr.Johnson joined the Beagle as Midshipman. In May Mr.Musters fell a victim to fever, caught in the harbour of Riode Janeiro: — Mr. Forsyth took his place.Mr. Earle suffered so much from continual ill health, thathe could not remain on board the Beagle after August 1832 ;but he lived at Monte Video several months previously to hisreturn to England. The disappointment caused by losing hisservices was diminished by meeting Mr Martens at MonteVideo, and engaging him to embark with me as my draughtsman.In March 1833, Mr. Hellyer was drowned at the FalklandIslands, in attempting to get a bird he had shot. In September1833, Mr. Kent joined as Assistant Surgeon. In June 1834,Mr. Rowlett died, at sea, of a complaint under which he hadlaboured for years : and the vacancy caused by his lamenteddecease was filled by Mr. Dring.Mr. Martens left me, at Valparaiso, in 1834 ; and Mr.King remained with his father, at Sydney, in Australia, inFebruary 1836. After these changes, and at our return toEngland in October 1836, the list stood thus —Return LIST SUPPLIES. 2]Robert Fits-Roy Captain and Surveyor.John Clements Wickham Lieutenant.Bartholomew James Sulivan Lieutenant-edwardMain ChafFers Master .Benjamin Bynoe Surgeon (Acting.)John Edward Dring Purser (Acting.)Peter Benson Stewart Mate.John Lort Stokes Mate and Assistant Surveyor.Arthur Mellersh Mate.Charles Richardson Johnson Mate .William Kent Assistant Surgeon.Charles Forsyth Midshipman.Alexander Bums Usborne Master's Assistant.Thomas Sorrel Boatswain (Acting.)Jonathan May Carpenter.And on the List of supernumeraries were Mr. Darwin : GeorgeJ. Stebbing : my steward : and Mr. Darwin's servant.Our complement of seamen, marines, and boys was completeat our return, and generally during the voyage ; because,although many changes happened, we had always a choiceof volunteers to fill vacant places.Many of the crew had sailed with me in the previous voyageof the Beagle; and there were a few officers, as well assome marines and seamen, who had served in the Beagle, orAdventure, during the whole of the former voyage. Thesedetermined admirers of Tierra del Fuego were. LieutenantWickham, Mr. Bynoe, Mr. Stokes, Mr. Mellersh, and Mr.King; the boatswain, carpenter, and sergeant; four privatemarines, my coxswain, and some seamen.I must not omit to mention that among our provisions werevarious antiscorbutics — such as pickles, dried apples, andlemon juice — of the best quality, and in as great abundanceas we could stow away ; we had also on board a very largequantity of Killer and Moors's preserved meat, vegetables,and soup : and from the Medical Department we received anample supply of antiseptics, and articles useful for preservingspecimens of natural history.Not only the heads of departments exerted themselves for22 INSTRUCTIONS.the sake of our health and safety, but the officers subordinateto them appeared to take a personal interest in the Beagle ; forwhich I and those with me felt, and must always feel, mostgrateful.Perhaps no vessel ever quitted her own country with abetter or more ample supply (in proportion to her probablenecessities) of every kind of useful provision and stores thanthe little ship of whose wanderings I am now about to give abrief and very imperfect narrative ; and, therefore, if shesucceeded in effecting any of the objects of her mission, withcomparative ease and expedition, let the complete manner inwhich she was prepared for her voyage, by the Dock-yard atDevonport, be fully remembered.On the 15th of November I received my instructions fromthe Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty.INSTRUCTIONSBy the Commissioners for executing; the office of LordHigh Admiral of the United Kingdom of Great Britainand Ireland, &c.You are hereby required and directed to put to sea, in thevessel you command, so soon as she shall be in every respectready, and to proceed in her, with all convenient expedition,successively to Madeira or Teneriffe; the Cape de VerdeIslands; Fernando Noronha; and the South American station; to perform the operations, and execute the surveys,pointed out in the accompanying memorandum, which hasbeen drawn up under our direction by the Hydrographer ofthis office ; observing and following, in the prosecution of thesaid surveys, and in your other operations, the directions andsuggestions contained in the said memorandum.You are to consider yourself under the command of Rear-admiralSir Thomas Baker, Commander-in-chief of hisMajesty's ships on the South American station, whilst you arewithin the limits of that station, in execution of the servicesINSTRUCTIONS. 23above-mentioned ; and in addition to the directions conveyed toyou in the memorandum, on the subject of your supplies ofprovisions, we have signified to the Rear Admiral our desirethat, whenever the occasion offers, you should receive fromhim and the officers of his squadron, any assistance, in storesand provisions, of which you may stand in need.But during the whole time of your continuing on theabove duties, you are (notwithstanding the 16th article of the4th section of the 6th chapter, page 78, of the General PrintedInstructions) to send reports, by every opportunity, to ourSecretary, of your proceedings, and of the progress you make.Having completed the surveys which you are directed toexecute on the South American station, you are to proceed toperform the several further operations set forth in the Hydrographer'smemorandum, in the course therein pointed out; andhaving so done, you are to return, in the vessel you command,to Spithead, and report your arrival to our Secretary, for ourinformation and further directions.In the event of any unfortunate accident happening toyourself, the officer on whom the command of the Beaglemay in consequence devolve, is hereby required and directedto complete, as far as in him lies, that part of the survey onwhich the vessel may be then engaged, but not to proceed to anew step in the voyage ; as, for instance, if at that time carryingon the coast survey on the western side of South America,he is not to cross the Pacific, but to return to England byRio de Janeiro and the Atlantic.Given under our hands, the 11th of November 1831.(Signed) " T. M. Hardy,G. Barrington."To Robert Fits-Roy, Esq.,Commander of his Majesty's surveying vesselBeagle,' at Plymouth."« By command of their Lordships,(Signed) " Geo. Elliot."24 Memorandum.Sir ; Admiralty Office, 11th November 1831,With reference to the order which my Lords Commissionersof the Admiralty have this day addressed to you, I amcommanded by their lordships to transmit to you a memorandum,to be shown by you to any senior officer who may fall inwith you, while you are employed on the duties pointed out inthe above order.I am, Sir, &c.(Signed) " Geo. Elliot."To Commander Fits-Roy,Beagle' surveying vessel, Plymouth'"Admiralty Office, 11th November 1831.Memorandum.My Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty having orderedCommander Fits-Roy, of his Majesty's surveying vessel theBear-le,' to make surveys of various parts of the South Americanstation, it is their lordships' direction that no seniorofficer who may fall in with Commander Fits-Roy, while heis employed in the above important duties, do divert himtherefrom, or in any way interfere with him, or take from him,on any account, any of his instruments or chronometers.(Signed) " Geo. Elliot."Memorandum.A considerable difference still exists in the longitude ofRio de Janeiro, as determined by Captains King, Beeches,and Foster, on the one hand, and Captain W. F. Owen, BaronRoussin, and the Portuguese astronomers, on the other ; andas all our meridian distances in South America are measuredfrom thence, it becomes a matter of importance to decide betweenthese conflicting authorities. Few vessels will have everleft this country with a better set of chronometers, both publicand private, than the Beagle ; and if her voyage be made inshort stages, in order to detect the changes which take placein all chronometers during a continuous increase of temperature,it will probably enable us to reduce that difference withinlimits too small to be of much import in our future conclusions.PLAN OF VOYAGE.« With this view, the run to Rio de Janeiro may be convenientlydivided into four parts : —1st. Touching at Madeira, the exact position of whichhas been admitted by all parties. Having obtained a four days'rate there, or, if the weather and the exposed anchorage willnot permit, at TenerifFe, the Beagle should, 2diy, proceed withthe least possible delay to Port Prayaa, in the Cape de VerdeIslands, not only to establish a fresh four days' rate ; but thatpoint being the pivot on which all Captain Owen's longitudesturn, no pains should be spared in verifying the position hehas assumed for it. From thence, 3dly, she should make thebest of her way across the Line to Fernando Noronha. Thisisland, indeed, lies somewhat to the westward of her track, andmay retard her progress a little ; yet a series of chronometerobservations there is essential to the object in view, because itforms the third nearly equal division of the whole run, andbecause it was the point of junction of Commander Foster'sdouble line of longitudes. If two or three days' delay at eitherof these two last stations will enable him to obtain satisfactoryoccultations, and moon culminating observations, which arelikely to be seen in this country, the increased certainty of theresults will well atone for that loss of time. The Commanderwill, of course, be careful to adopt, in all those stations, theprecise spot of the former observations, with which his are tobe compared. The Governor of Fernando Noronha was peculiarlyobliging to Commander Foster, and gave up part of hisown house for the pendulum experiments. There will be nooccasion now for trespassing so heavily on his kindness ; butthe difference of longitude between that station and CommanderFits-Roy's must be well measured.However desirable it may be that the Beagle should reachRio de Janeiro as soon as possible, yet the great importance ofknowing the true position of the Abrolhos Banks, and thecertainty that they extend much further out than the limitsassigned to them by Baron Roussin, will warrant the sacrificeof a few days, if other circumstances should enable her tobeat down about the meridian of 36° AV. from the latitude of26 MEMORANDUM.16° S. The deep sea-line should be kept in motion ; and ifsoundings be obtained, the bank should be pursued both ways,out to the edge, and in to that part already known.Its actual extent to the eastward, and its connection withthe shoals being thus ascertained, its further investigation maybeleft to more convenient opportunities.At Rio de Janeiro, the time necessary for watering, &c.will, no doubt, be employed by the commander in every speciesof observation that can assist in deciding the longitude of Vil-lebanonIsland.It is understood that a French Expedition is now engagedin the examination of the coast between St. Catherine's andthe Rio de la Plata ; it would therefore be a waste of meansto interfere with that interval ; and Commander Fits-Royshould be directed to proceed to Monte Video, and to ratehis chronometers in the same situation occupied by CaptainKing.To the southward of the Rio de la Plata, the real work ofthe survey will begin. Of that great extent of coast whichreaches from Cape St. Antonio to St. George's bay, we onlyknow that it is inaccurately placed, and that it contains somelarge rivers, which rise at the other side of the continent, andsome good harbours, which are undoubtedly worth a minuteexamination. Much of it, however, from the casual accountsof the Spaniards, seems to offer but little interest either tonavigation or commerce, and will scarcely require more thanto have its direction laid down correctly, and its prominentpoints fixed. It should nevertheless be borne in mind there,and in other places, that the more hopeless and forbidding anylong line of coast may be, the more precious becomes thediscovery of a port which affords safe anchorage and wholesomerefreshments.The portions of the coast which seem to require particularexamination are —1st. From Monte Hermoso to the Rio Colorado, includingthe large inlet of Bahia Blancoo, of which there are three manuscriptsin this office that differ in every thing but in name.PLAN OF VOYAGE. STSadly. The gulf of Todos los Santos, Which is studded inthe Spanish charts with innumerable islands and shoals. It issaid to have an excellent harbour on its southern side, whichshould be verified ; but a minute survey of such an Archipelagowould be a useless consumption of time, and it will thereforebe found sufficient to give the outer line of the dangers, and toconnect that line with the regular soundings in the offing.3dly. The Rio Negro is stated to be a river of largecapacity, with settlements fifty miles from its mouth, andought to be partially reconnoitred as far as it is navigable.4thly. The gulf of San Matias should be examined, especiallyits two harbours, San Antonio and San Jose, and a narrowinlet on the eastern side of the peninsula, which, if easyof access, appears to be admirably situated : and —5thly. From the Bahia Neva to Cape Blancoo, includingthe Gulf of St. George, the coast is of various degrees ofinterest, and will accordingly require to have more or lesstime bestowed on its different parts. The position of CapeBlancoo should be determined, as there appears to be an errorof some miles in its latitude, as well as much doubt about theplaces of two shoals which are marked near it in the Spanishcharts.From Cape Blancoo to the Strait of Magalhaens, the coasthas been partially corrected by Captain King ; and PortDesire, having been carefully placed by him, will afford a goodplace for rating the chronometers, and an opportunity for exploringthe river.Port San Julian, with its bar and wide river, should besurveyed, as well as any parts of that interval which were notvisited in the last expedition.The above are the principal points of research betweenthe Rio de la Plata and the Strait. They have been consecutivelymentioned in order to bring them into one point ofview ; but that part of this service would perhaps be advantageouslypostponed till after the Beagle's first return fromthe southward ; and, generally speaking, it would be unwiseto lay down here a specific route from which no deviation•28 Memorandum.would be permitted. Where so many unforeseen circumstancesmay disturb the best-concerted arrangements, and where somuch depends on climates and seasons with which we are notyet intimately acquainted, the most that can be safely done isto state the various objects of the voyage, and to rely on theCommander's known zeal and prudence to effect them in themost convenient order.Applying this principle to what is yet to be done in theStrait, and in the intricate group of islands which forms theTierra del Fuego, the following list will show our chief desiderata,Captain King, in his directions, alludes to a reef of half amile in length, off Cape Virgins, and in his chart he makes aseven fathoms' channel outside that reef; and still further out,five fathoms with over falls. Sarmiento places fifty fathoms atten miles E.S.E. from that Cape; thirteen fathoms at nineteenmiles ; and, at twenty-one miles in the same direction, onlyfour fathoms, besides a very extensive bank projecting fromTierra del Fuego, between which and the above shoals Malayspassed in thirteen fathoms. In short, there is conclusiveevidence of there being more banks than one that obstruct theentrance to the Strait, and undoubtedly their thorough examinationought to be one of the most important objects of theExpedition; inasmuch, as a safe approach to either straits orharbours is of more consequence to determine than the detailsinside.'• None of the above authors describe the nature of theseshoals, whether rock or sand ; it will be interesting to notewith accuracy the slope, or regularity, of the depths, in theirdifferent faces, the quality of their various materials, and thedisposition of the coarse or fine parts, as well as of what speciesof rock in the neighbourhood they seem to be the detritus ;for it is probable that the place of their deposition is connectedwith the very singular tides which seem to circulate in theeastern end of the Strait.Beginning at Cape Orange, the whole north-eastern coastof Tierra del Fuego as far as Cape San Diego should be sur-planOF VOYAGE. 29vexed, including the outer edge of the extensive shoals thatproject from its northern extreme, and setting at rest thequestion of the Sebastian Channel.« On the southern side of this great collection of islands,the Beagle Channel and Whale-boat Sound should be finished,and any other places which the Commander's local knowledgemay point out as being requisite to complete his former survey,and sufficiently interesting in themselves to warrant the timethey will cost ; such as some apparently useful ports to thewestward of Cape False, and the north side of WakefieldChannel, all of which are said to be frequented by the sealers.« In the north-western part it is possible that other breaksmay be found interrupting the continuity of Sines Island,and communicating from the Southern Ocean with the Strait ;these should be fully or cursorily examined, according to theirappearance and promise ; and though it would be a very uselesswaste of time to pursue in detail the infinite number of bays,openings, and roads, that teem on the western side of thatisland, yet no good harbour should be omitted. It cannotbe repeated too often that the more inhospitable the region, themore valuable is a known port of refuge.In the western division of the Strait, from Cape Pillarto Cape Froward, there are a few openings which may perhapsbe further explored, on the chance of their leading out to sea ;a few positions which may require to be reviewed ; and a fewports which were only slightly looked into during CaptainKino's laborious and excellent survey, and which may now becompleted, if likely to augment the resources of ships occupiedin those dreary regions.In the eastern division of the Strait there is rather morework to be done, as the Fuegian shore from Admiralty Soundto Cape Orange has not been touched. Along with this partof the service, the Islands of Saints Martha and Magdalena,and the channel to the eastward of Elizabeth Island, will comein for examination ; and there is no part of the Strait whichrequires to be more accurately laid down and distinctly described,from the narrowness of the channels and the transMEMORANDUM.verse direction of the tides. Sweepstakes Foreland may proveto be an Island ; if so, there may be found an useful outlet tothe long lee-shore that extends from Cape Monmouth ; and ifnot, perhaps some safe ports might be discovered in that intervalfor vessels caught there in strong westerly gales.It is not likely that, for the purposes of either war orcommerce, a much more detailed account will be necessary ofthose two singular inland seas, Otway and Skyring Waters,unless they should be found to communicate with one of thesounds on the western coast, or with the western part of theStrait. The general opinion in the former Expedition was certainlyagainst such a communication, and the phenomena of thetides is also against it ; still the thing is possible, and it becomesan interesting geographical question, which a detached boat infine weather will readily solve.These several operations may probably be completed inthe summer of 1833-34, including two trips to Monte Videofor refreshments ; but before we finally quit the eastern coastof South America, it is necessary to advert to our present ignoranceof the Falkland Islands, however often they have beenvisited. The time that would be occupied by a rigorous surveyof this group of islands would be very disproportionate to itsvalue ; but as they are the frequent resort of whalers, and asit is of immense consequence to a vessel that has lost her masts,anchors, or a large part of her crew, to have a precise knowledgeof the port to which she is obliged to fly, it, would welldeserve some sacrifice of time to have the most advantageousharbours and their approaches well laid down, and connectedby a general sketch or running survey. Clear directions forrecognizing and entering these ports should accompany theseplans ; and as most contradictory statements have been madeof the refreshments to be obtained at the east and west greatislands, an authentic report on that subject by the Commanderwill be of real utility.There is reason to believe that deep soundings may betraced from these islands to the main, and if regular they wouldbe of great service in rectifying a ship's place.PLAN OF VOYAGE. 31Having now stated all that is most urgent to be done onthis side of the South American Continent as well as in thecircuit of Tierra del Fuego, the next step of the voyage will beConception, or Valparaiso, to one of which places the Beaglewill have to proceed for provisions, and where Captain Kingsatisfactorily determined the meridian distances.The interval of coast between Valparaiso and the westernentrance of the Strait has been partly surveyed, as well asmost of the deep and narrow channels formed by the islands ofHanover, Wellington, and Madre de Dios; but of the seaface of that great chain of islands which stretches from QueenAdelaide Archipelago to Campania Island, little has yet beendone. It presents a most uninviting appearance, can probablyafford but little benefit to the navigator, and the chief objectin urging its partial examination, is to remove a blank fromthis great survey, which was undertaken by Great Britain fromsuch disinterested motives, and which was executed by CaptainsKing and Fits-Roy with so much skill and zeal.The experience gained by the latter in that climate willenable him to accomplish all that is now required in much lesstime than it would have occupied in the beginning of theformer expedition.At the Gulf of Penas the last survey terminated. Of thepeninsula de Tres Montes, and of the islands between that andChildee, a Spanish manuscript has been procured from DonFeline Bauza, which may greatly abridge the examination ofthat interval.From thence to Valdivia, Conception, and Valparaiso, theshore is straight, and nearly in the direction of the meridian,so that it will require no great expenditure of time to correctthe outline, and to fix the positions of all the salient points.Mocha Island is supposed to be erroneously placed : and thedepth, breadth, and safety of its channel are not known.To the south of Valparaiso the port of Topocalmo and thelarge shoal in the offing on which an American ship waswrecked, require special examination ; and according to CaptainBurgess, of the Alert, the coast and islands near Coquimbo32 Memorandum,are very imperfectly laid clown. Indeed of the whole of thiscoast, the only general knowledge we have is from the Spanishcharts, which seem, with the exception of certain ports, tohave been merely the result of a running view of the shore.Of this kind of half-knowledge we have had too much : thepresent state of science, which affords such ample means, seemsto demand that whatever is now done should be finally done ;and that coasts, which are constantly visited by English vessels,should no longer have the motley appearance of alternateerror and accuracy. If, therefore, the local Governments makeno objections, the survey should be continued to Coquimbo,and indefinitely to the northward, till that period arrives whenthe Commander must determine on quitting the shores of SouthAmerica altogether. That period will depend on the time thathas been already consumed, and on the previous managementof his resources, reserving sufficient to ensure his obtaining aseries of well-selected meridian distances in traversing the PacificOcean.The track he should pursue in executing this importantduty cannot well be prescribed here, without foreseeing towhat part of the coast he may have pushed the survey, andat what place he may find it convenient to take in his lastsupplies. If he should reach Guayaquil, or even Callao, itwould be desirable he should run for the Galapagos, and, ifthe season permits, survey that knot of islands. Felix Island,the London bank seen by the brig Cannon, in 1827, in 27° 6'S. 92° 16' W., even with the water's edge, and half a mile inlength ; some coral islands, supposed to be 5° or 6° south ofPitcairn Island, and other spots, which have crept into thecharts on doubtful authority, would all be useful objects ofresearch if the Beagle's route should fall in their vicinity. Butwhatever route may be adopted, it should conduct her toTahiti, in order to verify the chronometers at Point Venus, apoint which may be considered as indisputably fixed by CaptainCook's and by many concurrent observations. Except inthis case, she ought to avoid as much as possible the groundexamined by Captain Beeches.PLAN OF VOYAGE. S3*' From Tahiti the Beagle should proceed to Port Jacksontouching at some of the intervening islands, in order to dividethe run into judicious chronometer stages ; for the observatoryat Paramatta (Port Jackson) being absolutely determined inlongitude, all those intervening islands will become standardpoints to which future casual voyagers will be able to refertheir discoveries or correct their chronometers.From Port Jackson her course will depend on the time ofthe year. If it be made by the southward, she might touch atHobart Town, King George Sound, and Swan River, todetermine the difference of longitude from thence to the Mauritius,avoiding the hurricane months ; to Table or Simon'sBay, according to the season ; to St. Helena, Ascension, andhome.If she should have to quit Port Jackson about the middleof the year, her passage must be made through Torres Strait.In her way thither, if the in-shore route be adopted, thereare several places whose positions it will be advantageous todetermine : — Moreton Bay, Port Bowen, Cape Flinders, andone of the Prince of Wales Islands ; and in pursuing her waytowards the Indian Ocean, unless the wind should hang to thesouthward, Cape Valsche or the south-west extreme of NewGuinea, one of the Serwatty Chain, Company, or the extremeof Timor, Route Island, and one of the extremes of SandalwoodIsland, may be easily determined without much loss oftime. And, perhaps, in crossing the ocean, if circumstances arefavourable, she might look at the Keeling Islands, and settletheir position.Having now enumerated the principal places at which theBeagle should be directed to touch in her circuit of the globe,and described the leading operations which it would be desirableto effect, it remains to make some general remarks on theconduct of the whole survey.In such multiplied employments as must fall to the shareof each officer, there will be no time to waste on elaborate drawings.Plain, distinct roughs, every where accompanied byexplanatory notes, and on a sufficiently large scale to show theVOL. II. D34 MEMOKAXDUJr,minutiae of whatever knowledge has been acquired, will bedocuments of far greater value in this office, to be reduced orreferred to, than highly finished plans, where accuracy is oftensacrificed to beauty.This applies particularly to the hills, which in general costso much labour, and aie so often put in from fancy or frommemory after the lapse of months, if not of years, instead ofbeing projected while fresh in the mind, or while any inconsistenciesor errors may be rectified on the spot. A few strokesof a pen will denote the extent and direction of the severalslopes much more distinctly than the brush, and if not workedup to make a picture, will really cost as little or less time. Thein-shore sides of the hills, which cannot be seen from any ofthe stations, must always be mere guess-work, and should notbe shown at all.It should be considered an essential branch of a nauticalsurvey, to give the perpendicular height of all remarkable hillsand headlands. It requires but a single angle at each station,adds much to our geographical knowledge, materially assiststhe draftsman, and by tables which are now printing it willafford to the seaman a ready and exact means of knowing hisdistance.All charts and plans should be accompanied by views of theland ; those which are to be attached to the former should betakenat such a distance as will enable a stranger to recognizethe land, or to steer for a certain point ; and those best suitedfor the plan of a port should show the marks for avoidingdangers, for taking a leading course, or choosing an advantageousberth. In all cases the angular distances and the angularaltitudes of the principal objects should be inserted in degreesand minutes on each of the views, by which means they can beprojected by scale, so as to correct any want of precision in theeye of the draftsman. Such views cannot be too numerous ;they cost but a few moments, and are extremely satisfactory toall navigators.Trifling as it may appear, the love of giving a multiplicityof new and unmeaning names tends to confuse our grogramREMARKS 35phial knowledge. The name stamped upon a place by thefirst discoverer should be held sacred by the common consentof all nations ; and in new discoveries it would be far morebeneficial to make the name convey some idea of the nature ofthe place ; or if it be inhabited, to adopt the native appellation,than to exhaust the catalogue of public characters or privatefriends at home. The officers and crews, indeed, have someclaim on such distinction, which, slight as it is, helps to excitean interest in the voyage.Constant observations on the tides, including their set,force, and duration, the distance to which they carry saltwaterup the rivers, their rise at the different periods of thelunation, and the extent to which they ai-e influenced by theperiodic winds, by the sea currents, or by the river freshes,form so prominent a part of every surveyor's duty, thatno specific directions on this subject can be necessary. Noris there any occasion to insist here on the equally importantsubject of currents ; for it is only by a great accumulationof data that we can ever hope to reduce them to regularsystems, or that we can detect the mode in which they areaffected by change of seasons, or influenced by distant winds.The periods and limits of the monsoons and trade-windswill naturally be a continual object of the Commander's observationand study. It is true that he can only witness whatoccurs during his voyage ; but besides collecting facts on thisand the last subject, on which others can hereafter reason, it willbe of immense advantage that he should endeavour to digestthem with the remarks of former voyagers when on the spot.On the western coast of South America, for instance, someskill is required in making passages at different periods, andmuch scattered experience has been gained by seamen whohave been long occupied there ; but this information has notyet been presented to the public in an intelligible form ; andit seems to be the peculiar province of an officer expressly employedon a scientific mission like this, to combine that informationwith his own, and to render it accessible to every navigator.86 MEMORANDUM.The local attraction of the Beagle will of course havebeen ascertained before she leaves England ; but when favourableopportunities occur, it will be satisfactory to swing heragain in different latitudes, and under large differences ofvariation.No day should pass at sea without a series of azimuths,and no port should be quitted without having ascertained notonly the magnetic angle, but the dip, intensity, and diurnalvariation. If these observations should have been well madein the same places before, we shall at once obtain the annualchange ; and by multiplying them in new places, we shall havethe means of inferring the magnetic curves.The Commander has been so accustomed to the managementof chronometers, that there is no doubt, with proper precautionsand with proper formulas for determining their rates,that he will succeed in obtaining good results in reasonablyshort intervals of time and in gradual changes of temperature ;but after long periods, and sudden changes of heat and cold,it will be absolutely necessary to check them by astronomicalmeans.Eclipses, occultations, lunar distances, and moon-culminatingstars, will furnish those means in abundance : of allthese, the last can be obtained with the greatest regularity andcertainty ; they have become part of the current business atthe establishments of the Cape of Good Hope, Paramatta, andSt. Helena, in the southern hemisphere ; probably at Madras,and in many of the European observatories, and it will thereforebe scarcely possible that there should not be correspondingobservations for all such as he may have made.The eclipses of Jupiter's third and fourth satellites shouldalso be sedulously observed whenever both immersion andemersion can be seen, as the different powers of the telescopesemployed by the observers do not in that case affect theresults.There are also some remarkable phenomena, which will beannounced in the Nautical Almanac, and which will occurduring the Beagle's voyage. Some of these will be highlyGENERAL IIEMAIIKS. 37interesting to astronomers, and if it would not much derangeher operations, she should be taken to some convenient anchoragefor the purpose of landing the instruments.If a comet should be discovered while the Beagle is inport, its position should be determined every night by observingits transit over the meridian, always accompanied by thetransits of the nearest known stars, and by circum-meridionalaltitudes, or by measuring its angular distance from three well-situatedstars by a sextant. This latter process can beeffected even at sea, and the mean of several observations maygive very near approximations to its real position.Meteorological Registers may be of use in a variety ofways ; but then they must be steadily and accurately kept.The barometer should be read off to the third place of decimals,and recorded at regular periods of the day ; nine o'clock andfour o'clock may be recommended as the best, as being theusual hours of its maximum and minimum. The temperatureshould be marked at the same time, and the extremes of theself-registering thermometer should be daily recorded; carebeing taken that no reflected heat should act on any of theseinstruments. The temperature of the sea at the surface oughtto be frequently observed and compared with that of the air.An officer cruising on the east coast of South America, betweenthe parallels of 20° and 35°, was enabled by these meansto predict with singular precision the direction and strength ofthe current.In this register the state of the wind and weather will, ofcourse, be inserted ; but some intelligible scale should beassumed, to indicate the force of the former, instead of theambiguous terms ' fresh,' ' moderate,' &c., in using which notwo people agree ; and some concise method should also beemployed for expressing the state of the weather. The suggestionscontained in the annexed printed paper are recommendedfor the above purposes, and if adopted, a copy should be pastedon the first page of every volume of the log-book ; and theofficer of the watch should be directed to use the same terms inthe columns of the log-board.88 MEMORANDUM.The circularly-formed Coral Islands in the Pacific occasionallyafford excellent land-locked harbours, with a sufficiententrance, and would be well adapted to any nice astronomicalobservations which might require to be carried on in undisturbedtranquillity. While these aire quietly proceeding, andthe chronometers rating, a very interesting inquiry might beinstituted respecting the formation of these coral reefs.An exact geological map of the whole island should beconstructed, showing its form, the greatest height to which thesolid coral has risen, as well as that to which the fragmentsappear to have been forced. The slope of its sides should becarefully measured in different places, and particularly on theexternal face, by a series of soundings, at very short distancesfrom each other, and carried out to the greatest possible depths,at times when no tide or current can affect the perpendicularityof the line. A modern and very plausible theory has been putforward, that these wonderful formations, instead of ascendingfrom the bottom of the sea, have been raised from the summitsof extinct volcanoes ; and therefore the nature of thebottom at each of these soundings should be noted, and everymeans exerted that ingenuity can devise of discovering at whatdepth the coral formation begins, and of what materials thesubstratum on which it rests is composed. The shape, slope,and elevation of the coral knolls in the lagoon would also helpthe investigation ; and no circumstances should be neglectedwhich can render an account of the general structure clear andperspicuous.A set of observations connected with the theory of thetides might likewise be carried on with peculiar propriety inone of these coral basins, provided the openings should besufficiently wide and deep to admit the flux and reflux withoutmaterial impediment. The island selected for such a purposeshould be nearly midway in the ocean, and not very far fromthe equator. There the tidal wave, uninfluenced by the interruptingbarrier of one continent, and equally far from thereaction of the other, might be measured with very beneficialresults. Delicate tide-gauges should be prepared beforehand,General Recalls.and immediately fixed in some snug nook, where the undulationof the sea could not reach. The rise and fall of the tideshould be registered every hour, during the stay of the Beagle,as well as the moments (stated whether in apparent or meantime)of high and low water, as nearly as they can be obtained ;and the periods at which the sea and land breezes spring upand fail should likewise be noted, with their effects on the tide,if they can be detected. A boat should be detached, on eachtide, to some distance from the island, in order to ascertain thestrength and direction of the stream ; and all these operationsshould be continued, if possible, through a whole lunation.Compiling general and particular instructions, for thenavigation of all the places which he may visit, will of coursebe an essential part of the Commander's duty ; but he will alsohave innumerable opportunities of collecting a variety ofauxiliary information, which, when judiciously combined withthe above instructions, of a purely nautical character, willmuch enhance their utility to all classes of vessels. Such as thegeneral resources on which ships may depend in differentplaces : the chief productions that can be obtained, and theobjects most anxiously desired in return : the effect of seasons,of climate,, and of peculiar articles of food on the health of thecrew, and many others which will readily occur to his mind,and which become of great value to a stranger.On all the subjects touched on in these memoranda. CommanderFits-Roy should be directed to draw up specific reports,and to transmit them from time to time, through their lordships'sSecretary, to the Hydrographic Office, so that if anydisaster should happen to the Beagle, the fruits of the expeditionmay not be altogether lost. Besides such reports, and withthe same object in view, he should keep up a detailed correspondenceby every opportunity with the Hydrographer.The narrative of every voyage in the Pacific Ocean aboundswith proofs of the necessity of being unremittingly on guardagainst the petty treacheries or more daring attacks of thenatives. It should be recollected that they are no longer thetimid and unarmed creatures of former times, but that many ofMemorandum.them now possess fire-arms and ammunition, and are skilfulin the use of them. Temper and vigilance will be the bestpreservatives against trivial offences and misunderstandings,which too often end in fatal quarrels ; and true firmness willabandon objects of small importance, where perseverance mustentail the necessity of violence ; for it would be a subject ofdeep regret that an expedition devoted to the noblest purpose,the acquisition of knowledge, should be stained by a single actof hostility.(Signed) " F. Beaufort."Hydrographical Office, 11th November 1831."FIGURESTO DENOTE THE FORCE OF THE WIND.Calm.1 Light Air Or just sufficient to give steerage way.2 Light Breeze .?^q^ ^^^^ j^ ^^.^^ a man [ ^ *° 2 knots.Gentle Breezeand clean full, would go5 to 6 knots.Moderate BreezeFresh Breeze . . .Strong Breeze . . .Moderate Gale .Fresh GaleStrong GaleOr that in which a man-of-war,with all sail set, ^ 3 to 4 knots,and clean full, would goin smooth water fromOr that to which a wellconditioned ,&c.Single-reefed topsailsand top-gall, sails.Double-reefed top-warcould just carry ( sails, jib, &c,in chase, full and bysails, &c.Close-reefed topsailsL and courses.10 Whole Gale . .Or that with which she could scarcely bear close-reefedmain-topsail and reefed fore-sail.11 Storm Or that which would reduce her to storm staysails.12 Hurricane Or that which no canvass could withstand.WEATHER Letters. 41LETTERSTO DENOTE THE STATE OF THE WEATHER.b Blue Sky ; (whether clear, or hazy, atmosphere).e Clouds; (detached passing clouds).d Drizzling Rain.f Foggy f Thick fog.g Gloomy (dark weather).h Hail.1 Lightning.m Misty (hazy atmosphere).o Overcast (or the whole sky covered with thick clouds).p Passing (temporary showers),q Squally.r Rain (continued rainsSnow,t Thunder.u Ugly (threatening appearances).V Visible (clear atmosphere).w Wet Dew.Under any letter, indicates an extraordinary degree.By the combination of these letters, all the ordinary phenomenaof the weather may be expressed with facility and brevity.Examples : — Bern, Blue sky, with passing clouds, and a hazyatmosphere.Gv, Gloomy dark weather, but distant objects remarkably visible.Qpdltj Very hard squalls, with passing showers of drizzle, andaccompanied by lightning with very heavy thunder.CHAPTER III.Ready for sea— Detained— Sail from England— Well provided — Bay ofBiscay — Compasses — Local attraction — Eight Stones — Madeira —Deception — Squall — Teneriffe — Santa Cruz — Quarantine — Squalls —Cape Verd Islands — Port Prayaa — Produce — Arehilla — Bad season —St. Paul Rocks — Cross Equator — Fernando Noronha — Bahia —Slavery — Abrolhos — Cape Frio.I^' November, the Beagle was ready for sea, but a successionof hard gales from the westward prevented her leavingEngland until the end of December. Twice she sailed, andwent a few leagues ; yet was obliged to return in order toavoid the risk of being damaged, or losing a boat, at the verybeginning of her voyage. At last the westerly gales seemedexhausted, a dead calm succeeded, and, warned by the appearancesso peculiar to easterly winds, we unmoored at daylighton the 27th, and, as soon as the tide would allow, forthere was still no breeze, we warped from our sheltered andpicturesque retreat in Barn-pool, under that beautiful placeMount Edgecumbe.Vessels in the offing, and distant land ' looming' much ; afew mottled, hard-edged clouds appearing in the east ; streaks(mare's tails) across the sky, spreading from the same quarter ;a high barometer (30. 3) ; and the smoke from chimneys risinghigh into the air, and then going westward ; were the signswhich assured us of a favourable wind. A light ' cat's paw'rippled the water, we made all sail, the breeze increased, andat noon our little vessel was outside the Breakwater, with afresh easterly wind.Of the bitter feelings experienced by most of us when everysail was trimmed, and the land sinking fast from our view, Iwill say nothing : yet there were enlivening hopes, and all wereglad to be freed from the tiresome uncertainty of the pastmonth, all were anxious to enter upon a voyage which, though1831. WELL PROVIDED TO WHOM OWING. 43likely to be very long, promised much that would interest,and excite, and perhaps reward.To the executive officers of a ship it is always a most satisfactoryfeeling, independent of other thoughts, to be fairlyat sea, and away from the scenes of irregularity which so oftentake place in ports. Those scenes, however, are now much lessoffensive, and the sailor is far less heedless than he was formerly,if we may take Fielding's description as authority. Thathumorous sensible author says, in one of the most entertainingaccounts of a voyage ever written, "• To say the truth, fromwhat I observed in the behaviour of the sailors in this voyage,and comparing it with what I have formerly seen of them, atsea, and on shore, I am convinced that on land there is nothingmore idle and dissolute ; but, in their own element, thereare no persons, near the level of their degree, who live in theconstant practice of half so many good qualities."Never, I believe, did a vessel leave England better provided,or fitted for the service she was destined to perform,and for the health and comfort of her crew, than the Beagle.If we did want any thing which could have been carried, itwas our own fault ; for all that was asked for, from the Dockyard,Victualling Department, Navy Board, or Admiralty,was granted.To mention the names of those to whom my shipmates andmyself felt most grateful for attention to requests, and for akind foresight of our future wants, may be unnecessary, somemay think improper ; yet, at the risk of offending, I must tryto express the gratitude that I, and those who sailed with meinthe Beagle, owe to Sir James Graham, Sir Thomas Hardy,Captain Beaufort, Commissioner (now Admiral) Ross, SirRobert Springs, Sir James Gordon, the late Sir ManleyDixon, and Sir William Burnett : less I cannot say, moremight be displeasing.The wind increased, and drove us onwards into the Atlanticas fast as a heavily laden small vessel, with her ' scuppers'in the water, could be forced. We steered as southerly a courseas was safe, in hopes of keeping the east wind longer, and the44 WIND — DISCIPLINE — BISCAY. 1831.result proved that we were right ; for although the Beagle hada fair wind all the way to the Canary Islands, vessels whichsailed from England only one day after her, and steered morewesterly, lost the east wind very soon, and were retarded byanother succession of strong and contrary gales, similar tothose which had detained us a whole month.Individual misconduct, arising out of harbour irregularities,obliged me to have recourse to harsh measures before we hadbeen two days at sea ; but eery naval officer knows the absolutenecessity of a certain degree of what inexperienced personsmight think unnecessary coercion, when a ship is recentlycommissioned. Hating, abhorring corporal punishment, I amnevertheless fully aware that there are too many coarse natureswhich cannot be restrained without it, (to the degree requiredon board a ship,) not to have a thorough conviction that itcould only be dispensed with, by sacrificing a great deal ofdiscipline and consequent efficiency. " Certainty of punishment,without severity," was a maxim of the humane and wiseBeccaria ; which, with our own adage about a timely ' stitch,'is extremely applicable to the conduct of affairs on board aship, where so much often depends upon immediate decision,upon instant and implicit obedience.We crossed the Bay of Biscay without a gale ; though theheavy rolling of a vessel so deep in the water, running beforea strong wind, was almost as disagreeable as the effects of onewould have been. After witnessing high seas and storms invarious parts of the world, I can call to mind only two orthree that exceeded what I have myself experienced, or whatI have heard described, as having been sometimes encounteredin this famed bay.Why should the sea be higher, or more dangerous, in thebay of Biscay, than it is in the middle of the Atlantic, orelsewhere .'' — Is it really so ? — are questions often asked.I believe that there is a shorter, higher, and consequentlyworse sea, in and near the Bay of Biscay, than is oftenfound in other places, and attribute it to the effect of immenseAtlantic waves, rolling into a deep bight, or bay, whereDec. 1831. VESSEL easy — compasses. 45they close upon each other and receive vibratory undulationsfrom each shore ; augmented perhaps by the peculiar formationof the bottom of that bay, the variation in depth, and theeffects of currents, which, when running over uneven ground,or against the wind, alone cause a heavy swell; a strikingexemplification of which may be seen on the bank of Lagullas,near the Cape of Good Hope.Though so deep in the water, our little vessel's movementswere uncommonly easy, and all our best timekeepers beinghung in particularly good cymbals, I had no fear of their ratesbeing altered, except by the effect of a change of temperature.This was a point about which I was especially anxious, asso much would depend upon the going of our chronometers,and I did not then think that the motions of a ship affectedthose instruments so little : as I have since proved to be thecase by trying them frequently in boats, or small craft ofonly a few tons burthen. In her previous voyage the Beaglewas as easy a steamboat as could be desired ; but, having raisedher upper deck, altered her stowage and trim, loaded hermore heavily, and sheathed her with two-inch plank, preparatoryto this second expedition, I had abundant cause to feelanxious until the practical effects of such material changeswere ascertained.A little alteration was required near the compasses, forowing to some ill-placed iron-work they did not quite agree ;but, after this change was made, we were gratified by findingfour first-rate compasses, three fixed for steering, and one forbearings, agree precisely. Another source of satisfaction,connected with the compasses, was the knowledge that theywere not affected, unless in a very trifling degree, by localattraction : for while lying in Barn-pool we swung the vesselin order to ascertain its quantity, but were agreeably surprisedto find that none could be detected amounting even to onedegree. This was attributed to her having only brass guns ;and to some very large iron davits for the quarter boats,which were placed rather closely abaft and above the compasses,and perhaps counteracted the effect of iron in the hold,which was so much more distant.46 EIGHT STONES Madeira. Jan.On the 3d of January we were occupied in looking forthe " Eiffht Stones ;"' but nothing was seen to indicate eitherrocks, or shoals, or even shallow water. The sun was shiningbrightly on a deep blue sea, of one uniform colour : no soundingscould be obtained ; and had there been a shoal or rockwithin seven miles of us at any hour of that day, it could nothave been passed unnoticed. So many vessels have searched,in vain, for this alleged group of rocks, that their existencecan now hardly be thought possible.At day-light, on the 4th, the rocky high islet of PortoSanto was seen looming through haze and clouds which hungaround it. We steered between Porto Santo and the Deserts,intending: to anchor in Funchal Roads .• but the wind drewround to south-west, with such strong squalls, that I abandonedmy intention, and at once steered for TenerifFe. The roadsteadI have just mentioned is well known to be unsafe in southwestgales ; and there can be no doubt that the most prudentplan is to keep at sea while they last : but I have been told byold traders to Madeira, that ships sometimes remain at anchor,about half a mile from the Loo rock, and ride out south-westgales without difficulty : the ' under-tow' being so considerablethat their cables are little strained.In fine weather, and it is fine at Madeira nine months in theyear, the view of this steep and lofty island,* covered with brightverdure, and enlivened by numerous scattered houses, as whiteas snow, is very striking to a stranger who arrives from the low,and tame-looking shores of the south coast of England.Seamen are often deceived, when about to anchor in FunchalRoads, in consequence of the sudden transition which theyhave probably made from a low shelving coast to an abruptand high mountain-side : for the bottom of the anchorage slopesaway as suddenly as the heights overlooking it, and the anchormust indeed be let go upon the side of a mountain. Henceships seldom go close enough, unless guided by a person whoknows the place ; and many a chain cable ran out to the clinch,when chains were first used, owing to an incorrect estimate ofAbout five thousand feet high.Ijstt-v ^HiSB^.l?AW(S»Oa&EflQ® "ifOF.W ©If MA©[EO(aAoL'usii-.shr-a bj sentry CoIbtcm.Grefti Marlborough Street. 1B36.1832. DECEPTION — SQUALL — TENERIFKF 47the vessel's distance from the shore, and not taking time tosound accurately.Closing the land quickly after passing some time at sea —approaching high cliffs, or hilly shores, after being, for a time,accustomed to low coasts — or nearing a flat shore, after the eyehas been used to precipices and mountains — almost always is acause of error in estimating distance, however experienced aseaman may be.While passing at a few leagues from the land, a violentsquall came from the west, which was near doing damage :after one puff there was a short calm, with heavy rain, andthen a sudden blast struck the ship so violently that we wereobliged to take in all sail and run before it during the fewminutes it lasted. This squall was one of very many whichhave reminded me of the old doggrel lines —When rain comes before the wind,Halyards, sheets, and braces mind :But if wind comes before rain,Set and trim your sails again.At daylight the next morning we saw the Salvages, and at sunsetthought we could distinguish the Peak of Teneriffe.Early on the 6th we saw part of the island, and soon afterwardsthe upper clouds dispersed, and we enjoyed a magnificentview of the monarch of the Atlantic : the snow-coveredpeak glittering in the rays of the morning sun. Yet as ourideas are very dependent upon comparison, 1 suppose thatpersons who have seen the Himalaya Mountains, or the Andes,in all their grandeur, would not dwell much upon the viewof Teneriffe, had it not become classical by its historical associations,and by the descriptions of Humboldt and many distinguishedtravellers.Although some geographers adopted the Peak of Teneriffeas a zero point from which to reckon longitude, I am free tosay, that a less satisfactory one could hardly have been selected ;because there are no means of connecting the position of thepeak with that of the observer, whether on the shore of the48 ZERO FOR LONGITUDE — SANTA CRUZ. Jan.island, or on board a ship in the ofRng, except by a trigonometricalprocess, always open to errors. Indeed the summit ofthe peak is not visible from the east, on account of interveningland, until the observer is at some distance from the shore.Hence all meridian distances measured from Teneriffe mustdepend upon the degree of accuracy with which the position ofthe actual starting-point, with respect to the Peak, was determined.How many errors have been caused in ascertaining the longitudesof distant places, by a mistake in the longitude of theposition from which a ship, or an observer, actually departed !How many discrepancies between the measurements of differentnations would vanish, if the precise points from which eachobserver set out were known; and if the positions of thosepoints, with respect to one another, were accurately verified !About noon we approached the sun-burned, uninviting townof Santa Cruz. Lying upon a level, arid space, at the foot ofhills, that rise slowly to a considerable height, so as to shutout the more elevated part of the island ; hardly a tree to beseen, and no appearance of cultivation ; guarded by a rockyshore, on which there is always a disagreeable — often a dangeroussurf; it offers indeed little to tempt delay. But notwithstandingthis unpromising exterior, and a port so exposed thatSpanish ships of war were ordered by their Government tomoor there with four anchors, there is much to be found inthe higher and interior parts of Teneriffe which amply repaysthe labour of ascending to and exploring those regions. In oneof the churches in Santa Cruz is still hanging the remains of aflag, taken from the English, or left behind, when Nelson losthis arm.Our anchor had just touched the ground, when a boat fromthe Health Office approached nearly along-side, conveying theBritish vice-consul and some quarantine officers, who told us,after hearing whence we came, that it would be impossible togrant permission for any person to land ; and that until weshould have performed a strict quarantine of twelve days' duration,no personal communication could be expected. This1832. aUAEANTINE — SWELL SQUALL. 49regulation was adopted on account of the reports which hadreached them respecting the cholera in England.Observations on shore being indispensable for our purpose,and finding, after some discussion, that there was no chance ofattaining our object in a manner that would at all compensatefor the delay caused by anchoring and performing quarantine,we weighed without further loss of time, and made sail for theCape Verd Islands.This was a great disappointment to Mr. Darwin, who hadcherished a hope of visiting the Peak. To see it — to anchorand be on the point of landing, yet be obliged to turn awaywithout the slightest prospect of beholding TenerifFe again —was indeed to him a real calamity.During the whole of the 7th, the Peak was visible ; but onthe following day no land was in sight, and we made rapidprogress. A very long swell from the north-west, which wefelt until the 10th, was probably caused by a gale in the northernAtlantic ; and, judging from its size and velocity, Ishould think that it could not have subsided before traversingmany, perhaps ten more, degrees of latitude ; which would beto about 10° north. It is interesting to notice how far theundulatory movement of water reaches : in this case it extendedthrough at least ten decrees of latitude where the windwas from different quarters, and probably much farther.An unusual appearance was observed on the 12th. A cloudlikea dense fog-bank approached ; and as it drew near, thelower and darker part became arched, and rose rapidly, whileunder it was a white glare, which looked very suspicious.Sail was immediately reduced — we expected a violent squall ;but the cloud dispersed suddenly, and only a common freshbreeze came from the foreboding quarter. Neither the sympie-soever nor the barometer had altered at all ; but the cloudwas so threatening that I put no trust in their indications, notbeing then so firm a believer in their prophetic movements asI am at present. Nevertheless, I would by no means advocatethe neglect of any precaution suggested by appearances of theVOL. II. E50 INDICATIONS OF SQUALLS. Jan.weather, although no change should be foretold by the glasses.A mistake may be made by the observer, or a variation in theheight of the column may have passed unheeded ; while it isseldom that a practised eye can be deceived by the visiblesigns of an approaching squall or gale of wind.Undoubtedly the worst wind, next to a hurricane, which avessel can encounter, is a violent ' white squall,' so calledbecause it is accompanied by no cloud or peculiar appearancein the sky, and because of its tearing up the surface of the sea,and sweeping it along so as to make a wide sheet of foam. Bysqualls of this description, frequent in the West-indies, andoccasionally felt in other parts of the world, no notice will begiven much above the horizon ; but by consulting a goodbarometer or sympiesometer, and frequently watching thesurface of the sea itself, even a white squall may be guardedagainst in sufficient time.Squalls accompanied by clouds are so common, and at seaevery one is so much accustomed to look out for them, that Imay cause a smile by these notices ; yet as there is often muchdoubt in a young officer's mind, whether an approaching cloudwill be accompanied by wind or rain, or by both, andmany persons are unable to distinguish, by the mere appearanceof a cloud, what is likely to come with or from it, I willventure to mention that when they look hard, or hardened(like Indian ink rubbed upon an oily plate), theyindicate wind, and perhaps rain; but before the rain falls,those clouds will assume a softer appearance. When they areundefined, and look soft, rain will follow, but probably notmuch wind.Dark clouds, hard mixed with soft, and inky fragmentsin rapid motion beneath them, accompanied perhaps by lightningand distant thunder, are the fore-runners of a heavysquall. Soft, shapeless clouds, in which it is impossible topoint out a definite edge, usually bring rain, but not wind :and, generally speaking, the more distinctly defined the edgesof clouds are, the more wind they foretell. A little attention1832. REEL — CAFE VERD ISLANDS. 51to these simple observations, so familiar to persons who havebeen some time at sea, may save young officers unnecessaryanxiety in one case, and prompt them to shorten sail at aproper time in the other.*In again trying for soundings with three hundred fathomsof line, near the Island of St. Jago, we became fully convincedof the utility of a reel, which Captain Beaufort hadadvised me to procure, and of which Captain Vidal hadspoken to him in very favourable terms. Two men wereable to take in the deep sea line, by this machine, withoutinterfering with any part of the deck, except the place nearthe stern, where the reel was firmly secured. Throughoutour voyage this simple contrivance answered its object extremelywell, and saved the crew a great deal of harassingwork.15th. In consequence of a thick haze, very prevalent aboutthe Cape Verd Islands, land was not distinctly seen until wewere within three miles of it, and we then found ourselvesrather too far westward, owing to a current setting towardsthe west, at the rate of two knots an hour ; this was close tothe north point of St. Jago. Next day Ave anchored in PortPrayaa.The wind being always from the north or east during thisseason of the year (from December to June), a ship canmoor as close to the weather shore as may be convenient ;but during July, August, September and October, no vesselshould deem the bay secure, or anchor near the shore, becausesoutherly gales sometimes blow with much strength, and therollers, or heavy swell sent in by them, are dangerous toships which have bad ground tackle, or are lying near theland. As I have myself experienced the force of these galesin the vicinity of the Cape Verd Islands, and witnessed the searaised by them, I can confidently warn those who are inclinedto be incredulous about a gale of wind being found in fifteendegrees of north latitude, beyond the limits of the hurricaneregions.• In the Appendix are a few remarks on clouds.K 252 PORT Pray — Ribera GRANDE. JanStrong crusts come over the land into the bay during thefine season, when the breeze is fresh ; therefore a ship entering,with intent to anchor, ought to have a reef in her top-sails, andbe ready to clew up the top-gallant sails at a moment's warning.The vicinity of Port Prayaa offers little that is agreeable tothe eye of an ordinary visitor, though interesting enough toa geologist. A desolate and hilly country, sun-burned andstony, with but few trees even in the vallies, and those only thewithering, spectre-like trunks of old palms, surrounds the harbour.The distant and higher parts of the island, however, presenta striking outline ; and in the interior there is more to beseen, as the following extract from a few notes made by Mr.Rowlett Avill show.We procured some indifferent horses and rode to RiberaGrande, the remains of an old town, about nine miles west ofPort Prayaa, which was formerly the residence of the Portuguesegovernor of the Cape Verd Islands ; but in consequenceof the anchorage becoming blocked up,* the seat of governmentwas shifted to the small straggling town, or rathervillage, which stands upon a height overlooking the port ofPrayaa. We passed through the fertile and beautiful valliesof Achao and San Martin, and enjoyed drinking some ofthe finest water we had ever tasted. On a commanding;height stood the ruins of a very large fortress, and within thelimits of the old town were remains of a cathedral, a bishop'spalace, and a college ; besides a modern church, in tolerablerepair, an inhabited convent, and a hospital supported bycharity. In the convent we saw some good paintingsfrom scriptural subjects; and there were some curious oldtombs, on one of which, said to be that of a bishop, was thedate 1571, and on another we thought the almost obliteratedfigures were 1497.No person who has only visited the port of Prayaa canform the slightest idea of the beauty of the interior country; it exceeded any thing I had seen, either in Brazil or inthe West Indies.Perhaps by ati cai thqiiake ?1832. PRODUCE POPULATION AllCHILLA. 53Fruit was abundant; there were oranges, grapes, plantains,bananas, sour-sops, mammee apples, pomegranates, guavas,quinces, sapodillas, papaw apples, pines, citrons, medlars,figs, and occasionally apples."Notwithstanding its unfavourable exterior, its small anddirty town, and its black or brown population, I am inclinedto think Port Prayaa of more consequence to shipping than isusually supposed. Water may be procured by rafting thecasks, placing a pump in the well, and hiring a few of thenatives to do the more laborious work of filling and rolling.The local authorities are attentive and obliging : it is indeedtheir interest to be so, because much of their trade, and evenmany of the necessaries of life, depend upon the visits of shipping.Fowls, turkeys, and pigs, are very plentiful, but it isbetter to procure them by barter than with money. Clothes,new or old, are eagerly sought for, and their full value may beobtained in the produce of the island.The population is said to be about thirty thousand, a few ofwhom are Portuguese by birth, and many are descended fromPortuguese parents, but the greater number are negroes.I could hear no decided account of any earthquake havinghappened ; but being so near Fog, now an active volcano,one may suppose that St. Jago is not exempted from an occasionalshock.The exports of the Cape Verd Islands are small quantities ofsugar, cotton, and coffee. Hides of small bullocks, sheep andgoat-skins, are likewise exported ; and horses, mules, and asses,of an inferior description, are sometimes sent to the West-indies.The Archly weed, so much used in dyeing, ishowever the staple commodity, and, under proper management,might be made highly profitable. At the time of ourvisit, the yearly revenue arising out of the government monopolyof this article amounted to fifty thousand dollars ; andin some years it has been as much as three mundi-ed thousanddollars. This weed grows like a kind of moss uponthe cliffs, and is collected by men who climb up or are letdown by ropes, like the samphire gatherers.54 RAINY SEASON — STORMS. Jan,The natural dye is blue, approaching to purple ; but byusing metallic and other solutions, it may be turned to purple,crimson, or scarlet.Money having been slowly remitted of late years fromthe mother-country, a great part of the archly has beenapplied to the payment of the authorities, the clergy, and thetroops (such as they are). A story is told of the last governorhaving caused a sham mutiny, in order that he might have agood reason for selling the archly gathered that year, and withthe produce paying the troops — and himself. He was broughtout with a rope round his neck into the street, and thereobliged to promise that he would sell the archly, then in thegovernment storehouse, to the best bidder.A kind of castor-oil plant is found, from which a smallquantity of oil is obtained, and a sort of soap. Yams are veryscarce, being grown only at one part of the island. Mandiocais common, but it degenerates rapidly, and will not produceeven a second crop. Vegetables of various kinds are abundantin their seasons.From August to October is the rainy and sickly season. InSeptember, a south-west gale is usually experienced ; but fromfive to ten hours before its commencement, a dark bank ofclouds is seen in the southern horizon, which is a sureforerunner of the gale. Should a vessel be at anchor in theport at such a time, she ought to weigh and put to sea, untilthe storm has ceased and the swell subsided. In the monthof September preceding our visit, an American merchant-brigand a Portuguese slaver were at anchor in Port Prayaa. Abank of clouds was seen during the day in the S.W., and theAmerican went to sea ; but the slaver remained at anchor.A storm arose at night, drove the slave-vessel ashore, anddashed her to pieces in less than half an hour, yet did theAmerican no damage whatever, and the next day she anchoredagain in the port.In a valley near the town is a very remarkable tree,of the Baobab kind, supposed to be more than a thousandyears old ; but I am not aware of the grounds upon which this1832. FEVERS — DUST Massey's LEADS. 55assertion is made. Wild guinea-fowls are found in flocks,and there are wild-cats in the unfrequented parts of theisland ; but if induced to take a gun in pursuit of the guinea-fowls,I would advise a stranger not to overheat himself, orsleep on shore at night ; for fatal fevers have been contractedby Europeans, who were unguarded as to their health, whilepassing a few days in this hot climate, after being for sometimeaccustomed to the cold weather of a high northern latitude.Except during the rainy season, the wind is always northeasterly,and then the sky is clear and the sun very powerful ;but a dry haze hangs over the island in a peculiar manner,and a quantity of fine dust, quite an impalpable powder, frequentlysettles on every exposed surface, even on the sailsand rigging of a vessel, when passing near the islands.On the 8th of February our instruments were re-embarked,and, after swinging the ship to ascertain the amount of localattraction, we weighed anchor and sailed. By the compassfixed upon a stanchion in front of the poop, not twenty minutesdifference of bearing could be detected, in any position of thevessel : the object observed being the highest point of a sharppeak, distant eleven miles.On the 10th we spoke the Lyra packet, going from Englandto Rio de Janeiro, and received a box from her, containingsix of Massey's sounding-leads, those excellent contrivanceswhich we frequently found so useful. These machines, asformerly made, did not answer for a much greater depth thanone hundred fathoms ; because their hollow cylinder yieldedto the pressure of the water : but Mr. Massey has sinceremedied that defect in their construction.On the 13th a very confused swell seemed to presage achange of weather. Hitherto the wind had been steady fromthe north-east, and the sky clear ; but on this day large softclouds, light variable breezes, rain, and sometimes a shortcalm, showed us that we had passed the limits of the northeasttrade wind. 14th. Similar weather, with a good deal ofrain, but still breeze enough to keep us moving on our covirseiOn the loth, the wind was steady from east south-east.S6 - ST. PAUL ROCKS — BIliDS. Feb.and the sky free from heavy threatening clouds. We had thenentered the south-east trade wind, without having had twohours calm.St. Paul Rocks, or Penedo de San Pedro, were seen on thehorizon at sunset of the 15th. They appeared extremely small,being about eight miles distant ; and had we not been lookingout for them, I doubt whether they would have attractedattention. Excepting " Las Hormigas,"" on the coast of Peru, Inever saw such mere rocks at so great a distance from any land.At daylight next morning, two boats were sent to landupon, and examine them ; while the Beagle sailed round thissunk mountain top," sounding, and taking angles. Goodobservations were made during the day, as the sky was clear,and the water smooth.When our party had effected a landing through the surf,and had a moment's leisure to look about them, they wereastonished at the multitudes of birds which covered the rocks,and absolutely darkened the sky. Mr. Darwin afterwards said,that till then he had never believed the stories of men knockingdown birds with sticks ; but there they might be kicked,before they would move out of the way.The first impulse of our invaders of this bird-coveredrock, was to lay about them like schoolboys ; even the geologicalhammer at last became a missile. " Lend me the hammered''asked one. " No, no,'"'' replied the owner, " you'll breakthe handle ;" but hardly had he said so, when, overcome by thenovelty of the scene, and the example of those around him,away went the hammer, with all the force of his own right-arm. 'While our party were scrambling over the rock, a determinedstruggle was going on in the water, between the boats'*crews and sharks. Numbers of fine fish, like the groups (orgroups) of the Bermuda Islands, bit eagerly at baited hooksput overboard by the men ; but as soon as a fish was caught,a rush of voracious sharks was made at him, and notwithstandingblows of oars and boat hooks, the ravenous monsterscould not be deterred from seizing and taking away more thanhalf the fish that were hooked.1832. SHARKS— CROSS EaUATOH. 57At short intervals the men beat the water with their oarsall round the boats, in order to drive away the sharks ; andfor a few minutes afterwards the groups swarmed about thebaited hooks, and were caught as fast as the lines could behauled up— then another rush of sharks drove them away —those just caught were snatched off the hooks; and again themen were obliged to beat the water. When the boats returnedthey were deeply laden with birds and fish, both welcome tothose who had been living on salt provisions.From the highest point of the rock,* no discoloured water,nor any breaking of the sea, could be discerned, apart fromthe place itself ; and from the soundings taken in the boats,as well as on board the ship, I conclude that it is unconnectedwith any shoal, being merely the summit of a steep-sidedmountain rising from the bottom of the ocean.There was a slight current setting to the westward, notamounting to a mile an hour.At sunset that day we were out of sight of St. Paul (or St.Peter), and soon after dark were hailed by the gruff voice ofa pseudo-Neptune. A few credulous novices ran upon theforecastle to see Neptune and his car, and were received withthe watery honours which it is customary to bestow, on suchoccasions.Next morning we crossed the Equator, and the usual ceremonieswere performed.Deep was the bath, to wash away all ill ;Notched was the razor — of bitter taste the pill.Most ruffianly the barber looked — his comb was trebly nailed —And water, dashed from every side, the neophyte assailed.The disagreeable practice alluded to has been permitted inmostships, because sanctioned by time ; and though many condemnit as an absurd and dangerous piece of folly, it has alsomany advocates. Perhaps it is one of those amusements, ofwhich the omission might be regretted. Its effects on the mindsof those engaged in preparing for its mummers, who enjoy itSixty-four feet above the sea.5i3 CEREMONIES REMARKS. Feb.at the time, and talk of it long afterwards, cannot easily bejudged of without being an eye-witness.During the early ages of navigation, before the invention ofthe compass, somewhat similar, though really ceremoniousrites were observed in Spanish, Portuguese, and Italian vessels,when they passed the more remarkable promontories thenknown. A modern voyager, Kotzebue, notices this subject in amanner which appears to me so sensible, that I shall quote hiswords without affecting to add another remark.On the 11th of October we crossed the Equator, at twenty-fivedegrees west longitude, reckoning from Greenwich. Havingsaluted the southern hemisphere by the firing of guns, ourcrew proceeded to enact the usual ceremonies. A sailor, whotook pride in having frequently passed the line, directed theperformance with nmch solemnity and decorum. He appearedas Neptune, attired in a manner that was meant to be terriblyimposing, accompanied by his consort, seated on a gun-carriageinstead of a shell, drawn by negroes, as substitutes fortritons. In the evening the sailors represented, amidst generalapplause, a comedy of their own composition.These sports, while they serve to keep up the spirits of themen, and make them forget the difficulties they have to gothrough, produce also the most beneficial influence upon theirhealth ; a cheerful man being much more capable of resistinga fit of sickness than a melancholy one. It is the duty of commandersto use every innocent means of maintaining this temperin their crews ; for, in long voyages, when they are severalmonths together wandering on an element not destined by naturefor the residence of man, without enjoying even occasionally therecreations of the land, the mind naturally tends to melancholy,which of itself lays the foundation of many diseases, and sometimeseven of insanity. Diversion is often the best medicine, andused as a preservative, seldom fails of its effect." — (Kotzebue'sVoyage,' 1823-26.)Before sunset on the 19th we saw the island of FernandoNoronha, with its singular peak towering aloft, and at midnightanchored in the roadstead.1832. Fernando Corona. 59Next morning I landed with difficulty for observations, thesurf being so high that any common boat would have beenswamped. By taking great care, our broad and well-built whale-boatslanded the instruments and a small party, and rememberedthem afterwards, without accident.We landed in a small bay under the (so called) citadel, butthere is a safer and in every way preferable landing-place abouta mile to the northward. My object being chiefly to takesights of the sun, for time, and compare the chronometer usedon shore as soon as possible with those on board, I preferredlanding as near as I could to the place where the lamentedCaptain Foster observed : — but it was difficult to ascertainthe house in which his pendulum observations were made. Noteven the governor could tell me, for he had arrived since CaptainFoster's departure ; and most of the inhabitants of theisland had changed their dwellings frequently, being all exilesfrom Brazil.The governor was a major in the Brazilian service, born atPernambuco, and under his command were two hundred blacktroops, and about eight hundred human beings, only thirtyof whom were women, and a very few children.We obtained some fire wood from one of the islets northwardof the principal island ; but it was full of centipedes andother noxious insects, from which it was not easy to free iteven by charring and washing. Water we did not try to get,because of the heavy surf, but there is no scarcity of it onthe island. Neither live-stock nor vegetables could be procuredfrom the apathetic inhabitants.This place is rather picturesque ; and the lofty barren peak,already mentioned, is conspicuous from every point of view.Near the summit is a station from which a look-out is kept,not only over all the island, but over many leagues of the surroundingsea ; so that neither ship nor boat can approachor depart, during daylight, without being noticed.No boats are allowed to be kept on the island, and nointercourse is held with shipping without permission and thestrictest inspection.We sailed from Fernando Noronha the same evening, passed60 BAHIA — SAN SALVADOR. Feb.round the north-east extremity of the island, and steered forBahia de Todos Santos. Having remained only one day atanchor, in consequence of information that no better landingcould be expected for many days ; and wishing to ascertain therates of the chronometers, as well as to procure a supply ofwater, I decided to go to Bahia, as the nearest port convenientfor both purposes. From the 23d to the 27th we found a currentsetting us southward, between twenty and thirty mileseach day. This was quite unexpected by me, for I thoughtthat we should have been set westward. At daylight on the28th we made the land about Bahia, and before noon were atanchor in the port.As we sailed in rapidly from the monotonous sea, andpassed close along the steep but luxuriantly wooded northshore, we were much struck by the pleasing view. After thelight-house was passed, those by whom the scene was unexpectedwere agreeably surprised by a mass of wood, clingingto a steep bank, which rose abruptly from the dark-blue sea,showing every tint of green, enlivened by bright sunshine,and contrasted by deep shadow : and the general charm washeightened by turreted churches and convents, whose whitewalls appeared above the waving palm trees ; by numerousshipping at anchor or under sail ; by the delicate airy sails ofinnumerable canoes ; and by the city itself, rising like anamphitheatre from the water-side to the crest of the heights.We found ourselves in the middle of the rainy season, andalthough favoured by a fine day at arriving, cloudy weatherand frequent rain succeeded it, and during the short stay wemade, much embarrassed our observations.Bahia has declined ever since its separation from Portugal: unsettled, weak governments, occupied too constantlyby party strife to be able to attend to the real improvementof their country, have successively misruled it. Revolutions,and risings of the negro population, interrupting trade, haverepeatedly harassed that rich and beautiful country, and arestill impending.Were property secure, and industry encouraged, the tradefrom Bahia might be very extensive, particularly in sugar and1832. SLAVERY IN BRAZIL. 61cotton : but who will embark much capital upon so insecure afoundation as is there offered .''The immense extent and increase of the slave population isan evil long foreseen and now severely felt. Humanely as theBrazilians in general treat their slaves, no one can supposethat any benevolence will eradicate feelings excited by thesituation of those human beings. Hitherto the obstacles tocombinations and general revolt among the negroes, have beenignorance, mutual distrust, and the fact of their being nativesof various countries, speaking different languages, and in manycases hostile to each other, to a degree that hardly their hatredof white men can cause them to conquer, even for their immediateadvantage.The slave trade has already entailed some of its lamentableconsequences upon the Brazilians, in demoralizing them by extremeindolence, and its sure accompaniment, gross sensuality;but there are in store afflictions hitherto unfelt, occasioned bythe growing hordes of enemies who are yearly causing moreperplexity and dread in the territories of Brazil.Could the Brazilians see clearly their own position, unanimouslycondemn and prevent the selfish conduct of individuals,emancipate the slaves now in their country, and decidedlyprevent the introduction of more, Brazil would commence acareer of prosperity, and her population would increase in anunlimited degree. In that immense and most fertile country,distress cannot be caused by numerous inhabitants ; food isabundant, and the slight clothing required in so warm a climateis easily procured.The chief, if not the only cause of the slave trade in Brazil,is want of population — want of an industrious population,able as well as willing to clear away primeval forests, andrender the soil fit for culture — able to work in the openfields under a hot sun, to cultivate the sugar cane, cottonplants, mandioca, and other productions of tropical climates.While this extensive and most powerful cause exists, selfish,unprincipled owners of immense territories in Brazil, and elsewhere,will not refrain from importing hundreds, even SLAVERY — CITY. Marchsands of unhappy wretches, who, once landed, become thehelpless instruments of immense gain to their owners : neithercan any reasonable number of shipping efficiently blockadethe coasts of two great continents.If I am right in these assertions, it appears that there isno method by which the slave trade can be totally suppressed,except by destroying the cause of so abominable a traffic : andthat, to this end, a native population should be encouraged inhot climates, who, being gradually inured to work on theirnative soil, for remuneration from their employers, and a prospectof future comfort for themselves and their offspring, wouldtotally supersede the demand for constrained labour. Of course,the only way by which such a result could be obtained — Ishould say, perhaps, the first step towards so satisfactory aresult, would be, that the government of a slave-importingcountry should declare that trade piratical : and proclaimevery human being free ; bound to no man, free to do anythingnot contrary to religion, or law, from the moment he orshe embarked on board a vessel belonging to that country, orplaced a foot upon its soil ; which might then indeed be termed,in common with our happy land, a sacred soil. By such aplan as this, individuals would suffer for a time, but the massof society would be gainers incalculably.Wel-known authors have already said so much of Bahia, itsspacious harbour, and delightful environs, that it Avould beimpertinent in the writer of a mere narrative to add his hastyremarks to the calmly considered information which their workscontain. But I will venture to notice that however pleaseda stranger to Bahia may be at the sensations conveyed throughhis eyes, previous to landing, he will be miserably disappointedwhen he finds himself in the dij'ty, narrow, crowded,and hot ' lower town ;■■ and that the sooner he gets into asedan* chair, and desires the almost naked bearers to make thebest of their way to the ' upper town,' where he will enjoyAn arm-chair, with a high hack, a foot-board, and curtains to drawround, hung to a pole which rests on the shoulders of two men.tSsegm!3■■■'i? •''X ''\1832. SHOALS ABROLHOS. 63fresh air, a pleasing view, and freedom from annoyances, theless his organs will be offended, and his temper tried.We sailed from Bahia on the 18th. The bank which projectsfrom the light-house point had been minutely examinedby us, during the Beagle's stay in port ; on one day, indeed,she went out and anchored at the outer end of the shoal, inorder to determine its extent, and assist the boats in sounding ;therefore I did not hesitate to stand across it ; but there is notwater enough over the shallower parts for any ship drawingmore than fourteen feet, especially if there is a swell. Theshortest spot is near the outer end ; ships of any size may passbetween the inner extremity and the plant of land adjacentto it.There are rocks and dangerous shallows southward of theport, which it is extremely necessary to guard against inapproaching it from sea, because the current generally setstowards the south, and ships have got ashore on those shoalsin consequence. The land northward of Bahia should bemade, and some white sandy patches, looking like linen hungout to dry, should be seen before a ship steers more southerly.After losing sight of the land, our course was shaped to thesouth-east, towards the eastern limit of the great bank ofsoundings which extends so far to seaward of the Abrolhosislets. Having reached the parallel of the islands, and being tothe eastward of the easternmost soundings laid down in anychart, without finding any ground with three hundred fathomsof line, I began to steer westward — sounding continually, andkeeping a sharp look-out at the mast-head. At two in theafternoon of the 26th, we had no bottom, with three hundredfathoms of line; and at the next cast, about an hour afterwards,found only thirty fathoms, without there being the slightestchange in the colour of the water, or in its temperature, or anyother indication of so sudden a change in the depth. We hauledto the wind directly, worked to the eastward in order to ascertainthe precise limit of the bank, and lost soundings as suddenlyas we had previously struck them. A grapnel was thenput overboard, with two hundred fathoms of line, and we64 ABROLHOS BANKS AND ISLETS. Marcelagain steered westward, till a heavy pull upon the line, anda sudden jerk, showed that we had hooked the bank.The ship was hove-to, and the necessary observations madeon the spot. The grapnel, when hauled up, was found to bestraightened, a proof, in addition to that afforded by the lead,that the bottom was rocky. Our soundings at this time werethirty-eight fathoms, and thence to the Abrolhos islets wecarried a line of soundings, no where exceeding that depth,but extremely irregular, between thirty-six and four fathoms.As far as we had time to examine, the chart of these islands,by the Baron Roussin, appeared to be satisfactory ; but thesoundings are so very irregular in the vicinity of the Abrolhos,that little dependence could be placed on the lead. More thanonce we had four or five fathoms under one side of the vessel,and from fifteen to twenty under the other. These sudden andstartling changes, called by the French, ' Salts de sonde,' arevery unpleasant and perplexing.The tide, or rather current, which we found when lying atanchor near the islets, set continually to the southward, varyingin strength from half a mile to a mile and a half an hour ;but we had only three days' experience.I had imagined, from what I had heard, that the rock ofwhich these islets were chiefly composed was coral ; but was surprizedto find only coralline growing upon gneiss or sandstone.While sounding near the Abi'olhos we made a great numberof experiments with Massey's lead, in order to verify itsqualities ; and found it agree remarkably well with the commonlead, while in less than forty fathoms, but differ fromit frequently when the depth of water exceeded seventyfathoms ; and wholly fail when used in upwards of one hundredand twenty fathoms. The failure, in great depths, was inconsequenceof the small hollow cylinder, to which the vaneswere attached, bursting, or rather, being compressed by theweight of water. Some more remarks upon this instrumentwill be found in the Appendix.We anchored near the islets, at dusk, on the 28th, afterbeing in frequent anxiety, owing to sudden changes in the1832. ABROLHOS — BIRDS FISH. 65depth of water; and next morning, moved to a better berthat the west side, very near them. They are rather low, butcovered with grass, and there is a little scattered brushwood.The highest point rises to about a hundred feet above thesea. Their geological formation, Mr. Darwin told me, is ofgneiss and sandstone, in horizontal strata. When our boatslanded, immense flights of birds rose simultaneously, anddarkened the air. It was the breeding and mounting season ;nests full of eggs, or young unfledged birds, absolutely coveredthe ground, and in a very short time our boats were laden withtheir contents.A large black bird, with a pouch like that of a pelican, butof a bright red colour, was very remarkable, as it hovered, ordarted ainono- the bright verdure, and at a distance lookedhandsome ; but when seen close, it at once descended to thelevel of a carrion-eating cormorant or buzzard.Turtle are to be found at times : we observed the shell andskeleton of an extremely large one lying on a sandy spot atthe north side of the northern islet. Some very line fish, of thecod kind, were caught ; one was so large, that, until hauledon board, it was supposed to be a shark. The anchorage isgood, and easy of access: all swell is stopped by the shallowplaces, and by the islets themselves. There is no freshwater.If a general reader should honour these pages by hisperusal, and find such details about wood, water, fish, birds,&c., at places about which few know, and still fewer care —extremely tiresome, he will of course pass them over ; butinmy own exculpation, I must beg to be permitted to remindhim that the Beagle was employed by Government, to obtainpractical information likely to be useful to shipping ; and thatI might neglect my duty by omitting to mention such matters,when speaking of places which are seldom visited, and hithertobut slightly known.By those employed in the coasting trade, the Abrolhosare said to be particularly subject to squalls. If this be true,what is the reason ? Have the extensive shallows in theirVOL, II. F66 SQUALLS — SOUNDINGS CAPE FRIO.vicinity any connection with the fact ? Thinking myself thatthey have, I would beg the reader to bear this idea in mind,when, at another part of this narrative, the squalls so frequentin the dangerous archipelago of the low islands arementioned.*March 30th. We sailed and sounded in various directions,but such irregular depths I never found elsewhere. Suddenjumps, from thirty to ten, sometimes even to four fathoms,in successive casts of the hand-lead, gave us frequent alarm ;but by keeping a boat a-head, and two leads going briskly, weavoided danger, and giving up exploring, regained before darkthe safe channel which runs north and south between theAbrolhos and the main land, and steered to pass near CapeSan Tome, or St, Thomas. Next day we were off that cape,but saw none of the breakers which have been so frequentlyreported to lie at a dangerous distance from the neighbouringshore ; although we looked out for them, and steered so as topass the places where I was informed they would be seen.On the 3d of April, we passed Cape Frio. I wished tovisit the cove in which the Lightning and Algerine lay, whilerecovering the treasure sunk in the unfortunate Thetis, butcircumstances were unfavourable.The Bermuda Islands (" still vexed Bedclothes") may also bethoughtof, as being similarly' circumstanced.CHAPTER IV.Loss of the Thetis— Causes of her wreck — Approach to Rio de JaneiroOwen Glendower — Disturbance in Rio Harbour — Observations —Chronometers — Return to Bahia — Deaths — Macacu — Malaria —Return to Rio de Janeiro — Meridian Distances — Regatta — FuegiansLightning — Leave Rio — Equipment — Santa Martha — Weather —Santa Catharina — Santos — River Plata — Pampered — Gales off BuenosAyres — Monte Video — Point Piedras — Cape San Antonio — RiverPlata — Currents — Tides — Barometer — Absence of trees — Cattle.Among the shipwrecks which have taken place during lateyears, perhaps none excited so much astonishment, or causedso much trouble and discussion, as the loss of that fine frigatethe Thetis.Had any seaman been asked, on what frequented shore therewas least probability of a wreck, I almost think he wouldhave answered on that of Cape Frio. Yet, against the highcliffs of that bold and well-known coast did she run ' stemon,' going nine knots. One may conceive the shock andgeneral consternation as she crashed against the rocky cliff,and all her masts fell inboard.As some who turn over these pages may not have read theproceedings of the Court-martial held after the return of herofficers to England, I will insert a short account, derivedchiefly from those of old friends and shipmates, who were onboardher at the awful time of Iter wreck.The Thetis sailed from Rio de Janeiro on the 4th of December1830, and worked to the southward all day, against asoutherly wind and thick foggy weather. At Ih. 30m. a.m.on the 5th, she saw Rata Island for the last time, bearing New.by W., and distant eight or nine miles. The weather wasstill hazy, indeed at times very thick, and the wind southeast.She stood off on the larboard tack until seven a.m.,and then the wind having increased, and a cross sea gettingup, she wore to the eastward. Soon afterwards the winddrew to SS.E., and the ship was kept by the wind on theF 268 LOSS OF THE THETIS. Decemberstarboard tack until Ih. 30m. p.m., when it was consideredthat Cape Frio bore about N. 40° E., distant thirty-eightmiles. The position at noon, by dead reckoning, gave theCape bearing N. 43. E., distant forty-one miles ; all the calculationsgiving results between that and N. 51. E., fifty-threemiles ; but by dead reckoning only, as neither sun, moon, orstars had been seen. At Ih. 30m. the wind being scant, theship was steered E. by N., and at two, a cross sea checking herway through the water, the course was altered to En. E. Attwo, when the course was thus changed, she had run nineteenmiles since noon, and at four, twenty more miles had beenmade on the E.N.E. course ; at which time, four p.m. (underthe idea that she was almost abreast of Cape Frio, supposed tobe then distant about twenty-four miles), seeing a large ship,courses down,' in-shore of her, steering west or W. by N.,with all sail set ; and the weather clearing, for an interval,without any land being seen ; it was concluded that the Thetiswas still further from the shore than had been estimated, andher course was altered to Nee. by E. At five, the crew wasmustered at quarters, after which the reefs were mended, andthe fore top-gallant sail, jibs, spanker, and reefed fore topmaststudding-sail were set. From four o'clock to six she ran,by log, twenty-one miles ; after six the weather became verythick and rainy : and when the look-out men were relieved ateight o'clock, it was so dark, and rained so fast, that nothing-couldbe distinguished half a ship's length distant. Soon aftereight one of the look-out men, named Robinson, said to anotherman on the forecastle,* " Look how fast that squall iscoming" (this was the cliff looming indistinctly through therain and darkness), and next moment, " Land-head," "Harda-port," rung in the ears of the startled crew, and were echoedterribly by the crashing bowsprit, and thundering fall of theponderous masts.The hull did not then strike the rocks, having answeredthe helm so fast as to be turning off shore when the bowsprit• Borsworthick. Both these men afterwards sailed with me in theBeagle.1830. LOSS OF THE THETIS. 69broke ; but the lee yard-arm irons (boom-irons) actually struckfire from the rocky precipice as they grated harshly against it,the boom ends snapping off like icicles.All three masts fell aft and inward, strewing the deck withkilled and wounded men. An immense black barrier impendedhorribly, against which heavy breakers were dashing with anominous sound ; but the ship's hull was still uninjured. Sentrieswere placed over the spirit-room ; a sail was hoisted uponthe stump of the main-mast ; the winches were manned ; gunsfired ; rockets sent up, and blue-lights burned ; the quarter-boatswere cleared away to be ready for lowering ; and ananchor was let go ; but the water was so deep, that before shebrought up, her stern drifted upon a more shelving part of therock. Several men then tried to land ; but, in jumping ashore,many slipped, and were drowned in the surf, or crushedagainst the rocks. The stern and lee quarter boats were dashedto pieces, as the surf hove the ship against the cliff, and noboat was then available ; for the others were either stove, or socovered with wreck, that they could not be used. Finding thatthe anchor, which had been let go, did no good, but seemedto keep her tailing upon the rocks, the cable was slipped, afterwhich her head fell off to the westward. It was then foundthat the water was gaining, and the winches were worked.Successive waves threw her starboard quarter upon the rocks ;and the effects of repeatedly striking were soon but too apparent,as the water burst open the spirit-room hatches.At this moment a small opening appeared, into which theship providentially drove. It was at first thought that thiswas the opening into Cape Frio Harbour ; but it proved to beonly a very small cove, or indentation of the rocky cliffs. Whiledrifting close along the rocks into this cove, a hawser waspassed ashore, by which afterwards several persons landed.The ship struck heavily in the cove, gave some tremendousyawns, and sink. As she then lay upon the rocky bottom,each succeeding wave broke over and just covered her. By aviolent surge, the rock to which the hawser above-mentionedhad been made fast, was torn away ; and, for a short time, all70 # LOSS OF THE THETIS. Dec.hope of further communication with the land was suspended.Every effort that could be made to convey a rope to the shorewas attempted in vain, until Mr. Each, the boatswain, wentout on the stump of the bowsprit, and by the help of twobelaying-pins, succeeded in throwing the end of a small ropeto the rocks, by which a large one was immediately hauledashore, and then kept as much stretched as the strength of themen who had landed would allow. On this larger rope eachman was slung, in his turn, and hauled by the small onethrough the surf to a rough craggy rock. Mr. Each andJohn Langley, the captain of the forecastle, were among thelast to leave the ship, having almost exhausted themselves inslinging their shipmates.As day-light broke, the last man was hauled ashore. Manywere terribly bruised and lacerated by the fall of the masts, orduring these struggles for life, and twenty-five persons perished.Some of the officers made their way to a small village nearCape Frio, and obtained horses, and a guide who conductedthem to Rio de Janeiro, where the melancholy news was communicatedto the commander-in-chief. The captain, the otherofficers, and the crew, remained near the place of the wreck,waiting for assistance.An adequate cause for so great an error in the reckoning ofonly nineteen hours as that which occasioned the loss of thisfine ship and twenty-five souls, besides the personal property ofthose on board, and a large freight of treasure, is not difficultto find, even without supposing the compasses to have been inerror, or affected by local attraction, which, by the way, wouldin this case have operated in the ship's favour.The vicinity of Cape Frio, one of the most salient promontorieson the coast of Brazil, cannot be supposed exempt fromcurrents ; set in motion either by temporary causes, such asstrong or lasting winds ; or by the varying pressure of theatmosphere upon different portions of the ocean : — or fromtidal streams, more or less strong.1830. ' LOSS OF THE THETIS. 71Presuming that the Thetis was carried out of her supposedposition, by the former cause, about twenty-four miles ; surelyrather more than a mile an hour is no surprising current duringnineteen hours. But if a stream of tide also affected her, inthat time she would have had one whole tide either in herfavour or against her.There was no reason to suspect the existence of much currentnear Cape Frio, when the Thetis was lost, except on suchgeneral grounds as those just mentioned, because no pilot, asfar as I know, was aware of such a fact. With strong southerlywinds ships of large size do not often leave Rio de Janeiro —coasting vessels never — therefore few persons could have experiencedits effect when sailing from the port; and whenapproaching Rio in similar weather, vessels sail before a fairwind, steer by sight of the land, and take little notice of thelog : besides which, they then employ but three or four hoursin passing through that space of sea where the Thetis wasdetained nineteen.In all probability, such a current as that which drove theThetis on the rocks is only to be found during southerly winds,and in the summer season of that climate, when the general setof the current is along the coast, towards the south and west.If' a man of war is accidentally lost, a degree of astonishmentis expressed at the unexpected fate of a fine ship,well found, well manned, and well officered ; and blame isimputed to some one : but before admitting a hastily-formedopinion as fact, much inquiry is necessary. As in the caseof the Thetis, an English man-of-war may incur risk in consequenceof a praiseworthy zeal to avoid delaying in port,as a merchant-ship would probably be obliged to do, from herbeing unable to beat out against an adverse wind, and, likethat frigate, may be the first to prove the existence of anunsuspected danger.Those who never run any risk ; who sail only when the windis fair ; who heave to when approaching land, though perhapsa day's sail distant ; and who even delay the performance ofurgent duties until they can be done easily and quite safely ; are.72 APPROACH Rio DK JANEIRO. 1819doubtless, extremely prudent persons: — but rather unlikethose officers whose names will never be forgotten while Englandhas a navy.Of the measures taken for recovering the treasure sunk inthe Thetis, much has appeared in print ; therefore I will notadd a word to that subject of controversy.Weather such as that which caused the loss of the Thetis,is only at times met with off Cape Frio ; a clear sky, with ahot sun, and but little wind, is more usual ; and as my firstapproach to Rio de Janeiro, on board H.M.S. Owen Glendower,in 1819, made much impression upon me, I will endeavourto describe ifs circumstances.High blue mountains were seen in the west, just after thesun had set, and with a fair wind we approached the landrapidly. The sea was quite smooth, but a freshening breezeupon our quarter carried us on, nearly thirteen knots an hour.Though dark as any cloudy tropical night, when neitheruioon nor star relieves the intense blackness — astern of us•\vas a long and perfectly straight line of sparkling light,caused by the ship's rapid way through the water ; and aroundthe bows, as far forward as the bowsprit end, was dazzlingfoam, by whose light I read a page of common print. Sheetlightning played incessantly near the western horizon : andsometimes the whole surface of the sea seemed to be illuminated.As the moon rose, and the breeze decreased, the contrasts oflight and darkness, of swift change of place and apparent tranquillity,lost their effect. Next morning we had a dead calm :high land towered over the fog-banks, which were slowlydrawn upwards and dispersed by the heat of a powerful sun ;and the sea was smooth as a lake. Numbers of that beautifulfish, the dorado, often called a dolphin, were caught ; and thevivid, various colours displayed, as they lay upon our deck,exceeded description. Well I remember too the trouble wemiddies had with the sun at noon on that day ; not with the sunabove our heads, but with its image reflected by our quadrants.As he was almost vertical over us, we were dispersed round theship, each thinking he had brought the reflected image down1819 — 32. RIO DE Janeiro. 73to the proper point of the horizon, until, startled by hearingtwelve o'clock,' reported by the master, we found too late, andmuch to our annoyance, that it would have been wiser to havelooked at the compass before observing the altitude.Soon after mid-day black curling ripples stole along thehitherto glassy surface ; sail was made, the sea-breeze freshened,and we steered towards the entrance of that magnificentharbour, Rio de Janeiro.Often as it has been visited and described, I cannot expectany one to require another sketch, but will merely remarkthat I know no port ecfual to it in situation, security, capacity,convenience, and abundant supply of every necessary, as wellas in picturesque beauty. A day or two after the Owen Glendoweranchored, a party of her midshipmen were allowed totake a boat and enjoy a day's excursion in the beautiful harbour,or rather gulf. We landed on an island, which seemedto me like an immense hot-bed, so luxuriant and aromaticwere the shrubs, and so exotic the appearance of every treeand flower. Years since elapsed have not in the least diminishedmy recollection of the novelty and charm of that firstview of tropical vegetation.To return to the Beagle. On the 3d we were near RataIsland, but detained by calms. The light-house lately erectedthere showed a bright revolving, or rather intermitting light.On the following day, when the sea-breeze set in, we steeredfor the harbour. The sun shone brightly, and there wereenough passing clouds to throw frequent shadows over thewooded heights and across vallies, where, at other times, thebrightest tints of varied green were conspicuous : yet I didnot think the place half so beautiful as formerly. The charmof novelty being gone, and having anticipated too much, wereperhaps the causes ; and it is possible that so much wood hasbeen cleared away in late years, as to have diminished sensiblythe rich and picturesque appearance which it certainly oncepossessed.As we shortened sail under the stern of our flag-ship, I wassurprised by finding Sir Thomas Baker, the mo DE JANEIRO. Aprilchief, giving directions for the positions to be taken forthwithby the ships of his squadron then present, and orders for theboats to be prepared for landing marines. This was in consequenceof one of those disturbances almost usual in SouthAmerica, especially in Brazil. Some outrages had been committedin the town, and a mutiny had broken out among thetroops. Under old and established governments, revolt andmutiny are events which so seldom occur that their shock isnot only felt at the time, but transmits vibrations through succeedingages. In these unsettled states, however, they recur sofrequently, that even on the spot they cause little sensation, andexcepting by those personally concerned, are scarcely rememberedafterwards.Few strangers visit the metropolis of Brazil without beingdisappointed, if not disgusted. Numbers of almost nakednegroes, hastening along narrow streets — offensive sights andsmells, an uncivil and ill-looking native population — indisposeone to be pleased, even with novelty ; but impressionssuch as these soon wear off. In the environs of the city aremany good houses, in beautiful situations ; and while enjoyingdelightful rides amidst the richest and most varied scenery, orresting in the shade of a veranda, refreshed by the sea-breeze,and overlooking a prospect hardly to be surpassed in the worldthe annoyances and the nuisances of the town are forgotten.With respect to astronomical observations, I was extremelyunfortunate at Rio de Janeiro, except in those simple ones fortime and latitude, which depend upon sextants and artificialhorizons. Being the rainy season, but few nights were favourablefor observing the transits of stars with the moon, andthose few were too near the full moon to be available. But hadthe weather been otherwise, I doubt whether I should haveobtained satisfactory results, because the transit instrumentemployed was of an inferior construction, and still more,because I was unaccustomed to its use. So much time wasemployed, to the prejudice of other duties, in adjusting andrc-adjusting this imperfect instrument, and ineffectually watchingfor intervals of clear sky, that I resolved to set up the transit1832. OBSERVATIONS CHRONOMETERS. 75no more, until I had an interval of leisure, and a prospect ofsome cloudless nights.Having so many good chronometers on board ; being practisedin observations such as they require ; and placing greatconfidence in their results ; I felt inclined to give attentionand time to them rather than to perplex myself, and causemuch delay in moving from place to place, by attemptingseries of observations which would give occupation to an astronomer,and could not be undertaken by me, while activelyengaged in coast-survey, without interfering with other duties.In the Appendix it may be seen how far results obtained bythe chronometers agree with those of a higher class, especiallywith the recent ones of Captain Beechey, to whose determinations,resulting from moon-culminating observations, I concludethat a high value will be attached, because he is a well-practisedand able observer.As I found that a difference, exceeding four miles oflongitude, existed between the meridian distance from Bahiato Rio, determined by the French expedition under BaronRoussin, and that measured by the Beagle ; yet was unableto detect any mistake or oversight on my part ; I resolved toreturn to Bahia, and ascertain whether the Beagle's measurementwas incorrect. Such a step was not warranted by myinstructions ; but I trusted to the Hydrographer for appreciatingmy motives, and explaining them to the Lords of theAdmiralty. In a letter to Captain Beaufort, I said, " I have notthe least doubt of our measurement from Bahia; but do not thinkthat any other person would rely on this one measure only,differing widely, as it does, from that of a high authority — theBaron Roussin. By repeating it, if it should be verified, moreweight will be given to other measures made by the sameinstruments and observers."We sailed with the ebb-tide and sea-breeze, cleared the portbefore the land-wind rose, and when it sprung up steered alongthe coast towards Cape Frio. Most persons prefer sailing fromRio early in the morning, with the land-wind ; but to anywell-manned vessel, there is no difficulty whatever in working76 RETURN TO BAHIA DEATHS. Mayout of the port during a fresh sea-breeze, unless the flood-tideshould be running in strongly.On this passage one of our seamen died of a fever, contractedwhen absent from the Beagle with several of her officers, on anexcursion to the interiors part of the extensive harbour ofRio de Janeiro. One of the ship's boys, who was in the sameparty, lay dangerously ill, and young Musters seemed destinedto be another victim to this deadly fever.It was while the interior of the Beagle was being painted,and no duty going on except at the little observatory on Island, that those officers who could be spared madethis excursion to various parts of the harbour. Among otherplaces they were in the river Macacu, and passed a night there.No effect was visible at the time ; the party returned in apparenthealth, and in high spirits ; but two days had not elapsed whenthe seaman, named IVIorgan, complained of headach and fever.The boy Jones and Mr. Musters were taken ill, soon afterwards,in a similar manner ; but no serious consequences werethen apprehended, and it was thought that a change of airwould restore them to health. Vain idea ! they gradually becameworse ; the boy died the day after our arrival in Bahia ;and, on the 19th of May, my poor little friend Charles Musters,who had been entrusted by his father to my care, and was afavourite with every one, ended his short career.My chief object in now mentioning these melancholy facts isto warn the few who are not more experienced than I was at thattime, how very dangerous the vicinity of rivers may be in hotclimates. Upon making more inquiry respecting those streamswhich run into the great basin of Rio de Janeiro, I foundthat the Macacu was notorious among the natives as beingoften the site of pestilential malaria, fatal even to themselves.How the rest of our party escaped, I know not ; for they wereeleven or twelve in number, and occupied a day and night inthe river. When they left the ship it was not intended thatthey should go up any river ; the object of their excursionbeing to visit some of the beautiful islets which stud the harbour.None of us were aware, however, that there was soMay 1832. macacu — malaria. 77daiio-erous a place as the fatal Macacu within reach. I questionedevery one of the party, especially the second lieutenantand master, as to what the three who perished had done differentfrom the rest ; and discovered that it was believed theyhad bathed during the heat of the day, against positive orders,and unseen by their companions ; and that Morgan had sleptin the open air, outside the tent, the night they passedon the bank of the Acaciasfar as I am aware, the risk, in cases such as these, ischiefly encountered by sleeping on shore, exposed to the air onor near the low banks of rivers, in woody or marshy placessubject to great solar heat. Those who sleep in boats, or undertents, suffer less than persons sleeping on shore and exposed ;but they are not always exempt, as the murderous moralitieson the coast of Africa prove. Whether the cause of disease isa vapour, or gas, formed at night in such situations, or only acheck to perspiration when the body is peculiarly affected bythe heat of the climate, are questions not easy to answer, if Imay judge from the difficulty I have found in obtaining anysatisfactory information on the subject. One or two remarksmay be made here, perhaps. — The danger appears to be incurredwhile sleeping ; or when over heated ; not while awake andmoderately cool ; therefore we may infer that a check to theperspiration which takes place at those times is to be guardedagainst, rather than the breathing of any peculiar gas, or air,rising from the rivers or hanging over the land, which mighthave as much effect upon a person awake, as upon a sleeper.Also, to prevent being chilled by night damp, and cold, aswell as to purify the air, if vapour or gas should indeed be thecause of fever, it is advisable to keep a large fire burning whilethe sun is below the horizon. But the subject of malaria hasbeen so fully discussed by medical men, that even this shortdigression is unnecessary.To return to the narrative. Mr. Bynoe consulted with thebest medical advisers at Bahia,and afterwards at Rio de Janeiro,and he and I had the melancholy satisfaction of knowing thatthe best had been done for his patients.78 RETURN TO RTO DE JANEIRO. MayThe affectionate kindness of Mr. Bynoe on this, and indeedevery occasion where his skill and attention were required,will never be forgotten by any of his shipmates.In our passage from Rio de Janeiro to Bahia, we passed betweenthe Abrolhos Islands and the main land, having a freshsoutherly wind, and cloudy weather, with frequent rain. Ofcourse there was some anxiety until we saw the islands, and itwas necessary to keep the lead constantly going ; but we gotinto no difficulty, and, assisted by Massey's log, as well asMassey's lead, we made a short passage, without an hour's delayor scant wind. This was favourable for the chronometer measurement,and I was deeply gratified by finding, soon after ourarrival, that the measure from Rio to Bahia confirmed thatpreviously made, even to a second of time.On the 23d of May, we sailed the second time fromBahia, and steered to pass as near as possible to the easternside of the Abrolhos ; but, owing to unfavourable winds,could not approach near-er to them than in fourteen fathomswater.When examining many of the cases of preserved meat* withwhich the Admiralty had ordered us to be provided, we foundthat several had burst and caused a most disagreeable smell.This was not the fault of the tin cases, but an unavoidableaccident consequent upon their being stowed where salt waterhad occasional access, and corroded the tin. In so small andso crammed a hold as ours, it was not easy to make stowagefor every thing that ought to be kept dry, particularly witha hatch-deck, while rolling about in the Bay of Biscay ; butbeing warned by this first appearance of decay, our internalarrangement was partly changed, and some of the hatches onthe lower deck temporarily caulked down.Delayed by southerly winds and a long heavy swell fromthe southward, we made rather a tedious passage back to Rio,and did not anchor until the night of the 3d of June.Next day (4th) the usual sets of equal altitudes wereobserved ; and after the chronometer rates were ascertained, IPrepared by Killer and Moors.June 1832. meridian distances — regatta. 79had the satisfaction of finding that this third meridian distanceagreed exactly with the first and second. Upon further examination,it was seen that the Abrolhos Islands were laid downcorrectly in the French chart, with respect to Bahia ; but thatthe meridian distance between those islands and Rio de Janeirodiffered more than four miles from that resulting from threemeasures made by our twenty chronometers.A few weeks afterwards all the data and results of thesemeasurements were given to the French Commander-in-chief onthe station, who promised to forward them to the Baron Rous-sin; but I have heard nothing of their having been received.Even those who are disposed to place little reliance on theperformance of chronometers, and who doubt the accuracy ofdistances measured by the transport of time, might be interestedby a glance at the particulars of these meridian distances, whichare given in the Appendix. They much increased my ownconfidence in that simple method of ascertaining differences oflongitude, and tended to determine my dependence upon aconnected chain of meridian distances, in preference to anyother mode of finding the precise longitude.While watering, and rating the chronometers, a few comparativelyleisure days afforded a seasonable opportunity for tryingthe qualities of boats, and exciting fair emulation amongtheir crews. With the Commander-in-chiefs permission, andthe encouragement of the officers of his squadron, then in theport, some good boat-races were arranged ; and knowing howmuch might afterwards depend upon inequalities of the Beagle'sboats, it was very gratifying to find them excellent. Four ofthe set were built by Mr. Johns, the well-known boat-builderin Plymouth Dock-yard, and the other two by Mr. May, ourcarpenter. Captain Talbot, of the Warspite, and CaptainLandgrave, of the Seringapatam, tried their best boats andbest men on two successive days, to the encouragement of theboats' crews and boat-sailers of the squadron, and much to thesurprise of the Brazilians, who had never witnessed any thinglike a regatta.From our first arrival at Rio de Janeiro, until we were80 FUEGIANS — CLIMATE LIGHTNING. Julyready to leave, finally, in July, little Fuegia was staying onshore, at the house of an Englishwoman, near Botalbgo bay ;and it is worth noticing, that while there, she was supposed bystrangers to be one of the aboriginal natives of Brazil : andthat I went with York and Jemmy to see a person (whohad been many years resident in the interior of Brazil) whoremarked, directly he saw them, " they are extremely like theBrazilian aborigines !"At this time of year (July) the climate of Rio is comparativelycool and pleasant. Cloudy skies, southerly winds, andrain, are frequent ; but there is less thunder and lightning thanin summer, when not only thunder-storms occur often, butevery night there is a continual flashing or reflection of lightningover the distant Org-an mountains.Many ships and buildings have been struck, during lateyears, still there are but a very few protected by lightningconductors. I was a lieutenant on board the Thetis, when herforemast was shattered by lightning, in Rio Harbour, andshall not easily forget the sensation. Some of the officers weresitting in the gun-room, one very dark evening, while the heavenswere absolutely black, and the air hot and close, to anoppressive degree, but not a drop of rain falling, when arattling crash shook the ship. Some thought several guns hadbeen fired together — others, that an explosion of powder hadtaken place ; but one said — " The ship is struck by lightning !"and that was the case. The top-gallant masts were not aloft ;but the fore-topmast was shivered into a mere collection ofsplinters ; the hoops on the foremast were burst, and the interior,as well as outside of the mast, irreparably injured. Fromthe foremast the electric fluid seemed to have escaped by someconductor, without doing further damage ; yet it filled thefore part of the slip with a sulphureous smell, and the menwho were there thought something full of gunpowder wasblown up.No person received injury : the foremast was taken outafterwards, and replaced by another, purchased from the Braziliangovernment at a great expense, and made by the carpet1827-S2. LIGHTNING LEAVE RIO. 81tears of the Thetis. I should say that the electric fluid shookrather than shattered the fore-topmast, for it did not fall, butresembled a bundle of long splinters, almost like reeds. Ittwisted round the head of the foremast, instead of descendingby the shortest line, went into the centre of the spar, and then outagain to the hoops, every one of which, above the deck, was burstasunder. The Thetis was to have sailed in a few days, butwas detained by this accident almost two months. She had noconductor in use.Only two or three flashes of lightning were seen afterwards ;they were accompanied by loud peals of thunder, and thenheavy rain poured down. Just before the rain began, St. Elms'sfire was seen at each yard-arm, and at the mast-head. Thosewho have not seen this light, always a favourite with sailors,because they say it only appears when the worst part of thestorm is over, may excuse my saying that it resembles thelight of a piece of phosphorus — not being so bright, or so small,as that of a glow-worm, nor yet so large as the flame of asmall candle. I was curious enough to go out to a yard-armand put my hand on a luminous spot ; but, of course, couldfeel nothing, and when I moved my hand the spot reappeared.About the same time of the year in which thishappened, the Heron corvette was struck by lightning, anddamaged, while lying at anchor off" Buenos Ayres, in the riverPlata, a locality extremely subject to vivid lightning, yetdifferent in every respect from that of Rio de Janeiro : onebeing a flat, open country, near a fresh water river, and inlatitude 34°; the other a mountainous and woody region,near the sea, and within the tropic of Capricorn.On the 5th of July we sailed from Rio de Janeiro, honouredby a salute, not of guns, but of hearty cheers from H.M.S.Warspite. Strict etiquette might have been offended at sucha compliment to a little ten-gun brig, or, indeed, to anyvessel unless she were going out to meet an enemy, or werereturning into port victorious: but although not about toencounter a foe, our lonely vessel was going to undertake atask laborious, and often dangerous, to the zealous executionVOL. u. G82 PERMANENT Equipment. Julyof which the encouragement of our brother seamen was notrifling inducement.While in harbour, a few alterations had been made in thedisposition of our guns and stores, as well as some slightchanges in the sails and rigging ; and as the Beagles equipmentafterwards remained unaltered, I will here briefly describe it.She was rigged as a bark ; her masts were strongly supportedby squarer cross-trees and tops, and by larger rigging thanusual in vessels of her tonnage.* Chains were used wherefound to answer, and in no place was a block or a sheaveallowed which did not admit the proper rope or chain freely.There were large trysails between the masts, made of stoutcanvas, with several reefs, and very useful we found them. Onthe forecastle was a six-pound boat-carronade : before the chesterwere two brass six-pound guns : close to the bulwark oneach side of the waist were the ' booms ;' and amidships twoboats, on the diagonal principle, one stowed inside the other,and as close to thedeck as possible; being secured by iron cranks,or supports. Abaft the main-mast were four brass guns, twonine-pound, and two six-pound : the skylights were large ; therewas no capstan ; over the wheel the poop-deck projected,and under it were cabins, extremely small, certainly, thoughfilled in inverse proportion to their size. Below the upperdeck her accommodations were similar to, though rather betterthan those of vessels of her class. Over the quarterdeck,upon skids, two whale-boats, eight-and-twenty feet long,were carried ; upon each quarter was a whale-boat twenty-fivefeet in length, and astern was a dinghy.A few leagues southward of the port is a good situationfor enjoying a general view of the picturesque mountains in itsvicinity. When near the shore one only sees those of an inferiororder ; and it is not until an offing is gained that the bold andvaried outlines of the distant Organ Mountain s,+ the sharpTwo huiwJred and forty-two tons.t So called because they have a number of pinnacles, somewhat likethe pipes of an organ.1832. SANTA MARTHA — Catharine. 83peak of the Corcovado, and the singular heights over Tijuca,can be seen at once. Whimsical allusion has been made to thefirst Lord Hood in the name by which one of these heightsis called by English sailors ; and in their general outline is afancied resemblance to a huge giant lying on his back.Off Santa Martha, a sort of Cape Spartivento, near whichone rarely passes without having a change of wind, if not astorm, we were detained by strong southerly gales, whichraised a high sea. This extreme movement and delay I regrettedmuch at the time, on account of the chronometers ; but thesequel shewed that such motion did not affect them materially,and that alterations of their rates were caused chiefly, if notentirely, by changes of temperature.Gales in the latitude of Santa Martha generally commencewith north-westerly winds, thick cloudy weather, rain, andlightning. When at their height, the barometer begins to rise(having previously fallen considerably), soon after which thewind flies round, by the west, to south-west, and from thatquarter usually blows very hard for several hours. But these,which are the ordinary gales, blow from, or along the land, anddo not often raise such a sea as is sometimes found off thiscoast during a south-east storm.After a tiresome continuance of south-west winds, I becameanxious to make Santa Catharina, but before we could reachit the wind changed, and enabled us to steer along the coasttowards the south. Having mentioned Santa Catharina, Imay as well add a few words to the many lavished in its praiseby voyagers of all nations ; for it is, excepting Rio de Janeiro,and perhaps Bahia, the best trading port on the east coastof South America ; and, considering its situation, capabilities,and productions, is a place in which seamen mustalways have an interest. Tt enjoys the advantages of a temperateclimate ; an extensive and accessible harbour ; a mostfertile country, abounding in the necessaries of life ; and a mercantileposition of much importance. The people are moreinclined to exert themselves than those in northern Brazil; adifference arising partly, no doubt, from effect of climate;c284 SANTA Catharine SANTOS. Julybut chiefly from their having descended from active and enterprising,though lawless settlers, who were ejected from otherplaces ; and from a few respectable colonists induced to emigratefrom the Azores. Before I quit the neighbourhood offrequented ports on this coast, one possessing peculiar interest,Santos, ought to be mentioned ; to remind seamen that theymay there also obtain any refreshments, and secure their shipsin a sheltered creek, quite easy of access. For several leaguesround Santos there is an extensive flat, covered with thickwoods, but intersected by rivers and salt water inlets, whosebanks are lined with thickets of mangrove trees. Inland amountain range abruptly rises to the height of two or threethousand feet, every where clothed with almost impenetrableforests. The climate is, however, unhealthy in December,January, and February ; and during the whole year there isa great deal of rain.Returning to the coast southward of Santa Catharina, I maymention that Cape Santa Martha, and the shores extendingnorthward of it, are high and woody, like the greater part ofthe coast of Brazil ; but that on the south side of the promontorythere is a complete change of character : lofty ranges ofmountains sinking into low treeless shores, whose outline is astame and unvarying as that of the former is bold and picturesque.While sailing along the level uninteresting coast just mentioned,with a fresh breeze off" the land, we found it bitterlycold, though the thermometer never was below 40°. Fait : somuch does our perception of heat or cold depend upon comparison.Some of our exaggerated opinions as to the coldnessof the southern hemisphere may have arisen from the circumstancesunder which voyagers usually visit high southern latitudes,immediately after enduring the heat of the tropics, andwithout staying long enough to ascertain the real average temperatureduring a whole year.On the 22d of July we were near the river Plata, and as theweather, after sunset, became very dark, with thunder andlightning, though with but little wind, we anchored in the1832. ENTER RIVER PLATA. 85vicinity of Cape Sta Maria to avoid being drifted about by irregularcurrents. For upwards of an hour St. Elms fires wereseen at each mast-head, and at some of the yard-arms : themast-head vane also, fixed horizontally, and framed with copper,had an illuminated border round it. Heavy rain, muchthunder, and a fresh southerly wind followed ; but as we wereprepared for bad weather, and the sea did not rise much, wemaintained our position till daylight next morning, notwithstandingan officer of the watch startling me by reporting thatwe must be very near the land, because he heard bullocksbellowing"*On the 23d we entered the great estuary of this shallowthough wide river, a hundred and twenty miles across at thispart, yet averaging less than ten fathoms in depth ; and abovefifty miles wide between Monte Video and the opposite point,called Piedras, where the average depth is not more than threefathoms. Very great care is required by vessels navigatingthe Plata, because of its exceedingly dangerous shoals, itsstrong and irregular currents, and the sudden tempests to whichit is subject. The shoals and currents may be guarded againstby a very careful attention to the lead, and a ground-log ; butthe fury of a violent pampero-|- must be endured. The land oneach side of the Plata is so low, and those extraordinary plainscalled pampas, hundreds of miles in extent, are so perfectlyfree from a single obstacle which might offer any check to thestorm, that a pampero sweeps over land and water with theweight of a rushing hurricane. Captain King has already describedone, by which the Beagle suffered severely, in 1829 ;+but having, to my sorrow, been more immediately concerned,I will endeavour to give a brief account of that disastrousaffair, as a warning to others.On the 30th of January 1829, the Beagle was standing in,These noises must have been the discordant ' braying' of the birdcalled by seamen 'jack-ass penguin.'t So called because it appears to come from the vast plains calledpampas.'J Vol. i. pp. 189, VM, 101.86 EXTRAORDINARY Pamper. 1829.from sea, towards the harbour of Maldonado. Before mid-daythe breeze was fresh from N.N.W., but after noon it becamemoderate, and there was a gloominess, and a close sultry feeling,which seemed to presage thunder and rain. I shoved mentionthat during three preceding nights banks of clouds hadbeen noticed near the south-west horizon, over which there wasa frequent reflection of very distant lightning.The barometer had been falling since the 25th, slowly, butsteadily, and on the 30th, at noon, it was at 29-4, and the thermometer78°. I, and those with me, thought little about thefall of the mercury, and still less about the threatening aspectof the south-west horizon. " Heavy rain," I thought, " at night,will not signify when we are moored in Maldonado :" and therewas then every prospect of our reaching that port beforenight.Having been often in the river Plata, and once for eightmonths successively, I had acquired a familiarity with theplace, and a disregard for pamperoes, which was not surprisingin a young man who had witnessed many, but certainly, as ithappened, not one of so serious a nature as to cause any particularimpression on his mind. I had not then learned neverto despise an enemy.At about three o'clock the wind was light, and veering aboutfrom north-west to north-east. There was a heavy bank ofclouds in the south-west, and occasionally lightning was visibleeven in daylight. Myriads of insects, such as butterflies,dragon-flies, and moths, came off" from the land ; driven, as itappeared, by gusts of heated wind. At four the breeze freshenedup from N.N.W., and obliged us to take in all lightsails. Maldonado Tower then bore west, and Lobos Island(centre) S.W.b.S. The weather became more unsettled andthreatening, though still we had no expectation of any materialchange before night : but soon after five it became so darktowards the south-west, and the lightning increased so much,that we shortened sail to the reefed topsails and foresail ; stillhoping to reach our destination before the pampero began.Shortly before six the upper clouds in the south-west quarter1829- BEAGLE ALMOST UPSET. 87assumed a singularly hard, and rolled or tufted appearance,like great bales of black cotton, and altered their forms sorapidly, that I ordered sail to be shortened, and the topsails tobe furled, leaving set only a small new foresail. The water wassmooth, and, not being deep, there was none of that agitatedswell usually noticed before a storm in the great ocean.Gusts of hot wind came oft' the nearest land, at intervals ofabout a minute. The fore-topsail was just furled, and themen down from aloft, the main-topsail in the gaskets, but themen still on the yard, when a furious blast from the north-weststruck the ship. The helm was put up, and she paid off" fast ;yet the wind changed still more quickly, and blew so heavilyfrom south-west, that the foresail split to ribands, and theship was thrown almost on her beam-ends, and no longeranswered her helm. The main-topsail was instantly blownloose out of the men's hands, whose lives were in imminentdanger ; the fore-topsail blew adrift out of the gaskets ; themainsail blew away out of the gear ; the lee hammock-nettingwas under water ; and the vessel apparently capsizing, whentopmasts and jib-boom went, close to the caps, and sherighted considerably. Both anchors were cut away (for theland was under our lee), and a cable veered upon each, whichbrought her head to wind, and upright. The heaviest rush ofwind had then passed, but it was still blowing a hard gale,and the Beagle was pitching her forecastle into the short highwaves which had risen. As the depth of water was small, andthe ground tenacious clay, both anchors held firmly, and ourutmost exertions were immediately directed towards clearingthe wreck, and saving the remains of our broken spars andtattered sails. Had we suffered in no other way, I should havefelt joy at having escaped so well, instead of the deep regretoccasioned by the loss of two seamen, whose lives, it seemed,might have been spared to this day had I anchored and strucktopmasts, instead of keeping under sail in hopes of enteringMaldonado before the pampero began.When the main-topsail blew away from the men, who strutsEFFECTS OF Pamper. 1829-gled hard to keep it fast, they could scarcely hold on, or getoff the yard, and one young man fell from the lee yard-arminto the sea. Poor fellow, he swam well, but in vain : theship was unmanageable, almost overset, the weather quarterboat stove, and the lee one under water : a grating was thrownto him, and the life-buoy let go, but he was seen no more.Another man was supposed to have been carried overboardwith the main-topmast, as he was last seen on the cap.The starboard quarter boat was stove by the force of thewind ; and the other was washed away : and so loud was thesound of the tempest, that I did not hear the masts break,though standing, or rather holding, by the mizen rigging.NeVer before or since that time have I witnessed such strength,or, I may say, weight of wind : thunder, lightning, hail, andrain, came with it, but they were hardly noticed in the presenceof so formidable an accompaniment.After seven the clouds had almost all passed away ; thewind settled into a steady south-west gale, with a clear sky ;the barometer rose to 29.8, and the thermometer fell to 46°.Lobos Island was set S.E., bearing; distant two miles.In this pampero the masts of a vessel, at anchor off MonteVideo, were carried away ; and the upper cabin bulkhead of aBrazilian corvette was blown in while lying at anchor, head towind, with her masts struck. But Maldonado seemed to feelits utmost violence ; and there it certainly commenced likea whirlwind. A small boat, belonging to a poor man whocarried fruit and vegetables to ships in the bay, was hauledashore, just above high water mark, and fastened, by a strongrope, to a large stone. After the storm it was found far fromthe beach, shattered to pieces, but still fast to the stone,which it had dragged along. Not many days after our disaster,while lying in Maldonado bay, repairing damages, anotherpampero assailed the Beagle ; but though it did her no injury,it blew the boat, stove by its predecessor, away from the placeon shore where she was being repaired, and left no trace of herbehind.EFFECTS ON THE PLATA. 89Singular fluctuations occur in the river Plata before and afterthese pamperoes.* For some days previously the river rises,and it is always higher than usual when the south-west windbegins : but, after a few hours, the water falls rapidly, and vesselsare left aground : indeed instances have been known of theupper parts of the river, near Buenos Ayres, being so muchemptied by strong south-westerly, or westerly winds, that menhave rode several miles into its bed, to places where shipsusually anchor. I have myself known the water fall, in theouter road, off Buenos Ayres, from six to two fathoms, in lessthan twelve hours, in a place where the usual depth was fourfathoms. Such a change as this would not be thought remarkablewhere tides usually rise several fathoms ; but in the riverPlata, where there is very little, if any, tide, where the width ofthe channel is so great in proportion to its depth, and the confiningboundaries are so low, and in many places easily overflowed,a variation of four fathoms cannot take place without causinggreat difficulties and destruction. In this particular instance,-|-a heavy gale from the eastward dammed up the river forsome days ; and then changing, by the south, to the westward,emptied it again proportionably. Small craft wereleft literally scattered about the low country bordering on theriver near Buenos Ayres, and many vessels never floated again.By that gale, which blew directly up the river, and raised aheavy sea, every vessel was driven ashore from the inner roadof Buenos Ayres, except a schooner. Fourteen English merchantvessels lay high and dry upon the shore next day, mostof them totally lost. The Owen Glendower, bearing the broadpendant of Sir Thomas Hardy, the Icarus brig, and two orthree merchant vessels, anchored in the outer road, weatheredit out with topmasts struck ; but all drove considerably, exceptthe frigate, and she brought both anchors ahead, backed by• Although generally considered by strangers to refer solely to a squall,or storra, the term pampero is applied by the natives of the country toevery south-westerly wind, whether moderate or a hurricane.t In the year 1820. •90 LOSS OF A BOAT. 1820-32.stream anchors with half a cable on each, and riding with awhole cable on each bower, in four fathoms water, over verysoft tenacious ground. Part of her forecastle netting waswashed away by the sea, though she was an excellent roadster,and at that time drawing a foot less water than usual. She alsolost a boat in a manner so likely to be of future occurrence,that I will yet digress, in hopes of being useful, by relatingthe incident.Her barge, ably managed by an experienced seaman,* hadtried to beat off from the town to the ship, during the commencementof the gale, but could get no farther than theleewardmost merchantman in the outer road. Astern of thatvessel she was made fast by a strong hawser, and there rodeout the gale admirably until the current began to set out ofthe river: when the boat was carried against the vessel, andknocked to pieces before any thing could be done to saveher, as the sea was running high, and the wind still blowinga gale. The Druid frigate, when lying thereof would havelost a boat in the same way, had it not been one of thoseexcellent diagonal boats, built by Mr. Johns; for it wastaken, by the strong weather current, under the ship's bottom,and kept striking there long enough to have brokenany ordinary boat into a thousand pieces ; but neverthelessshe appeared again with only her gunwales injured, the bottombeing still perfectly sound.The Plata has been called by the Spaniards ' El Inferno delosmariners ;' sufficient stress has not however been laid onthe redeeming qualities which it possesses in having anchoringground every where, and in soundings, whose nature tellswhether you are approaching danger; as on and near thebanks the bottom is hard ; while in the deeper water it is verysoft.I have remarked that before a continuance of southerlywinds the water rises considerably in this river ; and I mayThe first who took a steam-vessel to the West-indies,t In 1832.LEVEL OF IllVEB AND OCEAN. IWadd, that the reverse takes place under opposite circumstances.Some persons attribute this change of level to the horizontalaction of wind ; but I am inclined to think it occasioned chieflyby vertical pressure of the atmosphere, increased, doubtless,during strong winds by their driving force.Before a pampero, the barometer continues to fall duringseveral days, and invariably the water then rises. The galecommences, the barometer ceases falling and begins to rise, andvery soon afterwards the level of the river is found to be sinking.For many following days the glass remains high, but thewater continues to fall, and, generally speaking, the river islow while the mercury is steady and above the average height,which I should consider to be 29'9 inches. In the Plata Inever saw the barometer higher than 30'3, nor lower than29'4<.* I will not delay here to speak of corresponding elevationsor depressions of the ocean at other parts of the SouthAmerican coast, and attempt to trace out the effects of gales inhigh latitudes, the space through which those winds extend,and whether they reach or affect places in a low or even middlelatitude ; but leaving such inquiries for another place, take afew more glances at the vicinity of the Plata, and then continuethe narrative.Having already noticed the width and average shallownessof this immense river, and the lowness of its adjacent shores, Ineed only add, that on the northern side there is a sprinklingof hills, of a granitic structure, scattered amidst extensiveplains, while on the south, or right bank, there is neither ahill, a rock, or even a stone-|- So low is the land betweenPoint Piedras and Cape San Antonio, that around the greatbay, called Sanborombon, it is extremely difficult to say wherethe water ends, or the coast line begins. Each difference, of• In estimating weather, or force of wind, by the height of the mercurialcolumn, due regard should be had to the goodness of theinstrument, as some barometers, used in ships, differ from others eventenths of an inch.+ Which has not been carried there by man, or by running water.TOSCA GRANITE — SOUNDINGS.even a foot, in the height of the water, makes a change ofcables'lengths, if not of miles, in the position of the limiting linebetween water and land. In consequence it is very dangerousfor ships to approach that shore ; and, although the bottom isin many places soft, often extremely deep mud, there are otherspaces in which hard lumps of tosca* are found, almost asinjurious to a ship's bottom as actual rock. I am not awarethat there is any granite on the south side of the river Plata,near the shore ; and although the name ' Piedras"' would inclineone to suppose there are rocks or stones near it, I could onlyfind tosca. But towards the northern shore rocks are found,and the dangerous shoal called ' Banco Yngles,' is said to havea granitic foundation. The ridge, of which the English Bankis the north-west extremity, extends eastward, inclining to thesouth, considerably beyond a line drawn from Cape SantaMaria to Cape San Antonio, and less than ten fathoms watermay be found upon it out of sight of land. Northward of theridge the depth of water varies from ten to thirty fathoms overa very soft bottom of bluish mud ; and to the southward of itthere are from twelve to three fathoms (diminishing as youapproach San Antonio) over a softish bottom of brown oryellow muddy sands When it is considered that three verylarge rivers, besides a host of smaller streams, enter the oceanby the estuary whose more remarkable features we are noticing,that two of those rivers are flooded periodically by tropicalrains and that very heavy gales assist in emptying or fillingthe shallow wide gulf, in which floods of fresh water contendagainst the volume of a powerful ocean ; not only will frequentTosca is a kind of hardened earth, rather than soft stone, about theconsistence of slightly baked clay : it is of a dark brown colour, andvaries in hardness from that which is almost stony, to the texture of asound old cheese.t Near Cape San Antonio and Point Tuyu there is very soft mud.I The Paraguay rises so far northward, that (excepting a portage ofthree miles) a canoe may go from Monte Video to the mouth of theAmazon.1832. TIDES — ABSENCE OF TREES. 93variations in depth be expected, as a natural consequence, butalso strong and varying currents. Little or no tide has beenhitherto noticed with any degree of accuracy in the estuary ofthe Plata ; but this anomaly may be more apparent than real :for where the depth of water is so fluctuating, and the currentsare so variable, it is difficult to distinguish the precise effectsof tides, except by a series of observations far longer than hasyet been made.To say much of Maldonado village, the town of MonteVideo, or the city of Buenos Ayres, would be to repeat anoft-told tale.' The views attached to this volume will give atolerably clear idea of a few striking peculiarities which areimmediately noticed by the eye of a stranger ; and of the inhabitantsthemselves I will only venture to say, upon my slightacquaintance with them, that although prejudiced by theirerroneous ideas of freedom, and deficient in high principles,they ai-e courteous and agreeable as mere acquaintances, kindto strangers, and extremely hospitable.It is well known that there are very few trees* on either bankof the Plata near its mouth, or on those immense plains, calledpampas, excepting here and there an ' ombu,'-f- or some whichhave been planted near houses ; or a few copses of small trees(mostly peach) planted for fuel : but I have not heard anysufficient reason given for this scarcity of wood, in a countrycovered with a great depth of alluvial soil, and adjoining districtsin which trees are abundant. The only second causesfor such a peculiarity, which I can imagine, are the following:the nature of the soil, which may be unsuited to most trees,although very productive of grass and gigantic thistles : thefurious storms which sweep along the level expanse, and woulddemolish tender, unprotected young trees : the general want ofwater, which in some years is so great as to become a severedrought : and the numerous herds of wild cattle which rangeThe exceptions are so few, that one might almost say there are notrees which have not been planted.+ A kind of elder.94 DROUGHTS — CATTLE — FERTILITY. 1812.over the plains, and eat up every leaf which retains any moistureduring the dry heats of summer. Before there were herdsof cattle, guanacoes ranged over the country, in great numbers,as they now do to the southward of the river Negro,where I have seen them grazing in large companies, like flocksof sheep. During the droughts above-mentioned vast numbersof cattle die for want of water, and perhaps this may betheprincipal reason why so few trees grow there naturally ; butit cannot be the only one, because they grow where planted,and partially sheltered, though not watered.Most people are aware of the scale upon which the cattlefarms of the ' Banda Oriental' and ' Republica Argentina' werecarried on : but the civil wars which have succeeded the steadygovernment of Spain have broken up and ruined many of thelargest establishments, where from one hundred to two hundredthousand head of cattle were owned by one man — wherethe annual increase was about thirty per cent — and where theanimals were, generally speaking, slaughtered for their hidesalone. What must be the natural fertility of a country, which,without the slightest assistance from man, can nourish suchenormous multitudes of cattle, besides immense droves ofhorses and flocks of sheep, and yet, except near its few towns,appear almost destitute of inhabitants.To return to our little vessel — entering the Plata in 1832.Unfavourable winds, and currents setting out of the river,delayed our progress, and obliged us to anchor frequently.We arrived at Monte Video on the 26th, and lost no timein making observations for our chronometers, and preparingfor surveying the coasts southward of Cape San Antonio : butas I found that it would be advisable to visit Buenos Ayres,in order to communicate with the Government, and obtaininformation, we sailed from Monte Video on the 31st, and twodays afterwards anchored off" Buenos Ayres. There, however,we did not remain an hour ; for the misconduct of a BuenosAyrean officer on board a vessel under their colours, and avexatious regulation with respect to quarantine, decided myJAugust. BUENOS Ayres — MONTE VIDEO. 95returning forthwith to Monte Video ; and commissioning acapable person to procure for me copies of some original charts,which I thought would be exceedingly useful, and whichcould only be obtained from the remains of hydrographical information,collected by Spain, but kept in the archives ofBuenos Ayres. The Beagle anchored again off Monte Video,on the 3d of August, and as soon as the circumstances whichoccasioned her return were made known to Captain G. W.Hamilton, commanding the Druid frigate, that ship sailed forBuenos Ayres.Scarcely had the Druid disappeared beneath the horizon,when the chief of the Monte Video police and the captain ofthe port came on board the Beagle to request assistance inpreserving order in the town, and in preventing the aggressionsof some mutinous negro soldiers. I was also requestedby the Consul-general to afford the British residents any protectionin my power ; and understanding that their lives, aswell as property, were endangered by the turbulent mutineers,who were more than a match for the few well-disposed soldiersleft in the town, I landed with fifty well-armed men, andremained on shore, garrisoning the principal fort, and thusholding the mutineers in check, until more troops were broughtin from the neighbouring country, by whom they were surroundedand reduced to subordination. The Beagle's crewwere not on shore more than twenty-four hours, and were notcalled upon to act in any way ; but I was told by the principalpersons whose lives and property were threatened, that thepresence of those seamen certainly prevented bloodshed.Some days after this little interruption to our usual avocations,we sailed across the river to Point Piedras, anchoredthere for some hours to determine its position, then went toCape San Antonio, and from that point (rather than cape)began our survey of the outer coast. To relate many details ofso slow and monotonous an occupation as examining any shoreof which the more interesting features have long been known,could answer no good purpose, and would be very tiresome to96 PLAN OF WRITING. 1832.a general reader ; therefore I shall hasten from one place toanother, dwelling only, in my way, upon the few incidents, orreflections, which may have interest enough to warrant theirbeing noticed in this abridged narrative, or are absolutelynecessary for carrying on the thread of the story.CHAPTER V.Eastern Pampa Coast — Point Medanos — Mar-chiquito — Ranges of HillsDirection of Inlets, Shoals, and Rivers — Cape Corrientes — ToscaCoast — Blancoo Bay — Mount Hermoso — Port Belgrano — Mr. Harris —Ventana Mountain — View — Argentina — Commandant — Major — Situation— Toriano — Indians — Fossils — Animals — Fish — Climate —Pumice — Ashes — Conway — Deliberations — Consequent Decision —Responsibility incurred — Paz — Liebre — Gale — Hunger — Fossils atHermoso — Fossils at Point Alta — Express sent to Buenos Ayres —Suspicions and absurd alarm— Rodriguez.Aug. 22. From Cape San Antonio (which, though so called,is only a low point) to rather more than half-way towards CapeCorrientes, the sea-coast is sandy and low. Behind the beachare sand-hills, and farther inshore are thickets affording shelterto numbers of jaguars. In sailing along, even with bothleads going, we were, for a few minutes, in imminent dangerof grounding upon a bank, or ledge, which extends six milesE.S.E. from Point Medanos. The water shoaled so suddenly,and so irregularly, that I could not tell which way to steer ;and as we had been running directly before the wind, it wasimpossible to retreat by the safest track (that which we hadmade in approaching) : however, by persevering in pushingeastward, away from the land, steering one way or another asthe water deepened, we at last got clear. We then stood out togain an offing, rounded the bank, and hauled close inshoreagain nearly opposite to a large salt lagoon, called ,which approaches the sea so closely as to have occasionedan idea that, by cutting through the narrow strip ofland which separates them, a fine port might be formed.Some persons assert that there is always a communicationbetween the lagoon and the sea ; that cattle cannot pass alongthe isthmus on account of that opening ; and that a boat mightswim from one to the other. If this is the case, we were muchdeceived on board the Beagle ; for when she passed so near thespot that the lagoon was overlooked by the officers at her mast-vol.II. H98 MAR-CHiaUlTO RANGES OF HILLS. AugUStheads, nothing like an opening could be detected, though thebeach was scrutinized with good glasses, as well from the deckas by those who looked down upon it from aloft as we sailedby. I suspect that there has been some confusion of ideasrespecting the little river San Pablo, and a supposed entranceto the lagoon : but, be this as it may, very great difficultywould be found in attempting to form a large and permanentcommunication at a spot so exposed to heavy south-east gales.At Port Valde (in latitude 42° S.) the entrance is sometimescompletely blocked up by shingle and sand, during andafter a strong south-east gale ; and I think it probable thatsuch an effect would be caused here, at times, whether therewere a natural or an artificial opening ; and as there is nogreat rise and fall of tide, I much doubt whether the openingwould be again cleared, as at Port Valde, by the mere ebband flow of water.In the vicinity of Mar-chiquito, the country (campo) is veryfertile, and well watered. Sheltered to the south by a rangeof down-like hills, whence numerous small brooks originate, itgives abundant pasturage to many thousands of cattle, andis considered by the Buenos Ayreans to be the finest districtof their territory. This range of his extends in a west northwestdirection for more than fifty leagues, and varies in nameat different places. That part next to Cape Corrientes is calledSierra Vulcan ;* twenty leagues inland is the ridge namedTandil, and at the western extreme is a height called Cayru.Between Tandil and Cayru there ai-e many hills known byparticular names, but they are all part of the range abovementioned; and it is a remarkable fact, that not only thisrange, that nearer to Buenos Ayres called Cerrillada, andthat of which the Sierra Ventana forms a part, extend nearlyin an east-south-east and west-north-west direction ; but thatmost of the ranges of high land, most of the rivers, and thegreater number of inlets, between the Plata and Cape Horn,have a similar direction, not varying from it above one point,or at most two points of the compass. After we became awareAll Indian word, which means ' opening,' or ' having openings.'1832. CAPE CORRIENTES TOSCA COAST. 99of this peculiarity, it was far easier to avoid shoals, as they alllay in a similar direction.On a round-topped hill, near Mar-chiquito, we saw an immenseherd of cattle, collected together in one dark-colouredmass, which covered many acres of ground. A few men, onhorseback, were watching them, who, seeing us anchor, drovethe whole multitude away at a gallop, and in a few minutesnot one was left behind. Probably they suspected us of maraudinginclinations.Cape Corrientes is a bold, cliffy promontory ; off which,notwithstanding the name, I could not distinguish any remarkablecurrent. It is said to be hazardous for a boat to go along-shore,near the high cliffs of that cape, because there are rocksunder water which sometimes cause sudden and extremelydangerous ' blind breakers"* More than one boat's crew hasbeen lost there, in pursuit of seals, which are numerous amongthe rocks and caves at the foot of those cliffs. Hence to BahiaBlancoo is a long and dreary line of coast, without an openingfit to receive the smallest sailing vessel, without a remarkablefeature, and without a river whose mouth is not fordable. Eventhe plan of it, on paper, has such a regular figure, that aneye accustomed to charts may doubt its accuracy ; so rarelydoes the outline of an exposed sea-coast extend so far withouta break. A heavy swell always sets upon it; there is no safeanchorage near the shore ; and, as if to complete its uninvitingqualities, in the interior, but verging on this shore, is a deserttract, avoided even by the Indians, and called, in their language,Huecuvu-mapu (country of the Devil). In exploringthis exposed coast, southerly winds sometimes obliged us tostruggle for an offing ; and we lost several anchors in consequenceof letting them go upon ground which we thought washard sand lying over clay, but which turned out to be tosca,slightly covered with sand, and full of holes. The lead indicateda sandy, though hard bottom ; but we found it ever*where so perforated and so tough, that, drop an anchor wherewe might, it was sure to hook a rock-like lump of tosca, whichsometimes was torn away, but at others broke the anchor.H ii100 TOSCA— Blanc BAY. Sept.Finding this to be the case, I had a stout hawser ' bent'' to thecrown' of the anchor, and after shortening in cable, trippedthe anchor by the hawser, and then weighed it, uninjured,without much difficulty.Along this extent of sea-coast, half way between the currentsin the vicinity of the Plata, and those occasioned by strongtides near Blancoo Bay and the river Negro, we found no current.Whether there was a rise of tide it was not easy to ascertainby the lead-line, when at anchor, from the bottom beingso uneven ; and to land wa impossible, on account of a furioussurf.Several kinds of fish were caught at our temporary anchorages,and noticed carefully by Mr. Darwin. Anchorage is notaword I should use in this case (where the anchor was only letgo for a short time while the ship's position could be fixedwith accuracy, and our triangulation carried on in a satisfactorymanner), as it might deceive a stranger to the coast : stopping-placewould be better.While examining the positions nearest to Blancoo Bay, wehad occasional alarms — such as the wind shifting and blowingstrong directly towards the land ; our soundings shoaling suddenlyto three, or less than three fathoms ; or thick weathercoming on while a boat was away sounding; — but these areevery-day events in a surveying vessel actively employed.Near Blancoo Bay we found the water greatly discoloured,and the soundings were not such as to tempt us onwards; however,it was necessary to proceed. We steered towards a littlehill, which I fancied must be Mount Hermoso,* and soonafter sun-set, on the 5th, anchored in what we afterwards foundto be the roadstead near that hillock, at the head of BlancooBay, close to the entrance of Port Belgrano, but divided fromit by a bank.As the bad apologies for charts of this place, which we possessedat our first visit, left us as much at a loss as if we had• Mount Hermoso is but 140 feet above the sea ; yet, on this low coast,it is somewhat remarkable, as being the only peaked hill close to thewater ; and having under it a low cliffy point, the only one thereabouts.1832. MOUNT Hermosa POET BKLGBANO. 101none, I set out with the boats next morning to seek for a passageinto Port Belgrano.*Our boats were soon stopped by shoal water, and I found,to my vexation, that the Beagle was anchored at the head ofan inlet, between the shore and a large bank extending fartowards the south-east, and that before going farther west shemust retreat eastward, and look for another passage. Thiswas an unexpected dilemma ; but our prospect was improvedby the appearance of a small schooner running towards us,from Port Belgrano, with a Buenos Ayrean (or Argentine) flagflying.Very soon she came near enough for our boat to reach her,and an Englishman came on board, who offered to pilot theBeagle to a safe anchorage within the port. This was Mr.Harris, owner of the little schooner in which he sailed, (a residentat Del Carmen, on the river Negro, and trading thencealong the coast), with whom we had much satisfactory intercourseduring the next twelvemonth.By his advice we weighed anchor, stood across the greatnorth bank, in very little more water than we drew, until wegot into a channel where there was water enough for any ship,and a soft muddy bottom : there we hauled up west-north west,-f-by his direction, and with a fresh wind sailed rapidly into theextensive and excellent, though then little known harbour,called Port Belgrano ; and at dusk anchored near the wellsunder Anchorstock Hi (or Point Johnson).To give an idea of the general appearance, or almost disappearance,of the very low land around this spacious port, I willmention, that when the Beagle had crossed the north bank,and hauled up in the fair way. Mount Hermoso was nearlybeneath the horizon ; some bushes on the flat land southwardOften erroneously called Bahia Blancoo ; a name originally given tothe outer bay, in compliment to General Blancoo.+ So constantly did Mr. Harris give this course, on subsequent occasions,that it became quite a joke; but it is nevertheless a strong corroborationof what I stated respecting the general direction of the inlets,and ridges, or ranges of hills.102 MB- HAKBI3— ARGENTINA. Sept.of US (Zuraita Island) could be just distinguished; and aheadin the north-west quarter, no land could be made out, exceptthe distant Zenana mountain, which we saw for the first timeon that day.In consequence of this extent of water being intersected by-banks,and having so few marks, it is very difficult of access ;and no place can offer less that is agreeable to the eye, especiallywhen the tide is out, and much of the banks shows abovewater. A more disagreeable place to survey, or one thatwould occupy more time, we were not likely to find, I thought,as I looked around from the mast-head ; but upon questioningMr. Harris, I learned that a succession of similar inlets indenteda half-drowned coast, extending hence almost to the Negro ;and that, although the dangers were numerous, tides strong,banks muddy, and the shores every where low, the interveningports were so safe, and so likely to be useful, that it was absolutelynecessary to examine them.Sept. 7. Messrs. Darwin, Rowlett, and Harris set out withme to visit the Buenos Ayrean settlement, called Argentina.Mr. Harris undertook to be our guide, but after two hours'sailing and pulling we found ourselves near the head of acreek, between two soft mud banks, where we could neitherrow nor turn the boat. We could not land because the mudwas too soft to bear our weight, so there we staid till the tideflowed. About two hours after this stoppage there was waterenough for us to cross a large bank, and gain the right channel,from which we had deviated, and then, with a flowing tide, wemade rapid progress, until the ' Guardia' was announced to us.This was a small hut near the water side, but to reach it wehad to wind along a tortuous canal, between banks of soft mud :and when we arrived at the landing-place seven hours had beenpassed among rushy mud banks, surrounded by which we wereoften prevented from seeing any solid land. The water wasevery where salt, the tide running strongly, and the boat oftenaground.Waiting to meet us was an assemblage of grotesque figures,which I shall not easily forget — a painter would have been1832. Grotesque GROUP SUSPICIONS. 103charmed with them. A dark visaged Quixotic character, partlyin uniform, mounted on a large lean horse, and attended byseveral wild looking, but gaily dressed gauchos,* was nearestto us. Behind him, a little on one side, were a few irregularsoldiers, variously armed, and no two dressed alike, but wellmounted, and desperate-looking fellows ; while on the otherside, a group of almost naked Indian prisoners sat devouringthe remains of a half roasted horse ; and as they scowled at ussavagely, still holding the large bones they had been gnawing,with their rough hair and scanty substitutes for clothing blownabout by the wind, I thought I had never beheld a more singulargroup.The tall man in uniform was the Commandant of the settlement,or fortress, called Argentina : he and his soldiers hadarrived to welcome us, supposing that we were bringing suppliesfrom Buenos Ayres for the needy colony. The Indianprisoners had been brought to work, and assist in carryingthe supplies which were expected. Finding that we wereneither Buenos Ayreans, nor traders from any other place, itwas supposed that we must be spies sent to reconnoitre theplace previous to a hostile attack. Neither the explanationsnor assertions of Mr. Harris had any weight, for as he wasour countryman, they naturally concluded he was in leaguewith us ; yet, as the commandant had some idea that we might,by possibility, be what we maintained we were, he disregardedthe whispers and suggestions of his people, and offered to carryus to the settlement for a night's lodging.Leaving the boat's crew to bivouac, as usual, I accepteda horse offered to me, and took the purser up behind ; Mr.Darwin and Harris being also mounted behind two gauchosoldiers, away we went across a flat plain to the settlement.,Mr. Darwin was carried off before the rest of the party, to becross-questioned by an old major, who seemed to be consideredthe wisest man of the detachment, and he, poor old soul,• Countrymen, employed in keeping and killing cattle, breedingand training horses, hunting, war, &c.FOKTALEZA Argentine.Sept.thought we were very suspicious characters, especially Mr.Darwin, whose objects seemed most mysterious.In consequence, we were watched, though otherwise mosthospitably treated ; and when I proposed to return, nextmorning, to the boat, trifling excuses were made about thewant of horses and fear of Indians arriving, by which I sawthat the commandant wished to detain us, but was unwillingto do so forcibly ; telling him, therefore, I should walk back, andsetting out to do so, I elicited an order for horses, maugre thefears and advice of his major, who gave him all sorts of warningsabout us. However, he sent an escort with us, and a troopof gaucho soldiers were that very morning posted upon therising grounds nearest to the Beagle, to keep a watch on ourmovements.We afterwards heard, that the old major's suspicions hadbeen very much increased by Harris's explanation of Mr.Darwin's occupation. ' Un naturalists' was a term unheard ofby any person in the settlement, and being unluckily explainedby Harris as meaning < a man that knows every thing,' anyfurther attempt to quiet anxiety was useless.As this small settlement has seldom been visited by strangers,I will describe its primitive state. In the midst of a levelcountry, watered by several brooks, and much of it thicklycovered with a kind of trefoil, stands a mud-walled erection,dignified with the sounding appellation of ' La fortaleza protectorArgentina.' It is a polygon, 282 yards in diameter,having about twenty-four sides, and surrounded by a narrowditch. In some places the walls are almost twenty feet high,but in others I was reminded of the brothers' quarrel at thebuilding of ancient Rome, for there is a mere ditch, overwhich a man could jump. It is, however, said by the gauchos,that a ditch six feet wide will stop a mounted Indian, and thattheir houses require no further defence from attacks of theaborigines. How, or why it is that such excellent horsemendo not teach their horses to leap, I cannot understand.Within, and outside the fort, were huts (ranchos) and a few1832. SITUATION — ADVANTAGES. 105small houses : — more were not required for the inhabitants,who, including the garrison, only amounted to four hundredsouls. Some half-dozen brass guns were in a serviceable condition; and two or three other pieces occupied old carriages,but did not seem to be trustworthy.The fort was commenced in April 1828, by a Frenchengineer, named Parchappe. The first commandant was Es-tomb: his successor. Morel, was killed, with ninety followers,by a party of Indians under Chenil, in 1829. Valle and Rajassucceeded, and the latter was followed by Rodriguez. Placedin the first instance as an advanced post, at which to watchand check the Indians, rather than as a colony likely to increaserapidly, Argentina has scarcely made any progress since itsestablishment, though it is the beginning of what may hereafterbe a considerable place. Situated favourably for communicatingwith Concepcion — by way of the pass through theCordillera, near Tucapel — it is also the only port, between25° S. and Cape Horn, capable of receiving in security anynumber of the largest ships.There is pasture for cattle near the streams which descendfrom the ' Sierra Ventana :' large salinas (spaces covered withsalt) lie within an easy distance of the settlement : of brushwoodfor fuel there is plenty, though there are no large trees :and report says that there are valuable minerals, including coaland iron,* in the Ventana-f- mountain.The most serious objection to the locality, as an agricultural,or even as a mere grazing district, is the want of rain.Two or three years sometimes pass without more than a slightshower; and during summer the heat is great. In winter,there are sharp frosts, sometimes snow; but neither ice norsnow ever lasts through the day.Good fresh water may be generally obtained, independentof the few running streams, by digging wells between four and• I believe there is no good foundation for this report. Mr. Darwin'sopinion is against the supposition.t The name ' Ventana' was given because of an opening, at the southside, resembling a window. ,106 TORiANO — indians. Sept-tenfeet deep : and in this way we found no difficulty in obtainingan ample supply.Three months before our visit to Argentina, a number ofIndians had been surprised and taken prisoners by Rodriguez ;and among them was the famous old cacique, Toriano, whosemere name was a terror to the frontier settlers. The commandantattacked their 'tolderia' (encampment) just before sunrise —when the young men were absent on an expedition — and madeprisoners of the old men, women, and children. Toriano was shotin cold blood; with another cacique, and several Indians of inferiornote : and his head was afterwards cut off, and preserved forsome time at the fort, in order to convince his adherents of hisdeath. Toriano was a noble Araucanian, upwards of seventyyears old when surprised asleep and taken prisoner by his mercilessenemies. So high was his acknowledged character as awarrior, that his followers supposed him invincible ; and untilconvinced by the melancholy spectacle seen by their spies,they would not believe him gone.Perhaps it is not generally known, that many of the mostdesperate incursions upon the Buenos Ayrean colonists havebeen made by flying troops, or hordes of Indians, whose headquartersare in the Cordillera of the Andes, or even on thewest coast, between Concepcion and Valdivia. Mounted uponexcellent horses, and acquainted with every mile of the country,they think lightly of a predatory or hostile excursionagainst a place many hundred miles distant.We returned to the Beagle without another delay amongthe mud-banks, and found the rising grounds (heights theycould not be called), nearest the ship, occupied by the troopof gaucho soldiers. As they did not interfere with us, oursurveying operations were begun, and carried on as usual. Mr.Darwin, and those who could be spared from duties afloat,roamed about the country ; and a brisk trade was opened withthe soldiers for ostriches and their eggs, for deer, cavies, andarmadillo.My friend's attention was soon attracted to some low cliffsnear Point Alta, where he found some of those huge fossilI1832. FOSSILS — ANIMALS. 107bones, described in his work ; and notwithstanding our smilesat the cargoes of apparent rubbish which he frequentlybrought on board, he and his servant used their pick-axes inearnest, and brought away what have since proved to be mostinteresting and valuable remains of extinct animals.The soldiers appointed to watch our movements soon relaxedso far as to spend nearly all their time in hunting animals forus. Besides those already mentioned, they one day brought afine living puma, in hopes I should offer a good price, andembark it alive; but having no wish for so troublesome acompanion in our crowded little vessel, I only bargained forits skin. The soldiers made a hearty meal of the flesh, andasserted that it was good, though inferior to that of a horse,which I had seen them eating a day or two previously.Four kinds of armadillo were described to us by thesemen, of which we saw but two : the quiriquincha, with ninebands ; the mataca-bola, which rolls up into a ball ; the pluto,which is large and hairy ; and the molto, of which I heardonly the name. Mr. Rowlett saw a black fox, and he wastold that there are wolves in the neighbourhood. Two small burrowinganimals are also found : the murillo, or skunk ; and thetucu-tucu. While speaking of animals, I should say that thecommandant (Rodriguez) told me, that he had once seen, inParaguay, a ' grand bestir,' not many months old, but whichthen stood about four feet high. It was very fierce, and securedby a chain. Its shape resembled that of a hog, but it hadtalons on its feet instead of hoofs ; the snout was like a hog's,but much longer. When half-grown, he was told that it wouldbe capable of seizing and carrying away a horse or a bullock.I concluded that he must have seen a tapir or anta ; yet as hepersisted in asserting that the animal he saw was a beast ofprey,* and that it was extremely rare,* I here repeat what hesaid. (See extract from Falkner. — Appendix — No. 11.)Abundance — I may well say shoals of fish were caught byour men, whenever we hauled the nets at a proper time (thebeginning of the flood-tide) ; and as they were chiefly un-neitherof which remarks apply to the Anta.108 CLIMATE — PUMICE. Sept.known to naturalists, Mr. Earle made careful drawings ofthem, and Mr. Darwin preserved many in spirits. We procuredplenty of good fresh water from wells near the beach,and small wood for fuel in their immediate neighbourhood.The climate is delightful, and healthy to the utmost degree,notwithstanding such extensive flats, half-covered with water,and so many large mud-banks. Perhaps the tides, which risefrom eight to twelve feet, and run two or three knots an hour,tend to purify the air ; indeed, as the whole inlet is of saltwater,there may be no cause for such effects as would beexpected in similar situations near fresh water.In our rambles over the country, near Port Belgrano, weevery where found small pieces of pumice-stone ; and till Mr.Darwin examined the Ventana, supposed they had been thrownthence : he has, however, ascertained that it is not volcanic ;and, I believe, concludes that these fragments came from theCordillera of the Andes.— (See Vol. III. by Mr. Darwin.)Falkner, in whose accounts of what he himself saw I havefull faith, has a curious passage illustrative of this supposition ;and it is not impossible — nor even, I think, improbable — thatsome of the pumice we saw fell at the time mentioned in thefollowing extract : — " Being in the Vulcan, below Cape St.Anthony, I was witness to a vast cloud of ashes being carriedby the winds, and darkening the whole sky. It spread overgreat part of the jurisdiction of Buenos Ayres, passed theriver of Plata, and scattered its contents on both sides of theriver, insomuch that the grass was covered with ashes. Thiswas caused by the eruption of a volcano near Mendoza, thewinds carrying the light ashes to the incredible distance ofthree hundred leagues or more"" — Falkner, p. .51.As an indisputable, and very recent instance of the distanceto which volcanic substances are sometimes carried, I mightmention the fact of H.M.S, Conway having passed throughquantities of pumice-stone and ashes, in latitude 7° north, andlongitude 105° west, being more than seven hundred miles fromthe nearest land, and eleven mundi-ed from the volcano nearRealejo, whence it is supposed that they proceeded ; but as it is1832. Montana — DELIBERATIONS. 109possible that those substances might have been thrown out of avolcano in the Galapagos Islands, and drifted on the surfaceof the sea by currents, which near there run from twenty toeighty miles in twenty-four hours, towards the north-west, onecannot, with certainty, rely upon that fact as evidence of adistance to which pumice has been carried by wind.Captain Eden informed me, that the Conway was surroundedby ashes and pumice-stone for a day and a half (onthe 5th and 6th of May 1835), and that they were supposedto have been ejected from a volcano near Realejo, at the timeof the great earthquake ; and an eruption which darkened theair during three days.The aborigines of these regions attach considerable importanceto the Ventana,* chiefly on account of its use as a landmark; for, rising abruptly to the height of 3,340 feet in a flatcountry, where there is not another hill of consequence, it isof no small use to them in their wanderings. I was told byMr. Darwin, that he found it to be chiefly of quartz formation; but I need not risk causing a mistake, by repeating herethe information which he gave me, when it is given fully inhis own words in the accompanying volume.After a few days' examination of Port Belgrano, andmaking inquiries of Harris, as well as those persons atArgentina who knew something of the neighbouring watersand shores, I was convinced that the Beagle alone could notexplore them, so far as to make her survey of any real use,unless she were to sacrifice a great deal more time than wouldbe admissible, considering the other objects of her expedition.What then was to be done ? Open boats could not explorethe seaward limits of those numerous shoals which lie betweenBlancoo Bay and the river Negro, because there are dangerous' races,'t and often heavy seas. The Beagle herself, nodoubt, could do so, and her boats might explore the inlets ;but, the time that such a proceeding would occupy was• The Peel Indians called the Ventana Casu-hath (high hill); and theMole-che, Vuta-calel (great bulk.) — Falkner, p. 74.t Tide-races, or ripples.110 DECISION RESPONSIBILITY. Sept.alarming to contemplate. I might run along the outer line ofdanger in the Beagle, and connect it with the soundings inthe offing ; but how could an English ship surveying a frequentedcoast overlook six large ports,* only because theirexamination required time, and was dangerous ? At last, aftermuch anxious deliberation, I decided to hire two small schoonersor rather decked boats, schooner-rigged — from Mr. Harris,and employ them in assisting the Beagle and her boats. Mr.Harris was to be in the larger, as pilot to Lieutenant Wick-ham— and his friend Mr. Roberts, also settled at Del Carmen,on the river Negro, was to be Mr. Stokes's pilot in the smallervessel. These small craft, of fifteen and nine tons respectively,guided by their owners, who had for years frequentedthis complication of banks, harbours, and tides, seemed to mecapable of fulfilling the desired object — under command ofsuch steady and able heads as the officers mentioned — withthis great advantage ; that, while the Beagle might be procuringsupplies at Monte Video, going with the Fuegians on herfirst trip to the southward, and visiting the Falkland islands,the survey of all those intricacies between Blancoo Bay andSan Bias might be carried on steadily during the finest timeof year. One serious difficulty, that of my not being authorizedto hire or purchase assistance on account of the Government,I did not then dwell upon, for I was anxious andeager, and, it has proved, too sanguine. I made an agreementwith Mr. Harris-j- on my own individual responsibility,for such payment as seemed to be fair compensation for hisstipulated services, and I did hope that if the results of thesearrangements should turn out well, I should stand excusedfor having presumed to act so freely, and should be reimbursedfor the sum laid out, which I could so ill spare. However,I foresaw and was willing to run the risk, and now consolemyself for this, and other subsequent mortifications, by thereflection that the service entrusted to me did not suffer.• Blancoo Bay and Port Belgrano, False Bay, Green Bay, BrightenInlet, Union Bay, and San Bias Bay.t See Appendix.1832. PAZ — Libre REFIT. IllThe formal agreement with Mr. Harris being duly signed,I despatched him forthwith to the river Negro, in search ofhis vessels, and sent the purser with him to ascertain the stateof things at Del Carmen, especially with a view to futuresupplies.They went in a small coasting vessel, belonging to anotherEnglishman (H. Elsegood), settled at Del Carmen; for theschooner, from which Mr. Harris came to us near to MountHermoso, did not delay, but continued her course towardsthe river Negro.Our boats were constantly employed while these arrangementswere pending, and directly they were finished, the Beaglegot under sail to examine the entrance and outer parts ofthe port. For several days she was thus engaged, anchoringalways at night. In a week the schooners arrived, bringingour purser and their owners. The Paz, of about fifteen tonsburthen, was as ugly and ill-built a craft as I ever saw, coveredwith dirt, and soaked with rancid oil. The Liebre, ofabout nine tons burthen, was a frigate's barge,* raised anddecked — oily like the other ; but as both had done their ownersgood service in procuring seal and sea-elephant oil, I saw noreason to doubt our being able to make them answer our purpose.Yet the prospect for those who had so handsomelyvolunteered to go in any thing, with or without a deck, couldnot be otherwise than extremely unpleasant ; for they did notthen foresee how soon a thorough cleansing and completeoutfit would be given to both vessels, and how different theywould afterwards appear.Lieutenant Wickham, with the sail maker, armourer, cooper,and a small party, were immediately established under tents,on the banks of a small creek (Arroyo Pareja). The littleschooners were hauled ashore for examination and a thoroughrefit ; and then, having left them the stores and other necessarieswhich they would require, I went with the Beagletowards Blancoo Bay ; completed the examination of anarrow though deep channel, by which any ship mayShe had been the barge of the Brazilian frigate Miranda.lis GALE — HUNGER FOSSILS. Sept.enter Port Belgrano, passed round the great north bank, andagain anchored under Mount Hermoso. While some officersand men were on shore there, building a sea-mark on the mount,and otherwise employed for the survey, a gale of wind came onfrom S.E., which soon sent so heavy a sea into the roadsteadnear the mount, that the Beagle was obliged to striketopmasts and veer a long scope of cable upon two anchors,besides having another under foot. Unluckily, our partyon shore had only one day's provisions, so while the galelasted their situation was sufficiently disagreeable; the keenair and hard exercise sharpening their appetites, while theyhad nothing to eat after the first day ; and having no guns,they had no prospect of procuring anything. Mr. Darwinwas also on shore, having been searching for fossils, andhe found this trial of hunger quite long enough to satisfyeven his love of adventure. Directly it was possible to puta boat on the water, one was sent, with provisions securedin a cask which was thrown overboard at the back of the surf,and soon drifted ashore to the famishing party. This galelasted several days, and proved to us not only how heavy asea is thrown into this bight (rincon, Spa), by a south-eastgale; but also, that the holding-ground is sufficiently goodto enable a ship to withstand its effects.One of our party on shore (who is not likely to forgetbuilding a mark on Mount Hermoso) discovered many curiousfossils in some low cliffs under the mount; and judging fromwhat Mr. Darwin then found, future collectors may reap a richharvest there, as well as at Point Alta.We next returned to the Wells, and while some assisted theoutfit of Lieutenant Wickham's little vessels, others exploredthe upper parts of the port, quite to its end, and Mr. Darwintook advantage of the opportunity to make some of thoseinteresting excursions which he describes in his volume. Atthis time there were no soldiers to watch us, neither was thereany longer a suspicion of our character ; for it appeared thatan express had been sent off to Buenos Ayres, at our firstarrival, giving an exaggerated and rather ludicrous account ofOct. 1832. ABSURD ALARMS. 113our officers, instruments and guns — to which an answer hadbeen immediately returned, desiring the commandant to affordus every facility in his power, and checking the old majorrather sharply for his officious and unnecessary caution. Hadwe not been hastily treated in the roads of Buenos Ayres,when I went there to communicate with the Government, andobtain information, I should doubtless have carried with meorders, or a letter, to this commandant, which would haveprevented a moment's suspicion : but, as it happened, no realdelay was occasioned, and no person was much disturbedexcept the major, who fancied that our brass guns were disguisedfield-pieces, our instruments lately invented engines ofextraordinary power, our numerous boats intended expresslyfor disembarking troops ; and an assertion of mine, that anynumber of line-of-battle ships might enter the port, a sureindication that the Beagle was sent to find a passage for largeships : which would soon appear, and take possession of thecountry. Such was the substance of his communication to theGovernment at Buenos Ayres, and as he acted as secretary —(Rodriguez being a man of action rather than words) — he hadfree scope for his disturbed imagination. I shall not easilyforget his countenance, when I first told him — thinking hewould be glad to hear it — that there was a deep channel leadingfrom Blancoo Bay to the Guardia near Argentina, and that aline-of-battle ship could approach within gunshot of the placewhere I first met the commandant. He certainly thoughthimself almost taken prisoner ; and I really believe that if hehad been commanding officer, we should have been sentin chains to Buenos Ayres, or perhaps still worse treated.Fortunately, Rodriguez the commandant, being a brave man,and a gentleman, contemplated no such measures.VOL. II.CHAPTER VI.Beagle sails with Paz and Liebre — Part company — Beagle visits BuenosAyres — Nautical remarks on the Plata— Sail from Monte Video forSan Bias— Lieut. Wickham and tenders— Butterflies— Sail for Tierradel Fuego— White-water — Icebergs— Rocks— Cape San Sebastian —Opens-men — Cape San Diego — Good Success Bay — Natives— Guana-does— Cape Horn— St. Martin Cove — Gales— Heavy Seas — NassauBay— Goreee Road— Prepare to land Matthews and the Fuegians.18th October. No person who had only seen the Paz andLiebre in their former wretched condition, would easily haverecognised them after being refitted, and having indeed almost anew equipment. Spars altered, and improved rigging, well-cutsails, fresh paint,* and thorough cleanliness, had transformedthe dirty sealing craft into smart little cock-boats : and as theysailed out of Port Belgrano with the Beagle, their appearanceand behaviour were by no means discouraging.At dusk, Lieutenant Wickham and his small party of venturousassociates separated from us, and steered into FalseBay.f The Beagle anchored for the night, and next day pursuedher route towards Monte Video, where she arrived on the26th.Desirous of communicating with the Government at BuenosAyres, and measuring the difference of meridians between thatcity and Monte Video, we weighed anchor on the 31st, proceededup the river, and remained in the outer roadstead, offBuenos Ayres, until the 10th of November. We then employedthree days in verifying the positions of some banks,:|:as laid down in Heywood's and other charts, and returned toMonte Video on the 14th.• Or rather red-ochre, coal-tar, and white-wash*t See orders to Lieut. Wickham, in the Appendix.J Ortiz, Chico, and Ensenada.1832. NAUTICAL REMARKS — SAIL. 115It is not prudent for any vessel drawing more than ten feetwater to remain under sail in this part of the river, while it isdark, unless a good pilot is on board ; and even the best practicalexperience is not always a sure guide, so uncertain andfluctuating are the currents and depths of water. There areafew simple precautions, useful in such circumstances, ofwhich I may be excused for reminding young sailors. Aground-log ought to be hove frequently, and compared with acommon log ; there should be a herdsman in each chains, one,at least, of whom should sound constantly : the deep-sea lead*ought to be used now and then, even in shallow water, as acheck upon the hand-lead : from the vessel's draught of waterto two fathoms more than that depth, the hand-line should bemarked to feet, by alternate marks of dark-coloured hair andsmall line : strong lanterns should be suspended under thechain-wales, near the water, but close to the ship's side ; whilea careful person ought to superintend the herdsman, and occasionallytake a line into his own hand, so that by ' plumbing 'the bottom himself he may ascertain how far reliance is to beplaced upon the herdsman's opinion.In the Plata, as well as in many other pilot-waters, tofeel the ground thus is often more useful than knowing theprecise depth of water, or even the colour, or nature, of thebottom.27th Nov. Our arrangements and observations being satisfactorilycompleted, a sufficient quantity of provision on boardto last eight months, at full allowance, and an extra supplyof iron and coals for the forge, in case of any seriousaccident, the Beagle sailed from Monte Video ; and, afterfilling water near Cape Jesu Maria,-|- hastened to look after herlittle assistants, left near Bahia Blancoo.In this trip we benefitted by the assistance of Mr. RobertN. Hamond, an early and much esteemed friend of mine,who was lent to the Beagle from H.M.S. Druid, of which hewas then a mate.• Massey's is preferable .t Above Monte Video, on the north shore.I 2116 OFF SAN Alas. DeCDecember 3d. Soon after daylight we saw the very lowislands, just to the northward of San Bias. I wished to havemade Point Rubia, but was set twenty miles northward, duringthe night, by the flood tide. We stood directly towards theshore, but when eight miles from it fovind a wide breadth ofdiscoloured water, and the depth shoaled suddenly from tento three fathoms in a few casts of the lead. Hauling off", westeered southward, with the ebb tide. There was no ripple onthe banks, but the water was quite yellow, and at the time wealtered our course, in consequence of such shallow water, thenearest land was, at least, eight miles distant.While tracing the outer edge of this bank we descried ourcock-boats coming out to meet us, and soon afterwardsMr. Wickham came on board. He gave us gratifying newswith little drawback ; but had he been half-roasted his ownappearance could hardly have been more changed. Notwithstandingthe protection of a huge beard, every part of his facewas so scorched and blistered by the sun that he could hardlyspeak, much less join in the irresistible laugh, at his ownexpense. His companions were similarly sunburned, thoughnot to such a degree. They had been much occupied insounding extensive banks and harbours, under a hot sun, andwhile a fresh wind kept them constantly wet with spray.But this inconvenience was trifling ; one of more importancewas excessive sea-sickness, in consequence of the short andviolent movements of such small craft under sail among thetide-races and eddies so numerous on that coast.In other respects all had prospered so well, that I determinedto give Mr. Wickham fresh orders,* enlarging considerablyhis share of surveying operations. He was desired tocontinue exploring the coast, even as far as Port Desire, untilthe Beagle's return from her visit to Tierra del Fuego andthe Falkland Islands.Astheweather promised well, an anchors dropped where wewere, outside the banks, but the schooners sought shelter in theharbour of San Bias. Next day they came out and anchored• See Appendix..1832. PAZ Libre BUTTERFLIES. 117close to US, in order to receive stores and various supplieswhich we had brought for them from Buenos Ayres and MonteVideo. I was a little uneasy when I saw that the pilot of theLiebre, Mr. Roberts, was one of the largest of men, and thathis little vessel looked, by comparison, no bigger than a coffin ;but Mr. Wickham allayed my doubts by assuring me thathis moveable weight answered admirably in trimming thecraft ; and that, when she got a-ground, Mr. Roberts steppedoverboard, and heaved her afloat. " Certainly," said Mr. Wick-ham," he did harm on one day, by going up to look-out, andbreaking the mast."In the afternoon of this day (4th) we weighed anchor andparted company from the Paz and Liebre. They returnedto San Bias, and the Beagle steered southward. Secure andcapacious as is the port just mentioned, it is one of the mostdifficult and dangerous to enter on this coast The best,indeed only approach to it, is called by those sealers and sea-elephantfishers who have hitherto frequented it, — ' HeU-gate''At about four the weather was very hot, the sky cloudless,and varying flaws of wind drove quantities of gossamer, andnumbers of insects off" from the land. The horizon wasstrangely distorted by refraction, and I anticipated some violentchange. Suddenly myriads of white butterflies surroundedthe ship, in such multitudes, that the men exclaimed, " it issnowing butterflies." They were driven before a gust from thenorth-west, which soon increased to a double-reefed topsailbreeze, and were as numerous as flakes of snow in the thickestshower. The space they occupied could not have been lessthan two hundred yards in height, a mile in width, and severalmiles in length.Our next object was to visit Tierra del Fuego, examinesome portions of that country — yet unexplored — and restorethe Fuegians to their native places ; but in our passage, strongsoutherly winds, severe squalls, and cold weather, though it wasnear midsummer in that hemisphere, caused delay and discomfort,as they must always in a small and deeply-laden vessel,where little can be done except in fine weather.118 WHITE WATER — Icebergs. Dec.• We passed through a space of sea,* many miles in extent,where the water was of a very much lighter colour than usual ;not of a light-green or muddy hue, such as one sees near land,but of a milky white tint. Being in soundings, one naturallyattributed such a change of colour to some peculiarity in theground ; but I have since thought differently, and am nowinclined to believe that the light-coloured water came from adistance, in one of those great, though slow-moving currents,which sweep past the Falkland Islands, and thence northwards :but to what cause its unusual whiteness is to be attributed, Iknow not. The dissolution of a huge iceberg, or of many icebergs,might alter the colour, and certainly would change thetemperature of a considerable body of water ; but in this case,a thermometer immersed in the sea did not indicate a degreelower than that of the previous or following day. During thethree days, our soundings varied only from fifty to sixtyfathoms. The lead certainly brought up fine grey sand whilethe water was light-coloured, and dark sand at other times ;but I can hardly think that so decided a change— different fromany I noticed elsewhere — could have been caused in fifty fathomswater by so small an alteration in the quality of the bottom.Icebergs have been seen in latitude 40° S., and near the longitudeof 50° W' ; perhaps they are sometimes carried nearerthe coast, in which case they would ground, and melt away.I suspect that some of the rocks, so often, yet so fruitlessly,sought for — and instead of which many persons have supposeddead whales, wrecks, or large trees, were seen — may have beenicebergs, against and upon which sea weed, drift-wood, or othersubstances, may have lodged temporarily, causing a rock-likeappearance. In this way, perhaps, arose the report of a rocksaid to have been seen by Lieutenant Burdwood ; of the Aigleand Ariel rocks — and even of those islets sought for ineffectuallyby Weddell, a few degrees eastward of the FalklandIslands.-f-Lat. 46°.S. Long. 63° W.t On this subject there are a few more remarks, under the head — Currentsof the ocean, — in the last chapter but one.183?. TIERRA DEL Lego. 119In the first volume some notice was taken of the supposedAriel Rocks, and I will avail myself of this opportunity to saythat at various times the Beagle passed over and near theirasserted position; and that she likewise searched for thereported Aigle shoal or rock, without ever finding the slightestindication of either.On the 15th, we saw the land off Tierra del Fuego, nearCape San Sebastian, and next day closed the shore about CapeSunday, ran along it past Cape Penas, and anchored off SantaInez. A group of Indians was collected near Cape Penas,who watched our motions attentively. They were too far offfor us to make out more than that they were tail men, on foot,nearly naked, and accompanied by several large dogs. Tothose who had never seen man in his savage state — one of themost painfully interesting sights to his civilized brother— eventhis distant glimpse of the aborigines was deeply engaging ;but York Minster and Jemmy Button asked me to fire atthem, saying that they were " Opens-men— very bad men""Our Fuegian companions seemed to be much elated at thecertainty of being so near their own country ; and the boy wasnever tired of telling us how excellent his land was — how gladhis friends would be to see him — and how well they would treatus in return for our kindness to him.We remained but a few hours at anchor under Cape SantaInez, for so heavy a swell set in, directly towards the shore,caused probably by a northerly gale at a distance, that oursituation was dangerous as well as disagreeable. Our onlychance of saving the anchor and chain was by weighing immediately; yet if we did so, there would be a risk of driftingashore : however, we did weigh, and drifted some distance, rollingour netting in ; but a breeze sprung up, freshened rapidly,and soon carried us out of danger. This happened at three inthe morning, so my hopes of observations and angles were frustrated,and I had no choice but to run for the strait of LeMaire.At noon, very high breakers were reported by the mast-headman, off Cape San Diego ; at that time the flood-tide was GOOD SUCCESS BAY. Dec.ting strongly against a northerly wind and high swell ; butwhen the tide was slack, at one, the breakers disappeared ; andwhen we passed close to the cape, at two, the vater was comparativelysmooth.There is a ledge extending from Cape San Diego, over whichthe flood-tide, coming from the southward, sometimes breakswith such violence, that a small vessel might be swamped bythe ' bore ' which it occasions.As we sailed into Good Success Bay, a Fuegian yell echoedamong the woody heights, and shout after shout succeededfrom a party of natives, posted on a projecting woody eminence,at the north head of the bay, who were seen wavingskins, and beckoning to us with extreme eagerness. Findingthat we did not notice them, they lighted a fire, which instantlysent up a volume of thick white smoke. I have often beenastonished at the rapidity with which the Fuegians producethis effect (meant by them as a signal) in their wet climate,where I have been, at times, more than two hours attemptingto kindle a fire.Scarcely was our ship secured, when the wind shifted tosouth-west, and blew strongly, bringing much rain with it ; andwe had indeed reason to rejoice at having attained so securean anchorage. During the night, heavy squalls (williams)disturbed our rest very often, but did no injury, the waterbeing quite smooth.18th. Mr. Darwin, Mr. Hamond and others, went with meto the natives who had so vociferously greeted our arrival;and deeply indeed was I interested by witnessing the effectcaused in their minds by this first meeting with man in such atotally savage state.There were five or six stout men, half-clothed in guanaco-skins,almost like the Patagonians in aspect and stature, beingnear six feet high, and confident in demeanour. They scarcelybore resemblance to the Fuegians, except in colour and class offeatures. I can never forget Mr. Hamond's earnest expression,What a pity such fine fellows should be left in such a barbarousstate!" It told me that a desire to benefit these isrno-oi1832. INTERESTING MEETING. 121rant, though by no means contemptible human beings, was anatural emotion, and not the effect of individual caprice or erroneousenthusiasm ; and that his feelings were exactly in unisonwith those I had experienced on former occasions, which hadled to my undertaking the heavy charge of those Fuegianswhom I brought to England.Disagreeable, indeed painful, as is even the mental contemplationof a savage, and unwilling as we may be to considerourselves even remotely descended from human beings in sucha state, the reflection that Caesar found the Britons paintedand clothed in skins, like these Fuegians, cannot fail to augmentan interest excited by their childish ignorance of mattersfamiliar to civilized man, and by their healthy, independentstate of existence. One of these men was just six feet high,and stout in proportion ; the others were rather shorter : theirlegs were straight and well formed, not cramped and misshapen,like those of the natives who go about in canoes; andtheir bodies were rounded and smooth. They expressed satisfactionor good will by rubbing or patting their own, and thenour bodies ; and were highly pleased by the antics of a manbelonging to the boat's crew, who danced well and was a goodmimic. One of the Fuegians was so like York Minster, thathe might well have passed for his brother. He asked eagerlyfor " cuchillo." About his eyes were circles of white paint, andhis upper lip was daubed with red ochre and oil. Another manwas rubbed over with black. They were (apparently) verygood-humoured, talked and played with the younger ones ofour party, danced, stood up back to back with our tallest mento compare heights, and began to try their strength in wrestling— but this I stopped. It was amusing and interesting tosee their meeting with York and Jemmy, who would notacknowledge them as countrymen, but laughed at and mockedthem. It was evident that both of our Fuegians understoodmuch of the language in which the others talked ; but theywould not try to interpret, alleging that they did not knowenough. York betrayed this by bursting into an immoderatefit of laughter at something the oldest man told him, which122 GUANACOES — CAPE HORN. DeC.he could not resist telling us was, that the old man said he wasdirty, and ought to pull out his beard. Now, if their languagediffered much from that of York Minster, or was indeed otherthan a dialect of the same original, it is not probable thatYork could have understood the old man's meaning so readilywhen he spoke quietly, without signs.Richard Matthews was with us, but did not appear to be atall discouraged by a close inspection of these natives. Heremarked to me, that " they were no worse than he had supposedthem to be."20th. Soon after day-light this morning, some very largeguanacoes were seen near the top of Banks Hill.* Theywalked slowly and heavily, and their tails hung down to theirhocks. To me their size seemed double that of the guanacoesabout Port Desire. Mr. Darwin and a party set off to ascendthe heights, anxious to get a shot at the guanacoes and obtainan extended view, besides making observations. They reachedthe summit, and saw several large animals, whose long woollycoats and tails added to their real bulk, and gave them anappearance quite distinct from that of the Patagoniann animal ;but they could not succeed in shooting one.21st. Sailed from Good Success Bay. On the 22d we sawCape Horn, and being favoured with northerly winds, passedclose to the southward of it before three o'clock. The wind thenshifted to north-west, and began to blow strong. Squalls cameover the heights of Hermite Island, and a very violent one,with thick weather, decided my standing out to sea for thenight under close-reefed topsails. The weather continued badand very cold during that night and next day.On the morning of the 24th, being off Cape Spencer, withthreatening weather, a high sea, the barometer low, and greatheavy-looking white clouds rising in the south-west, indicative 'of a gale from that quarter, I determined to seek for an anchorage,and stood into (the so-called) St. Francis Bay. InSo named in remembrance of Sir Joseph Banks's excursion,t In the first volume doubts are expressed (in a note to page 199)respecting the place named by D'Arquistade, St. Francis Bay; or ratherI said'1832. ST. MARTIN COVE— CONTRAST. 123passing Cape Spencer we were assailed by such a furious hail-squall,that for many minutes it was quite impossible to look towindward, or even to see what was a-head of us. We could notventure to wear round, or even heave to, for fear of getting sofarto leeward as to lose our chance of obtaining an anchorage ;however, we stood on at hazard, and the squall passed awaysoon enough to admit of our anchoring in seventeen-fathomswater, quite close to a steep promontory at the south side ofSt. Martin Cove.After being for some time accustomed to the low barrenshores and shallow harbours of the Pampa and Patagonianncoasts, our position almost under this black precipice was singularlystriking. The decided contrast of abrupt, high, andwoody mountains, rising from deep water, had been muchremarked in Good Success Bay; but here it was so great thatI could hardly persuade myself that the ship was in securitysufficiently far from the cliff.*25th. Notwithstanding violent squalls, and cold dampweather, we kept our Christmas merrily ; certainly, not theless so, in consequence of feeling that we were in a secure position,instead of being exposed to the effects of a high sea andheavy gale.I said, that " I do not think the bay adjacent to Cape Horn is that whichwas named by D'Arquistade, ' St. Francis,' and, if my supposition iscorrect, Port Maxwell is not the place which was called ' St. Bernard'sCove.' "If the modern chart be compared with that issued by the Admiralty afew years ago, published by Laden in 1818, it will be seen that the particularplan of St. Francis Bay, given in Laden's chart, agrees much betterwith the west side of Nassau Bay than with any other place ; and that theremarkable island, like a castle," noticed in the plan, is evidentlyPacksaddle Island," of the modern chart. The rough sketch of landtowards the north and east, as far as Cape Horn, on that plan, I take tobe the random outline of land seen at a distance by the person who drewthe plan, and the name " Cape Horn," affixed to the southernmost landthen in sight; which must have been Cape Spencer. But it is now toolate to remedy the mistake, which is indeed of no consequence.• As the shores of Tierra del Fuego are so much spoken of in otherplaces, I say no more of them here.124 GALES DIEGO RAMIREZ. Jail.At sun-set, there was a reddish appearance all over the skyclouds shot over the summits of the mountains in raggeddetached masses — and there was a lurid haze around, whichshowed a coming storm as surely as a fall of the barometer.The gale increased, and at midnight such furious squallscame down from the heights, that the water was swept up, andclouds of foam were driven along the sea. Although we wereclose to a weather shore, with our top-gallant masts down andyards braced sharp up, we hardly thought ourselves in securitywith three anchors down and plenty of chain cable out.*Dec. 31. Tired and impatient at the delay caused by badweather, we put to sea again the first day there was a hope ofnot being driven eastward ; and during a fortnight we tried hardto work our way towards Christmas Sound. My purpose wasto land York Minster and Fuegia Basket among their ownpeople, near March Harbour, and return eastward throughthe Beagle Channel, landing Jemmy Button also with histribe, the Tekeenica. Part of Whale-boat Sound and the westernarms of the Beagle Channel were to be surveyed : and bythis scheme I proposed to combine both objects.Jan. 2d. We were rather too near the Diego RamirezIslands, during a fresh gale of wind, with much sea ; but bycarrying a heavy press of sail, our good little ship weatheredthem cleverly, going from seven and a half to eight knots anhour, under close-reefed topsails and double-reefed courses —the top-gallant-masts being on deck.On the 5th, the same islands were again under our lee — asufficient evidence that we did not make westincr. In fact, nosooner did we get a few reefs out, than we began taking themDuring; such sudden, and at times tremendous squalls as these, it isabsolutely necessary to have a long scope of cable out, although the vesselmay be in smooth water, in order that the first fury of the blast may beover before the cable is strained tight ; for otherwise, the chain or anchormight snap. When the violence of the squall is past, the weight of achain cable sinking down, draws the ship a-head, so far as to admit of herrecoiling again at the next william ; thus, a kind of elasticity may begiven to a chain, in some degree equivalent to that always possessed bv ahemp cable.1833. GALES CllITICAL TIME. 125in again ; and although every change of wind was turned toaccount, as far as possible, but little ground was gained.On the 11th we saw that wild-looking height, called YorkMinster, ' looming ' among driving clouds, and I flattered myselfwe should reach an anchorage ; but after tearing throughheavy seas, under all the sail we could carry, darkness and asuccession of violent squalls, accompanied by hail and rain,obliged me to stand to seaward, after being within a mile ofour port. All the next day we were lying-to in a heavy galewearing occasionally.At three in the morning of the 13th, the vessel lurched sodeeply, and the main-mast bent and quivered so much, that Ireluctantly took in the main-topsail (small as it was when close-reefed),leaving set only the storm-trysails (close-reefed) andfore-staysail.* At ten, there was so continued and heavy arush of wind, that even the diminutive trysails oppressed thevessel too much, and they were still farther reduced. Soon afterone, the sea had risen to a great height, and I was anxiouslywatching the successive waves, when three huge rollers approached,whose size and steepness at once told me that oursea-boat, good as she was, would be sorely tried. Havingsteerage way, the vessel met and rose over the first unharmed,but, of course, her way was checked ; the second deadened herway completely, throwing her off" the wind ; and the thirdgreat sea, taking her right a-beam, turned her so far over, thatall the lee bulwark, from the cat-head to the stern davit, wastwo or three feet under water.For a moment, our position was critical ; but, like a cask,she rolled back again, though with some feet of water over thewhole deck. Had another sea then struck her, the little shipmight have been numbered among the many of her class whichhave disappeared : but the crisis was past — she shook the seaoff" her through the ports, and was none the worse — exceptingI have always succeeded in carrying a close-reefed main-topsail (fivereefs) in the Beagle, excepting on this and two other occasions ; but wereI again under similar circumstances, I think I should try to carry it —even then — for some time longer.126 GALES — HASTY OPINIONS Jan.the loss of a lee-quarter boat, which, although carried three feethigher than in the former voyage (1826-1830), was dippedunder water, and torn away.*From that time the wind abated, and the sea became lesshigh.-}- The main-topsail was again set, though with difficulty,and at four o'clock the fore-topsail and double-reefed foresailwere helping us towards False Cape Horn, my intention beingto anchor in Nassau Bay. When the quarter-boat was tornaway, we were between the Ildefonsos and Diego Ramirez :the wind varying from W.S.W. to S.W.This gale was severely felt on all parts of the coast, southof 48°, as I afterwards ascertained from sealing-vessels : and atthe Falkland Islands, a French whaler, called Le Magellan,was driven from her anchors and totally wrecked in that landlockedand excellent port, Berkeley Sound.Some persons are disposed to form a very premature opinionof the wind or weather to be met with in particular regions,judging only from what they may themselves have experienced.Happily, extreme cases are not often met with ; butone cannot help regretting the haste with which some men(who have sailed round Cape Horn with royal set) incline tocavil at and doubt the description of Anson and other navigators,who were not only far less fortunate as to weather, buthad to deal with crazy ships, inefficient crews, and unknownshores ; besides hunger, thirst, and disease.Before midnight we anchored under shelter of the land• It was well that all our hatchways were thoroughly secured, and thatnothing heavy could break a-drift. But little water found its way to thelower deck, though Mr. Darwin's collections, in the poop and forecastlecabins on deck, were much injured. Next to keeping a sharp look-outupon the skj^, the water, and the barometer, we were always anxious tobatten down our hatches in time — especially at night, during a gale, or jin very squally weather.t The roller which hove us almost on our beam ends, was the highest jand most hollow that I have seen, excepting one in the Bay of Biscay,]and one in the Southern Atlantic; yet so easy was our little vessel that!nothing was injured besides the boat, the netting (washed away), and one [chronometer.1833. NASSAU BAY — Gore Had. 127near False Cape Horn ; and next morning (14th) crossed NassauBay in search of a convenient harbour near the BeagleChannel. Having found so much difficulty in getting to thewestward by the open sea, I decided to employ boats in theinterior passages, and leave the Beagle at a secure anchorage.Furious squalls prevented our effecting this purpose ; and weanchored for the night in Windhond Bay.* The following day(15th) we again tried to get to the head or north-west corner ofNassau Bay, but ineffectually, for repeated squalls opposed us,and at last obliged me to bear up for Goreee Road ; one of themost spacious, accessible, and safe anchorages in these regions.Here, to my surprise, York Minster told me that he wouldrather live with Jemmy Button in the Tekeenica country thango to his own people. This was a complete change in his ideas,and I was very glad of it ; because it might be far better thatthe three, York, Jemmy, and Fuegia, should settle together. Ilittle thought how deep a scheme master York had in contemplation.18th. Having moored the Beagle in security, and madearrangements for the occupation of those who were to remainon board, I set out with four boats (yawl and three whale-boats),carrying Matthews and the Fuegians, with all the stockof useful things which had been given to them in England, -|-A temporary deck having been put upon the yawl, she carrieda large cargo, and was towed by the other boats when thewind was adverse. Matthews showed no sign of hesitation orreluctance ; on the contrary, he was eager to begin the trial towhich he had been so long looking forward. Messrs. Darwin,Bynoe, Hamond, Stewart, and Johnson, with twenty-fourseamen and marines, completed the party.My intention was to go round the north-east part of NavarinIsland, along the eastern arm of the Beagle Channel, throughMurray Narrow, to the spot which Jemmy called his country :• So named by the Dutch in 1624, after one of their ships, the Wind-hand.•]- By far the larger part of their property, including Matthews's outfit,was sent by Mr. Coates, Secretary of the Church Missionary Society.128 Arrangements. Jan. 1833-there establish the Fuegians, with Matthews : — leave themfor a time, while I continued my route westward to explorethe western arms of the channel, and part of WhaleboatSound : and at my return thence decide whether Matthewsshould be left among the natives for a longer period, orreturn with me to the Beagle.But before I briefly relate this attempt to form a temporarysettlement among the Fuegians, it may be advisable to give ageneral sketch of the aborigines who thinly people the southernmostregions of South America : including not only thevarious tribes of Fuegians (as far as we know them), but thePatagonians, and those natives of Western Patagonia whoare supposed to be a remnant of the tribe called Honos.CHAPTER VII.SOUTHERN ABORIGINES OF SOUTH AMERICA.Of the tribes which scantily people Patagonia and Tierradel Fuego, far less is yet known than might generally beexpected. Although frequently seen by white men, and oftenholding intercourse with them, probably no person even moderatelyeducated, excepting Falkner, has staid among themlong enough to become acquainted with, and describe theirpeculiarities.His description of the aboriginal natives who, in his time(1740-80), roamed over the fertile ' Pampas' of Buenos Ayres,or the sterile plains of Patagonia ; of the western mountaineers ;and of those unconquerable tribes which repulsed the PeruvianIncas, opposed Spanish conquerors, and are still independent,is so decidedly corroborated by Molina, by many Spanishauthors, and by modern testimony, that in attempting to describethe Patagonians, I shall try to unite his account (bearingin mind the time elapsed, and consequent changes) to theinformation which has been obtained during late years.Of the Fuegians, a few notices are to be found in narrativesof various voyagers ; but the imperfect description here givenis principally derived from the natives who went to England inthe Beagle ; and from IMr. Low, who has seen more of themin their own country than any other person.About the middle of the last century, the aboriginal inhabitantsof that portion of South America which lies between theparallels of thirty and forty, formed two principal divisions,more or less separated by the only real barrier existing in thatextent of country, the Cordillera of the Andes, Those wholived eastward of the Andes were called ' Peel-che,' signifyingVOL. II. K130 SOUTHERN ABORIGINES.east people; and those on the other side were known by theterm ' Mole-che,' which signifies war people, or warriors : andthese terms are still in habitual use.Numerous subdivisions have perplexed all whose attentionhas been attracted to the aboriginal population of SouthernAmerica. Falkner's account is the least confused, in everyway the most probable, and agrees the best with what is nowfound to be the condition of that portion of uncivilized man.For our present purpose, I believe, it will be sufficient toremark, that the Peel-che and Mole-che called the tribeswho lived towards the south, ' Tehuel-het'* and ' Huilli-che,'both of which terms signify people of the south. The Huilli-che were again divided into Pichi Huilli-che and Vuta Huilli-che ; ' pichi,' meaning little ; and ' vita,' great. Both theTehuel-het and the Vuta Huilli-che lived to the southward offorty degrees of latitude. A branch or tribe of the Tehuel-hetwho lived farthest towards the south, on the eastern side,had no horses, and that tribe was called ' Yacana-k unny,'-]- (footpeople). Westward of those people, separated from them by aridge of mountains, was a tribe called Key-hue, Key-yus, orKey-es ; and northward, the Sehuau-kunny:J:.Falkner, in his account, rather confuses the habits of theYacana-kunny with those of the Key-hue, which is not tobe wondered at, as he described those tribes solely from theaccounts of others. The Key-hue have neither 'bowls,' orballs (bolas), nor ' ostriches"" (see Falkner, p. Ill), in theirrugged tempestuous islands : neither do the Yacana-kunnylive chiefly on fish.' The former live on fish, while thelatter kill guanacoes, birds, and seals.Between the Key-hue and the Honos tribe were the Poy-yus, or Spey-es, living on the sea-coast. The Honos inhabitedthe Archipelago so called, and part of Chloe.These three last-mentioned tribes — Key-hue, Poy-yus, andHonos — were called ' Vuta Huilli-che.'Called by themselves ' Tehuel-kunny.'t ' Che,' ' het,' and ' sunny,' signify people, in different dialects,I The Sehuau-kunny are a part of the Tehuel-het.SOUTHERN ABORIGINES. 131Rather than occupy time in attempting to give an accountof the past state of these ever-varying tribes,— whose numbershave been so much altered, and v.'hose locations may be nowchanged, — I will endeavour to give some idea of the presentcondition, distribution, and probable numbers of the peoplecalled. Patagonians ; of the natives of Tierra del Fuego, orFuegians, and of the western tribe called Honos. By thosewho have frequented the Strait of Magalhaens or its vicinity,the latter are often called ' Canoe Indians;' and. the Patagonians,' Horse Indians.'The Patagonians (Tehuel-het) travel on horseback over thecountry between the River Negro and the Strait of Magalhaens;from the Atlantic to the Cordillera of the Andes. They have noboats or canoes of any kind ; and their disposition, habits, andlanguage are very different from those of the Fuegians (,Key-hue, and Poy-yus). Those who live in thenorth-eastern part of Tierra del Fuego have neither canoes norhorses. The natives of the southern and western islands, andof the shores of Otway and Skyring waters, also the peoplewho live upon the western islands and coast of Patagonia, havecanoes, but no horses.The Patagonians are now divided into four parties, each ofwhich has a separate though ill-defined territory. Each of theseparties has a leader, or cacique ; but they speak one language,and are evidently subdivisions of one tribe. When mutuallyconvenient, they all assemble in one place : but if food becomesscarce, or quarrels happen, each party withdraws to itsown territory. At such times one body will encroach upon thehunting grounds of another, and a battle is the consequence.About four hundred adults, and a rather large proportion ofchildren, are in each of these parties : the number of womenbeing to that of the men as three to one. Near the Strait of about fourteen hundred Patagonians have been latelyseen encamped together for a short time ; but usually there isonly one horde, of about four hundred grown people, in thatneighbourhood.Less is known of the Yacana-kunny than of any other tribe,k2132 SOUTHERN ABORIGINES.or portion of a tribe. It may consist of about six hundredmen and women, besides children.Beyond a range of high mountains to the southward of theYacana, is the tribe formerly called Key-hue, now probablythe Tekeenica. These are the smallest, and apparently the mostwretched of the Fuegians. They inhabit the shores and neighbourhoodof the Baffle Channel. The number of adults in thistribe may be about five hundred. (Note 1.)To the westward, between the western part of the BeagleChannel and the Strait of Magalhaens, is a tribe now calledAlikhoolip (which may be the Poy-yus), whose numbersamount perhaps to four hundred.About the central parts of Magalhaens Strait is a small andvery miserable horde, whose name I do not know. Their usualexclamation is ' Pecheray !'' ' Pecheray !' whence Bougainvilleand others called them the Pecherais. For want of a morecorrect term I shall here use the same word. The number ofadults among them is about two hundred.Near Otway and Skyring waters is a tribe, or fraction ofa tribe, whose name I could not learn ; for the present Ishall call them ' HuemuF — because they have many skins of akind of roebuck, which is said to be the animal described byMolina as the ' Huemur *. Their number may be one hundred,or thereabouts. I am inclined to think that these HuemulIndians are a branch of the Yacana people, whom Falknerdescribes as living on both sides of the Strait.On the western coast of Patagonia, between the Strait of and the Honos Archipelago, there is now but onetribe, in which there are not above four hundred grown people.Each of the tribes here specified speaks a language differingfrom that of any other, though, as I believe, not radically differentfrom the aboriginal Chilian. Some words are common totwo or more tribes ; as may be seen by reference to the fragmentof a vocabulary in the Appendix ; and differences mustincrease because neighbouring tribes are seldom at peace.The numbers above stated are mere estimations. The diffusedNote 2, at the end of this chapter.Southern ABORIGINES. 133cult of obtaining either language or information from theFuegians can only be well appreciated by those who have hadintercourse with them, or with the New Hollanders; whosemimickry of what one says is as perplexing as the same trickis when speaking to the Fuegians.Allowing that theTehuel-het or Patagoniansamount to 1,600Yacana 600Tekeenica 500Alikhoolip 400Pecheray 200Huemul 100, andHonos , 400the total will be 3,800, which Ido not think is five hundred in error : and I should say, inround numbers, that there are about four thousand adultssouth of the latitude of forty degrees, exclusive of Childee.By Patagonia is meant that part of South America whichlies between the River Negro and the Strait of Magalhaens.Eastern Patagonia is the portion of this district which lieseastward of the Cordillera ; and Western Patagonia, the partlying between the summits of the Andes and the Pacific Ocean.Tierra del Fuego takes in all the islands southward of theStrait of Magalhaens (including Staten Land), as far as theDiego Ramirez islets.Before entering into a more detailed account of these aborigines,I will try to give a slight general idea of their personalappearance ; of their horses and canoes ; of their houses andcountry ; in short, an outline sketch of that which is observedat the first glance of a stranger's eye. The minuter details,which will follow, may be tedious to many readers.Magalhaens first gave the name of Patagonia to the nativeswhom he saw at Port San Julian in 1 520. They were of verylarge (gigantic) stature, and their feet, being wrapped in roughguanaco skin, by way of shoes, were remarked particularlyProbably their footsteps in the sand were noticed, and excited134 SOUTHERN ABORIGINES.some such exclamation as ' que patagonia!' (what great feet !)paragon meaning a very large foot. — (See note 3.)Tierra del Fuego was also named by Magalhaens, becausemany fires were seen, in the night, upon that land.The aboriginal natives of Eastern Patagonia are a tall andextremely stout race of men. Their bodies are bulky, theirheads and features large, yet their hands and feet are comparativelysmall. Their limbs are neither so muscular nor solarge boned as their height and apparent bulk would induceone to suppose : they are also Rounder and smoother than thoseof white men. Their colour is a rich reddish-brown, betweenthat of rusty iron and clean copper, rather darker than copper,yet not so. dark as good old mahogany.* But every shade ofcolour between that just mentioned and the lighter hue of acopper kettle, may be seen among individuals of various ages.Excepting among old or sickly people, I did not notice atinge, of yellow : some of the women are lighter coloured —about the tint of pale copper — but none are fair, according toour ideas.Nothing is worn upon the head except their rough, lank, andcoarse black hair, which is tied above the temples with a filletof platted or twisted sinews. A large mantle, made of skinssewed together, loosely gathered about them, hanging from theshoulders to their ankles, adds so much to the bulkiness of theirappearance, that one ought not to wonder at their having beencalled ' gigantic' I am not aware that a Patagoniann hasappeared, during late years, exceeding in height six feet andsome inches ; but I see no reason to disbelieve Falkner's accountof the Cacique Cangapol, whose height, he says, was seven feetand some inches. When Falkner stood on tiptoe he could notreach the top of CangapoPs head. It is rather curious, thatByron could only just touch the top of the tallest man's head• The colour of these aborigines is extremely like that of the Devonshirebreed of cattle. From the window of a room in which I am sittingsee some oxen of that bi-need passing through the outskirts of a wood, andthe partial glimpses caught of them remind me strongly of the SouthAmerican red men.Southern AliOKIGINES. 135whom he saw. Ever restless and wandering, as were theTehuel-het, of which tribes that cacique was chief, mightnot Byron have measured Cangapol ? * Who disbelieves thatthe Roman Emperor, Maximin, by birth a Thracian, wasmore than eight feet in height? yet who, in consequenceexpects all Thracian to be giants ? At present, among twoor three hundred natives of Patagonia, scarcely half-a-dozenmen are seen whose height is under five feet nine or ten ; andthe women are tall in proportion.I have nowhere met an assemblage of men and womenwhose average height and apparent bulk approached to that ofthe Patagonians. Tall and athletic as are many of the nativesof Otaheite, and other islands in the Pacific Ocean, there arealso many among them who are slight, and of low stature.The Patagonians seem high-shouldered — owing perhaps tothe habit of folding their arms in their mantles across thechest, and thus increasing their apparent height and bulk,as the mantles hang loosely, and almost touch the ground.Until actually measured, I could not believe that they were notmuch taller than was found to be the fact.But little hair shews itself on their faces or bodies. Fromthe former it is studiously removed by two shells, or somekind of pincers. Although they do not augment the coarsenessof their features by piercing either nose or lips, they disfigurethemselves not a little by red,-f- blacks!: or white paint,with which they make grotesque ornaments, such as circlesaround their eyes, or great daubs across their faces. Uponparticular occasions, all the upper part of their body, from thewaist upwards, is strangely decorated (or disfigured) by paint,awkwardly laid on with very little design. On their feet andlegs are boots made out of the skins of horses' legs. Woodenspurs, if they cannot get iron ; sets of balls (bolas), and a longtapering lance of bamboo, pointed with iron, complete theirequipment. These lances are seldom seen near the Strait ofMagalhaens, but the natives are not always without them.The women are dressed and booted like the men, with theByron's voyage, 1765. — Falkner, 1740-80.t Ochre. X Charcoal and oil. § Felspathic earth and oil.SOUTHERN Aborigines.addition of a half petticoat, made of skins, if they cannot procureforeign coarse cloth. They clean their hair, and divideit into two tails, which are platted, and hang down, one on eachside. Ornaments of beads, bits of brass, or silver, or anysimilar trifles, are much prized, and worn in necklaces, or asbracelets ; sometimes also as ear-rings, or round their ankles.Mounted upon horses of an inferior size, averaging only aboutfourteen hands and a half in height, though rather well-bred,the Patagonians seem to be carried no better than the full-accoutreddragoons, who rode eighteen stone upon horses equalto twelve ; yet those horses, so slight in comparison with theirmasters, carry them at full speed in chase of ostriches or guana-does; and we all know what our dragoon horses have done undertheir heavily-weighted, but determined riders. With bridles ofhide tied to the lower jaw, when there is not a Spanish bit, anda light saddle of wood, covered with some skins and placedupon others, a Patagoniann rides hard when there is occasion —but frequently changes his horse. Many large dogs, of arough, lurcher-like breed, assist them in hunting, and keep anexcellent watch at night. (Note at end of Chapter VIII.)The toldos (huts) of these wanderers are in shape not unlikegipsy tents. Poles are stuck in the ground, to which othersare fastened, and skins of animals, sewed together, form thecovering, so that an irregular tilt-shaped hut is thus made.Three sides and the top are covered ; but the front, turnedtowards the east'; is open. These toldos are about seven feethigh, and ten or twelve feet square ; they are lower at theback, or western side, than in front, by several feet. Theseare their ordinary dwellings ; of other rather larger constructionsa description will be given hereafter.The country inhabited by these Patagonians is open and,generally speaking, rather level, but with occasional hills andsome extensive ranges of level-topped heights (steppes). Thereare very few trees, and water is scarce. The eye wanders overan apparently boundless extent of parched, yellow-lookingsemi-desert, where rain* seldom falls, and the sky is almost• Except during a few days in each year, or perhaps at intervals oftwo or three years, when it pours down in torrents.>SOUTHERN Aborigines. 137always clear'. The heats of summer are very great ; but inwinter, though the days are not cold, the frosts at night aresevere ; and at all times of the year, in the day-time, strong'winds sweep over the plains.The Yacana-kunny, natives of the north-eastern part ofTierra del Fuego, resemble the Patagonians in colour, stature,and clothing.* They seem to be now much in the condition inwhich the Patagonians must have been before they had horses.-f*With their dogs, with bows and arrows, balls (bolas), slings,lances, and clubs, they kill guanacoes, ostriches, birds, and seals.The north-eastern portion of Tierra del Fuego is a bettercountry than Patagonia. The woody mountains of the southwesternislands are succeeded, towards this north-east district,by hills of moderate height, partially wooded ; northward ofwhich are level expanses, almost free from wood, but coveredwith herbage adapted to the pasturage of cattle.The climate is a mean between the extremes of wetness anddrought, which are so much felt by the neighbouring regions ;and when a settlement is made, at some future day, in thatpart of the world, San Sebastian Bay, in the Yacana country,called by Narborough, King Charles South Land, would beanadvantageous position for its site. JThe Tekeenica, natives of the south-eastern portion ofTierra del Fuego, are low in stature, ill-looking, and badlyproportioned. Their colour is that of very old mahogany,or rather between dark copper, and bronze. The trunk ofthe body is large, in proportion to their cramped and rathercrooked limbs. Their rough, coarse, and extremely dirty blackhair half hides yet heightens a villanous expression of theworst description of savage features.Passing so much time in low wigwams, or cramped in smallExcepting boots'.t See Magalhaens' first interview. Burney, vol. i. p. 34.+ Falkner says (p. 93, speaking of this country), " It is evident that thisplace has the conveniences of wood, water, and soil ; and, if there couldbe found a tolerable harbour, it would be much more convenient for acolony, and have a better command of the passage to the South Sea thanFalkland's Islands."138 SOUTHERN ABORIGINES.canoes, injures the shape and size of their legs, and causesthem to move about in a stooping manner, with the kneesmuch bent ; yet they are very nimble, and rather strong.They suffer very little hair to grow, excepting on theirheads. Even their eyebrows are almost eradicated— two muscle-shellsserving for pincers. This aversion to the smaller tufts ofhair does not extend to the thatch-like covering of their uglyheads, which is lank, covered with dirt, hanging about their ears,and almost over their faces. Just above their eyes it is jaggedaway by a broken shell, if they have not a piece of iron hoopfor a knife, the pieces cut off being scrupulously burned. Inheight varying from four feet ten to five feet six, yet in thesize of their bodies equalling men of six feet, of course theylook clumsy and ill-proportioned ; but their hands and feet arerather small with respect to the size of their bodies, though notso in proportion to their limbs and joints, which, excepting theknees, are small. Their knees are all strained, and their legsinjured in shape, by the habit of squatting upon their heels.Awkward and difficult as such a posture appears to us, it is tothem a position of easy rest.Sometimes these satires upon mankind wear a part of theskin of a guanaco or a seal-skin upon their backs, and perhapsthe skin of a penguin or a bit of hide hangs in front ; but oftenthere is nothing, either to hide their nakedness or to preservewarmth, excepting a scrap of hide, which is tied to the sideor back of the body, by a string round the waist. Even thisis only for a pocket, in which they may carry stones for theirslings, and hide what they pick up or pilfer. A man alwayscarries his sling around his neck or waist, wherever he goes.Women wear rather more clothing, that is, they have nearlya whole skin of a guanaco, or seal, wrapped about them, andusually a diminutive apron. The upper part of the wrapper,above a string which is tied around the waist, serves to carryan infant. Neither men nor women have any substitute for shoes.No ornaments are worn in the nose, ears, or lips, nor on thefingers ; but of necklaces, and bracelets, such as they are, thewomen are very fond. With small tills, or pieces of the bones jSouthern ABORIGINES. 139of birds, strung upon lines made of sinews, these necklaces andbracelets are made, when nothing preferable is to be found ;but beads, buttons, pieces of broken glass, or bits of fracturedcrockery ware are most highly esteemed.The hair of the women is longer, less coarse, and certainlycleaner than that of the men. It is combed with the jaw of aporpoise, but neither platted nor tied ; and none is cut away,excepting from over their eyes. They are short, with bodieslargely out of proportion to their height ; their features,especially those of the old, are scarcely less disagreeable thanthe repulsive ones of the men. About four feet and someinches is the stature of these she-Fuegians — by courtesy calledwomen. They never walk upright : a stooping posture, andawkward movement, is their natural gait. They may be fitmates for such uncouth men ; but to civilized people their appearanceis disgusting. Ver};^ few exceptions were noticed.The colour of the women is similar to that of the men. Asthey are just as much exposed, and do harder work, this is anatural consequence : besides, while children, they run aboutquite naked, picking up shell-fish, carrying wood, or bringingwater. In the colour of the older people there is a tinge ofyellow, which is not noticed in the middle-aged or young.Both sexes oil themselves, or rub their bodies with grease ;and daub their faces and bodies with red, black, or white.A fillet is often worn round the head, which upon ordinaryoccasions is simply a string, made of sinews ; but if going towar, or dressed for show, the fillet is ornamented with whitedown, white feathers, or pieces of cloth, if they have obtainedany from shipping. Small lances, headed with wood ; others,pointed with bone ; bows, and arrows headed with obsidian,agate, or jasper ; clubs ; and slings ; are the weapons used bythe Tekeenica.The smoke of wood fires, confined in small wigwams,hurts their eyes so much, that they are red and watery ; theeffects of their oiling, or greasing themselves, and then rubbingochre, clay, or charcoal, over their bodies ; of their oftenfeeding upon the most offensive substances, sometimes in a140 SOUTHERN Aborigines.State of putridity ; and of other vile habits, may readily beimagined.As a Tekeenica is seldom out of sight of his canoe or a wigwam,a slight idea of these — his only constructions — shouldbe given with this sketch.The canoe is made of several large pieces of bark, sewedtogether ; its shape is nearly that which would be taken by thestrong bark of the trunk of a tree (twelve to twenty feet inlength, and a foot, or two feet, in diameter), separated fromthe solid wood, in one piece. If this piece of bark were drawntogether at the ends, and kept open by sticks in the middle,it would look rather like a Fuegian canoe.A Tekeenica wigwam is of a conical form, made of anumber of large poles, or young trees, placed touching oneanother in a circle, with the small ends meeting. Sometimes,bunches of grass or pieces of bark are thrown upon the sidewhich is exposed to the prevailing winds. No Fuegians, exceptthe Tekeenica, make their huts in this manner.The country of this people may be briefly described by sayingthat deep but narrow arms of the sea intersect high mountainousislands, many of whose summits are covered with snow,while the lee or eastern sides of their steep and rocky shores aremore than partially covered with evergreen woods.Between projecting rocky points are sandy or stony beaches,fronting very small spaces of level land, on which the huts ofthe natives are generally placed. Almost throughout the year,cloudy weather, rain, and much wind prevail ; indeed, reallyfine days are very rare. Being so near the level of that greatclimate agent, the ocean, frost and snow are far less frequentthan might be expected in a high latitude, among snow-coveredmountains, of which the siffht alone inclines one to shiver.The men of the Alikhoohp tribe are the stoutest and hardiest,and the women the least ill-looking of the Fuegians.Though not very dissimilar, they are superior to the Tekeenica ;but they are inferior to the Yacana, and far below the natives ofPatagonia. Their canoes are rather better than those of theTekeenica, made, however, in the same manner.iAPyiiLO MATT.ftYahoo yahHITEMC'-. BOY.r'LCANA v. /JpEC'TiEHAr ■HA'M,[F 1! '17. © A Kl Silenrv CoTbum. Crc&l ll9rR)orMai2i 3ir<vt,lSlVSOUTHERN ABORIGINES. 141The wigwams of the Alikhoolip, and indeed of all theFuegians, except the Tekeenica (and perhaps some of theYacana, whom we have not seen), are shaped like bee-hives.Their height is not above four or five feet above the ground ;but an excavation is usually made within, which gives anotherfoot, making about five feet and a-half of height, inside,and they are two, three, or four yards in diameter. Branchesof trees stuck in the ground, bent together towards the top,form the structure, upon which skins, pieces of bark, andbunches of coarse grass are roughly fastened. Of course,neither these nor the Tekeenica wigwams are wind or watertight,neither does the smoke need a chimney.The country and climate of the Alikhoolip are similar tothe Tekeenica, though wetter, more windy, and more disagreeable.Both men and women are better covered with sealor otter skins than the Tekeenica and Pecheray tribes. Whensurprised, or sure that they would not be plundered, the womenof this tribe were always seen wrapped in large otter or sealskins.The natives of the central parts of Magalhaens Strait appearto be almost as miserable a race as the Tekeenica. As in nothingbut language, and the construction of their wigwams, is thereany difference which has yet been found out (though probablyexisting), I shall say no more of them in this place.Their climate is nearly the same as that of the Alikhoolip ;and the country is similar, though more wooded in manyplaces, because more sheltered.Those whom I have hitherto called Huemul, who live nearthe Otway and Skyring Waters, seem to be a mixed breed,rather resembling the Yacana, of which tribe they are probablya branch. In habits, as well as in appearance, they partake ofsome of the peculiarities of Patagonians as well as Fuegians.Their country is like the Yacana — Tierra del Fuego blendingor sinking into Patagonia, sharing the qualities of each region,and therefore preferable to either. They have very few canoes ;and no horses: but large dogs are used by them in huntingthe huemul and guanaco.142 SOUTHERN ABORIGINES.The tribe mentioned in a following page, which was metby Mr. Low at the north side of Fits-Roy Passage, musthave been chiefly composed of slaves (zapallos). The Huemultribe is not numerous, and having plenty of land, with abundanceof food, would hardly quit their own territory to submitto a Patagoniann Cacique. These natives are neither inclinedto serve a master, nor to learn new habits : besides, beingseparated from the Horse Indians by a little channel, theycould not easily be caught, and obliged to remain with thePatagonians, as some persons have supposed.The Honos, who live on the western shores and islands ofPatagonia, are rather like the Alikhoolip, but not quite so stoutor so daring. In general they are less savage than the Fuegians ;and though their habits of life are similar, traces are visibleof former intercourse with the Spaniards, which doubtlesshas tended to improve their character.Prior to the Spanish conquest, the Honos Indians inhabitedChloe and the Honos Archipelago ; but that now they areall south of Cape Tres Montes, there is good reason to suppose,though certainly no positive proof. The canoes of theseHonos Indians are made of planks, sewed together ; and theyare rowed with oars. Generally there is a cross at one end ofthe canoe, or rather boat. Their wigwams are like thosealready mentioned of the bee-hive form.The climate of Western Patagonia is so disagreeable that thecountry is almost uninhabitable. Clouds, wind, and rain arecontinual in their annoyance. Perhaps there are not ten daysin the year on which rain does not fall ; and not thirty onwhich the wind does not blow strongly ; yet the air is mild,and the temperature surprisingly uniform throughout the year.The country is like the worst part of Tierra del Fuego — skrange of mountains, half sunk in ocean ; barren to seawardimpenetrably wooded towards the mainland, and always'drenched with the waters of frequent rain, which are never dried,up by evaporation before fresh showers fall.Having this endeavoured to give a slight general idea of themore obvious peculiarities of these, the most southern amorisABORIGINES. 143gives on the globe, I will enter into rather more detail, even atthe risk of being prolix. As there is much similarity in thehabits of all the tribes above-mentioned who use canoes, and weknow little of the Yacana, I shall speak of the Horse Indians,generally, in the first place ; and of the Canoe Indians, asone body, in the second.Note 1. — There is so much difficulty in deciding upon the orthographyof words whose sounds are variously given by individuals even of thesame tribe, and which, caught by ears of varying acuteness, are writtendown according to the pronunciation of different languages, that one maytrace some connexion between the names Key-es, Key-yus; Keyuhuesor Keyuhue ; Kekenica, or Tekeenica, and Kennel. This last termis taken from Van Noort. (Burney, vol ii. p. 215.) Perhaps the countrythere called ' Coin' may be that inhabited by Jemmy Button's Opens-men.2. Molina's description of the Huemul is said by naturalists to be unsatisfactoryand inconclusive ; therefore, whether it is an animal hithertounnoticed (except by him), or the ' kind of roebuck,' mentioned in page132, remains to be decided. See Molina, vol. i. p. 364.3. Pennant, in his ' Literary Life,' quotes Cavendish's as well as Brouwer'smeasurement of footsteps eighteen inches long ! As Pennant waspersonally acquainted with Falkner, and collected much informationrespecting the Patagonians from other sources likewise, I have inserteda short extract from his work in the Appendix to this volume. Theoriginal book is now becoming scarce, and some of the notices containedin it are very interesting in connexion with this subject.While I Wits revising my manuscript journal. Sir Woodbine Parishhad the kindness to lend me ' Viedma's Diary,' with permission to makeuse of it : and, finding some interesting notices of the Patagonians whichwere quite new to me, 1 have added to the appendix of this volume averbatim extract from Viedma, which I think will repay the curiousreader, especially where their ideas of the transmigration of souls arementioned.CHAPTER VIII.HORSE INDIANS OF PATAGONIA.Head — Physiognomy — Stature — Wanderings — Clothing — Armour —Arms — Food — Chase — Property — Huts — Wizards — Marriage — Children— Health — Illness — Death — Burial — War — Horsemanship —Gambling — Caciques — Superstitions — Warfare — Morality — Disposition— Chups — Apollos.The head of a Patagoniann is rather* broad, but not high ;and, except in a few instances, the forehead is small and low.His hair hangs loosely : it is black, coarse, and very dirty. Afillet which is worn around the top of the head may be intendedas an ornament, for it is certainly of no use. The brow isprominent : the eyes are rather small, black, and ever restless.Deficiency of eyebrow adds to the peculiar expression of theireyes; and a mixture of simplicity and shrewdness, daringand timidity, with that singular wild look which is never seenin civilized man, is very conspicuous in the Patagonians. Itsimmediate effect is to remind one of the necessity of beingalways on guard while within reach : yet of all savage nations,perhaps the Patagonians are least inclined to attack or deceivestrangers.In general, the women's stature, physiognomy, and dress, somuch resemble those of the men, that, except by their hair, itis difficult for a stranger to distinguish them.By nature they have but little hair on either face or body,and that little they try to eradicate. Their faces are roundish,and the width or projection of the cheek-bones makes themlook unusually wide. The nose is a little depressed, narrowbetween the eyes, but broad and fleshy about the nostrils,which are rather large. The mouth is large and coarselyformed, with thick lips. Their teeth are often very good,,though rather large ; and those in front have the peculiarity,which will be discussed when speaking of the Fuegians, of beingflattened, solid, and shewing an inner substance. The chin isCONFIDENCE — STATURE — WANDERINGS. 145usually broad and prominent : all the features, indeed, arelarge, excepting the eyes. The expression of their countenancesis open and honest (compared with other savages), and theirintrepid, contented look is rather prepossessing. The unhesitatingmanner in which, unarmed, they trust themselves amongstrangers whom they never before saw, or venture on boardship, even under sail in the offing (if they can obtain a passagein the boat), and go voluntarily from place to place withtheir white acquaintances, is very remarkable.Of the stature and bulk of these Indians I have alreadyspoken. It appears to me that those who now live on thenorthern side of Maffalhaens"' Strait are descendants of the Patagonianswhose size excited so much surprise and discussion ;and that, occasionally, individuals have exceeded the commonheight. Speaking of Cangapol, whose chief resort was thevicinity of the river Negro, though he and his tribe were restlesswanderers, Falkner says — " This chief, who was called bythe Spaniards the ' Cacique bravo,' was very tall and well proportioned.He must have been seven feet and some inches inheight, because, on tiptoe, I could not reach to the top of hishead. I was very well acquainted with him, and went somejourneys in his company. I do not recollect ever to have seenan Indian that was above an inch or two taller than Annapolisbrother, Sardinian, was but about six feet high. ThePatagonians are a large-bodied people ; but I never heard ofthat gigantic race which others have mentioned, though I haveseen persons of all the different tribes of southern Indians." Inanother place he says, " there is not a part of all this extremityof the continent that some of these wandering nations do nottravel over frequently"" Of their wanderings, many personsbesides myself and those with me can bear witness. Patagonians,who were personally known by officers of the Beagle,were seen by them at the Spanish (now the Buenos Ayrean)settlement, Del Carmen, near the mouth of the river Negro, inSeptember 1832; and by Mr. Low, at their usual abode, nearthe Strait of Magalhaens, in February 1833. The individualwho was then most noticed, a half-breed Indian woman, namedVOL. II. L346 CLOTHING Armour.Maria,* once persuaded some of her companions to go with herto the Falkland islands, in a vessel commanded by Mr. MatthewBrisbane. They went, staid there some weeks, and returned inthe same vessel, highly delighted by all the novelties, exceptingsea-sickness. The chief wizard of the tribe was one of theparty. ]varia was then a person of much consequence, beingalmost their only interpreter, and the wife of a principal person.Her own history must be curious : she was born at Asuncion,in Paraguay ; and has a son who is a cacique.The mantles are curiously painted, usually on one side only,but some have had the hair rubbed off and are painted onboth sides. They are very neatly sewed together with threadmade out of the split sinews of ostriches, which is the strongestand most durable material they can procure. Making mantlesis one of the occupations of the women. The paint used isfound on the hills : it is an earthy substance, of various colours.Moistened with water, and made into the shape of crayons,pieces of this substance are dried in the sun ; and when used,one end of the crayon is dipped in water and rubbed on thepart to be coloured. These mantles are tied about the neck,and usually round the middle, by sinew cords. Often the upperpart is dropped, and the body left quite exposed above thewaist, and while in active exercise on horseback, this is usuallythe case, if the mantle is not then entirely discarded. Thissubstantial substitute for clothing is made with skins of theanimals of their country ; and among those of guanaco, puma,fox, skunk (a kind of weasel or polecat), cavy, dog, otter, seal,and colt, the most esteemed are the small grey fox skins.A kind of ' maro' is sometimes worn by the men ; and theirboots, I have already said, are made out of the hock part ofthe skins of mares' and colts' legs. After being cleaned fromfat, or membranous substances, dried, and then made pliablewith grease, these ready-shaped boots require neither sewingnor soles. Wooden substitutes for spurs aise worn, if iron cannotbe procured.For warlike purposes the men clothe themselves in three of• Frequently mentioned by Captain King' in vol. i.ARMOUR ARMS. 147their thickest mantles : the two outer ones have no hair, butare gaily painted : all three are worn like ponchos. On theirheads they then wear conical caps, made of hide ; and surmountedby a tuft of ostrich feathers. Another kind of armour,sworn by those who can get it, is a broad-brimmed hat, or helmet,made of a doubled bulls hide : and a tunic, or frock, with ahigh collar, and short sleeves, made of several hides sewed together; sometimes of anta skins, but always of the thickest andmost solid they can procure. It is very heavy, strong enoughto resist arrows or lances, and to deaden the blow of a stoneball (bola persia) ; but it will not turn the bullet fired froma musket. Some say that it will do so, but that which I sawhad been pierced through, in the thickest part, by the musket-ballwhich killed the wearer. When obliged to fight on foot,they use a shield made of hides sewed together (clypeus sep-temple).Their arms are balls (bolas), lances, bows and arrows, clubs,and swords when they can get them. But in hasty, unforeseenskirmishes, they engage in as light order as the morenorthern Indians, without head-cover or mantle, stripped totheir spurs, and armed only with lances and balls ; which latterthey are never without.The balls, bowls, or bolas, called by themselves ' soma,' aretwo or three round stones, lumps of earth hardened, iron orcopper ore, or lead. If made of earth or clay, the material isenclosed in small bags of green (fresh) hide, which, placed in thesun, contract so much, that they become like stones in hardness ;but these clay balls are not used by the Patagonians so muchas by the Pampa Indians, in whose country stones or metalsare so scarce that there probably the last-mentioned balls wereinvented. Two balls, connected by a thong of hide, two, three,or four yards in length, are called ' somai."" Three such balls,connected by thongs, equal to one another in length, with theirinner ends united, are called ' achico.' Taking one ball in theright hand, the other two are whirled around several times,and the whole then thrown at the object to be entangled.There are also balls of less weight and size, made of marble,l2148 BALLS — LANCE.lead, or metallic ore, with shorter cords or thongs, which arefor small animals.Sometimes two small balls, each of which has a cord abouta yard in length, are fastened to the thong of the larger set.This is to entangle the victim more effectually. They do nottry to strike objects with these balls, but endeavour to throwthem so that the thong shall hit a prominent part ; and then,of course, the balls swing around in different directions, andthe thongs become so 'laid up' (or twisted), that strugglingonly makes the captive more secure. They can throw them sodexterously, as to fasten a man to his horse, or catch a horsewithout bruising him. If an animal is to be caught withoutbeing thrown down suddenly — an inevitable consequence ofthese balls swinging round his legs while at full speed — asoma is thrown at his neck. The two balls hang do^vn, andperplex him so much by dangling about his fore-legs, that hisspeed is much checked ; and another set of balls, or a lasso,may be used, to secure, without throwing him down. Thelasso is not much used, so adroit are they with the balls. Aformidable missile weapon is the single ball, called by theSpaniards ' bola persia.' This is similar to the other in sizeand substance, but attached to a slighter rope, about a yardlong. Whirling this ball, about a pound in weight, with theutmost swiftness around their heads, they dash it at their adversarywith almost the force of a shot. At close quarters, it isused, with a shorter scope of cord, as an efficient head-breaker.Several of these original, and not trifling offensive weapons,are kept in readiness by each individual ; and many a Spaniard,armed with steel and gunpowder, has acknowledged theireffect.The lance (chuza) is a long bamboo cane, from twelve totwenty-four feet long, headed with iron or steel. The greatlength and tapering slightness of these spears makes them formidableto any adversaries, but often fatal to those who areunskilful or timorous, because their vibration, artfully increasedto the utmost by the holders, makes it extremely difficult toparry the advance of their point ; but, once parried they areARMS — women's dress. 149useless — perhaps become encumbrances to their owners, who,if they do not turn and dash off at full speed, have recourse totheir balls or to swords. Some have swords obtained fromwhite men ; others fasten long blades (knife-blades, perhaps, orpieces of iron hoop, straightened and sharpened) to handles threeor four feet in length. Their bows are three or four feet long ;and the arrows, about two feet in length, are headed withsmall triangular pieces of agate, jasper, obsidian, or evenbone. But bows, arrows, shields, clubs, and heavy armour aredaily less used ; and may we not infer, that arms and armour,suited to foot encounters — such as arrows, heavy clubs ormaces, shields, and many-fold tunics — have been laid aside bydegrees, as horses have multiplied in the country ? Fightingon foot is now seldom practised, except in personal quarrels.Falkner says, they used to envenom the points of their arrowswith a species of poison, which destroyed so slowly, that thewounded person lingered for two or three months, till, reducedto a skeleton, he at last expired ; but I have not heard ofsuch a practice among the southern aborigines in these days.Those Indians who have felt the effects of fire-arms, andown abundance of horses, the men of Araucania, who are theterror of the Pampa tribes, have long abolished armour andthe arms of former wars — wars so well sung by Ercilla, inwhich they gained unfading honour in maintaining the freedomof their country. Naked on their horses, armed withlances, swords, and balls, those men now rush like the whirlwind— destroy — and are gone !The women of Patagonia wear nothing on their heads ; theirhair, parted before and behind, is gathered into two largetresses, one on each side. Ear-ornaments, necklaces, bracelets,and anklets, made of beads, pieces of brass, silver, or gold,are much esteemed. Their mantles are similar to those of themen ; but they are pinned across the breast by a woodenskewer, or a metal pin, and are gathered about the waist,hanging loosely almost to their ankles. A short apron, orhalf-petticoat, made with skins of small animals, or coarse cloth,is tied about their waist, under the mantle. It only coversthem in front, and reaches to the knee. Boots, similar to those150 FOOD — CHASE.of the men, and additional clothes, are worn when they ridedistances ; sitting astride, upon a heap of skins, which serveat niorht for bedding.The principal subsistence of these Indians is the flesh ofmares, ostriches, cavies, or guanacoes ; but though they arenot particular, and eat almost anything that they catch, theflesh of young mares is preferred to any other. They broil theirmeat, and eat it with a lump of fat, and salt. The fat of maresand that of ostriches are boiled together and put into/bladders ;but the fat of guanacoes is eaten raw, being preferred in thatstate. There are two roots which they eat, one called tus, theother chalas. The tus is a bulbous root, growing wild, whichwhen cleaned and baked, or rather roasted, becomes mealy,like a yam. They use it sometimes With their meat, but notoften. The chalas is a long, white root, about the size of agoose-quill. It is either roasted in the embers or put intobroth, which they make for women and sick people. Whenon the sea-coast, limpets and muscles are gathered by thewomen and children ; but fish or seals are seldom obtained.Dogs are not eaten, neither are horses, unless disabled by anaccident.Cattle are yet scarce in the southern regions, because pasturelandis rather deficient ; but about the lately-discovered river,Chupat, (lat. 43,21. S.) which, though small, is supposed tocross the continent, they are rather numerous, but their fleshis not thought equal to that of mares.The only prepared drink which they use, besides the decoctionof chalas, is the juice of barberries, mixed with water, anddrank in its natural state. They have no fermented liquor.Hunting is both amusing and necessary to the men. Theygo out to the chase in parties, more or less numerous, accordingto the strength of the tribe, the scarcity of food, and thesupply of horses. An extent of country is enclosed by thehorsemen ; then drawing together, they drive before them allthe animals ; till, when tolerably collected together, the cacique,or leading man of the party rides at an animal and throws itdown nth his balls. All then set to work, and ball away inevery direction. They do not stop because one animal falls,iCHASE — WEALTH HUTS, 151since not one in a hundred escapes by his own exertions whenonce entangled ; but another and another become the victimsof a good hunter, before the collection escapes out of his reach.All their sets of balls being employed, and the game dispersed,they begin to kill and divide. Each animal is knocked on thehead with a ball, skinned, and cut into pieces, where it fell,and the pieces are then carried on horseback to their huts.After reaching their settlement, the produce of the chase isbrought together, and divided among the different families, inproportion to their respective numbers. If one family haseaten its share sooner than others, some one of that hungryhouse goes to any party which has meat left, and cuts off whatis wanted, without a question.A number of large dogs assist in the hunt : whether theyscent the game I know not, but probably they run by eye, asso many animals are a-foot at once. Each regular hunter hasaspare horse at hand ; the best horses being carefully reservedfor war and the chase. Upon others they travel, place thewomen and children, and their property.The method of hunting abovementioned is that employedon set occasions ; but if only a few men are together, theysurprise and chase, as they can. Sometimes they ride together,and chase whatever they see, whether ostrich, skunk, guanaco,fox, or puma.The wealth of these Indians consists chiefly in horses anddogs, the richer individuals having forty or fifty horses, and alarge number of dogs ; the poorer, only one or two horses, andbut one dog.The tents or huts called by themselves ' cow,' and by theSpaniards and their descendants, toldos (tolderia is the placeof toldos, or Indian village, in Spanish), have already beenpartly described. Made of skins, sewed together and supportedby poles, a tilt-like construction, open towards the east, is theirhastily-formed dwelling. The top slopes towards the westside, which is not above two feet in height. The front is aboutsix or seven feet high ; and the inside space about twelvefeet by nine. Both poles and skins are carried with them when\52 DWELLINGS — MARRIAGES.they migrate from place to place. Water does not lodge on thehide covering, neither does wind penetrate ; and as east windsar very rare in Patagonia, a temporary screen, such as a fewskins, suffices for protection against them.Two or three families sleep in one hut, unless it is the dwellingof a cacique, or person who has many wives. Poor peoplehave but one wife. Those who are rich, and able to maintainthem, have seven-al wives — three, four, five, or even more.In places where some of the tribe stay constantly, and whichare considered the head-quarters, or central rendezvous of atribe, there are larger huts, almost deserving the name of houses.Some of these are for the cacique and his wives ; others are forthe wizards, who, in their three-fold capacity of priests, magiciansand doctors, have great influence over the superstitiousminds of their countrymen. These larger dwellings are madewith poles and skins, put together so as to form an oblong shed,with a sloping roof, shaped like a small cottage. The substitutesfor walls are about five feet in height, and the roof is inthe middle about eijjht feet from the ground. Some of thesehouses are four or five yards in width, and eight, ten, or twelvein length. I have never seen one myself ; but those who gaveme other information, which I found true, said that there weresuch houses in the interior, and described them minutely to me.At night, skins are spread upon the ground to sleep on ; twoor three rolled up, along the length of the back part of thetent or hut, form a pillow for the whole party, on which eachfamily has its place, and the dogs lie at their feet.The children have a Uttle square place to themselves, in onecorner. Infants in the cradle (a piece of hide with a thongfast to its four comers, by which it is suspended from the roofof the dwelling), are placed near their mother.Marriages are made by sale more frequently than by mutualagreement. Instead of receiving a dowry with his wife, a manpays a large price to her nearest relations. Sometimes girls arebetrothed while very young, and a part of the stipulated pricepaid to the relations. Mutual inclination may sometimesdetermine the choice ; but payment must in every case beIMARRIAGES SLAVES. 153made, in proportion to the supposed value of the damsel, andthe property of her purchaser. If a girl dislikes a match madefor her, she resists, and although dragged forcibly to the hut ofher lawful owner, plagues him so much by her contumacy,that he at last turns her away, or sells her to the person onwhom she has fixed her affections ; but he seldom beats her, ortreats her ill. Perhaps she does not wait to be so disposed of,but elopes and takes her choice of a protector ; who, if morepowerful than the husband, obliges him to submit to the doubleloss, unless a cacique, or a powerful friend of the losing party,forces the gallant to restore her, or compromise the matter,and these affairs are in general easy to settle. It has beenalready mentioned that each man who possesses any propertyhas usually more than one wife ; and that some few men, whohave forty or fifty horses, and other riches in proportion,maintain four or five wives.Women who have accepted their husbands with good-willare in general very faithful and laborious," says Falkner;their lives are but one continued scene of labour ; for, besidesnursing and bringing up children, they are obliged to do muchdrudgery." Except hunting, providing food, and fighting, allwork is done by the women. Indeed they sometimes aid inbattle. Some families have slaves who do household work ;but if they should have no slaves, not even the wives of acacique are exempt from every-day labour.Men do not marry before they are about twenty years ofage. Girls are married earlier: from fourteen or fifteen theyare considered to be marketable commodities. Falkner says,When once the parties are agreed, and have children, theyseldom forsake each other, even in extreme old age. The husbandprotects his wife from all injuries, and always takes herpart, even if she is in the wrong, which occasions frequentquarrels and bloodshed ; but this partiality does not preventhim from reprimanding her, in private, for engaging him inthese disputes.He very seldom beats her ; if she is found unfaithful helays blame on the gallant, and, if able, punishes him severely ;154 CHILDREN — INDIAN DISPOSITION.unless the delinquent atones by some valuable gift. Sometimes,at the command of a wizard, a man orders his wife to gotoan appointed place, usually a wood, and abandon herself tothe first person she meets. Yet there are women who refuse tocomply with such orders."When it does happen that a man and his Avise quarrel, thewoman is sometimes punished by having her two tails rathersavagely pulled. I have been told that the husband scarcelyever beats her, except in the height of passion.Children are left to take care of themselves soon afterthey can walk. With sets of little balls (bolas) they annoy thedogs not a little, practising their future occupation. While veryyoung they climb upon old, or quiet, horses' backs. If a youngguanaco is caught and tamed, or a bird with its wingsclipped hops about the tolderia, the little ones have fine sport.While infants are suckling, the mothers use frames or cradlesin which their charges are carried about : they are made offlat pieces of wood, with a few semi-circular guards of lath, orthin branches, whose ends are fixed into holes in the wood. Insuch frames, between pieces of guanaco skin, the babies areplaced ; and while travelling, these cradles are hung at themothers' saddle-bows. The children are much indulged.Falkner says, " The old people frequently change their habitationsto humour the caprices of their children. If anIndian, even a cacique, wish to change his abode, and thetribe with whom he is living do not choose to part with him, itis customary to take one of his children, and pretend such afondness for it, that they cannot part with the little favourite.The father, fond of his child, and pleased that it is so muchliked, is induced to remain."Yet with all this apparent goodness of disposition, in momentsof passion, these Indians have been seen to be like othersavages, disgraced by the worst barbarity. Neither man,woman, wife, nor even a smiling innocent child, is safe fromthat tiger in human shape — a savage in a rage. " Nunc,nunc fiarse de los Indies," is a Spanish maxim, as well foundedas it is common.HEALTH — ILLNESS — DEATH. 155Education, and the beneficial effects of the opinions of others,an influence fully felt only in civilized society, have so tamedand diminished the naturally strong passion of anger, with itssequel, immediate violence, or hatred and revenge, that imaginationmust be called to the assistance of those who, happily,have never seen a furious savage.Who can read that instance of child murder, related so wellby Byron, in his narrative of the Wager's wreck, without ashudder ? yet the man who, in a moment of passion, dashedhis own child against the rocks, would, at any other time,have been the most daring, the most enduring, and the mostself-devoted in its support and defence ! (Appendix No. 14.)Generally speaking, the Patagonians are extremely healthy.Their constitutions are so good that wounds heal rapidly : butthey are not ignorant of the healing properties of some herbs ;nor of the purgative qualities of others. They know the effectof bleeding, and can adroitly open a vein with a sharp pieceof shell or flinty stone.When sick, the chalas root, pounded and mixed with water,is a favourite specific. Should this, or the few other remedieswhich they think they know, fail, the wizard (who is alsodoctor) performs some absurd ceremonies, and then rattles togethertwo pieces of dry bladder, in which are some loose stones,in order to frighten away the ' Valichu,' or evil spirits, who areopposing their art, and tormenting the unlucky patient. Thediabolical noise caused by rattling these dried bladders, is continueduntil the disease takes a favourable turn, or the suffererdies. If death ends the scene, the body is wrapped in the bestmantle of the deceased, placed on his favourite horse, and carriedto the burying-place of the tribe. The wizard rattles,and the other people howl over the corpse as it is carried to thesepulchre. In a square pit, about six feet deep, and two orthree feet wide, where many others have been deposited,the corpse is placed in a sitting posture, adorned with mantles,plumes of feathers, and beads. The spurs, sword, balls, andother such property belonging to the deceased, are laidbeside him ; and the pit is then covered over with branches ofBURIAL — CEREMONIES.trees, upon which earth is laid. His favourite horse is afterwardskilled. It is held at the grave while a man knocks it onthe head with one of the balls of the deceased. When dead, itis skinned and stuffed, then, supported by sticks (or set up)upon its legs, with the head propped up, as if looking at thegrave. Sometimes more horses than one are killed. At thefuneral of a cacique four horses are sacrificed, and one is set upat each corner of the burial place. The clothes and othereffects belonging: to the deceased are burned : and to finishall, a feast is made of the horses' flesh.But there are also other modes of disposing of dead bodies :and as I am certain that at least two of them are practised bythe Patagonians of the present day, and we are assured byFalkner that other methods, one of which was carrying theminto the desert by the sea-coast, were customary in his time, 1shall here repeat what he says on the subject (p. 118).The burial of the dead and the superstitious reverencepaid to their memory, are attended with great ceremony. Whenan Indian dies, one of the most distinguished women amongthem is immediately chosen to make a skeleton of his body ;which is done by cutting out the entrails, which they burn toashes, dissecting the flesh from the bones as clean as possible,and then burying them under ground till the remaining fleshis entirely rotted off, or till they are removed (which must bewithin a year after the interment, but is sometimes within twomonths) to the proper burial-place of their ancestors.This custom is strictly observed by the Mole-che, Calumet,and Diuihet,* but the Chechehet and Tehuelhet, or Patagonians,place the bones on high, upon canes or twigs woventogether, to dry and whiten with the sun and rain.During the time that the ceremony of making the skeletonlasts, the Indians, covered with long mantles of skins, andtheir faces blackened with soot, walk round the tent, with longpoles or lances in their hands, singing in a mournful tone ofvoice, and striking the ground, to frighten away the Valichus,The Calumet, Chechehet, and Diuihet, were tribes of Peel-che.MOURNING — BURIAL.' 157or evil spirits. Some go to visit and console the widow, orwidows, and other relations of the dead, that is, if there is anythingto be got ; for nothing is done but with a view of interest.During this visit of condolence they cry, howl, and sing in themost dismal manner ; straining out tears, and pricking theirarms and thighs with sharp thorns, to make them bleed. Forthis shew of grief they are paid with glass beads, brass cascadesand such like baubles, which are in high estimation amongthem. The horses of the dead are also immediately killed,that he may have wherewithal to ride upon in the ' alhuemap,' or country of the dead, reserving only a few to gracethe last funeral pomp, and to carry the relics to their propersepulchres.When they remove the bones of their dead, they packthem up together in a hide, and place them upon one of thedeceased's favourite horses, kept alive for that purpose, whichthey adorn after their best fashion, with mantles, feathers, &c.,and travel in this manner, though it be to the distance of threehundred leagues, till they arrive at the proper burial-place,where they person the last ceremony.The Mole-che, Calumet, and Diuihet, bury their dead inlargesquare pits, about a fathom deep. The bones are puttogether, and secured by tying each in its proper place, thenclothed with all the best robes they can get, adorned with beads,plumes, &c., all of which they cleanse or change once a year.They are placed in a row, sitting, with the sword, lance, bowand arrows, bowls, and whatever else the deceased had whilealive. These pits are covered over with trees, canes, or brancheswoven together, upon which they put earth. An old matronis chosen out of each tribe, to take care of these graves, andon account of her employment is held in great veneration.Her office is to open every year these dreary habitations,and to clothe and clean the skeletons. Besides all this theyevery year pour upon these graves some bowls of their firstmade chicha, and drink some of it themselves to the goodhealth of the dead. (N. B. Not the Tehuelhet.)These buying places are, in general, not far distant from158 METHODS OF Burial.their ordinary habitations; and they place, all around, thebodies of their dead horses, raised upon their feet and supportedwith sticks.The Tehuelhet, or more southern Patagonians, differ insome respects from the other Indians. After having dried thebones of their dead, they carry them to a great distance fromtheir habitations, into the desert by the sea-coast ; and afterplacing them in their proper form, and adorning them in themanner before described, they set them in order above ground,under a hut or tent erected for that purpose, with the skeletonsof their dead horses placed around them.In the expedition of the year 1746, some Spanish soldiers,with one of the missionaries, travelling about thirty leagueswithin land, to the west of Port San Julian, found one of theseIndian sepulchres, containing three skeletons, and having asmany dead horses propped up around it."In the expeditions of the Adventure and Beagle, between1826 and 1834, a few burial places of another kind were examined.These were piles of stones, upon the summits of thehighest hills, on the eastern sea-coast. Some had been throwndown and ransacked ; probably by the crews of sealing vessels:others there was no opportunity of visiting : only one untouchedpile was found : and that one was examined by LieutenantWickham. It was on a height, near Cape Dos Bahiass, in latitudeforty-five south. Only bones were found, in a much decayedstate, under a pile of stones about four feet high ; and fromthe remains of the bones Mr. Bynoe ascertained that they hadbelonged to a woman of the ordinary stature. A pile of stoneson a neighbouring height had been pulled down by the crewof a sealing vessel : under it were fragments of decayed bones,which were thought too much injured by time and weather tobe worth removing; indeed they crumbled to the touch.Under similar heaps of stones the ' gigantic skeletons' whichsome voyagers have described, were said to have been found.Doubtless these several methods of disposing of the deadare not those of one horde only, but of various tribes. ButI prefer mentioning all that is yet known of the subject, asMOURNING WAR— Exercise. 159far as I am aware,* and leaving it for better-informed personsto decide upon the particular habits of each subdivision. Wouldany one tribe bury each of the five following persons in a similarmanner, and in the same place ? A powerful cacique — awizard — a woman — an ordinary man — a child ?The widow or widows of the dead are obliged to mournand fast for a Avhole year after the death of their husband.This consists in keeping themselves close shut up in their huts,without having communication with any one, or stirring out,except for the common necessaries of life ; in not washing theirfaces or hands, but being blackened with soot, and having theirgarments of a mournful appearance ; in abstaining from horse'sand cow's flesh, and, within land where they are plenty, fromthe flesh of ostriches and guanacoes ; but they may eat anythingelse. During the year of mourning, they are forbiddento marry, and if, within this time, a widow is discovered tohave had any communication with a man, the relations of herdead husband will kill them both, unless it appears that therehas been violence. But I did not discover that the men wereobliged to any such kind of mourning on the death of theirwives." (Falkner, p. 119.)Manslaughter is not infrequent. When quarrels arise, theparties draw their knives, or take such weapons as are athand, and fight, if not parted, till one is killed. War oftenoccurs between the smaller tribes, but does not last long.When the small tribes unite against another nation, suchas the Mole-che, or the Peel-che of the north, their preparationsare more serious, and their hostilities of far longerduration.When at war, or expecting an attack, the Patagonians exerciseon horseback, in their armour, every other evening. Frequentlythe occasion of hostility is an encroachment upon theterritories of a neighbouring tribe, either for hunting or plunder.War is, in such case, instantly declared by the insultedExcept about the tomb which is described by Captain King in thefirst volume.160 HORSEMANSHIP RACING — GAMBLING.party. In armour, and upon their best horses, they sally forthto meet the intruders. Having met, they ask why their landhas been invaded, and desire the strangers to return to theplace whence they came. The non-compliance of the intrudersis a signal for action ; they close — fight — and one party, beingvanquished, loses all its property. The manner of fighting hasalready been mentioned.The horsemanship of the Patagonians is not equal to that ofthe northern Indians : yet it is not indifferent. From theirweight, and the openness of their country, they do not habituallyride so hard, or practise so many manoeuvres as theAraucanian,* who can hang at the side of his horse while atspeed, directing him by voice and rein ; or even while goingthrough a wood can cling quite beneath his belly for a shorttime, still urging on and directing him ; but such feats, performedby naked men, who are almost centaurs, surpass thepowers, or rather the dexterity, of the bulky, well-fed, andheavily-clothed Patagoniann.The Patagonians are very fond of racing. At almost everyleisure hour either horses or play engage their attention, forthey are also great gamblers. Race-courses are regularlymarked out, but they are very short, not a quarter of a mile inlength. These short bursts at the utmost speed seem absurd,till one considers that in hunting wild animals, attacking orescaping fx-om the sudden attack of an adversary, such shortstarts are of the utmost importance. They bet upon the horses,and sometimes stake even their wives and their children.Payment is faithfully made, even to the uttermost. Thecards with which they play are pieces of skin, with figuresThe Araucanian hangs at one side of his horse to shelter himselffrom the lances, halls, or shot of his adversaries, or to avoid trees. Ata distance, a troop of these Indians advancing irregularly, might seemto an inexperienced eye merely loose horses, of which so many are seenin the Pampas ; but to another Indian, or to a trained gaucho, theattempt to conceal themselves would avail them nothing, because thehorses' action, and manner of going, would, at a glance, show him thatthey were guided by riders.< SUPERSTITIONS. 161painted upon them : perhaps rough imitations of the cardsused by the Spaniards ; but this may be doubted.According to Falkner, the native of Patagonia is a superstitiouspolytheist. I cannot add to, nor have I reason todoubt his account ; and shall therefore repeat what he says onthis subject, abridging it slightly.The Indians imagine that there is a multiplicity of deities,some good, others evil. At the head of the good deities isGuayara-kunny, or the lord of the dead. The chief evil agentis called Atskannakanatz, or Valichu. This latter name isapplied to every evil demon.*They think that the good deities have habitations in vastcaverns under the earth, and that when an Indian dies his soulgoes to live with the deity who presides over his particularfamily.They believe that their good deities made the world, andthat they first created the Indians in the subterranean cavernsabove mentioned ; gave them the lance, the bow and arrows,and the balls, to fight and hunt with, and then turned them outto shift for themselves. They imagine that the deities of theSpaniards created them in a similar manner, but that, insteadof lances, bows, &c., they gave them guns and swords. Theysay that when the beasts, birds, and lesser animals werecreated, those of the more nimble kind came immediately outof the caverns ; but that the bulls and cows being the last, theIndians were so frightened at the sight of their horns, that theystopped the entrances of their caves with great stones. Thisis the grave reason they give why they had no black cattle intheir country, till the Spaniards brought them over ; who,more wisely, had let them out of their caves.The Patagonians call the good deity the Creator of all things, butconsider him as one who afterwards has no concern about them. He isstyled by some Souci, or chief in the land of strong drink ; by others,Guayara-kunny, or lord of the dead. The evil principle is called Hue-cove,or the wanderer without. Other spirits are supposed to take careof particular people — protect their own and injure others : they are calledValichu. — Pennant, p. 61.VOL. II. M162 Superstitions.Some say that the stars are old Indians ; that the milkyway is the field where the old Indians hunt ostriches, and thatthe Magellan clouds are the feathers of the ostriches whichthey kill. They have an opinion that the creation is not yetexhausted ; nor all of it yet come out to the daylight of thisupper world. The wizards, beating their drums, and rattlingtheir hide-bags full of shells, or stones, pretend to see intoother regions under the earth. Each wizard is supposed tohave familiar spirits in attendance, who give supernatural information,and execute the conjuror's will. They believe thatthe souls of their wizards, after death, are of the number ofthese demons, called Valichu, to whom every evil, or unpleasantevent is attributed.Their religious worship is entirely directed to the powersof evil ; except in some particular ceremonies made use of inreverence to the dead.To perform their worship they assemble together in thetent of the wizard, who is shut up from the sight of the restin a corner. In this seclusion he has a small drum, one or tworound calabashes or bags of dry hide, with small sea shells inthem, and some square bags of painted hide in which he keepshis spells. He begins the ceremony by making a strange noisewith his drum and rattle-bags ; after which he feigns a fit, orstruggle with the evil spirit, who it is then supposed hasentered into him ; keeps his eyes turned up, distorts his face,foams at the mouth, screws up his joints, and, after many violentand distorting motions, remains stiff and motionless, resemblinga man seized with an epilepsy. After some time hecomes to himself, as having overcome the demon's influence ;next he feigns, behind his screen, a faint, shrill, mournfulvoice, as of the evil spirit, who, by this dismal cry, is supposedto acknowledge himself subdued ; and then the wizard,from a kind of tripod, answers all questions that are put to him.Whether his answers are true or false, is of very littleconsequence ; because, if his intelligence should prove false, itis the fault of the demon, or Valichu. On all these occasionsthe wizard is well paid.SUPERSTITIONS. 163The profession of the wizards is very dangerous, notwithstandingthe respect that is sometimes paid to them ; for itoften happens, when an Indian chief dies, that some of thewizards are killed ; especially if they had any dispute withthe deceased just before his death; the Indians, in this case,attributing the loss of their cacique to the wizards and theirdemons. In cases also of pestilence and epidemic disorders,when great numbers are carried off, the wizards often suffer.On account of the small-pox, which almost destroyed theChechehet tribe, Cangapol ordered all the wizards to be killed,to see, if by such means, the distemper would cease.There are wizards and witches. The former are obligedto dress in female apparel, and are not allowed to marry. Thelatter are not restricted. Wizards are generally chosen whenchildren ; and a preference is always shewn to those who, atthat time of life, discover an effeminate disposition. They areclothed very early in female attire, and presented with the drumand rattles belonging to the profession which they are to follow.Those who are seized with fits of the falling sickness, orthe ' Chorea Sancti Vii' (St. Vitus's dance), are immediatelychosen for this employment, as selected by the demons themselves; whom they suppose to possess them, and to cause allthose convulsions and distortions common in epileptic paroxysms."The Patagonians, and indeed all the South-americanaborigines, have faith in witchcraft. They all believe thatthe wizards or witches can injure whom they choose, even todeprivation of life, if they can possess themselves of some partof their intended victim's body, or that which has proceededthence — such as hair, pieces of nails, &c. ; and this superstitionis the more curious from its exact accordance with that so prevalentin Polynesia.The tribe, or subdivision of the Tehuelhet who generally livenear Magalhaens' Strait, have learned to pay a sort of homage(perhaps it may be termed worship) to an image of wood, cutinto the figure of a man's head and body, and called Crista ;this image they rarely produce to strangers, or even amongstM 2misgovernment — CACIQUES.themselves, except at deaths, or on very particular occasions.This attempt at an outward demonstration of faith in customsof the Romish church, appears to have been caused by a CaptainPelippa, who visited the Strait of Magalhaens some timebefore the Adventure and Beagle. Who or what he was, Icould not discover.There is a particular kind of tree, which is esteemed sacred,and never burned. It is like a thorn ; a resinous gum issuesfrom the knotty, close-grained stem, which has a pleasantaromatic smell, if put into the fire.Regular government, or any forms and rules approaching towhat may be called a civil constitution, no one would expectto find among tribes of wandering savages ; but amongst theAraucanian tribes of Moloch, who do not wander, and haveadvanced towards civilization, there are regular laws, supportinga settled form of government ; and their ideas have beencommunicated to the southern tribes, and have slightly influencedthem. Thus, in many cases, offenders are tried by anassembly of the older people, and their sentence pronounced,after mature deliberation, instead of being at once dealt withas the cacique may, at first thought, deem expedient.The caciques or chiefs are hereditary. Those who possessmuch property and have many followers are highly respected ;but their authority, though absolute in some instances, is littleexerted in the common occurrences of life. When meetingsare held for the purpose of deciding upon any question, thecacique presides — that is, he is considered the principal personpresent ; certainly he looks the most solemn, and is the leastactive. He gives orders to hunting parties, or to those whoexercise for war : and if men quarrel, he sometimes causes themto be parted. In time of war he leads his tribe, and in proportionto his enterprise and success is his actual authoritywhile the war lasts. Each person has a particular name, implyinga quality or some peculiarity ; sometimes a particularplace.All the sons of a cacique," says Falkner, " have a right toassume the dignity, if they can get any persons to follow them ;CACIQUES. '[Q5but, on account of the small utility of the rank of cacique, it isoften resigned."Falkner's account of the caciques ought to be, and is, nodoubt, one of the best ; it is as follows : —The cacique has the power of protecting as many as applyto him ; of composing or silencing any difference ; or deliveringover the offending party to be punished with death, withoutbeing accountable for it. In these respects, his will is the law.He is generally too apt to take bribes, delivering up his vassals,and even his relations, when well paid for it. Accordingto his orders, the Indians encamp, march, or travel from oneplace to another, to hunt or make Mar. He frequently summonsthem to his tent, and harangues them upon their behaviour;the exigencies of the time; the injuries they havereceived ; the measures to be taken, &c. In these harangues,he always extols his own prowess and personal merit. Wheneloquent, he is greatly esteemed ; and when a cacique is notendowed with that accomplishment, he generally has an orator,who supplies his place"" (as in Polynesia).In cases of importance he calls a council of the principalIndians and wizards, with whom he consults about the measuresto be taken, to defend himself or attack his enemies. Inageneral war, when many nations unite against a commonenemy, as in the great alliances against the Spaniards, theychoose a commander-in-chief, called Apo (or Loqui), fromamong the oldest or most celebrated caciques ; but this honourthough properly elective, has for many years been hereditaryin the family of Cangapol. (Written in 1780.)The caciques have not the power to raise taxes, or totake away any thing from their vassals ; nor can they obligethem to serve in the least employment, without paying them.They are obliged to treat their vassals with great humanityand mildness, and oftentimes to relieve their wants, or theywill seek the protection of some other chief. For this reason,many of those who are born caciques refuse to have any vassals,as they cost them dear, and yield but little profit. NoIndian, or body of Indians, can live without the protection ofINJURIES — Warfare,some cacique, according to their law of nations ; and if any ofthem attempted to do so, they would undoubtedly be killed,or carried away as slaves, as soon as they were discovered.In case of any injury, notwithstanding the authority ofthe cacique, the party aggrieved often endeavours to do himselfjustice to the best of his power. They know of no punishmentor satisfaction, but that of paying or redeeming the injuryor damage done with something of value. If the offence is notvery great, and the offender is poor, the injured party perhapsbeats him with his balls on the back and ribs ; but, in general,they do not chastise, except by death. When the offender istoo powerful, they let him alone ; unless the cacique interferes,and obliges him to make satisfaction."A curious plant is found in Patagonia (and at the FalklandIslands), somewhat like a very large and very solid cauliflower.It is greenish, or yellowish-green, tough, and veryabundant. It grows upon and close to the ground, forming alump like a large ant-hill overgrown with moss and grass.From the succulent stalks of this plant a balsamic juice or sapexudes, which is particularly good for healing wounds.Battles between tribes are carried on similarly to their warsagainst a nation ; but, of course, on a smaller scale. The attackingparty halts at a great distance from the enemy, and sendsout scouts to reconnoitre. These emissaries hide during theday, but at night examine every detail most minutely, andreturn to the camp with a full account of their opponent'sstrength and position. When the moon is near, or a little pastthe full, showing good light for their work, they advance tothe attack. A few hours after midnight they make the assault,kill all the men who resist, and carry away the women andchildren for slaves.Sometimes the Indian women follow their husbands, andshare in the booty. Laden with plunder, they all retreat ashastily as possible, resting neither night nor day, till they areat a great distance, and out of the reach of their enemies.Sometimes they ride more than a hundred leagues from theplace of attack before stopping to rest, and divide the booty.HORSES MORAL RESTRAINT. 167On such occasions, if fearful of pursuit, or hai'd pressed bypursuers, they stop very little by the way — light no fire — eatbut little food, and thati-aw — and some are even able to changehorses without checking their speed, or touching the ground.A troop of loose horses is always driven along before the party :and when an Indian, at such a time, wants to change, he ridesalong-side of a loose horse, jumps on his back, bridle in hand,and in an instant, the bit is transferred from one to the other.Saddle they care not for, when thus pressed.In guiding and managing their horses, the Indians use thevoice with very good effect. The best of those animals areexceedingly well trained ; and the owners are as reluctant topart with them as Arabs are to sell their steeds.The natives of Patagonia breed their own horses as well asdogs : but their constant practice of killing the horses of menwho die tends to prevent their being numerous. Upon suchoccasions, all, excepting the few which had been assigned tohis children (generally one or two to each child at its birth),are killed. Dogs have a similar fate. With such laws, a manneed not fear being put out of the way for the sake of his property; nor, while the women are enjoined to go through sucha mourning ordeal, is it likely they would enter into or favourany combination made against their husbands, however harshlythey might be treated by them.Excepting that of the caciques, I believe there is no superiorityof one person over another among the Patagonians.Those who have more property than others, or who are relatedto the chief, have influence over the rest, but are not consideredby them to be their superiors.The moral restraints of these people seem to be very slight.Each man is at liberty to do very much as he feels inclined ;and, if he does not injure or offend his neighbour, is not interferedwith by others. Their social habits are those handeddown by their ancestors, and adapted to the life they are compelledto lead. Ideas of improvement do not trouble them.Contented with their fine climate — plenty of wholesome food,and an extensive range of country — they rather pity AvhiteANECDOTES Traffic.people, who seem to them always in want of provisions, andtossed about at sea. These natives have a great dislike tothe motion of a ship ; yet, for novelty, they will go afloat whenopportunity offers.In landing at Gregory Bay, Mr. Low has had much troublein preventing the natives from crowding into his boat, allbeing anxious to see the vessel. Once, when many strangeIndians (of another tribe) were present, he was obliged toaffect to quarrel with them; and afterwards they behavedbetter and were quite civil, but he never allowed his boat tobe grounded. Having left a Dutchman as boat-keeper, thenatives teased him into a quarrel, and then dragged him out ofthe water, boat and all, with their lasses leaving him amongthe bushes, frightened and spluttering, while they gallopedoff, laughing heartily. The Dutchman hastened to Mr. Low ;but while he was gone, the boat was put into the water by theauthors of the trick, who then dashed off at full speed, highlyamused at their feat. Mr. Low gave one of the women a gaygown ; it was the first she had seen ; and wishing to suckleher infant, she put it under the skirt of the gown, and, withsome difficulty, forced the little thing upwards to her breast.Alien the Patagonians meet white men, their inclinationsare almost always friendly ; but if they find themselves able todictate to the strangers, a tribute of tobacco, bread, muskets,powder, ball, or such articles as they see and fancy, is oftenimposed.A trading schooner called at Gregory Bay (in the Strait ofMagalhaens) in 1834. Her mate landed, and was asked forvarious things which he could not or did not wish to give. Thenatives detained him as a prisoner ; sent his boat away ; andkept him till his ransom (tobacco and bread) was sent ashore.Considerable traffic for knives, swords, muskets, ammunition,tobacco, bread, and, latterly, spirits, has been kept up betweenthe southern Patagonians and the vessels which have touchedon their shores (especially at Gregory Bay) in going throughthe Strait. Their returns have been mantles, skins, and freshguanaco meat.SAN LEON SUBDIVISIONS. 169During late years, several persons, run-away seamen andothers, have passed many months — some, indeed, have passedyears — in their company, — living as they live.In 1833-34, one of the most influential individuals amongthem was a Chilian, named San Leon, who had been carriedto Patagonia by Mr. Brisbane, for the purpose of trading withthe Indians for horses. He ran away from the vessel (1830-32),and has since lived with the tribe who are generally foundnear Gregory Bay. His wife is the daughter of an old nativewho possesses much property (according to their ideas) ; shespeaks a little Spanish, and interprets for strangers better thanher husband, whose knowledge of the Indian language is veryslight. Bred in Chile, San Leon is a good horseman, andconsidered by the Indians to be an excellent hunter.Mr. Low thinks that the natives would encourage and befriendly to a settlement of white people, made in Patagonia.They profess to like white men, and to wish some to live withthem : when old Maria (the woman previously mentioned) wasat the Falkland Islands, Mr. Low told her that he intendedto build a house at Gregory Bay, and carry white people withhim to live there, at which she and her party (including thewizard) seemed to be much pleased.Mr. Low considers that those natives who live eastward andnorthward of the First Narrow are not of the same tribe asthose who are generally about Gregory Bay, with whom, hesays, they are frequently at war. He also thinks that thosewho live farther westward, near Otway and Skyring Waters,form another subdivision. The following notices, written fromhis dictation will show that what I have already stated respectingthese minor tribes, considered as subdivisions of one largebody or nation, cannot be very far wrong : —During the stay of the Unicorn (Mr. Lows vessel) inthe channel between Otway and Skyring Waters, a fire wasmade, as a signal to the Indians. They soon began to arrivein small detached parties, some of whom were known to Mr.Low, whose acquaintance with them had been formed at GregoryBay. They travelled in small parties, therefore were not.170 Capitan Chips.in all probability, on bad terms with their neighbours at thattime.Those who first arrived were invited on board; but declinedgoing, because their chief was expected : and with the lastparty came a boy, about nine years' old, fantastically deckedwith ornaments of copper and brass, with beads, and with a newmantle. A tall, fine-looking man, of the Gregory Bay tribe,accompanied this young cacique, and made him known to Mr.Low, by the name of ' Capitan Chups.'These natives have adopted the word ' capitan,' and nowalways use it when addressing white men who they supposehave authority. When some Patagonians of the Gregory Bayparty came on board the Beagle, in 1834, seeing a largernumber of officers than is usual in small vessels, one of the firstquestions asked, in broken Spanish, was, " Quanto capitalsabordo .'*'"Little Capitan Chups seemed to have no small idea of hisown consequence, and tried to affect much dignity. He willinglywent on board the Union ; but not a native wouldenter the boat until the young chief was seated, when therewas a most inconsistent scramble, which nearly swamped it.However, after pushing out a few of the intruders, the partyreached the vessel in safety. On board her was a Patagoniannboy, who had been four months with Mr. Low, and had beenclothed at Monte Video. He had recognized Capitan Chupsat a distance, said who he was, and showed by his manner thathe considered him a person of high distinction. The littlecacique called this boy, asked him many questions, andexamined every part of his dress. Afterwards the boy joinedsome of his own family, who were present. He had beforerefused to go to the party at Gregory Bay, while there in thevessel, alleging that they were not his people.Mr. Low said, that the tribe on the banks of this channelwere mixed, being partly horse and partly canoe Indians. Theywere entirely under the dominion of the Gregory Bay party,who appointed their chiefs. Maria's son, called ' Capitan Chico,'was their ruler, until the arrival of Capitan Chups.CHICO Slave TRADE. 171Yet Mr. Low did not think that the little capitan belongedto any of the families residing near Gregory Bay, but tosome part of the same tribe who live far inland. Maria's son,Chico, was subsequently cacique, or acting as cacique of theGregory Bay party. Had this western tribe been under thedominion of the Gregory Bay party, would the successor toChico have been taken from a tribe who live far inland .-'The apparent mixture of horse and canoe Indians appearsto me to have been an accidental consequence of the fire madeas a signal, which called to the spot horsemen from the northand canoes from the south. The novelty of a vessel anchoringin a place never before disturbed by such a visitor, might wellsuspend hostilities between neighbouring tribes, even had theybeen at war ; but there is every reason to conclude that thecanoe men of the south side of those waters have frequent andeven amicable intercourse with the horsemen of Patagonia.A part though of that amicable intercourse consists in sellingtheir children to the Patagonians for slaves. The followingincident led to the discovery of this slave-trade : Mr. Lowheard Maria talking of ' zapallos,''* and asked her if she couldget some for him — and how many ? He thought she meantpumpkins (for which zapallos is Spanish) ; Maria replied,two boat loads," and to show of what, pointed to a youngslave, lately purchased from the Fuegians. When there aremore zapallos among them than are wanted for slaves, or thansuits their convenience, what becomes of them ? While young,they may be more useful than when they grow old ; and awandering people, subsisting by hunting, would not in allprobability take the trouble of providing for useless slaves, whomight maintain themselves. The Patagonians are not so barbarousas to kill them ; then what becomes of those zapallos ?If they are not sent to the borders of the Skyring and OtwayWaters, there to shift for themselves, with perhaps a few oldhorses, and even some young men who help them to hunt, theemployment of their later years is unexplained.• ' Apollos,' or some word of similar sound.172 COUNTING Respect TO AGE.The canoe Indians are in reality despised by the Patagonians; but, for the sake of trade, are generally kept upon half-friendlyterms. For dogs, old horses, guanaco meat, and oldmantles, the former give pieces of iron pyrites (used for strikingfire), their captives, or their children.Patagonians have a great antipathy to negroes. As soon asthey see a black man, they shout, hoot, hiss, and make facesat him.No signs of hieroglyphics or writing have been noticed amongthe Patagonians. They can reckon as far as thousands. Time iscounted by years and moons, days and nights. There are particularwords denoting the various phases of the moon, the seasonsof the year, and the times of day and night. In counting,the fingers and toes are used, as well as words expressing numbers,especially when trying to make their meaning clear tostrangers. Once, when Mr. Low was leaving Gregory Bay, hegave Maria to understand that he would return again in fourmoons, and asked her to have some guanaco meat ready forhim when he should arrive. He returned a fortnight beforehis time. No meat was ready. Maria said he was too soon,explaining herself by holding three fingers up, and the fourthbent half down. The few words of their language which havebeen collected by me are mentioned in the Appendix.The Patagonians pay respect to old people, taking greatcare of them ; they seldom move about on ordinary occasions,but remain near the tolderia (village or encampment) with theherds of mares.It has been mentioned that the Patagonians have latelytaken a liking to spirits. When intoxicated, they are verynoisy, but not quarrelsome. They are very fond of tobacco ;and use some sort of pipe, frequently ornamented with brassand tassels : it is passed round from one to the other. Theyneither work, nor use any metal but what is obtained fromwhite men. There is no kind of pottery made by them:wooden vessels, or bladders, being used for containing water.Many of them now have iron kettles, in which meat is sometimesboiled, but their usual mode of cookery is roasting ; aWOMEN Gratitude. 173piece of meat being put upon a wooden skewer, which is stuck,into the ground near their fire.The conduct of the women does not correspond to their characterdrawn by Falkner ; but their ideas of propriety mayhave been altered by the visits of licentious strangers. Both atGregory Bay (on the north shore of Magalhaens Strait), andat the River Negro, the Patagoniann women are now thought tobe unfaithful to their husbands, and to care little about chastity.The men appear to give themselves no anxiety on thesubject. Spirits, provisions, and (to them) valuable articles ofhardware, or clothing which they receive, occupy much moreof their attention.These Indians do not appear very sensible of heat or cold,if one may judge from their habits of life, and from their clothing;in the latter, the only difference made during the coldestpart of winter is wearing horse-hide boots more constantly. Insummer, their feet and legs are generally naked. Both menand women wash themselves occasionally, neither regularlynor often ; but the women are rather less uncleanly than themen. I have elsewhere mentioned that they comb their hairwith the jawbone of a porpoise (obtained from the zapallos).They have also a small brush, made of coarse grass, twigs,or rushes, with which their toilet is assisted.When Mr. Low was returning from Monte Video, with theboy on board who has been spoken of as recognizing CapitanChups, some natives were seen on Elizabeth Island (Straitof Magalhaens). A boat was sent, with the boy in her, to tradewith them for skins. When near enough to distinguish persons,he seemed extremely frightened — clung to the thwartsof the boat — and begged not to be landed. These were canoeIndians, but of what tribe was not ascertained : he said theywould certainly kill him. Some time after this boy hadrejoined his family, Mr. Low was informed, by the GregoryBay people, that he had collected seal-skins for ' Capitan Low,'which he would not part with to any other person, as he knewthey were the object of his friend's trading voyages. Thisinstance of gratitude for kind treatment speaks well for both174 Patagonians DOGS.parties : but, indeed, every white man who has passed any timeamong the Patagoniann Indians agrees in giving a favourableaccount of the treatment experienced. The ' Basket-makers''however, would fare better than the ' Scholar,' I fancy, withthese, as well as with most other tribes of savages, until ideascould be communicated clearly.*The dogs now found in the southern part of Patagonia havea wolfish appearance — their size, colour, hair, ears, nose, tail,and form being in general much like those of a wolf; thoughsome black or spotted dogs are also seen. The roof of the mouthis black : the ears are always erect, and the nose sharp-pointed.I should say that their usual height is about that of a large foxhound.Generally the coat is harsh or wiry, and rather short ;but there are some dogs among them which have thick woollycoats, like those of Newfoundland or large shepherd's dogs,which some resemble ; others being more like lurchers ; but allhave a wild wolf-like look, not at all prepossessing. I had afine dog of this kind, rather like a Newfoundland, except inphysiognomy, but his habits were so savage that he came toan untimely end. These dogs hunt by sight, without givingtongue ; but they growl or bark loudly at the approach ofstrangers. As to attachment to their masters, the dogs we hadcould hardly give fair testimony, having been taken (bought)from them ; but to strangers they were always snappish.With reference to what has been ah-lady mentioned about theirmigratory inclinations, I will here annex an omitted date: — Maria andher companions were at Gregory Bay in November 1831 : at the RiverNegro in September 1832 : and again at Gregory Bay, in the Strait ofMagalhaens, in March 1833.CHAPTER IX.Features — Form — Paint — Disposition — Food — Doctor — Religious ideasSuperstitions — Marriage — Death — Burial — Cannibalism — WeaponsWomen's occupation — Training — Obtaining food — Fire — LanguageSagacity and local knowledge — Battles — Ceremony — Natives inTrinidad Gulf — Obstruction Sound — Potatoes — Dogs.The most remarkable traits in the countenance of a Fuegianare his extremely small, low forehead; his prominentbrow ; small eyes (suffering from smoke) ; wide cheek-bones ;wide and open nostrils ; large mouth, and thick lips. Theireyes are small, sunken, black, and as restless as those of savagesin general. Their eyelids are made red and watery by thewood smoke in their wigwams. The chin varies much ; thatof a Tekeenica is smaller and less prominent than that of anAlikhoolip, in whom it is large and rather projecting, but thereis much variety. The nose is always narrow between the eyes,and, except in a few curious instances, is hollow, in profile outline,or almost flat. The mouth is coarsely formed (I speakof them in their savage state, and not of those who were inEngland, whose features were much improved by altered habits,and by education) ; their teeth are very peculiar : no canine,or eye-teeth, project beyond the rest, or appear more pointedthan those ; the front teeth are solid, and often flat-topped likethose of a horse eight years old, and enamelled only at the sides:the interior substance of each tooth is then seen as plainly, inproportion to its size, as in that of a horse. Their hair is black,coarse, and lank, excepting the few instances mentioned in thenext page. It grows by single hairs, not by piles, or by littlebunches like very small camel-hair pencils. It does not falloff', nor does it turn gray until they are very old. Little, ifany, hair is seen on the eye-brow. They would have a stragglingbeard, but scrupulously pull out every hair with tweezersmade of muscle-shells.176 HAIE — FEATURES — FORM.As exceptions to the general appearance of these people, itought to be said that, among the Fuegians, I have seen severalindividuals, both men and women, with curly or frizzled hair(like that of some of the Polynesians or Malays), with ratherhigh foreheads, straight or aquiline noses ; and in other featuresallied to the natives of New Zealand rather than to theircountrymen of Tierra del Fuego. I was much struck by thoseexceptions, and, at the time, conjectured that they might bedescendants of the Spanish colonists at Port Famine : but sincethen, having seen the Polynesians, I have been led to thinkotherwise ; as will be mentioned in a future page relating toNew Zealand.Phrenological remarks on the forms of their heads are addedin the Appendix : some were made on the spot by Mr. Wilson,the former surgeon of the Beagle, and others by a person inLondon. Mr. Wilson's paper also contains anatomical remarksand measurements. In this place it will be sufficient to remarkthat their heads are remarkably low, but wide ; and full fromthe ears backward. The neck of a Fuegian is short andstrong. His shoulders are square, but high ; his chest andbody are very large. The trunk is long, compared to the limbsand head. His arms and legs are rounder, and less sinewy,than those of Europeans ; his joints are smaller, and his extremitiesare likewise comparatively less. The hands are shapedlike those of Europeans, but the feet, from always going barefooted,are square at the toes, and would, by some persons, beconsidered of the Papua form. Most of them are rather bow-legged,and they turn their feet a little inwards in walking.The knee is strained by the custom of sitting so long on theirheels, so that, when straightened, there are considerable foldsor wrinkles of loose skin above and below the joint. The musclesof their thighs are large, but those of the legs, small. Littlechildren are nearly of the same hue as their parents' skin iswhen cleaned ; but infants are, for a few days, rather lightercoloured.As I have already said, a small fillet is aU that is wornaround the head. Usually this is a mere string, made of theSIGNS — Paint SHYNESS. 177sinews of birds or animals ; but, to make a show, they sometimesstick feathers, bits of cloth, or any trash given to them,into these head-bands. White feathers, or white down, on thefillet, is a sign of hostility, or of being prepared for war. Red isthe favourite colour, denoting peace, or friendly intentions, andmuch admit-ed as ornamental. Red paint, made with ochre, isprofusely used. Their white* paint is added to the red whenpreparing for war ; but the marks made are mere daubs, ofthe rudest, if of any design. Black is the mourning colour.After the death of a friend, or near relation, they blackenthemselves with charcoal, and oil or grease. Any sort of clayis used, if their paint is scarce, to preserve warmth rather thanas an improvement to their appearance.When discovered by strangers, the instant impulse of aFuegian family is to run off into the wood with their children,and such things as they can carry with them. After a shorttime, if nothing hostile is attempted by the intruders, and ifthey are not too numerous, the men return cautiously, makingfriendly signs, waving pieces of skins, rubbing and patting theirbellies, and shouting. If all goes on quietly, the women frequentlyreturn, bringing with them the children; but theyalways leave the most valuable skins hidden in the bushes. Thishasty concealment of seal or otter skins is the result of visitsfrom sealers, who frequently robbed Fuegian families of everyskin in their possession, before the natives understood the motivesof their expeditions in boats into the interior waters ofTierra del Fuego. Sometimes nothing will induce a single individualof the family to appear ; men, women, and childrenhide in the thick woods, where it would be almost impossibleto find them, and do not show themselves again until thestrangers are gone : but during the whole time of their concealmenta watchful look-out is kept by them upon the motions oftheir unwelcome visitors.Scarcity of food, and the facility with which they move fromone place to another in their canoes, are, no doubt, the reasons• Aluminous earth, indurated pipe clay, or decomposed feldsparir. N178 tod DOCTOR.why the Fuegians are always so dispersed among the islandsin small family parties, why they never remain long in oneplace, and why a large number are not seen many days insociety. They never attempt to make use of the soil by anykind of culture ; seals, birds, fish, and particularly shell-fish,being their principal subsistence; any one place, therefore, soonceases to supply the wants of even one family ; hence they arealways migratory.In a few places, where the meeting of tides causes a constantsupply of fish, especially porpoises, and where the land isbroken into multitudes of irregular islets and rocks, whoseshores afford an almost inexhaustible quantity of shell-fish, afew families may be found at one time, numbering altogetheramong them from twenty to forty souls ; but even thoseapproaches towards association are rare, and those very familiesare so migratory by nature, that they do not remain manymonths in such a spot, however productive it may be, but gowandering away among the numerous secluded inlets or soundsof their country, or repair to the outer sea-coast in searchof seals, a dead whale, or fragments of some wrecked ship.During the summer they prefer the coast, as they then obtaina great quantity of eggs and young birds, besides seal, whichcome ashore to breed at that season ; and in the winter theyretire more into the interior waters in search of shellfish, andthe small but numerous and excellent fish which they catchamong the sea weed (kelp).The substitutes for clothing, the arms, canoes, and dwellingsof the Fuegians have been so often described already,that I will not tire the reader by a repetition. Some of theircustoms, hitherto not related, may be more interesting.There is no superiority of one over another, among theFuegians, except that acquired gradually by age, sagacity,and daring conduct ; but the ' doctor-wizard ' of each party hasmuch influence over his companions. Being one of the most cunning,as well as the most deceitful of his tribe, it was not surprisingthat we should always have found the ' doctor' concernedin all mischief and every trouble arising out of our intercourseIDEAS OF llELIGION. 179with these natives. It became a saying among us, that sucha person was as troublesome as a Fuegian doctor.In each family the word of an old man is accepted as lawby the young people ; they never dispute his authority. Warfare,though nearly continual, is so desultory, and on so smalla scale among them, that the restraint and direction of theirelders, advised as they are by the doctors, is sufficient.Ideas of a spiritual existence — of beneficent and evil powersthey certainly have ; but I never witnessed or heard of any actof a decidedly religious nature, neither could I satisfy myselfof their having any idea of the immortality of the soul. Thefact of their believing that the evil spirit torments them in thisworld, if they do wrong, by storms, hail, snow, &c., is one reasonwhy I am inclined to think that they have no thought of afuture retribution. The only act I have heard of which couldbe supposed devotional, is the following. When Matthewswas left alone with them for several days, he sometimes hearda great howling, or lamentation, about sun-rise in the morning; and upon asking Jemmy Button what occasioned thisoutcry, he could obtain no satisfactory answer ; the boy onlysaying, " people very sad, cry very muche'' Upon one occasion,when some canoes were alongside the Beagle, at asubsequent visit to the Beagle Channel (in 1834), a suddenhowl from one of the Fuegians aroused several others whowere near, and at the opposite side of the vessel, when a generalhowl of lamentation took place, which was ended by alow growling noise. By this, as well as by pulling their hair,and beating their breasts, while tears streamed down theirfaces, they evinced their sorrow for the fate of some friends whohad perished, some days before the Beagle's arrival, by theupsetting of a loaded canoe.* There was no regular weeping,nor any thing at all like the downright cry of a civilized being ;it was a noise which seemed to be peculiar to a savage. Thishowling was mostly among the men, only one young womanwas similarly affected. Now whether the noises heard by• The bottom of a Fuegian canoe is full of mud, or clay, for the fireplace.N 2180 SUPERSTITIONS.Matthews were occasioned by similar feelings, or by those of adevotional nature, I cannot pretend to say.The natives whom I carried to England often amused us bytheir superstitious ideas, which showed, nevertheless, that theirideas were not limited by the visible world. If any thing wassaid or done that was wrong, in their opinion it was certain tocause bad weather. Even shooting young birds, before theywere able to fly, was thought a heinous offence. I rememberYork Minster saying one day to Mr. Bynoe, Ashen he had shotsome young ducks with the old bird — ' Oh, Mr. Bynoe, verybad to shoot little duck — come wind — come rain — blow — verymuch blow."A great black man is supposed to be always wandering aboutthe woods and mountains, who is certain of knowing every wordand every action ; who cannot be escaped, and who influencesthe weather according; to men's conduct. York related a curiousstory of his own brother, who had committed a murder.In woods of my country," said he, " some men go aboutalone ; very wild men — have no belly (meaning probably thatthey were very thin), live by stealing from other men." Hethen went on to say, that his brother had been getting birdsout of a cliffy, and, on coming down, hid them among some longrushes, and went away. Soon afterwards he returned, and, seeingfeathers blown away by the wind from the spot, suspectedwhat was going on ; so taking a large stone in his hand, hecrept stealthily towards the place, and there saw one of thesewild men plucking a bird which he had got out of the cliff*.Without saying a word, he dashed the stone at the wild man'shead, and killed him on the spot. Afterwards York's brotherwas very sorry for what he had done, particularly whenit began to blow very hard. York said, in telling the story,rain come down — snow come down — hail come down — windblow — blow — very much blow. Very bad to kill man. Big manin woods no like it, he very angry." At the word ' blow,'York imitated the sound of a strong wind ; and he told thewhole story in a very low tone of voice, and with a mysteriousmanner; considering it an extremely serious affair.DEATH — BURIAL. 181Jemmy Button was also very superstitious, and a greatbeliever in omens and dreams. He would not talk of a deadperson, saying, with a grave shake of the head, " no good, nogood talk ; my country never talk of dead man." While at sea,on board the Beagle, about the middle of the year 1832, hesaid one morning to Mr. Bynoe, that io the night some mancame to the side of his hammock, and whispered in his earthat his father was dead. Mr. Bynoe tried to laugh him outof the idea, but ineffectually. He fully believed that such wasthe case, and maintained his opinion up to the time of findinghis relations in the Beagle Channel, when, I regret to say, hefound that his father had died some months previously. Hedid not forget to remind Mr. Bynoe (his most confidentialfriend) of their former conversation, and, with a significantshake of the head said, it was " bad — very bad," Yet thosesimple words, as Mr. Bynoe remarked, seemed to express theextent of his sorrow, for after that time he said no more abouthis father. This subsequent silence, however, might have beencaused by the habit already noticed, of never mentioning thedead.When a person dies, his family wrap the body in skins, andcarry it a long way into the woods ; there they place it uponbroken boughs, or pieces of solid wood, and then pile a greatquantity of branches over the corpse. This is the case amongthe Tekeenica and Alikhoolip tribes, as well as the Pecheray ;but how the others dispose of their dead, I know not, exceptingthat, on the west coast, some large caves have been found, inwhich were many human bodies in a dried state. One of thesecaves is mentioned in Byron's narrative of the wreck of theWager : and another was seen by Mr. Low, which will bespokenof in describing the natives of the western coast ofPatagonia (the Honos Indians), who from their intercoursewith the Spaniards may be supposed to have acquired ideassomewhat more enlarged than those of the southernmost regionsthe Alikhoolip and Tekeenica. I prefer relating all that Iknow of these tribes, in consequence of the intercourse carriedon with them by the Beagle's officers and myself, and the visit182 MARllIAGE.of York, Jemmy, and Fuegia to England, before any of Mr.Low's account is given ; because, as his intercourse was chieflywith the Honos tribe, and was quite unconnected with theBeagle's visit, it will be more satisfactory to the reader to beenabled to compare accounts from different sources, which insome points are so strikingly similar, that their agreement givegreat weight to the whole.The Fuegians marry young. As soon as a youth is able tomaintain a wife, by his exertions in fishing or bird-catching,he obtains the consent of her relations, and does some piece ofwork, such as helping to make a canoe, or prepare seal-skins,&c. for her parents. Having built or stolen a canoe for himself,he watches for an opportunity, and carries off his bride. Ifshe is unwilling, she hides herself in the woods until her admireris heartily tired of looking for her, and gives up the pursuit; but this seldom happens. Although this is undoubtedlythe custom among many of them, we had some reason tothink there were parties who lived in a promiscuous manner — afew women being with many men. It is, however, hardly fair tojudge from what we saw during our short visit, when the ordinaryhabits of their life were certainly much altered. Weobserved, while at Woollyaa, a disproportionately small numberof females ; but it ought to be remembered, that the peoplewhom we then saw came to look at us from a distance, andthat the greater part of their women and children were probablyleft in security at various places, as were the women andchildren of those who stole our boat in the former voyage(vol. i. p. 394) whom we found in a retired nook, far out ofordinary observation.Jemmy Button often talked of his father, mother, brothers,and sisters, also of uncles* and aunts, after he knew enoughof our language to understand distinctly the relationship. Nowthis could not have been the case had not his father and motherlived together permanently as man and wife, according to theclear account which he himself always gave of their custom inthis respect.It was an uncle who gave him to me for some buttons.CANNIBALISM.From the concurring testimony of the three Fuegians abovementioned,obtained from them at various times and by manydifferent persons, it is proved that they eat human flesh uponparticular occasions, namely, when excited by revenge orextremely pressed by hunger. Almost always at war withadjoining tribes, they seldom meet but a hostile encounter isthe result ; and then those who are vanquished and taken, ifnot already dead, are killed and eaten by the conquerors. Thearms and breast are eaten by the women ; the men eat the legs ;and the trunk is thrown into the sea. During a severe winter,when hard frost and deep snow prevent their obtaining foodas usual, and famine is staring them in the face, extreme hungerimpels them to lay violent hands on the oldest woman oftheir party, hold her head over a thick smoke, made by burninggreen wood, and pinching her throat, choke her. Theythen devour every particle of the flesh, not excepting the trunk,as in the former case. Jemmy Button, in telling this horriblestory as a great secret, seemed to be much ashamed of his countrymen,and said, he never would do so — he would rather eathis own hands. When asked why the dogs were not eaten, hesaid " Dog catch iappo" (iappo means otter). York told methat they always eat enemies whom they killed in battle ; andI have no doubt that he told me the truth.When the Dutch fleet were in Nassau Bay (1624), a boat'screw were attacked by the natives, murdered and partly eaten.But previous to this (in 1599), Oliver Van Noort had attackedsome Fuegians in a cave near a cape, then called Nassau, wherehe killed several men, and took four boys and two girls prisoners.Jemmy Button told me that there are two tribes of ,differing only in situation, who go to war sometimeswith one another, though usually at peace; they live eastand west, respectively, of some islets in the Beagle Channel, ashort distance north-eastward of Woollyaa. With these twotribes or subdivisions of the Tekeenica there is constant warmade by the Yacana, called by Jemmy ' Opens-men ;'' but they(the Tekeenica) are sometimes at peace with the AlikhooHp.FOOD WEAPONS.The food of the Fuegians has been mentioned so often inthe preceding pages of this or the former volume, that I willonly add here a few remarks which have not hitherto beenmade. When there is time, the natives roast their she-fish,and half-roast any other food that is of a solid nature ; butwhen in haste, they eat fish, as well as meat, in a raw state. Aseal is considered to be a grand prize ; for, besides the flesh,they feast on the oil ; and a porpoise is much valued, for asimilar reason. Seal are often killed on the rocks, by strikingthem on the nose with a club, or large stick : and rather than leta seal go, which has been intercepted by getting between it andthe water, they will risk having a severe bite by attacking itwith a stone in hand. Both seal and porpoises are speared bythem from their canoes. When struck, the fish usually runinto the kelp, with the spear floating on the water, beingattached by a short line to a moveable barb ; and there themen follow with their canoe, seize the spear, and tow by it tillthe fish is dead. To them, the taking of a seal or porpoise is amatter of as much consequence as the capture of a whale is toour countrymen. On moonlight nights, birds are caught whenroosting, not only by the men but by their dogs, which aresent out to seize them Avhile asleep upon the rocks or beach ;and so well are these dogs trained, that they bring all theycatch safely to their masters, without making any noise, andthen return for another mouthful. Birds are also frequentlykilled with arrows,* or by stones slung at them with unerringaim. Eggs are eagerly sought for by the natives ; indeed, Imay say that they eat any thing and every thing that is eatable,without being particular as to its state of freshness, or as toits having been near the fire. Penguins are much prized ; theotter is also valued, excepting the body part, which they seldomThese arrows are of hard wood, well polished, and quite straight.They are about two feet in length, and in a notch at the point have asharp triangular piece of agate, obsidian, or broken glass; which is notpermanently fixed, and therefore remains in a wound, though the shaftmay be drawn out. The bow is from three to four feet long, quite plain,with a string made of twisted sinews.FOOD — DRINK — WOMEN. 185eat unless hard pressed by hunger. Sometimes they spear finefish, like cod-fish — fifteen or twenty pounds in weight. Smallfish are caught in abundance by the method formerly described,*and they are the staple article of food among theTekeenica. The fins of a dead whale are esteemed ; but ifother food is to be had, they do not eat the blubber.In the Tekeenica country, near the beagle channel, there aremany small animals, about the size of a cat, which they sometimestake and eat. These, I think, are nutria ; for, on oneoccasion, a fresh nutria skin was obtained from them, the onlysign I ever found of a small animal in that neighbourhood.Of vegetable food they have very little : a few berries, cranberries,and those which grow on the arbutus, and a kind offungus, which is found on the birch-tree, being the only sortsused. This fungus is very plentiful in some places : it growsupon the birch-tree much as the oak-apple upon an oak-tree.Mr. Darwin describes it fully in his journal (vol. iii). Thereis also another much larger kind of fungus, which is sometimeseaten. On what tree it grows, I know not, but it was mentionedto me as being about two feet in circumference. The Fuegiansdrink only pure water, but often, and in large quantities. Thewomen or children fetch it in small buckets, made of birch-bark; and two or three times in the course of a night theywake to eat and drink. In the day-time also they eat anddrink very frequently.The men procure food of the larger kind, such as seal, otter,porpoises, &c. ; they break or cut wood and bark for fuel, aswell as for building the wigwams and canoes. They go out atnight to get birds; they train the dogs, and of course undertakeall hunting or warlike excursions.The women nurse their children, attend the fire (feeding itwith dead wood, rather than green, on account of the smoke),make baskets and water-buckets, fishing-lines and necklaces,-|-go out to catch small fish in their canoes, gather shell-fish,dive for sea-eggs, take care of the canoes, upon ordinary occasionspaddle their masters about while they sit idle ; — and doany other drudgery.See vol. i. p. 428. t !See note at end of chapter.186 SWIMMING TRAINING.Swimming is a favourite amusement of the Fuegians duringsummer ; but the unfortunate women are obliged to go outinto rather deep water, and dive for sea-eggs in the depth of winteras often as in summer. Men, women, and children are excellentswimmers ; but they all swim like dogs. Directly they comeout of the water they run to the fire, and rub their bodies alloverwith oil or grease and ochreous earth, to keep out the cold.Swinging between branches of trees, as our children do, isalso a favourite pastime, the ropes being made of strips of sealskin.Frequently the men are lowered down by such ropesover the faces of high cliffs in search of eggs and young birds,or to attack the seal which herd in caves washed by the surf,and inaccessible to man from seaward.When ill, however seriously, they know of no remedies butrubbing the body with oil, drinking cold water, and causingperspiration by lying near the fire, wrapped up in skins.Both men and women are remarkably fond of the little children,and were always much pleased at any notice taken ofthem by our parties, when they felt sufficient confidence in usto bring the children forward. Much respect is said to bepaid to age ; yet we never saw either man or woman whoappeared to be very old — certainly no one was decrepit.It is rather curious that usually each of these natives istrained to a particular pursuit : thus, one becomes an adeptwith the spear ; another with the sling ; another with a bowand aiTows; but this excellence in one line does not hindertheir attaining a considerable proficiency in all the others.*Hostilities are usually carried on with slings and stones ratherthan by close encounters ; yet occasional surprises happen,especially when the Opens-men make an attack, and then there issavage work with clubs, stones in the hand, and spears.In the winter, when snow lies deep on the ground, theTekeenica people assemble to hunt the guanaco, which thencomes down from the high lands to seek for pasture near thesea. The long legs of the animal stick deeply into the snowand soft boggy ground, disabling him from escape, while theMr. Low has seen Fuegians with balls (bolas) in the northern part oftheir country.GUANACOES FIRE. 187Fuegians and their dogs hem him in on every side, andquickly make him their prey.Jemmy Button's division of the Tekeenica, living westwardof Murray Narrow, never obtain guanacoes; but the otherdivision, who live eastward of that small passage, often killthem in winter ; and at other times of the year they sometimesget them by lying in wait, and shooting them with arrows, orby getting into a tree near their track, and spearing them asthey pass beneath the branches. An arrow was shewn to Low,which was marked with blood two-thirds of its length inwounding a guanaco, afterwards caught by dogs. Low held outhis jacket, making signs that the arrow would not penetrate it :upon which the native pointed to his eye.Some of the families of this eastern division of the Tekeenicahave no canoes, living entirely at a distance from the shore, andsubsisting upon berries, birch-fungus, guanacoes, and birds.The bows and arrows of those men are longer and better, andthey have some very fine dogs, which are trained to search forand bring home food. These dogs often surprise the largerbirds, while feeding on the ground, as well as when they areat roost, so quietly do they steal upon their prey. Byron mentionsthat the Honos Indians send their dogs away to fish,and that they assist their owners in fishing, by swimming about,and driving the fish into a corner. This I have not witnessedor heard of among the Fuegians ; but their dogs assist in asimilar manner when in pursuit of an otter, by swimming anddiving after it with the utmost eagerness.Fire, that essential necessary to man in every state and everyclimate, is always kept alive by these savages wherever theygo, either in their canoes, in their wigwams, or even in theirhand, by a piece of burning wood ; bit they are at no lossto rekindle it, shoved any accident happen. With two stones(usually iron pyrites) they procure a spark, which receivedamong tinder, and then whisked round in the air, soon kindlesinto a flame. The tinder used is the inner down of birds,well dried; very fine dry moss; or a dry kind of fungus foundon the under side of half-rotten trees. Where the pyrites is188 LANGUAGE — CAUTIONS.usually obtained, I do not know ; but it cannot be plentiful inthe Tekeenica country, since every woman keeps small piecesby her, in the basket which holds their paint and ornaments,and will not easily be prevailed upon to part with them. Someof the sealers have fancied these pieces of pyrites were silver orgold ore, and have eagerly sought for the mines whence theycame. One person finding a large quantity in a rock somewherenear the Gulf of Trinidad, employed his crew and himselffor many days in loading his ship with it, being quite sureit was gold.Of the Fuegian language we know but little, althoughthree of the natives were so many months with us. f foundgreat difficulty in obtaining words, excepting names for thingswhich could be shown to them, and which they had in theirown country ; however, the few which I have collected aregiven in the Appendix to this volume, and I can assure thereader that the utmost pains were taken to spell each word soas to ensure having the correct sound when pronounced byother persons ; and to place the marks of accent, as well asquantity, with precision. All the Fuegian sounds are imitableby using our letters, excepting one, a curious sort of ' cluck"*meaning ' no.' Many of their words are exceedingly gutturalin their pronunciation, yet I have twice heard their womensing, and not disagreeably. Weddell, in his narrative (p. 173),gives some Fuegian words, and endeavours to trace a similarityto the Hebrew language. Molina also, in his vocabularyof the Araucanian language, which appears to be related tothe Fuegian, traces some singular correspondences.Mr. Low, who has had more intercourse with the Fuegiansthan perhaps any other individual, gave me much informationabout them. He says that, generally speaking, they appear tobe friendly when meeting strangers, but that their subsequentconduct depends entirely upon their relative numbers. Theyought never to be trusted, however, as they have hasty tempers,and are extremely revengeful. They show much hardiness anddaring, being always ready to defend their own property, orresent any ill treatment; and they are enterprising thieves.CANNIBALISM. 189Wlicn the intentions of the natives arc hostile, the women andchildren are kept out of the way ; the tien are quite naked,their bodies painted more than usual, and the leader of theparty has a band of white feathers around his head.Mr. Low had a Fuegian boy on board the Adeona, wholearned to speak English very tolerably, during eighteen monthsthat he staid on board as a pilot and interpreter. This boy,whose name, among the sealers, was Bob, was one of the Honostribe, and had never been south of Magalhaens Strait beforehe embarked with Mr. Low. He said, that in cases of extremedistress, caused by hunger, human flesh was eaten, and thatwhen they had recourse to such food, the oldest women invariablysuffered. The poor creatures escaped to the woods, ifpossible, at such a time, but were soon found and broughtback by force. They were killed by suffocation, their headsbeing held over the thick smoke of a fire made of green wood,and their throats squeezed by the merciless hands of theirown relations. This boy imitated the piercing cries of themiserable victims whom he had seen sacrificed. He also mentionedthat the breasts, belly, hands, and feet, were most liked.When first questioned on this subject, he showed no reluctancein answering any questions about it ; but after a time, perceivinghow much shocked his English companions were at thestory, and how much disgust it excited among the crew of thevessel, he refused to talk of it again.The different tribes of canoe Indians are generally uponhostile terms with each other, as well as with the horse Indians.This may be more particularly noticed about the westernentrance of Magalhaens Strait, where the tribes which inhabitopposite sides* are particularly inveterate in their hostility.On the west coast of Patagonia, from the Strait of Magal-hans to Cape Tres Montes, Mr. Low found that the nativesseemed to be of one tribe, and upon friendly terms with oneanother. A man, whose native name was Niqueaccas, wastaken on board Mr. Low's vessel, near Cape Victory, as a pilot,Honos and Alikhoolip.190 RELIGIOUS IDEASand he afterwards proved to be acquainted with all the nativesmet with along the coast as far north as the parallel of 47°- Hewas always glad to see the various parties of Indians whomthey met, and was invariably well received by them. Perfectlyacquainted with every part of the coast, he was ableto point out excellent harbours, as well as the best seal ' fooleries""Niqueaccas and the boy Bob were of the same tribe ;but whenever he was spoken to about eating people, he becamesullen, and not a word could be obtained from him. He spokeEnglish very fairly before leaving the vessel in his own country,after being with Mr. Low fourteen months.The people of this tribe* are by no means without ideasof a superior Being. They have great faith in a good spirit,whom they call Ferri Yuppon, and consider to be the authorof all good : him they invoke in time of distress or danger.They also believe in an evil spirit, called Baccy-ma, whothey think is able to do all kinds of mischief, cause badweather, famine, illness, &c. : he is supposed to be like animmense black man. After being hard pressed for food, andthen obtaining a good quantity, much form is observed in distributingthe first supplies. Mr. Low witnessed a ceremony ofthis kind, during which the greatest order prevailed. Thewhole tribe was seated round a fire, and the oldest man gaveeach individual a share, repeatedly muttering a short prayer,and looking upwards. Not one of the party, although nearlystarved, attempted to touch the food, a large seal, until thisceremony was ended : one share was offered to Mr. Low. Atanother time, on Madre de Dios Island, after having beendetained in port upwards of three months, owing to very badweather, during which time the natives were almost famished,being unable to reach the outer rocks in quest of food, Mr.Low went with his boats and procured a few seals, taking anIndian in each boat. At his return the carcasses of the sealswere sent ashore, but not one of the natives, ravenous as theywere, attempted to touch a morsel until all was landed, till the» Honos. See page 194.BURIAL PLACES^CUBBA. 191ceremony above-mentioned had been duly performed, and tillthe natives who had been in the boats had chosen what theypleased for their share.This tribe appears to have regular places for depositing theirdead; as on a small out-lying island, a little southward of Madrede Dios, Mr. Low found a cave which had been used for such apurpose : it was strewed with human bones, and the body of anative child was found in a state of putrefaction. The bodiesseemed to have been placed in shallow graves, about a footdeep, which had been dug along the sides of the cave, andcovered with twigs and leaves. Slips of a peculiar plant,resembling box, had been carefully planted along the outersides of each grave, and those near the mouth of the cave hadtaken root and were growing, but all those in the interior haddecayed.One evening, while at sea, Mr. Low called the boy to him,and said, " Bob, look at the sun ; it is going to be drowned."The boy shook his head, saying, " No, no drown ; tomorrowmorning get up again. Sun go round earth ; come again tomorrow."The natives of this tribe* suppose that all white peopleoriginally came from the moon ; they call them " cuba;" andoften make use of an expression with reference to them whichmeans " White men of the Moon." These Indians, in commonwith those of the other southern tribes, are exceedinglysuperstitious, implicitly believing omens, signs, and dreams, aswell as the ' wise men' among them, who are thought infallibleas prophets, doctors, and magicians. Once, when Mr.Low was detained about three weeks by contrary winds andbad weather, his crew became discontented, and attributedtheir ill-luck to a native who was detained on board against hiswill. To pacify those who were, in this instance, every bit assuperstitious as the aborigines themselves, a fire was made onshore, to invite the Indians to approach ; and when they camehe delivered their countryman to them, explaining at the sameChe192 SAGACITY.time that he would depart as soon as the wind became fair.An old Indian, then, in a very ceremonious banff! mysteriousmanner, gave Low what he understood to be a charm, withstrict injunctions not to look at it until next morning ; when,at sunrise, there would be a fair wind, and the vessel mightsail. Notwithstanding the old man's orders, he was no soonerout of sight than Low opened the mysterious packet, whichappeared to contain human hair, mixed with the scrapings ofthe shaft of an arrow.Next morning, however, at sunrise, a fair (easterly) windsprung up, and the vessel sailed. How the old man foreknewthe change — whether he judged by the sky, the tides, or otherindications, did not transpire ; but this was by no means asingular instance of extraordinary accuracy shown by thenatives in foretelling changes of weather.The sagacity and extensive local knowledge of these peopleis very surprising; Niqueaccas was so well acquainted withallthe coast between 47° and the Strait of Magalhaens, that,upon being taken to a high hill, immediately after landing froma cruise, in which they had been far out of sight of land, hepointed out the best harbours and places for seal then visible ;and in one direction, a long way off (pointing towards EyreSound, then far out of sight), he said there were great numbersof fur seals. The boy Bob also described that same place, when hewas with Mr. Low at the Galapagos Islands. On a calm day,while there was nothing going on, he made a chart with chalkupon the vessel's deck, reaching from the windlass to the taffrail,and Mr. Low has since felt quite certain that the boymeant Eyre Sound, though at that time these interior waters onthe west coast of Patagonia had not been explored by anyAvhite man.Niqueaccas was always anxious and timid about taking theAdeona through a passage where he knew danger existed, andproportionably pleased when the dangers were safely passed,and the vessel anchored in a safe position.The boy Bob, when only ten years old, was on board theAdeona at sea. As the vessel approached land, Low askedLOCAL KNOWLEDGE WAR. 193him where a harbour could be found ? As soon as he understoodwhat was meant, which was an affair of some difficulty,for he then could speak but very little English, he got up onthe vessels bulwark, and looked anxiously around. Aftersome hesitation, he pointed to a place where the ship mightgo, and then went to the lead-line, and made signs to Mr. Lowthat he must sound as he approached the land. The cove wasfound to have a shoal and narrow entrance, but was safe andsufficiently spacious within. Such knowledge at so early an ageis an extraordinary proof of the degree in which the perceptiveand retentive faculties are enjoyed by these savages. Wheneverthe advice of Niqueaccas or any of his tribe was, ejected, muchsullenness and displeasure were shown. Upon one occasion hisservices were refused, and a harbour tried against his advice,which proved to be a bad one ; it was left to seek for thatwhich he had previously recommended, and his sullennesssuddenly changed into delight; but when his harbour waspronounced excellent, and he was duly praised, his joy knewno bounds.Generally speaking, both Niqueaccas and the boy Bob werewell-behaved and good-tempered ; but the boy was sometimesinclined to be mischievous, and would hide the people's clothes,or put salt into their mouths while asleep. When much annoyed,he would use both teeth and nails, and attack anyone, howeversuperior to himself in size and strength.Battles between parties of the same tribe seem to occuroccasionally, as this boy showed Mr Low two spots wherequarrels had been decided. Both were open spaces, clear oftrees, and near them were the remains of wigwams. One ofthose battles occurred in consequence of one party wishingto take some seal-skins away from the other ; but it did notdistinctly appear from the boy's account whether these encounterswere between parties of his tribe, or whether an encroachmentupon their territory, with a view to plunder, had beenmade by some other tribe. That parties occasionally crossoverland from Skyring Water to Obstruction Sound is evidentfrom Mr. Bynoe's account (page 198), and that people of theVOL. II. ■ o194 SIGNAL OF WAR.tribe to which Niqueaccas belonged either make excursionsthemselves southward of the Strait of Magalhaens, or that theAlikhoolip invade their territory and take away canoes, isevident from the fact of plank canoes* having been seen in andabout the Barbara Channel. The arms used are similar to thoseof the Alikhoolip already described.A method of declaring war, ascertained by the following circumstance,is rather curious. The boy Bob had been takenon board the Adeona, in consequence of some dispute with thenatives, who had stolen things from the vessel. Mr. Lowintended to keep him as a hostage until the missing propertyshould be restored ; but the tribe decamped, and asLow was obliged to sail, he carried the boy away with him.At the return of the vessel, about eight months afterwards,the boy saw something on shore, at the entrance of the harbour,which he looked at for some time very earnestly, and thengave Mr. Low to understand that the natives had declared waragainst him and his ship, and intended to attack her at herreturn. No natives beinff visible, Low went ashore with theboy, to see what it was that had attracted his attention, andfound a number of spears, arrows, and clubs, roughly cut outof wood, painted red, and stuck into the ground, across a pointof the island, and having in the middle a large block of wood,roughly carved into a strange figure (said by the boy to bethat of their evil spirit) curiously painted, with long red teeth,and having a short halter of hide (seal-skin) round the partintended to represent a neck. Notwithstanding this outwarddemonstration of anger and intent to revenge, not a native wasseen in the neighbourhood during the many months whichLow passed there, and in consequence he had no opportunity ^of restoring the boy to his own tribe ; but he was afterwards jkindly received, and treated as Low's son, among the Patago-jnians of Gregory Bay.The natives of Niqueaccas' tribe (Honos) are less dishonest].and deceitful than those of the southernmost islands. Mr. Low]:•: * Plank canoes are used on the west coast. See page 142.REMARKABLE CONDUCT. 195has sometimes left his vessel, while he was away sealing, withonly two men on board; and although in one instance, at Madrede Dios, there were about a hundred and fifty natives assembled,no hostile or predatory attempt whatever was made bythem in his absence : indeed so careful were they to prevent anycause for misunderstanding, that in no instance did more thantwo of their party go on board the vessel during the absenceof the boats ; though, after their return with Low, they wentto her as usual in great numbers. This tribe was in extremedistress for want of food ; the whole party looked thin andmiserable. Continual gales had prevented the rocks from beinguncovered at low water, and no canoe could be launched onaccount of the surf, therefore they could get neither shell-fishnor seal. A small party were observed going away, as if on anexcursion, and the others who remained explained to Low, bysigns, that in four sleeps they would return with food. On thefifth day they were met by Low, returning, but almost deadwith fatigue, each man having two or three great pieces ofwhale-blubber, shaped like a poncho with a hole in the middle,on his shoulders. The blubber was half putrid, and looked as ifit had been buried under ground. When they entered thelargest wigwam, an old man cut very thin slices off one piece,broiled each successively, and distributed to the party in rotation; but before doing so, he muttered a few words over eachpiece in a mysterious manner, while strict silence was kept bythe by-sanders. One slice was offered to Low. The boy Bobonce noticed marks where a whale had been cast ashore; takinga sharp stick, he probed the sand in several places, and foundmany large pieces of blubber, which were taken on board andboiled down for oil. One of the men of this tribe, seeing twolong powder-horns on board the Adeona, placed them to hishead and made a noise like the bellowing; of cattle ; but he andhis tribe were much frightened by sheep and pigs. They wouldnot land on a small island where some pigs were turned loose,and when talking of them, naade signs that they had very bignoses which alarmed them. When a pig was killed by the crewo2Remarkable CONDUCT.and part of it cooked, the natives refused even to taste themeat. One day several of these people had gone on board theAdeona with some old axes and pieces of iron, which theywished to have ground at her grindstone (a favour which hadoften been granted) ; but in consequence of something havinggone wrong in the vessel, which had ruffled Low's temper, herather roughly refused to let them stay on board. They wentaway quietly, but left their axes, &c. behind; and whilereturning were met by the mate of the vessel, who asked ifthey had ground them ; they replied negatively, and gave themate to understand that the captain's face was too long, butthat they would come again when it was shorter. This occurredbefore either Niqueaccas or the boy had been taken on boardthe Adeona.Mr. Low remarked to me that the conduct of these Indianson this occasion of his harshly refusing to comply with aslight request, was quite different from that which the Fuegianswould have shown under similar circumstances : they wouldhave been angry, and in all probability have returned hisill-temper with a display of their own, evinced by a shower ofstones. Once, when Low was in the Magdalen Channel, hedesired some Fuegians who were on board to leave the vesselwhile his men were below at dinner. They refused to comply,and offered resistance ; but being obliged to go, went in theircanoes to a short distance a-head, and there remained slinginglarge stones on board, which broke several windows. To drivethem away muskets were used, though without injuring anyof their party. Next day the hardy fellows came alongsideagain, as unconcernedly as ever.When the Fuegians are inclined to attack an enemy withstones, they generally try to raise a breastwork of boughs orlogs ; but no such preparation was ever noticed among thenatives of the western coast of Patagonia.While the Adelaide tender was examining the inner passagesand sounds of the western shores of Patagonia, underLieutenant Skyring, some interesting remarks were made byTRINIDAD Natives. 197Mr. Bynoe, which do not appear in the narrative of thatcruise given in the preceding volume. I shall here insert themin his own words : —We entered the Gulf of Trinidad, and while surveyingthereabouts met two large canoes, which were thought to bewhale-boats when first seen at a distance ; but as we concludedthat some sealing vessel was in the neighbourhood, and that thesewere her boats, little notice was taken of them until they hadapproached very near, when, to our astonishment they provedto be large plank canoes, pulled with oars, and full of finestout Indians. Just within hail they stopped, lay on theiroars, halloed to us most vociferously, and waved skins abovetheir heads. One man was very conspicuous, having on hishead a tall leathern cap, tapering to a point, which was ornamentedwith feathers of various gaudy colours ; and aroundthe brim of this high conical hat there was also a fringe offeathers. This singular character was painted black all overfrom head to foot, except a circle of white round each eye, anda few white dots upon his cheeks. By signs we succeeded intempting them to come alongside the schooner, and were thenstill more struck by their appearance : they were far superiorto any Fuegians I had seen, being a taller race, more upright,and better proportioned ; their limbs were better formed, moremuscular, rounder, and fuller than those of any canoe Indiansof the Strait of Magalhaens or Barbara Channel ; and theirskins were cleaner as well as clearer, which was probably thereason why we thought them lighter coloured than the otherswhom we had seen. The length of back, so remarkable in aFuegian, was not very discernible in these people, neither werethey by any means so ugly as the former ; indeed a ratherpleasing smile was sometimes noticed on the younger faces.None among them were much smoke-dried, nor did their eyeslook red and watery. There did not appear to be one of theparty above a middle age, and most of them were young. Threeof the men had lost each an upper incisor tooth, and one hada long though not deep scar upon the breast. We all pronouncedthese people to belong to a finer race than we had198 TRINIDAD NATIVES.seen on the water, and the size of their canoes was quitebeyond anything hitherto noticed : they were near thirty feet inlength and seven feet broad, with proportionate depth, beingmade of planks sewn together with strips of twisted bark andrushes : the bow and stern were flat, and nearly upright. Sixround pieces of wood formed the thwarts, which were fastenedto the gunwale by ropes of twisted rushes ; and there weresix short oars on each side. These oars were about seven feetlong, the blade being a flat piece of wood about sixteen inchesin length, fastened to the handle by rush rope passed throughtwo holes in the blade. Of such burthen were these boats(rather than canoes), that two men standing on one gunwaledid not bring it down to the water. Each was steered by anold woman, who sat silently abaft ^vith a paddle. All theparty were quite naked excepting the old women.From one of the old women a small bag was obtained,in exchange for a shirt and some woollen stuff, which proved tocontain white dust, feathers, parrots' heads, hawks' feet, whiteearth, and red ochre. One of the men had an old hatchet, andmade signs that he wanted to sharpen it at our grindstone : ofcourse we compared with his request, and allowed a man and ayoung lad to come on bodied for that purpose. The lad turnedthe stone, while the man held the axe ; and extremely well itwas sharpened. The spears and slings were similar to thoseseen in other places.Although these natives seemed to be remarkably well disposed,it was not quite pleasant to see thirty of them lookingover the schooner's bulwark, while our boats were away andonly five or six men left on board : however, they made noattempt to do any thing improper, and before sunset left uspeaceably, striking up a song as they paddled away."Mr. Eynoe remarked, that in the neighbourhood of EasterBay (Obstruction Sound), the country had much the appearanceof English park scenery ; large clumps of trees growingstraight and tall, with intervening spaces of clear ground coveredwith long grass. In this place he found great numbersof wigwams and deserted canoes. Some of the former were ofiOBSTRUCTION SOUND. 199large dimensions, and various shapes : two were like invertedwhale-boats, each of which might hold forty or fifty people ;and in the long ones (six feet high), Mr. Bynoe could walkupright. All of them were built of slight materials, such asbranches of trees covered with long grass. Five or six largewigwams stood together in each place ; and near them canoeshad evidently been built, for many trees had been felled andbarked close by. The traces of fire were visible, which hadbeen trained around the roots of the trees ; and many largepieces of bark were lying about, partly sewed together. Fourgood canoes were found in one place, one of the four beingquite new : and there were many old or broken ones. They alsosaw on nearly every sandy point a neatly-constructed smallwigwam, about two feet high, at the entrance of which was aplatted rush noose, intended as a snare to catch swans probably,which were numerous about the adjoining grounds, andgenerally roost on those sandy points. Many deer, like a kindof roebuck, were seen by Mr. Bynoe, but he did not succeedin shooting one. Horse tracks were seen near the upper part ofObstruction Sound ; showing that the eastern Patagoniansoccasionally visit this part of the western coast. Mr. Bynoesuggested the possibility of the natives of Skyring Water travellingoverland, building canoes, and then going northwardalong the west coast ; but I do not myself think it so likely asthat the Honos Indians should select such a spot, aboundingin food, to pass their winter in, or to stay at for a considerabletime Avhile building canoes. Probably, when Mr. Bynoe wasthere (being summer-time) the tribe, whose winter quarters ithad been, were dispersed along the sea-coast in search ofseal, eggs, and young birds. In support of his idea Mr. By-noesays, " I only met one canoe, and that of the bark kind,in the Messer Channel : whence could that one have come ?None of the bark canoes have been seen by us on the westcoast, excepting in that instance, and in Obstruction Sound.The distance from Skyring Water to the head of ObstructionSound is small, though sufficiently difficult to traverse toprevent transporting canoes, because of low prickly brushwood.200 POTATOES.How can we account for the numerous canoes stranded in ObstructionSound, excepting by a supposition that the natives,after using them in a north-westerly excursion, left thembehind at their return, as they may have left others on theshores of Skyring Water ? These canoes were all of bark,and rather smaller than those usually made by the southernFuegians." Should this be the case, there can no longer beany doubt of the non-existence of a direct passage betweenSkyring Water and the Smith Channel (leading northwardsfrom Magalhaens Strait). Perhaps the horse Indians sometimesstay in the neighbourhood of Obstruction Sound, and obligetheir slaves (zapallos) to build canoes and swan-traps, to fishfor them, and even make excursions for seal.Mr. Bynoe saw many nutria among the islands of WesternPatagonia, and a great number of otters. Brant-geese, swans,ducks, and rock-geese were also plentiful in particular places,but not generally. Besides the wild potato, found on theGuaianaco islands (mentioned in the first volume), Mr. Bynoenoticed, in the Gulf of Peiias, an abundance of the plantcalled ' langue,' which grows also in Chloe, and is so muchliked by the Choses.Mr. Low said that natives whom he met in the Gulf of Trinidadrelished potatoes which he gave them, and asked formore. They pointed towards the north and used the wordaquinas," which he recognized as being the term used forpotatoes by the aborigines at the south of Chloe.A native who was on board the Adeona in one of her excursionsamong the western islands of Patagonia induced Low totake long walks in search of potatoes, which never were found ;and afterwards, in the Messer Channel, he persuaded him to goabout in quest of seals, until an opportunity offered for escapingto a small party of his own tribe whom he met there. Whentaxed by the crew with deceiving Mr. Low about the potatoes,he fell into (or affected) a violent passion, and sprung at thenearest man, grappling him in a most determined and maliciousmanner.Having now mentioned all that I know respecting the CanoeDOGS. 201Indians (excepting some facts i-elated by Capt. King in vol. i.),I will add a few words about their constant and faithful companion,the dog : and then continue the narrative.The dog of a Fuegian or Honos Indian is small, active, andwiry, like a terrier with a cross of fox. His hair is usuallyrough, and dusky, or dark-coloured ; but there are many dogsamong the Fuegians almost white, or prettily spotted, some ofwhich have fine smooth hair. All that wei-e examined hadthe roof of their mouth black, the ears erect, large, and pointed ;the nose sharp, like that of a fox ; the tail drooping, andrather inclined to be bushy. They are exceedingly vigilantand faithful. Their sagacity is shown in many ways, some ofwhich I have already noticed ; and not least, in their providingfor themselves, each low-water, by cunningly detaching limpetsfrom the rocks, or by breaking muscle and other shells, andthen eating the fish.These dogs bark at strangers with much fury : and theygive tongue eagerly when hunting the otter.*• Byron says they do so likewise when driving fish into corners.Note to page 185. — The Fuegian necklaces show some ingenuity inthose who make there, being composed of small shells, perforated veryneatly, and fastened together on strings of sinews or gut, so finely dividedand platted, that one is, at first, inclined to doubt their being the manufactureof such uncouth savages.CHAPTER X.Set out to land Matthews and the Fuegians — Their meeting with NativesSupposed Volcano — Dream — Opens-men — Scene — Arrival at WoollyaaEncampment — Concourse of Natives — Jemmy's Family — WigwamsGardens — Distrust — Experiment — Westward Exploration — RemoveMatthews — Revisit Woollyaa — Gale — Sail for the Falkland Islands.At the end of Chapter vi., I described our preparationsfor landing the Fuegians, who had been in England, amongtheir own countrymen ; and now, having attempted to give afuller idea of those people, the narrative of our proceedingsshall be continued.Jan. 19, 1833. The yawl, being heavily laden, was towedby the other three boats, and, while her sails were set, wentalmost as fast as they did ; but after passing Cape Trees, andaltering our course to the westward, we were obliged to dragher along by strength of arm against wind and current. Thefirst day no natives were seen, though we passed along thirtymiles of coast, and reached Cutfinger Cove. (This name wasgiven because one of our party, Robinson by name, almostdeprived himself of two fingers by an axe slipping with whichhe was cutting wood.) At this place, or rather from a hillabove it, the view was striking. Close to us was a mass ofvery lofty heights, shutting out the cold southerly winds, andcollecting a few rays of sunshine which contrived to strugglethrough the frequent clouds of Tierra del Fuego. Opposite,beyond a deep arm of the sea, five miles wide, appeared anextensive range of mountains, whose extremes the eye could nottrace ; and to the westward we saw an immense canal, lookinglike a work of gigantic art, extending between parallel rangesof mountains, of which the summits were capped with snow,though their sides were covered by endless forests. This singularcanal-like passage is almost straight and of nearly anMet NATIVES — VOLCANO. 203uniform width (overlooking minute details) for one hundredand twenty miles.20th. We passed the clay cliffs, spoken of in the formervolume, first visited by Mr. Murray. They narrow the channelto less than a mile, but, being low, were beneath the horizonof our eye at Cutfinger Cove : — westward of them the channelwidens again to its usual breadth of two miles. Severalnatives were seen in this day's pull ; but as Jemmy told us theywere not his friends, and often made war upon his people, weheld very little intercourse with them. York laughed heartilyat the first we saw, calling them large monkeys ; and Jemmyassured us they were not at all like his people, who were verygood and very clean. Fuegia was shocked and ashamed ; shehid herself, and would not look at them a second time. It wasinteresting to observe the change which three years only hadmade in their ideas, and to notice how completely they hadforgotten the appearance and habits of their former associates ;for it turned out that Jemmy's own tribe was as inferior inevery way as the worst of those whom he and York calledmonkeys — dirty — fools — not men."We gave these ' Yahoos,' as York called them, some presents,and crossed over to the north side of the channel to befree from their importunities; but they followed us speedily,and obliged us to go on further westward than was at allagreeable, considering the labour required to make way againsta breeze and a tide of a mile an hour. When we at last landedto pass the night, we found that the forests on the sides of themountains had been burned for many leagues ; and as we werenot far from the place where a volcano was supposed to exist,in consequence of flames having been seen by a ship passingCape Horn, it occurred to me that some conflagration, likethat of which we found the signs, might have caused appearancesresembling the eruption of a distant volcano : and I havesince been confirmed in this idea, from having witnessed avolcano in eruption ; and, not long afterwards, a conflagration,devouring many miles of mountain forest ; both of which, at adistance, shewed lines of fire, fitful flashes, and sudden gleams.204 CONFLAGRATION DREAM. Jan.Persons who have witnessed a forest burning on the side of amountain, will easily perceive how, when seen from a distance,it may resemble the eruption of a volcano ; but to those whohave not seen fire on such a scale, I may remark that each gustof wind, or temporary calm ; each thick wood, or comparativelybarren space ; augments or deadens the flames so suddenly, asthe fire sweeps along the mountain side, that, at a distance offifty miles or more, the deception may be complete.22d. Favoured by beautiful weather, we passed along a tractof country where no natives were seen. Jemmy told us it wasland between bad people and his friends;" (neutral-groundprobably). This evening we reached a cove near the MurrayNarrow; and from a small party of Tekeenica natives. Jemmy'sfriends, whom we found there, he heard of his mother andbrothers, but found that his father was dead. Poor Jemmylooked very grave and mysterious at the news, but showed noother symptom of sorrow. He reminded Bennett* of the dream(related in the previous chapter), and then went for some greenbranches, which he burned, watching them with a solemn look :after which he talked and laughed as usual, never once, of hisown accord, recurring to the subject of his father's decease.The language of this small party, who were the first of Jemmy'sown tribe whom we met, seemed softer and less guttural thanthose of the " bad men" whom we had passed near the claycliffs ; and the people themselves seemed much better disposed,though as abject and degraded in outward appearance as anyFuegians I had ever seen. There were three men and twowomen : when first we were seen they all ran away, but upontwo of our party landing and advancing quietly, the menreturned and were soon at their ease. Jemmy and York thentried to speak to them ; but to our surprise, and much to mysorrow, we found that Jemmy had almost forgotten his nativelanguage, and that, of the two, York, although belonging toanother tribe, was rather the best interpreter. In a few minutesthe natives comprehended that we should do them no hai-m ;and they then called back their women, who were hiding in the• My coxswain.1833. JEALOUSY Opens-MEN. 205woods, and established themselves, very confidently, in a wigwamwithin a hundred yards of our tents. During this andthe preceding day, we found the weather, by comparison, somild, even warm, that several of our party bathed ; yet the thermometerranged only to 53° in the shade, and at night fell to40°. The temperature of the sea was seeingwithin a few hours' pull (row) of Jemmy's ' own land,'which he called Woollyaa, we all felt eager, though anxious,and I was much gratified by seeing that Matthews still lookedat his hazardous undertaking as steadily as ever, betrayingno symptom of hesitation. The attentions which York paid tohis intended wife, Fuegia, afforded much amusement to ourparty. He had long shewn himself attached to her, and hadgradually become excessively jealous of her good will. If anyonespoke to her, he watched every word ; if he was not sittingby her side, he grumbled sulkily ; but if he was accidentallyseparated, and obliged to go in a different boat, his behaviourbecame sullen and morose. This evening he was quizzed somuch about her that he became seriously angry, and I wasobliged to interpose to prevent a quarrel between him and oneof his steadiest friends.On this and previous evenings, as we sat round the blazingpiles, which our men seemed to think could never be largeenough, we heard many long stories from Jemmy about theOens, or Coin men, who live beyond the mountains at the northside of the Beagle Channel, and almost every year make desperateinroads upon the Tekeenica tribe, carrying off Avoientand children, dogs, arrows, spears, and canoes ; and killingthe men whom they succeed in making prisoners. He told usthat these Opens-men made their annual excursions at the time of'red leaf;' that is in April or May, when the leaves of deciduoustrees are changing colour and beginning to fall ; justthe time of year also when the mountains are least difficult topass.At that period these invaders sometimes come down to theshores of the Beagle Channel in parties of from fifty to a hundred; seize upon canoes belonging to the Yapoo division of206 OEXs-MEN — ARRIVALS. Jan.the Tekeonica tribe, cross over to Navarin Island, and thencesometimes to others, driving the smaller and much inferiorTekeenica people before them in every direction. By Jemmy'sown account, however, there are hard battles sometimes, andthe Oens tribe lose men ; but as they always contrive to carryaway their dead, it seems that the advantage of strength is ontheir side.These periodical invasions of a tribe whose abode is in thenorth-eastern quarter of Tierra del Fuego are not to be confoundedwith the frequent disputes and skirmishes which takeplace between the two Tekeenica tribes ; and it is interestingto compare what we thus heard with the account obtained byOliver Van Noort in 1589 : who learnt that the people lived incaves dug in the earth, * and that there were five tribes — fourof ordinary stature and one of gigantic size. These giants,called Tiremenen, lived in ' Coin.' The other tribes were calledEnoo, Kemenites, Warlike, and Kennel.23d. While embarking our tents and cooking utensils, severalnatives came running over the hills towards us, breathlesswith haste, perspiring violently, and bleeding at the nose.Startled at their appearance, we thought they had been fighting; but it appeared in a few moments, that having heard ofour arrival, they lost not a moment in hurrying across thehills from a place near WooUya, and that the bloody noseswhich had surprised us were caused by the exertion of running.This effect has been noticed among the New Hollanders, Ibelieve the islanders of the Pacific Ocean, as well as theEsquimaux, and probably others; but to our party it wasthen a novelty, and rather alarming.Scarcely had we stowed the boats and embarked, before canoesbegan to appear in every direction, in each of which was astentor hailing us at the top of his voice. Faint sounds ofdeep voices were heard in the distance, and around us echoesto the shouts of our nearer friends began to reverberate, andwarned me to hasten away before our movements should betheground within a wigwam is scooped out considerably.HOSTAGE SCENE NOISE. 207come impeded by he number of canoes which I knew wouldsoon throng around us. Although now among natives whoseemed to be friendly, and to whom Jemmy and York contrivedto explain the motives of our visit, it was still highlynecessary to be on our guard. Of those men and boys who ranover the hills to us, all were of Jemmy's tribe excepting oneman, whom he called an Opens-man ; but it was evident, fromhis own description, that the man belonged to the Yapoo, oreastern Tekeenica tribe, and was living in safety among hisusual enemies, as a hostage for the security of a man belongingto Jemmy's tribe who was staying among the eastern people.As we steered out of the cove in which our boats had beensheltered, a striking scene opened : beyond a lake-like expanseof deep blue water, mountains rose abruptly to a great height,and on their icy summits the sun's early rays glittered as ifon a mirror. Immediately round us were mountainous eminences,and dark cliffy precipices which cast a very deepshadow over the still water beneath them. In the distantwest, an opening appeared where no land could be seen ; andto the south was a cheerful sunny woodland, sloping graduallydown to the Murray Narrow, at that moment almost undistinguishable.As our boats became visible to the natives, whowere eagerly paddling towards the cove from every direction,hoarse shouts arose, and, echoed about by the cliffs, seemedto be a continual cheer. In a very short time there werethirty or forty canoes in our train, each full of natives, eachwith a column of blue smoke rising from the fire amidships,and almost all the men in them shouting at the full power oftheir deep sonorous voices. As we pursued a winding coursearound the bases of high rocks or between islets covered withwood, continual additions were made to our attendants ; andthe day being very fine, without a breeze to ruffle the water,it was a scene which carried one's thoughts to the South SeaIslands, but in Tierra del Fuego almost appeared like a dream.After a~few hours (pulling hard to keep a-head of our train)we reached WooUya, and selected a clear space favourablysituated for our encampment, landed, marked a boundary-line.208 Woolly — ENCAMP.placed sentries, and made the various arrangements necessaryfor receiving the anticipated visits of some hundred natives.We had time to do all this quietly, as our boats had distancedtheir pursuers several miles, while running from the MurrayNarrow before a favourable breeze which sprung up, and, toour joy, filled every sail.We were much pleased by the situation of Woollyaa, andJemmy was very proud of the praises bestowed upon his land.Rising gently from the water-side, there are considerablespaces of clear pasture land, well watered by brooks, andbacked by hills of moderate height, where we afterwards foundwoods of the finest timber trees in the country. Rich grassand some beautiful flowers, which none of us had ever seen,pleased us when we landed, and augured well for the growthof our garden seeds.At our first approach, only a few natives appeared, whowere not of Jemmy's family. The women ran away and hidthemselves, but Jemmy and York contrived (with difficulty)to make the men comprehend the reason of our visit; and theirawkward explanation, helped by a few presents, gradually putthem at ease. They soon understood our meaning when wepointed to the boundary-line which they were not to pass.This bne was on the shore between our tents and the grassland; immediately behind the tents was a good landing-place,always sheltered, where our boats were kept in readiness incaseof any sudden necessity.Soon after our arrangements were made, the canoes whichhad been following us began to arrive ; but, much to my satisfaction,the natives landed in coves at some distance from us,where the women remained with the canoes while the menand boys came overland to our little camp. This was veryfavourable for us, because it divided their numbers and leftour boats undisturbed. We had only to guard our front,instead of being obliged to look out all round, as I hadexpected ; and really it would have been no trifling affair towatch the pilfering hands and feet of some hundred natives,while many of our own party (altogether only thirty in untillIi''J:FAMILY AllKIVE. 209ber) were occupied at a distance, cutting wood, diggingground for a garden, or making wigwams for Matthews,York, and Jemmy.As the natives thronged to our boundary-line (a mere markmade with a spade on the ground), it was at first difficult tokeep them back without using force ; but by good temper onthe part of our men, by distributing several presents, and bythe broken Fuegian explanations of our dark-coloured shipmates,we succeeded in getting the natives squatted on theirhams around the line, and obtaining influence enough overthem to prevent their encroaching.Canoes continued to arrive ; their owners hauled them ashoreon the beach, sent the women and children to old wigwams ata Uttle distance, and hastened themselves to see the strangers.While I was engaged in watching the proceedings at ourencampment, and poor Jemmy was getting out of temper atthe quizzing he had to endure on account of his countrymen,whom he had extolled so highly until in sight, a deep voicewas heard shouting from a canoe more than a mile distant :up started Jemmy from a bag full of nails and tools which hewas distributing, leaving them to be scrambled for by thosenearest, and, upon a repetition of the shout, exclaimed " Mybrother!" He then told me that it was his eldest brother's voice,and perched himself on a large stone to watch the canoe, whichapproached slowly, being small and loaded with several people.When it arrived, instead of an eager meeting, there was acautious circumspection which astonished us. Jemmy walkedslowly to meet the party, consisting of his mother, two sisters,and four brothers. The old woman hardly looked at himbefore she hastened away to secure her canoe and hide herproperty, all she possessed — a basket containing tinder, firestone,paint, &c., and a bundle of fish. The girls ran offwith her without even looking at Jemmy ; and the brothers(a man and three boys) stood still, stared, walked up to Jemmy,and all round him, without uttering a word. Animals whenthey meet show far more animation and anxiety than wasdisplayed at this meeting. Jemmy was evidently much mortisII. V210 MAKE WIGWAMS — Gardens. Jan,find, and to add to his confusion and disappointment, as wellas my own, he was unable to talk to his brothers, except bybroken sentences, in which English predominated. After afew minutes had elapsed, his elder brother began to talk tohim ; but although Jemmy understood what was said, he couldnot reply. York and Fuegia were able to understand somewords, but could not or did not choose to speak.This first evening of our stay at Woollyaa was rather ananxious one ; for although the natives seemed inclined to bequite friendly, and they all left us at sunset, according to theirinvariable practice, it was hard to say what mischief mightnot be planned by so numerous a party, fancying, as theyprobably would, that we were inferior to them in strength,because so few in number. Jemmy passed the evening withhis mother and brothers, in their wigwam, but returned to usto sleep. York, also, and Fuegia were going about among thenatives at their wigwams, and the good effect of their intercourseand explanations, such as they were, was visible nextday (24th) in the confident, familiar manner of the throngwhich surrounded us while we began to dig ground for gardens,as well as cut wood for large wigwams, in which Matthewsand his party were to be established. Canoes stillarrived, but their owners seemed as well-disposed as the restof the natives, many of whom assisted us in carrying wood,and bringing bundles of grass or rushes to thatch the wigwamswhich they saw we were making, in a pleasant shelteredspot, near a brook of excellent water. One wigwam wasfor Matthews, another for Jemmy, and a third for York andFuegia. York told me that Jemmy's brother was "verymuch friend," that the country was " very good land," andthat he wished to stay with Jemmy and Matthews.A small plot of ground was selected near the wigwams, and,during our stay, dug, planted and sowed with potatoes, carrots,turnips, beans, peas, lettuce, onions, leeks, and cabbages.Jemmy soon clothed his mother and brothers, by the assistanceof his friends. For a garment which I sent the old womanshe returned me a large quantity of fish, all she had to offer1833. WASHING DOCTOR. 211and when she was dressed, Jemmy brought her to see me. Hisbrothers speedily became rich in old clothes, nails and tools,and the eldest were soon known among the seamen as TommyButton and Harry Button, but the younger ones usually staidat their wigwams, which were about a quarter of a mile distant.So quietly did affairs proceed, that the following day (25th) afew of our people went on the hills in search of guanacoes :many were seen, but they were too wild to approach. An oldman arrived, who was said to be Jemmy's uncle, his father's brother; and many strangers came, who seemed to belong to theYapoo Tekeenica tribe. Jemmy did not like their visit ; hesaid they were bad people, ' no friends.'26th. While some of my party were washing in a stream,stripped to the waist, several natives collected round, and weremuch amused at the white skins, as well as at the act ofwashing, so new probably to them. One of them ran to thenearest wigwams, and a troop of curious gazers collected,whose hands, however, were soon so actively employed inabstracting the handkerchiefs, shoes, &c., which had been laidon the bank, that a stop was put to the ablutions.We discovered that Jemmy's eldest brother was a ' doctor,'and though young for his occupation of conjuring and pretendingto cure illness, he was held in high estimation amonghis own tribe. I never could distinctly ascertain whether theeldest man, or the doctor of a tribe had the most influence; butfrom what little I could learn, it appeared to me that theelder of a family or tribe had a sort of executive authority,while the doctor gave advice, not only in domestic affairs, butwith respect to most transactions. In all savage nations, I believethere is a person of this description — a pretended prophet —conjuror — and, to a certain degree, — doctor.This evening our party were employed for a short time infiring at a mark, with the three-fold object of keeping our armsin order — exercising the men — and aw being, without frightening,the natives. While this was going on, the Fuegians sat about ontheir hams, watching our proceedings, and often eagerly talkingto each other, as successful shots were made at the target,p 2212 SCOUT Departure. Jail.Which was intentionally placed so that they could see the effectof the balls. At sunset they went away as usual, but lookingvery grave, and talking earnestly. About an hour after dark,the sentry saw something moving along the ground near ourtents, within the boundary line, which he thought was awild animal, and had just levelled his basket to fire at it,when he discovered it was a man, who instantly darted off, andwas lost in the darkness. Some native had doubtless stolen tothe tents, to see what we were doing ; perhaps with a view tosurprise us, if asleep, perhaps only to steal.27th. While a few of our party were completing the thatchof the last wigwam, and others were digging in the gardenwhich was made, I was much surprised to see that all thenatives were preparing to depart ; and very soon afterwardsevery canoe was set in motion, — not half a dozen nativesremaining. Even Jemmy's own family, his mother and brothers,left us ; and as he could give no explanation of thissudden departure, I was in much doubt as to the cause.Whether an attack was meditated, and they were removingthe women and children, previous to a general assembly of themen, or whether they had been frightened by our display onthe preceding evening, and feared that we intended to attackthem, I could not ascertain ; but deeming the latter by far themost probable, I decided to take the opportunity of theirdeparture to give Matthews his first trial of passing a night atthe new wigwams.Some among us thought that the natives intended to makea secret attack, on account of the great temptation our propertyoffered ; and in consequence of serious offence which hadbeen taken by two or three old men, who tried to force themselvesinto our encampment, while I was at a little distance ;one of whom, when resisted by the sentry, spit in his face ; andwent off in a violent passion, muttering to himself, and everynow and then turning round to make faces and angry gesturesat the man who had very quietly, though firmly, preventedhis encroachment.In consequence of this incident, and other symptoms of a1833. STRANGERS — MATTHEWS. 213disposition to try their strength, having more than three hundredmen, while we were but thirty, I had thought it advisable,as I mentioned, to give them some idea of the weaponswe had at command, if obliged to use them, by firingat a mark. Probably two-thirds of the natives around us atthat time had never seen a gun fired, being strangers, comingfrom the Beagle Channel and its neighbourhood, where no vesselhad been ; and although our exercise might have frightenedthem more than I wished, so much, indeed, as to have inducedthem to leave the place, it is not improbable that, without somesuch demonstration, they might have obliged us to fire at theminstead of the target. So many strangers had arrived duringthe few days we remained, I mean strangers to Jemmy's familymen of the eastern tribe, which he called Yapoo — that hisbrothers and mother had no longer any influence over themajority, who cared for them as little as they did for us, andwere intent only upon plunder. Finding this the case, I concludethat Jemmy's friends thought it wise to retreat to aneighbouring island before any attack commenced ; but whythey did not tell Jemmy their reasons for going, I know not,neither could he tell me more than that they said they weregoing to fish, and would return at night. This, however, theydid not do.In the evening, Matthews and his party — Jemmy, York,and Fuegia — went to their abode in the three new wigwams.In that made for Matthews, Jemmy also took up his quartersat first : it was high and roomy for such a construction ; thespace overhead was divided by a floor of boards, brought fromthe ship, and there most of Matthews' stores were placed ; butthe most valuable articles were deposited in a box, which washid in the ground underneath the wigwam, where fire couldnot reach.Matthews was steady, and as willing as ever ; neither Yorknor Jemmy had the slightest doubt of their being all well-treated; so trusting that Matthews, in his honest intentionto do good, would obtain that assistance in which he confided,I decided to leave him for a few days. The absence of the214 PILFERING TRIAL. Jan.natives, every one of whom had decamped at this time, gave agood opportunity for landing the larger tools belonging toMatthews and our Fuegians, and placing them within orbeneath his wigwam, unseen by any one except ourselves ; andat dusk, all that we could do for them being completed, weleft the place and sailed some miles to the southward.During the four days in which we had so many natives aboutus, of course some thefts were committed, but nothing ofconsequence was stolen. I saw one man talking to JemmyButton, while another picked his pocket of a knife, and eventhe wary York lost something, but from Fuegia they did nottake a single article ; on the contrary, their kindness to herwas remarkable, and among the women she was quite a pet.Our people lost a few trifles, in consequence of their owncarelessness. Had they themselves been left among gold anddiamonds, would they all have refrained from indulging theiracquisitive inclinations ?Notwithstanding the decision into which I had reasonedmyself respecting the natives, I could not help being exceedinglyanxious about Matthews, and early next morning ourboats were again steered towards WooUya. My own anxietywas increased by hearing the remarks made from time to timeby the rest of the party, some of whom thought we should notagain see him alive ; and it was with no slight joy that Icaught sight of him, as my boat rounded a point of land, carryinga kettle to the fire near his wigwam. We landed andascertained that nothing had occurred to damp his spirits, orinany way check his inclination to make a fair trial. Somenatives had returned to the place, among them one of Jemmy'sbrothers ; but so far were they from showing the slightest ill-will,that nothing could be more friendly than their behaviour.Jemmy told us that these people, who arrived at daylightthat morning were his friends, that his own family would comein the course of the day, and that the ' bad men,' the strangers,were all gone away to their own country.A further trial was now determined upon. The yawl, withone whale-boat, was sent back to the Beagle, and I set out on1833. WESTWARD EXPLORATION. 215a westward excursion, accompanied by Messrs. Darwin andHamond, in the other two boats : my intention being to completethe exploration of Whale-boat Sound, and the north-westarm of the Beagle Channel ; then revisit Woollyaa, either leaveor remove Matthews, as might appear advisable, and repair toour ship in Goreee Road. With a fair and fresh wind my boatand Mr. Hamond's passed the Murray Narrow, and sailed faralong the channel towards the west, favoured, unusually, byan easterly breeze. Just as we had landed, and set up our tentfor the night, some canoes were seen approaching ; so ratherthan be obliged to watch their movements all night, we at onceembarked our tent and half-cooked supper, and pulled alongthe shore some miles further, knowing that they would notwillingly follow us in the dark. About midnight we landedand slept undisturbed. Next day we made little progress,the wind having changed, and landed, earlier than usual,on the north side of the channel, at Shingle Point. Somenatives soon appeared, and though few in number, were inclinedto give trouble. It was evident they did not knowthe effect of fire-arms ; for if a musket were pointed at them,and threatening gestures used, they only made faces at us, andmocked whatever we did. Finding them more and more insolentand troublesome, I preferred leaving them to risking astruggle, in which it might become necessary to fire, at thehazard of destroying life. Twelve armed men, therefore,gave way to six unarmed, naked savages, and went on to anothercove, where these annoying, because ignorant nativescould not see us.On the 29th we reached Devil Island, and found the largewigwam still standing, which in 1830 my boat's crew calledthe ' Parliament House.' Never, in any part of Tierra delFueo-o, have I noticed the remains of a wigwam which seemedto have been burned or pulled down ; probably there is somefeeling on the subject, and in consequence the natives allowthem to decay naturally, but never wilfully destroy them. Weenjoyed a grand view of the lofty mountain, now called Darwin,with its immense glaciers extending far and wide. Whether216 ICE CLIFFS GLACIERS. Jan.this mountain is equal to Sarmiento in height, I am not certain,as the measurements obtained did not rest upon satisfactorydata ; but the result of those measures gave 6,800 feet for itselevation above the sea. This, as an abstract height, is small,but taking into consideration that it rises abruptly from thesea, which washes its base, and that only a short space intervenesbetween the salt water and the lofty frozen summit, the effectupon an observer's eye is extremely grand, and equal, probably,to that of far higher mountains which are situated at a distanceinland, and generally rise from an elevated district.We stopped to cook and eat our hasty meal upon a lowpoint of land, immediately in front of a noble precipice of solidice ; the cliffy face of a huge glacier, which seemed to cover theside of a mountain, and completely filled a valley severalleagues in extent.Wherever these enormous glaciers were seen, we remarkedthe most beautiful light blue or sea green tints in portions ofthe solid ice, caused by varied transmission, or reflection oflight. Blue was the prevailing colour, and the contrast whichits extremely delicate hue, with the dazzling white of otherice, afforded to the dark green foliage, the almost black precipices,and the deep, indigo blue water, was very remarkable.Miniature icebergs surrounded us; fragments of the cliff,which from time to time fall into a deep and gloomy basinbeneath the precipice, and are floated out into the channel bya slow tidal stream. In the first volume the frequent fallingof these masses of ice is noticed by Captain King in the Straitof Magalhaens, and in the narrative of my first exploring visitto this arm of the Beagle Channel ; therefore I will add no furtherremark upon the subject.Our boats were hauled up out of the water upon the sandypoint, and we were sitting round a fire about two hundredyards from them, when a thundering crash shook us — downcame the whole front of the icy cliff — and the sea surged up inavast heap of foam. Reverberating echoes sounded in everydirection, from the lofty mountains which hemmed us in ; butour whole attention was immediately called to great rolling waves1833. HAZARD DARWIN SOUND. 217which came so rapidly that there was scarcely time for the mostactive of our party to run and seize the boats before they weretossed along the beach like empty calabashes. By the exertionsof those who grappled them or seized their ropes, theywere hauled up again out of reach of a second and third roller ;and indeed we had good reason to rejoice that they were justsaved in time ; for had not Mr. Darwin, and two or three ofthe men, run to them instantly, they would have been sweptaway from us irrecoverably. Wind and tide would soon havedrifted them beyond the distance a man could swim ; and then,what prizes they would have been for the Fuegians, even if wehad escaped by possessing ourselves of canoes. At the extremityof the sandy point on which we stood, there were manylarge blocks of stone, which seemed to have been transportedfrom the adjacent mountains, either upon masses of ice, or bythe force of waves such as those which we witnessed. Had ourboats struck those blocks, instead of soft sand, our dilemmawould not have been much less than if they had been at onceswept away.Embarking, we proceeded along a narrow passage, more likea river than an arm of the sea, till the setting sun warned us toseek a resting-place for the night ; when, selecting a beachvery far from any glacier, we again hauled our boats on shore.Long after the sun had disappeared from our view, his settingrays shone so brightly upon the gilded icy sides of the summitsabove us, that twilight lasted an unusual time, and a fine clearevening enabled us to watch every varying tint till even thehighest peak became like a dark shadow, whose outline onlycould be distinguished. No doubt such scenes are familiar tomany, but to us, surrounded even as we so often were by theirmaterials, they were rare ; because clouds continually hangover the heights, or obscure the little sunshine which falls tothe lot of Tierra del Fueso.The following day (30th) we passed into a large expanse ofwater, which I named Darwin Sound — after my messmate,who so willingly encountered the discomfort and risk of a longcruise in a small loaded boat. Desirous of finding an opening218 DESOLATION — SARMIENTO. Feb.northwards, I traced the northern shore of this sound, mileby mile, leaving all islands to the southward until we enteredWhale-boat Sound, and I recognized Cape Desolation in thedistance, as well as a number of minor points which hadbecome familiar to me during the search after our lost boat inthe former voyage (1830).Feb. 2. Having done what was necessary and attainable forthe purposes of the survey, we traversed Whale-boat Sound,and stopped for a time at an old bivouac, used by me twicebefore, on an islet near the east extremity of the largest StewartIsland. While the boat's crew were occupied in preparingour meal, I went to Stewart Island, and from a small eminencesaw Mount Sarmiento quite distinctly. We next steered eastward,along the north side of the Londonderry Islands, andpassed the night in a narrow passage. On the 3d we got to theopen sea at the south side of Darwin Sound, and entered thesouth-west arm of the Beagle Channel rather too late, for ithad become so dark we could distinguish no place fit to receiveus ; however, after much scrutiny and anxious sounding, toascertain if our boats could approach without danger of beingstove, we were guided by the sound of a cascade to a shelteredcove, where the beach was smooth. Excepting for thenovelty and excitement of exploring unknown places, howeveruninteresting they may be, there was little in this trip worthyof general notice, considering how much has already been saidof these unprofitable regions. Even to a professed naturalist,there was scarcely anything to repay the time and trouble, as itwas impossible to delay long enough in any one place to givetime for more than a most cursory examination.I need hardly say that the survey of such places as werevisited in this hasty manner is little more than an eye-sketch,corrected by frequent bearings, occasional latitudes by sun,moon, or stars, and meridian distances, measured by two chronometers,which were always kept in a large box and treatedvery carefully. To have attempted more, to have hoped forsuch an accurate delineation of these shores, at present almostuseless to civilized man, as is absolutely necessary where .SOUTH-WEST ARM FIRE. 219ping may resort, would have been wrong, while so many otherobjects demanded immediate attention.4th. We sailed along the passage very rapidly, a freshwind and strong tide favouring us. The flood-tide stream settwo or three knots an hour through this south-west arm of theBeagle Channel, but the ebb was scarcely noticed : certainlyits strength did not, even in the narrowest places, exceed oneknot an hour. A few Alikhoolip Fuegians were seen in a coveon the south shore, ten miles west of Point Divide ; the onlynatives, except a very small party in Darwin Sound, that hadbeen met in the excursion since we left the Tekeenica people.Near Point Divide we saw a large fire, and approached thespot guardedly, supposing that a number of Fuegians must bethere. No one appeared ; but still the fire burned brightly*and we began to think there might be an ambush, or that thenatives who had been there had fled, but were still in theneighbourhood. Approaching nearer, we found that the firewas in a large tree, whose trunk it had almost consumed.Judging from the slow rate at which the tree burned while wewere present, I should say it had been on fire two or threedays, and that the frequent heavy rain had prevented theflames from making head. Had the weather been some timedry, the adjoining woodland would have blazed, and, as themountain side is steep and covered with trees, the conflagrationwould have been immense. At Point Divide the slate rockseemed to be of excellent quality, fit for roofing ; but whenwill roofing slates be required in Tierra del Fuego .'' Perhapsthough sooner than we suppose ; for the accidental discovery ofa valuable mine might effect great changes.On the south shore, nearly opposite to Shingle Point, we metalarge party of natives, among whom those who disturbed us atthat place as we passed westward were recognized. All of themappeared in full dress, being bedaubed with red and whitepaint, and ornamented, after their fashion, with feathers andthe down of geese. One of their women was noticed by severalamong us as being far from ill-looking: her features wereregular, and, excepting a deficiency of hair on the eyebrow,220 NATIVES — Woolly. Feb.and rather thick lips, the contour of her face was sufficientlygood to have been mistaken for that of a handsome gipsy.What her figure might be, a loose linen garment, evidentlyone that had belonged to Fuegia Basket, prevented ournoticing. The sight of this piece of linen, several bits ofribbon, and some scraps of red cloth, apparently quite recentlyobtained, made me feel very anxious about Matthews and hisparty : there was also an air of almost defiance among thesepeople, which looked as if they knew that harm had been done,and that they were ready to stand on the defensive if any suchattack as they expected were put into execution. Passingtherefore hastily on, we went as far as the light admitted, andat daybreak next morning (6th) were again hastening towardsWoollyaa. As we shot through the Murray Narrow severalparties of natives were seen, who were ornamented with stripsof tartan cloth or white linen, which we well knew were obtainedfrom our poor friends. No questions were asked ; wethought our progress slow, though wind and tide favoured us :but, hurrying on, at noon reached Woollyaa. Several canoeswere on the beach, and as many natives seemed to be assembledas were there two days before we left the place. All weremuch painted, and ornamented with rags of English clothing,which we concluded to be the last remnants of our friends'*stock. Our boats touched the shore ; the natives came hallooingand jumping about us, and then, to my extreme relief,Matthews appeared, dressed and looking as usual. After himcame Jemmy and York, also dressed and looking well : Fuegia^they said, was in a wigwam.Taking Matthews into my boat, we pushed out a shortdistance to be free from interruption, and remained till I hadheard the principal parts of his story : the other boat tookJemmy on board, and York waited on the beach. Nearly allthe Fuegians squatted down on their hams to watch our proceedings,reminding me of a pack of hounds waiting for a foxto be unearthed.Matthews gave a bad account of the prospect which hesaw before him, and told me, that he did not think himself1833. CONDUCT TO MATTHEWS. 221safe among such a set of utter savages as he found them to be,notwithstanding Jemmy's assurances to the contrary. Noviolence had been committed beyond holding down his headby force, as if in contempt of his strength ; but he had beenharshly threatened by several men, and from the signs used bythem, he felt convinced they would take his life. During thelast few days, his time had been altogether occupied in watchinghis property. At first there were only a few quiet nativesabout him, who were inoffensive; but three days after ourdeparture several canoes full of strangers to Jemmy's familyarrived, and from that time Matthews had had no peace byday, and very little rest at night. Some of them were alwayson the look-out for an opportunity to snatch up and run offwith some tool or article of clothing, and others spent thegreater part of each day in his wigwam, asking for every thingthey saw, and often threatening him when he refused to complywith their wishes. More than one man went out in a rage, andreturned immediately with a large stone in his hand, makingsigns that he would kill Matthews if he did not give him whatwas demanded. Sometimes a party of them gathered roundMatthews, and, if he had nothing to give them, teased himby pulling the hair of his face, pushing him about, and makingmouths at him. His only partizans were the women ; nowand then he left Jemmy to guard the hut, and went to thenatives' wigwams, where the women always received him kindly,making room for him by their fire, and giving him a share ofwhatever food they had, without asking for any thing in return.The men never took the trouble of going with him on thesevisits (which, however, ceased when so many strangers arrived),their attention being engrossed by the tools, clothes,and crockery ware at our shipmate's quarters. Fortunately,the most valuable part of Matthews' own things were underground,in a cave unsuspected by the natives, and other largetools were hidden overhead in the roof of his hut. York andFuegia fared very well ; they lost nothing ; but Jemmy wassadly plundered, even by his own family. Our garden, uponwhich much labour had been bestowed, had been trampled222 MATTHEWS RE-EMBARKS. Feb.over repeatedly, although Jemmy had done his best to explainits object and prevent people from walking there. Whenquestioned about it, he looked very sorrowful, and, with a slowshake of the head, said, " My people very bad ; great fool ;know nothing at all ; very great fool." It was soon decidedthat Matthews should not remain. I considered that he hadalready undergone a severe trial, and ought not to be againexposed to such savages, however willing he might be to trythem farther if I thought it right. The next difficulty was howto get Matthews' chest and the remainder of his property safelyinto our boats, in the face of a hundred Fuegians, who would ofcoarse understand our object, and be much more than a matchfor us on land ; but the less hesitation shown, the less timethey would have to think of what we were about ; so, dividingour party, and spreading about a little to create confidence — at afavourable moment the wigwam was quickly cleared, the caveemptied, and the contents safely placed in our boats. As Istood watching the proceedings, a few anxious moments passed,for any kind of skirmish would have been so detrimental tothe three who were still to remain. When the last man wasembarked, I distributed several useful articles, such as axes,saws, gibbets, knives and nails, among the natives, thenbade Jemmy and York farewell, promising to see them againin a few days, and departed from the wondering throng assembledon the beach.When fairly out of sight of Woollyaa, sailing with a fairwind towards the Beagle, Matthews must have felt almost likea man reprieved, excepting that he enjoyed the feelings alwayssure to reward those who try to do their duty, in addition tothose excited by a sudden certainty of his life being out ofjeopardy. We slept that night in a cove under Wesley Head ;sailed early the following morning (7th) along the north sideof Nassau Bay, and about an hour after dark reached theBeagle — found all well, the surveying work about Goreee Roaddone, the ship refitted, and quite ready for her next trip.A day or two was required for observations and arrangements,after which (10th) we beat to windward across Nassau1833. PONSOXBY SOUND. 223Bay, and on the 11th anchored in Scotchwell Bay. A roughnight was passed under sail between Wollaston and NavarinIslands, in which we pretty well proved the clearness of thatpassage, as it blew fresh and we made a great many boards.Next day I set out to examine the western part of PonsonbySound and revisit Woollyaa. In my absence one party was togo westward, overland, to look at the outer coast betweenFalse Cape and Cape Weddell, and another was to examineand make a plan of the bay or harbour in which the Beaglelay. In 1830, Mr. Stokes had laid down its shores withaccuracy on a small scale, but there was not then time to takemany soundings ; and as I conceived that Orange Bay andthis harbour were likely to be useful ports, it was worthmaking a particular plan of each.12th. With one boat I crossed Tekeenica Sound, and exploredthe western part of Ponsonby Sound. Natives were seenhere and there, but we had little intercourse with them. Somecurious effects of volcanic action were observed, besides massesof conglomerate, such as I had not noticed in any other partof Tierra del Fuego. On one islet I was placed in an awkwardpredicament for half an hour ; it was a very steep, precipitoushill, which 1 had ascended by climbing or creeping throughravines and among trees ; but, wishing to return to the boat'screw, after taking a few angles and bearings from its summit,I could find no place by which it appeared possible todescend. The ravine up which I crawled was hidden bywood, and night was at hand. I went to and fro, like a dogon a wall, unable to descend, till one of the boat's crew whowas wandering about heard me call, and, ascending at theonly accessible place, showed me where to plunge into thewood with a prospect of emerging again in a proper direction.This night we had dry beautiful weather, the leaves and stickson the ground cracking under our feet as we walked, whileat the ship, only sixty miles distant, rain poured down incessantly.The night of the 13th was passed on Button Island. This224 Woolly HOPES. Feb.also was quite fine, without a drop of rain, while at the ship,in Packsaddle Bay, it rained frequently. I mention theseinstances to show how different the climate may be even inplaces so near one another as Packsaddle Bay and Woollyaa.14th. With considerable anxiety T crossed over from ButtonIsland to Woollyaa. Several canoes were out fishing, womenonly being in them, who did not cease their occupation as wepassed : this augured well ; and in a few minutes after we sawJemmy, York, and Fuegia, in their usual dress. But fewnatives were about them, and those few seemed quiet and welldisposed. Jemmy complained that the people had stolen manyof his things, but York and Fuegia had contrived to takebetter care of theirs. I went to their Wigwams and found verylittle change. Fuegia looked clean and tidy dressed, and byher wigwam was a canoe, which York was building out ofplanks left for him by our party. The garden was uninjured,and some of the vegetables already sprouting.Jemmy told us that strangers had been there, with whomhe and his people had ' very much jaw'' that they fought,threw 'great many stone,' and stole two women (in exchangefor whom Jemmy's party stole one), but were obliged to retreat.Jemmy's mother came down to the boat to see us ; she wasdecently clothed, by her son's care. He said that his brotherswere all friendly, and that he should get on very well now thatthe ' strange men' were driven away. I advised Jemmy to takehis mother and younger brother to his own wigwam, whichhe promised to do, and then, finding that they were all quitecontented and apparently very happy, I left the place, withrather sanguine hopes of their effecting among their countrymensome change for the better. Jemmy's occupation washollowing out the trunk of a large tree, in order to make sucha canoe as he had seen at Rio de Janeiro.I hoped that through their means our motives in taking themto England would become understood and appreciated amongtheir associates, and that a future visit might find them sofavourably disposed towards us, that Matthews might then1833. Gore ROAD SUCCESS BAY. 225undertake, with a far better prospect of success, that enterprisewhich circumstances had obliged him to defer, though notto abandon altogether.Having completed our work in Packsaddle Bay on the 18th,the Beagle went to the inlet originally called Windhond Bayadeep place full of islets : thence, on the 19th, she moved toBretton Bay, on the north side of Wollaston Island, and toMiddle Cove. On the 20th, it was blowing a gale of windfrom the south-west, but we pushed across before it to GoreeeRoad, knowing that we should there find secure anchorage,and be unmolested by the furious williams which whirled overthe high peaks of Wollaston Island.We weighed from Goreee Road on the 21st, and ran underclose-reefed topsails to Good Success Bay, where our anchorswere dropped in the evening. The night of the 22d was oneof the most stormy I ever witnessed. Although close to aweather shore in a snug cove, upon good holding ground, withmasts struck and yards braced as sharp as possible, the windwas so furious that both bowers were brought a-head with acable on each, and the sheet anchor (having been let go early)had half a cable on it, the depth of water being only tenfathoms. During some of the blasts, our fore-yard bent somuch that I watched it with anxiety, thinking it would besprung. The storm being from the westward, threw no sea intothe cove, but I several times expected to be driven out of ourplace of refuge, if not shelter. During part of the time wewaited in Good Success Bay for an interval of tolerable weather,in which we might cross to the Falkland Islands withoutbeing molested by a gale, there was so much surf on the shorethat our boats could not land, even while the wind was moderatein the bay.While we were prisoners on board, some fish were caught,among which was a skate, four feet in length and three feetwide. Several fine cod-fish, of the same kind as those off CapeFairweather, were also hooked, and much relished.On the 26th we sailed, passed through a most disagreeableswell off" Cape San Diego, and ran before a fresh gale towardsVOL. II. Q226 SOUNDING — CURRENT. Feb.the Falkland Islands. Towards evening we rounded to forsoundings, but the sea was so high and short, that a man* atthe jib-boom-end was pitched more than a fathom under water.Lie held on manfully, both to the boom and the lead-line, and9,s he rose above the wave, blowing and dripping, hove the leadforward as steadily as ever.-f- My own feelings at seeing himdisappear may be imagined : — it was some time before wesounded again. This heavy though short sea seemed to becaused by the flood tide, coming from the southward, andmeeting waves raised by strong north-west winds. The streamof tide set us a mile each hour north-eastward.At eight the wind and sea were too much for us to run with ;therefore, watching an opportunity, we rounded to :|: underclose-reefed main-topsail, trysails, and fore-staysail. Nextmorning (27th) we bore up, though the sea was still heavy, andsteered to pass south of the Falklands. Our observations atnoon showed that since leaving Good Success Bay we had beenset more than thirty miles to the north-east. This effect, whethercaused by the flood tide-stream, or by a current independentof the tide, would be dangerous to ships endeavouring topass westward of the Falklands during bad weather, and in allprobability caused the embayment of H.M.S. Eden, CaptainW. F. W. Owen, when she was saved by his skill : also of aFrench storeship, the Durance ; and of several other vessels. Atnoon, on the 28th, we found that the current or stream of tidehad set us more towards the east than to the northward, duringthe preceding twenty-four hours, while we were at the southside of the islands.At daylight on the 1st of March (having passed the precedingnight standing off" and on under easy sail), we madeCape Pembroke, at the eastern extremity of the Falklands.The weather was very cold and raw, with frequent hail-squalls,• Nicholas White.t Two men in the staysail netting were also dipped under water, at asecond plunge, from which White escaped.X The barometer was below 29 inches. See Meteorological Journal inAppendix.J 833. FALKLAND ISLANDS. ^Sl*although in the month corresponding to September of ourhemisphere ; and while working to windward into BerkeleySound, the gusts of wind were sometimes strong enough tooblige us to shorten all sail. I did not then know of PortWilliam — so close to us, and so easy of access.The aspect of the Falklands rather surprised me : instead ofa low, level, barren country, like Patagonia, or a high woodyregion, like Tierra del Fuego, we saw ridges of rocky hills,about a thousand feet in height, traversing extensive tracts ofsombre-looking moorland, enlivened by a tree. A black,low, and rocky coast, on which the surf raged violently, andthe strong wind against which we were contending, did nottend to improve our first impressions of those unfortunateislands — scene of feud and assassination, and the cause of angrydiscussion among nations.In a cove (called Johnson Harbour) at the north side ofBerkeley' Sound, was a wrecked ship, with her masts standing,and in other places were the remains of two more wrecks. Weanchored near the beach on which Freycinet ran the Uranie,after she struck on a rock off Volunteer Point, at the entranceof Berkeley Sound ; and from a French boat which camealongside learned that the Magellan, French whaler, had beendriven from her anchors during the tremendous storm ofJanuary 12-13 ; that her crew were living on shore undertents, having saved every thing ; that there were only a fewcolonists left at the almost ruined settlement of Port Louis ;and that the British flag had been re-hoisted on the islands byH.M.S. Tyne and Clio.VOL. II. Q, 2CHAPTER XI.HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE FALKLAND ISLANDS.The Falkland Islands, lying between the parallels of 51°and 53° S., and extending from near 57° almost to 62° W., arein number about two hundred, but only two are of considerablesize. Between these latter, called East, and West Falkland,is the channel to which our countryman, Strong, gave thename of Falkland Sound, he himself calling the adjacentcountry Hawkins' Land.Plausible assertions have been made by parties anxious todisprove the claim of Great Britain to these islands, and so fewpersons, excepting those immediately concerned, have inclinationto refer to original documents, that I may be pardoned forrecalling to the recollection of those to whom the subject isstill interesting, a few well-known facts, which, if fairly considered,place the question above dispute.It has been asserted, that Americus Vespucius saw theseislands in 1502,* but if the account of Americus himself isauthenticate he could not have explored farther south than theright bank of La Plata. In 1501-2 Americus Vespucius, then• II me parott qu'on en peut attribuer la premiere d^couverte au calibreAmerica Vesture, qui, dans son troisi^me voyage pour la decouverte deI'Amerique, en harcourt la cote du nord au mois d'Avril 1502, 11ignorant a la verite si elle appartenoit a une ive, ou si elle faisoit partiedu continent ; mais il est facile de conclure de la route qu'il avoit suivie,de la latitude a. laquelle il etoit arrive, de la description meme qu'il donnede cette cote, que c'etoit celle des Malouines. J'assurerais, avec nonmoins de fondement, que Beauchesne Goblin, revenant de la nier duSud en 1700, a mouille dans la partie orientale des Malouines, croyantêtre aux Sebaldes. — Voyage de Bougainville, 2d edit. 1772, torn. i. p. 63.t Letters of Americus Vespucius, in Ramus's Collection, vol, i.fol. 128,iFALKLAND ISLANDS. 229employed by the King of Portugal, sailed 600 leagues southand 150 leagues west from Cape San Agostinho (lat. 8° 20' S.)along the coast of a country then named Terra Sancti Crucis.*His account of longitude may be very erroneous, but howcould his latitude have erred thirteen degrees in this hissouthernmost voyage ?The south shore of the Plata is low, and appears to bewoody, though it is not ; the depth of water off it is moderate,and the currents are strong — all which peculiarities have beenremarked on the northern coasts of the Falklands; thereforethe ' description' alluded to by De Bougainville would applyequally well to the right bank of the Plata. The late Mr-dalrymplepublished an extract from a chart printed at Rome,in 1508, in which it is said, that ships of Portugal discovereda continuation of land as far south as fifty degreeswhich did not there terminate. In that chart the name Americais not to be found. Brazil is there called Terris: SanctiCrucis.If the Portuguese or any other people actually traced oreven discovered portions of coast south of the Plata before1512, it appears strange that so remarkable an estuary, onehundred and twenty miles across, should have been overlooked ;especially as soundings extend two hundred miles seaward ofits entrance : — and that the world should have no clear record ofits having been discovered prior to the voyage of Juan de Solis,in 1512. Vespucius has already robbed Columbus and hispredecessor, Cabot, of the great honour of affixing their namesto the New World — shall he also be tacitly permitted to claim• The name America was not given before the year 1507. (Hearers,Dec. ],7, 5.)t The Falklands are beyond fifty-one degrees of south latitude.I In 1507 (the admiral Christopher Columbus being dead), AmericusVespucius was taken into the service of the King of Spain, with the titleof ' Pilot mayor,' and was employed in making charts of the new discoveries,which gave him an opportunity to affix his own name to the land ofSouth America. (Herrera, Dec. 1, 7, 5.)230 FALKLAND ISLANDS.even the trifling distinction of discovering the Falklands, whenit is evident that he could not have seen them ? *On the 14th of August 1592, John Davis, vs^ho sailed withCavendish on his second voyage, but separated from him in May1592, discovered the islands now called Falkland. In Mr. JohnJane's relation of Davis's voyage (Hakluyt, vol. iii. p. 846),there is the following simple, but distinct account of this discovery: " Aug. 14, 1792. We were driven in among certainisles, never before discovered by any known relation, lyingfifty leagues or better from the shore, east and northerly fromthe Strait" (of Magalhaens).At this time Davis was striving to enter the Strait of Magal-hans, but had been long at sea, and driven far by tempests.His bearing is correct, though the distance (by estimationonly) is too small.In 1683-4, Dampier and Cowley saw three islands in lat. 51°to 51° 20' S., which they (correctly) supposed to be those seenand named by Sebald de Wert. However, the editor of Cowley'snarrative, one William Hack, published a different latitudefor the land they saw, and called it Pepys Island, in complimentto the then Secretary of the Admiralty, intending thatit should be supposed a new discovery. The false latitude givenby Hack was 47° S. : in his drawing of the island he did notomit the insertion of an Admiralty Bay and a Secretary Point.Hawkins sailed along the northern shores of these islands in1594, and he, ignorant of Davis's discovery, named them Hawkins'sMaiden Land. His account appearing first, and prominently,before the public, procured for them the name by whichthey were known until Strong, in 1690, sailed through andanchored in the channel which he named Falkland Sound.The Welfare's journal, written by Strong, is in the BritishMuseum, together with Observations made during a SouthSea Voyage, written by Richard Simson, who sailed in the• Could the constructor of the chart, published at Rome in 1508, havebeen misinformed, owing to a mistake of 5 for 3 (50 for 30)? Such errorsoccur frequently in modern compilations.FALKLAND ISLANDS. 231same ship ; but a few sentences in each are so relevant to thepresent subject, that I shall quote them verbatim : — " 1690.Monday 27th January. We saw the land ; when within threeor four leagues, we had thirty-six fathoms. It is a large land,and lieth east and west nearest. There are several quays that lieamong the shore. We sent our boat to one, and she brought onboardabundance of penguins, and other fowls, and seals. Westeered along shore E. by N., and at eight at night we saw theland run eastward as far as we could discern. Lat. 51° 3' S.Tuesday 28th. This morning at four o'clock we saw arock that lieth from the main island four or five leagues. Itmaketh like a sail.* At six, we stood into a sound that liesabout twenty leagues from the westernmost land we had seen.The sound lieth south and north nearest. There is twenty-fourfathoms depth at the entrance, which is four leagueswide. We came to an anchor six or seven leagues within, infourteen fathoms water. Here are many good harbours. Wefound fresh water in plenty, and killed abundance of geese andducks. As for wood, there is none.On the 31st we weighed from this harbour, with the wind atW.S.W. We sent our long-boat a-head of the ship, to soundbefore us. At eight o'clock in the evening, we anchored in ninefathoms. The next morning we weighed, and sent our boatbefore us. At ten, we were clear out of the sound. At twelve,we set the west cape bearing N.N.E., which we named CapeFarewell. This sound, Falkland Sound as I named it, is aboutseventeen leagues long ; the first entrance lies S. by E., andafterwards S. by W."How it happened that the name Falkland, originally givento the sound alone, obliterated Hawkins, and has never yieldedto Davis, is now a matter of very trifling importance.I may be permitted to remark particularly, that Hawkinsand Strong not only saw both East and West Falkland, butthat in 1690 Strong anchored repeatedly between them, andlanded : and I do so, because stress has been laid upon the fact• This rock was seen by Hawkins, and named by him ' White Conduit.'Now it is called Eddystone.232 FALKLAND ISLANDS.of Beauchesne Gouin having anchored in 1700 on their easterncoast.In the year 1600, the islands now called Masons, Salvages,or Geraldine, at the north-west extremity of the Falklands,were seen and named by Sebald de Wert ; and during thenext two centuries many other navigators, sailing to or fromthe Pacific, saw the Falklands ; but it does not appear that anyfurther landing was effected, or even that any vessel anchoredthere, after Beauchesne, except the Saint Louis, of St. Malo,until M. de Bougainville landed to form his settlement, inFebruary 1764.Several ships of St. Malo passed near the Eastern Falklandsbetween the years 1706 and 1714, from whose accounts M.Frezier compiled his chart, published in 1717 ; and in complimentto the owners of one of them (the Saint Louis), hercommander, M. Fouquet, named the cluster of islets nearwhich he anchored, the Anican Isles.In consequence of the visits of these ships of St. Malo, theFrench named the islands Les Malouines ; but this was nottill after 1716, when Frezier compiled the chart in which hecalled them ' Isles Nouvelles,' although in his own narrative(p. 512, Amsterdam edition, 1717), he says, " Ces isles sontsans doute les menes que celles que le Chevalier RichardHawkins d^couvrit en 1593."The Spaniards adopted the French name, slightly altered,by changing Malouines into Malvinas: even now the termSaloon,' a corruption of Malouine, * is sometimes used byEnglish or Americans instead of island, in writing as well asin speaking.During the early part of the last century, France maintaineda lucrative commerce with Chile and Peru, by way of CapeHorn, and the advantages which might be derived from a portof refuge and supply at the eastern extremity of the Falklandsdid not escape her active discernment.De Bougainville says, " Cependant leur position heureuse" Fortunately, it is an this maloon,,or island, that bullocks andhorses are found running wild." — (Weddell, p. 97.)FALKLAND ISLANDS, 233pour servir de reached aux vaisseaux qui vont dans la mer dusud, et d'echelle pour la decouverte des terres Australes, avoitfrappe les navigators de toutes les nations. Au commencementde Tanner 1763, la cour de France resolute de former unestablishment dans ces iles. Proposal au ministers de le com-render a mes frais, et seconde par MM. de Neville et d'Ar-moulin, Tun mon cousin-germain et Autre mon oncle, je fissur le champ construire et armer a Saint Malo, par les soins deM. Duclos Guyot, aujourd'hui mon second, Tangle de vingtcanons, et le Sphinx de douze, que je munis de tout ce quietoit propre pour une pareille expedition. J'embarquai plusieursfamilies Audiences, espece hommes laborious, intelligente,et qui doit etre chere a la France par Inviolable attachementque lui ont prouve ces bonnets et infortunes citoyens.A' Monte Video nous primes beaucoup de chevaux, et debetes a come, — nous terraces sur les iles Sebaldes le 31Janvier 1764.La meme illusion qui avoit fait croire a Hawkins, aWoods Rogers, et aux autres, que ces iles soient couvertes debois, agit aussi sur mes compagnons de voyage, et sur moi.Nous vines avec surprise, en debar quant, que ce que nousavions pris pour du bois en cinglant le long de la cote, n'etoitautre chose que des touches de donc fort levees et fort approachesles unes des autres. Leur pied, en se descendant reqoitla couleur d'herbe morte jusqu^a une toise environ de hauteur ;et de la sort une touffe de jones* d'un beau verd qui couronnece pied ; de sorte que, dans Teloignement, les times deniespresentment Aspect d'un bois de mediocre hauteur. Ces jonesne croissent qu'au bord de la mer, et sur les petites iles ; lesmontagnes de la grande terre sont, dans quelques endroits,couvertes retirement de buyers, qu'on prend amusement deloin pour du taillis"— (Voyage autour du Monde, 1766-69,seconde edition, 1772, torn. i. p. 66-69.)On the 17th of March De Bougainville decided to place hisNow called Tussac by the sealers and colonists.234 FALKLAND ISLANDS.establishment on the spot where the present settlement stands,and forthwith disembarked to commence the laborious undertakingof founding a colony.In the year 1764, a squadron was sent to the South Seas byGeorge Til., in whose instructions, dated June 17th, 1764,it is said, " And whereas his Majesty's islands, called PepysIsland and Falkland Islands, lying within the said track,"(the track between the Cape of Good Hope and the Strait ofMagalhaens), " notwithstanding their having been first discoveredand visited by British navigators, have never yet beenso sufficiently surveyed, as that an accurate judgment may beformed of their coasts and product, his Majesty, taking thepremises into consideration, and conceiving no junction so properfor enterprises of this nature as a time of profound peace,which his kingdoms at present happily enjoy, has thought fitthat it should now be undertaken."On the 23d January 1765, Commodore Byron went onshore at these islands, with the captains and principal officersof his squadron, " when the Union Jack being erected on ahio-h staff, and spread, the commodore took possession of theharbour and all the neighbouring islands for his Majesty KingGeorge III., his heirs, and successors, by the name of FalklandIslands. When the colours were spread, a salute was fired fromthe ship."In consequence of Byron's favourable report, Captain Mac-bridewas sent out in H.M.S. Jason to begin their colonization.He arrived in January 1766.Spain, hearing of the French settlement, immediately laidclaim to the islands, as forming a part of her American possessions; and France, influenced by various considerations, agreedto deliver up to Spain her newly-formed colony, upon conditionthat the projectors and colonists should be indemnified fortheir losses : an agreement honourably fulfilled by Spain.On the 1st of April 1767, De Bougainville gave up possessionto the Spanish officer appointed to take charge ; the standardof Spain was hoisted, and royal salutes fired by the vestISLANDS. 235sels present. Some of the French colonists remained, but thegreater part preferred returning to France, and passages weregiven to them on board Spanish ships.In 1770, a Spanish armament attacked the British colonyat Port Egmont, and obliged its small garrison to surrenderto an overpowering force, and quit the place. England, indignantat the insult, armed for war, and demanded satisfactionfrom Spain for the injury inflicted. At first Spain argued andtemporized ; but finding that Great Britain continued firm,and that the English people were even more disposed for actionthan their Government, she relinquished her views — disavowedthe act of her officer — and restored Port Egmont. Englandwas satisfied — or rather, the court party professed to be satisfied; but the opposers of government angrily declared thatSpain had not done enough ; and that, though compelled tomake restitution, her insult Alas unatoned for.In 1774, finding the establishment at the Falklands expensive,and almost useless,* England quietly withdrew it ; butthe marks and signals of possession and property were leftupon the islands, and when the governor departed, the Britishflag remained flying, and various formalities were observed,intended to indicate the right of possession, as well as to showthat the occupation of them might be resumed.The reports made by officers employed at Port Egmontwere of such a discouraging tendency, that no person at thattime entertained the least wish to have any further concernwith the islands — and for years they were unnoticed — thoughnot forgotten by England. Spain, however, jealous of interferencewith her colonial possessions, and regarding theFalklands as a vantage-ground, from which those in the southmight be suddenly or secretly invaded, maintained a smallgarrison at the eastern extremity of the Archipelago, whereher ships occasionally touched, and from time to time reconnoitredthe adjacent ports, in order to ascertain whether anyvisitors were there. At what precise time the Spaniards with-thefact was, it was injudiciously situated, and therefore seldomvisited, except by a few fishermen.FALKLAND ISLANDS.drew this small garrison, and left the Falkland archipelagouninhabited by man, I am not certain ; but it must havebeen early in this century, because from 1810 to 18^0 therewas no person upon those islands who claimed even a shadowof authority over any of them.In 1820, a ship of war was sent from Buenos Ay res to PortLouis ; her captain, Hewitt, hoisted the Argentine flag, andsaluted it with twenty-one guns ; notifying, at the same time,to the sealing and whaling vessels present, that he was " commissionedby the Supreme Government of the United Provincesof South America to take possession of these islands in thename of the country to which they naturally appertain." —(Weddell, p. 103.) This act of the Buenos Ayrean Governmentwas scarcely known in Europe for many years ; and notuntil 1829 was it noticed formally by Great Britain.After reading this short statement of facts, one may pauseto consider what nation is at this moment the legitimate ownerof the Falklands. Do the discovery, prior occupation, andsettlement of new and uninhabited countries give a right topossession ? If so, Great Britain is the legal owner of thoseislands. Davis first discovered them ; Hawkins first namedthem ; Strong first landed on them ; and (excepting theFrench), Byron first took formal possession of them ; and(again excepting the French), Macbride first colonized them.Respecting the French claim, depending only upon first settlement,not discovering, naming, or landing ; whatever validityany one may be disposed to allow it, that value must bedestroyed, when it is remembered that Spain asserted hersuperior claim, and that France actually admitted it, resigningfor ever her pretensions to those islands. Whatever Francemight have been induced to do for political reasons, of whichthe most apparent now is the continuance of the trade she thencarried on with Chile and Peru, England never admittedthat the Spanish claim was valid : and France having withdrawn,the question is solely between Spain and Great Britain.Spaniards neither discovered, landed upon, nor settled in theFalklands before Englishmen ; and their only claim rests uponJFALKLAND ISLANDS. 237the unstable foundation of a papal bull, by virtue of whichSpain might just as well claim Otaheite, the Sandwich Islands,or New Zealand.As to the pretensions of Buenos Ayres, I shall only remark,that in a paper transmitted by her government to Mr.Bathes, charge-affaires of the United States of North America,on the 14th August 1832, the advocate of her claimsasserts, that " it is a political absurdity to pretend that acolony which emancipates itself, inherits the other territorieswhich the metropolis may possess. If that singular doctrinewere to be found in the code of nations, the Low Countries,for example, on their independence being acknowledged, in1648, would have succeeded to Spain in her rights to America ;and in the same manner, the United States would have appropriatedto themselves the British possessions in the East-indies,Inheritance, indeed ! the United States did not inherit therights of England in Newfoundland, notwithstanding its contiguity; and are they to inherit those which she may have tothe Malvinas, at the southern extremity of the continent, andin the opposite hemisphere."'"'*The writer of the preceding sentences, in his haste to attackthe United States of America for an assertion made by one oftheir journalists, to the effect that the United States inheritedfrom Great Britain a claim to fish around the Falklands, musthave overlooked the simple fact, that his arguments were evenmore applicable to Buenos Ayres than they were to the UnitedStates of North America.When Captain Hewitt arrived at the Falklands, he foundmore than thirty sail of vessels engaged there in the seal fishery,besides others which were recruiting the health of their crewsafter whaling or sealing voyages in the antarctic regions. Bythe crews of these ships numbers of cattle and pigs were killed,as well as horses, the wild descendants of those taken therebyBougainville and his successors.Papers relative to the origin and present state of the questions pendingwith the United States of America on the subject of the Malvinas(Falkland Islands). Translated and printed at Buenos Ayres in 1832.238 FALKLAND ISLANDS.In 1823, the Buenos Ayrean Government took another step,in the appointment of a ' comandante de las Malvinas ;' and inthe same year, Lewis Vernet, by birth a German, in concertwith his friends at Buenos Ayres, " solicited and obtained fromthe Government the use of the fishery and of the cattle on theEastern Melvin, and likewise tracts of land thereon, in orderto provide for the subsistence of the settlement.* This undertakingdid not prosper ; but the next year Mr. Vernet prepareda second expedition, in which he himself sailed. Hisown words (translated) are : + " After many sacrifices, I wasenabled to surmount great obstacles ; but still that which weexpected to effect in one year was not realized before the expirationof five. My partners lost all hope, and sold me theirshares. I bought successively three vessels, and lost them;I chartered five, one of which was lost. Each blow produceddismay in the colonists, who several times resolved to leavethat ungrateful region, but were restrained by their affectionfor me, which I had known how to win, and by the exampleof constancy and patience which my family and myself heldout to them."In 1828, the Government of Buenos Ayres granted to Mr.Vernet (with certain exceptions) the right of property in theFalkland Islands — and in Staten Land ! " It also concededto the colony exemption from taxation for twenty years, andfor the same period the exclusive right to the fishery in all theMalvinas, and on the coast of the continent to the southwardof the Rio Negro, under the condition that within three yearsI (Vernet) should have established the colony." IAbout this time merchant-vessels of all nations visited theFalkland Islands, both in their outward voyage and whenreturning from the Pacific; but advantageous as their visitswere, those of numerous sealers had a very different effect : for,instead of frequenting the settlement, their crews killed theseal indiscriminately at all seasons, and slaughtered greatnumbers of wild cattle. " For this reason," says Vernet, " ISee note in preceding page. t Idem. J Idem.FALKLAND ISLANDS. 239requested the Government to furnish me with a vessel of war,to enable me to cause the rights of the colony to be respected.The Government was aware of the necessity of the measure ;but not being then able to place a vessel at my disposal, itresolved to invest me with a public and official character, andfor that purpose issued the two decrees of the 10th of June :the one re-establishing the governorship of the Malvinas andTierra del Fuego; and the other nominating me to fulfil thatoffice"*In 1829, Vernet warned off some North American sealers ;and in 1831, upon their repeating the sealing excursion ofwhich he had complained, he detained them by force. Thisact, and various circumstances arising out of it, drew upon himand his unfortunate colony the hasty indignation of CaptainSilas Duncan, of the United States corvette Lexington, who,on his own responsibility, without waiting to communicate withhis Government, sailed from the Plata to the Falkland Islands,surprised, assaulted, and made prisoners of many unoffendingpeople, and unwarrantably destroyed both property and buildings.Mr. Brisbane and several others were put into confinement,and carried away, on board the Lexington, to BuenosAyres, where they were delivered up to the Buenos AyreanGovernment, in February 1832. The United States supportedtheir officer, and immediately despatched a charge-d'affaires toBuenos Ayres, with instructions to demand compensation forthe injury done to North American trade, and full reparationto all North American citizens for personal wrongs.While the United States and Buenos Ayres were discussingthe questions at issue. Great Britain, following up the solemnwarnings she had given Buenos Ayres (especially in the protestaddressed to that Government by Mr. Parish, in November1829), issued orders to her Commander-in-chief on the SouthAmerican station, to send a vessel of war to re-hoist the Britishflag upon the Falkland Islands ; to assert her right of sovereignty,and to cause every thing belonging to the BuenosAyrean Government to be embarked and sent away.See note, pag-e 2.36.240 FALKLAND ISLANDS.On the 2d of January 1833, H.M.S. Clio anchored in BerkeleySound, to carry these orders into effect ; H.M.S. Tyne,about the same time, anchoring in Port Egmont. In eachplace the British colours were hoisted and saluted : the smallBuenos Ayrean garrison at Port Louis quietly withdrew, andsailed for the Plata in an armed schooner, belonging to BuenosAyres : and from that time those unhappy islands have beenmore ostensibly British, though but little has yet been doneto draw forth the resources, and demonstrate the advantageswhich they unquestionably possess. When the Tyne and Cliosailed, after a very short stay at the islands, no authority wasleft there, but the colours were entrusted to an Irishman, whohad been Mr. Vernet's storekeeper.*In 1834, a lieutenant in the navy, with a boat's crew,was sent to reside at Port Louis, and since that time varioussmall ships of war have succeeded each other in visiting andexploring the numerous islands and harbours of that archipelago.Those who may wish for more historical information on thissubject — for further details of former negociations betweenSpain and England, or of the late discussions between NorthAmerica and Buenos Ayres — should refer to Dr. Johnson'sThoughts respecting the Falkland Islands'" (Johnson'sWorks, vol. viii. p. 96, Murphy's Edition, 1816) ; to Junius's42d Letter ; and to papers published at Buenos Ayres in 1832;in addition to general history.Not long before the Clio arrived, there had been a mutiny in the garrison,and the Buenos Ayrean commanding officer had been barbarouslymurdered. In the early part of 1834, Mr. Brisbane fell a victim totreachery. These fatal occurrences will be mentioned again in the courseof my narrative.i\CHAPTER Xri.First Appearance — Tides — Currents — Winds — Lightning — SeaTemperature — Rain — Health — Dangers — Cautions — View — Settlement— Animals — Foxes — Varieties — Seal — Whales — Fish and FisheryBirds — Brushwood — Peat — Pasture — Potash — Orehilla — Grazing —Corn — Fruit — Vegetables — Trees — Plants — Land— Situation of principalSettlement — Prospective advantages ■ — Suggestions — Vernet'sEstablishment — Reflections.In the appearance of the Falkland Islands, there is verylittle either remarkable or interesting. About the greater partof the archipelago, barren hills, sloping towards low andbroken ground, or rocky surf-beat shores, are the only objectswhich meet the eye. On the West Falkland, and some smallislands near it, there are high precipitous cliffs in a fewparts exposed to the western seas ; but other places, andespecially the southern portions of East Falkland, are so lowthat they cannot be seen from the deck of a vessel five milesdistant. The average height of the western island is greaterthan that of the eastern, although the highest hills seem to bein the latter, where they rise to about thirteen hundred feetabove the sea level.Around the islands, especially toward the south-eastern andnorth-western extremes, there are numerous islets and rocks,whose distance from shores, where tides run strongly and windsare violent as well as sudden, makes them exceedingly dangerous; more particularly near the north-west extremity of thegroup : and as seamen require information on these mattersbefore entering a port, I will notice the tides, winds, and climateprevious to other subjects.The tides differ much as to strength and direction in differentparts of the archipelago, but the times of syzigial highwater only vary from five to eight o'clock ; and the rise of tideis almost similar every where, about four feet at neap, and eightVOL. II. K242 TIDES — Currents.feet at spring tides. The principal swell of the ocean, whichcauses the tidal streams about these islands, comes from thesouth-east. Scarcely any stream is perceptible on the south-eastcoast of East Falkland ; but along the north, south, and westshores it increases in strength, until among the Jason Islands itruns six miles an hour, causing heavy and dangerous races. OffBerkeley Sound, across the entrance, and near Cape Carysfort,the tide runs about two knots, at its greatest strength ; andthence westward it increases gradually. Into Falkland Soundthe tide flows from both openings, and meets near the SwanIslands ; shewing, I apprehend, that the principal wave orswell impinges upon the coast considerably eastward of south.The tidal currents are stronger along the northern shores ofthe archipelago than they are along the south coasts ; and thestream of flood is stronger than the ebb. At Port William, theeasternmost harbour, the time of high water at full moon isfive ; and thence westward, the times increase gradually tohalf-past eight, at New Island, which is nearly the westernmostof the group.Generally speaking, the sea is much deeper near the southernand western shores than it is near those of the north ; andto those local differences I attribute the varying velocity of theminor tide streams.Besides these movements of the surrounding waters, there isa current setting past the islands from south-west to northeast: a current which continually brings drift wood to theirsouthern coasts, and has brought Fuegian canoes. On all partsof the southern shores that are open to the south-west, thebeaches or rocks are covered with trees, which have drifted fromStaten Land or Tierra del Fuego. Great quantities of thisdriftwood may be found between Cape Oxford and Cape Meredith; upon the Arch, Speedwell, George, and Barren Islands :indeed, there are few places between Cape Oxford and ChoiseulBay where a vessel may not find a good supply of fuel. OnLong Island, and in the bay behind the Sea-lion Islands,portions of Fuegian canoes have often been found ; one consistedof an entire side (pieces of bark sewed together), whichWINDS STORMS. 243could not have been made many years. At sea, when noilli-eastward of the Falklands, great quantities of drift kelp* areseen, besides water-worn trunks and branches of trees, nearwhich there ai-e generally fish, and numbers of birds. Thesesure indications of a current from the south-west have been metwith upwards of two hundred miles to the northward of BerkeleySound. There is not, however, reason to think that thiscurrent ever runs more than two knots an hour, under any circumstances,and in all probability its usual set is even less thanone knot.Wind is the principal evil at the Falklands : a region moi-eexposed to storms, both in summer and winter, it would bedifficult to mention.The winds are variable ; seldom at rest, while the sun isabove the horizon, and very violent at times ; during the summera calm day is an extraordinary event. Generally speaking, thenights are less windy than the days, but neither by night nor byday, nor at any season of the year, are these islands exemptfrom sudden and very severe squalls ; or from gales which blowheavily, though they do not usually last many hours.It has been stated by Bougainville and others that in summerthe wind generally freshens as the sun rises, and dies awayabout sunset: also, that the nights are clear and starlight.The information I have received, with what I have myself witnessed,induces me to agree to the first of these statements inits most general sense, and to a certain degree I can admit thesecond ; but, at the same time, it is true that there are manycloudy and very many windy nights in the course of each year,I might almost say month. The Magellan was driven fromher anchors, though close to a weather shore in the narrowestpart of Berkeley Sound, and totally wrecked in Johnson Harbourabout midnight of the 12th of January 1833.The prevalent direction of the wind is westerly. Gales, ingeneral, commence in the north-west, and draw or fly roundto the south-west ; and it may be remarked, that when rain• Sea-weed detached from the rocks and drifting' with the current,t The month which, in that hemisphere, corresponds to July in ours.R 22UWINDS LIGHTNING.accompanies a north-west wind it soon shifts into the southwestquarter, and blows hard.Northerly winds bring cloudy weather ; and when very light,they are often accompanied by a thick fog : it is also worthnotice that they almost always occur about the full and changeof the moon.North-east and northerly winds bring gloomy overcastweather, with much rain ; sometimes they blow hard and hangin the N.N.E., but it is more common for them to draw roundto the westward. South-easterly winds also bring much rain,they are not frequent, but they blow hard, and as the galeincreases it hauls southward. During winter the winds arechiefly from the north-west, and in summer they are morefrequently south-west. Though fogs occur with light easterlyor northerly winds, they do not often last through the day.Gales of wind, as well as squalls, are more sudden, and blowmore furiously from the southern quarter, between south-westand south-east, than from other directions.Wind from the east is rarely lasting, or strong ; it generallybrings fine weather, and may be expected in April, May, June,and July, rather than at other times, but intervals of fineweather (short indeed), with light breezes from E.S.E. toE.N.E., occur occasionally throughout the year.Neither liffhtnino- nor thunder are at all common, but whenthe former occurs easterly wind is expected to follow. Ifliffhtninff should be seen in the south-east while the barometeris low,* a hard gale from that quarter may be expected. Southeastand southerly gales last longer than those from the westward,and they throw a very heavy sea upon the southernshores. In the winter there is not, generally, so much wind asin the summer, and in the former season the weather, thoughcolder, is more settled, and considerably drier.• A seaman may naturally ask here, and at other passages where referenceis made to the barometer, " What is considered low for that place ?"and as a reply may be obtained more satisfactorily by consulting theMeteorological Journal, in the appendix, than by receiving an answerin figures (barometers and direction of wind varying so much), I willbeg: him to look at that Journal.SEASONS — TEMPERATURE. 245In different years seasons vary so much, that those who havebeen longest about the islands hardly venture to predict whatweather will be found during any particular month. All theysay is, that January, February, and March, though warmest,are the windiest months, and that May, June, and July, thoughcold, are much less stormy.*I must here add one word in favour of the barometer, orsympiesometer. Every material change in the weather is foretoldby these invaluable instruments, if their movements aretolerably understood by those who consult them, and if theyare frequently observed. Mr. Low said to me, " The barometeris worth any thing in these countries " (alluding toTierra del Fuego, as well as the Falklands) ; " some say theydislike it because it is always so low, and foretelling badweather ; but how often do we have any other ?" They must,somehow, think the barometer ominous, and overlook the use ofthe omen.The temperature may be considered equable ; it is neverhot, neither is it ever very cold ; but the average is low, andin consequence of frequent rain and wind, a really moderatedegree of cold is much more noticed than would probably bethecase if the weather were dry and serene.Since 1825 Fahrenheit's thermometer has only once beenobserved so low as 22° in the shade, at mid-day, and it has beenbut once above 80° in the shade. Its ordinary range is between30° and 50° in the winter, and from 40° to 65° in the summer.Ice has not been known to exceed an inch in thickness ; snowseldom lies upon the low lands, or at any period exceeds twoinches in depth. Although rain is so frequent, it does notcontinue falling for any considerable time ; and as evaporationis rapid, in consequence of so much wind, there are no unwholesomeexhalations ; indeed, the climate is exceedinglyhealthy, and no disease whatever has been hitherto contracted,in consequence of its influence, excepting ordinary colds andcoughs, or rheumatic affections, brought on by unusual .Low scarcely ever found two succeeding' years alike, as to windand weather, during the corresponding seasons.Dangers KELP.sure to weather. It is said by those who have had the mostexperience there, that the climate of West Falkland is milderthan that of the Eastern large island. Probably the west windsare chilled in passing over the heights, and upon reachingPort Louis are several degrees colder than when they firststrike upon the western islands. In Tierra del Fuego, andmany other places, the case is similar, the western regionshaving a milder climate than is found about the central oreastern districts. Excellent harbours, easy of access, affordinggood shelter, with the very best holding ground, abound amongthese islands, and, with due care, offer ample protection fromthe frequent gales.In approaching the land, and especially while entering aharbour, a careful look-out should be kept for ' fixed kelp,'the seaweed growing on every rock in those places, which iscovered by the sea, and not very far beneath its surface. Lyingupon the water, the upper leaves and stalks show, almost aswell as a buoy, where there is a possibility of hidden danger.Long stems, with leaves, lying regularly along the surface ofthe sea, are generally attached to rocky places, or else tolarge stones. Occasionally a few straggling stalks of kelp areseen in deep water, even in thirty fathoms : many of whichare attached to stones, and so firmly, that their long stemswill sometimes weigh the stone adhering to their roots. Suchscattered plants as these need not be minded by a ship ; but inpassing to windward of patches or beds of kelp, or rather inpassing on that side from which the stems stream away withthe current, care should be taken to give the place a wideberth, because the only part which shows, when the tide isstrong, lies on one side of, not over the rocks. Where thestream of tide is very strong this kelp is quite 'run under,' orkept down out of sight, and can no longer be depended on as awarning. When a clear spot is seen in the middle of a thickpatch of fixed kelp, one may expect to find there the leastwater.Drift kelp, or that which is floating on the surface of thesea, unattached to any rock or stone, of course need not beCAUTIONS — VIEW. 247avoided ; it may be known at a glance, by the irregular huddledlook which it has. OfF the south-east shores of the Falklandsthere are several rocky shallows, on which the sea breaksheavily during south-east gales, though not at other times : allthose shallows are marked by kelp, and in one place, thusindicated, not more suspicious in appearance than others, arock was found, almost 'awash' at low Vater.Many wrecks have occurred, even on the land-locked shoresof harbours themselves, and in 1833-4, some of their remainsserved as a warning to strangers to moor their ships securely :but with good ground tackle, properly disposed, and the usualprecautions, a vessel will lie in absolute safety, as the holding-groundis excellent : indeed, in many places so tenacious, thatit is exceedingly difficult to weigh an anchor which has beensome time down. Particular directions for making the land,approaching and entering harbours, and taking advantageousberths, will be found in another place : generally speaking,the local pilotage is very simple.The country is remarkably easy of access to persons on foot;but half-concealed rivulets and numerous bogs, oblige amounted traveller to be very cautious. There are no trees anywhere,but a small bush is plentiful in many vallies. Scarcelyany view can be more dismal than that from the heights : moorlandand black bog extend as far as eye can discern, intersectedby innumerable streams, and pools of yellowish brown water.But this appearance is deceptive ; much of what seems to be abarren moor, is solid sandy clay soil, covered by a thin layerof vegetable mould, on which grow shrubby bushes and a'coarse grass, affording ample nourishment to cattle ; besideswhich, one does not see into many of the vallies where thereis good soil and pasture. Some tracts of land, especially thoseat the south of East Falkland, differ in character, being low,level, and abundantly productive of excellent herbage.Mr. Darwin's volume will doubtless afford information as tothe geological formation of the Eastern Falkland. He did notvisit the western island, but obtained many notices of it from248 Peat ANIMALS.those who were there. The more elevated parts of East Falklandare quartz rock ; clay-slate prevails in the intermediatedistricts. Sandstone, in which are beautifully perfect impressionsof shells, occurs in beds within the slate formation : andupon the slate is a layer of clay, fit for making bricks. Nearthe surface, where this clay is of a lighter quality, and mixedwith vegetable remains, it is good soil, fit for cultivation. Insome places, a great extent of clay is covered by a layer ofvery solid peat, varying in depth from two to ten feet. Thesolidity of this peat is surprising ; it burns well, and is anexcellent substitute for other fuel. To the clay and to thesolid peat may be attributed the numerous bogs and pools ofwater, rather than to the total amount of rain. Is the peatnow growing, or was the whole mass formed ages ago ?The settlement, now consisting only of a few huts, some cottages,and a ruinous house or two, occupies the place originallyselected by Bougainville, close to Port Louis, at the head ofBerkeley Sound. Standing in an exposed situation, scatteredover half a mile of rising ground, without a tree or even ashrub near it, the unfortunate village has a bleak and desolateappearance, ominous of its sad history. Previous, however, toentering upon the affairs of the settlement, I will continue mysketch of the islands and their present produce, independentof the settlers now there.By the French, and afterwards by the Spanish colonists, anumber of black cattle, horses, pigs, and rabbits, were turnedloose upon East Falkland ; and, by considerate persons, engagedin whale or seal-fishery, both goats and pigs have beenleft upon smaller islands near West Falkland. These animalshave multiplied exceedingly; and, although they have beenkilled indiscriminately by the crews of vessels, as well as bythe settlers, there are still many thousand head of cattle, andsome thousand horses, besides droves of pigs, perfectly wild,upon the eastern large island : while upon Carcass Island,Saunders Island, and others, there are numbers of goats andpigs. In 18S4, the smallest estimate exceeded twelve thou:is-iTTIiSAKCE Ttat-SEKKEILE'tf SdDHJSaiiSETTILEailERiTr A\T W'©KT IL®UOS.SETCBSvEILIE'V Soothed F R 0. liMl. R Rl I® nSILIifaPS.Publiahed.'bjr Hffmy- CoIbam.Oxeul&rlbaDcni^ SoccXilS^C'BUIXS- — HORSES — FOXES. 249sand cattle, and four thousand horses; but there were nomeans of ascertaining their number, except by comparing theaccounts of the gavicho colonists, who were accustomed topursue them, not only for ordinary food or for their hides, buteven for their tongues alone, not taking the trouble to carryoff more of the animal so wantonly slaughtered.* The wildcattle are very large and very fat, and the bulls are really formidableanimals, perhaps among the largest and most savageof their race. At Buenos Ayres, the ordinary weight of abull's hide is less than fifty pounds, but the weight of suchhides in the East Falkland has exceeded eighty pounds. Thehorses look well while galloping about wild, but the gauchossay they are not of a good breed, and will not bear the fatigueof an ordinary day's work, such as a horse at Buenos Ayreswill go through without difficulty. Perhaps their ' softness,' asit is there called, may be owing to the food they get, as wellas to the breed. The wild pigs on East Falkland are of along-legged,ugly kind ; but some of those on Saunders Island andother places about West Falkland are derived from short-leggedChinese pigs. The only quadruped apparently indigenousis a large fox, and as about this animal there has beenmuch discussion among naturalists, and the specimens now in theBritish Museum were deposited there by me, I am induced tomake a few remarks upon it." The settlers, when they abandoned the eastern island, left behindthem several horses and horned cattle, which have increased so much,that, on going a few miles into the country, droves of both animals maybeseen, I have taken several of the bullocks by shooting them. Theysire generally ferocious, and will attack a single person; and thus, thosewho hunt them are enabled to get within pistol-shot of them by the followingstratagem. Four or five men advance in a line upon the animal,and, by appearing only as one person, it stands ready to attack, till withinone hundred yards, when the hunters spread themselves, and fire, endeavouringto shoot the bullock either in the head or in the fore-shoulder.The horses will also attack a single person, and their mode of doing soisby forming a circle round him, and prancing upon him ; but by meansof a masque they may be readily dispersed." — Weddell's Voyage, pp.102, 103.250 boxes SIM SON.It has been said, that there are two varieties of this ' wolf-fox,'as it has been called,* one being rather the smaller, and ofa redder brown ; but the fact is, that no other difference existsbetween the two apparent varieties, and as the darker colouredlarger animal is found on the East Falkland, while the otheris confined to the western island, the darker colour and ratherthicker furry coat may be attributed to the influence of a somewhatcolder climate. The fox of West Falkland approachesnearer the large fox of Patagonia, both in colour and size,than its companion of East Falkland does; but allowing thatthere is one shade of difference between the foxes of Eastand West Falkland, there are but two, or at most three shadesbetween the animal of West Falkland and the large fox ofPort Famine. In Strong's voyage (1690), Simson describesthese foxes as being twice as large as an English fox, but hedoes not say upon which island.-f-• " Le loup-renard, ainsi nomine parce qu'il se creuse un terrier, et quesa queue est plus longue et plus bourne de poil que celle du loup,habite dans les dunes sur le bord de la mer. II suit le gibier et se faitdes routes avec intelligence, toujours par le plus court chemin d'une balea Autre ; a notre premiere descente a terre, nous ne doutames point quece ne fussent des sentiers inhabitant. II y a apparence que cet animalpeine une partie de I'annee, tant il est maigre et rare. II est de canailled'un chien ordinaire dont il a aussi I'aboiement, mais foible. Commenta-t-il ete transporte sur les ties?" — Voyage de Bougainville, secondeedition, tome i. p. 113.t "They saw foxes on this land, which, Simson says, ' were twice as big;as those in England. Having brought greyhounds with us, we caughta young fox alive, which we kept on board some months, but on the firstfiring our great guns in the South Sea, he was frighted overboard, aswere also some St. Jago monkies. As to the antiquity of these foxes, asthey cannot fly, and it is not likely they should swim so far as fromAmerica, nor again is it probable that any would be at the pains ofbringing a breed of foxes so far as Hawkins' Island is from any otherland, it will follow that there have either been two distinct creations, orthat America and this land have been formerly the same continent.'There are means more within the common course of nature than thosewhich occurred to Simson, by which foxes may have become inhabitantsof this land. Islands of ice are met at sea in much lower southern latitudes,FOXES — WOLVES.All who have seen these animals alive have been struckby their eager ferocity and disregard of man's power. Byronsays, " Four creatures of great fierceness, resembling wolves,ran up to their bellies in the water to attack the boat !" also,When any of these creatures got sight of our people, thoughat ever so great a distance, they ran directly at them." — " Theywere always called wolves by the ship's company ; but exceptin their size and the shape of the tail, I think they bore agreater resemblance to a fox. They are as big as a middle-sizedmastiff, and their fangs are remarkably long and sharp."They burrow in the ground, like a fox"" The Beagle's offi-■ hers, when employed in surveying the Falklands, were oftenannoyed, as well as amused, by the intrusion of these fearlessanimals. In size, the larger ones are about twice as bulky asan English fox, and they stand nearly twice as high upontheir less.* Their heads are coarser, and their fur is not onlythicker as well as longer, but it is of a woolly nature.Referring again to a resemblance between the Falkland andPatagoniann foxes, I may remark, that there is as much differencein size, in coat, and in tail, between the guanaco of Port Desireand that of Navarin Island (near Cape Horn), as there is betweenthe fox of West Falkland and that of Port Famine.What the Patagoniann animal is which the Blancoo Bay peoplecalled ' wolf,'-!- or to which Pigafetta alluded in his vocabularyof words used by the Patagonians at Port San Julian, as equivalentto ' ani,'J I cannot say : I was inclined to suspect anequivoque arising out of the word ' lobo,' which means seal aswell as wolf; but Lieut. Wickham says he saw a wolf near theColorado River. § The Falkland foxes feed upon birds, rab-tides,many of which, no doubt, are formed in the bays and rivers of thecontinent. Seals and sea-birds repose on the edge of the shore, whetherit is ice or land, and foxes, or other animals, in search of prey, will frequentlybe carried away on the large pieces of ice which break off andare driven out to sea." — Barney, vol. iv, pp. 331-332.The country they range over being open, without trees, does notrequire them to steal along under branches, like the foxes of a woodycountry. t Page 107 of this volume.Burney, vol. i. p. 37. § Page 296.252 CHANGES IN ANIMALS.bits, rats and mice, eggs, seals, &c., and to their habits ofattacking king-penguins, if not seal, while alive, I presume thata part of their unhesitating approach to man maybe traced.Naturalists say that these foxes are peculiar to this archipelago,and they find difficulty in accounting for their presencein that quarter only.* That they are now peculiar cannot bedoubted ; but how long they have been so is a very differentquestion. As I know that three hairy sheep, brought to Englandfrom Sierra Leone in Africa, became woolly in a fewyears, and that woolly sheep soon become hairy in a hot country(besides that their outward form alters considerably aftera few generations) ; and as I have both seen and heard of wildcats, known to have been born in a domestic state, whose sizesurpassed that of their parents so much as to be remarkable ;whose coats had become long and rough ; and whose physiognomieswere quite different from those of their race whowere still domestic ; I can see nothing extraordinary in foxescarried from Tierra del Fuego to Falkland Island becoming:longer-legged, more bulky, and differently coated. But howwere they carried there ? In this manner : — In page 242, thecurrent was mentioned which always sets from Staten Landtowards the southern shores of the Falklands — icebergs or trees• Forster, as an exception, saw no difficulty in accounting for theirinvoluntary migration. " M. Forster, Anglais, de la Societe Royale, quiafait a cet ouvrage Honneur de le traduire, a accompagne sa traductionde plusieurs notes." — " Je dois dire que toutes ses notes ne sonatas galesjustes ; par exemple, dans le chapftre de Histoire Naturelle deslies Malouines, il est surpris de ce que je le suis devoir trouve sur cesAles un animal quadrupeds, et de mon embarras sur la manifest dont il aete transporte. II ajoute qu'ayant passe comme je I'ai fait plusieursanne's en Canada, j'aurois dft savoir que des quadrupeds terrestres setrouvant sur de grandes glaces au moment oh. elles sont detaches desterres, sont importers a la haute mer, et ardent a des cites fort eloi-knees de leur pays natal, sur lesquelles ces masses de glace viennentechoed. Je sais ce fait ; mais M. Forster ne sait pas que jamais lesvoyageurs n'ont rencontre de glaces flottantes dans les environs des fleshMalouines, atque dans ces countries il ne sey en peut pas former, n'yayantni grand fleuve ni meme aucune river un peu considerable.— Voyagepie Bougainville, seconde edition, torn. i. pp. xiv. et xv. (note).TRANSPORT OF ANIMALS. 253<lriftecl by that current and westerly winds afford the meansof transport ; and I appeal to the quotations already madefrom Forster's and Bougainville's works for proof that animalsmay be so carried.Because we do not know that there are foxes at this timeupon Staten Land, it does not follow that there are none, orthat they have never been there ; and as guanacoes, pumas, andfoxes are now found on Eastern Tierra del Fuego, why mightnot foxes have been carried to Staten Land and thence to theFalklands, or, which is still more probable, drifted from EasternTierra del Fuego direct. I have heard somewhere, thoughI cannot recollect the authority, that a man in North Americahauled a large old tree to the bank of a river in which it wasfloating towards the sea, and proceeded to secure it on thebank, when to his astonishment, out of a hole in the treejumped a fine fox. Clusters of trees are often found floating,which have fallen off" a cliff, or have been carried out of ariver ; and once in the ocean, they are drifted along partly bycurrents and partly by wind acting upon their branches orexposed surfaces.Rats and mice were probably taken to the Falklands by theearlier navigators who landed there, whose ships were oftenplagued with their numbers.* That they have varied from theoriginal stock in sharpness of nose, length of tail, colour, orsize, is to be expected, because we find that every animal variesmore or less in outward form and appearance, in consequenceof altered climate, food, or habits ; and that when a certain• In Viedma's Diary of an Expedition to Port San Julian in 1780, hesays, " El Bergantin San Francisco de Paula entre en el riachuelo paradescargarlo y tar humano a las rates." (The brig San Francisco dePaulo went into the creek to be unloaded and smoked, to kill the rats (ormice, rates signifying either). In Magalhaens' voyage (1520) " Juan (aPatagoniann) seeing the Spaniards throwing mice into the sea, desired hemight have them for food; and those that were afterwards taken beinggiven to him, he carried them on shore." — Burney, vol. i. p. 34. Perhapssome of those mice reached land alive, as the ships lay close to theshore. Many other vessels, however, afterwards staid some time in PortSan Julian, particularly those of Drake.254 VARIETIES OF ANIMALS.change, whatever' it may be, is once effected, the race no longervaries while under similar circumstances; but to fancy thatevery kind of mouse which differs externally from the mouse ofanother country is a distinct species, is to me as difficult tobelieve as that every variety of dog and every variety of thehuman race constitute a distinct species. I think that naturalistswho assert the contrary are bound to examine the comparativeanatomy of all these varieties more fully, and to tell us how farthey differ. My own opinion is, judging from what I havegathered on the subject from various sources, that their anatomicalarrangement is as uniformly similar as that of thedogs and of the varieties of man.On East Falkland there are numbers of rabbits, whose stockis derived from those carried there by Bougainville or the Spaniards.Among them were some black ones (when I was there),which had been pronounced indigenous, or, at all events, notbrought from Europe. A specimen of these pseudo-indigenousanimals has been carefully examined by those to whom a newspecies is a treasure, but it turns out to be a common rabbit.Sea-elephant and seal (both hair and fur-seal) were abundantalong the shores of the archipelago in former years, and bymanagement they might soon be encouraged to frequent themagain;* but now they are annually becoming scarcer, and ifmeans are not taken to prevent indiscriminate slaughter, at anytimeof year, one of the most profitable sources of revenue atthe Falklands will be destroyed.Whales frequent the surrounding waters at particular seasons,and they are still to be found along the coasts of Patagoniaand Tierra del Fuego (within easy reach from the Falklands),though their numbers are very much diminished bythe annual attacks of so many whale-ships, both large andsmall, which have made the Falklands their head-quarters duringthe last twenty years.A valuable source of daily supply, and by salting, of foreignOn the little island ' Lobos,' in the river Plata, passed and thereforeto a certain degree disturbed daily by shipping, seals are numerous ;being preserved like game, and destroyed only at intervals.IFISHERY BIRDS. Seaportsis the inexhaustible quantity of fish which swarm inevery harbour during the summer. The description whichmost abounds is a kind of bass, from two to three feet long,and six inches in depth : it takes salt well, and has been exportedby cargoes to the river Plata* and to Rio de Janeiro ;and there are delicious small fish in such shoals, that our boats'crews were sometimes obliged to let a large portion escape fromthe net before they could haul it ashore without tearing.-|-Mr. Vernet said, " We have a great abundance of fish in allthe bays, where they come at the beginning of spring to spawn.In the winter season they retire. They enter regularly twicein the twenty-four hours, at about half-flood. They are caughtin such numbers, that ten or twelve men salted about sixtytons in less than a month. Generally, they are caught with anet, but they will also take the hook ; they are of a species betweenthe mullet and the salmon, and become very fat towardsthe end of the summer. They are very good eating, and whensalted, some prefer them to the cod-fish." — Vernet, MS. 1831.In the fresh-water ponds, so numerous on the large islands,there is a very delicate fish, somewhat resembling a trout, whichmay be caught by angling. The shell-fish are chiefly musclesand clams, both of which are very abundant, and easily gatheredat low water.It may here be remarked that the cod-fishery ofl" Patagoniaand Tierra del Fuego might be turned to very good accountby settlers at the Falklands.Of the feathered tribe there are numbers, but not muchvariety has been found— a natural consequence of the absenceof trees. Three or four kinds of geese[: two kinds of snipe,several varieties of the duck, occasionally wild swans of two• Where fish, though plentiful, does not take salt well.t Many tons have been taken at a haul.t One kind of goose, that which has erroneously been called a bustard,arrives in a tame condition, about April or May, with easterly winds.Perhaps these birds come from Sandwich Land, or even Enderby Land.Their tameness may be a consequence of being ignorant of man, or ofthe half-tired state in which they arrive.256 Brushwood Peat — GRASS.kinds, a sort of quail (like that of Tierra del Fucgo), carrion-hawksor vultures, albatrosses, gulls, petrel, penguins, heavens,shags, rooks, curlew, sandpipers, rock-hoppers, and avery few land-birds, are found about most of the islands. *Although there are no trees, a useful kind of brushwoodgrows abundantly in vallies, to the height of three or four feet,and thickly set together. Over level plains it is but thinlyscattered. The settlers use this brushwood for lifting theirpeat-fires. There are three kinds of bushes : one grows straight,from two to five feet high, with a stem from half an inch toan inch and half in diameter : this kind is found abundantlyin most of the vallies. Another is common about the southernparts of the islands, and has a crooked trunk, as thick as a man'sarm, growing to about three feet in height. The third issmaller still, being little better than heather ; it grows almostevery where, though scantily.Peat is inexhaustible ; and, if properly managed, answersevery common purpose of fuel, not only as a substitute, butpleasantly.-j- It will not, however, in its natural state, answerfor a foi'ge; but if dried and subjected to heavy pressure forsome time before use, a much greater heat might be derivedfrom it.There is but little difference in the quality of the grass,either on high or low land ; but in sheltered valleys it is longer,softer, and greener, than elsewhere. The whole face of thecountry is covered with it ; and in some places, especially overa peaty soil, its growth becomes hard and rank. In the' Birds' eggs are so numerous at the proper season, that " eight mengathered at one place alone, in four or five da's, upwards of sixty thousandeggs, and might have collected twice that number had they remaineda few days longer." — Vernet, MS. 1831.•f " The want of wood on these islands would be a great inconvenience,were it not that good peat is very abundant. I have burned many tons, andfound it an excellent substitute for coal. Tn order to get it drv, it isnecessary to pull it from the sides of the pit, not very deep ; and as thereare several peat-holes, by working them alternately, the material may beprocured in a state fit for use." — Weddell's Voyage, p. 88.GRASS — SOIL POTASH. S57southern half of East Falkland, whore, as I mentioned, thesoil is good, there is abundance of long, but brownish grassover all the country, and at the roots of it there are sweettender shoots, sheltered from the wind, much liked by cattle.In that district there are several varieties of grass growing onfine dark-coloured earth, mixed with light white sand ; and,although, from never being cut, it has a rugged and brownappearance, its nutritive properties must be considerable, asthe finest cattle are found feeding there. Mr. Bynoe remarkedto me, that wherever the surface of the ground had been brokenby cattle, he found a very dark-coloured earth mixed withsand or clay, or else clay mixed with gravel and sand. Thatthe clay is good for bricks has been mentioned ; but I havenot said that there is stone of two or three kinds suitable forbuilding, and that any quantity of lime may be obtained byburning fossil shells brought from the coast of Patagonia,where the cliffs are full of them, or by collecting the shellsscattered upon the Falkland shores. Another natural production,of more value than it has hitherto been considered, is thecommon sea-weed or kelp ; * and I am told by Sir WoodbineParish that the archil or orchilla weed was obtained there bythe Spaniards.It is to be remarked, that the soil of East Falkland has beenvery much improved in the neighbourhood of the settlement,as well as around the estancia, or farm, where the tame cattleare kept, in consequence of the treading and manuring it has• The manner of extracting potash from sea-weed is as follows : —When a sufficient quantity of kelp has been collected, it is spread out inaplace where it will be dried by the sun and wind, and when dry enoughto burn, a hollow is dug in the ground three or four feet wide ; round itsmargin are laid stones, on which the weed is placed and set on fire.Quantities of this fuel being continually heaped upon the circle, there isin the centre a constant flame, from which a liquid substance, like meltedmetal, drops into the hollow beneath. This substance is worked, orstirred, with iron rakes, and brought to an uniform consistence while inastate of fusion ; and when cool, it consolidates into a heavy, dark-colouredalkaline substance, which undergoes in the glass-houses a secondvitrification, and then assumes a perfect transparency.VOL. II. SWOOL Glazing — CORN.received. The grass is there as short and as sweet as horsescould desire ; and does not this show, that by folding, on alarge scale, any extent of pasture land might, by degrees, bebrought to a similar condition? Why sheep have not beencarried there in greater numbers I am not aware, but judgingfrom the climate, and the fur of the foxes, I should supposethat the long-wooded sheep would do well, and perhaps improvethe staple of its wool, as the merino sheep has done in an oppositemanner — by transportation to Australia. Pigs have increasedin great numbers on the small islands, where theiryoung are safer from the foxes, and where there is abundance ofthe sedgy grass called tussac, the roots and stalks of whichare much liked by them.The size and fatness of the wild cattle is a clear proof thatthe country is adapted for grazing. Of twenty wild bullswhich were killed during one excursion of the settlers, shortlybefore the Beagle's arrival, the average weight of each hide wasabove seventy, and a few weighed eighty pounds. Some ofthese animals are so fat and heavy, that the gauchos say theycannot drive them across the marshy grounds which are passedby the other cattle, as well as by men on horseback. It hasbeen also ascertained that meat takes salt remarkably well inthat climate; and as salt of excellent quality, as well as saltpetre,abounds on the coast of Patagonia, there is no reasonwhy large quantities of salt meat and salt fish should not beprepared there, and exported to the Brazils, to the East, toChile, and Peru, besides supplying a number of the ships whichwould touch there.But there are alleged disadvantages to contend against,which must not be overlooked for a moment. It is verydoubtful whether corn will ripen. Fruit, which requires muchsun, certainly will not, and culinary vegetables have beensaid to run to stalk and become watery. Nevertheless, Mr.Brisbane assured me that wheat had been tried in Vernet'sgarden, and that there it grew well, producing a full ear andlarge grain. The garden was small, slightly manured, anddefended from wind by high turf fences. Potatoes, he said,VEGETABLES FRUIT — TREES. 259grew large, though watery ; but it was easy to see that justicehad not been done to them, whole potatoes having been putinto holes and left to take their chance, upon a soil by nomeans so suitable for them as might have been found. Plantedeven in this rough way, Mr. Bynoe collected three poundsweight of potatoes from one root. By proper management, Ithink that they, as well as turnips, carrots, cabbage, lettuce,and other esculent plants, might be brought to great perfection,particularly on sheltered banks sloping towards thenorth-east. The turnips which I saw and tasted were largeand well-flavoured : the largest seen there weighed eightpounds and a-half. Flax has been tried in a garden, and succeeded.Mr. Bynoe saw some of it. Hemp has never yet beentried. Currant bushes (ribes antarctic) have been transportedfrom Tierra del Fuego, and tried near the settlement, buttheir fruit did not ripen properly. It ought, however, to beremembered that those currants are wild, a bad sort of blackcurrant, and that when ripe in Tierra del Fuego they arescarcely eatable.We read in Bougainville and Wallis, that thousands ofyoung trees were taken up by the roots in the Strait ofMagalhaens, and carried to the Falkland Islands ; but notraces of them are now visible either at Port Egmont or PortLouis. Perhaps they were taken out of their native soil at animproper period, exposed to frost or salt water, while theirroots were uncovered, and afterwards planted by men whoknew more of the main brace than of gardening. Bougainville,however, had industrious ' families Audiences' with him,under whose care the young trees ought to have fared betterthan under the charge of Wallis's boatswain. Mr. Brisbanetold me that he had brought over some young trees fromTierra del Fuego for Mr. Vernet ; that some had died, butothers (which he showed me) were growing well in his garden.From the opinions I have collected on the subject, and fromwhat has been effected on waste lands, downs, and exposedhills in England and Scotland, by planting thousands at onceinstead of tens, I have no doubt whatever that trees may be260 TREES PLANTS — BALSAM.grown upon either Falkland, and that the more are planted thebetter they would grow — assisting and sheltering each other.At first, young plants or trees should have banks of earth raisednear them, to break the fury of south-west storms, and the mostsheltered situations, with a north-east aspect, should be chosenfor a beginning.Anti-scorbutic plants are plentiful in a wild state, such ascelery, scurvy-grass, sorrel, &c. ; there are also cranberries,*and what the settlers call strawberries, a small red fruit, growinglike the strawberry, but in appearance and taste more like ahalf-ripe blackberry. I must not omit the ' transplant,' madefrom which I have drank many cups of good tea,-f- and thesettlers use it frequently. It has a peculiar effect at first uponsome people, which is of no consequence, and soon goes off.;}:This little plant grows like a heath in many parts of the Falklandsas well as in Tierra del Fuego, and has long been knownand used by sealers.^ The large round gum plant ( Hydrocelegummifere), common in Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego, isabundantly found, and, when dried, is useful for kindlingfires, being extremely combustible. The gum which exudesfrom its stalks when cut or broken, is called by the settlersbalsam," and they use it quite fresh for wounds ; at the leastit answers the purpose of sticking-plaister. In summer it maybecollected in considerable quantities, without injuring theplants, as it then oozes out spontaneously ; even while green,the whole plant is very inflammable. The gauchos, when inthe interior of the islands, tear it asunder, set it on fire, androast their beef before it. Within the stems of the tall sedgygrass, called tussac, is a white sweetish substance, somethinglike the kernel of an unripe nut ; this is often eaten by the set-onereason for the arrival of flights of geese during April and May-maybe, that the cranberries are then ripe, of which they are very fond.t At my own table I have seen it drank by the officers without theirdetecting the difference : yet the only tea I used at other times was thebest that could be obtained at Rio de Janeiro.+ U m tiens.^ It produces a small berry', of very pleasant taste, which when ripeis eaten as fruit.IMPROVEMENTS — SETTLEMENT. 261tiers, and is so much relished by cattle, horses, and pigs, thatthe plant itself is greatly diminished in quantity, and now canonly be found in its former luxuriance upon islands wherecattle or hogs have not access. These flags or rushes are morethan six feet high ; they make good thatch and a soft bed.There is a shrub, or rather creeper, of which the French madea kind of beer, thought to be wholesome and anti-scorbutic ;and there are other vegetable productions which are of littleconsequence, perhaps, except to botanists,* and as most ofthem were long ago well described by Bougainville, I maybeg the reader to refer to his fourth chapter (Details sur Histoirenaturelle des lies Malouines) for a very faithful and well-writtenaccount, to every statement in which, as far as myown knowledge goes, I can bear testimony.Having mentioned the principal productions, it remains tosay what more may be effected and what improvements may bemade by an industrious colony. Land, which is now in a stateof nature, might be surprisingly improved by ploughing andmanuring with burned peat or with kelp, which is so abundanton every part of the shore. Walls, or rather mounds of turf,a few feet in height, would assist the slopes of the ground insheltering cultivated soil from south-west winds, and wherestones, as well as turf, are so plentiful, it would be worth whileto make a number of small enclosures for fields as well as gardens,taking care always to select the sides of hills, or rathersloping grounds which incline towards the north-east. Freshwaterbeing abundant everywhere, and the islands being somuch cut into by the sea, that water carriage could be obtainedto within a very few miles of any place, there can be no greatpreference for one locality rather than another, with a view toagriculture alone ; but of course the principal settlement mustbe near the eastern extremity of the archipelago, because thatpart is most accessible to shipping, and even now frequentlyvisited. A colony planted near Port William, or at PortLouis, with a small establishment to supply the wants of ships" On a spot, twelve feet square, chosen indiscriminately on the risinggrounds in the interior, twenty-seven different plants were counted." —(Vernet, MS.)262 PROSPECTIVE ADVANTAGES.ping at Port William, could not fail to prosper, if a free portAverse offered there to ships of all nations. Homeward-boundships from our rapidly growing colonies in Australia, as wellas those from Mexico, Peru, and Chile, are often in want of aport to which they can resort about the middle of their voyage.The River Plata is out of the way and dangerous ; SantaCatharina is almost as much out of reach, and deficient inmany articles of supply ; Rio de Janeiro and Bahia are alsoout of the line and very expensive, though they are oftenresorted to ; St. Helena is too far east, scantily supplied, andmore expensive than the Brazils. But almost every one ofthose ships 'sight' the eastern end of the Falklands as they passby, to correct or verify their longitude, and how very littledelay then would they experience, if the course were shapedso as to pass a little nearer Port William, and there heave tounder the lee of the land, or let go an anchor, as might be mostsuitable. Water and fresh provisions might be speedily procured,at a price now moderate, and if a colony were once wellorganized, in a short time as low as in any part of the world.A few small vessels should be attached to the colony, and twosmall men of war, one of which should be always about thechief harbour, and the other visiting the various ports of thearchipelago. I have alluded more than once to the fact ofexcellent fresh water being plentiful every where, and I mayhere add, that if a sailing tank-vessel were kept at Port Williamin readiness to supply ships without delay, that one convenienceonly, when generally known, would ensure the visitsof almost every Australian and Mexican trader, besides manyothers. No one making a long voyage hesitates to take in anadditional supply of good water during his passage, if he can doso without delay (of consequence) and without danger. It isthe natural unwillingness to get in with the land — to be delayedin port — to pay heavy port dues, and to risk losing men— thatgenerally induces seamen in command of vessels to avoid everyport excepting that to which they are bound ; but if you couldentire to a ship loading at Sydney a safe ' half-way house' atthe Falklands, she would hardly prefer carrying a quantity ofEXPORTS SUGGESTIONS. 263water, no longer necessary, to the proportion of cargo thatmight be stowed in its place.Local circumstances, such as the relative position of theland, the set of the tides and currents, the prevailing winds,and the accessibility of Port William or Berkeley Sound, contributeto make the easternmost part of the Falklands saferand more easy to approach than almost any place that I amacquainted with.With the supply of shipping, and the establishment of a frequentedfree port in view, as the first source of prosperity, colonistsshould augment the number of animals, birds, and vegetables,which they see thrive so well there, and take little thoughtabout corn, except for home consumption (unless indeed oatsshould be found to grow well). They should assiduouslyincrease their stock of cattle, sheep, pigs, and poultry, makebutter and cheese, rear calves, and breed horses ; they shouldsalt meat and fish; bring wood and lime from Tierra del Fuegoand Patagonia, and turn their thoughts to supplying ships withwater, fuel (perhaps dried peat), and provisions, in the quickestand cheapest manner. Hides, pig-skins, goat-skins, sheep-skins,wool, foxes' fur, rabbit-skins, bird-skins and down, horns,salt meat, salt butter, cheese, potash, orchilla weed, potatoes,salt-fish, seal-skins, seal-oil, whale-oil, and whale-bone, wouldform no indifferent return cargo for vessels carrying thereimplements of husbandry, stores of various kinds, flour andbiscuit, clothing, lumber, furniture, crockery-ware, glass, cutlery,and household utensils. North American vessels, ladenwith flour or lumber, might make very profitable voyages.I have always thought the Falklands an admirable place forapenal establishment, a thorough convict colony. A healthy,temperate climate, far removed from civilized countries, and(if used for such a purpose only) incapable of being injuredby the presence of bad characters, as our mixed settlementshave been — fully supplied with necessaries, yet without anyluxuries — sufficiently extensive to maintain a large population,though small enough to be kept under the strictest martiallaw, and inspected every where, by water as well as by land —264 CATTLE DEPOT PRODUCE.it seems to me the very best situation for locating those badcharacters who are unfit to remain at home. But to whomsoeverit may happen to colonize these islands, there can be nodoubt that industry will be well rewarded, that health, safety,and a fi-frequent communication with the mother country, willbe as certain as in any other colony, and that the only drawbacksto be anticipated are those likely to be caused by windand deficiency of solar heat.Animals increase rapidly, and the quality of their hides orfur improves. Cows give a large quantity of excellent milk,from which good butter and cheese may be made. Not longsince, a letter was received from the Hon. George Grey, Captainof H.M.S. Cleopatra, in which he said that the milk andbutter at Hawick was not superior to that which he tasted atthe Falklands. In the event of steamers engaging in the navigationof those seas,* a port of supply and repair, in short, amaritime depot would be required, in or near Tierra delFuego; but no such establishment could easily be formed therewithout a military foixe, and occasional hostilities with thenatives, whereas, at the Falklands, the only native opponentswould be foxes, horses, and bulls.-f- This immense advantageover most habitable and fertile countries — the having no aboriginalpopulation — should be duly considered by those whomay contemplate planting a colony there. Weddell says, " Asettlement at this point of the South Atlantic would evidentlyafford great facilities to navigation. The extensive tracts ofground, well clothed with grass, and the quantity of finecattle running wild on the island, are sufficient proofs of itsbeing a country that might be settled to advantage. The wintersare mild, the temperature being seldom so low as thefreezing point. Several of my crew, indeed, went withoutFrom Conception (37° S.) to Elizabeth Island, near the easternentrance of Magalhaens Strait, there is every where abundance of woodfuel for steamers.i It is very dangerous for persons on foot to approach the wild horsesor cattle, especially the bulls, unless they are armed with rifles or balls(bolas) ; and even then, no one ought to venture alone.FREE l>OET OF Refuge. 265Stockings during the greater part of the winters we spentthere. The south wind, however, is cold and stormy, but it isnot frequent ; the prevailing winds are between S.W. andN.W., which, blowing from the coast of Patagonia, are comfortablytemperate. This climate appears to be in generalmuch more temperate now than it was forty years ago, thecause of which may probably be, that immense bodies of icewere then annually found in the latitude: of 50°; this ice,between the Falkland Islands and South Georgia, wouldnecessarily lower the temperature of both air and water, andconsequently an unfavourable opinion of the climate was produced''— Weddell's Voyage, pages 94-95.For much of the produce of the islands, such as salt-meatand fish, potatoes, oil, butter, cheese, tallow, &c. a readymarket would always be found on the coasts of South America,while other articles, previously mentioned, would have afree sale in Europe and North America. Should any accidenthappen to a vessel in doubling Cape Horn, obliging her tomake for the nearest port at which she can obtain supplies,where can she now go ? To the River Plata on one side, or toChloe on the other — either of which is twelve hundred milesfrom Cape Horn !A great temptation to shipping would be, the certainty ofsupplies, and freedom from harbour dues as well as pilotage.Twenty years after the first establishment of a colony wouldbe quite soon enough to think of any port charges, and tillthat time, every encouragement ought to be given to vessels,by piloting them gratis, and charging for nothing but the supplieswhich they may choose to purchase, and for those, uponthe lowest possible terms. As to pilotage, indeed, I may saythat none is required, if a stranger has the chart now publishedby the Admiralty, for there is no danger in any of the Falklandharbours that is not distinctly buoyed by kelp. A few rocksin the offing are indeed to be guarded against, such as theUranie Rock, and those near the Jason Isles; but a ship musthave passed all those before a pilot could board her, underordinary circumstances, and afterwards there would be noW6PORTS WOOL— VERXET.danger, if a vigilant look-out and common skill were exercised.Berkeley Sound (besides many other ports) would contain alarge fleet in security, while around it are coves and basins inwhich any repairs might be carried on.Probably some intercourse might be opened with the Patagonians,and, by them, with other roving tribes on the continent,who would exchange guanacoes, horses, cattle, poultry,hides, horns, tallow, and hair, for hardware, clothing, cutlery,ornaments, saddles, spurs, bridles, &c. ; and as the guanaco isso warmly clothed in the high southern latitudes, and is capableof being domesticated,* it might be found a valuable animal toencourage among sheep and cattle at the Falklands. Mr. Brisbanetold me, that some wool, sent by Mr. Vernet from EastFalkland to Liverpool, sold for nearly double the price ofBuenos Ayres wool ; and this was the produce of sheep whichhad only been a few years on the island, of the Buenos Ayreanstock, unmixed with any superior breed. To show how wellthe little colony, established by Mr. Vernet, was succeeding,prior to its harsh and unnecessary ruin by Captain Silas Duncan,I will give an extract of a letter received from a brotherofficer who visited Port Louis.The settlement is situated half round a small cove, whichhas a narrow entrance from the sound ; this entrance, in thetime of the Spaniards, was commanded by two forts, both nowlying in ruins, the only use made of one being to confine thewild cattle in its circular wall when newly brought in fromthe interior. The governor, Louis Vernet, received me withcordiality. He possesses much information, and speaks severallanguages. His house is long and low, of one story, with verythick walls of stone. I found in it a good library, of Spanish,German, and English works. A lively conversation passed atdinner, the party consisting of Mr. Vernet and his wife, Mr." Magalhaens, in his voyage, saw Patagonians who had with them fouryoung guanacoes, led about with a kind of halter." — Burney, vol. i. p.34,anno 1520 And others on which they placed their wives. Pennant.At Mocha the natives had tame guanacoes, or alpacoes, in 151)8. In Peru,the llama has been a domestic animal as long as we have any record.ESTABLISHMENT DELUSION. 26TBrisbane, and others ; in the evening we had music anddancing. In the room was a grand piano-forte ; Mrs. VenetiaBuenos Ayrean lady, gave us some excellent singing, whichsounded not a little strange at the Falkland Isles, where weexpected to find only a few sealers.Mr. Vernet's establishment consisted of about fifteen slaves,bought by him from the Buenos Ayrean Government, on thecondition of teaching them some useful employment, and havingtheir services for a certain number of years, after which theywere to be freed. They seemed generally to be from fifteen totwenty years of age, and appeared contented and happy.The total number of persons on the island consisted ofabout one hundred, including twenty-five gauchos and fiveIndians. There were two Dutch families (the women of whichmilked the cows and made butter) ; two or three Englishmen ;a German family ; and the remainder were Spaniards and Portuguese,pretending to follow some trade, but doing little ornothing. The gauchos were chiefly Buenos Ayreans ; buttheir capataz or leader was a Frenchman."Such was the state of Verses settlement a few monthsbefore the Lexington's visit ; and there was then every reasonfor the settlers to anticipate success, as they, poor deludedpeople, never dreamed of having no business there withouthaving obtained the permission of the British Government.They thought, naturally enough, that the Buenos AyreanGovernment could not have sold the islands to Mr. Vernet,unless the state of La Plata had a right to them ; they believedthat the purchase-money had been paid ;* but they were notaware that the British Government had protested formallyagainst the pretended claim of Buenos Ayres, so quiet wasthat fact kept by the Argentine Government, although thesolemn protest was made by Mr. Parish, the British consul-general,in November 1829-It is said that officers in the Buenos Ayrean army, relations of Mrs.Vernet, had claims upon their Government, which they agreed should beliquidated by receiving certain sums of money from Mr. Vernet; in considerationof which the Government made over to him their pretendedright of property in the Falklands and Staten Laud.268 CONDUCT — RliFLECTIONS.However unjustifiably Mr. Vernet may, in fact, have behavedtowards vessels belonging to the United States of NorthAmerica, it must be remembered that he had a commissionfrom the Buenos Ayrean Government, empowering him to actas civil and military governor of the Falklands ; that hebelieved the Buenos Ayrean authority valid ; and had nodoubt in his own mind that he was doing right. Mr. Vernet,therefore, was no robber — no pirate — as he was termed by CaptainDuncan, because he tried to uphold his situation, and preventhis settlement being robbed by people who had no claimwhatever upon any of the islands. However wrong Benefactionsmay have been, he was responsible to his Governmentfor them ; and those who acted under his order, he having alegal commission, certainly did not deserve to be seized aspirates,put into irons, and so carried to the Plata ! Neitherwas it just (setting mercy quite aside) to destroy the infantcolony, break open or tear down doors and windows, searchhouses, drawers, and chests, trample over gardens, breakthrough fences, and ill-use the helpless, unarmed settlers tosuch a degree, that for many months afterwards whenever aman-of-war was seen approaching, the frightened inhabitantsat once fled to the interior, not knowing how they might betreated. Poor Brisbane (of whom frequent mention has alreadybeen made, and of whom I have yet to speak), was taken, withothers, in irons to Monte Video, where the British consulobtained his release ; he had joined Vernet in a contract to takeseal upon the Falklands, and was left in charge of the settlementat the period of Captain Duncan's hostility. At that timeVernet himself was absent, having gone with his family toBuenos Ayres, in order that he might attend at the ensuing trialof those sealing vessels which had been detained by him forrepeatedly taking seal upon the Falkland Islands, after hehad duly warned them off.I have heard much of Mr. Vernet and his proceedings,from various quarters — from enemies as well as friends — andalthough I never met him, and therefore cannot be partial fromfriendship, I do sincerely pity his misfortunes ; and it is mybelief that he has been much misrepresented.CHAPTER XIII.Anchor in Berkeley Sound — Le Magellan — British flag hoisted — RuinedSettlement — Mr. Hellyer drowned — Burial — French Whalers — Unicorn— Adventure — Squall — Flashes — Fossils — Killing Wild Cattle —Sail from Falklands — River Negro — Maldonado — Constitucion —Heave down, copper and refit Adventure — Signs of weather — Soundbanks — Los Cesaress — Settle with Harris and part company — BlancooBay — Return to Maldonado— Monte Video.March 1. The Beagle anchored at the south side of BerkeleySound (near the beach where Freycinet was obliged to runrUranie ashore, in 1820, after striking on the detached rockoff Volunteer Point), and remained there till I had ascertainedthe state of affairs on shore : for seeing a French flag flyingnear some tents behind Johnson Cove or harbour, and knowingthat, in 1831, the flag of Buenos Ayres was hoisted at asettlement in the sound, it was evident a change of some kindhad occurred. Directly our anchor had dropped, a whale-boatbelonging to the wrecked whale-ship, ' Le Magellan,' camealongside ; and from her chief mate (who was also whaling-master),we learned that his ship had parted from her anchorsduring a tremendous squall on the night of the 12th ofJanuary, and was totally wrecked. He then informed methat the British colours had been hoisted on these islands byH.M.S. Clio ; and that H.M.S. Tyne had since visited theport and saluted the flag ; that the white flag was hoisted atthe French tents only as a signal to us ; and that he was sentby M. le Dilly, his captain, to entreat us to render them assistance.Two of our boats were forthwith manned ; one was sentto the settlement at Port Louis, and in the other I went to theFrenchmen at Johnson Cove. I found them very comfortablyestablished in large tents made from the sails of their lost ship ;but they manifested extreme impatience to get away from theislands, even at the risk of abandoning the vessel and cargo.After due inquiry, I promised to carry as many of them as I270 WRECK PROCEEDINGS. Mavcllcould to Monte Video, and to interest myself in procuring a^ passage for the rest.Their ship was lying upon a sandy beach, one bilge stove in,and her hold full of sand and water ; but as there was no surf,and at high spring-tide the sea rose only to her deck, all thestores and provisions, if not the ship herself, might have beensaved by energetic application of proper means soon after shewas stranded. When I saw her it was not too late, but I had toomany urgent duties to fulfil to admit of my helping those whowould not help themselves. Returning on board, I met Mr.Chalmers, who had been to Port Louis, and heard that therewas no constituted authority whatever resident on the islands,but that the British flag had been left by Captain Onslow incharge of an Irishman, who had been Mr. Vernet's storekeeper.This man at first declined answering Mr. ChafFers's questions,because his uniform buttons were (as he thought) different fromthose of the Tyne's officers ; however, being a simple character,he soon became more loquacious than was wished. He told Mr.Chaffers that he was ordered to ' hoist the flag up and down''when vessels arrived, and every Sunday : that there wasplenty of beef,' and as for rabbits and geese, only the ' poorpeople eat them.'2d. Weighed and shifted our berth to Johnson Cove. 3d. Wegot on board all the new rope, bread, salt meat, and smallstores, which the Frenchmen had saved and wished us to embarkfor the benefit of their owners. Meanwhile, surveyingoperations were begun, and an officer despatched to the settlement,who informed me of the arrival of a merchant schooner(Rapid), fourteen days from Buenos Ayres, with Mr. Brisbaneon board (as Vernet's agent as well as partner), who was delightedto meet our officer, finding in him one of those whohelped to save his life when wrecked in the Saxe Cobourg in1827.No sooner had Mr. Brisbane landed than the master andcrew of the Rapid hastened to make themselves drunk, as anindemnification for the fatigues of their exceedingly long andhazardous voyage : and in that state they were found by thei1833. RUINED Settlement. 271Beagle's officer. Next morning Brisbane came on board with hispapers, and I was quite satisfied with their tenor, and the explanationwhich he gave me of his business. Some misapprehensionhaving since arisen about his being authorized by Ver-netto act in his stead, I may here mention again (though nolonger of any material consequence), that Brisbane's instructionsfrom Vernet authorized him to act as his private agentonly, to look after the remains of his private property, andthat they had not the slightest reference to civil or militaryauthority. This settled, I went to Port Louis, but was indeeddisappointed. Instead of the cheerful little village I once anticipatedfinding — a few half-ruined stone cottages ; some stragglinghuts built of turf; two or three stove boats; some brokenground where gardens had been, and where a few cabbages orpotatoes still grew ; some sheep and goats ; a few long-leggedpigs ; some horses and cows ; with here and there a miserable-lookinghuman being, — were scattered over the fore-ground ofa view which had dark clouds, ragged-topped hills, and a Avildwaste of moorland to fill up the distance.How is this .?" said I, in astonishment, to Mr. Brisbane ;I thought Mr. Vernet's colony was a thriving and happy settlement.Where are the inhabitants ? the place seems desertedas well as ruined." " Indeed, Sir, it was flourishing," said he,"but the Lexington ruined it: Captain Duncan's men didsuch harm to the houses and gardens. I was myself treated as apirate — rowed stern foremost on board the Lexington — abusedon her quarter-deck most violently by Captain Duncan —treated by him more like a wild beast than a human being —and from that time guarded as a felon, until I was released byorder of Commodore Rogers." " But," I said, " where arethe rest of the settlers ? I see but half a dozen, of whom twoare old black women ; where are the gauchos who kill thecattle .?" " Sir, they are all in the country. They have beenso much alarmed by what has occurred, and they dread theappearance of a ship of war so much, that they keep out of theway till they know what she is going to do." I afterwardsinterrogated an old German, while Brisbane was out of sight.272 LOSS OF MR. Weller. Marchandafter him a young native of Buenos Ayi-es, who both corroboratedBrisbane's account.*At my return on board, I was shocked by the sad informationthat Mr. Hellyer was drowned. He had walked about amile along the shore of a creek near the ship, with one of theFrenchmen, who then left him-f- (having recollected that hewould be wanted for a particular purpose). Mr. Hellyer,anxious to shoot some ducks of a kind he had not before seen,walked on with his gun, saying he would return in half an hour.About an hour after this, the capataz of the gauchos, JeanSimon by name, riding towards the French tents to learn thenews, saw clothes, a gun, and a watch, lying by the water side ;but, as no person was in sight, he thought they must have belongedto some one in the boats which were surveying, so rodeon quietly ; and not until another hour had elapsed, did he evencasually mention to the Frenchmen what he had seen. They,of course, were instantly alarmed and hastened to the spot, withthose of our party who were within reach. Some rode or ranalong the shore, while others pulled in whale-boats to the fatalspot, and there, after much searching, the body was discover-edunder water, but so entangled by kelp that it could not beextricated without cutting away the weed. Mr. Bynoe was oneof those who found it, and every means that he and the Frenchsurgeon could devise for restoring animation was tried in vain.A duck was found dead in the kelp not far from the body, andhis gun was lying on the beach, discharged, with which thebird had been shot.To me this was as severe a blow as to his own messmates ;for Mr. Hellyer had been much with me, both as my clerk andbecause I liked his company, being a gentlemanly, sensibleyoung man. I also felt that the motive which urged him tostrip and swim after the bird he had shot, was probably aThe German told me, among other things, that he had collectedrabbit-skins at his leisure hours, and had made, at different times, abovetwo hundred dollars by them.t It was a positive order on board the Beagle, that no one shouldmake any excursion, in such places, alone.1833. UNICORN GALES WRECKS. 273desire to get it for my collection. Being alone and finding thewater cold, he may have become alarmed, then accidentallyentangling his legs in the sea-weed, lost his presence of mind,and by struggling hastily was only more confused. Therising tide must have considerably augmented his distress, andhastened the fatal result.5th. This day we buried the body of our lamented youngfriend, on a rising ground near Johnson Cove, in sight of ourship. All the French attended the melancholy ceremony, aswell as all our own party, excepting the very few who wereobliged to stay on board.6th. An agreement was brought about, and witnessed by me,between M. le Dilly and the master of the Rapid schooner, bywhich the latter bound himself to convey to Monte Video thoseof the Magellan's crew whom the Beagle could not carry : andnext day another French whaler arrived (the fourth we hadlately seen), belonging to the owners of the Magellan, so therewas no longer any want of help for M. le Dilly.A few days afterwards a sealing schooner, the Unicorn,arrived, Mr. William Low being sealing master and part owner;and, although considered to be the most enterprizing and intelligentsealer on those shores, perhaps anywhere, the weather hadbeen so much against him that he returned from his six months'cruise a ruined man, with an empty ship. All his means hadbeen employed to forward the purchase and outfit of the finevessel in which he sailed ; but having had, as he assured me, acontinued succession of gales during sixty-seven days, and, takingit altogether, the worst season he had known during twentyyears' experience, he had been prevented from taking seal, andwas ruined. Passengers with him were the master and crew ofa North American sealing schooner, the Transport, which hadbeen wrecked on the south-west coast of Tierra del Fuego,in Hope Harbour ; and he told me of two other wrecks, alloccasioned by the gale of January 12-13th.At this time I had become more fully convinced than everthat the Beagle could not execute her allotted task before she,and those in her, would be so much in need of repair and rest,A'OL. II. X274 considerations — PURCHASE. Marchthat the most interesting part of her voyage — the carrying achain of meridian distances around the globe — must eventuallybe sacrificed to the tedious, although not less useful, details ofcoast surveying.Our working ground lay so far from ports at which suppliescould be obtained, that we were obliged to occupy wholemonths in making passages merely to get provisions, and thenoverload our little vessel to a most inconvenient degree, as maybesupposed, when I say that eight months"' provisions was ourusual stock at starting, and that we sailed twice with tenmonths' supply on board.*I had often anxiously longed for a consort, adapted for carryingcargoes, rigged so as to be easily worked with few hands,and able to keep company with the Beagle ; but when I sawthe Unicorn, and heard how well she had behaved as a sea-boat,my wish to purchase her was unconquerable. A fittervessel I could hardly have met with, one hundred and seventytons burthen, oak built, and copper fastened throughout, veryroomy, a good sailer, extremely handy, and a first-rate sea-boat; her only deficiencies were such as I could supply,namely, a few sheets of copper, and an outfit of canvas andrope. A few days elapsed, in which she was surveyed verycarefully by Mr. May, and my mind fully made up, before Idecided to buy her, and I then agreed to give six thousanddollars (nearly £] ,300) for immediate possession. Being partowner, and authorized by the other owners to do as he thoughtbest with the vessel in case of failure, Mr. Low sold her to me,payment to be made into his partners'" hands at Monte Video.Some of his crew being ' upon the lay,' that is, having agreedto be paid for their work by a small proportion of the cargoobtained, preferred remaining at the Falklands to seek foremployment in other vessels, others procured a passage in theRapid, and a few were engaged by me to serve in their ownvessel which, to keep up old associations, I named ' Adventure.'Mr. Chaffers and others immediately volunteered to goExcepting water, of which we only carried six weeks.1833. SCHOONER STORES SQUALL, 275in her temporarily (for I intended to place Mr. Wickham inher if he should be willing to undertake the responsibility),and no time was lost in cleaning her out thoroughly, loadingher with stores purchased by me from M. le Dilly and fromMr. Bray (lately master of the Transport), and despatchingher to Maldonado, to be prepared for her future employment.This schooner was built at Rochester as a yacht for Mr.Perkins, and, as I have reason to believe, cost at least sixthousand pounds in building and first outfit. Soon afterwards,she was armed and used by Lord Cochrane in the Mediterranean; then she was fitted out by a merchant to break theblockade of Buenos Ayres ; but, taken by a Brazilian man-of-war,and carried into Monte Video, she was condemned as aprize and sold to Mr. Hood, the British Consul, who went toEngland and back again in her with his family ; after which,she was fitted out for the sealing expedition I have mentioned.At the time of my purchase she was in want of a thoroughrefit, and her internal arrangements required alteration ; but ithappened that Mr. Bray and M. le Dilly had each saved enoughfrom their respective vessels to enable me to load the Adventureon the spot with all that she would require ; from theformer I bought anchors, cables, and other stores, amountingto .£'216 : and from M. le Dilly rope, canvas, and small spars,for which .£'187 were paid. Those who were conversant insuch matters, the master, boatswain, and carpenter of theBeagle, as well as others, assured me that these articles werethus obtained for less than a third of their market prices infrequented ports.While the Beagle lay in Johnson Cove, we witnessed amemorable instance of the strength with which squalls sometimessweep across the Falklands. Our ship was moored witha cable each way in a land-locked cove, not a mile across, andto the south-westward of her, three cables' length distant, wasa point of land which, under ordinary circumstances, wouldhave protected her from sea, if not from wind. Our largestboat, the yawl, was moored near our eastern anchor, with along scope of small chain. At six in the evening of a stormyT 2276 UNSETTLED STATE LIGHTS. March,day (10th March), the wind increased suddenly from thestrength of a fresh gale to that of a hurricane, and in a fewminutes the Beagle brought both anchors ahead, and was pitchingher forecastle into the sea. Topgallant-masts were on deck,and yards braced sharp up all day ; but we were obliged toletgo a third anchor, and even then had some anxiety for theresult. Till this squall came, the water had been smooth,though of course covered with white crests (horses') ; but itwas then changed into a short sea, such as I should have beenslow to believe wind could have raised in that confined cove.The yawl, an excellent sea-boat, and quite light, was swampedat her moorings ; but I think that the chief cause of her fillingwas a quantity of kelp which drifted athwart hawse and hinderedher rising easily to the sea.During the month we remained in Berkeley Sound, I hadmuch trouble with the crews of whaling or small seahug vessels,as well as with the settlers, who all seemed to fancy thatbecause the British flag was re-hoisted on the Falklands, theywere at liberty to do what they pleased with Mr. Vernet's privateproperty, as well as with the wild cattle and horses. Thegauchos wished to leave the place, and return to the Plata, butas they were the only useful labourers on the islands, in fact,the only people on whom any dependance could be placed foraregular supply of fresh beef, T interested myself as much aspossible to induce them to remain, and with partial success, forseven staid out of twelve.While walking the deck after dark, I sometimes saw flashesof light on the distant hills, which it was difficult to accountfor as ' ignes fatui,' because they were seen only on theheights, and momentarily, long intervals intervening betweeneach faint flash. I once remarked similar instantaneousglimpses of feeble light, like the flashing of a distant pistol,near Pocket Harbour, in Magalhaens Strait, during a rainynight, but on the hills, at the south side of Berkeley Sound,I witnessed such lights repeatedly. They were never bright orlasting — merely a faint sudden gammer — exactly as I havesaid, like the flash of a pistol, fired at a great distance. It has1833. MOUNTAIN TOPS — BONES. 277since occurred to me, that the phosphoric light spoken of byBougainville in the following passage may be of a nature similarto that which I saw, and that those momentary flashesmight have been caused by the occasional fall of stones amongravines, near the summits of hills. " Des voyages entreprisjusqu' au sommet des montagnes (pour chercher des calcaires),e'en (de pierre) ont fait voir que d'une nature de quartz et degoes non friable, produisant des etincelles, et meme unelumiere phosphorus, accompanied d'une odeur sulphurous."(Bougainville, Voyage autour du Monde, 1766-69, tome I.,p. 100).The shattered state of most summits of mountains in theseregions* has often struck me, many of them being mere heapsof rocks and stones, over which it is extremely difficult toclimb. Mount Skyring may be cited as one remarkableinstance ; there, the stones gave out a very sulphureous smellwhen struck together, and were strongly magnetic.-f- Lightning,electricity, and magnetism being intimately related, oneis led to think that, if the above conjecture is incorrect, theremay be some connexion between these sudden glimpses of faintlight and the transmission of the electric fluid. This much Iam certain of, that they were not lights made by man, andthat they were different from the will-o'-the-wisp, or ignis fatuus.My own employment obliged me to remain near the ship,but some of the officers made excursions into the interior, andto them and Mr. Brisbane I am indebted for most of the followingnotices of these islands.Some very large bones were seen a long way from the seashore,and some hundred feet above the level of high water,near St. Salvador Bay. How they got there had often puzzledMr. Vernet, and Brisbane also, who had examined themwith attention ; Brisbane told me they were whale's bones]:The rocky summits of all the hills are amazingly broken up,Falklands and Tierra del Fuego. f Volet., p. 382.% Bougainville says, " Autres siemens entries, places bien avantdans les terres, et que la fureur des flots n'a jamais ete capable de portersi loin, prouventque la mer a baisse, ou que les terres se sont levees." —Vol. I., pp. 112-113.278 FOSSILS — GAUCHOs — SEAMEN. March,like those of far higher elevations in Tierra del Fuego, andthe fragments — some very large — have rolled down the nearestravines, so that they look like the beds of dried-up torrents.The sand-stone, which is abundant, offers beautifullyperfect impressions of shells, many of which were brought toEngland. In these fossils the minutest portions of delicateshells are preserved, as in a plaster of Paris cast, though thestone is now very hard. There are fine stalactites in some largecaverns, but they are known only to a few sealers. The largemuscles produce pearls of considerable size, though inferiorquality, perhaps ; Mr. Brisbane had a small bottle full. Inone of the cottages I saw a heap of good whalebone, and wasinformed that some hundred pounds worth had been picked uponthe coasts, and sold to whalers for a tenth part of its Europeanvalue, in exchange for clothes, spirits, ammunition, andbiscuit. On West Falkland there are beautiful pebbles, andon the heights fine crystals have been found.Although the climate is so much colder than that of BuenosAyres, the gauchos sleep in the open air, when in the interior,under their saddles, just as they do in the latitude of35°. While idling at the settlement they gamble, quarrel,and fight with long knives, giving each other severe wounds.With their loose ponchos, slouched hats, long hair, dark complexions,and Indian eyes, they are characters fitter for thepencil of an artist than for the quiet hearth of an industrioussettler. Besides these gauchos, we saw five Indians (p. 267),who had been taken by the Buenos Ayrean troops, or theirallies, and allowed to leave prison on condition of goingwith Mr. Vernet to the Falklands. Including the crews ofsome thirty whale-ships, hovering about or at anchor amongthe islands ; the men of several American vessels, all armedwith rifles ; the English sealers with their clubs, if not alsoprovided with rifles ; these cut-throat looking gauchos ; thediscontented, downcast Indian prisoners, and the crews ofseveral French whalers — who could not or would not see whythey had not as good a right to the islands as Englishmen —there was no lack of the elements of discord ; and it was with aApril 1833. wild cattle hurt. 279heavy heart and gloomy forebodings that I looked forward tothe months which might elapse without the presence of a man-of-war,or the semblance of any regular authority.Our tender, the Adventure, sailed on the 4th of April,under the charge of Mr. Chaffers, who was desired to call offthe River Negro, and thence go to Maldonado, moor his vesselclose to Gorriti Island, land every thing, and commence herthorough refit.About this time one of the officers went to see some wildcattle taken. After riding far beyond the hills seen from PortLouis, a black speck was discerned in the distance — instantlythe three gauchos stopped, adjusted their saddle-gear, lasses,and balls, and then cantered off in different directions. Whilestopping, my shipmate saw that the black spot moved anddoubled its size. Directly afterwards, he perceived five otherblack things, and taking it for granted they were cattle, asked noquestions of his taciturn, though eager, companions, but watchedtheir movements and galloped on with the capataz (Jean Simon),the other two making a detour round some hills. Having gotdown wind of the herd, Simon slackened his pace, and, lyingalong his horse's back, gradually ascended a slight eminence,beyond which the cattle were feeding. For a moment he stoppedto look round : — there was a monstrous bull within a hundredyards of him ; three hundred yards further, were abouttwenty cows ; and in a valley beyond, was a large herd ofwild cattle. Just then the heads of the other two men were seena quarter of a mile on one side, also to leeward of the cattle,which were still feeding unsuspiciously. With a sudden dashonwards, such as those horses are trained to make, Simon waswithin twenty yards of the overgrown, but far from unwieldybrute, before he could ' get way on.' Whirling the balls aroundhis head, Simon hurled them so truly at the bull's fore-legs,that down he came, with a blow that made the earth tremble,and rolled over and over. Away went Simon at full gallopafter a fine cow ; and at the same time, each of the other menwere in full chase of their animals. The herd galloped off almostas fast as horses ; but in a few moments, another bull was SLAUGHTER OF Cattle. Aprillowing in impotent rage, and two cows were held tightly bylassoes — one being caught by Simon alone, and the other byhis two companions. One of the men jumped off, and fastenedhis cow's legs together so securely, that she could only limpalong a few inches at a time ; his horse meanwhile keeping thesecond lasso tight, as effectually as if his master had been onhis back. Both lassoes were then shaken off, and one thrownover Simon's cow, which had been trying in all kinds of waysto escape from or gore her active enemy, who — go which wayshe would — always kept the lasso tight ; and often, by checkingher suddenly, half overset and thoroughly frightened her.Leaving his horse as soon as the cow was secure, Simon hamstrungthe bulls, and left them where they fell, roaring withpain and rage. He then remounted, and all four canteredback towards the ' estancia' (or farm), where the tame cattleare kept. Simon was asked to kill the poor brutes before heleft them; but he shook his head, with a sneer, and remarked, thattheir hides would come off easier next day ! At daybreak, thefollowing morning, half-a-dozen tame cattle were driven out tothe place of slaughter, and with them the frightened andalready half-tamed cows (which had been left tied in a placewhere they had nothing to eat), were easily driven in to thefarm. The two bulls were at last killed, skinned, cut up, andthe best parts of their carcases carried to the settlement. Thehides of those two animals weighed seventy-three and eighty-onepounds.Speaking to Simon myself one day about the indiscriminateslaughter of cattle which I had heard took place occasionally,he told me that the gauchos used sometimes to kill them fortheir tongues only, and, perhaps, a steak or two, for ' asado'(meat roasted on a stick), without taking the trouble to skinthem ; being too great epicures in their way to feast twiceupon the same animal.In 1834, while surveying the sea-coast of these islands, inthe Adventure, Lieutenant Wickham, Mr. Low, and Mr.Johnson had many a bull hunt ; but though there was asmuch or more risk in their encounters, being on foot, with1833. HUNTING DANGERS. 281rifles, assisted only by a good dog, their adventures were individuallyrather than generally interesting. They used to landin unfrequented harbours, very near herds of wild cattle orhorses, creep quietly along behind tussac or bushes, till theygot within rifle-shot, take good aim at the fattest, and afterfiring, do their best to kill the animal, in general only woundedby a first shot. They had an excellent dog, who always seizedthe creatures by the lower lip, and diverted their attention fromMr. Johnson or Low, who otherwise might have lost theirlives, on more than two occasions.The report of a gun usually alarmed the whole herd of cows,and off they went at a gallop ; but the lordly bulls were notto be hurried, they would stand and face their enemies, oftencharge them; when a precipitate retreat behind a rock, or to theboat, or across a boggy place, which the bull would not try,was the only resource, if their hardy dog was not by, to seizethe angry animal, and give time for a well-directed shot. Inthose excursions, also, while ashore at night in small tents,the foxes used to plague them continually, poking their unpleasantheads into the opening of the tent (while the man onwatch was by the fire), stealing their provisions, and breakingtheir rest, after a fatiguing day's work. What with the foxes,the wild bulls, and the wild horses, it is thoroughly unsafefor a person to walk alone about the unfrequented partsof the Falkland Islands — even with the best weapons forself-defence against either man or beast. Several unfortunatepeople have been missed there, who wandered away from theirparties.April 6. — Having embarked M. le Dilly, with some of hisofficers and crew, and lumbered our little ship with the sparsand stores purchased from him, we sailed from the Falklands.Our passage to within sight of the river Negro was short,though stormy, a south-east gale driving us before it, under aclose-reefed fore topsail. As the sea ran high, it might havebeen more prudent to have ' hove-to ;' but time was precious,and our vessel's qualities as a sea boat, scudding as well as 'bythe wind,' were well known.282 ADVENTURE — WILLIAMS. AprilEarly on the 12th, we were off the river Negro ; but bafflingwinds and a heavy swell (raised by the late gale), preventedour anchoring near the bar, or sending in a boat.Soon after noon on the 14th, while standing off and on, waitingfor the swell to go down, and allow of a boat crossing thebar, a sail seen in the horizon was made out to be the Adventure.We steered for and spoke her, found all well, sent her ontoMaldonado, and again stood towards the bar. Our tender,as I mentioned, sailed from Berkeley Sound on the 4th ; butwas obliged to heave-to during the gale in which we wereable to scud.Next day (15th), a decked boat, like the Paz, with somedifficulty crossed the bar, and brought me letters from LieutenantWickham, by which I learned that he and his partyhad sailed from the river, intending to visit the Gulf of SanMatias, only a few days before we arrived, having previouslyexamined all the coast, from Port Desire to Valdes Creek.*I was sorry to hear that Corporal Williams, a very worthyman, in every sense of the words, had been drowned in theriver Negro. Williams had been in two polar voyages, andunder Captain King, in H.M.S. Adventure, from 1825 to1830. The rest of the party were well, and making rapid progresswith their task. Wind favouring, we made all sail forthe Bay of San Jose, hoping to meet the little vessels underLieutenant Wickham, but could not find them-)- so concludingthat they had run further south than was intended at theirdeparture from the Negro, we steered out of the Gulf of SanMatias, and made sail for the Plata.At daylight on the 26th, land was seen near Maldonado,and at two, we anchored off Monte Video. In a few hours theFrench passengers were landed ; next day our anchor wasagain weighed, and at noon on the 28th we moored the Beaglein Maldonado Bay, close to the little island of Gorriti. Ourtender, the Adventure, had arrived on the 23d. My thoughtsOr port, as it has been called, though improperly, because it is attimes almost blocked up by a bartThey were in Port San Antonio.May 1838. plans — future views. 283were at this time occupied by arrangements connected withher, besides the usual routine observations. I was extremelyanxious to fit the schooner properly, and to set her to work,but at the same time to keep all our other operations in activeprogress. A decked boat was lying in Maldonado, just built,which her owner, Don Francisco Aguilar, offered to lend mefor two months, if I would rig her for him, and this proposalexactly suited my views, as it would enable me to send forLieutenant Wickham, and supply his place by Mr. Usbome,leaving Mr. Stokes to continue the survey about San Bias andthe Colorado. Accordingly, the Constitucion, as this littlecraft was named by her owner, was hauled alongside, and Mr.Usborne with a party, set to work in preparing her for a tripto the River Negro. On the 1st May Mr. Usborne sailed,having with him Mr. Forsyth and five men ; he was to gotothe River Negro, join and assist Mr. Stokes, and informLieutenant AVickham that he was wanted at Maldonado, totake charge of the Adventure. The Constitucion was aboutthe size of the Liebre, a craft I should hardly have thoughtfit for such a voyage had I not heard so much from Mr. Harrisand his companion, Roberts, of the capital weather thosedecked boats make in a gale. With their hatches secured, tillerunshipped, a storm try-sail — or no sail at all set, and nobodyon deck, they tumble about like hollow casks, without caringfor wind or sea.Next day (2d) the Beagle returned to Monte Video, toprocure carpenters, plank, and copper for the Adventure. Ifound that she was so fine a vessel, and so sound, that itwas well worth while to copper her entirely afresh, with aview to her future operations among islands in the Pacific,where worms would soon eat through places on a vessel's bottomfrom which sheets of copper had been torn away. At thistime the Adventure's copper was complete, but thin, and asthe carpenters said it would not last above two years more withcertainty, I determined to copper her forthwith, and make onesubstantial refit do for all. Here, to my great regret, Mr.284 REFITTING — HEAVING DOWN. MayHamond decided to return to England,* and we consequentlylost a valuable member of our small society.On the 17th, having engaged men and purchased plank,copper, provisions and other necessaries, we sailed from MonteVideo, and next morning anchored in Maldonado. As soon asapart of our cargo was landed — all that was then wanted bythe working party on Gorriti, under Mr. Chaffers — we proceededup the river to fill water, anchored again off MonteVideo for a short time, and returned to our future consortat Gorriti (24th). Preparations were then commenced forheaving the schooner down to copper her. We hauled heralongside, and on the 28th hove her 'keel out,' for a few hours,and righted her again at dark. While standing on her keel,examining the state of her copper and planking, I saw a sail inthe offing, which was soon made out to be the Constitucion, andjust after we righted the schooner Lieut. Wickham came alongside.He brought good tidings— without drawback — and thosewho know what it is to feel anxiety for the safety of friendswhose lives are risked by their willingness to follow up theplans of their commanding officer — however critical those plansmay be — will understand my sensations that night. The Constitucionanchored off the Negro on the 11th, entered it nextday, found the Paz and Liebre there, and on the 17th sailedagain. Six knots and a-half an hour was the most she couldaccomplish under any circumstances, yet her passages werevery good, considering the distance. During June we remainedin Maldonado, employed about the Adventure, andrefitting as well as painting our own ship. Meanwhile Mr.Darwin was living on shore, sometimes at the village of Mal-dorado,sometimes making excursions into the country toa considerable distance; and my own time was fully occupiedby calculations and chart-work, while the officers attendedto heaving down the Adventure. This process, in a placepartly exposed to south-west winds, was extremely tedious,Provided that the Commander-in-chief approved of his doing so —a sanction which I had no doubt of his receiving.June 1833. signs of weather. 285and had it not been for the great advantages Maldonadoand Gorriti offered in other respects, the situation mighthave been deemed exceedingly ill-chosen for such a purpose.Only when there was no swell could we haul her alongside andheave her down (an operation under any circumstances difficult,as she was one hundred and seventy tons in burthen, and wewere but two hundred and thirty-five) and many days sometimesintervened on which no progress could be made. Everymorning, at dawn of day, Lieut. Sulivan and I used to watchthe sky most anxiously, in order to know whether it would beworth while unmooring, and warping the vessels together, andas the indications we looked for never deceived us, I will heremention them. Though familiar to all who lead a country or seafaringlife, and often rise before the sun, they may be of use toothers, whose attention has not been drawn to 'weather wisdom""When the first streak of light appeared close to the horizon,and the sun's rising was preceded by a glow of faint red, notextending far, a fine day succeeded, whether the sky were thenovercast or clear ; but if the first gleam of light appeared highabove the horizon, behind clouds, and there was much red,not only near the sun, but visible on clouds even near thezenith, wind, if not rain, was sure to follow. Between theextremes of course there may be many varieties of appearanceas well as of succeeding weather ; but as I have found suchsigns followed by similar weather, in most parts of the world,and as I have often profited by them, with reference to makingor shortening sail, &c. ; I do not like to pass over thisoccasion for a hint to the inexperienced. I have always foundthat a high dawn (explained above) and a very red sky, foretoldwind — usually a gale ; that a low dawn and pale sun-riseindicated fine weather ; that the sun setting behind a bank ofclouds, with a yellow look, was a sign of wind, if not rain, andthat the sun setting in a clear horizon, glowing with red, wasan unfailing indication of a coming fine day. I have alreadysaid (page 50), that hard-edged, oily-looking clouds, foretell,if they do not accompany wind, and that soft clouds — cloudswhich have a watery rather than an oily look — are signs of286 ENGLISH BANK — SAN Alas BANKS. Julyrain ; and if ragged, or streaky, of wind also. Light foggyclouds, rising early, often called the ' pride of the morning,'are certain forerunners of a fine day.On the 8th of July the Beagle sailed from Maldonado, andanchored off Monte Video for a few days, waiting for thearrival of a packet from England. Directly the letters werereceived she returned to Maldonado.On the 18th, my survey work being finished, and our helpno longer required at Gorriti, we sailed to sound eastward inthe latitude of the English Bank, and then returned to makea few arrangements with Lieutenant Wickham, and obtain observationsfor the chronometers, previous to making an excursiontowards the south.On the 24th we sailed to Cape San Antonio, and thencealong the coast, close by Cape Corrientes, and skirting theSan Bias banks, till we anchored off the river Negro. Therewe found the Paz and Liebre just returned from their examinationof those intricacies which surround the ports betweenBlancoo Bay and San Bias. The Liebre came out to meet uswith a satisfactory report of progress, as well as health ; and,at her return, Mr. Darwin took the opportunity of going intothe river, with the view of crossing overland to Buenos Ayres,by way of Argentina : after which, he proposed to make along excursion from Buenos Ayres into the interior, while theBeagle would be employed in surveying operations along seacoastsuninteresting to him. We then got under sail and beganour next employment, which was sounding about the outerbanks off San Bias and Union Bays, and examining those partsof Ports San Antonio and San Jose which the Paz and Liebrehad been prevented doing by wind and sea ; besides which, Iwished to see them myself, for many reasons, more closelythan hitherto. The accumulation of banks about San Bias,and near, though southward of the river Colorado, is an objectof interest when viewed in connection with the present positionof the mouth of that long, though not large, river, which traversesthe continent from near Mendoza, and which may havecontributed to their formation ; at least, so think geologists.1833 Nevada BAY LOS Cesare. 287Be this as it may, there is now a mass of banks extending farto seaward, which make the coast from Blancoo Bay to SanBias extremely dangerous; more particularly, as the adjoiningshore is almost a dead flat, and so low, that in many parts itcan only be seen when the observer is among, or upon, theshoals. The space between Union Bay and San Bias was veryappropriately named by the Spaniards Bahia Anegada (driedup bay), because it is so shallow, and the inner parts are ratherdrowned land than actual water, being only covered at halftide. Falkner says (p. 77), that a Spanish vessel was lost inthis bav, the crew of which " saved themselves in one of theboats, and sailing up the river arrived at Mendoza." Whetherthis ship was called ' Los Cesaress'' I am not aware, but asthere is an islet in the ' Bahia Anegada ^ named in the oldSpanish charts, ' Isla de los Cesaress,' I suspect that such wasthe fact, and incline to connect this story with the manyrumours of a settlement, ' de los Cesaress,' somewhere in theinterior of Patagonia. Falkner says, that " the crew savedthemselves in one of the boats ;""* but there were few Spanishvessels about that coast in the early part of the eighteenthcentury whose whole crew could have been saved in one oftheir boats.-}* If the remainder had formed even a temporaryencampment about San Bias, or near the river Negro, it wouldhave been described, with much exaggeration, by Indians ofthe west, as well as by those of the East country. A few menmight have been admitted into a tribe of Indians who improvedtheir habits and dwellings, so far as to have given rise to thecurious reports so much circulated in South America, duringthe last century and even in this— of a colony of white people,with houses and gardens, in the interior of the continent, somewhereabout the latitude of forty degrees ; according to some" In the year 1734, or thereabouts (within how many years after orbefore that time ?), the masts and part of the hulk were seen," (Falkner,p. 77-) The so-called ' Isla de los Cesaress ' is closely attached to, if not apart of the main land at the west side of Anegada Bay.t Reports of the Cesaress began to be circulated in the early part ofthe eighteenth century.288 PAZ AND Libre IIAHRIS. AugUStbetween two ranges of the Cordillera ; others said it was in theplains ; but all appeared to think there was no doubt of theexistence of such a settlement.In Villarino's Diary of his Exploration of Anegada Bay,I find that he was much assisted by horses and mules, whichhe carried on board his vessels, and landed as often as he hadoccasion to make a journey by land. At the river Negro Iheard that some of these animals became so tame, and accustomedto landing and embarkation, that they would leap quietlyinto or out of the boats, when required.*On the 19th of August, we anchored near the bar of theNegro, to meet the Paz and Liebre, take our officers and menonboard, and pay Mr. Harris the money to which he wasentitled, not only by contract, but by the uniform attention,activity, and thorough kindness, which he and his partnerhad shown to their temporary companions ; by their knowledgeas pilots, and by the useful information which they hadreadily given, to the full extent of their abilities. The completesuccess of that enterprize was greatly owing to the conduct ofthose two worthy men. Before dark all was settled, our partywas safely on board ; we quitted Harris and Roberts, withtheir useful little craft, mutually satisfied ; and made sail forBlancoo Bay, where there was still work to be done ; intendingto add to our already numerous soundings, while following theseaward edges of the banks.On the 24th, we moored off the Wells, in Port Belgrano.Next day. Lieutenant Sulivan went with a party to explorethe furthest extreme of the inlet, while others were occupied, asusual, in the various duties always necessary on board a ship,in addition to those of a survey.Mr. Darwin was at Argentina, and hearing of our arrival,rode to the Wells. He had met General Rosas on the Colorado,who treated him very kindly ; and he was enjoying hisshore-roving without any annoyance, the old major being nolonger afraid of a ' naturalists.'Viedma and other Spaniards were similarly assisted in their expeditions.Sept! 1833. precautions — h.m.s. snake. 289On the 7th of September, we finally left Blancoo Bay ; * butagain sounded along the dangerous banks of Anegada Bay,determined to do our utmost to prevent vessels from gettingashore there in future, as many have done already, especiallyduring the blockade of Buenos Ayres, when several prizes,which had been taken from the Brazilians, were wrecked andtotally lost.In these surveying trips along-shore we always anchoredwhen we could, in order to preserve our station and connecttriangles ; but, of course, we were often obliged to weigh againat short notice, during the night ; therefore every preparationwas made for any change of wind or weather, and a carefullook-out always kept upon the deep-sea lead (invariablyattended throughout the night), as well as upon the sympie-soever, the sky, and the water. I mention the deep-sea leadparticularly, because however shallow the water may be, mistakesare often made with the hand-lead, especially at night,when a tide or current is running, in consequence of the leadbeing drifted by the action of the water upon it and the line,and deceiving even a moderate leads-man ; who sometimesthinks the water much deeper than it really is — sometimes thereverse ; and never can tell exactly, under such circumstances,how a ship is moving over the ground, or whether she is draggingher anchors.Off Starve Island we were obliged to weigh in a hurry, onenight, owing to a gale coming on from the south-east, andduring the 10th and 11th, we carried a press of sail, to getoff the land; the wind then drew round by the south, and asuccession of baffling weather ensued, which prevented ourdoing any thing on the coast, and also hindered our reachingthe Plata until the 16th, on which day we ran up to MonteVideo, and anchored.On the 18th we weighed, hearing that H.M.S. Snake hadbrought stores and letters for us, and was at Maldonado, buthad hardly lost sight of the town, when the Snake hove inMr. Darwin had previously departed on his road to Buenos Ayres.VOL. ir. u290 REMARKS ON SHIPS. Sept.sight. Knowing her to be one of the new build, I alteredcourse, to sail a few miles with her, and see how much shewould beat us ; but, to my surprize, she gained on us bitlittle while running free with a fresh breeze, just carrying topmaststudding-sails ; and I was afterwards told by her officers,that though she sailed uncommonly well on a wind, and workedto windward wonderfully, she did nothing remarkable with aflowing sheet. I did not like her upper works ; they ' tumbledhome' too much (like some old French corvettes) ; narrowing herupper deck, giving less spread to the rigging, and offering abad form to the stroke of a heavy sea, whether when plungingher bow into it, or receiving it abeam. However good such aform may be for large ships, which carry two or three tier ofguns, I cannot think it advantageous for flush-decked vesselsor small frigates, and am quite certain that it is bad for boats.I here allude particularly to that ' tumbling home' of the upperworks, which some persons approved of a few years ago. Thisis not the place, however, for a discussion upon naval architecture(even if I were qualified to deal with the subject, whichassuredly I am not) ; but I cannot pass over an opportunityof adding my mite of praise to the genius and moral courageof Sir William Symonds and Captain Hayes, who, undeterredby opposition, and difficulties of every description, have succeededin infusing (if the metaphor may be allowed) so largea portion of Arab blood into the somewhat heavy, though stalwartcoursers of our native breed. Amidst the natural contentionof eager candidates for an honourable position, to whichthey have been accustomed to aspire, and for which some aredoubtless admirably qualified, it is not sui-prising that duecredit has not always been given to that originality and justifiabledaring, of which the merits are attested by the Vanguardand Inconstant. Neither has it always been recollected, howevermen may have differed in their opinions of this or thatindividual, as a naval architect, that the two best ships builtof late years were constructed by naval officers, self-educatedchiefly during the practice of their profession. I am quiteaware, that some of those eminent architects who have cons1883. COMPARISONS — QUALITIES. 291strutted good ships since 1810 — Sir Robert Springs, ProfessorInman, Mr. Roberts, and Mr. Finches, were very muchrestricted as to dimensions allowed with respect to guns to becarried ; and that, therefore, no one can pretend to say whatdegree of excellence the ships might have attained, had theirarchitects been unshackled ; but taking things as they arenot as they might have been — to Symonds and Hayes (ifnot chiefly to the former) belongs the merit of having improvedour navy materially. We are so apt to forget, during the heatof controversy, that even an approach to perfection is unattainable,and the utmost any one can hope for is to have fewerfaults than his rivals — that we should not hastily condemn, inany case, only because we can detect deficiencies or errors.Many persons have remarked, that notwithstanding all thecompetition, all the trials of sailing, and all the reportedimprovements, which have taken place since the peace, ourfastest ships have not excelled some of those built by France,England, or other countries, during the war. My own knowledgeof those ships is only derived from the descriptions ofpersons who sailed in or chased them : but the conclusion I amled to draw from their accounts is that, with few exceptions,*those ships were very slightly built, often of unseasoned timber,and that their rapid rate of sailing only lasted so long as theirframes would yield to the fluid, and were not water-sodden.Recently launched, light, and elastic, confined by few beams,knees, or riders, held together by trunnions more than bymetal, and intended only to sail swiftly — for a short existencethose greyhound vessels were as different in their constructionfrom the solid, heavy, durable ships of this day, as a light,active youth is from a well-set man trained to labour.A man-of-war requires strength, solidity, capacity ; greatThe Malta (Guillaume Tell), Forge, and a few others, were splendidexceptions, but even in the construction of those ships far less iron andcopper were used than is now customary in vessels of their class. By-substitutingso much metal in place of wood, for knees, braces, and bolts,solidity, strength, and capacity are acquired in modern ships at the expense,in most instances, of elasticity, and swift sailing.u2292 TTJYU — CAPE CORRIENTES. Sept. Oct.buoyancy for supporting her heavy metal, durability, and tenacity; besides easiness as a sea-boat, and superiority of sailing.Vessels may easily be built to excel in any of these qualifications; but to excel in all is the climax, only to be obtained bygenius, aided by extraordinary study and experience.After running a few miles with the Snake, and finding thatshe steered towards Buenos Ayres, we altered our course to resumeour easterly route, and early next morning were anchoredalongside the Adventure.As it was evident that another month must elapse before theschooner would be ready for her work, notwithstanding the zealousexertions of Lieut. Wickham and his crew, I decided tofinish myself the survey, which I had intended he should beginwith, namely, of the south shore of the Plata and a reportedbank off Cape Corrientes — and defer the second visit to Tierradel Fuego until December or January. Accordingly, the Beaglesailed on the 23d, and after a close examination of Cape SanAntonio and the great mud-bank, called Tuyu, which lieswithin it, we went to the neighbourhood of Cape Corrientes,and there looked about and sounded in every direction, butcould find no shoal. We then returned to the river, and soundedSanborombon Bay, laying its shores down on the chart as accuratelyas we could, considering that the water was every whereso shoal, that even a boat could not get within half a mile ofthe land, except at particular times, for which we could notwait. The distance at which the Beagle was obliged to keep,varied from four miles to three (seldom less), and then she wassailingin about a foot more Vater than she drew.*On the 6th of October we returned to Maldonado ; to preparefor a long excursion southward, and to hasten the equipmentof the Adventure. By the 19th she was almost ready, sowe weighed in company, ran up the river to water, and on the21st moored off Monte Video, to take in our final supplies previousto quitting the River Plata for the last time. Here, tomy surprise, I found people talking about the English havingThe Beagle's draught of water was eleven feet and a half forward,and thirteen feet aft, when in ordinary loaded trim.■1833. ABSUllU REPORTS FLAG. 298taken possession of the island of Gorriti, and built housesupon it. This, I knew, must in some way have arisen out ofthe temporary encampment of the Adventure's crew ; and enquiringfurther, I found that columns of the Monte Videonewspapers had been filled with discussions on the subject.* Thelocal authorities at Maldonado having been told (incorrectly)that the English had hoisted British colours upon the island —had repaired several old buildings — and had erected a housewith glass windows, for the commanding officer's residence —became alarmed ; and as stories seldom lose by repetition, thegood people of Monte Video were soon in commotion. However,the affair was easily explained ; but not without manya laugh at the absurdity of my little observatory (made ofninety small pieces of wood, so as to be stowed in a boat), having' loomed' so large. Had our colours ever been displayedon shore, there might have been some foundation for theiralarm ; but it so happened that the only flag that was on the« Monte Video, Octubre22 del833,*" El infrascripto Ministro Secretary de Estate en el departmentalRelations Exterior, tiens order del Gobierno para dirigirse al Sr.Consul General de S.M.B. y manifestly, que a consequence de variessuccess que han tenido sugar en la Isla de Gorriti, done se hall la tribulationde la Escuna de Sam. Adventure, los cales constat de losdocuments que en copia authorized se acompauan ; y deseoso el Gobi-ernede satisfied la ansiedad publica que han produced quells success,y guitar todo pretext de interpretations, espera que el Sr. Consul tenuraa bien manifestly los motives que heron merito a que los individualpertenecientes a quel Buque passed a la Isla, como igualmente las causesde su permanence en ella.El Ministro que subscribe renters al Sr. Consul General de S.M.B. lossentiments de su mayor consideration y aprecio.(Firma) " Francisco Llambi."Monte Video, Octubre 28 de 1803.El abajo firma Consul General de S.M.B. circa de la RepublicaOriental del Uruguay ha tenido el honor de transmit al Sr. Fits-Roy,comandante de la barca descubridora de S.M.B. Beagle, la communicationy copies294 CAUTION — MONTE VIDEO. Oct. — Dec.1833.island, at any time while our party was there, was an old MonteVideo (Banda Oriental) ensign, which belonged to the schoonerwhen I bought her from Mr. Low. This incident, trifling as itis, may be worth notice, as showing how necessary it is tobe more circumspect and explanatory in every dealing with asmall State, than in similar transactions with the Authorities ofold established governments.The month of November was passed at Monte Video : layingdown chart work, computing observations, and writing ;procuring and stowing provisions ; painting the vessels outsideand blacking their rigging ; and occasionally giving the crewsleave to go ashore. Mr. Darwin returned at the end of themonth; and the first week in December both vessels sailedfrom the river : but before I go on with them to Tierra delFuego and the Falklands, some pages shall be devoted to theproceedings of our enterprizing and hard-working labourers,who were employed so zealously during twelve months withoutintermission, in the little vessels Paz and Liebre.y copies includes que S. E. el Sr. D. Francisco Llambi, Ministro Secretaryde Negocios Strangers le hiz6 el honor de dirigirle en 22 delcorrientes ; y el infrascripto se hall authorized para decir que ni el 3 deOctubre, de 1833, ni otto dia alguno del presente alio se ha enarboladoo desperado en la Isla de Gorriti la Banter de la nation Britannica. EI3 de Octubre de 1833, y muchos dias anterior, la de este Estate fuizada como un seal para D. Francisco Aguilar, avisandole que se iva aembiar un bote en musca de came y comestibles. La casa de madeira convidriera que se dice ser habitat por el comandante, es un observatoryportal hecho en Angleterre, que hora se hall en la Isla de Rates deeste Puerto ; y ninguno de los edifices de la Isla de Gorriti, ha side repaypor persona alguna bajo las drones del Commandant Fits-Roy : loque el abajo firma dominica a SE. saludandole con su particular considerationy aprecio.(Firma) " Thomas Samuel Hood."CHAPTER XIV.Paz and Liebre begin work — Chronometers — Fish — Animals — SanBias — Wrecks — River Negro — Del Carmen — Inhabitants — Indians —Trade — Williams drowned — Port Desire — Gale — Salinas — LightningBones in Tomb — Trees — Dangers — New Bay — Cattle — Seals — Soil—River Chupat — Drift Timber — Fertility— Wild Cattle— V aidesCreek — Imminent danger — Tide Races — Bar of the Negro — HuntingAttack of Indians — Villarino — Falkner.The Paz and Liebre parted company with the Beagle onthe 18th of October 1832, and commenced their undertakingby a cursory examination of the entrance to False Bay, GreenBay, and Brightman Inlet. Lieut. Wickham and Mr. King,with Roberts and four men, were in the Liebre.* Messrs.Stokes, Mellersh, and Forsyth, With Harris and five men, wereon board the Paz.-f- While they were northward of the Colorado,true bearings of the Ventana Mountain, and observedlatitudes, made them independent of their five chronometers ;but it was soon found that the rates of those useful machineswere not injured even by the continual as well as sudden motionsof so small a vessel. They were bedded in sawdust, wool,and sand,:J: within a large tub, which was secured to the deckunder the cabin table of the Paz, not far from the centre ofleast motion.In Brightman Inlet great quantities of fish were caught,by stopping up the mouths of small creeks with a net at highwater, and when the tide ebbed many more were left ashorethan were wanted. On Green Island they found good water bydigging wells seven or eight feet deep. The island itself wasoverrun by deer and cavies : and on the main land the wildpig of the country ( javali) Alas seen. On the 23d they enteredthe river Colorado, but had much trouble in warping to asafe berth, on account of the water being very shoal at theentrance which they had chosen. The principal mouth was aNine tons burthen. t Fifteen tons.J Sawdust alone would have been better.296 WOLF — DEEK — DOGS. Oct. Nov.quarter of a mile further south, the stream being there " broadand rapid," with two fathoms water when the tide was out ; butbeset, to seaward, by sandbanks, which shift with every southeastgale. Quantities of drift-wood, a kind of willow (sauce),lay about every where, indicating that the river sometimesoverflowed its banks to a great distance, and brought downthese trees from the interior country, as none grow withinthree leagues of the mouth. The river hereabouts is dividedinto many streams, forming a great number of small islands,which are nearly all of clay covered with rushes. From one ofthese streams or channels, the Canada, there are creeks communicatingat high water with Union Bay. Here Lieut. Wick-ham'sparty saw a wolf.On the 27th they met a whale-boat (at Creek Island in Ane-gadBay) from the River Negro, in search of sea-elephants.Next day they reached a snug creek in San Bias Bay, herethey heard that the Indians had lately driven off all the cattlefrom the San Bias Estancia, had destroyed the houses, dismountedthe guns, and broken the carriages. They wereaccompanied by a number of desperate criminals who hadfled from justice at Buenos Ayres, and idle gauchos, whopreferred robbery to work, and were unquestionably the mostsavage of the troop. On the 29th the Liebre was hauled ashore,to ext-act a piece of sauce wood that had run through her bottom: and a party was afterwards employed in erecting a conspicuousmark upon Hog Island; a very difficult task, because theloose sand, of which that island wholly consists, flies in cloudsat every gust, and nowhere affords a solid foundation. By thehelp of casks filled with it, and spare anchors, they at length succeededin securing an old spar upright, which was large enoughto be seen ten miles round, in that low half-drowned country.Deer were very numerous on Javali Island ; but on the placecalled Deer Island, there was not one, though they were soplentiful there a few years before. Some dogs had been leftthere by a whale-ship, which have increased very much innumbers and are very savage : these dogs have exterminatedthe deer.Dec. 1832. san alas — wrecks. 297Any quantity of fresh water may be obtained in San BiasBay, by digging wells six or eight feet deep ; and fish areabundant : but it is no place for a ship to enter unless underfavourable circumstances of weather, wind, and tide ; and decidedlydangerous with a south-easter, because there is then asea on the banks outside which confuses the pilot's eye, andprevents his distinguishing the proper channel ; besides which,thick weather, if not rain, is the general accompaniment to thatwind.On the 3d of December the Beagle anchored off San Bias(as formerly mentioned). Both schooners went out to her, andin returning at night into San Bias Bay, working to windwardwith a strong flood tide, they passed close to an unknown rockwhich would have made an end of their cruise had they touchedit. The least water they had, however, was eight feet ;* butboth vessels were close to it, while the tide was running fouror five knots. This rock is in the middle of the entrance toSan Bias Bay. At midnight they reached their anchorage,without a dry article in either vessel.On the 6th, Lieutenant Wickham remarked, while at anchorbetween San Bias and the River Negro, off Point Ease, thatthe stream of tide began to set northward at half flood, andcontinued to run in that direction until half ebb, by the shore.It is not at all uncommon on this coast," he says, " to seewrecks of vessels above high water mark, and spars strewedalong the beach where the sea does not touch them." Thesewrecks took place during south-east gales, when the sea wasraised above its usual level in fine weather : and were thevessels spoken of in the previous chapter, as having beenentrusted to ignorant or careless prize-masters, who ran for SanBias or the River Negro, not then knowing that so fine aport as Blancoo Bay existed. Strong tides, shoals, a low coast,and bad weather would have perplexed professed seamen ;but those difficulties were insurmountable to such unpractisedcraftsmen as those who were in charge of them, and most ofthe prizes wei'e lost. One large ship of four or five hundredThe Paz drew five feet and a half, the Liebre four feet.298 Hover NEGRO BANKS. DeC.tons was taken, by a wiser master, to Port Melt, and thereher cargo was discharged into small craft, which landed itsafely in the River Negro. Many of these ill-fated vessels werenever afterwards heard of ; but from the numerous wrecks seenalong the coast between the Colorado and the Negro, it maybeinferred that they and their unfortunate crews perished inthe surf occasioned by south-east gales, or were capsized bysudden pamperoes.Running up the River Negro (on the 7th December), Lieut.Wickham found the 'freshes'* strongly against him. Thebanks of the river afforded a pleasing contrast, by their verdure,to the arid desert around Anegada Bay. Most part ofthese banks was cultivated, and great quantities of fine cornwas seen growing. Here and there were country houses (quintus)surrounded by gardens, in which apple, fig, walnut,cherry, quince, and peach trees, vines, and vegetables of mostkinds were abundantly plentiful.Although the banks of the river are so fit for cultivation,it is only in consequence of floods, which take place twicea-year — once during the rainy season of the interior, and onceat the time when the snow melts on the Cordillera. Thesefloods swell the river several feet above its banks, bringing adeposit of mud and decayed vegetable matter, which enrichesthe soil and keeps it moist even during the long droughts ofthat climate.The plough used there is wooden, and generally worked byoxen, but it does not cut deeply. Manure is never used, thesoil being so fattened by alluvial deposits.The town of Nuestra Senior del Carmen, is about six leaguesup the river, on its northern bank, upon a slightly-rising groundabout forty feet above the water. It is irregularly built : thehouses are small, one only having two stories ; and glass windowsare seldom seen : each house has a large oven. A squareenclosure of some extent, formed by walls of unbaked bricks(adobes), is called the fort, and within it are the church, theShowing that this was the period of one of the two floods to whichthe Negro is annually subject.1832. TOWN OF DEL CARMEN. 299governor's house, lodgings for the officers, and public stores.This fort commands the neighbourhood, as well as the houses(or cottages) surrounding it ; and of the hundred buildingswhich compose the town of Carmen, exclusive of about thirtyhuts on the south bank of the river, the fort is the oldest.It was built about 1763. Some houses, forty years old, are asfresh in outward appearance, as if built only a few years ago.In a population of 1,400, there are about 500 negroes. Altogetherthere may be in the town about two thousand inhabitants,but many of the poorer familles and negroes live incaves, which were dug out of cliffs on the river's bank by thefirst Spanish settlers. It is said that they served the Spaniardsas a secure refuge from the Indians, who could only approachthem by one path, easily secured. These caves, dug out ofearthy clay, are not despicable dwellings, while there is a firein them to expel damp.About a league from the entrance of the river are the ruinsof a large house, which was the " Estancia del Rey." Informerdays 100,000 head of cattle were attached to that establishment,now there is not even a calf.Some of the first settlers were living at Carmen in 1833,staunch royalists, every one looking back with regret to formertimes. One of them belonged to the crew of the Spanish launchthat first entered the river. He said, that the Indians were thenliving in detached tribes along both banks of the river, and werevery friendly to the Spaniards. This same old man afterwardsmade one of the exploring party, under Villarino, in 1786,when the natives were not only inoffensive, but gave themassistance. How different from the present day ! when if aChristian is seen by the natives, he is immediately hunted, andhis safety depends upon the fleetness of his horse. It hassometimes happened, that persons riding along near this river,have been surprized by a marauding party of Indians, andobliged, as their only resource, to leap off the banks (barracks),whether high or low, and swim across to the other side.The Indians have never followed ; hence this, though requiringresolution, is a sure mode of escape.300 INDIANS — HARSH Treatment. Dec.Prior to the conclusion of the war between Brazil and BuenosAyres (1828), the settlers at Carmen lived tranquilly —undisturbed by Indian aggression (retaliation ?) but since thattime, they have been kept in continual alarm. Prisoners areoften brought to Carmen to be ransomed, whom the Indianshave taken from other places. They are generally women orchildren ; and as the Indians often find out who their prisonersare, the ransoms asked are proportionably exorbitant. Men areusually put to death, if they do not die of their wounds. Thereis a tribe of friendly Indians living near Carmen, at the outskirtsof the town, who do much hard work for the inhabitantsfor very trifling remuneration ; but they are shamefully abused,cheated in every way by shopkeepers and liquor-venders, andharshly treated by other persons, who seem to consider theminferior beings — unworthy of any kind or humane consideration.Should one of these poor creatures fall by the knife of apassionate white man, no notice is taken of it by the authorities ;the murderer boasts of his deed, and the poor relations sufferpatiently the loss and the insult, which they dare not avenge.Having quitted the free tribes, seduced by promises neverfulfilled, they would not be received among them again ; andtheir own numbers, originally small, are reduced daily bydisease and abominable drugs, which the publicans sell themin what is said to be spirituous liquor (ague audience).Mr. Wickham saw a poor Indian woman, between fortyand fifty years of age, almost killed by a blow on the headfrom an ox's skull (with the horns), given by a wretch, whohad drawn his knife upon her husband for preventing hiskissing a pretty girl, their daughter, who was walking with her.This scoundrel was seen by Mr. Wickham, a few days afterwards,betting at the race-course with the principal people ofthe place.Thanks to the influence of Harris and Roberts, and theirconnections (both being married to daughters of Spanishsettlers), our officers and men were exceedingly well treated.Every door was open to them ; and the fruit in every gardenwas freely, as well as sincerely offered. Letters had been .INHABITANTS — TRADE. 301warded to the commandant or governor, from Buenos Ayres,desiring that we might have every facility and freedom in ouroperations ; but the disposition towards us was such, thatthose letters were not required.From the remains of former buildings, and accounts of theold men, Lieutenant Wickham thought that the Spanish settlersmust have been far more industrious and ingenious than theirCreole descendants, who are idle, indolent, and ignorant. Theheight of their ambition is to make a show at the Sunday races,where they deceive, drink, wrangle, gamble, and quarrel.These Sabbath occupations are always attended by the femalepart of the population, who take that opportunity of displayingtheir finery ; and though seated upon handkerchiefs on thesandy ground, without any defence from sun, wind, dust, orrain, every damsel displays silk stockings and a gaudy dressupon these occasions. The men do not go near them, notwithstandingtheir attire : they can beat a poor woman almost todeath, upon occasion ; but they cannot defer a bet, or risklosing a dollar, for the sake of female society.The climate is so healthy, that illness of any kind is scarcelyknown ; and the inhabitants, in general, live to a good oldage. There is a stirring trade carried on in small vessels, betweenBuenos Ayres and this place. Salt, of excellent quality,hides, peltry, seal or sea-elephant oil, and skins, are the principalexports, in return for which are received manufactures,sugar, spirits, tobacco, &c.The Indians, who live at the outskirts of the town in ' toldwhich are neither wind nor water-tight, load vessels withsalt ; but the price of their labour is usually spent in somekind of spirituous liquor, which is made and drugged expresslyfor them — the publicans often saying, " that it is a sin to givean Indian good spirits." When drunk, the howling of thesepoor wretches is quite frightful. Some of them are almostskeletons — the result, probably, of drinking.Some leagues up the river coal is obtained, I was informed,but I did not see a specimen myself. Probably Mr. Darwinhad an opportunity of examining its quality.302 CORPORAL WILLIAMS. Dec. 1 832.On the 12th, Lieutenant Wickham sailed for Blancoo Bay,to deliver some letters from me (which I had received fromBuenos Ayres) to the commandant Rodriguez.13th. Off the banks in Anegada Bay there was too much sea(during a S.W. gale) for the Liebre to keep on her courseany longer, having run as long as was prudent, and alreadyshipped several seas. When hove-to, under a balance-reefedforesail, with the tiller unshipped, she was dry and easy, andlay about five points from the wind.Mr. Wickham arrived at Argentina on the 16th, and left iton the following day. In sailing out of Blancoo Bay, along thesouth shore, while it was dark, the Liebre grounded frequently ;but her crew got overboard, and hauled her over the banks asoften as she was stopped by them, and at midnight she was atsea. A south-east gale on the 18th drove her into the Colorado,where Lieutenant Wickham found a strong outset, owingto the ' freshes,' even during the flood-tide.On the 22d, the Liebre entered the river again, and anchorednear Carmen.At daylight on the 24th, Corporal Williams was missed,supposed to have fallen overboard in the night, while asleep.He slept on deck sometimes, when tormented by mosquitoes ;and as the Liebre's weather-cloth rail was but a few inches abovethe deck, he might possibly have rolled overboard into thestream, which would immediately have carried him away. Hisbody was found, about three miles down the river, at sun-setthe next evening (Christmas day). The governor (though aRoman catholic) allowed the burial to take place in the consecratedground of the church, and the curate himself waspresent.While the Liebre was absent, Mr. Stokes, in the Paz, surveyedmany miles of the river, as well as the bar. No vesseldrawing' more than eleven feet water can enter without muchdanger : if at a favourable time any person should be inducedto risk crossing the bar with a ship of greater draught, heshould bear in mind that it is much more difficult to get to seathan it is to enter, because wind which is fair for approached.1833. port desire — gale. 303ing, raises the water ; and the reverse. Although ships drawingfourteen feet have passed the bar, at unusually favourabletimes, others of only ten feet draught have been detained fortydays in the river.29th. Both our little vessels sailed, and on the 4th of Januarythey anchored safely in Port Desire : — this was a boldstroke, but success attended it. They were thus placed at thesouthernmost point of the coast they were to survey, while thesun was farthest south ; and as the days shortened, they wouldwork along the coast northward. Recent traces of Indians werefound ; and the master of an American sealer told Mr. Wick-hamthat they had been there in considerable numbers, abouttwo months previously. The wells were all full ; thereforemuch rain must have fallen during October, November, orDecember. I have mentioned elsewhere that although theeastern coast of Patagonia is usually an arid desert, thereare periodical times, of short duration, at which rain fallsabundantly.11th. Having rated their chronometers, the little vesselsstood out to sea, in company with the North American sealer ;but they had not sailed many miles before the wind increasedto a gale, and still becoming stronger, bringing clouds of dustand sand off the land, they were reduced to bare poles, anddrifted fast off-shore, as well as northward. When the fury ofthe gale was over, their balance-reefed foresails were set, andwith their tillers unshipped they made very good weather, untilthey were driven near the tide-races off Cape Blancoo, wheresome anxious hours were passed, half-buried in foam, and thewind again almost a hurricane. Towards evening, the stormabated ; our water-soaked explorers succeeded in regaininga position under shelter of the land ; and anchored next morningunder Cape Blancoo, to dry themselves and take observations.In this severe gale, the North American schoonersplit two close-reefed foresails, lost a boat, and was otherwisedamaged.Lieutenant Wickham and Mr. Mellersh walked a long way304 SALINAS LIGHTNING. Jan. 1833.from Cape Blancoo, to trace the coast, and look out for shoalsin the offing ; in doing which, they found numerous ' Salinas'(extensive hollow places filled with salt), where the solidmass of very white and good salt was several feet in thickness.Guanacoes were numerous, hut shy. On the rocks some fur-sealwere seen ; too few, however, to be worth a sealer's notice.The following week was passed in examining St. George Bay.Scarcely any stream of tide was found in its western part,though the rise amounted to nearly twenty feet. AboutTilly road, where they landed, the mass or principal part ofthe soil, where visible in cliffs or ravines, is loose sandy clay(diluvium), with immense quantities of large fossil oyster shellsimbedded in it. These shells were found every where, even onsummits seven or eight hundred feet above the sea, and someof them weighed eight pounds,A place honoured by the Spaniards with the name of Malaysand described as a port, was found to be a wretched cove,ful of rocks, hardly safe even for the Liebre. While mooredthere, our party witnessed lightning set fire to bushes andgrass. The flames spread rapidly, and for two days, the faceof the country continued to blaze. Near Port Arredondo, Mr.Wickham went to the tops of several hills ; he found the countryunproductive, except of a few bushes, and yellow wirygrass. There were no traces of natives. Very heavy rain fellduring the night of the 28th. I mention it thus particularly,because some persons have said that rain never falls on the eastcoast of Patagonia, in any quantity.The cove called ' Oven' is a singular place, being a parting(as it were) in the solid rock, nearly a mile in length, but verynarrow, with four fathoms water in it at low tide. Surroundedon all sides by precipitous hills, it is, indeed, an oven ; andwould injure a ship seriously, even more than other portson this arid coast, if she were to lie long in it ; as her seamswould all be opened, and her planks split by the heat anddrought. The water found here was so strongly impregnatedwith salt-pere, that it was not drinkable ; but probably betterFeb. 1833. indian tombs — port santa elena. 305might have been procured had they dug fresh wells. On thesummit of South Cape an Indian tomb was found. The stoneshad been displaced, and some bones were lying about, a fewof which were taken on board, but none could be got in aperfect state. Mr. Bynoe afterwards examined them, andinformed me that they had belonged to a female of smallstature.*Off Ship Island, and thence to Cape Dos Bahiass, the tide-streamwas again felt strongly, running two, three, or, in someplaces, four knots an hour. At a little creek, in CanariesBay, near Cape Dos Bahiass, abundance of small wood, fit forfuel, was found ; and plenty of fresh water in hollows of therocks. A guanaco was shot, which weighed upwards of twohundred pounds. Not only is small wood plentiful about Cama-onesBay, but the country is sufficiently covered with grass ofgood quality. Several Indian tombs were seen on the hills,whence it may be inferred that natives at times frequent theneighbourhood, although no recent traces were met with by ourparty. Unfortunately, not one of these tombs, simply irregularpiles of stones, was found in an undisturbed state, neitherwere any more bones discovered : they are all similarlysituated upon the most conspicuous, smooth, and round-toppedhills.At Port Santa Elena many tons of excellent water were procuredfrom hollows in the rocks, (7th Feb.) Approaches to treeswere found at this place, which though stunted as to height,much like thorn-trees in exposed situations, were of respectabledimensions. One measured more than three feet round thetrunk, but its fellow was not seen.After dusk, on the 10th, while endeavouring to enter NewBay, with a fresh wind and strong flood-tide, the Liebre gotinto a ' race,' and was hustled within a fathom of a rock, overwhich the tide was boiling furiously. Fortunately, the Pazsaw the Liebre alter course and make more sail, and by imme-I gave them to Sir Francis Chantry, by whom they were shown toseveral persons.VOL. II. X306 NEW BAY — TJIVEE CHUPAT. Feb.lately following her example, avoided the danger. They thenhauled ofF, and passed the night at sea.Next day (11th), they stood towards the bay again, thewind increasing fast, till it blew a gale from W.S.W., whichbeing against a flood-tide stream, running at the rate of fourknots through the entrance, raised a short hollow sea, dangerousfor small craft. Battening down the hatches securely,and close-reefing, the little vessels worked through gallantly,though frequently obliged to lower their sails in squalls, or asthey dived into a sea heavier than usual. The tide soon sweptthem beyond the narrow part, and then they were comparativelyin safety.Part of the west shores of New Bay seemed to be fit for cultivation,being covered with a fine dark soil ; and there isabundance of fire-wood. Some small ponds of excellent waterwere found, over a clayey bed, in which were tracks of cattle.A guanaco shot here was superior to any killed elsewhere, as tocondition. Many thousand seals were seen on the rocks, whichdid not take to the water as soon as disturbed — therefore theycould not have been much molested by man.On the 24th, Lieutenant AVickham discovered the riverChupat, and after waiting for the tide, anchored half a milewithin the entrance. Next day he went a few miles up it in aboat, and found that, though free from drift-timber, it wasshoal and narrow, few places being deeper than six feet at low-water,or wider than a hundred yards. The stream ran downtwo or three knots an hour. Many tracks of cattle were seen,but none of natives. As the river seemed to be free from sunkentrees, and to have but few banks in it, Mr. Wickham decidedto move the Liebre as far up as he could, and then makeanother excursion in his little two-oared skiff. Betweenpulling* and sailing, the Liebre was moved twelve miles upin one day, and was moored in the middle of the stream, lestIndians should be near.Next morning, Mr. Wickham went in his boat, about eightBoth the vessels had oars.1S23. Itch SOIL CATTLE. 307miles further ; but in a direct line he was then not more thantwelve miles from the entrance. Along the banks on eachside, as he had advanced, both he and those with him, weremuch struck by the richness of the alluvial land (caused doubtlessby the river overflowing its low banks), and by the quantitiesof drift-timber, which actually looked like the stores inimmense timber-yards. Among the drift-wood there were manylarge and sound trees left several hundred yards from thebanks, therefore the periodical floods must be great.At Mr. Wickham's westernmost point "the river, and thecountry round had a beautiful appearance, as seen from arising ground on the south side — an excellent position for asettlement." From this elevation the stream was traced to thewestward, running with a very serpentine course, throughlevel meadow land, covered with rich herbage. Several herdsof wild cattle were seen, and their traces were observed everywherein such numbers as to indicate a great abundance ofanimals.Mr. Wickham returned on the 26th to the entrance, andfound that a store of fish had been salted by the cook, whileMr. Stokes and others were going about, surveying the neighbourhood.These fish were a kind of bass, nearly as good assalmon.I have no doubt that this is a river whose existence hasbeen many years known by Spaniards, but of which the situationwas intentionally concealed, on account of the lucrativetrade some individuals hoped to carry on by means of hidesand tallow obtained from the herds of wild cattle. The Spaniardsused to anchor their vessels in Port San Jose, andthence ride in large parties to the Chupat ; there they surroundednumbers of cattle, and drove them across the peninsulabetween San Jose and New Bay, where they slaughtered themat leisure. Numbers were probably killed nearer the river ;but all that could be driven, had doubtless the privilege ofconveying their own hides to the neighbourhood of their hunters'ships. There was still living at the River Negro (in 1833)an old man, who was one of the few individuals that escapedx2308 SPANISH SETTLEMENT. Marcelduring a dreadful massacre of Spanish settlers at Port SanJose. He said that the Indians were jealous of their encroachments,and seized an opportunity, while the Spaniards wereattending the performance of mass, to fall upon them, andindiscriminately slay all, except three or four who were takenalive and kept as slaves.That the Spaniards should have chosen San Jose for theplace of their settlement instead of New Bay, or the Chupatitself, is easily accounted for, by mentioning that small vesselscan generally run from the River Negro to Port San Josewithout much risk and in a short time, whereas there arestrong tides and dangerous ' races' off the peninsula of SanJose, and the entrance of the Chupat will not admit a vesseldrawing more than seven feet : even this only at high-water. Ithink that the Chupat is the river alluded to by Falkner,as being in the " country of Chulilaw." * He was told thatit traversed the continent as far as the Andes, and judgingfrom the drift-timber, as well as volcanic scoriae brought downby it, there is ground for thinking that the Chupatf rises in theCordillera. There is also reason to suppose that the river describedand placed variously by different geographers, underthe name of Canaries, is this Chupat, chiefly because theIndians who frequent the country bordering upon the southbank of the Negro, say that there is no river of consequencebetween that and the Santa Cruz, excepting the Chupat.With this river so near at hand, the west side of New Baywould be an excellent situation for a settlement. There shipsof any burthen might anchor in safety, and a communication becarried on with the interior by means of flat-bottomed boats,or barges, so constructed as to admit of being towed, or tracked,in the river, and capable of running up to New Bay before afair wind. In the River Negro similar boats go a long way upthe river for salt ; they are towed by horses or oxen ; and suchvessels, even of thirty tons burthen, might enter the Chupat,if constructed so as to draw but little water. I need not dwellupon the possible advantages to be derived from opening aFalkner, p. 87. t Chupat is the Indian name.I1833. Vales CREEK — TIDES. 309communication across the continent with Chloe, which mightbe a means of diffusing Christianity, civilization, and commercialintercourse.On the 3d, Lieut. Wickham and his party left the Chupat.Early on the 5th they entered Valdes Creek (by the Spaniardsstyled ' port), with the flood tide running nearly six knotsinto the narrow entrance : and on its shores found heaps ofhorns and bones, besides the wreck of a vessel.* These wereindications of one of the temporary settlements maintained onthe peninsula of San Jose for the purpose of obtaining hides.The carcases of the animals were invariably left to decay ; afew delicate portions only being selected for food.Until the 12th our little vessels were unable to quit thissingular place, for the ebb tide set so strongly against the swelloutside, raised by a S.E. gale, that they could not attempt tocross the bar. Sometimes the very narrow entrance of ValdesCreek is almost stopped up for a time by shingle and sand,after a S.E. gale has been blowing for a few days, therefore atsuch a time no vessel ought to run for it.During the war between Brazil and Buenos Ayres (1825-9),Mr. Adams, of Carmen, was master of a merchant vesselhired by Vernet to convey settlers to the Falkland Islands. Inreturning thence, short of water and provisions, he thought toput into Valdes Creek, knowing that some people were thereemployed in collecting hides. He ran in for the land, with afresh S.E. wand, and did not discover, until almost too late,that the bar was not passable. When close in he perceived aheavy sea breaking at the entrance, where he expected smoothwater, and directly hauled off; but it was only by carrying aheavy press of sail that he cleared the land ; and at the expenseof passing through ' races,' which tore off the vessel's bulwarksand otherwise damaged her materially. As our cock-boatscrossed this bar, they had ten feet water, but on each side of itthere were five fathoms. The Liebre, sharp built, plunged intoeach short swell ; while the Paz, with her bluff bow, did notOf about two hundred tons burthen.310 BAR — CRITICAL POSITION. Marlitake in a single sea. The bar is a continuation of the longshingle spit, or bank, which forms the seaward side of theharbour ; and is about nine miles long, though in some placesnot a hundred yards broad.Towards noon the wind fell light, and the vessels wereswept by a strong tide-stream towards a ' race,' whose noisemight have appalled the crews of much larger and stouterbarks. No bottom could be struck with the deep-sea lead, andno efforts of the crews at the oars had much effect in arrestingtheir progress towards apparently inevitable destruction. Evenat this awful time, habitual familiarity with danger, and zealfor the services shewed their effects strongly in Mr. Stokes,who eagerly watched for the sun's meridian altitude, withhis sextant to his eye, while every now and then he caught ahasty glimpse of the foaming and roaring race towards whichthe little craft were fast approaching. At this crisis a breezesprung up which just enabled them to pass clear ; but noone who was in those vessels can ever forget that day, neitherdo I think they attribute their preservation to blind chance.Sailors see too many of these ' chances' to think of or reflectupon them lightly, and those who have had experience are notwont to forget, that to direct and to preserve are among theleast efforts of Omnipotence — so far, at least, as our limitedintelligence enables us to discern.At five that afternoon the Paz and Liebre were about eighteenmiles offshoot, out of soundings with their lead-lines, andyet were only a mile and half from the eastern part of therace ; therefore they still stood to seaward, to get as far as possiblefrom a neigh boui'hood so dangerous at any time, butespecially so at night. For two hours they passed through arippling, but could strike no soundings with sixty fathoms ofline.In 1830 Mr. Harris (owner of the Paz) sailed from the RiverNegro in a vessel of about ninety tons, with some horses onboard,which he had engaged to convey to a party of gauchoeswho were employed on the peninsula of San Jose, in killingcattle for their hides. Within the Bay of San Matias, about six1833. ' races' SAN JOSE. 311leagues N.W. of the port (San Jose), he got into one of theseraces, '^ and could not extricate his vessel. No soundings couldbe obtained : the sails were useless in consequence of the violentmotion and want of wind, where the water was breaking sofuriously, though elsewhere a fresh breeze was blowing ; andnothing could be done. The crew took to the rigging, to avoidbeing washed overboard; and for almost three hours theywere tossed about, like an empty bottle in a ripple, before therace abated, with the turn of tide, so as to admit of theirsails acting enough to draw them a-head out of the commotion.The vessel, though a strong one, was so much shaken anddamaged, the horses so much injured, and all hands so muchscared,' as Harris honestly told me, that he steered backdirect for the Negro, forfeited his agreement, and refused to goagain.On the 14th March the Paz and Liebre again crossedthe bar of the River Negro, and next day they anchoreda-breast of the town (Carmen). Lieut. Wickham found thatan expedition had been sent from Buenos Ayres for the purposeof obliging the Indians to retire beyond (southward of)the Negro ; and, if possible, deprive them of their horses.Bad weather and a heavy sea on the bar, caused by south-eastgales, prevented the Paz and Liebre from sailing again untilthe 11th of April, when they went to Port San Antonio, andafterwards into Port San Jose. Plenty of firewood, and abundanceof fish, were found at San Antonio ; but no fresh water,except by digging wells. The tide-stream rushes into and outof Port San Jose in a violent manner, especially when opposedby wind ; but after the narrow part of the entrance is passed,all agitation of the water ceases, except what may be caused bywind. It is a barren and desolate place, without wood or freshwater,and too large for a harbour. Our party saw proof ofthis assertion in the wreck of a small vessel at the north-eastpart of the port, which had been driven from her anchors and• The tide-races within the bay are less formidable than those off PointNorth, near which our vessels were.312 Remarkable RIPPLES AND RACES. Maytotally lost, though she was lying in a land-locked bay, orrather gulf.On the 6th of May, while returning from San Jose to theRiver Negro, our little vessels got into a ripple, which did notbreak, but had almost the appearance of a whirlpool. There wasa hollow short swell, and an irregular motion in every direction,exactly like the boiling of a pot, on a great scale. Here againthey could touch no bottom with fifty fathoms of line and aheavy lead. These races and ripplings in such deep water,about the peninsula of San Jose, are very remarkable ; chieflybecause there are none such on any other part of the coast.They will be recurred to in a future page of this volume.May 7th. The Paz and Liebre returned to the Negro, butcould not reach an anchorage off" Carmen until late the nextday, owing to the ' freshes.' * The next occupation for ourparty was examining and sounding the entrance and bar of theNegro, a task purposely deferred, as being of minor consequence.The mouth of a rapid river like this, subject tofloods, and disemboguing at a place exposed to the full forceof such a heavy sea as is raised on that coast by a south-east gale,must be frequently changed, as to the detail of its shoals andchannels ; therefore no plan, however exact at one time, can bedepended upon after the lapse of a few years ; and no vessellarger than a boat would be justified in attempting to enterwithout a local pilot, if one can be obtained. In one spot, nearMain Point, where a small battery stood in 1826, there weretwo fathoms water in 1833 ; and within the same period thedeepest water for a few miles within the entrance, changed graduallyfrom the south side to the north. Mr. Darwin was toldthat the river was called Negro after a cacique of that name ;but Falkner asserts that it was so called by the Spaniards, becausethe aborigines knew it by the name of ' Casu Leuvu,"*which means black river. -}*There are two floods annually : one about December or January,caused by snow melted on the Cordillera; and the other about May orJune, occasioned by heavy rains in the interior country. These inundationsare very variable. t Falkner, p. 79.1833. HUNTING — PUMAS INDIANS. 313In May, June, July, and August, the neighbourhood of thisriver swarms with wild fowl, which migrate from the south,for the winter, and return there to breed about September.The old people foretell a severe winter when they arrive early,and in greater numbers than usual. In 1833-4 they formedthe staple article of food for the inhabitants of Carmen duringthe winter, as the Indians had deprived them of their cattle ; inthe summer cavies and ostriches supplied their tables. Huntingis a favourite amusement of the Carmelite. They sallyforth in large parties on horseback, attended by a motleycrowd of dogs, inclose a large extent of country, contractthe circle gradually,* and at last drive a great number ofostriches, wolves, cavies, deer, foxes, and pumas, into a comparativelysmall space, when the indiscriminate attack commences— balls and lassoes flying in every direction. Manyaccidents happen to the horses in these hunts, owing to theground being so undermined, in some places, by the ' tucu-tucu,'"!" a little animal like a small rabbit ; but the riders areso skilful, that they generally save themselves, however awkwardlytheir horses may fall. Pumas are an especial object ofattack, not only for the risk attached to encountering them,but because they do so much damage to the young animals ofall kinds : they have a peculiar method of instantly killing ayoung colt by breaking its neck with an adroit blow of onepaw, vfhile the poor creature is held fast between the other anda most formidably aimed mouth. In 1779 there were numerousherds of cattle and horses near the town of Carmen, butincursions of the Indians have diminished them to but few.During the time of the old Spaniards, after 1783, more than athousand Indians attacked the settlement at one time. The inhabitantsretreated to their caves!: where, defended by strongdoors, with loop-holes for musketry, they were safe ; but theirAs in eastern countries.t This Indian name, gutturally pronounced, expresses the curioussound made by these creatures while under ground — a noise somewhatlike the blow of a distant hammer.J Mentioned in p, 299.314 Villain — Constitution. Mayhouses were ransacked and burned, and all their animals drivenaway. Since that time the frequent predatory excursions ofminor parties of Indians have prevented the settlers from againattempting to collect animals in large numbers, seeing that theywould assuredly tempt the aborigines to repeat their attacks ona greater scale than ever. The old man, who was one of Villarino'sparty,* gave Mr. Darwin some information about thatexpedition, which entirely corroborates the interesting accountof Bailie Villarino himself, who made his way, by excellentmanagement, and extreme perseverance, to the foot of theCordillera, though surrounded by Indians suspicious of hisintentions. He managed so dexterously as to make one tribebecome his firm friends and assistants ; and behaved so wellhimself, in his own enterprises, as well as in his conduct tothose under him, as to have obtained their hearty co-operationduring eight long months. But he was soon afterwards savagelymurdered by the natives during another exploring expedition.-f-The old man said that ViUarino was much guided by theaccount of an Englishman whose description of the river andIndian country was found to be very accurate. Mr. Darwinheard several anecdotes of the Indians, and their attacks uponthe Christians (so they term aU white men) which interested mevery much ; but as I suppose they will be found in his volume,it is unnecessary here to do more than allude to them.On the 12th May Mr.Usborne, in the Constitucion, anchoredin the river, and next day put himself under Mr. Stokes's orders;to whom Lieut. Wickham gave up the charge of this branch ofthe survey, and then went on board the Constitucion to hastentowards Maldonado. On the 17th all three Uttle vessels sailed,Lieut. Wickham steering for the Plata, and Mr. Stokes forSan Bias.From this time till the Paz and Liebre were discharged, inBowman of his boat (lancetSir Woodbine Parish has given an abridged translation of Villarino'sDiary in the Journal of the R. Geog. Society for 1836, vol. vi, part ii,pp.136 — 167. J Falkner evidently.1833. MK. STOKES's PARTY. 315August,* Mr. Stokes and his party were most zealously occupiedbetween the Negro and Blancoo Bay ; but time was toofully occupied in the uninteresting, though useful works, ofsounding, measuring, observing, and chart-making, to admitof many notices of the country being obtained in addition tothose already mentioned ; indeed the nature of the coast, almostflat, uninhabited, without trees, and fronted by extensive sandbanks,precluded the possibility of acquiring much informationnot of a technical nature.Already mentioned, p. 288.CHAPTER XV.Beagle and Adventure sail from Monte Video— Port Desire — BellacocoRock — Refraction — Port San Julian — Viedma — Drake — Magalhaens— Patagonians — Port Famine — San Sebastian Bay — VVoollya — JemmyStory — Treachery— Opens-men — Improvement — Gratitude — Falklands— Events Captain Sermon — Search for Murderers — LieutenantSmith — Brisbane — Wreck — Sufferings — Lieutenant Clive — Sail fromFalklands.Dec. 6th, 1833. With a supply of provisions and coals,*sufficient for at least nine months, the Beagle and her tendersailed together from Monte video.We first touched at Port Desire (23d Dec), and afterpassing a very cheerful Christmas-day-f- and exploring theinlet to its extremity, the Adventure was left to completesome alterations in her masts and rigging, while the Beaglewould survey the coast between Sea Bear Bay and Port SanJulian,The party who went up the inlet were much struck by thewildness and height]: of the rocky cliffs which they saw oneach side of what appeared to have been the bed of a formerriver ; but could go no further with the yawl than I had beenin 1829- This I had foreseen, and therefore Mr. Chaffers, whowas in charge of the party, took with him a small dinghy, inwhich he went on after the yawl was stopped by the mud.Having proceeded two miles further, the prospect changedsuddenly ; instead of wild glens and precipitous heights ofporphyritic rock, low flat banks were seen, covered with rushesnear the water, and, further from the stream, with luxuriantpasture. It was almost high water when the dinghy reachedthis spot and entered a fresh water river about a hundredWood and water being easily procured in the regions we were goingto visit, we carried only a month's store of those essentials.t After noon on the 25th, both crews amused themselves on shore inwrestling, racing, jumping, and various games.J About three hundred feet."TS'^i'm'^i u'lmr^i' ^^^wf"w'uiM<£ Aiu Vials iHJLl^^siiu) &iF ihtfliu^U l£l£KUUKlC URGr.S'u'Published 'by Ucnry Colbum Greta "tfajtrboroxigli S^recL ;sisDec.1833. iuver rock at port desire. 317yards wide, but so shallow that there was only three feet waterin the middle. The river narrowed considerably as theyascended, till at the spot where Mr. Chaffers stopped to takesights of the sun, the stream was but forty yards across. Inthat place the deepest water was three feet at the top of hightide, over a gravelly bottom ; but from the level space betweenthe stream and the foot of the nearest hills, about three quartersof a mile, there was reason for supposing that during floodsall the valley might be inundated. From a neighbouring hill,four hundred feet in height, the river could be traced severalmiles further, making a distance of about eight miles seen byour party, in which the water was quite fresh. It was lost tothe westward, winding along an irregular break, or clifF-boundedvalley, in the distant hills. The only living creature seen, ofany size, was a lame horse, feeding near the river. There wereno traces whatever of Indians. Having hastened back withthe little boat before the river dried* (at half-ebb), Mr.Chaffers ascended another hill ; but saw little more exceptingan appearance of water to the southward, about which he couldnot clearly distinguish whether it was a lake, part of a river,or a salt-pond. I have no doubt, that during particular seasonsa large body of fresh water is brought down this valley,but I do not think the river rises near the Andes, because thereis no drift-wood on its banks, and the Indians say nothing ofit when enumerating the rivers which cross the continent.Jan. 4th, 1834. In working out of Port Desire, the Beaglestruck her fore-foot heavily against a rock, so as to shake herfore and aft ; but on she went with the tide, and as shemade no water, I did not think it worth while returning intoport. I was instantly convinced that we had hit the very rockon which the Beagle struck in 1829, in the night — a dangerwe never again could find by daylight till this day, when Iwas, rather imprudently, going out with the last quarter-ebb.The tide fell more than fourteen feet perpendicularly ; but a smallbrook remained, perhaps a foot deep, winding its course between theuncovered banks.318 Bella ROCKS — Reaction. Jan.At low-water there are but eight feet on this rock, which is notfar from mid-channel, just without the entrance.We anchored near Watchman Cape, and in other placesalong the coast, before reaching Port San Julian, and sometimewas devoted to an examination of the BeUaco Rock andits vicinity, as there is a dangerous reef extending from WatchmanCape towards, but not quite out to the Bellacoco.In my own notes I find this rock mentioned as " almostcovered at times, but occasionally showing above water as highas the hull of a ship !" In Mr. Stokes's journal, left with me,it is mentioned in these words : " Passed between the BellacocoRocks, close to the eastern one, nearly a-wash ;" and in thediary of the NodaW voyage (in 1619), it is spoken of as " unabaa que lababa la mar en ella," which means, a rock a-wash.The rise of tide there is about twenty feet, which explainsthe various appearances it had to my eye ; for at high water Isaw it almost covered, or a-wash ; and as the Nodules describedit similarly in 1619, there can have been extremely little, if any,change in the relative heights of sea and land in this placeduring the last two hundred and fifteen years.* Some time ago Ithought differently, having formed a hasty opinion upon thefact of my having seen the rock as high out of water as a ship'shull. I did not then consider how much the tide falls, nor didI recollect, till I referred to notes, that I had also seen ita-wash (the top almost level with the water), at times duringthe many days we were in the neighbourhood.On the day that Mr. Stokes and myself made our respectivenotes on the Bellacoco (without any communication of opinion),an extraordinary effect of refraction was remarked. The meridianaltitude of the sun (then far south) observed at oppositehorizons, differed no less than sixteen miles ! Similar effectshad been noticed before, especially on the Patagoniann coast,therefore we generally observed both ways ; but to nearlyAs the larger and eastern rock is about a hundred yards long andeighty wide, with kelp growing on most parts of it, I do not think thetop can wear away while so protected by sea-weed.1834. VIEWS— PORT SAN JULIAN. , 319such an extent as this we never either before or afterwards witnessedan error arising wholly from the state of the atmospherenear the horizon ; causing the visible water-line to be apparentlyraised several minutes of a degree. On these occasions wealways used the mean of the two results, which agreed closelywith the latitude resulting from triangular connection withpoints on the shore, whose latitude we knew by observationsmade with the artificial horizon.*7th. Mr. Stokes and I landed some leagues northward ofPort San Julian, near Cape Look-out, and ascended a developedrange of hills about 300 feet above the sea. The viewwe obtained was similar to those so tiresomely common ineastern Patagonia. Level, arid, desert-like plains extendedto the horizon : a few irregular hills were seen in the distance;some furnaces and a few ostriches were here and there discerned; a fox crossed our path, and a condor wheeled overhead; nothing more was noticed.We returned to the low ground near the sea, and there wefound plenty of small wood, stunted shrubby trees, fit forfuel ; as well as several ponds of fresh-water. The rise oftide on the shore was considerably more than twenty feet, butwe had not time to ascertain it accurately.9th. Mount Woods that excellent land-mark for Port SanJulian, was seen at daylight : and about noon the Beagleanchored ofi" the bar of the harbour. Mr. Stokes went withrae to examine the passage, and before evening our ship wassafely moored in the port. This was one, among numerousinstances I could mention, where the good qualities of theBeagle, as to sailing and working, saved us days of delay,trouble, and anxiety. All hands immediately set-to about theplan of the port, and such efficient officers as were with memade short work of it. One day Mr. Darwin and I undertookan excursion in search of fresh water, to the head of theinlet, and towards a place marked in an old Spanish plan,Bellacoco rocks are the same as Estevan shoal. There are at least twodistinct masses of rock. A ship may pass between them,t Nine hundred and fifty feet high.320 Search FOR FRESH WATER. Jan.pozos de ague dulce ;" but after a very fatiguing walk notadrop of water could be found. I lay down on the top of ahill, too tired and thirsty to move farther, seeing two lakes ofwater, as we thought, about two miles off, but unable toreach them. Mr. Darwin, more accustomed than the men, ormyself, to long excursions on shore, thought he could get tothe lakes, and went to try. We watched him anxiously fromthe top of the hill,* saw him stoop down at the lake, but immediatelyleave it and go on to another, that also he quittedwithout delay, and we knew by his slow returning pace thatthe apparent lakes were ' salinas.' We then had no alternativebut to return, if we could, so descending to meet him atoneside of the height, we all turned eastward and trudgedalong heavily enough. The day had been so hot that ourlittle stock of water was soon exhausted, and we were allmore or less laden with instruments, ammunition, or weapons.About dusk I could move no farther, having foolishly carrieda heavy double-barrelled gun all day besides instruments, so,choosing a place which could be found again, I sent the partyon and lay down to sleep ; one man, the most tired next tomyself, staying with me. A glass of water would have mademe quite fresh, but it was not to be had. After some hours,two of my boat's crew returned with water, and we werevery soon revived. Towards morning we all got on board,and no one suffered afterwards from the over-fatigue, exceptMr. Darwin, who had had no rest during the whole of thatthirsty day — now a matter of amusement, but at the time avery serious affair.Sir Woodbine Parish intends to publish a description ofthe Spanish settlements on these shores, in which no doubtViedma's, at Port San Julian, will have place. A fullaccount of it, in the original language, may be found in thediary of Antonio de Viedma, published at Buenos Ayres, in18B7, by Don Pedro de Angels. Finding no water near theharbour except after rain, which is there rare, Viedma pitchedNamed in the plan ' Thirsty Hill.'1834. VIEDMA — MAGALHAENS — DRAKE. 321his tents some leagues inland, near a spring frequented by theIndians, but their doubtful friendship, the progress of scurvyamong his own people, their discontent at such a situation,and other reasons, inclined the "Spanish viceroy to withdrawthe settlement. This dreary port, difficult of access and inhospitableeven when the stranger is within its entrance, iswell known to readers of early voyages as the place whereMagalhaens so summarily quelled a serious mutiny, and conspiracyagainst his own life, by causing the two principaloffenders, captains of ships in the squadron, to be put todeath :* and as the scene of the unfortunate Doughty's mocktrial and unjust execution. -^ That two such remarkable expeditionsas those of Magalhaens and Drake should have winteredat Port San Julian, and that two such tragedies shouldhave occurred there is remarkable. In the plan of that portwe now see Execution Island, Isle of True Justice, (injustice?) and Tomb Point : the two former being namesgiven by Drake One naturally asks how their ships obtainedwater, and the answers occurring to me are, — that theywere there in the winter season, when the rain which falls isnot soon dried up ; and that they may have dug wells, whichwe did not think it worth while to do, having no time to spare.15th. A French whaler came in over the bar, at high water,without having sounded it, or knowing what depth she wouldfind. The only instance of similar folly I have witnessed wasthat of a sealing schooner which I met near Port Famine,whose master had taken her through Possession Bay and bothNarrows, without knowing that the tide rose and fell there morethan six or seven feet, and without a chart of the Strait.When I told this man that the tide rose six or seven fathomsat the First Narrow, he certainly did not believe me. The barof San Julian is shingle (or gravel), and often altered informby south-east gales or unusual tides. Under ordinarycircumstances the tide rises thirty feet at full moon.1520. + Drake's Voyage, 1578.t And the latter a memento of Lieut. Shall, of the Beg-le, (vol. I.)VOL. II. Y322 PATAGONIANS — PORT FAMINE. Jan., Feb.19th. Sailed, and, for once during our experience of theseshores, found a heavy swell setting in from the east.*On the 20th we anchored again in Port Desire, and our firstemployment was to look for the rock whose top (Mr. May assuredme with a grave face) we had knocked off with our keel.22d. Both vessels sailed, and at sunset the Adventure partedcompany, steering for New Island in the Falklands. LieutenantWickham was to make a connected survey of the coastof that archipelago, while the Beagle was in other places.-f-After giving some time to sounding and examining portions ofground in the neighbourhood of Cape Virgins and the easternentrance of Magalhaens" Strait, we passed the First Narrowand anchored in Gregory Bay. There, of course, we had aninterview with old Maria and her party. They received uskindly, but with some form, being assembled and seated onthe ground near our landing place, with two men standing upin the midst of them, who looked immoveable grave andstupidly dignified. These men were acting as caciques, Mariasaid, the real chiefs being absent. They were stripped to thewaist, and the upper parts of their bodies spotted withwhite paint. J The rest of the people were dressed as usual.An active barter commenced, but the portly actors in themiddle did not take part in it, they remained in their solemnitytill we left them.On the 2d of February we anchored in Port Famine, andon the 10th, having obtained chronometer observations forwhich I went there, we sailed for the neighbourhood of theFirst Narrow and Lamas Bay (near Point Catherine). Weoften anchored thereabouts in the prosecution of our work.On the 17th, as we ran along the curious spit or bank ofshingle that fronts San Sebastian Bay, I really could not tell,though I had been in that bay before, whether I had not beenI think that this easterly swell must have been caused by a southeastgale, though it came to us from the east.+ Appendix, No. 18.J Much as a piece of new knotty wood is spotted with white leadbefore it receives a coat of paint.,,.^March. san Sebastian bay— woolly. 323deceived as to no channel existing,* so well defined and distinctdid a wide opening appear. A few more minutes, however,undeceived me : I discerned low flat land stretchingalong the western horizon : and soon afterwards we anchored inthe bay. The following week was occupied in surveying thenorth-eastern shore of Tierra del Fuego, which, except SanSebastian Bay, does not contain a port. San Vicente Coveis not worth notice as a harbour.On the 25th, Ave anchored at the Herraite Islands, on thenorth-east side of Wollaston Island. Thence, on the 27th,we crossed Nassau Bay to Goreee Road, and the following dayentered the Beagle Channel.The 1st of March passed in replenishing our wood andwater at a cove, where we had an opportunity of makingacquaintance with some Yapoo Tekeenica natives, who seemednot to have met white men before.Till the 5th the Beagle was actively occupied, by day, inworking to windward (westward) through the channel, andthen she anchored at Woollyaa. But few natives were seen aswe sailed along : probably they were alarmed at the ship, anddid not show themselves. The wigwams in which I had leftYork, Jemmy, and Fuegia, were found empty, though uninjured: the garden had been trampled over, but some turnipsand potatoes of moderate size were pulled up by us, and eatenat my table, a proof that they may be grown in that region.Not a living soul was visible any where ; the wigwams seemed• to have been deserted many months ; and an anxious hour ortwo passed, after the ship was moored, before three canoes wereseen in the offing, paddhng hastily towards us, from the placenow called Button Island. Looking through a glass I sawthat two of the natives in them were washing their faces, whilethe rest were paddling with might and main : I was then surethat some of our acquaintances were there, and in a few minutesrecognized Tommy Button, Jemmy's brother. In the othercanoe was a face which I knew yet could not name. " It mustbe some one I have seen before," said I, — when his sharp eye• Vol. I. p. 457-8.y2324 * JEMMY ' AND HIS FAMILY. Marchdetected me, and a sudden movement of the hand to his head(as a sailor touches his hat) at once told me it was indeedJemmy Button — but how altered ! I could hardly restrain myfeelings, and I was not, by any means, the only one so touchedby his squalid miserable appearance. He was naked, like hiscompanions, except a bit of skin about his loins ; his hair waslong and matted, just like theirs ; he was wretchedly thin, andhis eyes were affected by smoke. We hurried him below,clothed him immediately, and in half an hour he was sittingwith me at dinner in my cabin, using his knife and fork properly,and in every way behaving as correctly as if he hadnever left us. He spoke as much English as ever, and, to ourastonishment, his companions, his wife, his brothers and theirwives, mixed broken English words in their talking with him.Jemmy recollected every one well, and was very glad to seethem all, especially Mr. Bynoe and James Bennett. I thoughthe was ill, but he surprised me by saying that he was " hearty,sir, never better"* that he had not been ill, even for a day,was happy and contented, and had no wish whatever to changehis way of life. He said that he got " plenty fruits,"f " plentybirdies," " ten guanaco in snow time," and "too much fish."Besides, though he said nothing about her, I soon heard thatthere was a good-looking ;]: young woman in his canoe, who wassaid to be his wife. Directly this became known, shawls, handkerchiefs,and a gold-laced cap appeared, with which she wasspeedily decorated ; bit fears had been excited for her husband'ssafe return to her, and no finery could stop her cryinguntil Jemmy again showed himself on deck. While he wasbelow, his brother Tommy called out in a loud tone-^-" JemmyButton, canoe, come !" After some time the three canoes wentashore, laden with presents, and their owners promised to coralagain early next morning. Jemmy gave a fine otter skin tome,which he had dressed and kept purposely ; another he gaveto Bennett.A favourite saying of his,, formerly.t Excrescences on the birch trees, and berries,X For a Fuegian,^^;>Ny 'ECI)«.V ISftSDiET. n33S.a)Es«Mv's Wife uaa*.sji^'«iir;.lftRfflV DN C3S^K.j'liFiufjmr ©ofTiriai^i of '.'SSs.■ifoiRDi fioawsTEK n.Ffl Dsascork DM nsSia.(? U IS (B D fc M S .l^i'.li£ii>=\T bv HcTti^y Colbrm.Greul "Msrlbca:aagh.Strect."ir<i&1834. 'York's' treachery — jemmy's story. 325- Next morning Jemmy shared my breakfast, and then belindalong conversation by ourselves ; the result of which was,that I felt quite decided not to make a second attempt toplace Matthews among the natives of Tierra del Fuego.Jemmy told me that he knew very little of his own language ;that he spoke some words of English, and some Tekeenica,when he talked to his family ; and that they all understood theEnglish words he used. York and Fuegia left him somemonths before our arrival, and went in a large canoe to theirown country ; the last act of that cunning fellow was to robpoor Jemmy of all his clothes ; nearly all the tools his Tekee-nice 'friends' had left him; and various other necessaries.Fuegia was dressed as usual, and looking well, when they decamped: her helpmate was also well clothed, and bad hardlylost anything I left with him. Jemmy said " York very muchjaw," " pick up big stones," "all men afraid." Fuegia seemedto be very happy, and quite contented with her lot. Jemmyasserted that she helped to " catch (steal) his clothes," while hewas asleep, the night before York left him naked.Not long after my departure in February 1833, the much-dreadedOpens-men came in numbers, overland, to Woollyaa ;obliged Jemmy's tribe to escape to the small islands, and carriedoff every valuable which his party had not time to remove.They had doubtless heard of the houses and property leftthere, and hastened to seize upon it — like other ' borderers.'Until this time York had appeared to be settled, and quite atease, but he had been employed about a suspiciously largecanoe, just finished when the inroad was made. He savedthis canoe, indeed escaped in it, and afterwards induced Jemmyand his family to accompany him " to look at his land." Theywent together in four canoes (York's large one and threeothers) as far west as Devil Island, at the junction of thenorth-west and south-west arms of the Beagle Channel : therethey met York's brother and some others of the Alikhooliptribe ; and, while Jemmy was asleep, all the Alikhoolip partystole off, taking nearly all Jemmy's things, and leaving him inhis original condition. York's fine canoe was evidently not326 Gems-MEN IMPROVEMENT. Marchbuilt for transporting himself alone ; neither was the meetingwith his brother accidental. I am now quite sure that from thetime of his changing his mind, and desiring to be placed atWoollyaa, with Matthews and Jemmy, he meditated taking agood opportunity of possessing himself of every thing ; andthat he thought, if he were left in his own country withoutMatthews, he would not have many things given to him, neitherwould he know where he might afterwards look for andplunder poor Jemmy.While Mr. Bynoe was walking about on shore, Jemmy andhis brother pointed out to him the places where our tents werepitched in 1833, where the boundary line was, and where anyparticular occurrence happened. He told Mr. Bynoe that hehad watched day after day for the sprouting of the peas, beans,and other vegetables, but that his countrymen walked over themwithout heeding any thing he said. The large wigwams whichwe had erected with some labour, proved to be cold in thewinter, because they were too high ; therefore they had beendeserted after the first frosts. Since the last depredations of theOpens-men, he had not ventured to live any longer at Woollyaa ;his own island, as he called it, affording safer refuge and sufficientfood.Jemmy told us that these Opens-men crossed over the BeagleChannel, from eastern Tierra del Fuego, in canoes which theyseized from the Yapoo Tekeenica. To avoid being separatedthey fastened several canoes together, crossed over in a body,and when once landed, travelled over-land and came upon hispeople by surprise, from the heights behind Woollyaa. Jemmyasserted that he had himself killed one of his antagonists. ItAlas generally remarked that his family were become considerablymore humanized than any savages we had seen inTierra del Fuego : that they put confidence in us ; werepleased by our return ; that they were ready to do what wecould explain to be for their interest ; and, in short, that the firststep towards civilization — that of obtaining their confidence —was undoubtedly made : but an individual, with limited means,could not then go farther. The whole scheme, with respectU. .^^ C' ^ (i C .-AitiilUahed. ^ henry CdTbum^GrGKt ItoEEborough. Strcet,lS5B.1834. GRATITUDE POET LOUIS. 327to establishing a missionary with the Fuegians who were inEngland, among their countrymen, was on too small a scale,although so earnestly assisted by Mr. Wilson,* Mr. Wigram,Mr. Coates, and other kind friends.I cannot help still hoping that some benefit, however slight,may result from the intercourse of these people, Jemmy, York,and Fuegia, with other natives of Tierra del Fuego. Perhapsa ship-wrecked seaman may hereafter receive help and kindtreatment from Jemmy Button's children ; prompted, as theycan hardly fail to be, by the traditions they will have heard ofmen of other lands ; and by an idea, however faint, of theirduty to God as well as their neighbour.That Jemmy felt sincere gratitude is, I think, proved by hishaving so carefully preserved two fine otter skins, as I mentioned; by his asking me to carry a bow and quiver full ofarrows to the schoolmaster of Walthamstow, with whom he hadlived ; by his having made two spear-heads expressly for Mr.Darwin ; and by the pleasure he showed at seeing us all again.As nothing more could be done, we took leave of our youngfriend and his family, every one of whom was loaded with presents,and sailed away from Woollyaa.On the 9th of March we were off' Beauchesne Island. f Manypersons have fancied that there are two islands near togetherin that place, having been deceived by two hummocks on theonly island, which from a distance show just above the horizonlike two islets. Next day we anchored in Berkeley Sound ; firstin Johnson Cove, and afterwards in Port Louis.We found a state of affairs somewhat different from that ofMarch 1833 ; but though more settled, in consequence of thepresence of an established authority, resident at Port Louis (alieutenant in the navy), my worst forebodings had not equalledthe sad reality.In a note to page 240, I alluded to the murder of the BuenosAyrean commanding officer ; and to that of Mr. Brisbane. Afew weeks before the Clio arrived in 1833, there was a small• Of Walthamstow. t Near the Falklands.328 EVENTS IN THE Falkland. Marchgarrison at Port Louis, consisting of a sergeant's guard of soldiers,a subaltern, and a field officer. The men mutinied becausetheir superior was thought to be unnecessarily severe,and occupied them unceasingly in drill and parade, to the prejudiceof their obtaining food sufficient for health. They wereobliged, in consequence of his system, to hive upon worse farethan the settlers, because they could not go about to forage forthemselves ; and the result was that, after many threats, theymurdered him. A small armed schooner* arrived a few daysafterwards from Buenos Ayres, by whose officers and crew,assisted by some French sailors, the principal mutineers, ninein number, were taken and put into confinement on board.They were afterwards carried to Buenos Ayres.On the 26th of August 1833, three 'gauchos' and five In-diansj- (the prisoners before mentioned), set upon and murder-edMr. Brisbane ; Dickson, the man in charge of Vernet's store ; JSimon, the capataz ; the poor German ; and another settler ;after which atrocious acts they plundered the settlement anddrove all the cattle and horses into the interior. Only that morningMr. Low, who was then living with Mr. Brisbane, left PortLouis on a sealing excursion, with four men. Hardly was hisboat out of sight, when the deceitful villains attacked Brisbanein Vernet's house: suspecting no treachery, he fell at once by theknife of Antonio Riveroo. Simon defended himself desperatelybut was overpowered ; the others, overcome by fear, fell easyvictims. The rest of the settlers, consisting of thirteen men,three women, and two children, remained with the murdererstwo days, and then escaped to a small island in the Sound ;where they lived on birds' eggs and fish, till the arrival of theEnglish sealer Hopeful, § on board which was an officer of thenavy, || who in some measure relieved their immediate distress,but could not delay to protect them from the assaults whichStrand.t Antonio Riveroo, J. M. Luna, M. Godly, — J.Brasido, M. Gonzales,L. Flores, F. Salaam, M. Latter.P. 240. nov. 1833.II Mr. Rea, The Hopeful belonged to Messrs. Enderby.1834. Search Foil MURDERERS. 329they anticipated. About a month after the Hopeful sailed,H.M.S. Challenger, Captain M. Seymour, arrived, having alieutenant of the navy and four seamen on board, who hadvolunteered from H.M.S. Tyne, and were duly authorized toremain at the Falklands. The following extract from a letterwill show what took place on Captain Seymour's arrival.Captain Seymour, and the consuls, being anxious to visitthe settlement of Port Louis, landed some distance from it (thewind being strong from S.S.W.), intending to walk there.About a mile from the houses they were met by an Englishmannamed Channon, sent by the gauchoes to see who they were,and whether the ship was a whaler in want of beef, or a man-of-war.He informed them that the gauchoes and Indians hadmurdered Mr. Brisbane : Dickson, who had been left in chargeof the flag by Captain Onslow : Simon ; and two others : andhad pillaged the houses, destroying every thing in their searchfor money. He then pointed them out, sitting under a wall,with their horses behind the remains of the government house,ready saddled for a start on our nearer approach. They hadtwo gauchoes, prisoners, who had not been concerned in themurders, and whom they threatened to kill, if he, Channon, didnot return. He also stated that one of them was willing to "turn king's evidence, and would bring back all the horses, ifpossible, provided Captain Seymour would ensure his pardon.The whole of them, nine in number, retreated into the interioras soon as they found out it was a ship of war, taking all thetame horses, between fifty and sixty.* As his party were notarmed, Captain Seymour thought it right to return on board ;but after dark. Lieutenant Smith was sent with a party ofmarines, and two boats, to try and take them, if they shouldbe still about the houses, and to leave with Channon a bottlecontaining a crucifix, as a signal for Lunae!* On their landing.Lieutenant Smith took all necessary precautions, left six menincharge of the boats, and proceeded cautiously with theThirteen men and three women had escaped to an island in the Sound,as they could do nothing against the murderers, who had all the arms,t The gaucho who offered to become king's evidence.330 NEW SETTLEMENT BEGUN. Marchrest. He carefully searched every building in the place, withoutseeing even a trace of them. All was desolation ; yet helearned afterwards from the two innocent gauchoes, that AntonioRiveroo and another, suspecting who the party were, hadwatched them closely : that at one time Lieut. Smith was neartreading on them ; which seemed hardly credible, until thearrangements made on landing, the marching in Indian file tohide his men, &c. were mentioned. Mr. Smith left with CannonLuna's pardon, who, on the fourth day, brought in twohorses — not having been able to obtain more, as the murdererswere very watchful and fearful of each other, so much so, thatone of them had fallen a sacrifice to suspicion ; and Luna'sdesertion reduced their number to six. With Luna for theirguide, on the sixth day Lieut. Smith, four midshipmen andtwelve marines, were despatched into the interior. Theywere absent four days, and marched more than a hundredmiles, enduring much fatigue, which was increased by theboisterous state of the weather, and by continual rain for threeout of the four days. Water in ravines, which on going outhardly rose above their ankles, on their return had increased totorrents : in crossing them some nearly lost their lives, and onthe bleak moors they sunk at every step knee-deep in bog.Without sleep or shelter, they lived for the last two days onbeef just warmed through, by fires that it took hours to kindle.They were not successful in capturing any of the murderers,but at one time were so near, that they had the mortificationto see them drive their horses away at a gallop, and having allthe tame ones but two, they were quickly out of reach ofmusket-shot. So hasty however was their retreat, that they lefttheir provisions behind them. Captain Seymour finding thatcapturing the Indians would be a tedious and uncertain task,made one of the ruined houses habitable, and leaving sixmarines as an additional protection to Lieut. Smith and hisboat's crew, proceeded as ordered. The lieutenant endeavouredto make his abode comfortable, by clearing away rubbishand bones, and putting a garden into some order. Withthe two horses he succeeded in catching and taming two cows,1834. River TAKEN LOW. 331which gave about two gallons of milk daily, besides fourteenothers, five or six of which were in calf. By one means or otherall but one of the murderers were taken, and a cutter was hiredto remove them to the flag-ship at Rio de Janeiro."Before the Bea2:le''s arrival Lieut. Smith had succeeded incapturing the principal murderer, and transporting him to anislet in the Sound, where he was watched, and furnished withprovisions by the boat's crew. The lieutenant applied to mefor assistance, and knowing that he was not safe while such adesperate character as Riveroo was at large, though on an islet,and that the life of Luna (the king's evidence) was still morerisked, I took those men, and one named Channon, who wassaid to have been an accomplice in the plot, though not anactive agent, on board the Beagle. Riveroo was put in irons,Channon confined to the ship, and Luna left at liberty, thoughwatched.When Mr. Low returned from his sealing expedition hefound that his life was sought, as a friend of Mr. Brisbane ;and as he could do nothing on foot against the mounted gaulhe retired to Kidney Islet, at the entrance of BerkeleySound, to await the arrival of some ship. Tired, however, ofinaction, he set out to go westward, in search' of some whaler,and on the 6th of February, when in great distress, he fell inwith our tender, the Adventure, and immediately offered hisservices as a pilot : they were accepted, provisionally, by Lieut.Wickham, and afterwards by me, trusting that the Admiraltywould approve of my so engaging a person who, in pilotageand general information about the Falklands,Tierra del Fuego,Patagonia, and the Galapagos Islands, could afford us moreinformation than any other individual, without exception.Mr. William Low is the son of a respectable land-agent inScotland ; he was brought up as a sailor, and possesses strongcommon sense, quick apprehension, a readiness at description,and an extraordinary local memory.On the 13th the Adventure arrived: she had almost completedher examination of the west, south, and south-east outer coasts,in a very satisfactory manner, having been greatly forwarded332 Brisbane — WRECK. March 1834.and helped by Mr. Low's minute acquaintance with everyport, and almost every danger. Our tender sailed to continueher coasting examination on the 21st. She returned on the26th, and sailed again on the 30th. Meanwhile our own boatswere constantly occupied in and near Berkeley Sound andPort William.When I visited the settlement it looked more melancholythan ever ; and at two hundred yards' distance from the housein which he had lived, I found, to my horror, the feet of poorBrisbane protruding above the ground. So shallow was hisgrave that dogs had disturbed his mortal remains, and hadfed upon the corpse. This was the fate of an honest, industrious,and most faithful man : of a man who feared no danger,and despised hardships. He was murdered by villains, becausehe defended the property of his friend ; he was mangled by themto satisfy their hellish spite ; dragged by a lasso, at a horse'sheels, away from the houses, and left to be eaten by dogs.Besides my own acquaintance with him and opinions derivedfrom the personal knowledge of the Beagle's officers, some ofwhom had known Brisbane when his vessel, the Saxe Cobourg,was wrecked in Fury Harbour (owing to no fault of his),Mr. Weddell bears testimony to his character on many occasions,particularly by an observation in page 48 (Weddell'sVoyage), where he says, " I had full confidence in the careand ability of Mr. Brisbane." (1823.)In 1830 Mr. Brisbane was wrecked on the eastern coast ofTierra del Fuego, near Polycarp Cove, (54° 38' S.), when sealingthere in partnership with Mr. Bray, who afterwards commandedthe sealing schooner ' Transport,' lost in 1833, atHope Harbour. I have a copy of their log in my possession,from which the following extracts are selected, to show withwhat enduring patience some of those hardy sealers bear misfortuneand distress,Feb. 23d. Employed saving things from the wreck : sixIndians came to us. 24th. Twenty-five Indians came, with theirwomen and children. 25th. Another visit from natives : men,women, and children. 26th. Indians began to be very .LOG OF SHIPWRECKED CREW. 333become. 27t]i. Forty Indians came to us, all armed with bows,arrows, and slings, without women or children. Some of ourpeople employed in building a shallop out of the wreck. 28th.More Indians, with twelve strong women and eighteen children: but unarmed on this day.March 1st. More Indian visitors. 2d. Fifty-one natives,armed." To the 9th the crew continued to build their shallop,and were almost daily visited by natives, whom two-thirds ofthe party were obliged to watch with arms in their hands. Onthe 21st sixty-one natives visited them (these Indians alwayswent away before dusk). On the 23d the time of high-waterwas observed to be 4*^. 40™, and the rise seventeen feet, duringmoderate westerly wind and settled weather. Mr. Brisbanemade the latitude, by observation, 54° 38' S. and the longitudehe estimated at 65°. 30'. W. " 29th. Much troubled everydayby natives, who tried to steal our tools ; and hard pressedby hunger. No suppers) the last three days.2d April. Four long guns were found to the eastward, lyingon a piece of the forecastle of some large ship, supposed to bealarge frigate (6), also two leaden hawse pipes attached to thewoodwork. 8th. A large party of Indians, who were plaguingus, quarrelled among themselves, and had a severe fight. 9th.Our last remainder of provisions finished. 15th. Employedcaulking the shallop's deck, and getting limpets from the rocks.N. B. Almost starving. 17th. Not being troubled to-day bynatives, and the sea being smooth, went out in a little boatwhich we had saved, and caught eleven skate."After this day several fish were caught at times, which, withshell-fish, afforded a scanty subsistence; but before this timethey had been reduced to eating hide, and half putrid blubber,which they got by barter from the Indians. Mr. Bray, as wellas Brisbane, told me that hunger and anxiety so wore andexcited them, that they could seldom sleep more than an hourCap Supper was their principal meal ; as during the day, while theIndians were about, they had no time to cook or eat. R. F.rbj Perhaps the Higgins— ^Chilian). R. F.334 SUFFERINGS — DISASTERS. 1830or two at night, though working all day, while they were sohard pressed for food.22d. Launched the shallop, or rather, hauled her down atlow water, and let her float. 24th. Indians more troublesomethan ever ; obliged to fire at them repeatedly. 27th. Almoststarved, eating bullock's hide. 30th. Nothing to eat but bullock'shide and berries. Could not get the shallop over thereef because of a heavy surf.May 1st. Got out to sea ; found the shallop leak very much:nothing to eat but hide. 2d. Lat. 54°. 00'. Long. east. 63°. 50'.5th. Made Cape Meredith (in the Falklands), but could notget near for want of wind. 6th. Two men gave out(c) for wantof food : they had gone six days with but one pound of hide. 7th.A heavy gale; the shallop under bare poles, and almost sinking;sea making a clear breach over her ; men quite worn out byconstant pumping and baling, and by want of food : we had avery hard job to keep her from sinking : at dusk saw landthrough the rain and spray, half a mile to leeward ; showed thehead of the jib, and bore away right before the wind for thenearest part : saw a cove, ran into it, and anchored. Killednumbers of geese ; thanked God for our safety. 11th. Manyof our men ill from the sudden change. 17th. Went ashore inPleasant Harbour ; saw a great number of cattle ; the dogcaught two of them, and held them for us to killed) 30th ofMay. Anchored in Port Louis, landed, and hauled the shallopashore at high-water."The vessel in which Brisbane and Bray were wrecked, wasdriven ashore in a northerly gale, while sealing near PolycarpCove. Their crew consisted of about twenty men, most of whomhad fire-arms, and plenty of ammunition. Though it willswell yet more the catalogue of his disasters, I must add thatBrisbane was once wrecked on South Georgia, and escapedthence to Monte Video in a shallop, which he and his companionsin distress built out of the wreck of their sealing vessel.fcj Could work no longer. R. F.{dj Seized them by the lip. He was a large, strong animal, betweena bull-dog and a mastiff. R. F.AApril 1834. BURIAL of lieut. clive. 335I have now by me two of the tools, almost the only ones, whichthey had to use : one is a cooper's adze, nearly worn down tothe middle ; and the other a saw, made out of a piece of ironhoop, fixed to a wooden frame.6th April. While the Beagle was preparing for sea the bodyof Lieut. Clive,* late of H. M. S. Challenger, was found lyingat high-water mark, in an unfrequented part of BerkeleySound ; and the following morning I buried it in a grave onshore, not far from the tomb of our regretted shipmate Hellyer.After noon, on the same day, we sailed from the Falklands,depressed more than ever by the numerous sad associationsconnected with their name.Lieut. Clive was drowned accidentally, by the upsetting of a smallboat : — his body could not then be found.CHAPTER XVI.Sounding-s — Anchor in Santa Cruz — Lay Beagle ashore for repair —Prepare to ascend River — Set out — View of surrounding country-rapidstream — Cold — Ostriches — Guanacoes — Indians — Fish — CliffsFirewood — Lava Cliffs — Difficulties — Chalia — See Andes — FarthestWest — View round — Return — Danger — Guanaco hunters —Puma— Cat — Tides — Sail from Santa Cruz.In working to the westward from Berkeley Sound to theRiver Santa Cruz, we sounded frequently, and found that thedepth is nowhere much above one hundred fathoms betweenthose places. But the water is not of so little depth between theFalklands and Cape Virgins, or Tierra del Fuego ; for therewe could not strike soundings in some places, towards theislands, with one hundred and fifty fathoms of line.On the 13th we anchored in the Santa Cruz, and immediatelyprepared to lay our vessel ashore for a tide, to ascertainhow much injury had been caused by the rock at Port Desire,and to examine the copper previous to her employment in thePacific Ocean, where worms soon eat their way through unprotectedplanks. (16th.) When on the beach, at a place we afterwardscalled ' Keel Point,' it was found that a piece of the falsekeel under the ' fore-foot,' had been knocked off, and that a fewsheets of copper were a good deal rubbed. By Mr. May's exertionsall was repaired in one tide ; and the following day wewere making preparations for an excursion up the river.17th. An examination, or rather a partial exploring, of theRiver Santa Cruz had long been meditated. During the formervoyage of the Beagle, Captain Stokes had ascended the rapidcurrent as far as a heavy boat could be taken ; but his accountserved only to stimulate our curiosity, and decided my followinghis example.Three light boats were prepared (whale-boats strengthenedmuch provision as they could stow with safety was put intothem, and a party of officers and men selected. Lieut. Sulivan,p> ft a H r1834. River SANTA CRUZ BANKS. 837having to take charge of the ship during our absence, couldnot go ; neither could Mr. Stewart, or Mr. King, who wererequired to attend to duties on board ; but Mr. Darwin, Mr.Chaffers, Mr. Stokes, Mr. Bynoe, Mr. Mellersh, Mr. Martens,and eighteen seamen and marines prepared to accompany me.Early on the 18th we left the Beagle, and with a favouringwind and flood tide sailed up the estuary, into which the riverflows. This wide and turbid estuary receives a torrent whichrushes through a confined opening into the ocean, during sevenhours, and is opposed and driven back by the flood tide duringabout five hours of the twelve. On each side of both the estuaryand river lie extensive plains of arid desert land : these plainsare not, however, on the same level ; for, on the northern bankthe land is very little raised above the level of high spring tides ;while, on the southern side of the river, high, perpendicularsform a striking contrast : but after ascending these heights,by any of the ravines which intersect them, one finds a deadlevel expanse, similar in every respect to that on the northernshore. In the horizon, another ' steppe,' or parallel plain, at ahigher elevation, is seen ; which, at a distance, appears like arange of hills of equal height.Excepting in the porphyry districts, all the eastern coasts ofPatagonia, and the little of the interior which I have seen,seemed to me to be a similar succession of horizontal ranges oflevel land varying in height, intersected here and there byravines and water-courses. There are, certainly, hills in many-placeswhich appear when one is passing at sea, or in the distance,conical, or at all events peaked; but even those hillsare but the gable ends, as it were, of narrow horizontal ridgesof land, higher than the surrounding country.The cMs on the south side of the river have a whitishappearance ; and are similar to those on the outer coast,which were said by Sir John Narborough to resemble the.coast of Kent. Their upper outline, when seen from a distance,is quite horizontal. Brownish yellow is the prevailingcolour, lighter or darker, as the sun shines more, or becomesobscured. Here and there, in hollow places and ravines, aVOL. IT. 2338 BARRENNESS — Animals. Aprilfew shrubby bushes are seen. But over the wide desolationof the stony barren waste not a ti*ee — not even a solitary' ombu'' * — can be discerned. Scattered herds of ever-waryguanacoes, startled at man's approach, neighing, stamping,and tossing their elegant heads ; a few ostriches stridingalong in the distant horizon, and here and there a solitary condorsoaring in the sky, are the only objects which attract theeye. Certainly, upon looking closely, some withered shrubsand a yellow kind of herbage may be discerned ; and, in walking,thorns and prickles assure one painfully that the plain isnot actually a desert : but I am quite sure that the generalimpression upon the mind is that of utter hopeless sterility.Is it not remarkable that water-worn shingle stones, and diluvialaccumulations, compose the greater portion of theseplains .P On how vast a scale, and of what duration must havebeen the action of those waters which smoothed the shinglestones now buried in the deserts of Patagonia.Fresh water is seldom found in these wastes ; salinas-^ arenumerous. The climate is delightful to the bodily sensations ;but for productions of the earth, it is almost as bad as any,except that of the Arabian, or African deserts. Rain is seldomknown during three quarters of the year ; and even in thethree winter months, when it may be expected, but little fallsexcepting on rare occasions, when it comes down heavily fortwo or three days in succession. Sea winds sometimes bringsmall misty rain for a few hours, at any time of year, but notenough to do good to vegetable productions. The only animalswhich abound are guanacoes, and they care little for freshwater,for they have often been seen drinking at the salinas.The puma probably quenches its thirst in their blood ; ofother animals, supposed to require much liquid, there are nonein these regions.The climate is healthy and pleasant; generally a bright, sunnyday is succeeded by a cloudless and extremely clear night. In• A kind of elder, growing here and there in Patagonia and the Pampas.See page 93.t Salt depositions or incrustations.Port Santa Cras (Keel PoirUJ Lat. SO. 6.45 S.Long-.ff^. 24. O. W..Var. 20.54^. E.B . M.Hew. 9.45.Spring Rise 42 feet.Jfcap Rise 18..Strength, of tide S to 6 Scots.ScaIe,Salfa/i Inch • one Mile..hihluh/:d by Henry (2>lbuiii,6ffjitM-o-2bort/uah Street 133 fl.1834. CLIMATE — BANKS — TIDES. 339summer the heat is scorching, but not sultry ; and in winter,though the weather is sometimes searchingly cold, especiallyduring southerly winds, the air is always elastic and wholesome.Changes of wind are sudden, and cause rapid, thoughnot very great, variations of temperature. Sometimes the skyis slightly or partially overcast, occasionally clouded heavily ;but on most days there is bright sunshine, and a fresh or strongwesterly wind.The confluence of a continental torrent of fresh water, withgreat tides of the ocean, which here rise forty feet perpendicularly,has embarrassed the mouth of the Santa Cruz with anumber of banks. They are all composed of shingle and mud,and alter their forms and positions when affected by river-floods,or by the heavy seas caused by south-east gales.Into the entrance of the Santa Cruz, the flood-tide setsabout four knots an hour ; one may say, from two to fiveknots, according to the time of tide, and the narrower orbroader part of the opening ; and outwards, the water rushesat least six knots on an average in mid-channel. There areplaces in which at times, when acted upon by wind or unusualfloods, it runs with a velocity of not less than seven or eightknots an hour — perhaps even more; but near either shore, andin bights between projecting points, of course the strength ofthe outward as well as inward current is very inferior.In such a bight, almost under some high cliff's on the southernshore, the Beagle was moored, and it is easy to conceivethe different views presented in this situation, with forty feetchange in the level of the water. At high water, a noble river,unimpeded, moves quietly, or is scarcely in motion : at othertimes, a rushing torrent struggles amongst numerous banks,whose dark colour and dismal appearance add to the effectof the turbid yellow water, and naked-looking, black, muddyshores.The boats sailed on between some of the banks, with a freshsoutherly wind, disturbing every where immense flights ofsea-birds. Now and then a monstrous sea-lion lifted his unwieldybulk a few inches from the stony bank, lazily lookedz2340 weddell's ruff — fresh water. Aprilaround, and with a snort and a growl, threw his hugeshapelessness, by a floundering waddle, towards the nearestwater.As far as Weddell's Bluff* we sailed merrily ; but theretook to the oars, because the river makes a sudden turn, orrather, the river Santa Cruz (properly so called), enters theestuary of the same name from the south-west, as far as canbe seen from WeddelFs Bluff: — but a Httle beyond where theeye reaches, it takes a westerly direction. Another river, theChico of Viedma, also enters the estuary at this place from thenorth-west. Here, a little above the Bluff, the water was freshon the surface, and sometimes it is quite fresh, even into theestuary ; but in filling casks, or dipping any thing into thestream for fresh water, it is advisable not to dip deep, or to letthe hose (if one is used), go many inches below the surface,since it often happens that the upper water is quite fresh, whilethat underneath is salt. This occurs, more or less, in all riverswhich empty themselves into the sea : the fresh water, specificallylighter, is always uppermost.Wind failing us entii-ely, we pulled to the south-west. On ourleft, high cliffs still continued, and at their base a wide shinglebeach offered tempting landing-places, with many spots extremelywell adapted for laying a vessel ashore, to be repairedor cleaned ; on our right, a low shore extended, rising gradually,however, in the north-west, f to cliffs Uke those near KeelPoint.The flowing tide favoured us until about five, when welanded on the north shore, at a spot where the rise and fall ofthe tide had diminished to four feet. Here the river was sixhundred and forty yards in breadth, running down at the rateof about six knots during a part of the ebb, and from two tofour knots an hour during the greater part of the flood-tide.It was perfectly fresh to the bottom, and in mid-channel aboutthree fathoms deep ; but this depth extended very little wayNamed after the enterprizing southern navigator.i On the south side of the north-west arm of the Santa Cruz.1834. CHANGE OF SCENERY COLD. 341across, the deep channel being extremely narrow, not morethan twenty yards in width.The distinct difference between the opposite banks of theriver had been diminishing, until at this spot* both sides weremuch alike. We had left the cliffs and salt water, and hadfairly entered the fresh-water river. Instead of having a wideextent of dismal-looking banks and dark-coloured muddyshores, we were at the side of a rapid stream, unvarying inwidth, on whose banks shrubs and grass agreeably relieved oureyes from muddy shingle covered with hosts of crabs.Our first night passed Avell, for there were plenty of bushesto supply us with fire-wood. Early next morning, some of theparty went upon the nearest hills to look for guanacoes, whenthey saw that although the surface of the country appeared toan observer near the river to be irregular and hilly, uponascending the heights it became apparent that the stream ranin a large valley ; that the general character of the countrywas similar to what I have already described, and that thosewhich had appeared to be hills were the terminating sides ofextensive plains, whose level was about three hundred feetabove the river. Near the fresh water, shrubs, bushes, andgrass were not scarce ; but every where on the higher grounda sterile, stony waste met the eye. Mr. Stokes-f- and I went onthe heights, toobtaina view of the river ; and for a considerabledistance we could trace its windings, but were sorry to see agreat number of small islands, thickly covered with brushwood,which seemed likely to impede our progress if obliged to track Jthe boats.The southerly wind blew keenly over the high land, andthe surface of the ground was frozen hard ; but the air washealthily fresh and bracing. Where, indeed, could it be purerthan on these dry hills ? At first setting out we tried theoars, but very soon found them unable to contend with theThe northern bight, or cove, a few miles north-eastward of IsletReach.+ It was his office to make a map of the country we passed through.I Pull, or tow them along by a rope.34)2 TllACKING — MEASUREMENT. AprilStrength of the stream ; so landing all our party, except twoin each boat, we made the boats fast to one another, at a fewyards apart, in a line a-head : and then taking the end of acoil of whale-line ashore, half our party fixed themselves toitby spaniards of broad canvas straps, which passed acrosstheir breasts and over one shoulder, and walked togethersteadily along the river's bank. The bight of the line waspassed round a stout mast, stepped in the headmost boat andattended by the two men, who veered away or shortened inthe line as the varying width of the stream, or frequent impedimentsrendered necessary. In this manner, one-half of ourparty relieving the other about once an hour, every one willinglytaking his turn at the track rope,* we made steadyprogress against the stream of the river, which rather increasedm rapidity as we ascended, until its usual velocity was betweensix and seven knots an hour. While among the islandswhich I mentioned tracking was difficult and tedious, manywere the thorny bushes through which one half of the partyon the rope dragged their companions. Once in motion nomercy was shewn : if the leading man could pass, all the restwere bound to follow. Many were the ducklings, and nottrifling the wear and tear of clothes, shoes, and skin. Atintervals stoppages were made for refreshment and observations.Three chronometers were carried in the boats, with othernecessary instruments: among them two mountain barometers,with which Mr. Darwin and myself wished to measurethe height of the river above the level of the sea, and theheights of the neighbouring ranges of hills above the level ofthe river. This afternoon we picked up a boat-hook upon thesouth bank of the river, which was immediately recognizedto be one which had been left by accident sticking in a mud-bank,by the party who accompanied Captain Stokes in hisexcursion up this river in the year 1827.It was very cold at our bivouac this night, being a sharpMr. Stokes alone being excepted, as his duty required continualattention.1834. FROST — OSTRICHES SWIJVIMIXG. 343frost : and while observing the moon's meridian altitude, dewwas deposited so fast upon the roof of the artificial horizon,and froze there so quickly as it fell, that I could hardly makethe observation. My sextant was injured a little by the frost,for not having been used before in very cold weather, the brasscontracted so much as to injure the silvering at the back ofthe index glass, and slightly change the index error.In the morning it was so cold that our usual ablutions wereshunned, and all were anxious to have the first spell at therope in order to warm themselves, though few had slept manyminutes, and many had hard work the previous day. The thermometerwas at 22° Fahr. — nothing, — indeed warm weather toPolar voyagers, but to us, accustomed to temperate climates,it appeared a severe degree of cold.20th. As we were going along the bank of the river, whichto our great benefit was becoming more accessible and clearerof bushes, we saw some dark coloured animals crossing thestream at a distance, but no one could guess what they wereuntil the foremost of them reached the shore, and rising uponhis stilt-like legs, showed himself to be an ostrich. Six orseven of these birds were swimming across : till then I hadno idea that so long-legged a bird, not web-footed, would,of its own accord, take to the water and cross a rapid stream :this, however, was a certain proof to the contrary, for nothinghad disturbed them that we could discern. As far as we couldtell, at so great a distance, they seemed to be of the kindwhich the Spanish-patagonians call ' Avestruz-petis.' Theywere, however, far too wild to be approached with a gun. Wesaw smoke at a distance and anticipated meeting Indians, inthe course of our next day's journey. The country around continuedsimilar to that already described : but islands no longerimpeded our progress, though some high cliffy banks gave ustrouble. At the next place where we passed a night, Mr. Darwintried to catch fish with a casting net, but without success ;so strong a stream being much against successful fishing. Averysharp frost again this night. The net and other things, which344 RAPIDITY OF Stream Guanaco Aprilhad occupied but little room in the boat, were frozen so hard asto become unmanageable and very difficult to stow,21st. We proceeded as usual, dragging the boats up thestream (or rather torrent, for it never ran less than six knots,and in many places more) at the rate of about two miles anhour : and as we were approaching near to the smoke, we choseour position for the night, rather more cautiously than usual,upon a little peninsula.22d. We had not advanced a mile this morning, when freshtracks of Indians, on horseback, trailing their long lances,aroused our utmost vigilance. We thought they had beenreconnoitring our party, at day-light, and perhaps such wasthe case. The smoke of their fires was seen behind the nearestrange of low hills, on our side of the river, being then on thenorth bank, but the boats had been tracking on either side,as better ground for walking was found. Proceeding on, adead animal was found in the water, which proved to be aguanaco; how it came by its death did not appear, as itshowed no external wound, but some of our party, hungrieror less squeamish than the rest, immediately proposed dividingand eating it ; and hunger carried the day : the dead animalwas hauled on shore, cut to pieces, and distributed. Theguanaco steaks were much relished by all except two or three,who could not conquer their antipathy to supposed carrion.Our meal was eaten close to the place where we thought atribe of Indians was encamped: and, in consequence, ourarms were kept in readiness, and a careful watch set. afterwardscautiously proceeding, we arrived at the spot whencethe smoke had issued, but saw no human beings : thoughmarks of very recent fire, and numerous tracks of feet upon asoft muddy place at the side of the river, showed that a partyof Indians had lately crossed over, and a smoke rising at somedistance on the southern shore, pointed out where they weregone. At this spot there was about an acre of good pastureland,by the water side : and the breadth of the river itself wassomething less than usual, reasons which had induced the .' INDIAN pass' SHINGLE BEDS. - 345times to select it as a crossing place.* To pass a river runningat the rate of six or seven miles an hour, and about two hundredyards in width, can be no easy task to women and children.But as we saw many prints of very small feet on themuddy bank, both women and children must have crossed atthis place with the men. How did they get over ? there is nowood, neither are there rushes with which they might makebalsas.-f- Perhaps some of the women and children were putinto rough, coracle-like boats, made of hides and towedacross by the horses, holding by whose tails the men swamand perhaps many of the women. This method of holding bythe tail, while swimming, is said to be better than resting ahand upon the horse's neck and holding by the mane. Noneof the Indians sit upon their horses while swimming.This day (22d) we passed two places which we consideredrapids, the stream of the river ran so violently, and we hadso much difficulty in passing, even with all hands upon therope. Besides the strength of the stream we had to contendagainst high cliffs, over whose upper edges it was difficult toconvey the tow-line : yet we made good about twelve milesin the day. The night of the 22d was not so cold as the preceding,but we always found the nights wintry though thedays were warm, so much so, indeed, that we were oftenannoyed by the heat of the sun. So winding was the courseof the river that we certainly walked double the distancewhich was advanced in a direct line : yet very little of interest,as a picturesque subject, had been seen; for no countryexcepting a desert could wear a more triste and unvaryingappearance.Immense accumulations of shingle, rounded stones, imbedded,as before mentioned, in diluvial deposition, form thelevel plain, or valley, through which the river pursues itsvery winding course. The width of this vale varies from onemile to five miles, and the level of the shingle plain is fromMarked * Indian Pass ' on the plan. + Floats or rafts.X " Me envio tres indies nadadores, proviso de cueros y palos paraformer una pelota." (Diario de Viodma, p. 58.)346 - HEIGHTS — VALLEY — SCARCITY OF FUEL. Aprilthree hundred to one thousand feet below that of the adjacenthigher, but still horizontal ranges — whose broken-down ends,or sides, form the boundaries of the valley through which theriver flows. Those of the higher ranges look like hills whenone is in the valley, and it is not until after ascending totheir summits that their real nature is seen ; when, insteadof being inclined to consider those heights as hills, one becomesdisposed to think the valley of the river a vast excavation,cut down below the level of the neighbouring country.But on the height, or in the valley, all is an unprofitablewaste. Scarcely, indeed, could we find bushes enough, evennear the river, to make our nightly fires, after the third day'sjourney. The wiry, half-withered grass upon which theguanacoes feed is so scanty, that they are obliged to wanderover much ground in search of their food. Those few stuntedbushy trees which are found here and there, near the river*are a kind of thorn trees, the wood of which is extremelyhard and durable.* The night of the 22d we passed by theside of a little cove, which sheltered the boats from thestrength of the stream : and, as all hands were tired, we restedduring the morning of the following day.After noon (23d) we went on, and at dark stopped on thesouth shore. Scarcity of fuel and a cold night, made it necessaryto take good care of the wood when cut. There may behonour among thieves, but there was little to be found duringa cold night among our party, for the fire of those who happenedto be on watch was sure to blaze cheerily, at the expenseof the sleepers. A little incident occurred here very unimportantcertainly to those unconcerned, yet of much consequenceto us : we left our stock of salt behind, and a spade,which latter was much wanted for farthing up the sides of ourtents, to keep out the cold wind.24th. I noticed more than usual a curious effect of theriver water being so much warmer than the air over it.f AtA guanaco was eliot this day bj' the running fire of several guns.He was soon cut up and stowed in the boats.+ The temperature of the air being 30°, that of the water 4(i°.Isti. CLIFFS OF Earth PROGRESS — LAVA. 347daybreak, and until after sunrise, the river was smoking, quiteas if it were boiling. This day we passed some earthy cliffsbetween two and three hundred feet in height, and where theycame in our way it was extremely difficult to manage the boatsand tow-lines ; but by veering out at those times a great lengthof rope, our object was accomplished without any disaster.Near these cliffs the valley of the river begins to contract andbecome more irregular, and the sides or breaking down of thehigher ranges become more abrupt and are nearer to the river.In most places we found a cliffy side opposite to a low projectingpoint of shingle, but in some spots that we passedboth sides were high, and we had no choice on which to takethe tow-line. The difference, also, between the level of thehigher ranges and that of the river, was observed to be muchincreased.On this day (25th) our best shots succeeded in killing twoguanacoes, but they died out of our reach, and probablybecame food for pumas, instead of man. The order of ourmarch was usually one or two riflemen in advance, as scoutsMr. Darwin, and occasionally Mr. Stokes, or Mr. Bynoe,upon the heights — a party walking along the banks, near theboats, ready to relieve or assist in tracking, and the eightor ten men who were dragging the three boats along at therate of about two miles an hour over the ground, though fulleight knots through the water. Difficult places to pass —delays caused by embarking and disembarking frequently tochange banks, and avoid impediments — the necessary observations,rest, and meals, occupied so much time that we did notaverage more than twelve miles in one day : and even thatsmall distance was not accomplished without making bothshoulders and feet sore.26th. In the distance some very level topped, dark lookingcliffs, were seen at the summits of elevated ranges, whichMr. Darwin thought must have a capping or coating of lava.Of course we were very anxious to verify a fact so curious,and at noon were quite satisfied that it was so, havingapproached to the foot of a height thus capped, whose LAVA DisTracT — ' basalt glkn/ Aprilments had in falling not only scattered themselves over theadjacent plain, but into the bed of the river, in such a manneras to make the passage exceedingly dangerous ; because largeangular masses, in some places showing above the stream inothers hidden beneath, but so near the surface that the watereddied and swelled over them, menaced destruction to theboats as they were with difficulty dragged through the eddyingrapid ; sometimes the rope caught under or around oneof those masses, and caused much trouble. Near the spotwhere we stopped at noon there is a glen, quite different incharacter from any place we had passed.* Indeed, ripon enteringthe lava district, or that part of the country over whichlava formerly flowed, there was no longer a Patagoniann aspectaround. Steep precipices, narrow, winding vallies, abundanceof huge angular fragments of lava, a more rapid and narrowerriver, and plains of solid lava overlying the whole surfaceof the country, make this district even worse in its appearancethan the eastern coast of Patagonia. Excepting in anoccasional ravine nothing grows. Horses could not travel far,the ground being like rough iron ; and water, excepting thatof the river and its tributary in Basalt Glen, is very scarce.The glen above mentioned is a wild looking ravine, boundedby black lava cliffs. A stream of excellent water windsthrough it amongst the long grass, and a kind of jungle atthe bottom. Lions or rather pumas shelter in it, as therecently torn remains of guanacoes showed us. Condor inhabitthe basaltic cliffs. Near the river some imperfect columnsof basalt give to a remarkable rocky height, the semblance ofan old castle. Altogether it is a scene of wild loneliness quitefit to be the breeding place of lionsNo signs of human visitors were discovered : indeed, thenature of the country must almost prevent horsemen fromtraversing these regions, there is so little food and such badground : only in glens or ravines such as this can any grassor bushes be found. Guanacoes absolutely swarm upon the' Basalt Glen.' + " Loonum arica nutrix."I1834 MIRAGE Drifted TREES ANDES. 34)9heights, a consequence probably of their being undisturbed.They spread over the face of the high country like immenseflocks of sheep.During a long walk this evening Mr. Stokes and I wererepeatedly disappointed by the mirage over an extensive stonyplain, between two bends of the river. We were tired andvery thirsty, and went from one apparent piece of water toanother, only to be tantalized and to increase still more ourdilemma.27th. Similar country. On the banks of the river somedrift wood was found ; the trunks of trees of considerable size.Small trees had been found lying by the side of the river,from time to time, but none so large as these, some of whichwere almost two feet in diameter, and about thirty feet inlength. The wood appeared to be ' Sauce,' of the red kind.That these trees had been drifted from a great distance wasevident, because they were much water worn.28th. In passing a rapid, whose difficulties were much increasedby rugged blocks of lava lying in the bed of theriver, one of our boats was badly stove and barely rescuedfrom sinking in the middle of the stream : fortunately we gother on shore and there patched her up. There was still nochange in the scenery, nor any signs of inhabitants : and ourwork was as monotonous as heavy.29th. While upon a high range of lava-capped land, mistakesand Mr. Damn descried distant mountains in thewest, covered with snow. At last, then, the Andes were insight! This was inspiriting intelligence to the whole party ;for small had been our daily progress, though continual andsevere the labour. The river increased, in rapidity, whilebut little diminution had taken place in the quantity ofwater brought down : the breadth was rather less, certainly,but the depth in most places greater. No fish had yet beencaught ; indeed, only two had been seen, and those seemed tobe like trout.30th. The snowy summits of the distant Cordillera weremore distinctly seen from the heights, near the river, that rise350 BIRDS OF PREY GUANACOES. Aprilabout a thousand feet above its level, which, there, is aboutthree hundred feet above that of the sea. Two guanacoeswere shot with my rifle by H. Fuller,* who hastened to theboats for assistance. Some of our party went directly withhim to bring in the animals, but condor and cara- caras-[-had eaten every morsel of the flesh of one ; though the otherwas found untouched and brought to the boats. Four hourshad sufficed to the cara-caras and condor for the cleaning ofevery bone. | When our party reached the spot some of thosegreat birds were so heavily laden that they could hardly hopaway from the place. The guanaco that was eaten by thebirds must have been, by his size, at least fifty pounds heavierthan any shot by us in Patagonia, therefore about SOOlbs.Mr. Darwin and Mr. Stokes had much amusement with theseanimals, upon the heights. Being so much tamer there andmore numerous, whole flocks were driven by them into narrowdefiles, whei'e dozens might have been killed had therebeen more people with guns, lassoes, or balls.Though the bed of the river is there so much below thelevel of the stratum of lavas it still bears the appearance ofhaving worn away its channel, by the continual action of runningwater. The surface of the lava may be considered as thenatural level of the country, since, when upon it, a plain,which seems to the eye horizontal, extends in every direction.How wonderful must that immense volcanic action have beenwhich spread liquid lava over the surface of such a vast tractof country. Did the lava flow from the Cordillera of theAndes, or was it thrown out from craters in the low country ?Its position with respect to subaqueous deposits, its horizontalsurface and cellular texture, are reasons, among others, forthinking that it was thrown out of the earth, while these plainswere covered by a depth of sea.The valley, or channel of the river, varies here from onemile, or less, to about three miles ; but it looks narrower, owingMy steward. f A carrion-eating eagle,I The animal thus eaten lay on high ground : the other was in a hollow§ From ten to twelve hundred feet.'MBftfr».1W[•ilibMay 1834. weather — country — cordillera. 351to the deception caused by high land on each side. Some ofthe views are certainly striking, and, from their locality, interesting; I could not, however, have believed that the banksof any large fresh water river could be so destitute of wood,or verdure of any kind, or so little frequented by man, beast,*bird, or fish.May 1st. The weather was invariably fine during the earlierpart of our journey ; but this day it began to change, andtwo or three gloomy clouded days were succeeded by a fewhours only of small rain, and by some strong wind. This night• (1st) we slept at the foot of heights whose summits were coveredwith snow, but the temperature was many degrees warmer thanthat of the first nights, when it froze so sharply. There was noparticular frost after the 21st of April.We had great difficulty with the boats on the 2d, the riverbeing contracted in width, without any diminution of the bodyof water pouring down.On the 3d, we found a more open country, the lava-cappedheights receding gradually on each side, leaving a vale of flat,and apparently good land, from five to fifteen miles in extent.The width of the river increased ; on its banks were swampyspaces, covered with herbage ; and low earthy cliffs, withouteither shingle or lava, in some places bounded the river. Alittle further, however, the usual arid and stony plains ofPatagonia were again seen, extending from the banks of theriver to ranges of hills, about fourteen hundred feet above itslevel, on which the horizontal lava-capping could be distinctlydiscerned.In the distant west the Cordillera of the Andes stretchedalong the horizon. During three days, we had advanced towardsthose far distant mountains, seeing them at times verydistinctly ; yet this morning our distance seemed nearly asgreat as on the day we first saw their snow-covered summits.A long day's work carried us beyond the flat and into therising country, whose barren appearance I just now mentioned.Excepting guanacoes.352 WALKING PARTY — VIEWS. MayWe were all very tired of the monotonous scene, as well asof the labour of hauling the boats along.4th. Our provisions being almost exhausted, and the riveras large as it was beyond the lava country, our allotted timebeing out, and every one weary and foot-sore, I decided uponwalking overland to the westward, as far as we could go in oneday, and then setting out on our return to the Beagle. I wasthe more inclined to this step, because the river here made asoutherly bend, to follow which would have required at least aday, without making much westing, and because I thoughtthat some of our party might walk in that time at least twiceas far as they could track the boats, and then return beforenight. To have followed the course of the river two days longer,we should have needed all the small remainder of our provisions,and probably without being enabled to see further thanwe might by one day's walk directly westward. Leaving thosewho were the most tired to take care of the boats, a partyset out early, in light marching order. A large plain laybefore us, over which shrubs, very small trees, and bushes weresparingly scattered ; yet parts of this plain might be calledfertile and woody, by comparison with the tracts between usand the eastern sea-coast.At noon we halted on a rising ground, made observationsfor time, latitude, and bearing ; rested and eat our meal ; ona spot which we found to be only sixty miles from the nearestwater of the Pacific Ocean. The Cordillera of the Andesextended along the western side of our view ; the weather wasvery clear, enabling us to discern snow-covered mountains farin the north, and also a long way southward ; hence much ofthe range was visible, but of the river we could discern nothing.Only from the form of the land could we conclude that at theend of the southerly reach I have mentioned, the direction ofthe river is nearly east and west for a few miles, and that thenit may turn northward, or rather come from the north alongthe base of the Cordillera.There are many reasons for inducing one to suppose that itcomes not only from the north, but from a considerable dism\■li"'jr^ifl^■ism-,^t ^ •■SV' ' 1 • /1834. WATER DRAINAGE LAKE. 353tance northward. At the place where we ceased to ascend thestream, the Santa Cruz was almost as large as at the placeswhere we passed the first and second nights near the estuary.The velocity of the current was still at least six knots an hour ;though the depth remained undiminished. The temperature ofthe water was 45°, while that of the air was seldom so high,even in the day-time, and at night was usually below the freezingpoint. Trees, or rather the trunks of trees, were foundlying upon the banks, whose water-worn appearance indicatedthat they had been carried far by the stream. The waterwas very free from sediment, though of a whitish blue colour,which induces me to suppose that it has been chiefly producedby melted snow, or that it has passed through lakes in whichthe sediment it might have brought so far was deposited.If filled from the waters of the nearer mountains only, itstemperature would surely be lower, approaching that of meltedsnow : it would also, in all probability, bring much sediment,and would therefore be muddier, and less pure in colour.When one considers how large an extent of country there isbetween the River Negro and the Strait of Magalhaens, andthat through that extensive region only one liver of magnitudeflows, it may be difficult to account for the manner in whichthe drainage of the eastern side of the great Cordillera is carriedoff, or where the melted snow and occasional heavy rainsdisappear.The Galleys is small, though it runs into a large estuary.The Chupat river is very small : that at Port Desire isscarcely more than a brook. At times, it is true, these smallerrivers are flooded, but their floods (added to their usual streams)seem unequal to carrying ofi" the continual drainage of theAndes. South of the Negro only the Santa Cruz flows witha full and strong stream throughout the whole year, and myidea is that the sources of the river Santa Cruz are not farfrom those of the southern branch of the Neerro, near theforty-fifth degree of latitude ; and that it runs at the foot ofthe Andes, southward, through several lakes, until it turns tothe eastward in the parallel of fifty degrees.VOL. II. 2 A354 LAKE VIEDMA OK Caper FLOODS, MayIn Viedma's Diary I find that he heard from the Indians atPort San Julian (in 1782) that the river Santa Cruz flowedfrom a large lake near the Cordillera of the Andes, and thatthere was abundance of wood on its banks. In consequenceof this information, he went, in November, with a party ofSpaniards and Indians on horseback, to explore this lake. Inhis way, Viedma crossed the river Chico, which flows into theestuary of the Santa Cruz, just above Weddell Bluff: TheChico, though small at times and then fordable, was subject,the Indians said, to great floods in the spring, when the meltingsnows of the Cordillera over-filled a lake, far in the northwest,whence this river ran. Afterwards, Viedma crossed theriver Chaha, which they told him rose in another lake near theCordillera, was likewise subject to floods, and emptied itselfinto the Santa Cruz : when he passed, it was only up to thehorses'' knees (after searching many leagues, however, for aford), but at his return it was deeper. This Chalia can be noother than the stream which flows through Basalt Glen, a merebrook when we saw it in the driest season of the year. Viedmareached the lake,* and found every thing correspond to thedescription ; for it was deep and large, surrounded by snow-coveredmountains, on which were many forests.Some persons have doubted whether there is ever muchdrainage to be carried off* from the eastern side of the Andes,between the parallels of forty and fifty ; but if they will takethe trouble to read Viedma's Diary, and some other noticesto be found in the work of Don Pedro de Angels, I thinkthey will be convinced that there is always a considerable drainage,and that at times there are heavy floods to be carried oW.f• Called Caper, or Viedma. MS. Chart.t As one proof of this assertion, I may quote a passage from Viedma:" Reconcile pues todo" (all that there was to see in the neighbourhoodof the lake whence the Santa Cruz flowed), " nos expusd el IndiaPatricii nos debiamos apart lego de aqua, porque eon los vient laertes,y el sol, solid derretirse tanta nieve que era impossible vater los arroyospara regresar, y tendrils que pasar el verano en quel passage hastaque las beads empezasen.'' — (Uiario de Viedma, p 57.)1834. LEVEL OF RIVER — BONES. 355Reference to the accompanying plan will shew our positionwhen we halted, and I decided to return, not having explored,I should think, more than one-third of its course. At that placethe level of the river was found to be four hundred feet higherthan that of the sea at the entrance ; and as the distance isabout two hundred miles,* the average descent or fall of thewater must be near two feet in a mile, which, I apprehend, isunusually great. I could not, indeed, believe that the computationand data were correct, until after repeated examination.-f-Two barometers were used at the river-side, and a very goodone was carefully watched on board the Beagles Certainly,the rapid descent of the river, in many places, was such, thateven to the eye it appeared to be running down-hill ; and thisremark Alas often made in the course of our journey.Two days before we reached our westernmost point, manytraces of an old Indian encampment were seen ; but exceptingat that place and at the spot Which we passed on the 22d, nosigns of inhabitants were any where found. Scarcity of pasture,and the badness of the ground for their horses' feet,must deter Indians from remaining in this neighbourhood;but that they frequently cross the river, when travelling,is well known.The quantities of bones heaped together, or scattered nearthe river, in so many places which we passed, excited conjecturesas to what had collected them. Do guanacoes approach theriver to drink when they are dying .? or are the bones remainsof animals eaten by lions or by Indians ? or are they washedtogether by floods ? Certain it is they are remarkably numerousnear the banks of the river ; but not so elsewhere.I can hardly think that the guanaco is often allowed to diea natural death; for pumas are always on the alert to seizeinvalid stragglers from the herd. At night the guanacoes choosethe clearest places for sleeping, lying down together like sheep ;and in the day they avoid thickets, and all such places as mightFollowing the course of the river.t The data will he found in the Appendix. X At the level of the sea,2 a2356 RETURN — ANIMALS FISH. Mayshelter their ever-watchful enemy. Condor, also, and fiercelittle wild cats* help to prevent too great an increase of thisbeautiful, inoffensive, and useful animal.Late on the 4th we returned to our tents, thoroughly tiredby a daily succession of hard work, and long walks. At thisbivouac we were about one hundred and forty miles, in astraight line, from the estuary of Santa Cruz, or from WeddellBluff; and about two hundred and forty-five miles distantby the course of the river. Our station at noon on the4th, was eight miles in a straight line farther westward, andabout thirty miles from the Cordillera of the Andes. Theheight of those mountains was from five to seven thousand feetabove our level, by angular measurement with a theodolite.Early on the 5th we began the rapid descent. Sometimes thewind favoured, and we passed the land at the rate of ten knotsan hour ; sometimes dangerous places obliged us to turn theboat's head to the stream, pull against it, and so drop downbetween the rocks. Though easy, the return was far moredangerous than our ascent of the river.5th. Our first day's work in returning was a distance of eighty-fivemiles, which had cost us six days hard labour in ascending.Next day we made good about eighty-two miles ; and on the7th we reached the salt water. Although we made suchquick progress in returning, our halts for observations weresimilar to those made in going. While descending the rapidstream, so quickly and quietly, we saw many more guanacoesand ostriches than we had seen before ; but our flying shotsonly frightened them, and time was too precious to admit ofany delay. Only one fish was got, and that was a dead one,which had been left on the bank : it was similar to a trout.Not more than half a dozen live fish were seen, and none couldbe caught either with hooks or nets. Leaving a very smallparty near Weddell Bluff to look for guanacoes, I hastened moriboard with the boats ; and with the ebb tide reached the Beaglebefore noon on the 8th. The ship being ready for sea, exceptThough the wild cat could not injure a full-grown animal, it mightdestroy a young one with great ease.1834. TIDES rUMAS AIGLE ROCK. 357ing a ton or two of fresh water, the yawl and cutter were dispatchedto get it and bring on board the shooting party. Duringmy absence satisfactory observations on the tides had beenmade, which showed that the neap tides rise about eighteenfeet, and the springs from thirty-eight to forty-two feet. Oneday when walking through a woody ravine, not far from theanchorage, Mr. Stewart saw a puma lying under a bush, glaringat him : taking a steady aim, he fired, and laid the animaldead. It was a very large one ; and the skin is now in the BritishMuseum, The moment of thus looking a lion in the face, whiletaking aim, at only a few yards distance, must be somewhattrying to the nerves, I should imagine. A beautiful wild catwas also added to our collections, besides condor and foxes.9th. The boats, and shooting party, arrived with water andtwo guanacoes. As the sportsmen were returning with theirburthens on the preceding evening, darkness overtook themwhile yet distant from their tent ; and they were soon madeuncomfortably* conscious that an enemy was at hand, for thestrong and peculiar smell of a lion warned them that one wasnear. They trudged on with their cargoes, talking to oneanother ; but the scent was still strong until they approachedthe fire, which had been kept up by their companion, when itceased entirely. Such a weight as a lion's, added suddenly tothat of a guanaco, would have been rather distressing.We were detained for a day or two by an overcast sky, whichprevented my obtaining equal altitudes ; but on the 12th theBeagle left the Santa Cruz, and stood towards the alleged placeof the shoal, or rock, called ' Aigle,' not far from the westernmostof the Falkland Islands. No such danger, nor any sign ofshallow water being found, but, on the contrary, no bottom withone hundred fathoms of line, we steered towards MagalhaensStrait, and on the 18th anchored off Cape Virgins. Next morningI landed on the Cape, taking Mr. Darwin and Mr. Stokeswith me, and remained tiU after the noon observation, when,returning on board, the Beagle weighed and sailed to anotherstation. From this time (till the 25th) we were busily em-beingonly two in number.358 ADVENTURE — FORT FAMINE. May, June.played in sounding in the neighbourhood of Cape Virgins,Point Catherine, Lamas Bay, and Possession Bay.On the 23d, at day-light, we saw the Adventure comingfrom the Falklands. After communicating with us, she wenton to survey the portion of coast extending from SweepstakesForeland to Cape Monmouth ; and we remained to completeour own task of sounding the banks about the First Narrow,and examining the south shore of St. Philip Bay. On the 3dof June both vessels were moored in Port Famine, preparingfor their passage to San Carlos in Chloe.The next chapter will take the Beg-le into the Pacific by a route nothitherto used, except by sealing vessels : although it possesses manyadvantages over either the passage round Cape Horn, or that throughthe western reaches of the Strait of Magalhaens. Mr. Low is said tobe the first discoverer of it, and he certainly was the first to pass throughin a ship ; but I think one of the Saxe Cobourg's boats had passedthrough it previously, and 1 much question whether Sir Francis Drake'sshallop did not go by that opening into the Strait of Magalhaens in1578.*Before I finally leave Tierra del Fuego, a remark or two may herebe made respecting the language of the natives. ' Pichi,' in the Huilli-che or Araucanian language, means 'small ' or ' a little,' and 're' signifies' only,' ' but,' ' purely,' or ' simply.' Hence, Pecheray, alwaysuttered in a begging, or whining tone, may have some such signification.In Beauchesne's voyage it is said, that the natives in the Eastern partsof Magalhaens Strait were called ' Leagued-che,' and those westward,Haveguedi-che.'t These words are to me very interesting, because Isuppose the first to be a corruption of Laque-che, which means, in Araucanian,' People with balls ' (bolas), and the second is not far removedfrom Huapi-gulu-che, which means ' people of mountainous islandsheaped together,' terms respectively most appropriate for natives ofeastern and western Tierra del Fuego.See Burney, vol. i. p. 368 and p. 327, where he shows that Drakediscovered Cape Horn, and anchored near it (in or near St. MartinCove?) in 1578. Another early southern discovery is mentioned invol. ii. p. 198, where it is stated that Dick Gherritz discovered landin 64°. S. in 1591), (part of or near South Shetland?)t Voyage of Beauchesne, in Burney's History, vol. iv. p. 378.n, a iCHAPTER XVII.Beagle and Adventure sail from Port Famine through Magdalen andCockburn Channel — Enter Pacific — Death of Mr. Rowlett— ChloeChile — Government— Adventure sold — Consequent changes — PlansMr. Low — Honos — Lieut. Sulivan's party — Moraledada — Ladrilleros■ — Deva — Sharp — San Andres — Vallenar — Mr Stokes — San Este-van— ; Distressed sailors — Anna Pink Bay — Port Low — Potatoes —Indian names — Huafo — Volcano — Chilotes — Aborigines — Militia —Freebooters— Climate — Docks — Tides — Witchcraft — Alerse — Cal-buenos— Cesaress — Search for men — Meteors.June 9th. Good equal altitudes having been obtained, afteran interval of time sufficient for rating our chronometers,*we sailed from Port Famine, went down the Magdalen Channel,enjoying some fine scenery, among which Sarmiento waspre-eminent, and anchored in a cove under Cape Turn. Thefollowing day we beat to windward through the CockburnChannel, and would have anchored at night had a safe placeoffered in time, but as the only cove near us at dusk was avery small one, I preferred leaving that unoccupied for theAdventure, and remaining under way in the Beagle. Thenight was long and very dark, small rain fell nearly all thetime, and squalls from the westward were frequent. Therewere but four square miles in which it was safe to sail to andfro after dark, and for fourteen hours we traversed that areain every direction. It Meas necessary to keep under a reasonablepress of sail part of the time, to hold our ground againstthe lee tide ; but with the ebb we had often to bear up andrun to leeward, when we got too near the islets westward ofus. In a case of this kind a ship is so much more manageablewhile going through the water than she is while hove-to,and those on board are in general so much more on the alertthan when the vessel herself seems half asleep, that I havealways been an advocate for short tacks under manageable sail,so as to keep as much as possible near the same place, in preferenceto heaving-to and drifting.The Adventure had four chronometers.360 DEATH or ur. rowlktt. JuneWhen the day at last broke on the 11th, we saw the Adventurecoming out to us from the cove where she had passed thenight, and then both vessels sailed out of the Channel, pastMount Skyring and all the Furies, as fast as sails could urgethem. At sunset we were near the Tower Rocks,* and witha fresh north-west Avind stood out into the Pacific, with everyinch of canvas set which we could carry.On the 26th we were still together, in latitude 43° and longitude75°, although gales had occasionally separated us for afew hours. After passing the latitude of 45° we had a successionof bad weather, and adverse (N.W.) winds. Trustingtoo much to our usual good fortune I had steered in too directa line towards Childee, and in consequence all these north-westwinds were against us. Had I shaped a course which would havetaken us farther from the land, while we had the wind southwardof west, we might have made a fair wind of these provokingnorth-western, and arrived at Chloe at least a weeksooner. A few remarks upon the wind and weather, betweenthe parallels of forty and forty-seven, off Childee and theHonos Archipelago, will be found in the Appendix (No. 19).On the 27th we witnessed the last moments of Mr. Rowlett'sexistence in this world. He had long been sinking underan internal complaint of which it was impossible to cure him,except by a vigorous and uniform mode of treatment to whichhe was not willing to conform until too late : but his illness hadno relation whatever to the service in which he had been employed.He was much" regretted by all of us, having been akind, honourable friend. The following day we committed thebody of our deceased companion to the seaman's grave, thatever-changing and mysterious main." In the evening wewere near the north-west end of Childee, and at midnight ananchor was let go in our former berth, off Point Arena. TheAdventure arrived two days afterwards, her main-boom havingbroken in a heavy squall on the 27th, in consequence of whichshe got to leeward, and was prevented from sooner weatheringthe north end of the island. A supply of fresh provisionsNot far from Cape Noir, on Noir Island.1834. Civilian Government. 361and good rates for the chronometers were obtained, afterwhich we sailed (14th July) for Valparaiso, and arrived theretogether on the 22d.My first object would have been, after seeing the vesselssecurely moored, to go to Santiago, present my instructionsin the proper quarter, and ask for the sanction of the Chiliangovernment, in prosecuting the survey of the coasts of Chile ;but I was so much in arrear with respect to computations andcharts, that I could not venture to give even a week to anexcursion to that agreeable place, where a thousand attractivenovelties would inevitably have diverted my attention in somemeasure from the dull routine of calculation, and attentionto the data accumulated by many months' exertion of thoseon board the Adventure, as well as in the Beagle ; therefore Isent Lieutenant Wickham, who spoke Spanish, and had beenat Santiago before, to show my instructions to the Authorities,and request their approval of our examination of the shoresunder their jurisdiction. Nothing could be more satisfactorythan the reply (Appendix No. 20), and from that time untilthe Beagle left Chile she received every attention and assistancewhich the Chien officers could afford.As I proposed to remain at Valparaiso during the wintermonths, Messrs. Stokes, King, Usborne, and myself, whose occupationwould be sedentary and would require room, as wellas more light and quiet than we could always have on board,took up our quarters on shore ; while those on board attendedto the refit and provisioning of our vessels.At this time I was made to feel and endure a bitter disappointment; the mortification it caused preyed deeply, andthe regret is still vivid. I found that it would be impossiblefor me to maintain the Adventure much longer: my ownmeans had been taxed, even to involving myself in difficulties,and as the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty did notthink it proper to give me any assistance, I saw that all mycherished hopes of examining many groups of islands in thePacific, besides making a complete survey of the Chilianand Peruvian shores, must utterly fail. I had asked to be362 Adventure SOLD— CHANGES. NoV.allowed to bear twenty additional seamen on the Beagle'sbooks, whose pay and provisions would then be provided byGovernment, being willing to defray every other expensemyself; but even this was refused. As soon as my mind wasmade up, after a most painful struggle, I discharged theAdventure's crew, took the officers back to the Beagle, andsold the vessel.*Early in November our charts of the eastern coasts of Patagoniaand Tierra del Fuego, as well as those of the FalklandIslands (the work of the Adventure) were finished, and shippedoff for England ; and on the 10th we sailed, alone, to resumeour more active occupations on the southern coasts. My formerintention was to have filled up all blanks in the charts of theouter west coast of Patagonia, between the parallels of fifty-threeand forty-eight, and then carried a connected survey alongthe coast to the equator ; after which the Galapagos Islands ;Dangerous Archipelago; Marquesas, Society, Friendly, andFeejee Islands ; besides New Zealand ; were to have had asearnest an examination as could be effected by both vesselsduring 1836 and part of 1837. That this plan might havebeen carried out by the divisions of labour and exertions ofthe Beagle and her tender may, I think, be inferred fromwhat has actually been executed with inferior means andin much less time. But my reduced arrangements were ona much smaller scale : I could only look to the most usefulobjects that might be effected within the limited time to whichI dared to look forward.All on board partook, more or less, of the mortification causedby parting with our consort, just as she was most wanted, andmost able to take an effective part ; and I confess that my ownfeelings and health were so much altered in consequence — sodeprived of their former elasticity and soundness — that I couldmyself no longer bear the thoughts of such a prolonged separationfrom my country, as I had encouraged others to think• Though her sale was very ill-managed, parti' owing to my beingdispirited and careless, she brought 7j5U0 dollars, nearly i 1,-100, and isnow (1838) trading on that coast, in sound condition.1834. PLANS FOR Future — MR. LOW. 363lightly of, while I could hold out to them the prospect of seeingas well as doing a great deal among the islands of the Pacific,besides completing the surveys of Chile and Peru.I now proposed, first, to go to San Carlos, there set twoof our boats at work among; the islands eastward of the largeisland, while the Beagle would survey the more exposed coasts,those to the west and south ; then the ship was to examinethe seaward shores of the Honos archipelago, while anotherof her boats was employed among those islands ; and, theHonos explored, she would return to San Carlos, collect herscattered parties, and proceed along the coast, northwards,taking all the ports and islands in her way.On the 21 st we arrived at San Carlos, and were pleased tofind that Mr. Low had returned safe from his difficult undertaking; and that a person (Mr. Douglas) whom I had engagedto make an excursion to Calbuco and into the forests of 'Alerse,'on the Cordillera of the Andes, had also come back with therequired information, and was ready to engage himself to actas a pilot and interpreter.When last at San Carlos I proposed to Mr. Low, then servingas pilot on board the Adventure, to pass the time of our absenceat Valparaiso, in exploring part of the Honos Archipelagowith a whale-boat belonging to me, and a crew of natives(Chilotes). Low, ever restless and enterprising, entered eagerlyinto my views ; so furnishing him with money, a chart, and afew instruments, I explained where I wished him to go, andwhen he should be again at San Carlos, all further arrangementbeing left to him.Mr. Low hired a crew of six men,* and set out. After hehad quitted the southernmost place at which provisions couldbe procured, called Caylin, or ' El fin de la Christiana,' oneof his men-f" persuaded some of the others to eat up the stockA Welshman, two Chilotes, a Chilian, and two Sandwich Islanderswho had been left at San Carlos by a whaler. t The Chilian.J The Chilotes and Sandwich Islanders. Taffy remained faithful : heand Low, being able-bodied active men, frijj tenet the rest into reluctantsubmission.364< ISLAND OF SOCORRO — INDIANS. Dect)f provisions in the boat as soon as possible, in order that theymight be obliged to return without going far. But Low wastoo much inured to hardship to be so easily diverted from hisplan ; he went on, directly south, even after his provisionswere consumed ; obliging them to live for fourteen days uponshell-fish and sea-weed. After exploring much of the HonosArchipelago, sufficiently to facilitate our survey materially, hereturned with his hungry crew to Caylin.24th. Lieutenant Sulivan set out with the yawl and a whaleboat,to survey the east side of Chloe and the islets in theGulf of Ancud.* With him were Messrs. Darwin, Usborne,Stewart and Kent ; Douglas as a pilot, and ten men. Two daysafterwards, the Beagle sailed, to examine the western coast ofChloe, and the Honos Archipelago.Dec. 2d. While standing towards distant mountainous land,about the latitude of 45°, we saw a comparatively low and levelisland-|- considerably detached from those which seemed likeTierra del Fuego, being a range of irregular mountains andhills, forming apparently a continuous coast. This level islandI have since ascertained to be that formerly called NuestraSenora del Socorro, where Narborough anchored and landed, in1670. It was selected in 1740, by Anson, as a rendezvous forhis squadron ; but no one seemed to know where to look for it :the Anna Pink having made the land in 45°. 35', and the unfortunateWager in 47°, near Cape Tres Montes. Narboroughmentions seeing ' an old Indian hut"" on this island ; and in aMS. journal, written by Moraleda| (now in my possession)it is said that the former natives of the Honos used to makeannual excursions to that as well as other outlying islands.After witnessing the distance to which savages venture in suchfrail canoes as those of Tierra del Fuego, it does not surpriseone to find them going fifteen or twenty miles across an open• Orders in Appendix, No. 21.t About three or four hundred feet in height, excepting one hill, whichis seven hundred feet.+ MS. Diary of Moraledada's examination of Chloe and part of theHonos Islands in 1787-93, given to me at Lima, by a friend to whom Iam much indebted for valuable information.1834. HUAFO BREAK ANCHORS. 365space of sea in such large canoes as those of the Honos Indians,which are indeed boats. Fuegian wigwams have been foundupon Staten Land and upon Noir Island, each of which is asfar from any neighbouring coast as Socorro is from the nearestshore.While Narborough's ship was under sail, near Socorro, hewent in his boat to the island which is nearest to it, by himnamed Narborough Island.* There he landed, and took possessionfor his Majesty and his heirship"3d. Having passed the night quietly at single anchor, nearthe north-east point of Socorro, we weighed and continuedour route to and fro along the coast, taking angles, soundings,and observations. On the 5th, we were near Huafo,J which,to our surprise, we found to be twenty-five miles farther norththan the Spanish charts (following Moraledada) showed itsposition, yet the longitude was almost correct. In a small cove,near the south-east point of Huafo, we anchored, but broke abower-anchor in doing so ; for the cove is small — an unexpectedpuff of wind gave us too much way — and dropping the bowerin haste, it fell upon a rock, and broke. § Only two days beforeanother anchor was broken, near Socorro, by the ship pitchingwhile a short scope of cable was out, and the anchor hooking toa rock. I found, on landing, that the formation of the island,like that of Socorro and Narborough Island, is a soft sandstone?which can be cut with a knife as easily as a cake of chocolate.• " Neither the chart in Ulloa, nor any of the Spanish charts lately inHse, show the name of Nes. del Socorro to any island near the coast hereabouts.The Spanish Atlas of 1798, places an island very near the coastin 44° 50' S. latitude, which in shape and situation answers nearly to Marlborough'sdescription of the island, to which he gave his own name." —(Burney, vol. iii. p. 360. Note.)t " I saw no kind of mineral in it. Not finding this island noted inany draught (chart), I called it after my own name, Narbrough Island,and took possession of it for his Majesty and his heirs." — (Narborough'sVoyage to Patagonia and Chile, in 1669-1671.){ Called by Narborough " No-man's Island."§ Or between two rocks, so that the first sudden strain snapped theshank.S66 HUAMBLIX MOUNTAIN — VALLEXAE. DeC.These three outlying islands are thickly wooded, rather level,compared with their neighbours, and not exceeding eight hundredfeet in height. There are few, if any others, like them inthe Honos Archipelago ; almost all the rest, however portionsof some may resemble them, being mountainous, and very likethose of Tierra del Fuego and the west coast of Patagonia,beyond 47° south; therefore I need only remark, that thevegetation is more luxuriant ; that there is a slight difference init, consequent probably upon a milder climate; that someproductions, such as canes and potatoes, &c., are found therewhich do not grow near the Strait of Magalhaens ; and that inother respects, as to appearance, nature, and climate, the HonosArchipelago is like Tierra del Fuego in summer.We remained a few days in San Pedro harbour ; and onthe 9th Mr. Sulivan and his party joined us. Next dayMr. Stokes and I endeavoured to get to the top of the mountainnamed Huampelen, Huamblin, or San Pedro ; but afterclimbing, creeping, struggling, and tumbling about, amongold decayed trees, strongly interwoven canes, steep, slipperyplaces, and treacherous bog, we failed, and gave up the attempt.Mr. Darwin, Douglas, and others were with me, but we wereall foiled.11th. Having despatched Mr. Sulivan, with the same partyexcepting Mr. Darwin, we got under weigh, and hastenedtowards the middle of the Honos group, in order to find aport whence Mr. Stokes might set out to explore northwards,while I should examine the southern half of the archipelago.13th. We succeeded in finding a sheltered, and apparentlysafe anchorage in a road named by me Vallenar, because itcorresponded in situation to an island so called in an old chart,said to be of the Honos, but which bore no resemblance whateverto them. However, being anxious to remove no " neighbour'slandmark," and retain original names, when they couldbe ascertained, I kept them wherever I was able to do so. Asto the native names, those given by Indians, I had not themeans of finding them out, for no inhabitants were seen ; but,so far as Moraledada had collected them from his Indian inter1834. Morales Notices OF CHONOS. 367prefers, and made them known by his chart,* I have scrupulouslyfollowed him.-|-16th. Mr. Stokes set out, in a whale-boat, to work northwards,as near the sea-coast as possible, and meet me at a harbourin the Huaytecas group of islands, now called Port Low.He was accompanied by Mr. Low, Mr. Mayst and four menesMoraledada, in his diary and chart, describes a channel whichcrosses the Honos Archipelago, and is called by the nativesNinualac.'ll Through this passage the Honos Indians usedto go once or twice a year to inspect the small herds of goats,or flocks of sheep which they then had upon those outlying islandsI have already mentioned, namely Humbling (Socorro),and Ipun (Narborough) ; as well as upon others, of which I believeLemu, a woody island on the north side of Vallenar Road,was one. Moraledada himself explored part of the continent,and some of the islands adjacent to it (between 1786 and 1796),but he saw nothing of the sea face of the Honos. What fewnotices of it existed, prior to 1834, were obtained from thevoyage of Ladrilleros in 1557 ; from the Anna Pink in 1741 ;from Machado in 1769 ; and from the Santa Barbara in 1792 ;which, when compared together, tended to confuse a hydrographermore than they assisted him. In Spanish charts ofthe coast from Cape Tres Montes northward to Taitaohao-huon (a name long enough to perplex more verbose men thansailors) from which all others, of that coast, were copied, thatportion must have been originally laid down according to magNow in my possession.t His Huamblin and Ipun I take to be Socono and NarboroughIslands, but am not certain.X Having very little occupation on board, in his own particular line,just at that time, Mr. May volunteered to take an oar, as one of the boat'screw. § Orders in Appendix, No. 22.II " Grand Canal de Ninualac, que atraviese el Archipelago, per el informedel practice Hueiiupal que cash anualmente la transit con el motiveexpresado en el Diaries"— (Moraledada's MS. Chart, 1795.)1[ Huamblin, if, as I suppose it, a corruption of Huampelen, means ' anwatch,' * posted as a sentinel :' Ipun means ' swept off,' or ' swept away :'Lemu means ' wood :' names singularly applicable to each of those islandsrespectively.368 Alloa LADllILLEROS. DeC.netic, instead of true bearing; and the fragments of knowledgeacquired, about the latitude of 46° S., from the masterof the Anna Pink, the pilot Machado, and the officers of theSanta Barbara frigate, clashed so much that their result waswhat we see in the charts hitherto used, a dotted line, and afew straggling islands, totally unlike the truth, leading one toexpect a comparatively open space, whereas there is a successionof high and considerable islands, so near one another, thatfrom the offing they ' make ' like a solid unbroken coast.While on this subject I may remind the reader that besidesthe expeditions above-mentioned, the missionary voyages describedby Agues (Appendix, No. 23), the important undertakingof Sarmiento, and the disastrous voyage of the Wager,there have been other visitors to the west coast of Patagonia,part of whose acquired information, though slight, is uponrecord.In 1552, two ships, commanded by Don Francisco de UUoa,were sent by Valdivia to gain some knowledge of the Strait ofMagalhaens.* The journal of their voyage is not extant. Fiveyears afterwards (in 1557), Don Garcia Hurtado, Viceroy ofPeru, sent two vessels to examine the southern part of the coastof Chile, as far as the Strait of Magalhaens. The commanderwas Juan Ladrilleros, and with him were two pilots, namedHerman Gallery and Pedro Gallery. A mutiny took place,and one ship deserted, but with the other Ladrilleros persevered,passed four months in the Strait at anchor during the winter,then reconnoitred the eastern entrance, and afterwards sailedback to Chile, where he at last arrived with only one seamanand a negro, the rest of his people having perished by exposureto hardships, by scurvy, or by famine. The principalgeographical information obtained at so high a price, was someslight knowledge of Childee, and the archipelago of islands nearit. — (Burney, vol. i. p. 246-9.)Sarmiento's expedition in 1579-1580, has already been oftenquoted in the first volume of this narrative.In 1675 Antonio de Vea was sent from Peru in a ship,• Hastened, a Genoese, was, I believe, in this expedition. His MS.Journal is said to exist in the archives of Barcelona.Dec. 1834. de vea — sharp — cone creek. 369accompanied by small barks, as tenders, to reconnoitre theGulf of Trinidad, and the western entrance of MagalhaensStrait. De Vea made an examination of those places, and wasconvinced, from the poverty of the land, that no settlement ofEuropeans could be maintained there. One of the Spanishbarks, with a crew of sixteen men, was wrecked on the smallislands called Evangelists, at the west entrance of the Strait.De Vea returned to Callao in 1767. — (Burney, iv. 76.)In 1681, the notorious Sharp anchored in a gulf, surroundedby craggy mountains, whose tops were covered with snow, in50°. 40'. south latitude ; where " the difference of the rise andfall of the tide was seven feet perpendicular"" Sharp namedthe anchorage ShergalFs Harbour, the sound he called EnglishGulf; and the islands adjacent 'duke of York's Islands."The account of this buccaneer's visit is sufficiently connectedwith the object of this volume, to warrant my inserting it inthe Appendix, copied verbatim from that interesting work,invaluable to seamen and hydrogTaphers, Burney 's History ofthe Discoveries in the South Sea.*18th Dec. The Beagle weighed and sailed out of VallenarRoad, after experiencing the shelter afforded by that anchorage,during a heavy gale from the south-west and southward.At day-light on the 20th we were off Cape Tres Montes :having a fine day and smooth water, we surveyed the coastbetween that promontory and San Andres Bay, but it becamedark before an anchorage could be gained. Next morning weanchored in a narrow creek,-|- close by a singular cone (1,300feet high), an unfailing landmark. Finding it a place difficultto get out of, and not to be recommended, unless in distress,we did not stay there long, but moved to a cove at the southwestpart of the bay.:|: While under sail for this purpose, advancethis extract from Burney (Appendix No. 23), there is a criticismupon a hydrographical error, made by some copyist, which is interestingto me from its correspondence with what I suspect to have takenplace in the old charts of Nassau Bay and Cape Horn (See pages122, 123.)+ Cone Creek. + Christmas Cove.VOL. II, O jj370 SAN ESTEVAN — DISTRESSED MEN. DeC.take was taken of an interval of moderate weather to run severalmiles along the coast northward, and back again. Stronggales set in afterwards and kept us prisoners several days. ThisChristmas was unlike the last: it was a sombre period. The windblew heavily (though we did not feel it much, being well sheltered); all looked dismal around us ; our prospects for thefuture were sadly altered ; and our immediate task was thesurvey of another Tierra del Fuego, a place swampy with rain,tormented by storms, without the interest even of population :for hitherto we had neither found traces,* nor heard the voicesof natives.28th. Directly the weather would admit, we weighed andcoasted along till the sun was getting low, when we ranunder shelter from sea and wind, and anchored in the cornerof a bay which I afterwards concluded must be the bay orport called Stephens, and more properly, San Estevan. Whilewe were furling sails, some men were seen on a point ofland near the ship, making signals to us in a very earnestmanner. Being dressed as sailors, it was natural for us to concludethat they were some boat's crew left there to collect seal-skins.A boat was sent to them, and directly she touched theland they rushed into her, without saying a word, as menwould if pursued by a dreaded enemy ; and not till they wereafloat could they compose themselves enough to tell their story.They were North American sailors, who had deserted from theFrances Henrietta (a whaler of New Bedford), in October 1833.When off Cape Tres Montes, but out of sight of land, andin the middle af the night, these six men lowered a boat andleft their ship, intending to coast along until they should arriveat Childee. Their first landing was effected on the 18th, butowing to negligence the boat was so badly stove that theycould not repair her, and all their hopes of effecting a coastingvoyage were thus crushed in the very outset.With one exception. On a height near Cone Creek Mr. Darwinfound, in a sheltered hollow of the rock, strewed with dry grass, whatappeared to him the place on which a man had slept. For some timethis puzzled us considerably : probably a sealer lead slept there.1834. STORY OF RESCUED SAILORS. 371Finding it impossible to penetrate far into the country,on account of its ruggedness, and thick forests, which, thoughonly trifling in height, were almost impervious, they began apilgrimage along-shore ; but it was soon evident, to their dismay,that there were so many arms of the sea to pass round,and it was so difficult to walk, or rather climb, along the rockyshores, that they must abandon that idea also, and remainstationary. To this decision they were perhaps more inclinedafter the death of one of their number; who, in trying tocross a chasm between two cliffs, failed in his leap, fell, andwas dashed to pieces. Their permanent abode was then takenup at the point which shelters Port San Estevan, now calledRescue Point ; where they passed a year in anxious hope. Ofcourse the few provisions which their boat had carried ashorewere soon exhausted, and for thirteen months they had livedonly upon seals' flesh, shell-fish, and wild celery : yet thosefive men, when received on board the Beagle, were in bettercondition, as to healthy fleshiness, colour, and actual health,than any five individuals belonging to our ship. Few remarksworth noticing had been made by them, as the only experiencedman (whose name was John Lawson) lost his life as above-mentioned.There was an almost continual succession of rain andwind for several months after their first landing, except fromthe 20th to the 29th of December, which passed without rain :in July (1834) they had an extraordinary storm from southwest,which began early one morning, after a rainy night withnortherly wind: and in November (1834) there were twenty-onedays successively without rain. One day (in May) they saweight vessels sailing northwards together ; excepting which, notasail was ever seen by their aching eyes till the Beagle hove insight.Between San Andres, near which they first landed, andSan Estevan, the hull of a small vessel was found, quite beddedin sand ; she seemed to be about thirty-five tons burthen, fromthirty to thirty-five feet in the keel, and about sixteen broad.She was full-built ; neither coppered nor sheathed. In a cave,which had been used as a dwelling, near San Andres, the skullof a man was found, and some burned wood. A bracelet of2b2372 ANIMALS — TIDES — IXCHE-MO. DeC.beads was lying in the cave, but they noticed nothing else. Theskull seemed to them to have been that of a black man. Noanimals were seen at any time except deer and nutria, seal andotter ; the former were of a reddish colour, with short straighthorns, and very rough coats : no traces of other quadrupedswere observed, nor during the whole fourteen months did theyever meet a native human being. They told me that the nighttides seemed always to be a foot or more higher than those of theday, which, as they said, rose from four to seven or eight feetperpendicularly. I had intended to explore the interior ofPort Sen Estevan ; but as they had already done so, and foundit terminate in a fresh water river, or rather mountain stream, Igave up that plan, and sailed next day.29th. While examining the coast towards Cape Taytao* (Imust omit haohuon), we found a very dangerous patch ofrocks-f- five miles from the nearest land ; there are soundingsnear them. In the evening we dropped our anchor under InchesIsland ; an interesting locality, because there the Anna Pinkanchored before she was drifted across the adjacent bay intoPort Refuge (in 1741).30th. On landing an old wooden hut was discovered inasheltered corner, and we found that the island was overrunwith goats, which I suppose to have been left by theSanta Barbara's crew, if not by Machado's people. WhileMr. Stokes and I were engaged with the instruments, and twoboats sounding, a couple of guns were sent against the goats,and in consequence of their effectual employment in the handsof Mr. Bynoe and H. Fuller, all on board had a good fresh mealthe next two days. After noon we sailed across the Bays]:and found a snug, though very small coves where we mooredin security, and remained till the 4th of January, exploring theneighbourhood — an unprofitable wilderness of rocky mountains,woody and swampy valleys, islands and rocks in pro-capeTaytao is a high bold promontory.t Hellyer Rocks.I Now called Anna Pink Bay.§ Patch Cove.Jan. 1835. pout refuge — san rafael. 373fusion, and inlets or arms of the sea penetrating in everydirection.On the 4th we moved to Port Refuge, a safe, but out of theway place. In the " narrative of what befel the Anna Pink,"given in Anson's Voyage, this harbour is described in veryglowing colours ; but we may remember that those who discoveredit, were there saved from destruction ; and naturallylooked upon all things around them with excited feelings.*How the officers of the Santa Barbara made their survey ofthis port and its neighbourhood I am at a loss to know ; amere eye-sketch, drawn upon the spot, might have been muchbetter than that which they gave to the world as a mathematicalplan. In their distorted representation of Port Refuge,many soundings have been scattered, apparently at random, andquite at variance with truth. This is so unlike most Spanishworks of a similar nature, some of which are very accurate,-f-considering the date of their manufacture, and the means employed,— that I conclude the officers of that frigate, not understandingmarine surveying, merely drew rough sketches ofwhat they saw, which were afterwards ' cooked' into a moreregular ' appearance,' by some one who was not on board withthem. Had time allowed I should have explored the Gulf ofSan Rafael, at the back of Tres Montes Peninsulas: but knowingthat it could only be an object of geographical, not immediatelypractical interest to do so, I refrained from indulgingmere curiosity, much as I desired to corroborate the accountof Spanish missionaries who often went there, crossing theIsthmus of Ofqui, in search of Indians aiuong the Guaianecoislands, and even farther south, of whom they might makeconverts to Christianity. Doubtless some of these voyageswere undertaken and completed with benevolent and singlemindedintentions; but I suspect that others were conductedon a different principle; and that their chief object was toprocure able-bodied slaves to be employed in the mines ofAnson's Voyage, chapter iii.t Exclusive of mistakes made by compilers or translators.I Appendix, No. 24.374 PORT LOW — sTOKEs's JOURNAL. Jan.Chloe or Southern Chile. I should be glad to learn that thissuspicion is ill-founded.*On the 7th we anchored in Port Low, and found Mr. Stokesjust arrived, after a fagging cruise among the Honos islands.His journal contains a great deal of information, from whichI have extracted those passages most likely to interest the generalreader.His whale-boat was so loaded at starting (16th Dec.) thather gunwale amidships was but a foot above water. She wastwenty-five feet long and six feet broad, and then carried sevenmen, besides instruments and a month's provisions. Of watershe had only two ' bares,' because on that coast fresh water isonly too plentiful. In passing a promontory, the followingday, while their boat was still deep, the swell became so greatthat Mr. Low said he had never before been in a boat exposedto greater danger.In some places where they landed the woods were so thickthat Mr. Stokes was obliged to climb trees to get angles ; andnot being able to tell previously which would answer his purpose,sometimes he made three or four useless ascents, beforehe could obtain a view : " but," he says " there is a pleasure Icannot express in roaming over places never visited by civilizedman." On Rowlett Island potatoes were found growing wild ;the largest dug up measured two inches in length, and an inchin thickness: they were quite tasteless.At the east side of Ipun, on Narborough Island, an excellentsmall port was found, which was named Scotchwell Harbour.On the shore, near it, was a large bed of strawberries, like thosethat grow in English woods ; and there was a sweet-scentedpea, besides abundance of other vegetable produce, both herbageand wood, and plenty of water.Hitherto, all the islands we had seen were of slate-rock,some parts so soft, that I could break them easily with myfinger, and I found that they blacked my hand, like plumbago ;• It is difficult to account for the present abandoned state of theseregions, if no harsh usage was experienced by their former natives.18S5. CHONOS ISLANDS WILD POTATO. 375but Ipun is quite different in structure, being an earthy sandstone"*Syzygial high water at Ipun takes place at noon, and thetide rises six or eight feet. The flood-tide cones from thesouthward.At May Harbour (which may be the Bello Pique of theSanta Barbara), many cypress trees were noticed, for the firsttime hereabouts, and a surprising number of otters. The tiderose seven feet. About the Huaytecas Islands, the northernmostof the Archipelago, quantities of excellent oysters werefound, quite as good as any sold in London. No quadrupedswere seen, except nutria and otters, which were numerous.Their numbers, and the quantity of birds, show that Indiansdo not now frequent that quarter ; indeed, no traces of themwhatever were found by Mr. Stokes, or any of our party, amongthe Honos islands.10th. While lying at Port Low we caught plenty of fishwith the seine ; we obtained oysters from neighbouring creeks,and shot ducks and geese, so there was no want of fresh provision.Some piraguas from Chloe were in the port : theChilotes in them were in search of otters, seals, and nutria, andhad come across the gulf of Huafo, in their ill-conditioned vessels,with no little trepidation.On an outlying islet, near Port Low, I first saw the wildpotato. Next to seeing a wild man, I recollect few objects whichstruck me much more than that group of wild potatoes : — but Ihave neither inclination nor space here to speak of my ownsensations. The stems, leaves, and flowers of these vegetableswere as large, and appeared to be as healthy, as those in anEnglish garden, but the potatoes at their roots were small,watery, and insipid. It ought to be recollected, however, thatwe saw them early in January — corresponding to July —many weeks, at least, before one could expect to find eatablepotatoes in an English field.It was remarked in the Honos islands, as well as in Tierradel Fuego, that the trees which grow in thin soil, lying upon• Stokes, MS.376 HOOTS OF TREES MELl-mou. Jan.slaty rocks, extend their roots so horizontally that it is notsurprising to find, running through woodland, broad tractswhence the shallow-rooted trees have been swept away, partlyby wind, partly by the action of mountain-torrents.* As woodgrows even at the water's edge in those countries, where notexposed to the first attack of wind from seaward, and as thereare so many loose overhanging masses of rock, one cannot besurprised at the vast quantities of drift-wood found in someplaces ; or think it improbable for a quadruped to be occasionallyprecipitated into the sea, with a falling mass of rocksand trees, and afterwards drifted by wind and current to someother locality.From Port Low we saw a notable mountain, one of theCordillera of the Andes, having three points upon a small flattop, about eight thousand feet above the sea. I called it theTrident at that time ; but afterwards learned that there are fourpeaks (one of which was hid by another from our point of view),and that it is called by the aborigines Meli-moyu, which inthe Huilli-che language signifies four points.Three other remarkable mountains, active volcanoes, arevisible from the northern Huaytecas islands, as well as fromChildee ; I mean the Corcobado (hump-backed), of which I donot remember the Indian name ; Mantles (or Yanchinu, whichThe writer of Anson's voyage, speaking of Juan Hernandez, exactlydescribes the loose state of trees in such places, when he says, " The northernpart of this island is composed of high, craggy hills, many of theminaccessible, though generally covered with trees. The soil of this part isloose and shallow, so that very large trees on the hills soon perish forwant of root, and are then easily overturned, which occasioned the deathof one of our sailors ; who being upon the hills, in search of goats, caughthold of a tree upon a declivity, to assist him in his ascent, and this givingway, he immediately rolled down the hill ; and though in his fall he fastenedon another tree of considerable bulk, yet that, too, gave way, and hefell among the rocks, and was dashed to pieces. Mr. Brett likewise metwith an accident, only by resting his back against a tree, near as largeabout as himself, which stood on a slope ; for the tree giving way, he fellto a considerable distance, though without receiving any injury." —(Anson's Voyage, 8vo. edit,, p. 159.)1835. VOLCANOES — NAMES — HUAFO. 377means ' having a shivering, and unnatural heat), and Minchen-madam, which, in the Huilli-che tongue, means ' under a firebrand'; names so expressive and appropriate as to put to shamemuch of our own nomenclature. Wherever I have been able todiscover the aboriginal name of a place in South America, andcould ascertain its meaning, I have been struck by the extremeappositeness, as well as by the copious though condensed allusionusually conveyed.In Chloe and about the north-eastern Honos Islands, almostall the aboriginal names are preserved, because there interpreterscould be procured ; but, of course such advantages weregenerally unattainable in Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego.In Chloe, as in Araucania, every corner and every conspicuousspot, whether land or water, has a particular andexpressive name, a word usually compounded of two or threeothers : thus, Huapi-quilan means Three Islands : Calbu-co,Blue Water; Cauca-huapi, Gull Island; Huechu-cucuy,Point Cucuy,* or Grandmother ; Carel-mapu (Cara-el-mapu),Bad-city-country ; Pet-cura, middle stone (a rock in CacaoNarrow), &c.15th. We sailed from Port Low and went to Huafo oncemore, wishing to give Mr. Darwin an opportunity of examiningit geologically. There are now no inhabitants on that island,though there are a good many sheep belonging to Chilotes,who live at Caylin. Formerly there were Indians called Huy-huen-che,f upon Huafo ; but the Spaniards obliged them toquit it, for fear they should give information or supplies toEnglish ships. Near the Beagle, when at anchor, there was asquare place, like an entrance to some cave, seemingly cutby man in the soft sand-stone rock ; and I have since oftenreproached myself for having left the place without ascertainingCucuy is the name of a bird, much noticed by the aborigines becauseits motions are supposed to be ominous : it also means grandmother.+ The Huyhuen-che, often called Huyhuenes, were a tribe of HonosIndians, adjoining the Pichi-huilli-che, who lived in the northern portionof Chloe. The word Huyhuen signifies < whistle,' or ' hiss,' or ' to whistle,or hiss.'378 POINT Arena — VOLCANO ACTIVE. Jan.its real nature. It may be the entrance to some cave, formerlyused as a burying-place, similar to those explored by Low, andby the surgeon of the Wager.On the 17th we sailed, and next day anchored off PointArena, in San Carlos Harbour. Lieutenant Sulivan, with hisparty, had arrived a few days previously, after a very satisfactorycruise. We found his boats hauled up and refitted, hispeople lodged under their tents, and himself with Mr. Usbornebusily occupied in my little observatory, laying down the workfor which they had collected materials. Thus we were againassembled in safety, after being considerably divided, and, inconsequence,exposed to numerous dangers which human prudencecan neither foresee nor prevent. As some soundings werestill wanted near the English bank, and about the approach toSan Carlos, we employed the 19th in taking them, on board theBeagle, accompanied by her boats, and returned to our usualanchorage, close to Point Arena, at dark.When sounding on the English bank, we repeatedly tried toascertain its nature by forcing a very long iron lance downwardsas far as possible. The instrument penetrated about twofeet into sand in all instances but one, when it was stoppedabruptly by a substance which bent the lance and turned itspoint. It did not, however, feel like rock, rather, I should say,like hard wood.* This hard place was about a square yard inextent, and all around was sand.In the night, or rather from two to three the followingmorning, Osorao was observed in eruption, throwing up brilliantjets of flame or ignited matter, high into the darkness,while lava flowed down its steep sides in torrents, which fromour distance (seventy-three miles) looked merely like red lines.Daybreak diminished the effect, and as the light increased onlya dark column of smoke could be discerned. This mountainis one of the most striking in form which I ever saw. It is notonly quite conical from the base to the summit, but it is sosharply pointed that its appearance is very artificial. When seenMr. Sulivan had the lance in his hand at that time.Feb.1835. osoRKo — san carlos — chloe. 379from the sea, at a distance of ninety or a hundred miles, thewhole of the cone, 6,000 feet in height* at least, and coveredwith snow, stands out in the boldest relief from anion 2: rangesof inferior mountains. The apex of this cone being very acute,and the cone itself regularly formed, it bears a resemblance toa gigantic glass-house ; which similitude is increased not a littleby the column of smoke so frequently seen ascending.We remained till the 4th of February in the port of SanCarlos. Mr. Darwin profited by the opportunity afforded tomake an excursion into the interior of the island, while thesurveying party were occupied in arranging data, in layingdown chart-work, and in taking and calculating observations.I paid Douglas for his services and for a variety of informationcollected for me, from which — from Lieut. Sulivan'sjournal — and from my own notes — I shall now add such fewnotices of Chloe as I think may be interesting, and whichhave not been already introduced in the first volume, (pp.269—301.)Various accounts have been given of the characters anddispositions of the Chilotes. Some have said that they are anoble, industrious, and docile race ; others that they ate dishonest,idle, and ill-disposed : to reconcile these contradictoryaccounts is, therefore, at first sight, rather perplexing. Thereare four distinct classes of inhabitants in Chloe and the adjacentislands-f- the aboriginal Huyhuen-che, or Honos ; theHuilli-che, who came from southern Chile ; the foreigners,those neither born in Chloe nor descended from Chilotes; andthe Creoles. Of these the Honos are now nearly lost : in consequenceof disease and emigration they have by degrees abandonednot only Chloe but the adjacent Honos islands, andare only found southward. Some Indians to the south-westof Castro, in the interior of the island near the lake Cacao,The volcano of Osorno, or Purraraque, or Huenauca, is 7,5^0 feetabove the sea level.t The smaller islands of the Archipelago of Chloe, those in the gulfbetween Chil6e and the main-land, called the Gulf of Ancoed or Ancud.380 NATIVES HUILLI-CHK — CHONOS. Feb.are under the nominal jurisdiction of their own caciques:whether they are Honos or Huilli-che, I did not ascertainclearly. Being a race who are naturally little inclined to cultivatethe soil, and preferring a comparatively idle life amongmuscles, seal, and fish, to voluntary labour on their ownaccount, with a considerable degree of compulsory toil for theSpanish Government and priests, they quitted Chloe in successivefamilies. From them, probably, are derived the glimmeringsof religion, and the crosses among the Indians of Madrede Dios, and other parts of the west coast of Patagonia. Thattheir canoes or rather piraguas, should be similar to thoseof Chloe seems natural enough ; but the fact is that theHonos people taught the Huilli-che how to make them.*Coming from an inland district near Valdivia, the Huilli-chehad never required boats, though they knew how to cultivatepotatoes, maize, and beans ; how to make ' ponchos,' and takecare of sheep and cattle. These, though more industrious,and in some respects better members of society, are a tame anddocile race compared with the Honos, whose spirit of independencehas shown itself in their migration, and impatienceof mis-government.The principal population of Chloe is now Huilli-che, nominallyChristian but painfully ignorant of pure Christianity-abandonedto the crooked direction of ungodly pastors, intentupon their own worldly interest instead of the welfare of theirflock, extorting ' primicias'-f- and tithes from poor Indians,whom they scarcely see once in a year (I speak advisedly) — andtaught only the Romish doctrine in its worst form ; can anyoneexpect the poor Chilotes to be really religious and consequentlymoral ? That they should be extremely superstitiousis much more probable, and such is the fact. Their's is aconfused demi-religion, in which a medley of ideas concerningthe Virgin Mary, saints, images, and mtches,| is found farThese piraguas are extremely like the Madras surf-boats. (Seevol. i. p. 285, for a description of the piragua.t First fi-its of everything, animal as well as vegetable.X They are implicit believers in witchcraft.1835. RELIGION KINDNESS Trade. 381more often than any clear reference to our Saviour or theAlmighty.In the foregoing remarks on the Roman Catholic priests atChloe whom I conversed with and heard much about between1829 and 1835, I do not include all. There was certainly oneman (I hope there were more) whom I believe to have been assincerely pious, and therefore good, as any Roman Catholic,but there were others whose lives scandalized even their nominalChristianity.The foreigners settled in Chloe of course resemble theirown countrymen as to morals and habits, not being likely totake example from the Indians : and the Creoles adopt theirideas as hastily as our milliners adopt French fashions. Butthere is a virtue in Chloe, which if sins could be atoned forbythe good works of man alone, would go far towards purchasinggood treatment and very slight purgatory for the soulsof Chilotes : I mean the warm-hearted kindness shewn to oneanother, and particularly to strangers. Conspicuous as sucha feeling of hospitality and disinterested good-nature is amongthe descendants of Spaniards in South America, it is no wheremore to be observed than in Chloe,Increased intercourse with other countries is annually diminishingthe local peculiarities of Chilote society, a remarkableone being that of transacting mercantile business by barter,for want of current coin. Planks of alerse, indigo, tobacco,pepper, salt, &c. were substitutes for silver and gold in 1829,excepting among a very few foreigners or comparatively richdescendants of Spaniards and Creoles. At that time it wasextremely difficult to get a few dollars in exchange for a billupon good security at Valparaiso, even at the exorbitant priceof sixty-pence English for each dollar. In 1834, so muchhad the state of trade improved at San Carlos, that there wasno difficulty in obtaining as many dollars as we wanted for forty-eightpence each.In the first volume most of the products of Chloe are mentioned,except fish and coal. Of the shell-fish there is a full382 FISH — COAL CASTRO. Feb.account, but I may here add that smelt, mullet, a kind ofbass, and other fish are plentiful during the summer months-thenatives often catch ntiany more than they want by placingvery simple weirs across creeks at high-water, with a passagein the middle, which is shut when the tide begins to ebb.Some of these weirs are rough stone walls (on a small scale),others are wattled like hurdles. The number of fish keptback by them and left dry, as the water falls, is really surprising.Seals are now rare, and whales are fast diminishingin numbers. There is a good deal of coal in Chloe, but I amtold that it is of an inferior description, like that of Conception.Geologists say it is not true coal : lignite would be amore appropriate term. Be this as it may I tried some of it*in my cabin stove, and found it burn readily, though what Ihad was a lump taken from the surface of the ground. TheChilotes scarcely noticed it then, having so much wood aroundthem, but a day may arrive in which its value may be betterappreciated.Next to San Carlos,-f- in size and population, is Castro, theformer seat of Government, which has dwindled to a merevillage. Chacao, where the governor afterwards resided, isonly a hamlet. Remains of a town, such as lines of streetsand the ruins of a churchyard visible, but there are nowonly a few straggling cottages and a ruinous chapel. It issaid, on the spot, that the former church of Chacao was burnedby the old Spaniards, to oblige the natives to quit the placeand go to San Carlos. Castro, formerly styled a city, nowconsists of two or three short streets of bad wooden housesand two churches : one of which was built by the Jesuits morethan a hundred years ago, and is fast decaying thoughshored up ^ (supported by props) on all sides.The first discovery of Chloe was made by Spaniards in1558, one of whom was Ercilla. Enthusiastic in every thing,the warrior-poet tells us that he ran to a tree, half-a-mile south• Obtained for me by Mr. Robert Williams from the neighbourhood ofSan Carlos. t Described in vol. i. p. 274-5.1835. EKCILLA — POPULATION — MINES. 383of the place where his companions halted, and cut some lineson the bark.*The populous state of Chloe, in 1558, when first visitedby Europeans may be estimated by Ercilla's description, allowingfor poetical license. All accounts agree in stating that theHonos Indians, or Huyhuen-che, were once very numerous.Era un anchor archipelago pobladoDe innumerable isles deleytosas,Cruzando por el uno y otto ladyGondolas y piraguas presupposes :Lego una cora gondola literaDe done largos remus impelida."La Aeaucana, Cantos xxxv and xxxvi.That the Spaniards then with Ercilla, were thought to bedeities, is shown by the following lines : —Honores, o Doses riisticos, acidsEn estos sacro mosques y montaiias,Por celeste influence produces," &c.Ideji, Canto xxxvi.Some years afterwards (in 1566) Castro was founded, to bethecapital, and Chacao for a sea-port. From this time tillabout 1633 mines were worked in Chloe, but then discontinued,partly because they were less productive than those ofChile, and partly on account of the difficulty of obtaininglabourers after a raging epidemic had carried off one-third ofthe aboriginal inhabitants ; and fear of infection as well ashorror of the mining slavery, had driven away a large portionof the residue.-}- About this time the Huilli-che were carried to" Qui lego, done otto no ha llegado,Don Alfonso de Ercilla, que el priuieroEn un pequeno barce deslastradoCon solos dies, pas el desaguaderoEl alio de cincuenta y echo estradeSobre mil y quinientos por Hebrew,A las dos de la tarde el poster dia,Volviendo a la dexada campania."La Arcana, Canto xxxvi.t These were Huyhuenes, or Honos, vrhose place was afterwardssupplied by Huilli-che from southern Chile.384 H0ILLI-CHE — Chile PIRATES. Feb.Chloe, in addition to those who lead accompanied the fugitivesfrom Osorno (in 1599 — 1604) to Calbuco, Carel-mapu, andthence to Chloe ; who being a docile patient race, accustomedto agriculture, increased rapidly and supplanted the Honosemigrants.We read in the narrative of Brouwer's voyage (1643) thatthe port which the Dutch called Brouwer's Haven, was bysome called Chilova, and by others English Haven : and in1624, according to Agiieros (quoting D. Cosrae Bueno),Englishmen were on this coast : but I think it more probablethat the Bank Angles and Port Angles, near San Carlos, obtainedthose names from William Adams, in 1599,* ratherthan from them. In the Dutch chart published with thejournal, this island is called Chloe, and the adjacent gulf,Ankaos, or Ancoed.-f- Brouwer alarmed the inhabitants ofChloe not a little, but they were even more frightened andharassed before that time by Cordes, in 1600 ; Spitsbergen, in1615 ; and afterwards by Shelvocke, in 1719 ; besides others.To guard against, or rather watch for such visitors, aswell as to obtain the earliest intelligence of an enemy being onthe coast, the Spaniards established look-out stations in com-Voyage of Five Ships of Rotterdam, Burney, vol, ii. p. 193. (supposing46° should be 42° S.)+ I mention this to show that the accent, or stress, was then upon thesecond syllable of that name, not upon the third. The name Chil6e isderived from Chile, or, more strictly speaking, from Chili-hue (seeAgues and MolinaJ, which means ' farther,' or ' new,' or 'the end ofChili, and ought, by derivation, to have the accent, as Agiieros placed it,on the o. No reason can be given by a Spaniard for placing an accenton the final e of that word, yet it is almost generally placed there. Myown idea is that the French traders to Chile in 1700— 1780, first placed anaccent on the e in writing, and that Feuillee, Frezier, and others havebeen followed without inquiry. Had not the stress been laid on the o,surely the natives of Chloe would have been called Chiloetes, or Chloeinstead of Chilotes. As to the name Chile, every one knows it isderived from the Indian word Chili, (Herrera, Ovale, Agiieros, Molina,&c.) but why it was altered by the Spaniards to Chile, I have neverbeen able to discover.1835. TITHES — OPPRESSION — TASKS. 385standing positions and outer points, such as Coconut heights,Guabun Head, and Point Sentinels ; but at the present timeno such precautions being thought necessary, there is a supineindifference to molestation.Wherever Mr. Sulivan went with our boats, nearly all theIndians showed an anxiety for the island to be again under thedominion of Old Spain, and asserted that they were muchhappier and more prosperous before the revolution than theyhad ever been since. In a place where he passed two days(Builded) there was an unusual difficulty in obtaining provisions,and it was accounted for by the natives in the followingmanner: the proprietor of the tithes had just been there,and had taken from them, in sheep and pigs, the full tenth,not only of those animals, but of the growing crops of corn,apples, and potatoes. He had taken away all that the poorpeople could be deprived of, excepting only what was absolutelynecessary as stock for next year's supply.Lieut. Sultan says, in his journal : — " Besides the tithes,they have also to give 'first fruits' to the priests, and so hardare they on their parishioners, with respect to tithes and firstfruits,that whether the yearly produce be bad or good, thesame quantity must be contributed to swell the revenue of aperson whom they seldom see, except at the times of collection."This oppression, however, is not allowed by the superiors ofthe church, when it is duly represented and proved: for not longago a curate was dismissed from his parish in Childee, becausehe was a severe extortioner : I was informed that d urine fiveyears that man had amassed more than thirty thousand dollars.*Some of the natives complained bitterly to Lieut.Sulivan of the task work they were compelled to perform.At Lemuy he met a small piragua with only three men init, who were on their way from Castro to Quean. They hadwalked across the island from San Carlos where they had beenworking at the new mole, which all the ' militia were obligedThe number stated to me was 35,000;t Every able-bodied native man is enrolled in the local militia, andobliged to work thus till disabled by infirmity.VOL. n. 2 c386 PATRIOTS — SPAIN — CLIMATE. Jan. Feb.to do in turn, each man a fortnight : part of which time wasallowed for the journey. These three had worked eight days,finding themselves in everything and receiving no pay ; twowere old men : one more than sixty years of age ; and thethird was the oldest man's son. They all declaimed againstthe so-called ' Patriots ' (Chilians) very vehemently, and askedrepeatedly when they might hope to see the Spanish flag hoistedagain. The old man had been a cacique, and under theSpanish authority had charge of a watch-house and a smallparty of men, on Point Sentinels : but directly the Spaniardswere overthrown he was made a private militia-man — " not tofight," he said, " but to work." If any public work was inprogress, a party of militia-men were ordered to it, in theirrespective turns : and if the commandant had a friend tooblige, who wanted a job done, he would order a man to workat it for a week, when another would take his place, and soon.For these services no pay was given. The old man saidthat they were paid in money for every service performed whenunder the Spaniards ; and he could hardly be made to believethat there was no prospect of their returning.There is a marked difference of climate between the eastand west sides of Chloe, as to quantity of rain and wind.A proportion of both appears to be arrested (as it were) onthe windward side of the heights, so that the neighbourhoodof Castro and the islands in the Gulf of Ancud, enjoy muchfiner weather than is met with about San Carlos. But eventhere the inhabitants say a change has taken place gradually,and that they have not now nearly so much rain as used to fallformerly. ' They attribute this to the wood being cleared away,not only on Chloe itself, but on the neighbouring Cordillera.There is an idea prevalent in Chloe that, after a great eruptionof Osomo in particular, or indeed of any of the neighbouringvolcanoes, fine weather is sure to follow. Withoutdenying the possibility of some such correspondence, I shouldincline to think that there have been accidental coincidences ;and that fine weather occurring about or soon after thosetimes, has been more remarked than at other periods.1835. AI.AU—CALBUCO— DOCKS. 387On the little uninhabited island, Chiut, in the middle ofAncud Gulf, Mr. Sulivan found a great number of wild strawberries: they were not very good, being unripe. Near theislands beyond Chiut (called Deserts), on the shore of themain-land, he saw several piraguas stranded, evidently duringa late gale, as their crews were engaged in repairing them onthe beach.In the island Alau, Lieut. Sulivan met an old native, about112 years of age ; who had great-grandchildren about him,from twelve to fourteen years old. His eyesight and intellectualfaculties were still good, and he walked firmly. Fromthe inhabitants of Alau, Mr. Sulivan heard that an Englisharmed brig, accompanied by a Spanish vessel of war, had anchoredat that island about seventy years before 1835 (1765).Our boats visited Calbuco, and happening to arrive during thetime of Mass, found nobody stirring. At last one man cameout of church — ran back instantly — as if to tell the news, andimmediately hundreds came pouring out to see the strangers.Calbuco, called also El Fuerte, is much superior to Castroin appearance as well as size. It ranks next to San Carlos, inconsequenceto the Chilotes. Near here it was that friendlyIndians helping the distressed inhabitants of Osorno to escapefrom the Araucanians (1599-1605), raised a cry of Calbu-co(blue water), when, emerging from the woodland, they caughta glimpse of the sea.Our party examined places on the east coast of Chloe, wheredocks might be constructed, or vessels laid ashore with muchfacility, as the tide rises from fifteen to twenty-five feet inseveral land-locked coves where the swell of the ocean neverpenetrates.Round Chloe the flood tide-streams run both ways, from thesouth-west ; and meet in the north-west part of Ancud Gulf;the times of syzygial high water, in all the archipelago, varyonly from noon to an hour and half after noon. In Decemberand January our boat expedition found that the night tides werealways higher than those of the day, and the inhabitants saidthat was always the case in summer. In the months of July andVOL. n. 2 <■ 2388 HCiLLi-CHE — SUPERSTITIONS. Jan. Feb.August 18^ the day tides .were higher than the night, I amquite certain ; and an old Biscay, resident near point A rena,told me that they were always so in winter : hence we mayconclude they are regularly higher at that time of year.I refrain from entering here into many very interestingcustoms of the Huilli-che, because they are almost the sameas those of the Araucanian Indians, about whom so much hasbeen sung or said by Ercilla, Molina, and others, becausemy pages are limited, there being still information of a newercharacter to be written ; but I would ask the reader, who mayfeel interested about the migrations of our race, to comparesuch customs with those of the Polynesian islanders, especiallythat of the ' Mina,' and making ' Cava.' *The superstitious ideas, arising out of a debased Romishdoctrine, have not deprived the Huilli-che of their belief inwitchcraft, a belief held in common with all ignorant nations.Mr. Douglas, in his MS. Journal, says : — " No Chilote doubtsthe existence of wizards (bruxos) . When I was a magistrate,a complaint was made to me of a young woman who, theyasserted, had tried to bewitch a young man. The witnessesstated that she had bought from a professed witch (bruxa) acharm (llapui), which was produced in evidence. It consistedof a piece of loadstone, with iron filings adhering to it ; somefish-scales ; some hair and soap suds, proved to have been onthe young man's face, and sold by the barber ; some parings ofhis nails ; a small dead lizard ; some slips of a peculiar tree ;and many other ingredients. With this charm, with two preparedapples, and a bottle half full of a liquid mixed by thewitch, she proposed to win the young man's affections to sucha degree that he would give her all his property. The liquidappeared to be a decoction of the deadly nightshade, and somepoisonous ferns. The witnesses stated also, that this witch hada lantern made of the skin of a still-born child, which shelighted with a candle that burned with a blue flame ; and gaveThe Mina is described in Molina, and Spanish authors. For anexcellent discussion respecting the Cava, see Burney — Brouwer's Voyage,1643, vol iii. p. 137, 8, 9.1835. ' Bruno ' — WIZARDS — TREASURE. 389out sparks, when the witch flew through the air from place toplace.I have been informed," continues Mr. Douglas, " upon indisputableauthority, that such lanterns do exist ; and that whentwo or more witches wish to communicate by signal, one of themties a lantern to a long pole, and throws it up and down veryquickly, making the sparks fly. The other then makes similaruse of her lantern, at a considerable distance, and those whocasually see the lights, think that a witch has flown from oneplace to the other. The magical ait of the wizard is often exercisedin a search for hidden treasure. There are some placeswhere, in a dark night, inflammable gas, or phosphoric light, isseen, near the ground, not like a Will-o'-th'-wisp of Europe, butaclear steady light, of a white, yellow, or red colour. Popularsuperstition ascribes these lights to the ghosts of departedmisers, watching their hidden treasure ; and when one is discoveredby any person, he calls a friend to assist him andwatch it, about the time of new moon, until they ascertainthe spot whence it proceeds ; and there they dig in search of ananticipated heap of gold or silver. Not succeeding (of course),they apply to a wizard, who pretends to discover where thetreasure lies, and what it is, by looking earnestly into a smoothslab of black stone (which I suppose to be basalt). The wizardmay not himself find the prize, nor may he be present at thesearch ; but, after telling the people where and when to dig,he takes good care to alarm and frighten them away in somestrange manner, just at the moment they expect to grasp thestore of gold. Among other devices, the wizard, or witch,pretends to cover a worsted thread with quicksilver, and holdingit over the supposed place, allows the quicksilver to runoff into the ground, and then he desires them to dig till they findthe quicksilver, thus affording time for creating some suddenalarm, which they attribute to the ' devote,' or familiar spiritof the deceased. It is believed by some that I am able to discoverhidden treasure, and for my amusement I have more thanonce made an experiment before them, by sticking up two stakesin a line towards the light ; then going a quarter of a circle390 cALBUCANo's MODE OF LIFE. Jan. Feb.round it, I stuck up two more stakes, also in a line towards it ;and next day followed the lines to their crossing, at which spotI dug, and about two feet underground found a decayed tree."(Whence a gaseous exhalation ?)Mr. Douglas's account of the life of an industrious Callusis interesting. He says, that those who are called ' honoresde bien ' (honest men) are generally the sons of worthyparents, and who marry, while young, some hard-working soberwoman. Such a pair, as one of these men and his wife, sowsome corn and plant potatoes, then leave the land, with theirhouse, in the care of an old relation, and go to the Cordillerato work in an astillero.f If their luck is good, that is, if theyfind plenty of fine, straight grained trees, not farther than usualfrom the seas this pair will cut and bring down five hundredboards in a month ; then returning home they clean the potatogrounds, and attend to domestic affairs, until their feet heal,and a paralytic motion of the legs, acquired in the astiUero,has ceased. When quite refreshed they go for another cargo,and work till their legs and feet can stand it no longer. A thirdtrip is afterwards made by the husband, for about a fortnight,to a nearer astiUero, where he cuts pieces of timber and plankof as large a size as he can carry (tables y cuartones), thenreturns to collect his harvest, make chicha, and sow com fornext year. The winter months are passed in comparative inactivity,but not without due consumption of cider and potatoes.Occasionally the Calbucano goes to San Carlos, to sell,or rather barter his boards for indigo, tobacco, red pepper,clothes, axes, spirits, &c. ; and on these occasions, as well aswhen they go from Calbuco to the continent, several unitetogether to man a piragua, in the manner described by CaptainKing, vol. i, p. 285-6.Directly his children are able to walk a few miles, he takesthem with him to the astiUero ; begins by giving them twohalf-boards to carry, and as they grow stronger, increases their• Native of Calbuco.+ A timber-yard : or a place where alerse is cut down, on the flanksof the Cordillera of the Andes. J From three to five miles.1835. Averse FOllESTS — SIZE OF TREES. 391load. At about sixteen they borrow an axe, and make theboards they afterwards carry. The alerse forests are like minesto the Calbucano ; and nothing but old age or accident cancheck him from making boards after he has had one season ofgood luck. The profitable parts of the forests are now, ofcourse, much farther from the sea than they were, owing toconstant thinning. To get a load of twenty boards twice asmuch labour is therefore required as was necessary for a similarpurpose thirty years ago. The largest alerse tree that has beenfound by any Calbucano during the last forty years, measuredthirty feet in girth, at five feet from the ground ; and more thanseventy-six feet to the first branches. This famous tree gaveeight lengths of boards and half a length. The two largest treesseen by Mr. Douglas, in his excursion for me, measured onetwenty-four, and the other twenty-two feet round, at five feetfrom the ground: but these were dead trees, hollow in the centre.He saw none above ten feet in circumference, that were quitesound. Report, however, says, that in the Cordillera, out ofreach of the Calbuco woodsmen, there are enormous trees, fromthirty to forty feet in girth, and from eighty to ninety feet inheight to the first branches, above which the heads of thosegiant trees are said to rise some forty or fifty feet. The alersehas short, stout branches, with leaves like those of a pine, intheir bluish green colour, but shorter, being only half an inchlong, and one-twentieth of an inch wide : on one stem thereare four rows of these small leaves, at opposite sides.Captain King has fully described the alerse (vol. i, p. 282-3),and the manner of making the boards. I will add a few noticesof the way in which it is obtained.In carrying his load along many miles of bad road from anartillery,' to the nearest water conveyance, the Calbucanoweiss a sheep-skin on his shoulders, under a woollen shirt, andtaking a stick, with its lower end forked,* he trudges alongTo steady him across bridges of single trees, thrown over ravines,as well as to assist in supporting the load. Sometimes they climb up ordown precipices with their loads, by a fallen tree, notched to receivethe feet.392 LOADS — LAND-SLIPS — ' CESARES.^ Jan. Feb.with the load on one shoulder, and on the other the stick, whichpartly supports the weight till one shoulder is tired ; he thenshifts the burthen to the other, and goes on. This half rest iscalled ' can tun tun'' After eight, ten, or twelve of these,according to his strength, and the road, he casts down theload, and rests about ten minutes. This is his 'descant ;"* andhe makes about one such every two or three miles. The artilleryof Melipulli is ten ' descants'' a whole day's journey, fromthe place of embarkation. In examining the different forestsof alerse, Mr. Douglas saw some immense land-sips (quechi),one of which was said to have brought down one thousandverses, some of them being five fathoms round near the roots.This land-slip measured seven hundred yards in length andthree hundred yards in width.Mr. Douglas finds much fault with the manner in which theChilotes associate for a voyage, or any joint undertaking. Hesays, " their voyages being planned like a commonwealth, itfollows that their government on board must be republican,and the consequence is that every thing is decided by mostvotes and most noise." He also complains of their extremeselfishness, and of their reluctance to do any thing, howevertrifling, for a neighbour, unless for a consideration ; anotherevil consequence of democratic inclinations.When Moraledada was about Chloe he went across the cordillerato the lake Nahuel-huapi, in quest of information relativeto the ' Cesaress ;' but he could hear nothing positiveabout any such city or people, from the Indians whom he metnear that lake — well known to the Spaniards as a Jesuit missionarystation. Mr. Douglas's father-in-law* once commandeda party sent from Chloe to look for this reported city of ' Cesa-res.'f He got over and beyond the Cordillera to an elevatedplain, where he saw a very large number of Indian huts (toldplaced so as to form regular streets. Near them werelarge droves of horses and cattle, and small patches of curtisA Spaniard of Castile.t Pon Pedro de Angels, of Buenos Ayres, has collected and publisheda great number of documents relating to the ' Cesaress.'1835. Deserters — PADRE Feasts. 393dated ground : but he had no time to make further remarks,for his party was discovered, vigorously attacked and drivenback, with loss, to the sea. The old man said the climate andsoil of that plain were better than those of Chloe : and, as aproof of it, he found Indian corn with from five to nine largeheads, though in Chloe the same kind of plant only bearsfrom one to three small heads.A few of the remarks relative to Chloe, contained in thepreceding pages, arose out of an excursion made by me, in1829, among the neighbouring islands : and many of theother notices mentioned by Captain King (vol. i.) or myself,and given in the narrative as they were received from ourassociates, were corroborated by what I then witnessed. Theexcursion alluded to was undertaken in consequence of twocarpenters belonging to the Beagle being enticed to desert by aRoman Catholic priest named Forastes, who not only affordedthem the means of travelling to Castro and Lemuy, but hidthem on his own premises afterwards; and, when he heard thatI was seeking for them among the islands, sent them across thegulf of Ancud, in a piragua, to remain in a cove near the until the search should be over. One of these men wasnot worth taking trouble about ; but the other was a man whohad borne a high character, and had a wife and children inEngland depending upon him for support. I was satisfied thatthis man (Wells) had not deserted until overcome by extraordinarytemptation and the evil advice of his companion, anddetermined to do my utmost to recover him. He had pay duefor several years'' service, and his ' servitude time' * was considerable.I despatched Mr. Kirk overland to Castro for intelligence ;and set out in a light whale-boat, with five men, all as eager asI was myself to rescue their shipmate from the deceitful allurementsof Padre Forastes. As a carpenter, also, every one waswell aware, that his recovery was of much consequence to oursmall vessel, in a place where we could not obtain a substitute.• For the pension granted to seamen in the Royal Navy after twenty-oneyears' servitude.394 SCHOOLS — VAQUEANO-aug. Sept.While visiting various islands I was much struck by thegood order and cheerful alertness of several schools of boys,and by the apparent respectability of their teachers : and I wasinformed that these schools were much fostered by GeneralAlienate and his worthy secretary, Cornelius (a Swede).Nothing could be more pleasing than the appearance of theislands ; all highly cultivated, and thickly peopled by a quietrace of men, apparently industrious, certainly most obligingand hospitable.At Lemuy I heard that the fugitives had just left Cheminand Quehuy, in a piragua belonging to one Antonio Vargas,and were gone to the Cordillera, somewhere near the Corcovado,to kill seals and collect oil for him and Padre Forastes, untilwe should leave Chloe, when they would return and work forthe priest. This information cost me an ounce of gold, givento Vargas's own brother : and for six dollars, in advance, witha promise of more, I engaged a guide (vaqueano) to go with meto the main land. This man had no idea of moving by night ;but, understanding clearly that the piragua was gone to aninlet under the Corcovado Mountain, I sailed at once across thegulf, steering by the light of the volcano, much to the terrorof our vaqueano, who shrunk down to the bottom of theboat, drew his poncho over his head, and kept mutteringprayers, sometimes to the Virgin and his ' devote' (patronsaint), sometimes to ' bruxos;' but never ventured to look upat the large sail, or watch the boat reeling through the waves,as she sailed across with a fi-mesh westerly wind.After a variety of petty difficulties and disappointments, andsearching every inlet within twenty miles of the Corcovado,without finding a trace of the fugitives, I at last abandonedthe pursuit and returned to San Carlos ; having remanded ourunhappy vaqueano, who, while close to the land, had been useful; but whom we had ruined, he often asserted, by obliginghim to promise away all his property in masses, in offerings tosaints, and in presents to ' bruxos' for his safe deliverance fromsuch continual peril. After hearing such a melancholy statementof his prospects, I added a present to his earnings, which1829-1835. DESERTERS — METEORS. 395he assured me would amply satisfy both ' bruxos' and ' devotes,'and left him, notwithstanding his temporary fears, ahappy man.In 1834 I learned that we had actually been within a boat'slength of the deserters on one occasion, and that they had madeup their minds to yield unconditionally. They were hidden insome thick bushes on the borders of an inlet* under the ,and their piragua was hauled up behind a rock, out ofimmediate observation.It is now high time to quit Chloe, and proceed along thecoast northward : but before I do so, let me take advantageof this opportunity to express the gratitude of those with measwell as of myself, for a succession of private assistance andsincere kindness experienced from many persons at San Carlos,whose names I refrain from mentioning, because I have a greatdislike even to the idea of publishing any thing that occurs inthe unreserved intercourse of friends.Palbitad, or Almangrande.Extraordinary meteoric appearances have occasionally been noticedabout Chloe, and the islands southward of it. In describing' theCarel-map earthquake, of 1633, AgUeros says that torrents of rain followed ;and that on a high hill near the town was seen a globe of fire, which rosefor a short interval, and then fell into the sea : the waters of which werein consequence much disturbed. A violent tempest ensued, with haillarger than musket-balls.Another remarkable earthquake happened thereabouts on the 23d — ^24thof December, 1737 : and on the 30th, in the early part of the evening,a great exhalation or cloud of fire was seen passing, from north to south,over all the archipelago. It fell on the Huayteca islands, covered themwith ashes, and burned up the vegetation to such a degree that it wa*only in 1750, that the islands began again to look green. — Agiieros,pp. 102, 104, 105.In Sarmiento's voyage an appearance of a similar nature is mentioned,as having been seen near the Strait of Magalhaens : (Viage al Estrechode Magazines, p. 205). — Other authorities might be quoted.CHAPTER XVIII.Leave Chloe — Valdivia — Earthquake — Aborigines — Traditions —Words — Convicts— Tolten — Boroa — Imperial — Mocha — Shocks ofEarthquake — Anchor ois Talcahuano — Ruins — Account of a greatEarthquake which destroyed the city of Concepcion : and was feltfrom Chil6e to Copiapopo ; from Juan Fernando to Mendoza.At daylight on the 5th of February the Beagle sailed fromChloe, and passed along the coast of southern Chile, towardsthe port of Valdivia. This is a bold and high tract of land,without a danger for shipping to avoid ; but, at the same time,without a safe anchorage between the ports above-mentioned.Soundings extend some miles into the offing, though the wateris deep. At two miles westward of this shore we usually foundabout forty fathoms water ; at three miles about sixty, and atfive miles from seventy to eighty or ninety fathoms, with asoft, sandy, or muddy bottom.Whenever, as in this case, we were obliged to carry on thesurvey without landing, our observations for latitude — oftenthose for time also — were made at the opposite points of thehorizon, as well as in the usual manner, when land did notintervene, and the mean results taken as the most correct. Inthis way, it is probable that errors occasioned by refractionwere in a considerable degree avoided.*The day before arriving at Valdivia we had a strong northerlywind, with cold, rainy weather, though the glasses werehigh. Such an anomaly I have elsewhere noticed, especiallyin Tierra del Fuego ; but any attempt to explain it must bedeferred. Another singularity was the temperature of theWe had three sextants, made for me by Worthington, which hadadditional horizon glasses, enabling them to measure any angle less than160°. The contrivance was my own, and found to answer. It is describedin the Appendix.Feb. 1835. VALDIVIA — FORTRESSES — RIVERS. 897ocean, not being higher than that near the Honos Archipelago,and very little warmer than that of Magalhaens Strait ; thisfact will also be recurred to again.Feb. 8th. We anchored in the deceiving port of Valdivia.I say deceiving, because it offers to the eye ample space andthe utmost security, while, in fact, the safe anchorage is very limited; so much mud and sand being brought down by the riverthat extensive banks are formed, and increase yearly. We werestruck by the apparent strength of the fortresses, built originallyIjy the Dutch in 1643, but improved and increased by theSpaniards. Now, however, their strength is but apparent ; foracloser inspection shows that they are almost in ruins andthe guns out of order; indeed so nearly disabled, that theycould hardly fire a salute without danger. Around the portare high hills, completely covered with wood ; and they attractclouds so much, that almost as great a quantity of rain fallsthere as on the western shores of Childee. Several rivers emptythemselves at this one mouth, which is the only opening amonghills that form a barrier between the ocean and an extensivetract of champaign country,* reaching to the Cordillera of theAndes. The principal of these rivers are the Calla-calla-j- andthe Cruces; their tributaries are very numerous, few countriesbeing better watered by running streams than that about Valdivia.Every facility and kindness in his power was offered to us byDon Isaac Thompson, the Yntendente : — and by his secretary,Don Francisco Solano Perez, I was presented with a rare editionof Febres's ' Arte de la Lingua China,' which has been ofmuch use in explaining the meaning of aboriginal words andnames. Don Francisco wished me to take another curious work,but I declined ; and have often regretted since that I did notask him to let me copy a map in it which contained the tracks ofSpanish missionaries from Castro in Chloe to the lake of SanRafael, isthmus of Ofqui, and archipelago of islands in latitudeCalled "Los Llanos," or the plains,t On which is the town of Valdivia.398 TOWN — ABORIGINAL NATIVES. Feb.48-9° S. I thought another copy might be found at Lima, butduring my subsequent stay there, not one could be discovered.The town of Valdivia, formerly dignified by the appellationof city, disappointed our party extremely. It proved to be nomore than a straggling village of wooden houses, surroundedwith apple-trees ; and the only building, even partially constructedof stone, was a church.* Many of us were in thetown on the 20th of February, at the time of that great earthquake,which ruined so many places besides the city of Concepcion: an awful event, which will be related in the followingpages.An English carpenter, who had served on board the Beagle,in 1828, but had since settled on the banks of the river Cruces,about thirty miles from Valdivia, came on board his old shipone day, to see those whom he knew. It happened that I hadformerly been of some assistance to him, and he was naturallyglad to oblige me, by giving such information about the countryand the natives as he was able to impart ; and having livednearly four years among them, his accounts were not only interesting,but, I think, worthy of credence.-f As some of thesewere confirmed by what I heard from residents at Valdivia,and I have no doubt of their truth, I shall mention them withouthesitation in the course of my narrative.I was much struck by the peculiar physiognomy of thoseaboriginal natives whom I saw during my stay : and there musthave been some ground for Mr. Darwin and myself remarkingat different times, unknown at first to one another, that theircountenances reminded us of portraits of Charles I. This wasmy impression at the first glance ; but after closer examinationit wore off, and I thought less of that likeness than I did oftheir resemblance to the Hindoo race. There was neitherthe open honesty of a Patagoniann, nor the brutal look ofmost Fuegians ; but there was a sombre cast of depressedThat church and other edifices have since been laid in ruins by theviolent earthquake of Nov. 7) 1837-t He was a very intelligent, observing man, and a good workman : whilebelonging to the Beagle, he was rated carpenter's mate.i 2/ •Lani^.-azi- toasts.■y ft [L [© D Y a ft ,o>h»h»<i ^ Henry Cdbam, 'JdsiX Msa-Tboaragb. Steel, 1S33.I1835. FEATURES — DRESS — FEELING. 399intelligence that at once said, " we are restrained, but not subdued'"Their countenances were less wide, and more swarthy,than those to which our eyes had been accustomed ; and theyeyed us with a sinister although resolute glance, which seemedto ask whether we were also come to try for a share of theircountry. These men were of a middle stature ; and formedmore slightly than those of the south. They were all tolerablyclothed in blue cloth of their own manufacture ; and the menof different tribes were distinguished by a slight difference indress ; the Juncos, who live south of Valdivia, wearing a sortof petticoat, instead of trowsers, while the Rancos, anothersubdivision, wore short loose breeches. In other respects theyare similar, as to outward appearance, and their language isthat of all southern Chile.* These Juncos and Rancos are butportions of that collection of tribes usually known among Europeansby the celebrated name of Araucanians ; but among thenatives, by the terms Mole-che, Huilli-che, &c. I certainly gazedat these Indians with excessive interest, while I reflected on themultiplied sufferings undergone by their ancestors — the numbersthat perished in mines — or in trying to defend their country— and the insidious attempts made to thin their numbers byfrequent intoxication, if not by introducing deadly diseases*To keep these Indians on peaceable terms, and in order tohave early intelligence of any general combination, the Chiliansmaintain among them ' capitals de los amigos,' whose apparentoffice is 'to take the part of an Indian, if he should be ill-treatedby a ChiHan (of Spanish descent), and to interpretbetween parties who wish to barter goods. There is also acomisario de los Indies,' who is a centre of reference for thecapitals,' and who ought to be the friend and protector ofthe aborigines. Many tribes, however, will have nothing to sayto either the commissary or his captains, seeing through theirobject, and detesting even the descendant of a Spaniard toodeeply to admit any one of that abhorred race into theirterritory. About Valdivia there are only a few leagues ofground held by Chile, excepting which all that magnificentThe Huilli-ehe. t By giving them infected things.400 TRADITIONS — DELUGE — CHEM. Feb.tract of country, reaching from the Gulf of Ancud nearly tothe river Bio-Bio, probably the finest district in all SouthAmerica, is still kept by the brave Araucanians.These Indians are extremely superstitious, but in their ritesthere are curious customs, perhaps indicative of their origin.About Valdivia, whenever an aboriginal and heathen nativedies, he is buried in a small canoe, with a scanty supply ofprovisions and chicha,* on the bank of a river which flows tothe sea. Their idea is that the spirit goes by water to thatplace, in the direction of the setting sun, whence their remoteancestors came. Febres says, in his work before mentioned,that the island Mocha is the place meant : but if we reflectthat Mocha is very small, only twenty miles from the mainland,and that when first discovered, early in the sixteenthcentury, it was inhabited by Indians who often crossed overto the continent, I think we must look much farther west forthe place of departed souls to which these people refer.The aborigines who live near volcanoes offer propitiatorysacrifices to the evil spirit, Pillar, who is said to cause earthquakesand eruptions. They sacrifice bus and rams to him,besides offering fruit, vegetables, and chicha. On a mountaincalled Therein, or Theg-theghin, (which means to crackle orsparkle like fire), these people say that their early progenitorsescaped from the Deluge. There is a word in common use amongthem, meaning ' the great ancestor,' or ' our great ancestors,or ' the renowned,' which is hardly to be distinguished fromShem. Febres spells it ' Them"' but, as the th is frequently pronounced,.it would sound like chem.-f- Can this be handeddown from their ancestor of the Ark .'*]:Another word that attracted my notice particularly, wasmina.' I have a note by me (unfortunately without theproper reference) remarking the resemblance of mina, not• Fermented liquor made from maize, apples, or other substances.t Molina, Hist. Civil de Chile. Vol. ii. p. 333. Falkner says that theVuta Huilliche substitute t for ch, p. 99.J I am informed by Doctor Andrew Smith, that the word Ham isstill common among the nations of southern Africa, as a distinguishingappellation,1835. * Mina' CONVICTS — Molten. 401only, in sound but in meaning, to the Hebrew word mincha.Molina (p. 333) says that these people have a nasal g, whichbrings the two words to an identity of sound. The Hebrewterm, I am told, means an offering or collection of fruits,liquors, &c. ; and the corresponding Huilli-che word means aa feast of which those partake who are about to unite in awork for the benefit of him who makes the ' minfja.' In theAppendix a few Greek, Latin, and Araucanian words arearranged so as to show the remarkable similarity existingbetween them.I was told by the Yntendente that some Englishmen hadarrived in his district a few months before we came, whosecharacter and business he did not understand. Rumours hadreached his ears of their having escaped from one of ourconvict settlements, at the other side of the Pacific, and hewas inclined to believe the report. Three of these men hadmarried since their arrival, and all but one were industriousmembers of his community : indeed I saw two of them hardat work on a boat belonging to the Yntendente. Havinghowever no proof of their delinquency, I did not deem myselfauthorized to ask him to have them arrested and deliveredup to me, in order that I might convey them to thesenior British officer at Valparaiso. Afterwards I learned thatthese men, seven or eight in number, had escaped from VanDiemen's land in a very small vessel, and sailing always eastward,had at last arrived on the coast near Valdivia, whencethey were conducted by a fisherman into the port. Eventuallythey were made prisoners by the ChiHan authorities,delivered up to our Commodore, and by him sent to England.I was informed that there is coal in many places about Valdivia; but I did not see any. We sailed on the i^2d, afterreceiving, on all occasions, the kindest treatment from theresidents.As we passed along the low coast about the river Tolten,numbers of Indians on horseback, and armed with lances, wereseen riding along the shore, evidently watching our movements.This part of the coast is shoal, and at night wouldVOL. 11. D402 Bora INDIANS MOCHA. Febbe dangerous, for the low land projects considerably, andwould not then be readily seen. We could not distinguishthe mouths of either the Tolten or the Imperial (or Cauten)quite satisfactorily, but as they are bar rivers — useless toshipping — I would not risk anchoring on so exposed a coast,or sending a boat away into sadi a surf as we saw breaking,without having more time at my disposal and a higher objectin view.On the Cauten was the city called Imperial — celebrated inAraucanian story — and near its site now live the Boroa tribe,some of whom have light-coloured eyes, fair complexions, andeven red hair. I saw one of these Indians at Valdivia, who hadblue eyes, but dark hair. She told me that in her own country,Boreas'' there were many with eyes like her's ; that some wererubies,' that is, of a red and white complexion, and that a fewhad red hair. Her parents had told her, she said, that thosepeople were descended from the ' Huincas.''* How the red hairoriginated is rather curious ; I have heard of it from goodauthorities at other times, while in Chile.Late on the 24th we anchored at Mocha, and the followingweek was occupied in surveying its shores and the spacebetween them and the inainland.-f- Shocks of earthquakes werefrequently felt, more or less severely ; sometimes I thought thatthe anchor had been accidentally let go, and the chain was runningout ; and while at anchor, I often fancied the ship wasdriving, til I saw that there was neither swell, current, nor windsufficient to move her from the anchorage. We naturally concludedthat some strange convulsion was working, and anxiousfor the fate of Concepcion, hastened to Talcahuano Bay assoon as our duty would allow : arriving there on the 4th ofMarch — to our dismay — we saw ruins in every direction.The following account of this catastrophe was subsequentlyobtained : —At ten in the morning of the 20th of February, very largeflights of sea-fowl were noticed, passing over the city of ConanArcadian name for the Spaniards, signifying assassins.1 1 shall recur to Mocha again.1835. EARTHQUAKE AT rO"NCEPCION. 403coercion, from the sea-coast, towards the interior : and in theminds of old inhabitants, well acquainted with the climateof Concepcion, some surprise was excited by so unusual andsimultaneous a change in the habits of those birds,* no signsof an approaching storm being visible, nor any expected atthat season. About eleven, the southerly breeze-f- freshened upasusual — the sky was clear, and almost cloudless. At forty minutesafter eleven;[ a shock of an earthquake was felt, slightlyat first, but increasing rapidly. During the first half minute,many persons remained in their houses ; but then the convulsivemovements were so strong, that the alarm became general,and they all rushed into open spaces for safety. The horridmotion increased ; people could hardly stand ; buildings wavedand tottered — suddenly an awful overpowering shock causeduniversal destruction — and in less than six seconds the city wasin ruins. The stunning noise of falling houses ; the horriblecracking of the earth, which opened and shut rapidly andrepeatedly in numerous places ;§ the desperate heart-rendingoutcries of the people ; the stifling heat ; the blinding, smotheringclouds of dust ; the utter helplessness and confusion ; andthe extreme horror and alarm, can neither be described norfully imagined.This fatal convulsion took place about a minute and ahalf or two minutes after the first shock ; and it lasted fornearly two minutes, with equal violence. During this time noone could stand unsupported ; people clung to each other,to trees, or to posts. Some threw themselves on the ground ;but there the motion was so violent that they were obliged tostretch out their arms on each side, to prevent being tossed overand over. The poultry flew about screaming wildly. Horsesand other animals were greatly frightened, standing with theirlegs spread out, and their heads down, trembling excessively.After the most violent shock ceased, the clouds of dust which• Chiefly gulls. t Sea-breeze.{ Mean time. Equations m. subtraction from mean time.§ The direction of these cracks was not uniform, though generallysouth-east and north-west.2d 2404 DESTRUCTION OF THE CITY. Feb.had been raised by falling buildings, began to disperse ;people breathed more freely, and dared to look around them.Ghastly and sepulchral was the sight. Had the graves openedand given up their dead, their appearance could scarcely havebeen more shocking. Pale and trembling, covered with dust andperspiration, they ran from place to place, calling for relationsand friends ; and many seemed to be quite bereft of reason.Considerable shocks continued to harass and alarm at shortintervals. The earth was never long quiet during that orthe next day, nor indeed for the three days following thegreat shock ; and during many hours after the ruin, it wastremulous, and the shocks were very frequent, though notsevere. Many of these, but not all, were preceded by a rumbling,subterranean noise, like distant thunder. Some compared thesound to the distant discharge of many pieces of artillery.These noises came from the south-west quarter, and precededthe shock by one or two seconds ; sometimes, but not often,the sound was unaccompanied by any shock.It was the general opinion that the motion was from southwestto north-east. Some whole walls, whose direction wassouth-east and north-west, were laid flat, the bricks still maintainingtheir relative position, though end-wise, without beingscattered upon the ground. These walls fell, without exception,to the north-east.* Others were scattered as they fell;but still the greatest masses of brick work were thrown towardsthe north-east. Walls standing in the opposite direction, northeastand south-west, suffered far less : none fell bodily or inmasses ; fragments were shaken or torn off ; and some of thewalls were very much cracked,-f- but others suffered little.Houses built of ' adobes,';}; became confused heaps, and roofs fellin every where. The cathedral, whose walls were four feet inthickness, supported by great buttresses, and built of goodbrick and mortars suffered more than other buildings. Ad-thestreets of Concepcion lie north-east and south-west: northwestand south-east.+ Vertically, as if by the undulatory movement of the earth's surface inthe direction of their length. J Large unbaked bricks.§ Both bricks and mortar were excellent.<i <^ -6= "o1835. SITUATION — ANECDOTES. 405hearing to the remains of the walls were left the lower parts ofsome buttresses — the upper parts of others — while in one placea buttress stood on its own foundation, separated entirely fromthe wall.The city of Concepcion stands upon a plain, very little higherthan the level of the river Bio Bio. The soil is loose and alluvial.To the eastward and northward lie rocky irregular hills :from the foot of which the loose earth was every where partedby the great convulsion, large cracks being left, from an inchto more than a foot in width. It seemed as if the low land hadbeen separated from the hills, having been more disturbed bythe shock.Women washing in the river near Concepcion were startledby the sudden rise of the water — from their ankles to theirknees — and at the same moment felt the beginning of the convulsion.It was said that the dogs avoided the ruin, by runningaway before it occurred. This, though known withcertainty to have been the case at Talcahuano, wants confirmationwith respect to Concepcion. Of nine men who wererepairing the inside of a church, seven were killed, and twoseverely hurt. One of these poor fellows was half-buried in theruins, during five days, with a dead body lying across him,through which it was necessary to cut, for his release. A mother,escaping with her children, saw one fall into a hole; a wallclose to her was tottering ; she pushed a piece of wood acrossthe hole, and ran on ; the wall fell, covering the hole withmasses of brick-work ; but, next day, the child was taken out unhurt.Another woman missed a child ; saw that a high wall wastottering, but ran for her son, and brought him out. As shecrossed the street, the wall fell, but they were safe ; when thetremendous crash came, the whole street, which she had justcrossed, was filled up with part of the ruins of the cathedral.Besides a waving or undulatory movement, vertical, horizontal,and circular or twisting motions were felt. An angular stonepinnacle was particularly noticed, which had been turned halfroved, without being thrown down, or leaving its base.Persons riding at the time of the great shock, wei'e stopped406 EFFECTS AT TALCAHUANO. Feb.short ; some, with their horses, were thrown to the ground :others dismounted, but could not stand. So little was theground at rest after the great destruction, that between the20th of February and the 4th of March, more than three hundredshocks were counted.Much misery was alleviated by the good conduct and extremehospitality of the inhabitants of Concepcion. Mutual assistancewas every where rendered, and theft was almost unknown. Thehigher classes immediately set people to work, to' build straw-coveredhuts and temporary houses of board, Using meanwhilein the open air under trees. Those who soonest obtained orcontrived shelter, collected as many about them as they couldassist, and in a very few days all had a temporary shelter, underwhich they tried to laugh at their misfortunes and the shifts towhich they were reduced.At Talcahuano the great earthquake was felt as severely onthe 20th February as in the city of Concepcion. It took placeat the same time, and in a precisely similar manner : threehouses only, upon a rocky foundation, escaped the fate of allthose standing upon the loose sandy soil, which lies between thesea-beach and the hills. Nearly all the inhabitants escapeduninjured ; but they had scarcely recovered from the sensationsof the ruinous shocks, when an alarm was given that the seawas retiring ! Penco* was not forgotten ; apprehensive of anoverwhelming wave, they hurried to the hills as fast as possible.About half an hour after the shock, when the greater partof the population had reached the heights, — the sea havingretired so much, that all the vessels at anchor, even those whichhad been lying in seven fathoms water, were aground, andevery rock and shoal in the bay was visible, — an enormouswave was seen forcing its way through the western passagewhich separates Quiriquina Island from the mainland. Thisterrific swell passed rapidly along the western side of the Bayof Concepcion, sweeping the steep shores of every thing moveablewithin thirty feet (vertically) from high water-mark. ItPenco, the first Spanish capital of the province of Concepcion, wasoverwhelmed by the sea in 1730 : and old Concepcion in 1751.1835. Earthquake-WAVES— SHOCKS. 407broke over, dashed along, and whirled about the shippingas if they had been light boats ; overflowed the greater partof the town, and then rushed back with such a torrent thatevery moveable Which the earthquake had not buried underheaps of ruins was carried out to sea. In a few minutes, thevessels were again aground, and a second great wave was seenapproaching, with more noise and impetuosity than the first ;but though this was more powerful, its effects were not soconsiderable — simply because there was less to destroy. Againthe sea fell, dragging away quantities of woodwork and thelighter materials of houses, and leaving the shipping aground.After some minutes of awful suspense, a third enormous swellwas seen between Quiriquina and the mainland, apparentlylarger than either of the two former. Roaring as it dashedagainst every obstacle with irresistible force, it rushed— destroyingand overwhelming — along the shore. Quickly retiring, asif spurned by the foot of the hills, the retreating wave draggedaway such quantities of household effects, fences, furniture, andother moveables, that after the tumultuous rush was over, thesea appeared to be covered with wreck. Earth and watertrembled : and exhaustion appeared to follow these mightyefforts.Numbers of the inhabitants then hastened to the ruins,anxious to ascertain the extent of their losses, and to save somemoney, or a few valuable articles, which, having escaped thesweep of the sea, were exposed to depredators.*During the remainder of the day, and the following night,the earth was not quiet many minutes at a time. Frequent,almost incessant tremors, occasional shocks more or lesssevere, and distant subterranean noises, kept every one in anxioussuspense. Some thought the crisis had not arrived, andwould not descend from the hills into the ruined town. Thosewho were searching among the ruins, started at every shock,however slight, and almost doubted that the sea was not actuswere numerous in Talcahuano. Directly after the ruin thesescoundrels set to work — though crying ' Misericordia,' and with onehand beating their breast — with the other they stole most industriously.408 EFFECTS UPON THE Shipping. Feb.ally rushing in again to overwhelm them. Nearly all the inhabitants,excepting a few who went on board vessels in the harbour,passed the night upon the hills, without shelter: and nextday they began to raise sheds and huts upon the high grounds,still dreading the sea. It was said, and generally consideredcertain, that every dog at Talcahuano had left the town beforethe shock, which ruined the buildings, was felt.Without explanation it appears astonishing how the shippingescaped destruction. There were three large whale-ships,a bark, two brigs, and a schooner, very near the town, in fromfour to seven fathoms water : they were lying at single anchor,*with a good scope of cable :pone only was well moored.With the southerly breeze, which was rather fresh at thetime of the earthquake, these vessels lay to seaward | of theiranchors, having their sterns towards the sea ; and were leftaground in this position. The captain of the port, D. PabloDelano, was on board one of the whale ships at the time, withthe hatches battened down, and dead lights shipped. Allhands took to the rigging for safety. The first great wavecame in an unbroken swell to the stern of the vessel, brokeover and lifted her along without doing any material harm,more than sweeping her decks : and the slack chain draggingover the mud checked her gradually, as the first impetus of thewave diminished. Whin-ling her round, the water rushed outto seaward again, leaving the vessel stranded nearly in herformer position. From two fathoms, when aground, the depthalongside increased to ten, as the water rose highest duringthe last swell. The two latter waves approached, and affectedthe shipping similarly to the former : all withstood their force,though the light anchors were dragged. Some of the vesselswere thrown violently against others ; and whirled around asif they had been in the vortex of a whirlpool. Previous to therush of waters, the Pauline and Orion, two merchantmen, wereOr steadied by a second anchor which was too light to withstandany great strain.t Chain. — The holding-ground is excellent, a soft, tenacious mud.J Nearly half a cable's length ; or from sixty to one hundred yards.3835. ANECDOTES — MOTION OF SEA. 409lying a full cable's length apart ; and after it had passed theywere side by side, with three round turns in their cables.Each vessel had therefore g-one round the other with each wave :the bow of one was stove in : to the other little damage wasdone. A small vessel* was on the stocks, almost ready forlaunching; she was carried by the sea two hundred yardsin-shore, and left there unhurt. A little schooner, at anchorbefore the town, slipped her cable, and ran out in the offing asthe water fell. She met the wave, unbroken, and rose over itas an ordinary swell. The Colocolo-f* was under sail near theeastern entrance of the bay — she likewise met the wave, as alarge swell, without inconvenience.Many boats]: put off from the shore before the sea retired :some met the advancing waves before they broke, and rosesafely over them ; others, half swamped, struggled through thebreakers. The fate of one little boy was extraordinary. Aservant woman had taken refuge with him in a boat ; the boatwas dashed against an anchor, lying on the shore, and divided.The woman was drowned, but the half of the boat containingthe child § was carried out into the bay. It floated, and theboy held firmly. He was picked up afterwards, sitting upright,holding steadily with both hands, wet and cold, butunhurt. The boy's name is Hodges : his father is an Englishman,well known at Talcahuano, and was an officer in theBritish navy.For several days the sea was strewed with wreck ; notonly in the Bay of Concepcion, but outside, in the offing. Theshores of Quiriquina Island were covered with broken furnitureand wood work of all kinds ; so much so, that for weeksafterwards, parties were constantly at work collecting andbringing back property. During three days succeeding thatof the ruin the sea ebbed and flowed irregularly, and veryfrequently : rising and falling for some hours after the shocktwo or three times in an hour. Eastward of the island of the swell was neither so large nor so powerful as that» About thirty tons. t Chilian schooner of war.I Chiefly, if not all, whalebone. § Only four years old.410 MARINE EXPLOSIONS FISH. Feb.which swept over Talcahuano. Having more room to expendits strength in the wider and deeper part of the bay may per-haps have been the reason why the sea swelled rapidly, withoutbreaking, near Lirquen, in the south-east part of the bay ;and why it broke over Tome* with violence, though not sofuriously as over Talcahuano. The great waves, comingfrom the sea, appear to have been divided, at the entrance ofConcepcion Bay, by the island of Quiriquina, and turnedaside both ways, one part taking its course along the Tubes,or western shore, towards Talcahuano ; the other across theeastern opening, towards Tome. While the bay of Conceptionwas agitated by the great waves, it was noticed by CaptainWalford (from his house at Lirquen), that the Colocolowas swept to and fro remarkably. She was under sail near theeastern entrance of the bay. Two explosions, or eruptions, werewitnessed while the waves were coming in. One in the offing,beyond the island of Quiriquina, was seen by Mr. HenryBurton and his family, who were then embarked in a largeboat, near Tome ; it appeared to be a dark column of smoke,in shape like a tower. Another rose in the middle of the bayof San Vicente, like the blowing of an immense imaginarywhale : its disappearance was followed by a whirlpool whichlasted some minutes : it was hollow, and tended to a point inthe middle, as if the sea was pouring into a cavity of the earth.At the time of the ruin, and until after the great waves, thewater in the bay appeared to be every where boiling ; bubblesof air, or gas, were rapidly escaping ; the water also becameblack, and exhaled a most disagreeable sulphureous smell.Dead fish were afterwards thrown ashore in quantities ; theyseemed to have been poisoned, or suffocated; and for daystogether the shores of the bay were covered with fine corvinus,and numerous small fish. Black stinking water burstup from the earth, in several places ; and in Mr. Evans'syard, at Talcahuano, the ground swelled like a large bubble,Tome is near the eastern entrance of the bay, where the wave wouldmeet with more interruption than near Lirquen, though considerably lessthan in the western passage.1835. HEIGHT OF WAVE CONTRASTS. 411then bursting, poured forth black, fetid, sulphureous water.Near Concepcion similar outbursts of water were seen, andsimilarly described.By a marked part of the wall of Captain Delano's house, itwas ascertained that the body of water reached twenty-five feetabove the usual level of high water. It penetrated into thealtos'* and left sea weed hanging to the remains of roofs, orto the tops of broken walls. But this must not be taken as thegeneral height of the wave. A body of water, rushing upona sloping beach with such force, would naturally preserve itsimpetus for some time, and run up the inclined plane, to a greatheight. Those who watched the waves coming in, consideredthem, while beyond the shipping, about as high as the upperpart of the hull of a frigate ; or from sixteen to twenty feetabove the level of the rest of the water in the bay. Only thoseparts of the wave which encountered opposition broke, untilwithin half a mile of the beach, when the roar became appalling.Persons who were standing on the heights, overlookingboth bays, saw the sea come swelling into San Vicente at thesame time that it advanced upon Talcahuano. The explosionin San Vicente, and the sea advancing from both sides, madethem think that the peninsula of Tumbes was about to beseparated from the main land, and many ran up the hills untilthey had reached the very highest point.Strange extremes of injury and harmlessness were among theeffects of these overwhelming waves. Buildings were levelled,heavy twenty-four pound guns were moved some yards, andupset; yet a child was carried to sea uninjured; and window-frames,with the glass in them, were thrown ashore upon theisland of Quiriquina without a pane being broken ! Accordingto a register, kept by Captain Delano, it appears that his barometerfell foui or five tenths of an inch between the seventeenthand eighteenth of February, and was still falling on the morningof the eighteenth, after which it rose again. So great f andFirst floor rooms.t In Concepcion a fall of two or three tenths indicates bad weather;four or five tenths a gale of wind, with much rain.413 BAROMETER — CHANGES OF LEVEL. Feb.sudden a fall, not followed by bad Weather, may have beenconnected with the cause of the earthquake ; but some doubthangs over these observations. The barometers on board theBeagle, at that time in Valdivia, did not indicate any change.Still, at so great a distance, it does not follow that the mercuryshould move similarly ; and (notwithstanding doubts excitedby persons at Concepcion who had frequently looked at CaptainDelano's barometer,) I am hardly inclined to disbelieve theextract from his register which he gave me.In a river near Lirquen, a woman was washing clothes at thetime of the great shock. The water rose instantaneously, fromher feet half wa' up her legs ; and then subsided gradually toits usual level. It became very muddy at the same time. Onthe sea-beach the water swelled up to high-water mark, at thetime of the shock, without having previously retired. It thenbegan to retire, and confirmed falling about half an hour, beforea great wave was seen approaching.For some days after the devastation the sea did not rise toits usual marks, by four or five feet vertically. Some thoughtthe land had been elevated, but the common and prevailingidea was, that the sea had retired. This alteration graduallydiminished, till, in the middle of April, there was a differenceof only two feet between the existing, and former high-watermarks. The proof that the land had been raised exists in thefact, that the island of Santa Maria was upheaved some feetmore than other places.In going through the narrow passage which separatesQuiriquina from Tumbes, the great waves had swept the steepshores to a height of thirty feet (vertically) above high-watermark ; but this elevation was attained, in all probability, onlyat the sides of the passage, where the water met with moreobstruction, and therefore washed up higher. That passageis nearly one mile in width, and has ten fathoms water in themiddle ; but the rocks on the western side diminish its navigablewidth to half a mile.Wherever the invading waves found low land, the destructionwas great, from those lands being in general well cultivated, and1835. SANTA MARIA — UPHEAVAL. 413the site of many houses. The low grounds lying at the bottomof Concepcion Bay, particularly those of the Isla de losEyes, were overflowed, and injured irreparably : quantitiesof cattle, horses, and sheep were lost. Similar effects, in anequal or less degree, were felt on the coasts between the riverItata, and Cape Rumena. Large masses of earth and stone,many thousand tons in weight, were detached from the cliffs,and precipitous sides of the hills. It was dangerous to go nearthe edge of a cliff, for numerous chasms, and cracks in everydirection, showed how doubtful was the support. When walkingon the shore, even at high-water, beds of dead muscles,numerous britons and Hmpets, and withered sea-weed, still adhering,though lifeless, to the rocks on which they had lived,every where met the eye — proofs of the upheaval of the land.Besides suffering from the effects of the earthquake andthree invading waves, which, coming from the west round bothpoints of the island, united to overflow the low ground nearthe village, Santa Maria was upheaved nine feet. It appearedthat the southern extreme of the island was raised eight feet,the middle nine, and the northern end upwards of ten feet.The Beagle visited this island twice — at the end of March andin the beginning of April : at her first visit it was concluded,from the visible evidence of dead shell-fish, water-marks, andsoundings, and from the verbal testimony of the inhabitants,that the land had been raised about eight feet. However, onreturning to Concepcion, doubts were raised ; and to settle thematter beyond dispute, one of the owners of the island, DonS. Palma, accompanied us the second time. An intelligentHanoverian, whose occupation upon this island was sealing, andwho had lived two years there and knew its shores thoroughly,was also passenger in the Beagle.When we landed, the Hanoverian, whose name was AnthonyVogelborg, showed me a spot from which he used formerly togather ' chorus'* by diving for them at low tide. At dead lowwater, standing upon the bed of ' chorus,' and holding his handsup above his head, he could not reach the surface of the water:• A large kind of muscle.414 SANTA Maria — Tell MOCIIA. Feb.his height is six feet. On that spot, when I was there, thechores' were barely covered at high spring-tide.Ridings round the island afterwards, with Don Salvadorand Vogelborg, I took many measures in places where no mistakecould be made. On large steep-sided rocks, where verticalmeasures could be correctly taken, beds of dead muscles werefound ten feet above the recent high-water mark. A fewinches only above what was then the spring-tide high-watermark, were putrid shell-fish and seaweed, which evidently hadnot been wetted since the upheaval of the land. One foot lowerthan the highest bed of muscles, a few limpets and britons wereadhering to the rock where they had grown. Two feet lowerthan the same muscles, britons and limpets were abundant.An extensive rocky flat lies around the northern parts ofSanta Maria. Before the earthquake this was covered by thesea, some projecting rocks only showing themselves : after it,the whole surface was exposed ; and square acres (or manyquadrant) of the rocky flat were covered with dead shell-fish, thestench arising from which was abominable. By this elevationof the land the southern port of Santa Maria was almost destroyed:there remained but little shelter, and very bad landing:the soundings having diminished a fathom and a half everywherearound the island.At Tubul, to the south-east of Santa Maria, the land wasraised six feet. The waves did not enter that river's mouthunto about one o'clock ; and then in greater number, but withless force, six or seven having been counted. Might not thisbeowing to the meeting of the divisions of the great wavewhich passed around Santa Maria.At the island of Mocha the shock of the earthquake was sostrong that people could not stand. The sea washed over therocks at the end of the island, higher than it had ever reachedin a heavy gale of wind. Anthony Vogelborg was on one ofthose rocks, or rather on an islet at the south end of Mocha,at the time, with a party who were sealing. Their boat washauled up on the top of the rocky islet, and, expecting to bewashed off, they held by it in readiness. The boat was lying1835. INCIDENTS — VALDIVIA. 415nearly east and west. During the earthquake some water in herbottom ran as fast from one end of the boat to the other as ifsome one were quickly lifting one end off the ground and lettingit down again. It did not wash from side to side at any time.Two forked sticks were stuck in the ground, about three yardsapart ; another lay across them for hanging things to dry.These sticks also were nearly east and west of one another :and during the shock they waved to and fro till the forkstouched, and the cross stick fell. Strong shocks were felt byvessels under sail near Mocha ; and between Mocha and Concepcion,the same was experienced by several vessels, not onlyon the 20th, but during following days.At anchor off Mocha on the 24th, a shock was felt by me,which resembled the sudden crashing: of the anchor over rocks.Under way on the 2d of March, it was thought that a charitablewas running out at the hawse. In one vessel they supposedshe had run ashore: on board of another, that the ship had passedover a whale. Vogelborg thought that the land had been upheavedabout two feet ; and from his accuracy in other matters,I am inclined to trust to his opinion.At Valdivia the shock began gently, increased graduallyduring two minutes, was at its strongest about one minute, andthen diminished. The motion was undulating and regular, likewaves rolling from west to east, but strong ; and it lasted nearlyten minutes. There was no difficulty in standing or walking,but the houses waved and cracked. The stone church tottered,but was not injured ; its roof was very light. AH the dwelling-housesbeing strongly built of wood, withstood the shock.Most people thought the motion was from south-west to northeast,but Mr. Darwin and a person with him at the time, thoughtthe reverse.The river increased, or rose, at the same time, and rapidly fellagain to its former height. In the port the sea swelled suddenlyupon the shore to high-water mark, though it was then nearlythe time of low-water, and quickly fell again. Both sea and riverrose and fell frequently during the remainder of the day. Theriver never fell below its usual height, neither did the sea retire416 VALDIVIA — Chloe. Feb.beyond its proper place, at that time of tide ; but each swelledfrom time to time and again sunk down. This happened onceor twice in an hour. After the great convulsion, other slightershocks occurred at intervals of a few minutes during an hour.In the afternoon, at about five, a smart shock was felt, whichmade the people run out of their houses. * One man and onewoman were drowned by the sudden rise of the sea near Niebla:it was supposed that they were upon the rocks gathering shellfish.Excepting in this instance, no injury was done at Valdivia.No noise preceded or accompanied any of the shocks, "fThis great earthquake extended to the island of Chloe,and probably still farther to the southward. The shock wasthere slight, but lasted during six or eight minutes ; it wasneither preceded nor followed by any subterranean noise. Atabout thirty-four minutes after eleven, J the beginning of theshock was felt. The motion was undulating and not strong.The swell of the sea was felt there, but I know not at whattime. A man was going to leave the shore § in his boat; hewent a short distance to fetch something, and returning foundthe boat aground and immoveable: puzzled and vexed hewent away, but had not gone many yards before his son calledto him that it was afloat.• Although built of wood.t (Valdivia has since been ruined). " Valdivia, Nov. 7, de 1837-"El grand terremoto que ha experimental este pueblo en la marianade este dia, sin tocar los limites de la exasperation, se pede asegurar seael mayor de los hasta qui acontecidos. Di principio a las 8 y 5 minutes; y termini a las 8 y quarto : advirtiendo que el movement de la tierraen este espacio detiempofue tan extraordinary que con difieultad podiaun hombre listeners en pie. Continue en secunda hasta las 9 y mediacon interruption solo de moments, y teste esa bora hasta las 12 y tresquartos que son actual mente se experimental los minos movements,aunque no con igual fuerza. Las dos unica iglesias que habia en estepueblo, y todos los edifices fiscales, se ban arruinado complimentedsi no les ha cairo igual suerte a las dumas casas de esta oblation hacontribute sin dura la circumstances de ser elles de niagara, aunque portogeneral ban sufrido grande detriment. " Isidro Megara."Al S'. Ynt®. de la prov. de Concepcion, Dn. Manuel Baines." — Extractedfrom the ' Araucano' of Chile, Dec. 8, 1837.I Mean time (exact ?). § Point A rena— San Carlos.1835. TOME — Column Male. 41 TIn the small port of Coliumo, close to the northward ofConcepcion Bay, the waves rose about as high as at Tome,nearly fourteen feet before they reached the shore. The littlevisage of Dictate shared the general calamity ; but, subsidingrather higher and more distant from the sea than Talcahuano,it escaped the ravages of that element.At the mouth of the Maule the force and height of thewaves must have been considerably diminished ; for no particulareffect was noticed at the time, nor were there any marks uponthe shore by which the height of the wave could be afterwardsascertained. That the sea should not there have occupiedattention is not surprising, when one considers the locality o.La Constitucion, as the port and town are called. On levellow land, at the south side of the river, lies the town ; betweenwhich and the sea there is high land, and a distance of about amile. The river winds round the northern promontory of thehigh land, and then fights its way to sea over a bar, 6n whichthere are always breakers. There are no houses on the seashore; and, without going half a-mile up the hill, the seacannot be seen; naturally then, for some" time after the townwas ruined by the earthquake, the inhabitants would be engagedin saving and sheltering their property, rather thanlooking at the ocean. I could not ascertain whether the riverhad risen or not : and having previously heard that the waveswere very powerful at the mouth of the Maule, I was a gooddeal surprised to find they had been almost unnoticed : butall attention seemed to have been engrossed with the earthquake.A vessel, lying close under the promontory mentioned above,was obliged to move as quickly as possible, when the shocksbegan, so serious was the shower of stones which rattled downthe hill and fell about, and on board of her. I was assuredby the governor, by the chief pilot, and by other residents,that instead of the land having been elevated at all, theyconsidered that it had sunk about two feet. The pilot saidhe had found two feet more water on the bar, since the greatshock, and that he was certain the banks of the river wereVOL. n. 2 E418 JUAN Fernando — VOLCANOES. Feb. Marchlower, though he could not say exactly how much. A rushof water might have shifted the loose sands of the bar ; butwhether the land had sunk seemed to me very doubtful.Certainly, however, it had not risen.The island of Juan Fernandes was very much affected.Near Bacalao Head an eruption burst through the sea, in aplace about a mile from the land, where the depth is from fiftyto eighty fathoms. Smoke and water were thrown up duringthe greater part of the day, and flames were visible at night.*Great waves swept the shores of the island, after the sea hadretired so much that old anchors were seen at the bottom ofthe anchorage.This earthquake was felt at all places between Chloe andCopiapopo : between Juan Fernandes and Mendoza. On thesea-coast, within those limits, the retiring and swelling of theocean was every where observed. At Mendoza the motion wasevenly gentle. Copiapopo, Huasco, and Coquimbo felt similar,although rather more forcible undulations. Towns, and houseswhich lay between the parallels of thirty-five and thirty-eight,suffered extremely ; nearly all were ruined ; but northwardand southward of those latitudes, slight injury was done to anybuilding. In the parallel of thirty-three and a-half, Juan Fer-nantessuffered, yet Valparaiso, opposite, escaped uninjured.As to the state of neighbouring volcanoes, so various wei-ethe accounts of their action, both after and before the earthquake,that I had no means of ascertaining the full truth ;but I heard from Valdivia that directly after the earthquakeall the volcanoes from Antuco to Osorno, inclusive, were in fullactivity.-}-The highest summit of Juan Fernandes was " found to be burned,full of fissures and hot," in 1743. Ulloa saw a small flame there. —Voyage of Juan and Ulloa ; translated by Adams.t Of another earthquake the " Araucano," of Dec. 8, 1837, states asfollows :Talcahuano, Nov. 7, 1837.Fue obstante recto y duro como cuatro o cinco minutes, con la particularisednotable de habere adverted un pequeno retroceso de la maracia su centre en Talcahuano, y habere quedado interrumpido por algunosdias el flujo y reflux de sus agues."CHAPTER XIX.Mocha — Movement of Land — Penco — Ulloa — Shells — Coal — Maule —Topocalma — Aconcagua — Valparaiso — Horcon — Papudo — Pichi-cinque — Conchali — Herradura — Coquimbo — Wreck — Challenger —Blonde — Ride — Estate — Colcura — Villagran — Arauco — Formercaciques — Colocolo — Caupolican — Scenery — Quiapo — Night travelling—Leiibu — Tucapel — Valdivia — Lautaro — Challenger;When the Beagle entered Concepcion Bay, she had onlyone heavy anchor left, having broken or lost the others ; andas there were none fit for her at Talcahuano, it became absolutelynecessary to go to Valparaiso : accordingly, on the 7thof March we left the melancholy ruins and their disconsolatetenants, and on the 11th dropped our only anchor at Valparaiso.There our wants were soon supplied, and we sailed onthe Itt to revisit Concepcion.From the 27th the time was occupied in surveying the neighbourhoodof Concepcion, Arauco Bay, the island of SantaMaria, and Mocha, until the 17th of April.Mocha is a prominent land-mark for navigators, but dangerousrocks lie about its south-west quarter, and as the currentusually sets northward, a ship ought to beware of them.Previous to the eighteenth century it was inhabited by AraucanianIndians, but they were driven away by the Spaniards ;and since that time a few stray animals have been the onlypermanent tenants. Most of the early voyagers speak of it.We found the anchorage indifferent, the landing bad, and nosupplies to be obtained except wood, and, with much difficulty,"water.Our duties were greatly forwarded while about Concepcion,by the earnest and very kind assistance of the intendant, DonJose Alemparte ; and the active friendliness of Mr. Rouse, theBritish consul. Though their houses were levelled, and theythemselves without any of what most Englishmen would callcomfort, we were received and attended to by them and the2e 2420 VERTICAL MOVEMENT OF LAND. AprilPenquistos,'''^ as cordially as if their nerves and minds hadendured no strain.Although it was indisputably proved to the satisfaction ofevery person in the neighbourhood, that elevations of land hadoccurred to the extent mentioned in the previous chapter, Istrongly suspect that a sinking down has taken place sincethat period, to a very considerable amount, if not quite enoughto counterbalance former elevation. This idea is suggestedby the fact that when I was last at Talcahuano, in July 1835,only four months after the great convulsion, the shores ofConcepcion Bay had regained their former position withrespect to the level of the sea-|- — by what the people of Tubultold me, when I rode by, of the sea having returned to itscentres (meaning that it had regained its usual height), —and by what the inhabitants of Santa Maria said, when theytold me that for three or four weeks immediately followingthe earthquake, their little port was much shallower than itwas when I went there seven weeks afterwards.Whether this conjecture be well founded a short time mayshow : if it should be, an explanation might thus arise of thedifferences of opinion respecting the permanent elevation ofland near Valparaiso, where some say it has been raised severalfeet during the last twenty years, while others denythat it has been raised at all. It may have been elevated, orupheaved as geologists say, for a time, but since then it mayhave settled or sunk down again gradually to its old position.In a place like Valparaiso Bay, where dust is so much blownfrom the land to the water's edge, and even out to sea ; andwhere many streams bring detritus from ravines, no decisivejudgment can be formed as to the rise of land, because of thebeach increasing gradually, and the water diminishing in depth.Natives of Concepcion: so called because they formerly lived atPence : before that city was overwhelmed in 1730.t Close to the landing place at Concepcion is a rock that was usuallycovered at high-water, previous to the earthquake (of 1835), but whichwas two feet above the highest tides of the next few weeks. In July,1835, that rock was covered at ordinary high-water, as in 1834.X ' Esta hora el mar a su centre'1835. Pence Castle ' Alloa.' 421In a ride along the beach of Concepcion Bay, with Mr.Rouse, we examined the solid wall of old Penco Castle, andfound on one side the date 1686 and on another 1687.This castle and the adjoining foundations of houses, are sonear the level of the sea, that I am surprised the inhabitantsshould not have feared being frequently inundated, even bytides oily a few feet higher than usual.If all this coast has been more or less upheaved duringcomparatively modern times, how is it that the foundations ofPenco still stand at the water's edge, very little above thelevel of a high spring tide .? Ulloa remarks, that " thecountry round the bay, particularly that between Talca-guanoand Concepcion, within four or five leagues from theshore, is noted for a very singular curiosity, namely, thatat the depth of one-half or three-quarters of a yard beneaththe surface of the ground, is a stratum of shells of differentkinds, two or three toises in thickness, and in some places evenmore, without any intermixture of earth, one large shell beingjoined together by smaller, and which also fill the cavities ofthe larger. From these shells all the lime used in building ismade, and large pits are dug in the earth for taking out thoseshells, and calcining them. Were these strata of shells foundonly in low and level places, the phenomenon would be moreeasily accounted for by a supposition no ways improbable,namely, that these parts were formerly covered by the sea,agreeable to an observation we made in our description ofLima. But what renders it surprising is, that the like quarriesof the same^kind of shells are found on the tops of mountainsin this country, fifty toises above the level of the sea. Idid not indeed personally examine the quarries on the highestof those mountains, but was assured of their existence bypersons who had lime-kilns there ; but I saw them myself onthe summits of others, at the height of twenty toises abovethe surface of the sea, and was the more pleased with the sight,as it appeared to me a convincing proof of the universality ofthe deluge. I am not ignorant that some have attributed tapisto other causes; but an unanswerable confutation of their422 FOSSIL AND LIVING SHELLS. Aprilsubterfuge is, that the various sorts of shells which composethese strata both in the plains and mountains, are the verysame with those found in the bay and neighbouring places.Among these shells are three species very remarkable : thefirst is called ' chorus,' already mentioned in our description ofLima ; the second is called ' pies de burrows," asses' feet ; andthe third ' bulgados,' and these to me seem to preclude all mannerof doubt that they were originally produced in that sea,from whence they were carried by the waters, and deposited inthe places where they are now found.I have examined these parts with the closest attention, andfound no manner of vestige of subterraneous fires. No calcinationsare to be met with on the surface of the earth, noramong the shells ; which, as I have already observed, are notintermixed with earth ; nor are there stones, or any other heterogeneoussubstances found among them. Some of these shellsare entire, others broken, as must naturally happen in such aclose compression of them, during so long an interval of time.The pie de burro has its name from the fish enclosed in it,resembling, when taken out, the foot of an ass. This fish is ofa dark brown colour, firm and siliceous ; it is an univalve, itsmouth almost circular, and its diameter about three inches.The bottom of the shell is concave within, and convex without.The colour within is perfectly white, the surface verysmooth ; the outside scabrous and full of tubercles. Its thicknessin every part is about four or five lines; and being large,compact and heavy, it is preferred to all others for making lime.The bulgados, in the Canaries called burgos, are snails,not at all differing in their form from the common, but largerthan those of the same name found in gardens, being from twoinches to two inches and a-half in diameter. The shell is alsovery thick, rough on the outside, and of a dark brown colour ;and, next to the preceding, makes the best lime.All these species of shell fish are found at the bottom of thesea in four, six, ten, and twelve fathom water. They are caughtby drags ; and what is very remarkable is, that no shells, eitherthe same, or that have any resemblance to them, are seen either1835. COCHAYUYO— COAL. 423on the shores continually washed by the sea, or on those trackswhich have been overflowed by an extraordinary tide. Theyadhere to a sea-plant called cochayuyo (a).This plant divides itself into several branches, equal indimensions to the main stem. These branches successively produceothers of the same proportion, so that the produce of onesingle root covers a prodigious space. At the joints, where thebranches spring, is found this kind of shell-fish, where theyboth receive their nourishment, and propagate their species." —Ulloa's Voyage, translated by Adams, vol. ii. pp. 252-254.Not far from Old Penco is the stratum of coal about whichthere has lately been much discussion.Herrera says, " There is coal upon the beach, near the cityof Concepcion : it burns like charcoal"* Frezier bears witnessthat near Talcahuano there is good coal, which can be obtainedwithout digging deeper than two feet ; and he declares that thenatives were astonished at his companions taking a substanceout of the earth to burn as fuel in their forge.-f- Captain BasilHall saw the place whence coal had been " worked without anytrouble. The seam is thick, and apparently extensive, andmight probably, with due care and skill, be wrought to anyextent"! Captain Hall " laid in a supply of coals at thisplace. The coals, which were brought for us to the beach,cost twelve shillings per ton, every thing included.""^ Stevensonsays, " To what extent the coal reaches, has never yet beenascertained ; all that has been used has been obtained by throwingaside the mould which covers the surface. This "coal issimilar in appearance to the English cannel ; but it is reasonableto suppose that if the mine were dug to any considerabledepth, the quality would be found to improve."||Many other authorities! might be cited to prove that coalexists abundantly near Concepcion, and that it has often been(a) See note at end of chapter.Dee. 8, 1, 6, c, 11. t Frezier's Voyage, p. 146.X Hall's Journal, vol. i. p. 303. § Idem, p. 307.II Stevenson's South America, vol. i. p. 121.If The Earl of Dundonald for instance.424 Male— Constitution. Aprilused. There are objections to it, by no means insuperable,which have alarmed people, and checked the working of thosemines. It is said to be very bituminous — that it burns tooquickly to ashes to answer well for smith's work, because itdoes not give heat enough — and that it is liable to spontaneouscombustion. The last objection might be removed by keepingthe coal under water,* and coking-f- would render it availablefor the forge. Some geologists say that it is ' mere lignite,'and think very lightly of its quantity or value ; but practicalmen will doubtless attach some value to what has been provedby experience.On the 17th of April, the Beagle sailed from ConcepcionBay, examined Coliumo, and, coasting along, anchored offthe Maule River on the Both. In a very thick fog, duringthe night of the 19th, while carrying sail to get an offing, wewere within a fathom of being run down by a vessel crossingus on the opposite tack. As both ships were under all sail,and it was dark, our momentary sensations were far fromagreeable.To land here was perplexing enough, for a heavy surf brokeon the bar of the river, and nearly as much along the shore ;but with some risk and difficulty we effected our purpose intwo light whale-boats, which could be hauled up directly theytouched the beach. Nearly all the population of a thrivingvillage, called Constitucion, came down to meet us (on the21st), and assist in hauling our boats up the steep thoughyielding sand, where, for our comfort, they told us a wholeboat's crew had been drowned, not long previously, in attemptingto land. From a height overlooking the river, village, andneighbourhood, we enjoyed a very pleasing view, so long aswe turned away from the bar of the river, and the surf. Arich country and a fine river are pleasing things at all times,but the difficult approach to Constitucion mars half its beauty.Only the smallest craft can cross the bar ; it is dangerousI do not mean merely wet, but well saturated and covered with watertill required for use.t It has been coked, and found to answer well.1835. TOPOCALMA ACONCAGUA HOECON. 4^for boats to land on the outer beach : and difficult for them toprofit by the few opportunities which occur of passing the barwithout risk.Notwithstanding these local disadvantages, Constitucion maythrive wonderfully hereafter, by the help of small steamers,for she has a most productive country around her, aboundingin internal as well as external wealth, and a navigable river atcommand. Besides this, in 1805, a very practicable passagewas discovered through the Andes, about seventy leagues southof Mendoza, not far from the latitude of the River Maule,almost entirely level, and fit for waggons — the only pass ofsuch a description between the isthmus of Darien and Patagonia.From the Maule we sailed along the coast northward ; limitedtime, and work in prospect urging us to hasten more than couldhave been wished. The shoal, or rather rocks of Topocalma,or Repel, were examined ; some coves looked at, fit only forcoasting launches, and the line of this bold, but uninterestingcoast tolerably well determined. Before sunrise, on the 22d,we had a splendid view of the Andes — their range or Cordillerabeing unclouded, and distinctly visible from south-eastalmost to north. The sharp summit of Aconcagua, 23,000 feetabove the sea level, towered high over any other.At noon, on the 23d, we hove-to off Valparaiso, and sentboats ashore. Mr. Darwin came on board, and among otherpieces of good news, told me of my promotion, I asked aboutMr. Stokes and Lieut. Wickham, especially the former ; butnothing had been heard of their exertions having obtained anysatisfactory notice at head-quarters, which much diminished thegratification I might otherwise have felt on my own account.Mr. Darwin returned to the shore, intending to travel overland,to meet us at Coquimbo, his very successful excursionacross the Andes having encouraged him to make another longjourney northward.On the 25th, we anchored in Horcon Bay, a place (by somecurious accident) entirely left out of all former charts,although there is good anchorage, and a fishing village not far426 PAPUDO — PICHIDANaUE — COKCHALl. April, May.from a populous small place called Puchancavi. From thisstation we sailed to Papudo, a small port rising into repute,on account of copper-mines in its neighbourhood. It is wellmarked by a high-peaked hill, called Governor. Next toPapudo lies Lingua, a place where boats only can go ; farthernorth, or ' down the coast"' (as they say in Chile and Peru),is Pichidanque, an excellent cove, rather than port, now muchused for shipping copper, and formerly a smuggling place ;rendered more notorious by the murder of Butcher, the masterof an English smuggling vessel called the Scorpion, who wasenticed ashore and assassinated, after which his ship was seizedand plundered. This took place in the present century; andan individual, who was said to have taken an active part inthe tragedy, was living at Quillota, in 1885.Close to Pichidanque is a high pointed hill, called ' Silly"*(from its saddle shape), seeing which distinctly from Valparaiso,is said to be a sign of an approaching northerly wind.I landed at Conchali after dark on the 30th, leaving theBeagle under sail in the offing. My reception was very hospitable; but the people made sure I was a smuggler ; andsome of the principal inhabitants rode with me several milesnext morning to the place where my boat was hauled ashore,thinking all the time that I was only waiting for a favourableopportunity to tell them my secret, and make advantageousterms. All this coast, except a few corners, is bold and high,barren and uninteresting ; though picturesque in outline.May 2d. Another smuggling cove, called Quilimari, wasexamined by me. There is but doubtful landing, and no shelterfor a vessel ; balsas, however, might do a good deal of workfor such a character as I was taken for at Conchali.On the 4th, having hastily reconnoitred the coast nearly asfar as Coquimbo, we ran into Herradura Cove, and mooredship securely. It was my intention to refit there thoroughly,and prepare the Beagle for receiving a large supply of storesand provisions at Valparaiso, which would enable her to rundown the coast to the Galapagos, and thence cross the Pacificto Sydney in Australia. In Herradura she lay quietly close1835. HEllEADUHA— COaUIMBO. 427to the land until the 6th of June: and all her crew wereencamped on shore near the ship, while she was thoroughlycleared out, re-stowed, and painted. At Coquimbo (or Serena)we always met with a hearty welcome whenever duty requiredthat we should go there, or when we went for our own amusement.The Yntendente, Yrrisarte, the kind-hearted Mr. Edwardsand his family, and others, will not easily be forgottenby the Beagle's officers.As another real benefactor to the public service, I may beallowed to mention Don Francisco Vascuiian, who lent me avessel of thirty-five tons, called the Constitucion, to be employedin forwarding the survey. This craft was built in theRiver Maule, and bore a very high character as a sea boat.Lieutenant Sulivan, Mr. King, Mr. Stewart, and Mr. Forsythvolunteered to go in her ; so giving them a boat's crew, a smallboat, a native pilot with his balsa, and as good an outfit as mymeans would allow, I despatched this new tender to examinea portion of coast near Coquimbo, which the Beagle had notseen sufficiently, and directed Lieut. Sulivan, if he found thevessel efficient, to continue afterwards surveying along the coastof Chile, as far as Paposo, whence he was to repair to Callao.*On the 6th of June, the Beagle left Herradura, and sailedtowards Valparaiso. Anxious, however, to communicate withDon Diego Portales,*}- who was staying at his country-house,near Papudo, I touched there in my way ; arrived at Valparaisoon the 14th of June, and immediately began the arrangementsnecessary for our preparations to quit Chile. The liberal assistancerendered by Don Francisco Vascuiian, in lending me hisown vessel, without any kind of agreement or remunerationwhatever, had enabled me to look forward to adding much ofthe coast of Chile to our gleanings in hydrography ; for I wellknew that Lieutenant Sulivan would not only make despatch,but extremely correct work.Here I may remark, that if little is said henceforth about• Orders in Appendix.t Don Diego Portals, one of the ablest men in South America, wasmurdered, in 1837, by some of his ungrateful countrymen.428 REPORTED AVRECK. Juneplaces so well known as the coasts of Chile, Peru, and othercountries often described, it is because I feel bound to avoidmere repetition as far as possible, and because the limits of raynarrative are fixed. For the present, leaving the Beagle to gether stores and provisions on board, I must turn to another scene.16th June. By the post which arrived from Santiago thismorning, an English merchant received a laconic account ofthe total loss of his Majesty's ship Challenger. This reportspread as quickly as bad tidings are wont to do : but no officialinformation arrived during that day, or the ensuing night.Recollecting that a Swedish ship had come lately into Valparaiso,whose officers had seen what they described as " anAmerican brig " cast away near Mocha ; I found out the shipand questioned the master and mates. They had arrived atValparaiso on the 25th of May, and all agreed in stating thaton the 20th of that month, they saw a large vessel ashore onthe coast of the mainland, to the northward and eastward ofMocha. They saw her at daylight, but as they had light airsof wind and a very heavy swell until three in the afternoon,to save themselves from danger they were obliged to makeall sail away from the land, and lost sight of the wreck.The vessel looked large, with fore and main masts standing,and top-gallant masts an end until eight o'clock, when the fore-topmastwent over the side, or was struck : her fore-topsailyard remained across ; no main-topgallant yard was seen ;the raain-top-gallant mast was standing all day, and there wasa large ensign at the mast-head : white and red were seen,therefore it was thought to be American. Her bow was toseaward, as if she had anchored ; her sails were loose all day ;people were seen on the after part of what appeared to be aroundhouse painted green. Bulwarks very high — ports verylarge — no boats on deck or at the quarters — no guns on upperdeck. Looking at her end on, With the masts nearly in a lineall her upper deck could be seen, though very indistinctly,owing to hazy weather, the additional haze caused by spraythrown up from a furious surf, and their own distance fromthe wreck : which was never less than four miles.1835. LOSS OF THE CHALLENGER. 429The log of the Swedish ship was produced, which exactlycorroborated their statement. The master said he could notlower a boat, so great was the swell ; and during five hours ofalmost calm, he was drifting helplessly towards the wreck, andexpecting to share her fate. The two masts and red and whiteensign, caused them to consider her an American brig, andas such she was reported to the consul for the United States.A few of the preceding data convinced me they had seen thepoor Challenger, but I was more strongly assured of the factby pointing to the Conway, then at anchor near us, and askingwhether she was like that ship — and near her size ? Yes, sir,they replied. The green roundhouse abaft, seemed to havebeen a deception caused by looking at the curved green tafFrailof the Challenger. I concluded that the mizen-mast had beencut or carried away ; perhaps used as a raft : that the boatshad been lowered, and that the ensign was St. George's, (SirG. E. Hamond's flag being white at the mizen) but did notfly out, as there was no wind. The quarter-deck guns wereclose to the side, or perhaps below. Such were my thoughts,but other persons were of a totally different opinion. I wasastonished that the Commodore did not hear officially fromSantiago — particularly as the merchant's private notice wasreceived through our Consul-general.17th. At the Post-office I obtained a large packet, directedto our vice-consul, the moment the post-master opened the mailbag ; and hastening to the consul's office, I was surprised tofind it shut, and to hear that no one would be there for anhour or two. Such apathy — upon such an occasion ! Notchoosing to break the seals, though I saw by the direction whatwere the contents (Despatches by Challenger), I went in searchof the proper person to open the packet : took the Commodore'sletters, and hastened with them to the Blonde. Everydoubt was then ended. The Challenger was lost on the nightof the 19th of May, at the spot described by the Swede : butall her crew were saved except two ; and on the 26th of thatmonth, Captain Seymour, the officers and men were encampednear the wreck, at a place called Molguilla. The Blonde BLONDE — TALCAHUANo. Junepared for sea : an offer of such assistance as I could render wasaccepted by the commodore ; and, having arranged the Beagle'saffairs, as far as then necessary, I went on board theBlonde, taking with me Mr. Usborne, J. Bennett, and a whaleboat.Lieut. Wickham was to forward the Beagle's dutyduring my absence, and take her to Copiapopo, Iquique, andCallao, before I should rejoin her.18th. Weighed at three in the morning and cleared theport before daybreak. A northerly, freshening wind favouredus much when in the offing.21st. Anchored in the bay of Concepcion, off Talcahuano,at noon. As soon as I could get a boat I landed, and hastenedto obtain information, horses, and a guide, as the commodorewished me to go to Captain Seymour, and concert measuresfor removing the crew and the remaining stores.The captain of the port told Commodore Mason that thepart of the coast on which the Challenger went shore, is quiteinaccessible in any weather, but that boats had entered themouth of the river Lelibu^ near Molguilla.Lieutenant Collins (of the Challenger) had been at Taletrying to procure a vessel, in which the shipwreckedcrew might embark by means of boats, at the Leiibu, but notsucceeding he had returned to his shipmates ; whom he expectedto find at the mouth of the river. It was said that a largebody of Indians was in motion towards them, that the crewwere short of provisions, and that they were becoming sickly.Assisted by the governor of Talcahuano, horses and a nativeguide were soon obtained ; but I wanted a more energeticassistant, and engaged a Hanoverian who was used to the halfIndian natives of the frontier, and well known among them.This man was Vogelberg, or Verger, already mentioned.With orders and letters from Commodore Mason, accompaniedby Vogelberg and H. Fuller, and provided with five horses, Ileft Talcahuano the same evening.Being personally acquainted with the Yntendente, and hissecond in command, I hastened immediately to their houses atConcepcion, wishing to get an order to pass the Bio Bio River1835. RIDE FROM Conception. 431that night, and to procure a circular letter to the local authorities.Not a minute was lost by either of those zealousofficers in attending to and complying with my requests.Alemparte left his dinner to write a circular letter, in his ownhand ; and neither he nor Colonel Boza would return to theirrespective parties, until they had ascertained that I was properlyprovided with horses and a guide, and that I required nofurther assistance.Although orders were issued and the ferry-boat at herstation, no crew were to be found, and only those men whobelonged to the boat knew how to cross over safely. Vexatiousas the delay seemed, I was afterwards glad of it ; forjudging by the work in day-light, I doubt our having everreached the opposite bank with our horses, in a dark night.While talking to Colonel Boza I remarked a watchful, wild-looking,young Indian, in a Chilian half-uniform, standing inthe house. Something unusual in his manner attracted my noticethough hurried, and I have since regretted losing that opportunityof acquainting myself with the son of Colipi, a famouscacique, who is the principal, and a very powerful leader ofthe northern Araucanians, though at present a friend to theChilians. Colipi is a very tall and unusually strong man ; hisonset and his yell are talked of with a shudder, by those whohave suffered from Indian hostility. Educating his son atConcepcion is one of the methods used to conciliate the ' barbara.'22d. Before the dawn of day we were looking for the watermen; and, as the sun rose, succeeded in getting their boat, orrather flat-bottomed barge, into motion. We rode into the river,about two hundred yards, until we reached the barge, thenlying close to an overflowed bank. By some persuasion of voice,whip, and spur, the horses were made to leap out of the water,over the gunwale and into the boat. They certainly showedmore sense than horses usually have, in understanding soreadily how to behave ; but whether their owners showedmore than asses, in having so clumsy a ferry-boat, may be432 FEBBY — RIVERA — ESTATE. Ji)nCdoubted. In leaping in the horses nearly knocked down, ortrod upon, those who were dismounted ; and when leaping outagain, they made such a splashing of the water in the leakyferry-barge as effectually washed our faces. The river is wide,deep, and rapid ; and there are many sand-banks. The boatmenuse oars as well as long poles ; but are slow and awkwardto a degree I could scarcely have believed, had I not witnessedtheir progress. The breadth at the ferry is about a quarter ofa mile, when the river is low, but upwards of half a mile whenflooded, as at this time. The south bank is steep ; and fromSan Pedro, a little village at the ferry, the land rises in a southeastdirection, towards a lofty range of hills ; but towards thesouth-west, it is low, level, and firm. Across this excellentgalloping ground we tried our horses, and made the miles seemshort, till we reached a low range of hills over Point Colonel.There, dismounting, we used our own legs until the hills werepassed, and before us lay two long sandy beaches, calledPlaya Negro,' and ' Playa Blanc.'In our gallop we passed the house of Don Juan de DiosRivera,* whose estate on the south side of the Bio Bio is mentionedby Captain Hall as an instance of the progressive transof the Indians. Several liege barn-like buildingsspread over about two acres of ground, enclosed by a highfence of rough posts and rails, showed an eye accustomed tothe country, that the proprietor held in his own hands a largeestate : but that collection of thatched irregular roofs, andthe utter absence of any thing like outward neatness or regularity,brought to my mind a very neglected rick-yard, nearwhich not even a cottage appears.Yet this was the house of a man of large property ; and notby any means a bad one, compared with others in that country.Many reasons might be adduced to explain why Chilian gentlemenare reluctant to expend either time, trouble, or moneyin building good houses. Earthquakes are very frequent ; propertyis yet insecure; and the country has been occupied,Yntendente of Conception 1821.1835. ' hacienda' — river a — xf.gr a. 4B8but so lately that there has not been any leisure time in whichto think of more than the first necessaries of life. Noble treessurround this 'casa de hacienda'* No underwood impedesyour riding at a rapid pace in any direction : and beyond thewoody spaces, extensive plains stretch towards the sea and tothe bank of the river. These plains are intersected by numerousstreams, and adorned with irregular clumps or thickets oftrees : smaller indeed than those which shade the ' casa dehacienda,' but of a size sufficient to shelter cattle.This estate, which is not considered a large one in that country,comprises, besides many square leagues of wild hilly country,more than one hundred square miles of excellent land, wellwatered, abundantly wooded, and most pleasantly as well asconveniently situated. The owner is said to be a most worthyman, and numerous instances of his active goodness as well asexcellent disposition, have been related to me at differenttimes ; one of which I must stop to relate.My attendant, Vogelborg, passed near the door of DonJuan de Dios Rivera, while executing a commission entrustedto his most speedy despatch. Stopping a moment to ask theway, Don Juan remarked that he looked ill, and had betterrest. Vogelborg thanked him, but explained the necessity ofhastening onwards : in truth he was ill and very tired, thoughanxious to proceed. Don Juan then suggested the quickermethod of forwarding the letters, entrusted to Vogelborg, byhis own confidential servant, and forthwith despatched himupon one of his own horses, desiring Vogelborg to take possessionof an excellent bed ; where he remained two days underthe kind care of Don Juan de Dios and his wife, who till thattime, had never seen him.Abreast of Negro Beach is an anchorage, sheltered from thenorth and north-west winds by Point Colonel, but exposed tothe southerly and west winds. Here, as well as in coves furthersouth, much smuggling was carried on in the time of theSpaniards.Leaving the sea-shore, and some slippery rocky places overCountry-house upon the owner's estate.VOL. II. 2 F434 Colour — GOBERXADOR — HORSES. Junewhich we were obliged to lead our horses, we ascended theheights of Colcura. For our reward, after a muddy scrambleup to the top of a steep hill, we looked down upon a fine thoughbut partially wooded country, forming an agreeable successionof valleys and high grounds ; while to seaward there was anextensive view of the coast, with the island of Santa Maria inthe distance.Perched on a height overlooking the sea, and directly abovea very snug little anchorage, is the hamlet called Colcura ; andthither we hastened, inattentive to the complaints of our guide(who was likewise guardian of the horses), and trusting toVogelborg's recollection of the road. Riding into a sort of fieldentrenchment at the top of Colcura hill, we were accosted bya sly-looking, sharp-visaged character, whose party-colouredracket appeared to show that its owner held some office of amilitary nature, but whether that of ' cabo,"** or a higher, Icould not determine vmtil I heard him say he could giveus a good meal, and that he had three fine horses near thehouse ; when at once styling him ' governor' I rebuked myselffor having thought ill of his physiognomy, and proceededto unsaddle. Disappointed, however, by a scanty bad meal, wethought to regain our tempers upon the backs of our host'shorses ; but not an animal had he sent for ; nor, to our furthervexation, could any inducement tempt him to lend one ofthose fine horses, which, he still said, were close by. The Indians,he declared, were expected daily ; he knew not themoment he might have to fly for his life; on no conditionwovild he lend a horse : no, not if a fleet of ships were wrecked,and I were to offer him an ounce of gold for each mile that hishorse should carry me.Every Chilian residing on the frontier endeavours to keepby him a good horse, on which to escape, in case of a suddenattack of the Indians; for, as they never give quarter, andapproach at a gallop, it is highly necessary to be always prepared.Those who can afford to do so, keep horses solely forthe purpose of escape, which are the finest and the swiftestthey can procure. I remember hearing, that when GeneralCorporal.1835. VILI.AGRAN ERCILLA. 435Rosas was carrying on a war of extermination against thePampa and Patagoniann Indians, on the banks of the riversColorado and Negro, he had with him horses so superior, thatit was said he could always ensure escape, if by chance heshould be pursued : and one of them was invariably led about,saddled and bridled, near his tent.Saddling our own steeds, and quitting the thin-faced dispenserof tough hens and sour apples, we set off at a gallop,leaving the lazy guide whom we brought from Talcahuano, toreturn there with the two worst animals (it was fortunate indeedwe had brought with us a spare one), and in two hours vyereached the foot of Villagran ; that hill so famed in Araucanianstory.Being a natural barrier, it was a spot often chosen by theAraucanians, at which either to lie in ambush for the Spaniards,or openly oppose them. In one battle, the brave Villa-grand,after whom this ridge of hills is named, and a smallSpanish force, opposed a multitude of Indians who had hemmedthem in on every side. The only opening by which Villa-grandcould escape, was stopped up with a barrier of branchesand fallen trees, behind which the Indians stood dischargingarrows and slinging stones. Ercilla gives an animated descriptionof this scene ; but as his book is scarce, I will attempt afree translation of that passage, lame as it must necessarily betheveteran Villagran,Heedless of any kind of death,Hazarded all upon a cast.He rode a stately powerful horse,Purest of Spanish blood —Strength and activity were well combinedIn that courageous steed —Swift and high-spirited, he yet obeyedThe slightest touch of finger on the rein.The danger reached — instant as thought —The warrior's spurs excite the noble brute —He dashes on — and down the barrier goes.A deafening crash and dire dismayFollowed, as onward tore their wayThose few determined men.2 F 2436 VIEW — Chilling— SANTA MART A. JuneThe gallant steed unhurt appeared,Strove foremost in the fight, and fearedOnly to be the last!Ekcilla. Canto VI.We ascended the heights by winding narrow paths, up whichour horses were led, in order to spare them as much as possible,and met a small party of Chilians, on their way from the wreckof the Challenger towards Concepcion, from whom we heardthat the wreck had been abandoned, and that the officers andcrew were entrenched in a secure position, on the height ofTucapel Viejo,' close to the mouth of the river Lelibu. Wewere also told that the Indians increased in number daily, andthat Great fears of their hostility were entertained.From the summit of Villagran we had an extensive view,reaching from Tumbes Heights, at the west side of the Bay ofConcepcion, to Cape Rumena. The low island of Santa Maria,with its sandy spit, shaped like an arm, seemed to be within afew miles of us, though distant several leagues. I could tracethe long, low, and almost straight beach of Laraquete till endedby the white cliffs of Tubul : I could distinguish the heightimmortalized by Colocolo"'s name, and under it smoke arisingfrom the classical Arauco. Southward, a large extent of fertile,level, and rather woody plains reached to distant ranges ofhills, which showed only a faint blue outline. Time allowed nodelay', but with a hasty glance, as we mounted our horses andcantered along the summit, I saw a schooner* in the distance, offthe Paps of Bio Bio, working her way to the southward.Descending the hill, we reached ' Chivilingo,' a village neara small river which runs through a ' hacienda' belonging tothe ' Santa Mana' family. We called at the door of their large,barn-like dwelling, to ask if horses could be spared. The mistressof the house happened to be at home, having latelyarrived from Concepcion ; and directly she heard my story sheordered every horse to be put in requisition; but, unfortunately,two only were within reach, one of which was lame. All theothers had been sent to grass at a distance. After acknowledgeCarmen, With Mr. Usborne on board— see page 456.1835. Paraclete — CARAMPANGUE. 437ing her kindness, and paying her ' mayor domo'' for the hire ofthe horse, we pushed on with that one and two of the least jadedof our own animals.Between Chivilingo and the rivulet called Laraquete is ahill, unimportant at present, though it may hereafter becomeof consequence, as it contains coal. Some that I carried awaywith me was thought to be almost equal to cannel coal, whichit very much resembled. The little river Laraquete, whichwill admit a large boat at high water, runs at the foot of thehill, and there is no surf whei-e it enters the sea. Very glad Iwas then to see nothing like a hill between us and Arauco .We urged our horses along the dead level, and reached a passof the Carampangue river as the sun was sinking below thehorizon. From his sickly appearance and the black gatheringclouds, I thought we should not be long without heavy rain,and that the sooner we could house ourselves the better. TheCarampangue is shallow, except in the middle, but wide. Menand animals are carried over it on a ' balsa,' made of severallogs of light wood fastened together, and pushed or poledacross With their burdens by one man. These contrivances arevery convenient where the water is shallow near the bank, andwhere the bank itself is low : for a horse can walk upon themfrom the shore without difficulty, or any scrambling ; and assoon as they ground on the opposite side, it is equally easy todisembark. Where wood is not plentiful, balsas are made ofrushes tied together in bundles ; or of hides sewn up and inflated,or made into a rough kind of coracle.The last few miles had been slowly accomplished by dint ofwhip and spur ; but from the river to Arauco was a long leagueover unknown ground, in the dark, and while rain fell fast.Heavily we toiled along, uncertain of our way, and expectingeach minute to be bogged; our horses, however, improved aswe neared their anticipated resting place, and almost tried tocanter as lights appeared twinkling within an open gateway inthe low wall of Arauco. * We asked for the house of the 'romansIt is a low wall, or rather mound of earth, enclosing a number ofranches' (cottages or huts).438 Venezuela — AiiAuco. June 1835.dante,' and were directed to a rancho rather higher and largerthan the rest. Without a question we were received, and toldto make the house our own. That we were wet and tired, wasa sufficient introduction to the hospitable Chilian.Before thinking of present comfort, it was necessary to securehorses for the next day's journey, and dispose of our own tiredanimals ; but money and the willing assistance of the commandant(Colonel Germ. J. Venezuela), soon ensured us bothhorses and a guide. In the colonel's house, a barn-like building,entirely of wood, and divided into three parts by low partitions,I was surprised to see an arm-chair of European make, whichin no way corresponded to the rest of the furniture. Some largeshells, not found in these seas, also caught my eye, and temptedme to ask their history. They had been brought only theprevious day from the wreck of the Challenger, and were givenby Captain Seymour to Don Geronimo, who had himselfbut just returned from assisting the shipwrecked party. Hisaccount and the chances of an attack being made by the Indians,increased our anxiety to proceed ; it would, however, havebeen worse than useless to attempt finding our way in a darknight, while it was raining fast and blowing very hard ; butat daybreak in the morning we saddled, and soon afterwardswere splashing along the low flat tract of land extending fromArauco westward towards Tubul. Heavy rain during the nighthad almost inundated the low country, and to our discomfortappeared likely to continue tiring the day. In half an hourafter starting we were soaked with mud and water ; but beingwell warmed by galloping, we felt indifferent to the rain, andto a heavy gale of wind that was blowing.Arauco, famous in Spanish song and history, is simply asmall collection of huts, covering a space of about two acres,and scarcely defended from an enemy by a low wall or moimdof earth. It stands upon a flat piece of ground, at the footof the Colocolo Heights, a range of steep, though low hills,rising about six hundred feet above the sea.In the sixteenth century, Arauco was surrounded by a fosse,a strong palisade, and a substantial wall, whose only openingEllClLLA CAt'laUES COLOCOLO. 439Alas secured by a gate and drawbridge. Now the ditch, dugby the old Spaniards, is filled up, and the remains of their drawbridgehave disappeared, having been used probably as fuel.This was the first place assaulted by the Indians, after theirgrand union against the Spaniards, at the end of the sixteenthcentury. To relate even a part of the history of those timeswould be digressing too much ; but an anecdote of Colocoloand the great Caupolican may shorten our journey, and divertus for a time from mud, and rain, and wind.Ashamed at having given way to men, at first imagined tobe gods, and indignant at the outrages and oppressions of theirinvaders, a general gathering of the Indian tribes took placenear Arauco. Ercilla names sixteen caciques of renown, besidesothers of inferior fame, who assembled with their followers.At the feast which followed their first consultation, greatdisputes arose among the rival caciques. A general was to bechosen, and each esteemed himself worthy of that high distinction.Insulting words induced an appeal to arms, and desperatestrife was about to commence, when Colocolo, the oldest andmost respected chief, advancing hastily,* with haughty strides,exclaimed : —What madness is exciting you, Caciques!Thus eagerly to rush into a warAgainst the very sources of our strength —To tear each other's entrails out, as beasts,And utterly forget the tyrant foe ?Turn your arms and angry blowsAgainst those authors of your slavery,Whose shameful inroads on our fathers' landHeap infamy upon Arauco IArauco's sons yourselves display —And cast their galling yoke away.Husband every drop of blood,To mingle with a Spanish flood!"Having gained attention and temporary silence, the AraucanianNestor continued an eloquent address to the angryErcilla, canto ii.Election OF SUPREME CHIEF.chiefs, in which, after expostulating with them upon theirruinous rivalry ; he exhorted them to choose a leader by sometrial of ability, which should be publicly made ; and suggestedthat the man who could bear a heavy weight for the longesttime must be the fittest to endure the burthen of governing.The caciques agreed to his proposal, and prepared a largetrunk of a tree for this great trial of strength. Colocolo wellknew that the qualifications of an Indian general were notbodily strength and activity, unless accompanied by qualitiesof mind proportionably superior ; but it happened that Catholiconexceeded all his countrymen in mental, and all butLincoya in bodily qualifications. Accident had impeded hisattendance at the ' gathering,' and the object of Colocolo inproposing so tedious and otherwise absurd a trial was to gaintime for Caupolican's arrival.Fourteen chiefs successively bore the ponderous tree upontheir shoulders. No one gave up the trial, until he hadendured more than four hours' oppression ; some even sustainedthe burthen six, eight, or ten hours ; and one hardy mountaineercarried the tree for fifteen. But the famed Lincoya claimedthe prize ; confiding in his Herculean strength, he had allowedall others to precede him in the trial. When at last he threwthe mantle from his Atlas shoulders, he took the tree from theground as if it had been a stick ; ran, jumped, and danced withit on his back, seeming to feel no weight ; and the multitude,astonished, exclaimed, ' Lincoya shall be general ! the rest areinfants in comparison!' but the wise Colocolo insisted uponthe completion of the trial, knowing that Caupolican wouldsoon arrive, and that Lincoya's antics would exhaust even hisgreat strength, and make it possible for an inferior to carry thetree longer. The crafty veteran had himself excited Lincoya tothe unnecessary exertions which he knew would underminehim. From sunrise, until noon of the following day, full thirtyhours, did the gigantic Lincoya sustain his immense load.While the air yet resounded to the shouts of ' Lincoya,' Catholiconarrived, and demanded to try his strength ; but Colo-colointerposed, saying that Caupolican had arrived from aLIXCOYA Catholicon. 441great distance, and ought to rest. Until the next morning,therefore, the trial was postponed.During the night. great excitement animated the vast multitude.The strength and ability of Caupolican were wellknown ; even Lincoya doubted the result ; he had deemed hisonly rival far off; and the antics in which he had indulgedhad prematurely exhausted his strength. At daybreak thetribes again assembled, and as the sun rose, Caupolican liftedthe tree, and quietly poised it upon his shoulder. His manner,and the ease with which he placed his burthen, excited thesurprise and admiration of all, except Lincoya, whose spiritssunk as he watched the cautiously guarded manner and easymovements of his rival.During that day and the following night, lighted by the fullmoon ; during the whole of the next day, and throughout thesecond night, did Caupolican sustain that overpowering weightwhich men of common strength could only bear during a veryfear hours : and when the sun rose on the third morning, thestill untired chief lifted the tree above his head, and dashed it tothe ground, with an effort which showed that his powers werefar from being exhausted. He was unanimously chosen general,amidst extraordinary shouting and applause : and no soonerhad the other caciques acknowledged his authority, than hebegan to take measures for acting immediately against theSpaniards.Arauco, their nearest strong hold, was to be attacked.Eighty chosen men approached, disguised as the serving Indians,who supplied the Spanish soldiers with firewood, andforage for their horses. Each man, with his load of fuel orgrass, in which his arms were hidden, advanced unsuspected tothe fort, when, by preconceived signal, they threw down theirloads and attacked the unprepared Spaniards. This assault wasthe signal for other Indians to rush towards the fort ; but theSpaniards, although surprised, made so good a defence, thatalmost all the eighty chosen men were killed, and no otherscould gain admittance. The whole Indian multitude then surroundedArauco ; and the Spaniards, seeing that they must be44)2 STRATAGEM SCENERY — CATTLE.luneoverpowered if they remained, opened the gate in the dead ofthe night and escaped. Thus began this famed insurrection,which caused the destruction of seven towns, and drove everySpaniard from Araucania.Leaving the low land near the sea, we ascended slopinghills, and found ourselves in a beautiful country. Though Idid not see it distinctly until my return, I will endeavour todescribe it in this place: — the outer range of hills, near thesea, is a succession of downs, free from wood, except here andthere in the valleys, and every where covered with short sweetgrass : — there is no sandy or barren rocky land. Numbers offine cattle were seen grazing in the neighbourhood, but veryfew sheep. In-shore of the downs is a very luxuriant country :gradually rising hills, every where accessible ; extensive valleys,woods of fine timber trees, very little encumbered withunderwood ; spaces of clear grass-land, like fields ; beautifullakes, and numerous streams of excellent water, together witha rich soil clothed with sweet grass, disposed me to think thisthe finest country I had ever seen.Generally speaking, the soil is clayey ; but there is everywherea layer of vegetable mould upon the surface; whichindicates that the country was covered with wood until theIndians partially cleared it by burning. While they were sonumerous as they are said to have been in the sixteenth century,large tracts of ground must have been cultivated by them, orcleared for their sheep. In riding across this now unemployedland, regretting at every mile that it should be so neglected, finebullocks often crossed our path ; or wild-looking, but well-conditionedtroops of horses. These animals must be verynearly wild : for restrained by no fences, looked after by nobody,they are free to roam and feed where they please. Onceonly in a year they are driven together, if they can be found,to be counted, marked, or killed. Here and there a stray cottage,or rather hut, was seen, with a high thatched roof, likethose of Chloe. But for these cottages, and a field or two nearthem, this excellent country would have appeared to be quitedeserted by the human race, though possessing every desirable1835. Native GUIDE INDIANS. 443quality. We passed over no hills of any consequence as toheight, though generally we were ascending or descending. Anin-shore circuit was taken, to avoid crossing three rivers, which,near the sea, are difficult to pass ; and having lost our way(notwithstanding the alleged excellence of our guide), a native,almost Indian, was easily prevailed upon to run by the side ofour horses until he put us into the right track. Before runningthrough the bushes, he carefully tucked up his loose trousersas high as possible ; thinking, I suppose, that his skin was lesslikely to be torn than the trousers ; and thus bare-footed andbare-legged he ran before us for several miles with the greatestease. At the cottage from which he came, a very good horse,in excellent condition, and well cleaned, was standing in a yard.I asked the owner to let me hire or buy him, but he wouldconsent to neither ; alleging that, in the Indian country, his lifedepended upon having a good horse close at hand. Threethousand Indians had assembled, he told me, and were expectedto make an attack upon the Chilian frontier ; but onwhat particular part was quite uncertain. They had heard ofthe wreck, and wei*e actually going to the place to plunderthe crew, when accidentally met and driven back by Colipi,with his friendly tribe. Dogs seem to be kept at these cottagesfor the same purpose as those at the ' ranchos,' in the Pampas,namely, to give warning of the approach of enemies. Smallparties of Indians seldom or ever attack a house withoutreconnoitring carefully ; and this they cannot effect if thereare many dogs about.After our running guide had left us, though put into theright track, we were soon at a loss again ; so numerous werethe tracks of horses and cattle in this rich pasture land. Theprofessed guide whom we had brought from Arauco, was moreuseful in recovering half-tired horses, than from knowing theway : no sooner did he get upon a horse, which one of myparty could not persuade to go out of a walk, than he startedoff at full gallop, exulting in his skill. Perhaps his secret layin a sharp pair of iron spurs : for the thick skin and coarse444 QUiAPo — A ' Anchor"' Junehair of horses, so roughly kept as these, is proof against ordinaryspurs, used with humanity.Going very much by chance, often losing our way, andoften taking a cast round to look for the most frequented track,we at last arrived at Quiapo, a hamlet consisting of five hutsonly, just in sight of one another on neighbouring hills. Towhich of them the name belongs, I know not, as ' Todo esQuiapo,' was all the answer I could get from my guide.Riding up to the nearest hut, we tempted a young manwho occupied it, to sally forth in the rain in search of freshhorses. This exertion was caused by the sure stimulant —money. We might have talked of the wreck, and the Indians,until that day month, without exciting our acquaintance tomove ; but the touch of dollars at once overcame the apathywith which he listened to our first request for food and horses.His wife told us to kill a fowl, if we could, for there was nothingelse to be had ; so forth we sallied, and as each understoodthat the permission applied to himself, great was the confusionamong the poultry. To the dismay of our hostess, wesoon reappeared, each with a fowl ; but a certain silver talismanquickly hushed her scolding, and set her cooking. Meanwhilethe rancho was ornamented with our wet clothes hangingabout it to be dried ; but rain came through the roof in so manyplaces that our trouble was useless. Dripping wet, having beensoaked since the morning, and of course cold, we could notgo near the fire, because of the smoke ; so with a long pole wepoked a hole through the thatch, which let the smoke out, andthen closing round the fire, we surprised the good woman byour attack upon her half-roasted fowls.All these huts are much alike. Under one thatched roof,there is a place where all the family (including the dogs,cats, and pigs) eat, while sitting or lying round the fire, whichis on the ground in the middle ; and there is a kind of ' daisy"*where the same party afterwards seek that sound sleep fromwhich none of the insect tribe appear to awake them, howeverRaised half a foot above the ground.1835. GRANARY — BAD TRAVELLING. 445much they may plague others. Sometimes there is a sort of bedstead,and a slight partition for the older people ; but the otherstake their rest upon the raised part of the floor, wrapped in sheepskins,or goat-skins, and rough woollen clothes. A large heapof potatoes occupies one corner of the hut, and another is filledby a granary, curiously contrived with stakes about six feet inlength, driven into the ground in a circle of perhaps six feetdiameter. Rough wicker-work unites the stakes, and forms abottom about half a foot from the ground. Straw is theninserted into the wattled-work, until there is enough to preventany com from falling through. This large fixed basket is filledat harvest time, and supplies the family during the whole year :neither rat or mouse can get at it without making a rustlingnoise, which instantly alarms each cat and dog.Before our host returned with horses it Alas evening. Hewould have detained us until the next morning, could hisarguments have availed, but finding that with or without him,on we were resolved to go, he set out at a good pace towardsLeiibu. Less rain and wind encouraged hopes of a fine night,so we trotted or galloped along while day-light lasted, but asthe night grew dark rain again poured down : and, obligedthen to go slowly, we followed one another as close as possible,placing the guide in front with a white poncho. Whilein the open country we got on pretty well, but, after twohours easy work, we found that the track was taking usthrough thick woods. My first intimation of the change wasbeing nearly knocked off my horse by the bough of a tree,so pitchy dark was the night ; and after this I kept my headon the horse's neck, trusting to his eyes entirely, for Icould see nothing. That our guide could find the way hasbeen matter of astonishment to me ever since : he never failedonce. Some of the defiles through which he led were knee-deepin clayey mud, so stiff that the horses could hardlymove. Often we were set fast in such places, obliged to getoff, and feel for the track, — knee-deep, and up to our elbowsin mud, — for it was upon hands and knees that we went,oftener than upon our legs. Our guide knew we were in the446 A SCRAMBLING Adventure. June 1835.right track, but each of us was obliged to seek safe footingfor himself and his horse, in the defiles among steep ravinesand streams, swelled by heavy rains. Passing these streamswas dangerous, and there only did the guide hang back. Atonebrook which seemed by the noise, to be deep and large,he refused to cross, saying his horse would not go on, andthat we could not get over in the dark. However, Vogelborgwas not to be so stopped. Leaving his own horse stuck fastin a slough, he scrambled through, hauling my horse afterhim by the bridle. Holding by my horse's long tail, anddriving" him on, I scrambled after : Vogelborg then wentback, and with the guide brought the others over. In severalplaces, while in the ravines, I had recourse to the tail of theguide's horse for my support and dragged my own animalafter me, for it was hopeless to remain on his back, so oftenwas he stuck fast or down in the mud. The last man. Fuller,fared the worst, as he had no one behind him to drive hishorse on ; and frequently we were obliged to stop and hollato one another, to avoid parting company. At last we emergedfrom the wood and from those horrible ravines. Before uswe could then see that there was space, nothing interferingbetween our eyes and the clouds ; but while under the treesand in the water courses, utter blackness surrounded us to adegree I never witnessed in any other place. Our eyes werenot of the least use, for I could not even see the white ponchoof our guide, though close before me. Feeling and hearingalone availed. Heavy rain during the whole time preventedthe mud from forming too thick a coat upon us. Anotherhour brought our small party to an Indian settlement, nearthe river Leiibu ; and as we rode by the huts, our guidetalked to those within at the utmost pitch of his voice, as ifdetermined no one should be ignorant of his adventure.Hearing their conversation carried on in the Indian language,was rather an impressive novelty. We continued our route,and at last reached the Leiibu.The north side of this river (on which we were), is low andsandy near the sea, but the south side rises to a high, VIEJo' Valdivia. 447able headland, called the ' Heights of old Tucapel,' — (' Altosde Tucapel viejo.') The breadth of the river is about onehundred yards. Tucapel was the name of one of the morepowerful caciques who united under Caupolican, to resist andexpel the Spaniards. In his district and near his usual residence,which bore the same name, the daring but avariciousValdivia was overwhelmed by numbers and taken prisoner,though not until every one of his small party had desperatelyfought and devotedly died for the cause which many amongthem considered that of God and their king.Religion had so much influence over the minds of the earlierSpaniards, and was so warped and misinterpreted by thepriests of their day, that actions, in themselves most unjustifiable,found defenders and active supporters among churchmen,and energetic performers among those who trusted theirconsciences to other men's keeping. An enthusiastically religiousfeeling, strengthened them to persevere under all trialsand disappointments, and helps to account for the wonderfulenergy and constancy, shown in discovering, exploring andsubduing the New World. This high sentiment of religion,urging them to conquer in order to convert to Christianity,and to honour God by serving their king, was an impellingmotive in the minds of the early adventurers, at least as strongas the desire of riches. I here allude to those leaders who firstopened the roads, which crowds of inferior men afterwardsfollowed. One proof of this feeling is the fact, that the last ofValdivia's faithful companions who fell, was his chaplain, withoutwhom, it appears, he did not even go to battle.Valdivia had set out in the morning with only fiftySpaniards, besides a body of friendly Indians, intending toattack and disperse the multitude of his opponents. As heapproached Tucapel, some fugitive friends* entreated him notto proceed, assuring him that twenty thousand Indians werethere who had sworn to take his life, or sacrifice their own.Despising the natives and used to conquer, Valdivia listened• Friendly Aborigines.44S LAUTAUO — valdivia's death.to no cautions. The three thousand Indians, supposed tobe friendly, accompanied him to the battle but turned againsthim : and his own page, Lautaro, who there immortalized hisname among his countrymen, was the first to set the exampleand proved himself the most daring in the fight. (It shouldbe mentioned that Lautaro's servitude was compulsory, havingbeen brought up against his inclination, in the Spaniard'shouse)* Onward dashed Valdivia, at the head of his smallband, and was speedily surrounded by a countless throng.Hemmed in on every side, and overpowered by men who tillthen used to fly from a man in armour and mounted on a horse,all that desperate brave men could do, was done: but theirhorses tired, slaughter appeared to diminish neither the numbernor rage of their opponents, and one after another sunk to theground. Valdivia's chaplain fell the last, except the generalhimself, who fought like a lion at bay : till, seeing that hewas alone, he turned and fled. The goodness of his horseenabled him to escape for a little while, but he was hunted bythe swiftest and strongest, whose speed exceeded that of atiring horse. His steed failed, and he was taken prisoner to betortured and put to death, after suffering every torment thatsavage ingenuity could devise. When he was at the stake, therage of the older Indians could not be repressed : and an agedman named Locate, who had suffered long and severely bySpanish oppression, struck him on the head with his club, andat one blow deprived him of life.Although surrounded by a multitude, so resolute andenergetic were the companions of Valdivia, that they wereactually gaining the day, until Lautaro rallied the retreatingIndians, and by his heroism turned the tide of victory againstthe Spaniards. The natives' superstitious awe of these superiormen, once thought gods, added to their being mounted onLautaro was the son of an Araucanian chieftain, who fell in battleagainst the enemies of his race. Though brought up and educated inthe family of Valdivia, from a mere child, he had never ceased to longfor an opportunity of turning his forced acquirements to the disadvantageof his instructors, and revenging the death of his father.1835. FIND challenger's crew. 449horseback and clad in armour, were such immense advantages,that to oppose the progress of a few resolute Spaniards evenby the numbers of a multitude, was a daring effort.In consequence of this and many subsequent acts of valourand conduct, the young Lautaro became a most celebratedleader, and was chosen by Caupolican as his lieutenant andsuccessor.But I must return to the banks of the Lelibu, which wewere approaching as fast as our tired horses could drag theirhoofs through deep, loose sand, when a solitary light movingon the dark side of the opposite high land, showed the placewhere our countrymen were anxiously waiting for assistance ;we had heard that their encampment was under TucapelHeights, and close to the river's mouth.As soon as we arrived at the water side, I hailed as loudlyas I could call, but no answer was returned. Again I hailedChallenger's a-hoy," and a faint ' hallo ' repaid us for everydifficulty. " Send a boat !" I called. " Aye, aye !" echoed fromthe hills. Lights appeared directly coming down the hill : a littleboat came across the river, and very soon we were embarkedin the Challenger's dinghy,* the only boat saved. The masterand one man were in her, from whom we heard that all theparty were well, and that they had not yet been molested bynatives. - — captainSeymour was at the landing place. Old friends,meeting under such circumstances, can say but little. Hasteningto the encampment, where all had turned out to hearthe welcome news of assistance being at hand, we made theirhearts rejoice by saying that the Blonde was at Talcahuano,and coming to their relief. With the officers, I found oiu*excellent consul, Mr. Rouse.-^ At the first intimation of theChallenger's loss, he had hastened to the spot without an hour'sdelay ; well aware how useful his influence and informationwould prove, and supposing that the officers would not beAt Midnight. The horses were sent back to the Indian huts, withwhose owners our guide held such noisy intercourse as we passed,t H. B. Majesty's consul at Concepcion.VOL. II. 2 G450 MB. rouse's assistance. June.conversant in Araucanian habits and language, even if theyshould have made a slight acquaintance with those of Chile.His assistance proved to be of the utmost consequence, for notonly did his explanations intimidate and discourage open ordisguised enemies, who were not wanting, but his credit andinfluence procured daily supplies of provisions: while to hisaddress and good sense every one of the shipwrecked crewwas much indebted in many transactions.Daylight found Seymour and myself still talking, thoughhe had given me his bed. Partly at that time, and partly insubsequent conversations, he gave me the following account ofthe loss of the Challenger ; but without mentioning his ownexertions or conduct, which I heard of from his officers.I will take this opportunity of mentioning that there is a large fox,called ' culpen,' in the Araucanian country, which was mentioned to me asbeing more like a wolf than a fox; but at that time I paid very little attentionto the subject. Stevenson sa's, " the culpen is rather more foolishthan daring, but not void of the latter quality. It will advance within eight,or ten paces of a man, and after looking at him for some time, will retirecarelessly." " Its colour is a dark reddish brown, with a long straighttail covered with shaggy hair; its height is about two feet." — Stevenson'sSouth America, vol. i. p. 115. (Is not this like the Falkland animal?)(Note referred to in page 423.)(a) UUoa said that the word ' cochayuyo ' meant 'lake herb.' Hisauthority is too good to be lightly questioned, otherwise I should havehad no doubt that the word was derived from * cochin,' ' salt,' or ' bitter,'and ' yu,' a thread : as the plant grows with long thread-like stalks, whichtaste salt, like most sea-weed : and ' lavquen ' is the word generally usedfor ' lake,' as well as * sea,' rather than ' concha.'CHAPTER XX.Challenger sails — Sounds off Mocha — Wrecked on the main-land — Crewsaved — Stores landed — Camp formed — Great exertions and excellentconduct — Mr. Consul Rouse — LeUbu— Plague of mice— Curious rats —Return to Blonde — Ulpu — Araucanian dress — Arauco — ' Boroanos' —Tubul — Bar rivers — Apples — Ferry — Blonde sails — Seek for theLeubu— Schooner Carmen— Errors and delay — Embark Challenger'screw — Rescue the Carmen — Talcahuano — New Concepcion — Valparaiso— Coquimbo— Challenger's sail in Conway — Reflections.The Challenger sailed from Rio de Janeiro on the 3d ofApril 1835 : she had much bad weather off Cape Horn, whichlengthened her passage considerably.On the 18th and 19th of May, strong north-west winds, withthick weather and heavy rain, prevented observations beingtaken ; except a few for time only. The ship was approachingthe land, and her position estimated by dead reckoning fromthe last observations.At five P.M. on the 19th, the Challenger hove-to, bentcables, bestowed the anchors, and sounded, but no bottom wasfound with two hundred and ten fathoms of line. This soundingwas taken as a matter of form rather than utility, for noone supposed that the ship could be less than fifty miles froma steep coast, ois which soundings extend a very little way. Atthis time, she was really about twelve miles from Mocha, whichbore from S.E. to S. The weather was clear overhead, but toohazy near the horizon to see land, or any object distant morethan four or five miles. Mocha is high, bold land, which inclear weather may be seen at thirty, forty, or even fifty milesdistance ; but soundings are no guide in its neighbourhood.They are irregular, and indeed not to be got, except very nearthe land.A course was shaped for passing Santa Maria, and approachingthe entrance of Concepcion Bay ; and with a strong windfrom W.N.W., the ship ran eight or nine knots an hour, undertreble-reefed topsails, courses, and jib, steering N.b.E. untilVOL. II. 2 G 2452 CHALLENGER — BREAKERS. Mayeight o'clock, when it was thought prudent to haul to the winduntil daylight. By many on board even this step was deemedunnecessary caution. Captain Seymour proposed putting herhead to the south-west till daylight ; but the master felt soconfident of the ship's place, and so much disliked the idea oflosing both time and ground, that his opinion was preferred,and her head was kept to the northward. About nine, or soonafter that time, the Challenger was lying from N. to N. | E.,going about four knots, under the sail before-mentioned. Thewind had moderated ; but a thick haze surrounded the ship,though the sky overhead was clear.Captain Seymour had been walking the deck for some time,and had only just gone to his cabin, when a change in theappearance* of the water alongside, and an unusual motion ofthe ship, startled the officer of the watch, and induced him toorder the 'helm' down and ' about ship,' while a midshipmanwas sent to tell the captain there was a suspicious alteration inthe water. Just then breakers were seen by the look-out menand by the officer of the watch at the same moment ; and asthe captain flew up the ladder, (the ship coming round) hesaw her position, and gave the order, ' mainsail haul,' as shewas rising to a heavy rolling breaker. The after-yards swunground, but while bracing them up, she struck heavily ; thenhauling the head-yards,' and bracing up, she seemed to ' gatherway ;' — the foam alongside, from the recoiling waves, probablydeceiving their eyes. A high breaking sea struck herbows — and astern upon the rocks, a helpless wreck, the proudChallenger was dashed-|- Again, a great roller approached,threatening to overwhelm her ; but it broke short, and onlydrenched her fore and aft with force sufficient to wash menoverboard. While bracing up, the topmen had been orderedaloft to shake the reefs out, and readily they went, withoutLines of foam, and intervals of light-coloured water.t When the ship was thus hove violently astern, her rudder, stern-post,dead-wood abaft, gun-room beams, cabin-deck, and many timbers, besidesplanking, crashed awfully as they broke at once before the resistless powerof an ocean swell.1835. POSITION — Preparations. 453a moment's hesitation. They were, however, quickly recalleda few moments sufficing to show that saving lives was allthat could be attempted. Each succeeding sea drove the ship'sstern higher than the bow* upon the shore, and along shorewithal, inside some rocks, which partly deadened the fury ofthe great south-west swell, that rolls in directly against thispart of the coast. That the sea did not break at first uponthe hull of the vessel, and drive every thing before it, isaccounted for by her position — with the bow to seaward— andby the defence afforded by a large rock near her bow whichreceived the first shock of each wave.Heavily the ship continued to beat upon the shore, reeling fromside to side as seas struck her, yet her masts, though totteringat every shock, did not fall; nor did her strong hull yield to thecontinual striking, until hours had passed. Then, indeed, therising of the tanks and contents of the hold showed that herframe had given way, and that the well-built Challenger wouldnever float again. There was scarcely any wind ; but the soarof the breakers and the clouds of spray would have almost stupefiedthe crew, had not life been at stake. No land could bediscerned till after the moon had risen — no one could evenconjecture where the ship had struck, excepting only the master,who thought they must be on the Dorniido shoal, off theisland of Santa Maria. The purser collected the ship's papers,and saw them headed up in a water-tight cask : each personendeavoured to secure some valuable : — till daylight came furtherpreparation would have availed nothing.The captain was asked to cut away the masts; but herefused to let more than the mizen-mast be touched, becausetheir weight, after the first few seas, steadied the ship, as shelay over, and prevented her rolling to seaward with the recoilingwaves. When she first struck, he was asked to let gothe anchors ; another request which he wisely refused, rightlyjudging that having struck, anchoring could not improve theirThe peculiarity of her form — drawing as much water forward as shedid abaft — may have been partly the cause of her bow maintaining to seaward,which contributed so much to the preservation of lives.EFFECT A LANDING.Maycondition, but might prevent their drifting past the rocks andnearer to the shore ; both anchors, however, were kept in readiness,in case the water astern should deepen, which might havehappened had they struck upon an isolated shoal, like theDomino.Soon after the moon rose, at about two in the morning, landwas seen astern of the ship, not far distant. It seemed to berather extensive, though not high ; and as there was no longerany doubt of their having struck upon the mainland, betterhopes of saving life relieved the torturing, anxious suspensethey had hitherto endured. Daylight shewed them the shore onwhich they were. Near the ship lay an extensive sandy beach,and beyond it, gradually rising in the interior, a thicklywooded country appeared to reach to distant mountains. Themizen-mast was then used to form part of a raft ; the jolly-boatwas lowered over the stern ; and in her Mr. A. Booth(mate), after a long struggle, reached the shore, with the endof the deep-sea lead-line. Mr. Gordon (midshipman), next triedto land in another boat, to assist in hauling a rope ashore, butthe boat was upset, rolled over and over, and Mr. Gordon andone of the men were drowned. The other man was saved. Mr.Gordon was one of the most active and able young men of hisage, and very much esteemed by all his shipmates.* His fellow-sufferer,John Edwards, was one of the best men in the ship.A stream of tide or current, setting two or three knots anhour, along the shore, much increased the difficulty of reachingit, or of assisting those who were making the perilous attempt.Meanwhile, each succeeding heave of the sea forced the shiphigher upon the sandy beach, and rendered the situation ofthose on board less critical.The men who reached the land safely, hauled stouter ropesashore with a line ; rafts were then made ; the large boatsgot overboard ; the sick landed, and a party was sent ashoreto protect them. A few Indians appeared at a distance, whoseapproach, with numbers of their countrymen, was a seriousevil in prospect.He had anxiously sought to go in the first boat.1835. Indian ASSISTANCE CAMP. 4>55Before much had been done in landing stores, a great manyIndians and some creole natives had assembled. Nearly-allcame on horseback, and many assisted in hauling the raftsashore, or helping the people to land. Even the Indian womenrode into the furious surf, and with their lassoes helped verymaterially : some took the boys up behind their saddles, andcarried them ashore ; others fixed their lassoes to the rafts.Thus instead of molesting the sufferers, these ' uncivilizedbarbarians' exerted themselves much for them. What a lessonto the ' wreckers' of some other coasts, whose inhabitants arecalled civilized !But notwithstanding these friendly acts, Captain Seymourwas too prudent to put confidence in the natives. He rememberedthe saying, ' Nunc, nunc fiarse a los Indies ;' and forminga small encampment upon the beach, he barricaded it withspars, boats, casks, and other moveables.* There every thingwas carried when landed, and put under care of the guard.All this day was anxiously occupied in landing stores and provisions.A small party remained on board ; but the rest were onshore, during the night of the SOth.f Throughout the followingdays, some of the officers and all the men who were not onguard ashore, were constantly occupied in bringing provisions,ammunition, and stores from the wreck. Heavy and laboriousas this duty proved, it was persevered in until every transportablearticle of value was removed. Two boat carronades weremounted on shore, which, with small arms and the barricadeabove mentioned, would have kept off a considerable force ofIndians.On the 21st, Lieutenant Collins and Mr. Lane (assistant-surgeon)set out to go to Concepcion : whence, directly afterthey arrived, Mr. Rouse set out, with horses and mules, takingsuch few useful things as he could carry, among which weretwo small tents, that had belonged to the Beagle, and werelent to Mr. Rouse, when his own house was shaken down bythe destructive earthquake of February.The barricade was finished on the 25th.t It was on this day that the Swede saw the unfortunate Challenger.4i56 Rouse — MOLGuiLLA — LEuBU. MayWherever Mr. Rouse went he carried with him the thoroughgood-will and high respect of the inhabitants of the provinceof Concepcion — a feeling inestimably valuable at such a time,and totally different from the mere outward formal civilityshown to him as the British consul ! This feeling forwardedhim on his journey, induced others to assist in earnest, andafterwards enabled him to procure a large supply of fresh provisionsfor the shipwrecked crew.From Concepcion Lieutenant Collins went to Talcahuano,to hire a vessel. Only one fit for such a purpose was in theport, the Carmen, an American schooner, but her owner askeda price so utterly unreasonable, that the Lieutenant refused toengage with him, and returned to the wreck.After Lieutenant Collins was despatched to Concepcion,Captain Seymour and the master went to examine the mouthof the river Leiibu, about eighteen miles to the N.N.W. ofPoint Molguilla, where the ship struck. They found thatboats might enter and leave the river with most winds ; thatthere was no bar at the entrance ; and that under TucapelHeights* there was a spot very suitable for their encampment,until some means of embarkation should offer. Travelling overlandso great a distance as to Concepcion, in such a country,would have been almost impracticable, except as a last resource ;for it must have involved the total loss of every thing whichthey could not carry on their backs, and rendered useless themany days hard labour, in a raging surf, by which so muchhad been landed. It was therefore resolved, that as soon as allvaluable stores which could be removed were landed, measuresshould be taken for shifting their camp to the Leiibu. -}-When the consul arrived his advice strengthened the opinionImmediately over the entrance of the river.+ While Captain Seymour was away at the Leiibu, the officers availedthemselves of the opportunity to get the greater part of his stores andprivate property, books, &c. landed ; for he would not allow any of hisown things to be moved, or a man to be employed about them, while anarticle of the ship's stores could be saved, though his private propertywas very valuable.June 1835. cacique — stores — remove. 457of Captain Seymour, and their immediate removal was decidedupon. Though the Indians as yet had been inoffensive, Mr.Rouse had heard as he came of a large body who were approachingfrom the interior, and whose intentions he suspected tobe hostile. The ti'ibe then about Molguilla was that of anIndian cacique, in alliance with the Chins, and thereforeinclined to be civil, while the plunder was not very tempting,and while all the party were well armed and on the alert.A few days after the ship was wrecked, this cacique gave afine young heifer to Captain Seymour, who thanked him forhis present, and expressed regret that any thing he could offerin return must be very trifling ; when he was startled by aviolent exclamation from the chieftain, who indignantly refusedto accept any thing from men in distress. He would not takethe paring of a nail from them, (biting his thumb-nail angrilyas he spoke).By Mr. Rouse's exertions and assistance, as interpreter andadviser, several yoke of oxen were procured, as well as manyhorses, mules, and donkeys ; but even with such unhoped-forhelp, the removal of the heavy stores which had been savedwas a tedious and difficult undertaking. Once established,however, at Leiibu, they felt comparatively secure : tents weremade out of sails ; a palisade was fixed and a ditch dug : butthe guns, spars, anchors, cables, and large boats, were left onthe beach, as they were too heavy for removal overland ; andto transport them by sea, from such an exposed coast, was outof the question.Leaving their good ship a wreck upon the shore, in thehands of those who would soon destroy her, to get at thecopper and iron, was to all a melancholy sensation. But thefeelings of her captain at that moment — how little those whoobeyed orders had to feel, compared with him who gave them !On the 8th of June the wreck was abandoned : and thewhole party were encamped at Leiibu. Time passed away butno tidings of assistance arrived. Sickness began its insidiousattacks : for cold wet weather had succeeded to a duration offine dry days unusual at that time of year. Some of their458 MfCE — EATS — camp. Juneessential articles of provision were exhausted : inactivity anduncertainty were depressing the minds of all, and CaptainSeymour had begun to concert measures for abandoning theships' stores, which had been so painfully saved, and travellingoverland to Concepcion, when the letters from CommodoreMason were given to him. It ought not to be forgotten thatMr. Rouse decided to remain with Captain Seymour, andshare his fate, whatever plan he might adopt.Among evils of magnitude trifling vexations are littlenoticed ; an absolute plague of mice caused amusing occupation,rather than annoyance. The ground, the tents, theirbeds, everything and every place was infested by mice : nothingwas safe from their teeth ; provisions were hung up, andpeople were obKged to watch them. Hundreds were killed everyhour, for they literally swarmed over all that part of thecountry, and curiously enough the old people attributed theirappearance to the earthquake ! Besides these mice, which hadfeet like those of a lizard, enabling them to climb in all directions,even along the smallest line or branch of a tree, therewere animals that they called rats, about the encampment atLeiibu, which deserve mention, not on account of their numbers(as there were comparatively few) but because they wereformed like opossums, having a pouch to contain their youngfor some time after birth.Early the next morning (24th) I went up with Captain Sey-mourto the heights of Tucapel, which overlook the river andcommand an extensive view of the sea. Flag-staffs had beenerected there, and large piles of wood collected, in order thatflags might be kept flying by day, and fires burning at night.The Uttle camp below presented a regular and very respectableappearance : fourteen or fifteen tents, pitched in regular order,and surrounded by a palisade with a ditch, would have causedeven a large body of Indians to hesitate before they attackedit. I was much struck by the strength of the position, andthe ease with which it might be defended by a small forceagainst numbers, and still maintain communication with thesea. There was formerly a small settlement there, called a1835. POTATOES— THEFT MISCONDUCT. 459town, though in truth only a very small village : but latterly,the river Leiibu- has scarcely been noticed, except as the lastretreat of the pirate Benefices. Nevertheless it is a situationadmirably adapted for a commercial as well as agriculturalsettlement.Though bread and other things were deficient, the shipwreckedparty never knew the want of water, and they hadalways an abundant supply of a very fine kind of potato,which perhaps is hardly to be surpassed in size or quality byany in the world. Not one of the officers of the Challengerhad seen its equal, and I never recollect eating any that wereso good, and at the same time so large.* Neither beef normutton were scarce, in consequence of the 'credit'* obtainedby Mr. Rouse. Money was soon exhausted, but the high characterof the consul was known all over the country, and thenatives trusted implicitly to his word.The report of a ' wreck' had quickly drawn numerous plunderers,even from Concepcion and Talcahuano : but those pilfererssatisfied themselves secretly, I believe, without attemptingany daring robbery. During the confusion of the firstday no doubt much was stolen by Indians, and hidden in theneighbourhood : since many articles were sold to the Talepeople for spirits or tobacco, and being taken by themto that place, occasioned a report of the officers and crewhaving been stripped and plundered.But it must not be supposed that Captain Seymour and hisofficers had no internal troubles, and that strangers were theironly foes. Shameful acts of robbery were committed by someof the Challenger's own party : a very few of her marinesscrupling not to rifle chests and boxes belonging to officers.This conduct, in connexion with . a spirit of insubordinationwhich began to show itself, among some of those who knewCaptain Seymour the least, occasioned his calling the crewtogether on the beach, and causing one man to be corporallypunished.The officers of the Blonde were of a similar opinion, after trying agreat many that were sent on board from the Leiibu.■4B0 Praiseworthy DECISION IIKTUIIN. JuneOn this trying occasion Captain Seymour animadverted onthe thoughtless conduct of a few who talked of what oughtto be done, as if they were on equal terms with those whoseauthority at such a time was more than ever necessary ; andwho, in their unguarded conversations, heeded not who waslistening, or which of their inferiors might be influenced bytheir opinions. He reminded them of the treacherous andoften hostile disposition of those Indians who then surroundedthem, and were daily increasing in numbers ; and made knownnot only his own determination to stay by the stores, at allhazards, but that those who attempted to desert should do soat the peril of their lives. He well knew that the majority(and that majority included all the worthiest and best) wouldstand by him to the last, and think little of difficulties ordangers incurred in doing their duty.After this well-timed public admonition not a word morewas heard about " abandoning the stores, and making the bestof the way to Concepcion." Neither was there again occasionto inflict punishment. This one act of necessary justice, executedso properly and decidedly, was probably the means ofsaving much property, of upholding character, and even ofpreserving many lives : for when once anarchy begins, who canforetel all its consequences ?Anxious to return as soon as possible to tell the Commodorehow easily the Blonde might take off" both people and stores,at the mouth of the Leiibu, that he might lose no time ineffecting the embarkation — I recrossed the river and was gallopingtowards Quiapo, before noon (on the 24th) hoping to reachArauco ere midnight ; and, certain of fresh horses, I and mytwo companions spared neither whip nor spur. Our guidedropped behind, but as we could find the path by our tracks ofthe previous day, we did not wait for him. Such ravines(quebradas) as we passed : how we got through them duringthe black darkness of the preceding night astonished me, forwe could hardly scramble along in broad daylight : and hadI known the nature of those passes, I certainly should nothave tried to get through, excepting by day.1835. QUIAPO 'ULTV'' CATTLE. 461At Quiapo we had a mixture of corn and water, which Ithought tolerably good. It is a common mess among thelower class of natives in many countries besides Chile.* Afew handfuls of roasted corn, roughly pounded between twostones, were put into a cow's horn, half full of cold water,and well stirred about with a stick until changed into a substantialmess of cold porridge. Our haste shortened the journey,and we should have reached Aravxco in good time, hadnot a second guide (the man who waited at Quiapo with theArauco horses) mistaken the road, and taken us along a trackwhich was crossed by two rivers, not then fordable. His errorwas not discovered until too late, and to pass the rivers wewere obliged to make a delay of several hours. The tractof country we traversed this day, was as fine as any that Ihave attempted to describe. I do not think we rode over oreven saw an acre of unproductive land. The woody districtswere very pleasing to the eye, and as specimens of a rich andfertile country almost in a state of nature, equally so to themind. In many places our road lay through an open forest,where fine trees stood at considerable distances apart, and notbeing surrounded by underwood allowed us to gallop betweenthem as we pleased. I thought of England's forests in theolden time.'In one of the quiet woodland glades we passed through,some of the finest cattle I ever saw were grazing. One immenseanimal would have attracted admiration, even by theside of show-cattle in England. Very large, well-shaped, andextremely fat, he looked and moved as if few things had evercaused him to turn against his will. These cattle have owners,I was told, but are seldom molested : once perhaps in someyears a large number may be killed for the sake of theirhides and tallow; and even then so extensive and so littleknown a;-e these woods, that a considerable proportion of thecattle are not seen by their indolent destroyers, nor yet atthe almost nominal musters which take place annually. The• Among the Araucanian aborigines it is made with maize, and calledulpu.462 CLIMATE RIVER Sancho. Juicesoil being usually of a tenacious, clayey nature, and streamsof water numerous, moisture sufficient for vegetation is ensured,even at the driest periods. Indeed, these countries never havesuffered from drought ; their climate being a happy meanbetween the dry, parching heat of Northern Chile, or Peru,and the continual wet, wind, and chilliness of Childee.The first river we had to cross was not more than fifty feetwide, but the banks were hollow and rotten. Our guide lookedalong the stream till he found a tree which had fallen across,so as to form a bridge over two-thirds of the width: and witha pole in his hand, he climbed as far as the boughs would bearhim : then finding that the water beneath was not above hismiddle, he waded through the remainder. Unsaddling, wesent all the gear across by help of the tree and lassoes, andturned the horses over, much against their will, foi* they hadto plunge in and scramble out.Again using our spurs, we hoped to pass the second riveralso before dark, but in vain; there was only just daylightenough left to see that it had overflowed its banks, and seemedto be wide and rapid. Even Vogelborg thought it impossibleto cross before the next morning, so we turned back to lookfor some hut in which we might obtain shelter from heavyrain, which was beginning to pour down. The night was verydark and our prospect rather comfortless, when we were fortunateenough to find a ' rancho'' and there we gladly tookrefuge. Its owners were absent at a merry-making in theneighbourhood ' (about twenty miles off!) ; their daughters,however, and an Indian captive (from Boroa) were not deficientin hospitality. Poor girls ! they were rather frightened at first,at their house being so suddenly occupied, but our guidequieted their alarm. As soon as the horses were provided for,we looked about for food for ourselves, and could find nothingbut potatoes, till, hearing Vogelborg call for help in his brokenEnglish, I ran to him thinking he was hurt or attacked.He was struggling with a sheep which he had caught, and wasdragging to the hut. Greatly were the poor girls alarmedwhen they saw that the sheep was to be sacrificed ; they 1835. TORMENT ARAUCANIANS. 463claimed that their father would beat them terribly, that thesheep was worth eight rials !* A dollar for the sheep, andanother for each of themselves, altered their tone ; and beforelong we had such a fire and supper as the old ' rancho ' hadnot witnessed since the wedding-day of its owners.But what a night of penance we passed — the place swarmedwith fleas, not one moment could I rest, though very tired ;and it twas raining too hard, and was too cold to sleep outsidein the open air. These insects are the torment of travellersin Chile. The natives appear either not to feel, or not to beattacked by them, but an unlucky stranger who ventures tosleep within the walls of an inferior kind of house, or evenany country house, in Chile, is sure to be their victim. WhenI stripped to bathe the next day, I found myself so covered,from head to foot, with flea-bites, that I seemed to have aviolent rash, or the scarlet fever.As the day broke (on the 25th) we mounted our horses, eagerto get away from such unceasing tormentors : and the Indiangirl undertook to show us a place where we might pass theriver, even flooded as it was. By the help of fallen trees, lassoes,and poles, we conveyed ourselves and the saddles across ;but to get the horses over was very difficult. The stream beingrather wide and rapid, and the banks steep and rotten, occasionedso much difficulty, that two whole hours were spent ingetting the animals across and out of the river. Our unitedstrength applied to good lassoes, was barely sufficient to helpthe struggling and frightened creatures up the muddy brokenbanks. When one had passed, the others followed in their turnsmore readily ; but I thought we should have lost one of them.From this river to Arauco was not above an hour's ride, at thepace we went, though it is called seven leagues.During the last two days I had seen several Indians of pureAraucanian blood, in their native dress, and was much struckby the precise similarity of that worn by the women, to the dressof the aborigines of Peru, as described and figured in Frezier'svoyage. The square cloak, or mantle, thrown over the shoulders,Or a dollar, equal to about four shillings.464 DRESS FEATURES ARAUCO. Juiceand fastened in front by a pin with a very large flat head, thesize of a dollar, or even the palm of a hand ; the broad bandround the waist ornamented with beads ; and the beaded orbrass ornaments in the hair, ears, and round the neck, caughtmy eye sooner than their features, which are so similar tothose of the almost Indian breed who live on the borders,that at first sight the difference was hardly noticed. Perhapsthe eye of one of those Indians who has never lived with civilizedpeople, is the only feature which differs strikingly : somuch have the lower classes of Chilian Creoles mixed with theaborigines. In the eye of a free, wandering Indian, there is arestless suspiciousness, which reminds one of the eye of awild animal : but this peculiar expression is soon removed bycivilization.The clothing of the Araucanians, made by themselves, isvery strong good cloth. Indian pouches will keep out rainlonger than any others. Dark blue is the usual colour oftheir clothes, from pouches to petticoats ; and they are all ofwoollen manufacture.The women dress their hair with some pains, and ornamentit with beads, bits of brass, or large-headed pins, such as thoseI have described. Some few have ornaments of gold : and tosee an Indian woman dressed in her national costume, withlarge golden ornaments, quite transports the imagination tothe days of Cortes and Pizarro. I saw but one so ornamented,a fine-looking young woman, the daughter of a cacique, whohad accompanied some of her tribe to look at the ship wreckedwhite men. Her horse was a beautiful animal, looking as wildas herself.At Arauco the worthy colonel welcomed me to breakfast,but regretted that I had been prevented from proceeding tothe wreck : he thought some accident had happened, andhardly could believe that we had actually passed a night at theLeiibu. D. Geronimo told me he had received intelligence of alarge body of Indians, about three thousand strong, who weremarching northward against Colipi, and his allies, the Chi-leans.He thought it probable that they would molest the Chalk'boroanos"' — tubal river. 465longer's people, for the sake of plunder as well as because theyhad been on friendly terms with Colipi.This hostile tribe, whose visit he was anticipating, was thatcalled ' Boroanos,' by the Chilians (' Bora-che,' by the Indians).I have before said that in Boroa there are fair Indians ;and that I saw, when at Valdivia, one of the natives of thatdistrict. The Indian girl, whom I mentioned just now as acaptive, agreed exactly in what she stated of them, with theaccount I had previously heard. She and the ' Bologna ' at Valdiviaboth said, that " their fathers had told them that therubies' (meaning red and white, or red-haired people) werechildren of the women whom their ancestors took prisonerswhen they destroyed the seven cities." Many of these ' rubies'had blue eyes, with rather fair complexions ; and some few hadred hair. If this is the true story, they must be graduallylosing such striking peculiarities ; and the assertion made acentury ago that there were white Indians in Araucania, mightwell be thought erroneous now. Both of the ' Boroanos'whom I saw had dark blue or grey eyes, and a lighter complexionthan other Indians; but their features were similarto those of their countrywomen, and they had long blackhair.In our way to Arauco this morning, we passed by Tubul, aplace admirably adapted for a large town, but now occupiedonly by a few poor families living in huts. Hills surround afine plain, through which the river Tubul winds to the sea :lying in that river, I saw the remains of a whaler (the Her-silica)captured by Benefices, when at anchor near the islandof Santa Maria.* She was brought into the Tubul, plundered,and partly burned.Some years ago, ships of two hundred tons could enterthe mouth of this river, and pass up nearly a mile ; but thelate earthquake had raised the land so much, that only verysmall vessels could enter at this time. May not changes ofrelative level, similar to this, have occurred at the riversCaptain Hall's Journal, vol. i. p. 312-13.VOL. II. 2 H466 CAUTEN PASSAGE OF CARAMPANGUE. JuneCauten, Tolten, and Bueno ? The Cauten, or Imperial, isspoken of by the earlier writers on Chile, as admitting shipsof burthen ; but now the entrance of each of those rivers isalmost closed by a bar.In opposition to this idea it may be urged, that where a largeriver runs into the sea exactly against the direction of the prevailingwind and swell, a bar of sand, shingle, and mud must beformed by deposition from the opposing waters ; and that it isonly where a river runs uninterruptedly into the sea, protectedfrom wind and swell by a projecting islet or point of land, thata perfectly clear entrance may be expected ; and, therefore,that the Spanish accounts must have been incorrect. I suspectthat they described those rivers as they found them at some distancein-and, not at the mouth.Leaving the hospitable colonel assembling a remarkably awkwardsquad, whom he was anxiously preparing for the threatenedattack of the ' Boi'oanos,' we rode away upon the goodhorses which, three days previously, had brought us from Conception.At the Carampangue there was no balsa. What was to bedone ? To wait until some one brought a boat from the oppositeshore might expend the day ; but the river was wide anddeep, and the weather too cold for so long a swim : nevertheless,five dollars excited our guide, or rather horse-keeper, tomake the trial, and during several minutes I thought he musthave been drowned : for, instead of slipping off the horse, andholding by the mane or tail when he began to swim, the mansat bolt upright, so that the poor horse's head was scarcelyvisible ; and both horse and man appeared to get confused,turning round in the stream two or three times, while the currentwas carrying them down the river. At last they struggledout, to my infinite joy, and galloped off in search of the menwhose business it was to attend at the ferry with a balsa. While jwe were anxiously waiting, a large party appeared on the oppositebank, with whom were the balsa-men. They had been merrymaking,the previous day having been the feast of St. John ;and as they had hardly recovered from the effects of ' chicha,'1835. CHICHA — Apple-trees — VlLLAGItAN 467and other favourite libations, to carry so large a number acrossupon a small raft, was a difficult undertaking. Talking at thepitch of their voices, laughing and tumbling about, theirreaching the opposite shore without a cold-bath, was attributedby Vogelborg to the protection of the saint whose anniversarythey had so dutifully celebrated. The ' chitchat'* is sometimesfermented, and then soon affects a person's head, if drankto excess : but these votaries of St. John had doubtless improvedits insipid taste by aguardiente. During the chichaseason, or autumn, the Indians are said to be more dangerousthan at other times, as they indulge in this, their favouritebeverage, to excess.Apple trees are now abundant in southern Chile, throughoutthe Indian swell as Spanish territories. They were also plentifulon the eastern side of the Andes, particularly about the riverNegro and the great lake ' Nahuelhuapi," in the middle of thelast century. Whether they are indigenous, or were planted bythe early missionaries, has been much disputed in that country;but as the Indian name for them is ' manchana,^-f' I shouldincline to think they were introduced by the first missionaries.Our road over the heights of Villagran was much worse thanat our former passage. Heavy rain and constant traffic, in consequenceof the wreck, had worn it into a curious successionof steps : and each animal endeavouring to place his feet inthe holes made by those which had previously passed — therain having filled up the hollows with mud and water — hadworked the clayey track into a continuation of transverse ridgesand trenches. A man might step from ridge to ridge withoutwetting his feet ; but the horses always planted theirlegs, up to the knees and hocks, in the mud and water of thetrenches. Their motion was just as if they were steppingover logs of timber : unpleasant enough for the rider, and extremelytiring to themselves. We helped them however as muchas possible, to the surprise of our lazy guide, by dismountingand leading them up the hills as well as down.' Clichy' is made with maize, apples, or other things,t Montana is Spanish for apple.2n 2468 PLAYA Blanc — Ferry-boat. JuneWe reached ' Playa Blanc ' as it got dusk. The heights nearPoint Colonel were difficult, in the dark, but we passed withoutworse disaster than a roll in the mud, from my girths breakingwhile struggling in a slough. Along the level lands of DonJuan de Dios Rivera we galloped briskly, until we were completelybewildered in the darkness. At last we found ourselvesamong enclosures, and by pulling up rails and breaking fences,made our way to a farm-house, where such information wasobtained as enabled us to reach San Pedro, on the south bankof the Bio Bio, soon after midnight. No inducement couldprevail upon the owner of the ferry-boat to let her take usacross before daylight, so we sat down by a fire, after feedingour excellent horses, and dozed till daybreak.With the first dawn we drove the lazy boatmen to theirbarge, urging them alternately with money, entreaties, reproaches,and threats. The river was exceedingly swollen by lateheavy rains, so that it was almost twice as wide, and quite asrapid, as usual. Our heavy ferry-boat was ' tracked ' up ituntil it seemed possible for us to reach the other bank beforethe current swept us out to sea; but the appearance of theboat and men, and the utter uncertainty caused by a verythick fog, gave me no great hopes of reaching Concepcion in anyreasonable time, though a vivid expectation of passing a fewhours upon a sand-bank at the mouth of the river, if we escapedbeing hurried into the open sea. In this clumsily-built, flat-bottomedboat (a sort of large punt) were five horses, a troublesomeyoung bull, six men, and three nominal boatmen, one ofwhom merely attempted to steer. With very long poles ouiunwieldy craft was pushed into the stream, and while the shorecould be distinguished through the fog, made progress in aproper direction, though most crab-like was the movement.When fairly out of sight of land, the boatmen became alarmedand puzzled; but just then a large bell was heard tolling atConcepcion, which served to animate them, and to ensure ourtrying to go in the right direction. After an hour's unpleasantwork, in a very cold morning, we landed about a mile belowConcepcion, having started about as much above it on the oppose.CARMEN ERKOE WEATHER. 4b'9site side. No time was then lost in galloping to Talcahuano,and going on board the Blonde, so that Captain Seymour'sletter was delivered to Commodore Mason soon after ten.I found that the commodore had engaged an Americanschooner* to go in search of the crew of the Challenger ; andthat Mr. Usborne had been sent in her, with the second master ofthe Blonde,-!- three seamen of that ship, my coxswain, and thewhale-boat which I took from the Beagle ; she was a poorcraft, and wretchedly found, though reputed to have sailedwell, and to have been a fine vessel in her time. They leftTalcahuano on the day after a gale from the north-west (onthe 24th), which, by all accounts, was one of the severest thathad been experienced during many years.The Blonde sailed from Concepcion Bay on the 27th, themorning after I arrived ; but unfortunately, during all thatday, thick weather and half a gale of wind from the northward,prevented our having even one glimpse of the land, as we wererunning towards the entrance of the Leiibu.On the 28th, thick weather kept us in the offing. On the29th, at daylight, the schooner Carmen was seen, and soonafterwards, through the haze, we made out Tucapel Head.At this time, neither Vogelborg (who was on board as localpilot) nor I, knew that the Heights of Tucapel Viejo wereidentical with the headland we recognized by the name ofTucapel Head. We both thought that Tucapel Viejo was inthe bay where the river « Lebo' is placed in the old Spanishcharts. This error appears almost unaccountable to me now ;though both he and I were then drawn into it by a variety ofreasons unnecessary to detail here, and we therefore advisedthe commodore to run along-shore towards the supposed placeof the Leiibu (or Lebo), which he did ; but the weather wasso unfavourable, so thick and hazy, that nothing could beseen distinctly. Scarcely indeed could we discern the line of thesurf, heavily as it was beating upon the shore ; and at noon wewere obliged to haul off", on account of wind and rain.The Carmen ; for which such exorbitant demands had been madein answer to Lieutenant Collins. f Mr. Biddleconibe.470 TUCAPEL HEAD — DELAYS. JulyI should have mentioned that we spoke the schooner at eightin the morning, when Mr. Usborne said they had seen nothingin their run along-shore on the 26th, the only clear day theyhad had. After speaking us, he kept to the northward, intending,as we concluded, to close the land about Tucapel Head,and again run along-shore to the southward. In the haze wequickly lost sight of the schooner ; but thinking that we shouldsoon meet again in clearer weather, little notice was taken ofthis circumstance, which was afterwards so much regretted.Continual thick weather prevented any observations beingtaken, as well as the land from being seen, until the 2d ofJuly, when Tucapel Head was indistinctly made out in thedistance. But strong wind and a high swell were reasons sufficientto keep the Blonde far in the offing, while thick hazyweather lasted ; and after making the land we actually stood tosea again, without even attempting to show the ship to thepoor fellows on shore. In the course of this night a few starswere seen ; and their altitudes were the only observations thatcould have been obtained at any moment since we left ConceptionBay, during six days of constantly clouded and hazyweather, in which neither sun, moon, nor stars, nor even thehorizon could be seen !On the 3d, Tucapel Head was again made out indistinctly ;but nothing was done, a wide offing being still preserved.On the 4th, the weather had improved enough to allow of apartial view of the coast between the supposed place of theLeiibu and Cape Tirua ; but no signal-fire, nor any thing likea flag, could be perceived on any of the heights.Land appears so different when viewed from an offing at seaand when seen closely, especially from the land side, that itis less surprising that Vogelberg, who had visited the Leiibudozens of times by land, and also by sea in a boat, should beas much at a loss as myself to recognise the height which wehad both ascended with Captain Seymour.How it happened that I, who had surveyed this coast, shouldbe ignorant of the real place of the Leiibu, as I then certainlywas, is another affair entirely, and one which I feel bound to1835. MISTAKE ABOUT LEUBU 471explain. A momentary reference to my instructions showsthat the Beagle was only expected to " correct the outline, andto fix the positions of all the salient points"* of the coast betweenChaldeans Topocalma (near Valparaiso); and the Beagle'scharts of that coast prove that a great deal more was accomplishedthan was thought practicable when those instructionswere framed.Between Cape Tirua opposite Mocha, and Tucapel Head,the shore was laid down on our chart as determined by triangulationconnected with the ship under sail, her distance fromthe land varying from one mile to five miles ; and as no riverwas seen thereabouts, nor any break in the coast-line where ariver's mouth could be, our chart contained merely a note,saying, " River Lebo, according to the Spanish chart." Now,the erroneous place of this Lebo (meant for Lei'ibu) was twentymiles south of the real position, which, shut in behind TucapelHead, could never have been seen from any vessel sailing-past,however near the shore she nightmare been. The coast-linein the Beagle's chart was proved to be perfectly correct ; butthe place of the Leiibu, which could only have been obtainedby landing, or having a local pilot on board, was not known ;and not being a navigable river, I did not deem it of sufficientconsequence to be worth our delaying on an exposed coast,without an anchorage or a landing-place — so far as I thenknew — while it was sought for.Considering the multiplicity of places the Beagle had tovisit subsequently, I often found it necessary to sacrifice suchdetails as seemed to me of least consequence. Every seamanknows how very difficult it is to make out the openings of somesmall rivers, while he is sailing along a coast little known, andall marine surveyors know that there is seldom any way ofmaking sure of such openings without landing ; or enteringthem in a boat. I do not say this to excuse neglect — not feelingculpable — but simply to explain how the case stood.On each day, when near the land, guns were fired at intervals,and sometimes three or four were fired at once; blueHydrographer's Memorandum, p. 31.47S DISCOVER AND REACH LEUBU. Julylights also were occasionally burned during the nights, inhopes that the schooner might see them.On the 5th of July, the day broke clearly for the first timeduring the longest week I ever passed, and we saw the landdistinctly, from Cape Rumena to Tirua, with Mocha Island,strange to say, for the first time — near it as we had often been.Now that the tops of the hills were quite free from fog orcloud, I recognised the Heights of Tucapel at the first glance ;and after looking for some minutes at their summits, througha good glass, I distinctly saw smoke rising. Standing towardsthem — in half an hour flags were discerned on the heights, andthere was no longer any doubt ; yet no steps were taken untilnear one o'clock, though it was a beautiful, and almost calmday. From nine in the morning vmtil one, the Blonde layalmost becalmed, about five miles from the land. At one, threeboats were sent to the mouth of the Leiibu, with some moneyand a small supply of bread ; but a current setting along theshore from the northward delayed their reaching the entranceof the river until evening.We found the greater part of the Challenger's crew still inhealth ; but delay and bad weather had increased the sick-list,and two of her party (the assistant-surgeon and a young midshipman)were in danger : waiting so long in uncertainty, andwithout employment, in a wet, dirty place, had tried all theirconstitutions severely. It was too late to attempt going out intothe offing after the Blonde, (which was standing to sea) withthe gig and cutter, two indifferent boats ; so manning the bargewith a double crew, one crew being men of the Challenger,and taking one of her officers (Lieutenant Collins) with me, Ihastened out of the river as the sun was setting. A light breezefrom the land favoured us, and though the Blonde was hulldown in the south-west when we started, we were happy enoughto get on board at about eight o'clock.In going off to the ship after it became dark, we kept theend of a piece of old gun-breeching burning, held up in thebow of the boat. The light, as strong almost as that of a falsefire, was seen plainly on board the ship, and then she was hove-to.1835. EMBARKATION ARRANGEMENTS. 473As soon as the barge was hoisted in, the frigate again madesail off shore ; but a fortunate mistake caused the main-yardto be squared about midnight, and at daybreak next morningwe were in a good position off the entrance of the river. TheBlonde then steered towards the land, and at nine anchorednear the River Leiibu, about a mile from Tucapel Head.Every boat was hoisted out, and the work of embarkation proceededrapidly. Though a swell made the ship roll heavily,and delayed the boats along-side, the weather was so fine anda south-east wind so favourable, that the quickness of goingand returning made amends for some delay in discharging eachcargo. At six in the evening, Captain Seymour came on boardwith the last party of his crew, and at eight, the Blonde weighedand made sail, before a fresh and favourable breeze.Most of the tents remained standing, being of very littlevalue, and some of the stores were left. For what was abandoned,both there and at Molguilla, the commodore appointed Vogel-bornto be agent, leaving him on the spot to take charge : andhe wisely asked one of the Chilians who lived in the neighbourhood,and had generally supplied the shipwrecked crew withprovisions, to join him in his undertaking. Between them theymight have recovered many things of value to individuals, but,to the British Government, nothing worth the great expense ofcarriage to Concepcion.Mr. Rouse sent his servants back by land, with his horsesand mules, and accompanied his esteemed friend, Captain Sey-mour,in the Blonde. The numerous Indians and others whomwe left gathering round the encampment, in all probability savedVogelborg and his partner the trouble of taking care of much ofthe property. They reminded me of the vultures which in thosecountries gather round the places where men are slaughteringcattle.During the night of the 6th, the Blonde passed rapidly northward,running before a fresh southerly breeze ; and at elevenin the morning of the 7th, she was off Point Tumbes, whenseeing a dismasted vessel, with an English blue ensign hoisted,about five miles to the northward of us, the frigate stood towards474 Schooner — ACCIDENTS. Julyher, and finding that she was the schooner Carmen, closed andtook her in tow. But for the Blonde's opportune arrival, shewould have been drifted to the northward, and obliged to runinto any port she could reach. Mr. Usborne came on board,and as soon as he had refreshed himself by a few hours' sleep,gave me the following account of his proceedings and accidents.After leaving Talcahuano, wind and weather favoured theCarmen until she had run along the coast from Tucapel Headto Cape Tirua, at about a mile from the surf, without seeingeither smoke, flags, people, or wreck ; but, during one night,a fire was seen on Tucapel Head. When Mr. Usborne spokethe Blonde, on the morning of the 29th, the schooner was onher way to the place where she had seen the fire; and hewould have said so when the Blonde hailed him had he hadtime, but as she passed on without stopping, and he felt surethat the Challenger's people were not in the direction whichshe was taking, he kept a different course. At about twoin the afternoon of that day, while four seamen were aloft onthe topsail yard, furling the topsail, the schooner gave a suddenplunge into a high swell, and away went the foremasthead, fore-topmast, and topsail-yard. The four men were carriedoverboard, but saved ; though one (James Bennett) was severelybruised. The mainmast followed, being dragged downwardsand broken by the rigging attached to the head of the foremast ;and in this state, a mere wreck, the Carmen drifted towardsMocha. So wretchedly was the vessel provided in every way,that the only tools which they had to cut the spaniards of therigging with, were knives and a cooper's old adze.After clearing the wreck, they got up a small spar abaft, onwhich was set the Beagle's boat's sail ; and by means of cleats,*Bennett and J. Butcher (boatswain's mate of the Blonde), gotto the head of the stump of the foremast, although, being loosein the step, it swayed to and fro as if it would go overboard,and fixed temporary rigging, A staysail and trysail werethen set, and just saved her from going ashore upon the wearsecure these cleats to the mast, they were obliged to draw nailsout of the vessel's beams, having no others.1835. dangers — escape— osborne. 475ther side of Mocha, while it was blowing hard, with a highsea running ; and in all probability, not one person would havebeen saved had she struck. If Mr. Usborne had not knownthis land well, from his late survey, it is not likely that theywould have escaped, because when they found themselves abouthalf a mile from the breakers, the tack which appeared to theothers to be by far the best, was in truth the worst : had theygone on that tack, nothing could have saved them. Mr.Usborne saw their position exactly, and knowing how the currentwould affect them, determined upon what they thoughtthe wrong tack, and rescued them. I say that Mr. Usbornedid this ; because Mr. Biddlecombe was sick, and the masterof the vessel reluctantly yielded to the person who he saw wasat home, while he himself was utterly bewildered.After this narrow escape, the schooner was drifted to the southward,as far as the latitude of Valdivia, before the southerlywind, which took the Blonde to the mouth of the Leiibu,drove the Carmen back slowly to the northward. Mr. Usborneand his companions had almost entered the opening of the Bayof Concepcion early in the morning of the day on which theBlonde took them in tow, but had been drifted away again bya fresh wind, and were falling to leeward fast, for want of sail,when the Blonde arrived. Mr. Usborne recovered from hisfatigue in two or three days, but Bennett was ill for a fortnight.During the few days they were away, they suffered much.As for the ten men belonging to the vessel, they were utterlyuseless, being frightened or sick during the whole time ; sothat but for the exertion of the Blonde's seamen, of Bennett, ofthe master of the vessel (Mr. Thayer), of Mr. Biddlecombe,and above all, Mr. Usborne, the Carmen might have left herremains on the shore, when perhaps few, if any, would havesurvived to tell the fatal tale.*The Blonde worked to windward, with the schooner in tow,during the remainder of the day and early part of the night,and at midnight they both anchored off" Talcahuano.Mr. Osborne's narrative of this affair is in the Appendix, No. 2/.476 conception — BE-building. JulyUntil the 10th, it was necessary to remain at anchor, asthere were accounts to settle between the commodore, theconsul, the pursers, the officers, and the owner of the schooner ;there were visits to the Authorities, to thank them for theirassistance, and, as usual on board men-of-war, there was muchto do in very little time. To Don Jose Alemparte, the intendantof the province ; to Colonel Boza, the principal militaryauthority ; to D. Miguel Baron, the governor of Talcahuano ;and to Don Pablo Delano, captain of the port, sincere thankswere really due for their earnest exertions. Mr. Rouse took hisleave of us on the 10th, and we then sailed.While the Blonde was lying off Talcahuano, I had a fewopportunities of looking about, and seeing that both Conceptionand Talcahuano were rising out of their ruins, and thattheir unfortunate inhabitants had, at least, roofs over theirheads. Concepcion was, and is still nominally, a city : but itwall be long before it again appears as such to the eye of astranger. Some idea may be formed of the low scale to whichevery thing was there reduced, when I mention that it wasvery difficult to find a carriage of any kind in which the Commodorecould go to visit the Yntendente.Great discussions had arisen on the subject of rebuilding thecity. The government party wished to remove the site to abetter position ; but there was so strong an opposition, thatthe result was likely to be the gradual rebuilding of the townin the same place, while the removal was still undecided, andunder consideration. Two situations were named as much moreeligible than the former: one on the banks of the little riverAndalien, about a mile from the old city ; and the other, on arising ground about two miles on the Talcahuano side of Conception.This latter position has many and great advantages, as allacknowledged ; but people were reluctant to move ; each onehad or fancied an advantage in the old situation of his house,encumbered as it was with ruins. Besides, many more seriousdifficulties would arise in leaving small freeholds, and obtainingequivalents in another place : however, an active governmentmight have accomplished so desirable a change without injuring1835. SITUATION — HOUSES — SUGGESTIONS. 477anyone, by purchasing the ground, and distributing it so fairlythat each man should gain rather than lose. The sum necessaryfor purchasing ground for a new city, would not have beengreater than might have been borrowed ; and repaid in tenyears out of the custom-house.Perhaps there is not a situation in the world much moreadvantageous to the prosperity of a commercial city than thisof which we are speaking. Centrally placed between the greatand navigable river Bio Bio, the port of San Vicente, the noblebay of Concepcion, and an easy communication by land withthe best part of Chile, 'a part which may well be called one ofthe finest countries in the world : — with a large extent of leveland fertile land on all sides — with the means of obtainingwater by sinking wells to a small depth, as well as by anaqueduct from the Bio Bio — and with the blessing of an unexceptionableclimate — how could the New Concepcion failto thrive, and increase rapidly ? It might be shaken down anddestroyed by an earthquake as soon as built, maybe said. Probably,may be replied, if the inhabitants should be so unwise as tobuild houses of brick and stone, one or two stories in height,and with heavily tiled roofs. But let them try another modeof building. Wood is abundant, and let them make that the onlymaterial of which either walls or roofs shall be composed. Astrong frame-work, similar in some measure to that of a ship,lightly covered or ceiled with thin planks, and roofed withshingles,* would, if placed on the ground and not let into itas foundations usually are, withstand the convulsions of anyearthquake which has yet happened in that tormented country.Why do not the Chilians pay more attention to the remark ofthe aborigines of Peru, who, when they saw the Spaniardsdigging deep foundations for their buildings, said, " You arebuilding your own sepulchres .''"fThe houses of the natives of Peru were in those days builtwithout foundations, simply upon the levelled ground ; andthey withstood the severest shocks. No house should extend farSmall pieces of wood, like tiles. t Ulloa, vol. i. p. 340.478 AKAUCANTAN BOYS — ORATORY. Julyupwards. Nothing should be above the ground floor but a lightstrongly-secured wooden roof : and they should be placed uponfirm ground — if possible, upon rock. The principal objectionsagainst the present site of Concepcion are — that the earthupon which the houses stand is every where loose, and sandy,and that it is too near the river.One day, while visiting a gentleman at Talcahuano, hecalled three little Araucanian boys into the room where Mr.Rouse and I were sitting with him, and desired them to harangueor make speeches to one another in their own way. Thelittle fellows stepped forward boldly, and one of them spoketo the other two in a very fluent and expressive manner ; butended every marked sentence, or portion of his subject, by thesingular sharp rise of the voice which has so often been noticedas a peculiarity in the oratory of Indians in this country.Another boy replied in a similar manner ; and then they beganto fight with their fists. This part of the display of coursewe stopped ; but we were much interested by the composureand readiness with which the little boys spoke. One ofthe speakers was son of a cacique. All three had been obtainedby actual (though secret) purchase from their countrymen,through the intervention of one of the ' Capitals de los '*one of whose offices is to take the part of and protect thenatives. Perhaps, in the first instance, these boys had beenstolen or taken prisoners, and were not the children of thosewho sold them to the ' captain of the friends.' In the family ofDon those boys found a comfortable and a happy home ;he had taken them from the rascally 'capitaine los amigos""as an act of charity, and intended to give them employmentand land on his estate. I thought of Lautaro, as I noticed thebright eye of the little cacique.When I took leave of the Yntendente, he said that he wasabout to make a journey to the frontier, for the sake of inspectingthe outposts and securing the assistance of the friendlyIndians : and this, I afterwards understood, was in consequenceSee page 399,1835. coauiMBo — conway sails. 479of the rumoured approach of those hostile tribes of whomColonel Venezuela had spoken to me at Arauco.We sailed from Talcahuano with a fair wind, Which carriedus quickly and pleasantly along-shore ; but crowded, and anxiousas we were, the ship could not go fast enough for us. Thesick people, excepting Mr. Lane, were improving when wereached Valparaiso on the 13th. Much attention and kindnesswere shown to Captain Seymour by his acquaintance at Valparaiso; but it could not be expected that he should be cheerful,or inclined to see people, excepting intimate friends, at thattime ; particularly as the death of Mr. Lane was an additionalblow much felt by him. I was very glad when we weighedanchor, on the 17th, for every hour caused an increase of painfulfeeling;.A fresh fair wind drove us in twenty-four hours to Coquim-bo, where the Conway was at anchor ready for sea. It wasthen arranged, that all the officers and two-thirds of the crewshould go home in the Conway ; and, of course, no small bustleof preparation for so many passengers was caused. Captain*and Mrs. White already occupied one-half of the captain'scabin, and their luggage a considerable space below ; but asboth Captain Eden and the senior lieutenant, Johnston, werebent upon accommodating the ship-wrecked party to theutmost of their power, stowage-room was cleverly contrived.How striking the contrast appeared between the fertility andverdure of the Concepcion country, and the dry barrenness ofthe naked earth or rocks about Coquimbo. Scarcely any onewent on shore ; a mixture of unpleasant feelings occasioned agloomy heaviness in most of our minds.On the 2Sd, both ships sailed from Coquimbo, and soonafterwards parted company. The Conway stood to the westward,' close-hauled ;' while the Blonde steered towards thenorth with a fresh southerly wind.What caused the loss of the Challenger.? — is a questionnot easy to answer with certainty. The error in her reckoningThen Vice-consul at Valparaiso.480 EXTRAORDINARY CURRENTS. Julyamounted to more than forty miles ; and the only way in whichI can account for it to my own satisfaction is, that while thenorth-west wind was blowing, a current set to the southwardand eastward, for which no allowance was made, as those onboardcould not be aware that such a current might be found,its existence not being known. A south-east current was not to beexpected thereabouts ; for the general set of the waters is northerly,excepting near the land, and they thought themselves inthe offing. But currents are very uncertain and treacherous inmostplaces. Unusual winds, peculiar seasons affecting theweight of the atmosphere, and those powerful interrupters of allorder — earthquakes, have immediate effect upon the greatocean, as well as upon small bodies of water, though notalways so visibly.Scarcely four months had elapsed since that tremendousearthquake, which destroyed so many towns in Chile, hadaltered the movements of the Pacific Ocean upon all the extentof coast which reaches from latitude forty-five to theparallel of twenty-five. Even in July, the land about Conceptionwas scarcely considered to be at rest, and recovered, as itwas said, from those awful convulsions. Can it then be consideredimprobable that the currents of that sea should havetaken unusual directions, and betrayed even cautious seamen,such as Captain Seymour and Mr. Macdonald (the master)were well known to be. So much care and judgment had alwaysbeen shown in conducting the Challenger, and she had visitedso many places in the Atlantic, in the Pacific, and among theSouth Sea Islands, that of all the King's ships at that time incommission, those who sailed in her (unconnected even with hermanagement) thought her one of the last that would end avoyage disastrously.* The surprising manner in which thehull of the Challenger held together, and so long resistedheavy shocks, reflects infinite credit upon her architect (Hayes),and upon the dockyard where she was built.This I have heard from several persons who were wrecked in theship, whose opinions I have reason to respect.CHAPTER XXI.Andes — Aconcagua — Villarica — Islay — Powder — Callao — Rejoin BeagleConstitucion — Plans — Wilson — Carrasco — ' Galapagos' — IguanasLava Rocks — Land tortoises — Craters — Turtle — Shells Dye —Volcanoes — Settlement — Albemarle Island — Cyclopian Scene — TagusCove — Tide Ripples — Settlers— Climate — Salt — Dampier— Birds —Transportation of Tortoises — Currents — Temperature of Water.The irreclaimably barren appearance of the sea coast ofNorthern Chile, is very repulsive to an eye accustomed towoodland scenery : yet there is an effect in its lofty mountains,which seem to rise abruptly almost from the ocean, thatcharms one for a time. Just before sunrise is generally themost favourable moment for enjoying an unclouded view of theAndes in all their towering grandeur : for scarcely have hisbeams shot between their highest pinnacles into the westwardvallies, when clouds of vapour rise from every quarter, andduring the rest of the day, with few exceptions, obscure thedistant heights.It has been long supposed that the Andes are higher aboutthe equator than near or beyond the tropic; but the Bear-le'smeasurements of Aconcagua* and Villarica,f prove that thereis still much to be ascertained on this subject. Few results,depending upon angular measurement, are more difficult to obtainwith accuracy than the heights of distant mountains. Withrespect to Aconcagua, though a variety of measurements, takenby different officers at various times, agreed together so closelyas to give from 23,200 to 23,400 feet for the vertical elevationof that volcano above the level of the sea, I would not claimto be much nearer the truth than within 500 feet.The Blonde touched at Cobija, Arica, and Islay— haplessarid dwelling-places for either man or beast, as I have everLat. 32». 39'. S. : height, 23,000 feet above the sea level,t Lat. 39\ 10'. S. : height, 16,000 feet above the sea level.VOL. II. 2 I482 ISLAY — WHITE Powder. AuffUStoseen. Of these and other ports along the coasts of NorthernChile and Peru, nautical information will be found in the Appendix.I will only delay the general reader with one or twoobservations.From near Iquique to Arica the precipitous coast is so lofty,and approaches so much to the character of enormous cliffs,about a thousand feet high, that it is really sublime. NearIslay, the land is in several places covered with a whitishpowder, or dust, which lies many inches thick in hollows orsheltered places, but is not found abundantly in localitiesexposed to wind. Much difference of opinion has arisen aboutthis powder. People who live there say it was thrown out of avolcano near Arequipa a great many years ago : other personsassert that it is not a volcanic production, and appertains to,or had its origin, where it is found. My own idea was, beforeI heard any thing of the controversy, that there could be nodoubt of its having fallen upon the ground within somehundred years, for it was drifted like snow, and where anyquantity lay together, had become consolidated about as muchas flour which has got damp in a damaged barrel.In one of the old voyages there is a passage which seems tothrow some light upon this subject : " As they (of VanNoort's ship) sailed near Arequipa, they had a dry fog, orrather the air was obscured by a white sandy dust, with whichtheir clothes and the ship's rigging became entirely covered.These fogs the Spaniards called ' annales.' " — Voyage of VanNoort, in 1660, from Burney, vol. ii. p. 223.On the 9th of August, the Blonde anchored in Callao Bay,and I enjoyed the satisfaction of finding all well on board theBeagle. She had touched at Copiapopo and Iquique, for Mr.Darwin, in her way to Callao, where she arrived on the 19th ofJuly. Lieutenant Sulivan brought his little vessel safely toan anchor near the Beagle on the 30th, having accomplishedhis survey in a very satisfactory manner. So well did he speakof the Constitucion, as a handy craft and good sea boat, andso correctly did his own work in her appear to have beenexecuted, that after some days' consideration I decided to buy1835. Constitution — Plan EXPLANATION. 483her, and at once set on foot an examination of the coast ofPeru, similar to that which Mr. Sulivan had completed of thecoast of Chile. Don Francisco Vascufian had authorized thesale of his vessel at Callao : she was purchased by me for =£'400,and immediately fitted out afresh.I could not spare Lieutenant Sulivan to remain on the coastof Peru, while the Beagle would be crossing the Pacific, onher return to England by way of the Cape of Good Hope ; butthere was Mr. Usborne, able and willing to undertake the task,who, from his station, could be spared without prejudice tothe duties yet remaining to be executed on board the Beagle,and a letter man for the purpose I could not have desired.With him Mr. Forsyth volunteered to go, and CommodoreMason was prevailed upon to allow Mr. E. Davis, a master'sassistant of the Blonde, to join the little expedition ; who, withseven good seamen, and a boy, volunteers from the Beagle,completed Mr. Usborne's party.A stranger might well smile at the idea of such a boat affairbeing started to survey, in eight or at most ten months, thewhole coast of Peru, from Paposo, near Atacama, to the RiverGuayaquil ; but the task was completed ; the charts are now engraved;and very soon seamen will be able to test their accuracy.Most people are aware that the coast of Peru is free fromstorms ; that the wind blows moderately along the land or fromit ; and that there is little or no rain. Consequently, as thesea is seldom much disturbed (except by a south-west swell),and there are neither ' races ' nor dangerous streams of tide, anopen boat might undertake such a task, if safety alone were tobe considered, provided that she did not try to land in a siu-f.The real impediments to surveying that coast are — the surfcaused on those steep rocky shores by an occasional heavyswell, almost amounting to rollers, from the south-westward ;the delays and doubts created by prevalent fogs ; and the lossof positions, as well as time, consequent upon being drifted bycurrents during a calm. Mr. Usborne had also to prepare for,and provide against, as much as possible, difficulties of avery different nature — those arising out of the disturbed state2 r 2484 MR. WILSON DON E. Carrack. Sept.of that country — the anarchical eternal dissensions which arethe bane of all South America, but especially of Peru. Inthis respect there Averse so many prospective dangers, as well asdifficulties, that I should not have ventured to let him encounterthem, had we not had such a man as Belford Linton Wilson*to rely upon for foresight, advice, influence, and as heartyunflinching assistance, as any one public servant could afibrdto another, Mr. Wilson's exertions were unceasing, until heprocured every passport and document that could by any possibilitybe required for Mr. Usborne. He introduced him aswell as myself, to the hydrographer (Don Eduardo Carrasco)Who assisted us in many ways most materially ; and after I leftthe coast he showed every possible attention and kindness toall the Constitution's party ; winding up by advancing a largesum of money out of his own purse, to forward the service inwhich they were engaged, and increase their comfort duringa long passage to England round Cape Horn.Captain Carrasco, formerly in the Spanish navy, and nowDirector of the Nautical School at Lima, gave me, andafterwards Mr. Usborne, every particle of information whichhe and I thought might be useful — both verbally and in writing— besides which he ransacked the archives for manuscripts,charts, and books, from which he allowed extracts to be takenor copies made, in the most truly liberal manner ; and I longto see the results of our voyage, whatever they may be, laidbefore him and his friends, as an acknowledgment — howeverslight— of their free assistance and co-operation.On the 6th of September Mr. Usborne sailed He was tocommence near Paposo ; work along the coast thence to Guayaquil,and afterwards return to Callao.The following day the Beagle left Callao, and steered direct '' jtowards the Galapagos Islands, of which, as they are novelground, I shall be rather minute in my description.15th. Uncertain of the strength, and even of the directionof the currents — though aware that at times the former is veryThen consul general, now charge d'affaires of H.B.M. in Peru.t Orders in Appendix.1835. GALAPAGOS ISLANDS. 485considerable — we were anxiously looking out for land, whenwhat appeared to be an islet was seen from the mast-head. Thisseeming islet turned out to be the summit of Mount Pitt, aremarkable hill at the north-east end of Chatham Island.(Charles Island of Cowley, 1684). As the breeze and currentcarried us onwards, the tops of other hills successively appeared,and for a short time looked very like a cluster of islets.Gradually rising above the horizon, the greater part ofChatham Island became distinctly visible : in this neighbourhoodit is not often that the air near the water is clear enoughto allow of very distant high land being thus gradually raisedabove the horizon of an eye at the mast-head ; for, in general,clouds hang about these islands, and the atmosphere itself ishazy. Towards evening the higher parts of the land wereclouded over, but we were near enough to see that the islandwas very rugged — in some places quite barren — in otherscovered with a stunted and sun-dried brushwood — and thatthe heights, on which the clouds hung, were thickly clothedwith green wood. The shores seemed to be bold, and easy toapproach, though not to land upon, because of a continualhigh surf.A number of little craters (as they appeared to be) andhuge irregular-shaped masses of lava rock, gave a strangelymisleading appearance to the lower parts of the island ; andwhen first seen through that indistinct glimmer which is usuallynoticed over land on which a hot sun is shining, were supposedto be large trees and thick wood.* Hood Island, small andrather low, was seen before dusk, when we tacked and stretchedto seaward for a few hours.16th. Assisted by a current running to the westward, weworked up to Hood Island during the night, and at daylightlowered a boat down and prepared her for Mr. Chaffers,• This glimmering haziness is at times a great impediment to makingaccurate measurements of an object, when both it and the observer's eyeare near the ground. Raising either some few feet higher, remedies thisinconvenience, which is much felt when using a micrometer for measuringa base.486 CHATHAM ISLAND IGUANAS. Sept.who, with Mr. Mellersh, was to examine this island and theanchorages about it. Under the land we saw two whalers atanchor, which showed North American colours. The island issmall — neither high nor low — rugged, covered with small sunburntbrushwood, and bounded by a bold, rocky shore. Somesmall beaches of white sand are visible here and there.As soon as Mr. Chaffers had set out, the Beagle steeredtowards Chatham Island, with a moderate breeze, which allowedus to prepare the yawl for another party, under LieutenantSulivan. At noon, Barrington Island was visible from the deck,and appeared to be distant about twenty miles ; when withMessrs. Stewart and Johnson, and ten chosen seamen in theyawl, Mr. Sulivan left us to examine the central islands of thearchipelago.In continuing our course, we passed through several ripplings,apparently caused by the meeting of streams of currentwhich set along the shores of Chatham Island, from theeast towards the west. If not so caused, they must be the effectsof currents passing over very uneven ground, but we got nobottom, with fifty fathoms of line. When such appearancesare created by shoals, it should be remembered that the shallowestplace is generally under the smoothest part, close tothe ripple. Favoured by smooth water and fine weather, wepassed close to the low south-west extreme, and anchoreddirectly that point was found to defend us from the swell.This part of the island is low, and very rugged. We landedupon black, dismal-looking heaps of broken lava, forming ashore fit for Pandemonium. Innumerable crabs and hideousiguanas started in every direction as we scrambled from rockto rock. Few animals are uglier than these iguanas ; they arelizard-shaped, about three feet in length ; of a dirty blackcolour ; with a great mouth, and a pouch hanging under it ; akind of horny mane upon the neck and back ; and long clawsand tail. These reptiles swim with ease and swiftness — butuse their tails only at that time. At a few yards from thewater we found vegetation abundant, though the only soil seenwas a little loose dusty earth, scattered upon and between the1835. TERRAPIN TREES ROCKS. 487broken lava. Walking is extremely difficult. A hand-barrowwas lying at the landing-place, which showed that terrapinwere to be got near us, though we did not then see any. Themen from whalers and sealing vessels carry the large terrapin,or land-tortoises, on these barrows.Ascending a little hill, we were surprised to find muchbrush or underwood, and trees of considerable size, as large inthe trunk as one man could clasp. These were prickly pears,and a kind of gum-tree : how their roots are able to penetrate,or derive nourishment from the hard lava, it is hard to say;for earth there is scarcely any. Wild cotton shrubs are numerous.This first excursion had no tendency to raise our ideasof the Galapagos Islands.17th. Weighed and stood alongside, sounding. There wasgood anchorage, until near the south-west point of StephensBay, off which the water is shoal, and the bottom uneven. Weanchored in Stephens Bay, and found an American whalerlying there. This bay is large, and the anchoring ground generallygood ; but the landing is bad at low water. There is nofresh water : and it is frequently difficult to enter, as well as toleave, because usually becalmed by high land, it seldom feelsthe true wind. Enderby Cove is only fit for a boat ; atlow water it is full of rocks. The Kicker Rock is a curiousmass of stone, rising almost perpendicularly from the bottomof the sea, where it is thirty fathoms deep ; and in the offing isanother (called the Dalrymple, by Colnett), which looks exactlylike a ship becalmed, with all sail set. Seeing a remarkablehill at the north-east side of the bay, which had not an appearancelike other parts of the island, I went to it in a boat, hopingto find water near the foot, and to have a good view from thesummit. Disappointed in both ways, the hill being composedof a crumbling sand-stone, and almost inaccessible, I returnedto the ship early next morning. Several new birds were seen bythose who were on shore, and many fish were caught on board,of which the best and most numerous were a kind of rock cod,of large size.18th. Weighed and stood alongside until noon, when we488 CllATEKS TOilTOlSES WATER. Sept.anchored close to a low rugged point, near the north-east endof the island : employed two boats in examining the shore,and landed a party to look for terrapin : Mr. Darwin and Mr,Stokes went to the top of a neighbouring hi. Throughout thisday it blew so fresh a breeze, that double-reefed topsails were asmuch as could be carried : but I think this strength of windonly prevailed under the lee of the island, where the wind rusheddown in squalls, after having been intercepted and checked bythe high land. All the hills appear to have been the craters ofvolcanoes : some are of sandy mud, others are lava. There isplenty of wood hereabouts, though stunted and dry. On nopart of this shore is there a chance of finding water ; all isstony, without any soil which could either collect or carryit off.Our party brought eighteen terrapin on board. In size theywere not remarkable, none exceeding eighty pounds. Thisanimal appears to be well defended by nature ; but, in truth,it is rather helpless, and easily injured. The shell is slight, andbecomes weaker (in proportion to the animal's size), as the tortoisegrows older.19th. Sailed round the north-east extremity of the island,and worked to the southward against a tide, or rather current,setting strongly to the north-west.20th. At daylight we were off the south-east part of theisland ; and continued working to the south-west, during theforenoon, along a shore quite bold, excepting the small rocksabove water in ' Middle' Bay. At noon, seeing a small cove, Iwent in a boat to examine it, and look for water. We found nosigns of any in that place ; but a little farther west, a fine streamwas seen falling from a lava cliff, about thirty feet high. Mr.Low had described this waterfall correctly ; and his accountof the watering place near it was soon verified, by our discoveringa cove half a mile to the westward of the cascade.We landed on a stony beach in the cove, and found a finestream of excellent water : two others were likewise seen, butthey were inaccessible. This water runs from the highestparts of the island (which are almost always enveloped in1835. Stephens BAY Turtle SHELLS. 489clouds) down a large valley.* All this southern side of theisland is well wooded ; and on the higher ground the wood isvery green.Continuing our course along shore, we arrived at our formeranchorage in Stephens Bay soon after dark, when Mr. Chaffersreturned on board, having reached the anchorage in the morning.22d. So generally cloudy is the weather here, that a daysuch as this proved to be, of hot, vertical sunshine, was muchfelt by every body ; and to show how objectionable our anchoragewas in this respect, I may mention that a fresh breezewas blowing all day in the offing ; yet in the bay only lightvariable airs were felt.Some fine turtle were brought on board, the first we hadseen here ; they are rather like the green turtle of the West-indies,but not exactly. Among the shells found about theislands one is common, which reminded me of the purple murex,as the fish emits a strongly dyeing liquid of a similar colours"A kind of mangrove grows near the water, on the sandybeaches of this island ; and the shape and colour of that curioustree are some relief to an eye tired of looking at rugged lava orwithered bushes.23d. While becalmed we tried the claims I in fifty fathomswater, and brought up as much sand as would fill a bucket,but nothing curious. Afterwards we had a breeze, and passedBarrington Island pretty closely. It is not high, yet theshores are bold and fronted by cliffs ; the more elevated partsappear to be level, and rather woody. This night was spentunder sail between Charles and Hood Islands.24th. While we were endeavouring to reach the anchoragein Post-office Bay (Charles Island), Mr. Chaffers and Mr.Mel-leash went away in a boat to visit the islets that lie near theeastern side of that island : and it was found that they had allThere is no other place in the Galapagos where ships can water atall times of the year. t Found also on the coast of Peru (UlJoa).X An indifferent contrivance of mine, made and put together by ourown armourer.490 VOLCANOES — POST-OfFICE BAY. Sept.been the summits of volcanoes. Charles Island is peculiar inits outline : for a succession of round topped hills, preciselysimilar in shape, though differing in size, shews on every pointof view. This exact similarity is very remarkable. Must notall these volcanoes* have been thrown up under the same circumstances,such as similar action of the ocean, or even astrong wind — perhaps at the very same time ? -f-The highest and largest of these hills rises 1,800 feet, thenext about 1,700 ; the rest are of various smaller heights.The northern sides of the island are wooded, but the woodlooks as brown as that on the lower parts of Chatham Island.Post-Office Bay is sheltered, easy of access, has excellent anchorage,and only wants fresh-water to make it a most desirableharbour for shipping. Its name is the result of a custom establishedby the whalers : a box was placed on a post, to receiveletters, and homeward-bound ships examined the directions,taking with them all which they might have means of forwarding; but since the island has been peopled the box hasbeen empty, for letters are now left at the settlement.25th. Mr. Nicholas O. Lawson, acting for the governor ofthis archipelago, \ came on board. With him and me a partywent to another anchorage called Black Beach Road, landed,and walked up towards the settlement. In 1832, the republicof the ' Ecuador ' decided to use these islands as a place ofbanishment, and sent a small colony to Charles Island. ' LaFlorins'' is the name given to this island by the Guayaquilthough by the Spaniards it was once called ' Santa Mariade TAguada.' The governor, at the time of our visit, wasDon Jose Villain. There were then about eighty small houses,or huts, and nearly two hundred souls upon the island, mostof whom were convicts.After walking rather more than a mile along a good path,through the underwood (which as the ground rises becomesvery thick), we reached a small spring of water, near whichare a few huts, but no cultivated ground. The water from thisFor volcanoes they certainly have been. t See page 493.% An officer of the republic of the Equator.1835. Flourishing SETTLEMENT. 491spring might be conveyed to shipping by means of leadenpipes, without much difficulty, but it is not of very goodquality. Having ascended gradually during another half-hour'swalk, we reached the ridge of that height which limitedour view from the sea ; when surprisingly sudden and agreeablewas the change. Heated and tired by a dusty uphill walk,through sun dried trees and over rugged lava stones, our bodieswere here refreshed by a cool breeze, while our eyes enjoyedthe view of an extensive, fertile and cultivated plain. Surroundedby tropical vegetation, by bananas, sugar canes,Indian corn, and sweet potatoes, all luxuriantly flourishing, itwas hard to believe that any extent of sterile and apparentlyuseless country could be close to land so fertile, and yetwear the most opposite appearance. Our eyes having beenaccustomed to the desert shores of Peru and northern Chile,during many months, were completely dazzled by a sight sonew and unforeseen.It appears that rain falls very frequently on these highergrounds, and is absorbed by rich black mould of a naturesufficiently clayey to enable it to retain moisture. Duringthe wet season this plain becomes quite muddy, while thelittle rain that falls on the lower ground is so quickly absorbed,or finds its way so soon through the loose lava stones that itseffects are not there visible.Most of the houses are in this fertile space, but it appearsthat a house on the dry ground, and plantations in the moistvalley, would answer better : for at Mr. Lawson's house saltcannot be kept dry, books and paper become mouldy, and ironrusts very quickly. At his table we found the welcome of acountryman, and a variety of food quite unexpected in theGalapagos Islands, but fully proving their productiveness. Atthe foot of a hill we saw water dropping plentifully, and fromthis spring, called the " Governor's Brimstone," the inhabitantsobtain a certain supply throughout the year.Although most of the settlers were sent here against theirwish, there are many who do not desire to return to the continent.Some are married and have children on the island.493 ' brimstone'' — local peculiarities. Sept.In a small cave near the " governor's brimstone," an old sailorlived during several years : he had been unfortunate, and wastired of the world. Terrapin and potatoes were his food, tilla former friend, the master of a whaler, recognised him, and carriedhim away by force. So strongly was the old man attachedto his cave, that he shed tears when taken away.There are goats and hogs upon this island, but they arescarce and wild, not having yet had time to increase much ;they are hunted with dogs, though it would be wiser to letthem alone for a few years. The settlers have abundance ofvegetables, and depend chiefly upon terrapin for their meat.Many of these animals being large and heavy, the peoplewho go in search of them kill and open them on the spot,then take out the fleshy pieces and put them in a bag. Thusone man can carry away the useful parts of more terrapinsthan several men could lift.The quantity of tortoise shells lying about the ground,shows what havock has been made among these helpless animals.On the lower ground, near the spring, I saw an apologyfor a garden, in which the large terrapin shells were used tocover young plants, instead of flower pots. In a place onehas not seen before, some marked peculiarity occasionallyreminds one, more forcibly than the ordinary novelties ofscenery, that all around is strange and new. The palm-treesand arid appearance of St. Jago, the sedan chairs of Bahia,the boats of Rio de Janeiro, the beef carts of Monte Videothe travelling waggons of Buenos Ayres, the ' told ' of thePatagoniann, the wigwam of the Fuegian, the wooden housesand clogs of San Carlos de Childee, the stockades of Valdivia,the effects of earthquake at Concepcion, the concentratedbustle of Valparaiso, the quiet and uniform serenity of Co-quinto,women riding astride and troops of ill-used donkeysat Lima, are a few instances among the multitude of suchlocal peculiarities.Small birds are numerous on this island, and so remarkablytame that they may be knocked down with a stick. Lizardsare also numerous ; and there are a few small snakes, but those1835. ALBEMARLE ISLAND CRATERS. 493we caught were not venomous. Among the useful vegetableswe noticed the plantain, pumpkin, yuca, Quito orange, castoroil plant and melon, besides those before mentioned.Returning on board we met Mr. Stokes on his way fromthe southern parts of the island : he described the lava thereaboutsas having such a form and rugged surface as the seawould present if suddenly congealed, while ruffled by a verystrong wind.26th. After completing the necessary observations in PostofficeBay, we weighed and worked round to an anchorage offBlack Beach : and at nine in the evening Mr. Chaffers returned,having been round the south side of this island aftervisiting the small eastern islets. He found much difficulty inlanding on them, but succeeded, and from the top of GardnerIslet saw a dangerous breaker about a mile to the south eastward.27th. Being Sunday, many of the officers and ship's companywere on shore in the afternoon, and some of the officers wentto the top of the highest hill, which has a crater, as have allthe hills we examined about these islands ; and these craters areall similarly broken down on the side towards the south.28th. Having taken on board live pigs and a quantity ofvegetables, we weighed and stood towards Albemarle Island.Four small islets, the remains of volcanoes, lie near the lowsouth-east extreme of this island, and together with BrattleIslet, are extremely useful in warning vessels of their approachto a very dangerous piece of coast. So low are the sovith-easternextremities of Albemarle Island that they are not discernibleuntil you see the surf on the shore. A heavy swell setting towardsthe land, and generally light winds, add to the dangerof getting near this coast ; but there is anchorage in case ofnecessity.Albemarle Island is a singular mass of volcanic ejections.Six volcanoes have there raised their summits from two tofour thousand feet above the ocean, and from them immensequantities of lava have from time to time flowed towards the494) WILD cYCLOPiAX SCENE. Sept.sea ; so that this island, large as it is, may be literally describedby saying that it consists of six huge craters, whose bases areunited by their own overflowed lava. The southern side, whichis exposed to the trade wind, and completely intercepts it, withallthe clouds it brings, is thickly wooded, very green, anddoubtless has fresh water ; but how is that water to be obtainedwhere such a swell rolls upon the shore ? The weather sideof Chatham Island is partially protected from the greatsouth-west swell of the Pacific by Hood Island, yet even thereit is difficult to land.We passed this night under easy sail, off the south-westextreme of Albemarle Island ; and on the 29th we found asmall cove, in which we anchored ; but such a wild-lookingplace — with such quantities of hideous iguanas as were quitestartling ! Hence I despatched Mr. Mellersh and Mr. King,to examine the depth of Elizabeth Bay, and rejoin us beyondNarborough Island ; we then weighed, and continued ourexamination of this unearthly shore. Passing a low projectingpoint, our eyes and imagination were engrossed by the strangewildness of the view ; for in such a place Vulcan mighthave worked. Amidst the most confusedly heaped masses oflava, black and barren, as if hardly yet cooled, innumerablecraters (or funerals) showed their very regular, even artificiallooking heaps. It was like immense iron works, on a Cyclesscale !When this lava flowed from the heights it must have beenstopped rather suddenly (cooled) by the water ; for the lavacliffs are in some places twenty, and in others forty feet high,while close to them there is water so deep that a ship could notanchor there, even in a calm while the sea is quite smooth.Until we rounded this point the wind was very strong, eddyinground the high south-west cape ; but here we were becalmed,and passed some anxious hours, till at length lightvariable airs carried us off-shore.30th. This morning we passed a remarkably fine Americanwhaler, the Science, carrying nine whale-boats ! On the south-oct.1835. SMOKE ANCHOR IN CRATER, 495eastern height of Albemarle, smoke was seen issuing fromseveral places near the summit, but no flame. Profiting bvevery breeze, we hastened towards Tagus (or Banks) Cove.Narborough Island is exactly like a part of Albemarle — agreat volcano, whose base is surrounded by an extensive fieldof lava : it is utterly barren and desolate. A few mangroves,on the sandy beaches near Albemarle Island, are not seen inthe distance ; neither are there enough of them even to diminishthe dismal appearance of the island.We entered the passage in the afternoon, and anchored in thelittle cove first described by Capt. Ripon, who then commandedH.M.S. Tagus. This cove is the crater of an extinct volcano,and its sides are so steep as to be almost inaccessible.*1st October. Our first object was to find water : none couldbe got in the cove, but at a short distance from it a fewholes were found, out of which a bottle might be filled inan hour. Around this scanty spring draining continuallythrough the rock, all the little birds of the island appearedto be collected, a pretty clear indication of there being thenno other fresh-water within their reach : yet during the rainyseason there must be considerable streams, judging by gullieswhich are worn in the rock. All the heights hereabouts, andthe sides of the craters, are composed of sandstone that lookslike fine sandy mud half baked ; but the low grounds arelava. The crater in which we anchored gave me the idea ofits having been a mud volcano. The climate is very differentfrom that of the Windward Islands; for wind clouds and rainappear to be obstructed in their northward passage, by theheights on the southern part of this island. The heat is herefar greater than in other parts of the archipelago, and theland is more sterile. Numbers of another sort of iguana wereseen for the first time, and many were killed and eaten. Insize and shape they resemble the black kind, but their colourIn 1825 H.M.S. Blonde, commanded by Lord Byron, anchored here.In her voyage (pp. 92, 93, 94) the black and the red (or brown) iguanasare described, and it is stated that a specimen of the black kind wasbrought to England from Mexico. Lord Baron saw a volcano burning onNarborough Island.496 IGUANAS TAGUS COVE RIPPLES. Oct.is a dirty orange red, inclining to reddish brown above andyellow beneath. These reptiles burrow in the earth like rabbits,and are not bad eating. Of the black kind a vast numberrun about the rocks near the sea, living either upon fish orsea-weed. As we went afterwards in a boat along the ragged irregularshore, we saw numbers of turtle. There are small sandybeaches here and there, to which these animals approach in theevenings : when, as it gets dark, they land and usually lie onthe beach during the night, even if it is not the season in whichthey seek a place for their eggs.From a height near Tagus Cove dismal indeed was the view,yet deeply interesting. To see such an extent of country overwhelmedby lava, to think of the possible effects of the sevendormant volcanoes then in sight, and to reflect that at someoneperiod all was activity and dreadful combustion where wethen witnessed only silent desolation, was very impressive.2d October. We passed this day and the following night inBanks Bay. On the 3d, Mr. Mellersh returned, having examinedElizabeth Bay and the western shore of NarboroughIsland. We then went round the north-west end of AlbemarleIsland, and passed the night under sail off the north extreme.At daybreak, on the 4th, we made all sail towardsAbingdon Island, which is small, rather high, and tolerablycovered with stunted wood ; we did not maintain a positioneven near where I wished to pass the night, but were carriedabout forty miles away, dead to leeward, during onlya few hours of light wind. The consent hereabouts runsbetween one and four knots an hour to the north-westward,yet the depth of the water is unfathomable by ordinary means :excepting for which it is like a vast river in the sea.5th. While working to windward, endeavouring to regainour lost ground, we saw Bindloes Island : and passed throughmany ripplings, some of them dangerous for a boat ; these werenorthward, and rather eastward of Abingdon. During the 6th,other indications of a strong current were noticed, besides ripplingssuch as these, which, in very deep water, and in the opensea, are difficult to explain : sometimes at night, while allJ 835. JAMES ISLAND SETTLERS. 497around was smooth and tranquil — a short, deep plunge suddenlystartled every one : but in a minute afterwards the shipwas again quiet. We continued to work to the southward inorder to reach James Island, and meet Lieutenant Sulivan.7th. While working to windward we saw Towers Island,which is different in appearance from all the other islands ofthis archipelago, being low and flat. We passed it aboutnoon, and Bindloes at sunset. The latter has an irregular hilly-surface,partially wooded, but like the rest is a mass of lava,and indurated sandy mud.*8th. The Beagle was close to James Island, a high, lai-ge,and well-wooded tract of ground, or rather lava. We anchoredat the northern end, and a boat came alongside loadedwith fish, for there was a party of settlers here, detached fromCharles Island, whose employment was salting fish and extractingoil from terrapin.f This oil is of a light colour,and exceedingly good quality, being very like pure olive oil.Lieutenant Sulivan returned with his party, and I then detachedMr. Chaffers in the yawl, accompanied by Mr. Johnsonand six men, to examine Bindloes, Abingdon, and TowersIslands. As Mr. Darwin anxiously desired to see as much aspossible of the productions of this central and large island,he was landed, accompanied by Mr. Bynoe, besides his servantand H. Fuller, to remain until the Beagle's return. Althoughthere is abundance of water on the higher parts of this island,so broken and dry are the lower grounds that it does not arriveat the shore : at two places only can enough water for evena boat's crew be procured, in the dry season ; and for a shipthere is scarcely hope of a sufficiency. The poor fellows whobrought us the fish had been living so long upon terrapin, andthe produce of their lines, without any thing else, that half abag of biscuit (50 lbs.) which we gave them, appeared to beaninestimable treasure, for which they could not sufficientlythank us. We sailed in the evening, but made very little• Of course much of the information given in these pages was collectedby the officers.t They also salt the terrapin ; or tortoise.VOL. II. 2 K498 , CLIMATE — ANCHORAGE SOIL. Octprogress towards our destination (Chatham Island) this day(9th). The winds appear to be much lighter and more variable,to leeward of the archipelago, while the current is considerablystronger.* We got pretty close to Chatham Island atdusk, worked to windward during the night, and on the followingmorning stood along the weather shore towards thewatering place.11th. How remarkably different is the climate of the windwardand leeward islands of this group ! Here we were envelopedby clouds and drizzling fog, and wore cloth clothes. AtTagus Cove and James Island, a hot sun, nearly vertical, overpoweredus ; — while the south side of Albemarle, Charles, andChatham Islands, were almost always overshadowed by clouds?and had frequent showers of rain. We anchored close to thewatering place : but it appeared strange to remain at anchor insuch a spot, only three cables'' lengths from a surf breakinghigh upon a steep clifTj^ shore, with nothing but the oceanbetween us and the antarctic ; and such was our position ; yet itwas a safe one, because the great south-west swell of thePacific is interrupted by Hood Island, and the southerly trade,or perennial wind is so moderate, that it has neither power toraise a sea nor to harm a vessel lying at anchor, if her groundtackle is not defective.The 12th was spent in filling water, washing, cutting somewood, and bringing thirty large terrapin on board. Theseanimals abound hereabouts ; and some are very large, deservingthe name of elephant-tortoises. Two of our party tried toreach the higher and thickly wooded part of the island, butfound their task impracticable, in so short a time as they couldspare, for the wood grows impenetrably thick, though none isstraight or of a large size. The upper grounds have a richloamy soil, lying upon rock, in which the terrapin wallow likehogs, and may be found by dozens. This was a very hardday's work for so few men as were then on board our smallvessel. (18th) We had some difficulty in ' casting,' so as to• It appears that the Norfolk Island of Colnett, is the north-eastextreme of Indefatigable Island./'ripstOi^ejWat£rzn^ J'lucc■ T ¥-\t^\m a s i;Waste WDW© IPO-AJrS^'wfcw/i D, OB E fi A (B I. .1 a X ,\ rN It's -PTjhhahcd'hjHcnTTC-^T^i-r-l.'' ''t:-'. !'-'-ltnrr,iii,h C-uraoL?.*-:1835. Shoal ESCAPE SALT. 499clear the land, but got out of the scrape and were workingtowards Hood Island when the man looking out aloft reporteda breaker, which proved to be on a rock at the west end ofMacGowen shoal. When first seen it was on the horizon, andhardly differed from the topping of a sea ; — once only in aboutten minutes it showed distinctly. We steered for it, lowered,two boats, and employed the rest of the day in examining thisvery dangerous shoal, and fixing its position. One rock atthe west end is just a-wash, but there is another under water,except in the hollow of a swell, about half-a-niile to the eastward,which is exceedingly treacherous. We had two narrowescapes this day; while weighing from Chatham Island, bafflingwinds sent us a great deal too close to the cliffs before ouranchor was up, or the ship under command ; and whilesounding along the edge of MacGowen shoal we were driftedso close to the second rock, mentioned above, that I was notsure on which side of us it lay.14th. Anchored and examined Hood Harbour, having heardthere was a sunken rock in it which our boat had not discovered,but we found nothing dangerous for a ship. Shoalwater and large blocks of lava lie near the shore in the harbour; but a vessel must have stood too close in if she touchesthereabouts. Left Hood Island at noon, and steered for thesouthern part of Charles Island. Having a fine breeze werounded Saddle Point at eight, and anchored at nine off BlackBeach.15th. I went to Post-Office Bay and near the best landingplace, found some excellent salt, which though but small inquantity gives a hint that more may be got elsewhere.16th. Weighed in the afternoon, having obtained the necessaryobservations, and went to Black Beach Road to take inwood, potatoes, and pigs. We there found a small schoonerat anchor, just arrived from Guayaquil, and having, amongother things, a bag of letters from England, for the Beagle.That very evening we were to leave Charles Island ; not toreturn ! In the schooner were some emigrants ; who broughtcattle, and information that the governor, Villain, might be2 k2500 SALT SPRING THICK WOOD. Oct.expected to arrive in a few days, with a vessel laden with animals,and supplies for the settlement. We stood across, duringthe night, to the four islands near Point Woodward; and at daylightnext morning (17th) resumed our usual occupations, whilesailing along the east side of Albemarle Island. At noon westeered for Albany Islet, to embark Mr. Darwin and Mr.Bynoe ; and after our party were on board, we returned towardsthe shore of Albemarle Island, and there passed thenight under sail, in order to start early from a particular position.Our landsmen had enjoyed their stay and profited by it,though the heat was oppressive, and the sky nearly cloudlessby night and by day : how different was this from the weatherwe had had on board ! The higher grounds of James Islandare extensive, and would be adapted to cultivation if the wood,which now grows thickly, were cleared. There is a fine saltspring, or lake, in an old crater ; the salt is excellent, in colourand quality : and the men employed by Mr. Lawson wereusing it daily for curing their fish and terrapin.When at some height upon the island, among the thickwood, it is extremely difficult to find the way: men have beenlost thereabouts, and it is said that some of the bodies neverwere found. The day we remembered Mr. Darwin there wasa man missing, belonging to an American whale ship, and hisshipmates were seeking for him. The master of this whalerwas very obliging to our party, supplying them with water,and offering his hearty assistance in any way which lay in hispower. The earnest wishes to be of use, and the attentions ofNorth Americans to us on all occasions, have been often andgratefully remarked by many on board the Beagle.18th. Continued our examination of Albemarle Island-whenoff the northern volcano, the black streams of lava, whichhave flowed in every direction down the sides of the mountain,looked like immense streams of ink. Thence we steered forAbingdon Island to meet Mr. Chaffers. I thought the currentless strong, and setting more to the west, than when I washere on a former day.On the 19th we were close to Abingdon Island, where there1835. Penman ISLET — Dampier, 501is a fine bold-looking clifF, at the west side, considerably higherthan any I had seen in the Galapagos. Mr. Chaffers sooncame alongside after we closed the land ; when, his orders beingexecuted, the boat was hoisted in, and we made sail to thenorth-west in search of Penman and Culpepper Islets.Next day (20th) we saw and steered for Penman Islet, anothercrater of an extinct volcano. It is high, small, and quitebarren : correctly speaking, there are three islets and a largerock, near each other, which, at a distance, appear as one island,but they are fragments of the same crater. We afterwards passedCulpepper Islet, which is a similar rocky, high, and barrenlittle island. At sun-set we made all sail and steered to set wellinto the south-east trade wind, so as to expedite our passagetowards the dangerous archipelago of the Low Islands, andthence to Otaheite (or Tahiti). While sailing away from theGalapagos, impelled westward over a smooth sea, not only byfavouring easterly breezes but by a current that set more thansixty miles to the west during the first twenty-four hours afterour losing sight of Culpepper Islet, and from forty to ten mileseach subsequent day until the 1st of November,* I will lookback at those strange islands, and make a few more remarks onthem.There are six principal ones, nine smaller, and many isletsscarcely deserving to be distinguished from mere rocks. Thelargest island is sixty miles in length, and about fifteen broad ;the highest part being four thousand feet above the sea. Allare of volcanic origin, and the lava, of which they are chieflycomposed, is excessively hard. Old Dampier says,f " The Spaniards,when they first discovered these islands, found multitudesof 'glances 'and land-turtle, or tortoise, and namedthem the Galapagos | Islands." Again, " the air of theseislands is temperate enough, considering the clime. Here isconstantly a fresh sea-breeze all day, and cooling refreshingwinds in the night ; therefore the heat is not so violent hereLai 10°. 14'. S. lone. 120°. 35'. W.t Dampier's Voyage round the World, 1681—1691. (At the Galapagosin 1684). J Galapago being Spanish for tortoise.502 RAINS — Collect MOISTURE. Oct.as in most places near the equator. The time of the year forthe rains is in November, December, and January : then thereis oftentimes excessive dark tempestuous weather, mixed withmuch thunder and lightning. Sometimes before and after thesemonths there are moderate refreshing showers ; but in May,June, July, and August, the weather is always very fair." 'I can add nothing to this excellent description, except thatheavy rollers occasionally break upon the northern shores ofthe Galapagos during the rainy season above-mentioned —though no wind of any consequence accompanies them. Theyare caused by the ' Northern,' or ' Papagayos,' which are sowell known on the coast between Panama and Acapulco. Col-nextalso gives a good description of these islands : — in his voyage,p. 58, he says, " I consider it as one of the most delightfulclimates under heaven, although situated within a few miles ofthe equator." The buccaneers often resorted to them for refreshments,and as a place where they might refit their vessels,share out plunder, or plan new schemes of rapine, without anyrisk of being molested.Striking instances of the manner in which high land deprivesair of its moisture may be seen at the Galapagos. Situated in awind nearly perennial, those sides only which are exposed to it(the southern) are covered with verdure, and have water : allelse is dry and barren, excepting such high ground as the passingclouds hang upon indolently as they move northward. Inasimilar manner may Ave not conclude that western Peru isdeprived of rain— since the easterly trade wind which carriesmoisture, and consequent fertility, to eastern Peru, is drained,or dried, as it crosses the Andes ? And may we not extendthis reasoning to other countries similarly situated, such asPatagonia, perhaps Arabia, and even Africa, upon whose ariddeserts no moist wind blows'' Currents of air, moving fromocean to land, convey vapour ; but as these currents pass overDuring the rainy season, or from November to March (which is not,however, at all to be compared to a continental rainy season) there arecalms, variable breezes, and sometimes westerly winds : though the latterare neither of long duration, nor frequent.1835. Birds Remarkable BEAKS. 503high land, or even a considerable extent of low country, muchif not the whole of their aqueous contents is discharged, anduntil such a body of air has again acquired moisture, it is foundto be dry, parching, and unfavourable to vegetation.All the small birds that live on these lava-covered islandshave short beaks, very thick at the base, like that of a bullfinch.This appears to be one of those admirable provisionsof Infinite Wisdom by which each created thing is adaptedto the place for which it was intended. In picking up insects,or seeds which lie on hard iron-like lava, the superiority of suchbeaks over delicate ones, cannot, I think, be doubted; butthere is, perhaps, another object in their being so strong andwide. Colnett says, p. 59, " they observed an old bird in theact of supplying three young ones with drink, by squeezingthe berry of a tree into their mouths. It was about the size ofa pea, and contained a watery juice, of an acid, but not unpleasanttaste'" " The leaves of these trees absorb the copious dewswhich fall during the night ; the birds then pierce them withtheir bills for the moisture they retain, and which, I believe,they also procure from the Various plants and evergreens.'The torch thistle contains a liquid in its heart, which thebipeds drank, when it was cut down. They sometimes evenextracted it from the young trees by piercing the trunks withtheir bills." For thus squeezing berries, and piercing woodyfibre, or even only stout leaves, a slight thin beak would bescarcely available. Colnett* observes, that some of the birdswhich he saw resembled a few that he had seen at New Zealand,but as he also remarks that all the dead shells which he foundupon the beach were familiar to him, I think one may suspectthe accuracy of his eye, if not his memory, in those instances.Mr. Stokes made some notes about the tortoises (terrapin),while with me, and as he and I are satisfied as to the facts, Iwill add them. Fresh water was first discovered on Charlesand on James Islands, by following the terrapin paths. Theseanimals visit the low, warm ground to seek for food and de-collect'sVoyage to the South Seas, pag-es 52, 55, 5J.Oct.posit their eggs ; but it must be a toilsome journey indeed forthem to ascend and descend the rugged heights. Some thatMr. Stokes saw in wet, muddy places, on high ground, seemedto enjoy themselves very mich, snuffling and waddling aboutin the soft clayey soil near a spring. Their manner of drinkingis not unlike that of a fowl : and so fond do they appear to beof water, that it is strange they can exist for a length of timewithout it ; yet people living at the Galapagos say that theseanimals can go more than six months without drinking. Avery small one lived upwards of two months on board theBeagle without either eating or drinking : and whale-shipshave often had them on board alive for a much longer period.Some few of the terrapin are so large as to weigh between twoand three hundred weight ; and, when standing up on theirfour elephantine legs, are able to reach the breast of a middlesexman with their snake-like head,* The settlers at CharlesIsland do not know any way of ascertaining the age of a terrapin,all they say is, that the male has a longer neck than thefemales On board the Beagle a small one grew three-eighthsof an inch, in length, in three months ; and another grew twoinches in length in one year. Several wei-e brought alive toEngland. The largest we killed was three feet in length fromone end of the shell to the other : but the large ones are not sogood to eat as those of about fifty pounds Weight — which areexcellent, and extremely wholesome food. From a large oneupwards of a gallon of very fine oil may be extracted. It israther curious, and a striking instance of the short-sightednessof some men, who think themselves keener in discriminationthan most others, that these tortoises should have excited suchremarks as — '•' well, these reptiles never could have migratedWhen their long necks and small heads are seen above low bushesthey look just like those of snakes.t Their eggs were found in great numbers in cracks of a hard kind ofclayey sand; hut so small were the cracks that many of the eggs couldnot be got out without being broken. The egg is nearly round, of awhitish colour, and measures two inches and a half in diameter — whichis about the size of a young one when first hatched.1835. MIGRATION — CURRENTS. 505far, that is quite clear," when, in simple truth, there is no otheranimal in the whole creation so easily caught, so portable,requiring so little food for a long period, and at the same timeso likely to have been carried, for food, by the aborigines whoprobably visited the Galapagos Islands on their balsas,* orinlarge double canoes, long before Columbus saw that twinklinglight, which, to his mind, was as the keystone to an arch.Honest Dampier immediately reverted to the tortoises of theWest Indies, and of Madagascar!" when he saw those ofthe Galapagos. He had observed too many varieties caused byclimate, soil, food, and habits, to entertain a doubt of theirbeing other than a variety of the tortoise kind. As to theglances'' they were, to his eye, familiar objects.The currents about these islands are very remarkable, for inaddition to their velocity, which is from two to five miles anhour, and usually towards the north-west,! there is such a surprisingdifference in the temperature of bodies of water movingwithin a few miles of each other, that this subject must bereserved for further discussion. On one side of an island(Albemarle Island) we found the temperature of the sea, a footbelow the surface, 80°. Fait. ; but at the other side it was lessthan 60°. In brief, those striking differences may be owing tothe cool current which comes from the southward alone thecoasts of Peru and Chile, and at the Galapagos encounters afar warmer body of water moving from the bay of Panama, asort of ' gulf stream." The retentive manner in which suchocean rivers preserve their temperature has been frequentlyremarked : and must have a great effect upon the climates ofcountries near whose shores they flow.I have heard that driftwood, not the growth of these islands, is frequentlyfound on the south-east shores. On this subject Colnett says(p. 58), " on several parts of the shore there was driftwood, of a largersize than any of the trees that grow on the island : also bamboos and wildsugar canes, with a few small cocoa nuts at full growth, though notlarger than a pigeon's egg." -f Dampier, vol. i. p. 102.X In the twenty-four hours immediately previous to first making theseislands, the Beagle was set fifty miles to the west north-west.CHAPTER Xxii.Dangerous Archipelago of the Low Islands — Krusenstern — Squalls —Discoveries — Otaheite — Matavai — Natives — Houses — Point Venus —Theft — Singing — Pomare — Sugar — Papiete— Church — INIr. PritchardThierry — Shells — Mr. Nottt — Bible — Paamuto Natives — Falkner —Ua' — Papawa — Relics — Divine Service — Hitote — Henry — AudienceQueen — Missionaries — Roman Catholics — Forming head — Meetingat Papiete — Dress — Behaviour — Eloquence of natives — Honourablefeelings — Interesting discussion — Venilia.After sailing before the wind twelve days, our approach tolandwas indicated by a black tern which flew past the ship.*Tropic birds were seen on the previous day (2d), but theyroam farther than tern. On the 9th we saw Honden Island,one of the low coral formations, only a few feet above water, yetthickly covered with cocoa-nut trees Our observations corroboratedthe position assigned to it by Admiral Krusenstern,;]: inhis excellent chart and memoir, the only documents of any useto us while traversing the archipelago of the Low Islands.This archipelago is indeed extremely deserving of its appellation,' Dangerous;' for numerous coral islets, all low, and someextensive, obstruct the navigation, while unknown currents andstrong squalls, and a total want of soundings, add to the risk ofsailing there at night. Singular interruptions to the trade-windare caused by these low lagoon § islands ; not only does the easterlywind often fail among them, but heavy squalls come fromthe opposite direction, and more frequently by night than byday. This is especially the case from November to March.I have before remarked (pp. (J5, 66), that extensive shallows,such as the Abrolhos and Bermudas, are liable to heavy squalls;• 3d November, lat. 1 1°.45'S., long. 126° W. .t About 110 feet from the water level to the top of the trees.I Admiral Krusenstern had the kindness to send me a copy of hisAtlas of the Pacific Ocean, accompanied by an elaborate memoir.§ Most of them are little better than dry reefs encircling a shallowlake or lagoon.1835. SQUALLS OVER LOW ISLANDS. 507and so far as I have heard or observed, it is usually the casethat on land, a wide tract of flat country, Without hills, or atsea, a considerable space of partly-covered ground, nowhererising much above high-water, is subject to more frequentand violent blasts of wind than mountainous or even hillyregions, whether continental or island.Clouds are certainly attracted, even if their formation be nothastened, by land ; especially when it is covered by trees : andas low islands (such as those of the Dangerous Archipelago,between 14° and 20° south) have no hill or height of any kind,about which clouds attracted by the archipelago (taken together)can gather and discharge a portion of their contents,electrical as well as fluid, it may, I think, be inferred, thatthe want of such a conductor as Avould be furnished by amountain five or six thousand feet high, is the reason whyclouds in various electrical conditions unite or oppose one another,as the case may be ; and, in consequence, cause rapidchanges in the atmosphere around them ; of which the effectsare seen in squalls (sometimes with heavy rain, sometimeswithout), and even in whirlwinds. Where high land acts as aconductor between the earth and certain portions of our atmosphere,there may be a continual, though unperceived, electricalaction. In connection with this subject I would, if I were able,consider the effects of rapidly varying temperature over land,and comparatively uniform temperature over ocean duringtwenty-four hours; which latter fact I might suspect to beone reason why the great Humboldt could not discover anyparticular electrical action, as indicated by his electrometers,while sailing from Europe to Brazil : although those sameinstruments were far from inactive after he landed. But I feelmyself out of my depth, and will leave such speculations tothose who are qualified to indulge in them.*On the 13th, after having passed some anxious nights invery squally weather,-f- we were gratified by seeing an isletwhose existence we had not suspected. Cairo is the name bySee note («) at the end of this chapter,t All the squalls were from the westward.508 DISCOVERIES OTAHEITE. NoV.which it is known to the islanders of the archipelago. A fewhours afterwards we ranged along the shore of another andmuch larger island, or rather group of islets, till then not laiddown in any chart, the native name of which is Cavahi. Wesaw a number of islets covered with cocoa-nut trees, surroundinga lagoon ; but could not delay to examine the south side,because we had been so unexpectedly detained by contrarywinds, and I was very anxious about the chronometer measurement,the interval being already considerable.Hastening on, therefore, we passed between the Elizabethand Wittgenstein (or Faarava) groups, which are similar toCavahi in appearance, and carried a press of sail to reach theSociety Islands. It was singular that directly we were clear ofthe Low Islands, we got into a steady trade-wind, such as wehad enjoyed before seeing Honden Island ; and were no moretroubled by westerly wind, or squalls, till long after we hadleft Otaheite* and were approaching near New Zealand.15th. Early this morning we saw Otaheile; but cloudshanging over the high land and a haziness about the horizon,at first disappointed our expectations. As the sun rose higher,the clouds shrunk away, vanishing as they rolled along thegrandly formed mountains : high, sharp, irregular peaks, andhuge masses of rock appeared between the mists, and again werehidden — deep vallies or glens showed darkly, and while theshadows passed, seemed to be denied the light of day. Strikinglydifferent in appearance were the lower hills and dales,and the richly wooded land at the sea-side. There the brightsunshine heightened the vivid and ever-varying tints of a richverdure. The beautiful alternation of light and shade, eachmoment changing as the flitting shadows passed over every kindSome diversity of opinion has arisen respecting the spelling of thisname. No person now doubts that Tahiti is the native word, and thereforethe most correct to be used when talking to Polynesian islanders, orwriting for them ; but as our immortal countryman, Cook, wrote Ota-heine, and it is difficult to hear or see the word without thinking of him,I shall beg to be allowed the same privilege that Frenchmen claim whenwriting ' Londres,' or Englishmen ^jhen they write ' Sicily;' and for thefuture use only the word Otaheite.1835. SCENERY CANOES NATIVES. 509of green ; the groves of graceful palm-trees ; the dazzlingwhite foam of the breakers on the coral reefs, contrasted by thedeep blue of the sea, combined to form a most enchanting view.At a distance in the west, Eimeo (Moore) showed a picturesqueoutline, and added to the beauty of a scene whichsurpassed our ideas, even heightened as they had been by thedescriptions of former voyagers.Passing Point Venus, and avoiding the Dolphin Shoal, weworked up to an anchorage in Matavai Bay. No pilot appeared,but had we waited in the offing, a very good one* would haveoffered his services. With a fresh breeze, we gained the anchorageso quickly that few natives had time to hasten on board,as is their usual custom : only one long canoe came alongsidewhile we sailed in : it was made of half a tree, hollowed outwitha narrow rough plank laced to each side, and an outrigger,consisting of two crooked branches, secured to the canoeand to a long piece of light wood which floated in the waterparallel to it. This out-bigger extended eight or ten feet fromthe ticklish conveyance, and enabled four men to sit at theirease in the narrow trunk of a tree that had never exceeded afoot in diameter.The personal appearance of these men was to me most remarkable: tall and athletic, with very well-formed heads and a goodexpression of countenance, they at once made a favourableimpression, which their quiet good-humour and tractable dispositionafterwards heightened very much. To my eye theydiffered from the aborigines of southern South America in theform of their heads ; in the width or height of the cheek-bones ;in their eye-bigots; in their colour; and most essentially inthe expression of their countenances. High foreheads ; definedand prominent eyebrows ; with a rich, bronze colour, give anAsiatic expression to the upper part of their faces ; but theflat noses (carefully flattened in infancy), and thick lips, arelike those of the South Americans.By the time the vessel was secured, a number of canoes hadCalled James Mitchell, though an aboriginal Otaheitan.SIO TRAFFIC — DRESS — MATAVAI. NoV.assembled, each containing from two to ten persons. A few, indeed,were so small that they could only hold one man each. Theoutriggers hindered their approach, as much as hoops impededthe motions of our maternal ancestors ; but those who couldnot get near looked equally happy at a distance. All werecheerful, tractable, and patient, though eager to see themanna' (their corruption of man-of-war), and dispose of theirmerchandize (shells and fruit) to the new-comers.The work necessary for securing the ship being completed,permission was given to admit the natives ; and on board theyswarmed like bees. In a minute, our deck became a crowdedand noisy bazaar. ' One tala' (dollar), and ' my ty ' ('maitai,'meaning ' good, fine, agreed,' &c.) sounded in all tones, exceptthose of women, none of whom appeared afloat. The currentprice of every article was ' one tala' : a pig, a shell, a wholebasket of shells, a roll of cloth, a heap of fru t, or a single fishhook,of the worst description, were offered as equivalents forthe coveted dollar. Old clothes, if of cloth, they would nottake, unless as a gift ; but linen was acceptable. Every manhad a light linen or cotton garment, or the remains of one, ofsome kind ; the more respectable wore shirts, and loose wrappersfor trowsers ; a few had jackets and trowsers. Many hadstraw hats ; some had a wreath of leaves, some flowers in theirhair : only a few of the youngest boys were nearly naked.Mr. Darwin and I went to Point Venus, and landed amonga mob of inquisitive, laughing, and chattering natives, most ofwhom were women and children. Mr. Wilson, the respectedmissionary, so long resident at Matavai, met us on the beach ;and with him we went, attended by the younger part of themob, to his house. Ten minutes' walk along level land, everywhere,except at the sea-side, covered or shaded by thick underwood,tall palms, and the rich foliage of the bread-fruit tree,brought us to the quiet dwelling. The free, cheerful mannersof the natives who gathered about the door, and unceremoniouslytook possession of vacant seats, on chairs, or the floor,showed that they were at home with their benefactors ; andthat any seclusion or offensive intimation of superiority had1835. CHIEFS — NATIVE HOUSES. 511not existed in the conduct of Mr. or Mrs. Wilson. Two chiefs,of inferior rank, made acquaintance with us; they walked intothe room, shook hands, sat down at their ease, and conversedwith Mr. Wilson in exactly the manner of respectable Englishfarmers. They were large, but inactive-looking men, andround-shouldered — suitably clothed, above the knees, in cleanwhite jackets, shirts, and wrapper trowsers, with their closely-cuthair hidden by a large straw-hat— their appearance wasvery respectable. ' la-oran,' pronounced ' corona,' was asalutation we soon learned ; but one of my younger shipmateswas a little perplexed during his first excursion, " Why doesevery one call me 'Your honour'" said he. Most of ourofficers and many of the men passed the evening on shore,and Mr. Darwin and myself rambled about until darknesssummoned all on board.Often as the native houses have been described, I found themdifferent from the idea I had formed. Perhaps they are nowrather slighter, and not constructed exactly like those of othertimes. Upon slight posts, placed in the ground in a long ellipse,a very light and elegant frame-work of ' purau'* is supported.This frame-work forms the low, but extensive roof; and upon itathatch of pandanus leaves,— simply doubled upon twigs orreeds placed crosswise on the purau-wood rafters, which havetheir ends outwards, — forms a light covering, impervious towater, regular, indeed pretty to the eye, impenetrable by heat,and easily replaced once in eight or ten years. The middle ofthe roof forms an obtuse angle, as a common low roof doeselsewhere ; but the ends are rounded. The purau rafters areplaced at equal distances around the circumference, convergingas radii to the centres and central hne of the ellipse. All of themare of equal length and size, and their ends are generally ornamentedwith a neat matting, made of a mosaic f pattern. Eachline of twigs, holding the leaves, is straight and equi-distantfrom the next ; and as, in the house, only about three inches ofthe smooth surface of each leaf is seen between the lines oftwigs, the flat under surface, of an uniform appearance andThe ' purau' is something like bamboo. t Or arabesque.512 INTEElOll OF HOUSE — POINT VENUS. Nov.light straw colour, aids the smooth, round purau in agreeablysurprising the eye of a stranger by a new kind of architecture,as admirable as it is simple. Around the house, insteadof a wall, are strong canes, regularly placed between the supportingposts, at distances (one or two inches) equal to thediameter of the canes ; they are driven into the ground, andsecured to the roof ; one opening only is left for a door. Withinare some screens of native cloth, or framed bed-places, or simplymats spread upon dry grass. There are a few low stools, somebaskets, joints of bamboo holding cocoa-nut oil, and calabasheswith water, besides a variety of smaller things, which I hadnot time to examine. What house in a tropical climate couldbe more agreeable than one of these elegant wicker-work cottages,shaded round by large trees, and profiting by the freshair of every breeze ?Pretty shades for the face (they cannot be called hats, as theyencircle and project from, without covering the head) are madewith the palm-leaves. When fresh, adorned by Avhite, or deepred flowers, and tastefully placed, this head-dress is unique andpleasing.Perhaps my eyes were prejudiced in favour of features andcomplexion ; for the shambling gait and flat noses of the nativewomen had no charms for me. I saw no beauty among them ;and either they are not as handsome as they were said to be, ormy ideas are fastidious. The men, on the other hand, exceedevery idea formed from the old descriptions.On this day, with us the loth, but to agree with the reckoningof Otaheite and those who came from the west, changed tothe 17th, I was fully occupied in making observations uponthe spot where once stood Cook's observatory, a classical, andto us, important place. Upon the situation of this celebratedpoint, Venus, depend most of the geographical positions ofislands in the South Sea ; and its locality upon our globehas been deemed well known. Messrs. Wales, Green, andBailey are particularly entitled to the greatest share of creditfor having by their observations attained to so great a degreeof accuracy.1835. Curiosity— THEFT — SINGING. 613While we were engaged with the instruments on shore, a crowdof natives were eagerly displaying their merchandise along sideor on board the ship. From the dawn of day, until they wereadmitted at breakfast time, canoes had been approaching fromevery direction. Their occupants had heard of the dollars, andevery canoe within reach had been loaded. This sort of competitioncould not last ; so I thought it better to give them asmuch opportunity to dispose of their wares as our small deckallowed ; and desired Lieut. Wickham to let the market beheld,till trade grew dull. Some wanted to build us a house ;many asked to be allowed to wash our clothes. There appear-edto be no want of will to work, if dollars were to be gained.On shore it was difficult to make the required observations,among a crowd of curious observers of ourselves and our instruments;for though they readily drew back as far as we wished,it was quite impossible to keep them from running about andshaking the ground. While employed with the dipping needleunder a tent, I thought myself fortified : but they besieged thesmall opening so closely, in their eagerness to see the sight,that the heat caused by a vertical sun was soon increased tothat of an oven, from their thus blocking up the only air-hole.At my return to the ship in the evening, I found that thefair had not lasted above an hour after breakfast. All the nativeshad behaved well excepting two ; one of whom absconded withthe top of a brass stanchion. The other tried to carry off anaxe ; but was detected, and pointed out to the more respectableof his countrymen, who said he should be tried, and thathis sentence would probably be a fine of ten hogs.*This evening some of our party were much pleased by hearingthe pretty plaintive songs of the children, as they sat ingroups upon the shore. Their voices accord in the most perfectmanner ; and, although the tunes are rather monotonous,• The man who tried to steal the axe wa fined ci;,^ht hogs and a largepiece of cloth. Five of the pigs went to the queen, and three were senton board the Searle. The cloth was given to the man who c;iiight thethief.VOL. II. 2 L514 TOMBS — POM ARE SUGAR. NoV.they detained us, sitting upon the sandy beach, till we couldstop no longer.18th. Mr. Wilson went with me in a boat to Papiete, themost frequented harbour of Otaheite. We passed inside thereefs, by narrow twisting passages among the coral rocks.Seeing two marks set up on an extensive rocky flat, partiallycovered by the water, I concluded they were placed as beacons; but was told they were tabu (taboo) marks to keeppeople from fishing or picking up shells upon the queen'spreserve.' We passed the royal burying-ground, which isadorned by that peculiar tree, the tito, whose wood is so hardthat it is called iron-wood. This tree looks like the Englishyew. It is purposely planted by the natives near their ,and used to be considered sacred. Anotherremarkable tree, resembling (although larger and finer than) theilex, also casts a solemn shade over the tomb of Pomare.*The point of land on which the tombs and one of the royalhouses stand, is one of the most agreeable places on theisland, in point of position ; and was a favourite residenceof old Pomare. A portion of their superstition hangs about thenatives yet : I could not persuade them to approach the tombof their king, although they told me to go and look at it. Thetomb is a plain mass of masonry, sheltered by a roof of wood.At Toanoa, between this place (called Papawa) and Pa-piece,we saw Mr. Bicknell's sugar-mill. The sugar made therefromnative cane is of a very good quality, and cheap. Mr.Bicknell told me that the natives brought their canes to him ;and that latterly he had given up growing and attending tothem himself. Noticing a large deficiency in some lead-work,he remarked : " That lead was stolen in the last civil war ;our books were then in high request, not to be read, but tomake cartridges." That such a sad misapplication of numbersof books sent out by missionary societies, has also occurred in jNew Zealand, as well as among the eastern Indian nations, I ihave heard from many quarters.The late .Papists. CHURCH IMPOSTOR. 515Papiete is a pretty and secure little bay. Around it islow land, ornamented with trees and European as well as nativehouses : but immediately behind the level part, hills rise to aheight of two or three thousand feet. Lying to leeward of theisland it enjoys less sea-breeze, and is therefore hotter thanother harbours. In the middle of the bay is a little islandbelonging to the queen, where the colours of Otaheite (red,white, red, horizontal) are displayed.Several neat-looking white cottages showed that Europeanideas had extended their influence hither : but I was sorry to seethenew church, a large wooden structure capable of holdingsix hundred people, covered by a partly Otaheitan roof, in lieuof one formed completely in their own style. Instead of thecircular end, an ugly gable terminates a high box-shaped house,resembling a factory.Mr. Pritchard * arrived fi'om Eimeo as we landed. Leavinghim for a short time, I went to see a person who styled himselfBaron de Thierry, King of Nuhahiva-j- and sovereign chief ofNew Zealand. About the house in which resides this self-calledphilanthropist, — said to be maturing arrangements for civilizingNuhahiva and New Zealand — as well as for cutting acanal across the Isthmus of Darien, — were a motley group oftattowed New Zealanders, half-clothed natives of Otaheite,and some ill-looking American seamen. I was received inaffected state by this grandee, who abruptly began to questionme with — " Well, Captain ! what news from Panama .'' Havethe Congress settled the manner in which they are to carry myideas into effect ?" I tried to be decently civil to him, as well asto the ' baroness '; but could not diminish my suspicions, andsoon cut short our conference.In his house was a pile of muskets, whose fixed and verylong bayonets had not a philanthropic aspect. He had beenthere three months, and was said to be waiting for bis ships toarrive and carry him to his sovereignty. Born in England, ofFrench emigrant parents ; his own account of himself was thatNow Her Majesty's Consul. f One of the Marquesas.Q T 9516 QUEEN POMARE — NATIVES. NoV.he was secretary of legation to the Marquis of Mariana, atthe congress of Vienna; and that in 1815 he belonged tothe 23d Light Dragoons (English). In 1816 he was attacheto the French ambassador in Ixjndon. In 1819 he was studyingdivinity at Oxford. In 1820-21, he was a student of lawsat Cambridge. Afterwards he travelled on the continent :and lately had been sojourning in the United States. He visitedand brought letters from the Governor of St. Thomas, in theWest Indies. He showed papers to prove these assertions :had a wife and four children with him ; and he had succeededin duping a great many people.Mr. Pritchard had seen the queen (by courtesy calledPomare, after her father, though her name was Aimatta) atEimeo, the day before he arrived at Otaheite ; and as she hadnot intimated an intention of coming thence, I agreed to gowith him in a few days to pay my respects to her, and to makea formal application upon the subject of the Truro, a merchantvessel plundered and destroyed by the Low Islanders in1830-31.* I returned to Matavai in the evening, and, afterlanding Mr. Wilson, remained nearly two hours listening tothe natives singing. I asked them to dance ; but they said itwas forbidden, and that the watchman would take them to thegovernor of the district, who would fine them heavily. Singing,except hymns, is also forbidden to the grown people, butthey seemed to like listening to the children.This evening, before dark, there was a sight upon theBeagles deck, which delighted us who wished to collect shellsbut had not time to look for them. An Englishman hadspread out a liege collection which he had just brought fromthe Low Islands, and soon found eager purchasers.19th. We weighed anchor, and went into the little cove ofPapawa, for the sake of watering quickly, without exposingthe men and boats to a heavy surf. It is easy to avoid thenumerous rocky patches, while there is a breeze, and the sunThis I was requested to do by Commodore Mason,t John Middleton.W? IMOTTT's Old CJaAIPIELOTAHEITE OK. TAHITIPuaiahee."trr Ji-^njrr Carron, Grex HBrrborocgn 3--\3c'., ISSG .1835. Mil. Not — OTAHEITAN lille. 517shining on either side, or astern ; but if the sun is a-head, it isalmost impossible to distinguish the reefs, by the colour, orrelative smoothness of the water. Walking to the house ofMr. Nottt, I saw an elderly native writing in a cottage, andapparently very intent ripon his employment. He showed mewhat had engaged his attention, an Otaheitan version of thebook of Jeremiah, in Mr. Nottt's writing, which he was copyingin a very distinct, good hand.Mr. Nottt, the senior missionary upon the island, had thenalmost completed a great work, the translation of the Bible.*When we consider the judgment and persevering industryrequired to translate the Bible from one written language intoanother, it becomes easier to obtain a fair conception of thelabour necessary to fix, and make proper use of an unwritten,and very peculiar language, in order to effect such a work, — awork worthy of the fathers of our church. I paid my respectsto the author of this immense undertaking, and asked his adviceand opinion respecting the affairs in which I was instructed totake a part, while on the island.In the course of another visit to Papiete, I again met thetitular king of Nuhahiva, and told him my suspicions, soplainly, that he said he should appeal to the governor of NewSouth Wales, to the Admiralty, and to the king of Englandhimself, against the unjust suspicions and improper conduct ofthe captain of the Beagle !Since the 17th the weather had been too cloudy, by nightand by day, to admit of astronomical observations. Instead offine clear weather, there was a thickly overcast sky, and onlylight and variable wind. From the latter end of December tothe beginning of March cloudy weather (with much rain, andwesterly winds) is usual at Otaheite. Singular interruptions toThis noble work is completed. I have now lying by me a copy oafthe entire Bible, in the language of Otaheite, translated and compiled byMr. Nottt, who has just sailed from England on his return to Otaheite,carrying with him an ample number of copies of the Book of Books. Ifelt deeply gratified by that good man's kindness in giving nie one of thefirst copies which were printed.518 WEATHER — LOW ISLANDERS. NoV.the regularity of the trade-wind occur among all the tropicalislands of this ocean. One instance has already been given ofthe uncertain and changeable state of the weather among theLow Islands, and many more may be found in the narratives ofvoyages in the Pacific between the tropics.20th. While conversing with Middleton about those LowIslands (where he had passed much time), I was overmuch struckby the unpleasant personal feeling shewn by him when alludingto the missionaries, and their regulations, as contrasted with thestrong terms in which he mentioned the good effects of theirintercourse with the Low Islanders ; and how much more missionarieswere required. His own words, as I find them in apaper of remarks he gave me, are, " the inhabitants (of the LowIslands) are familiarized to Europeans ; and are partly civilized,owing to the Gospel having been preached to them bythe missionaries'" In another place he says, " there are inhabitantsenough to require the constant residence of one or twomissionaries. They have some books of the Gospel in theirhands, but are yet too ignorant to profit by their contents."His own antipathy to the missionaries had arisen, I found, inconsequenceof their restraints upon his conduct, while atOtaheite. — Among other information he said that the nativesof Chain Island told him frequently, that the first ship theyever saw was manned with black people ; but the captain,whom the natives styled the ' King of the Spirits,' was a whiteman. They were much alarmed when they saw the vesselcome close to their island, and their old men deemed it an omenof impending disasters. Soon after this event, the island wasinundated by the sea, and many people perished. They werethen cannibals, and always at war with the natives of theneighbouring islands : since that time, which was ' long ago*(how long he could not ascertain), the Chain Islanders haveinvaded and successively conquered the other Low Islands,invariably killing and eating the greater proportion of theircaptives. (The Low Islands are called Paarauto.)Middleton arrived at Otaheite from Chain Island, only twodays before this conversation took place, He came in his1835. Alia TllUUO — Massacre. 510own open whale boat, with a crew of five natives; two beingChain Islanders, one a native of the Gambier Islands, one fromthe Marquesas, and one from the ferocious set who live uponan island called Aura.* Knowing their habits, and understandingtheir language, radically the same though differing indialect, had assisted his daring and enterprising dispositionin a series of wanderings about all the islands which lie in thisquarter of the Pacific. He sold me a chart, made by himself,in which, he said, every one of the Low Islands was marked,though not con-ectly.-j- From him I obtained their nativenames also, with the proper pronunciation. He says thenatives are great talkers, and have very good memories : forhours at a time he has often listened, with the deepest interest,to their traditions, and to the terrible tales of their inhumanwarfare. About the year 1800, as near as he could ascertain,a ship was cast away upon the low island Arutua :]: her crewwere Europeans (meaning white men). The people of Arutuaoffered no violence, but the blood-thirsty natives of Aura hearingof the wreck, repaired to the place in a body, and massacredevery man.In the year 1831, the master and mate of the unfortunateTruro, passing by Aura in a small boat, Averse invited ashoreby many friendly signs. They suspected no danger, landedtogether, without arms, were instantly speared by the treacherousnatives, and fell, embracing each other. § Those islandsare supposed, by Middleton, to have received their easierinhabitants from the Marquesas; and a few, latterly, fromOtaheite.By frequent intercourse, by presents, and by some slightknowledge of medicine, Middleton thought he had establishedExcepting the savages of Aura the natives of Chain Island haveconquered, successively, all the other islanders in their neighbourhood.On Chain Island there are more hogs and fruits than on any other lowisland.t Some of these data were used in adding to Admiral Krusenstern'schart. + I do not know its position.§ I remarked that the heads of the Otaheitans and those few of theChain Islanders whom I saw, were strikingly different, but truly conformableto their respective characters.520 Falkner ' Ua' Diseases. NoV.himself among the low islanders so securely that he scruplednot to visit any of their islands, Aura alone excepted. Hownecessary it must be for a missionary to have a knowledge ofmedicine and surgery. The Jesuit, Falkner, wandered alonein safety among the tribes of South American Indians, owing,in a great measure, to his knowledge of the healing art.*21st. I went to see ' Ua,' an old man, who rememberedToots' (Cook) ; yet was still strong and active : he told methat in those days he was a little boy. There were many morepeople then inOtaheite; ten to one, as compared with the presentnumbers : but sickness had destroyed a great many, he thought.The island was not so healthy as in former times ; and they hadcaught diseases, in those days unknown. Asking who broughtthis or that disease, he imputed the worst to the ships whichcame after Cook's first visit, and left men upon the island until" Mr. Thomas Falkner was the son of a surgeon of eminence at Manchester,and was brought up in his father's profession, for which he alwaysmanifested the most promising disposition. To complete his professionalstudies, he was sent to London to attend St. Thomas's Hospital; and,happening to lodge in Tooley-street, on the Surrey bank of the Thames,he made an acquaintance with the master of a ship, employed in theGuinea trade, who persuaded the young surgeon to accompany him in hisnext voyage in his professional capacity. On his return to England, heengaged to go in the same situation on board a merchant ship to Cadi,from which he continued his voyage to Buenos Ayres, a Spanish settlementon the River La Plata. Here he fell sick, and was in so dangerousa state when his ship was ready to depart, as not to be in a condition tobe carried on board; so she sailed without him. The Jesuits, of whichthere was a college at Buenos Acres, nursed him during his illness withthe greatest care and kindest assiduity; and perceiving the very greatadvantage which they would derive, in their missions, from possessing abrother who was so well skilled in medicine and surgery, spared no painsto win his affection and secure his confidence. In short, they so workedupon his mind, as to persuade him to enter into their college, and finallyto become one of their order. He now entered upon his ministry amongthe Indians who inhabit the vast track of country between the River LaPlata and the Straits of Magellan. His skill in the cure of diseases, andin performing chirurgical operations, together with his knowledge ofmechanics, rendered his mission successful beyond example. In thiscountry he remained near forty years, and was among the persons appointed1835. MATAVAI Industry. 521their return the following year.* Curvature of the spine, orahump-back, never appeared until after Cook's visits ; and ashehad a hump-backed man in his ship, they attribute thatdeformity to him. ' Ua' told me that I need not yet have anyanxiety about a westerly wind, or bad weather. " The windwould be light and variable during that day, but on the morrowwould draw round to the eastward, and two days afterwardsthe sky would be nearly free from clouds"" Thankingthe old man with some presents, I returned on board ; and theBeagle then got under weigh, ' swept' out of the harbour, and,by the sails and sweeps, alternately employed, regained herformer anchorage in Matavai Bay. In the course of a walkamong the cottages between Papawa and Matavai, I foundnumerous tokens of industry, such as I had not expected in aSouth Sea island. In an enervating climate, where abundanceof food is easily procured, one ought not to expect the contentednatives to distress their minds or bodies, with anxious andindustrious endeavours to supply wants which they do not feel,in any degree like the inhabitants of cold or temperate climates; yet the men of Otaheite undergo great fatigue, andcarry heavy burthens up and down most difficult tracks in thepointed by the Spanish government to make a survey of the coasts betweenthe Brazils and the Siena del Fuego, Falkland Island, &c.When the society of .Jesuits was dissolved, he was sent back to Spain,and after an absence of near forty years, arrived in his native country.Soon after his return to England he became domestic chaplain to RobertBerkeley, esquire, of Speeches, near Worcester, a Roman Catholic gentlemanof distinguished knowledge, most respectable character, and largefortune. There he wrote the account of Patagonia, which has been quotedin this volume, and was afterwards published, with a map corrected fromthat of D' Danville, according to his own observations. Mr. Falkner possesseda very acute mind, a general knowledge, and most retentive memory.Of his medical experience and practice, I have heard physiciansof eminence speak in the highest terms of commendation. His manners,as may be supposed from the tenor of his life, were at once singular andinoffensive : and he retained somewhat of his Indian habits to the last.He died, as I have been informed, about the year 17^1." — Colnett's Voyage,page 25, note.Spanish ships, from Lima, in 1774-6.523 ANECDOTES — CURIOUS RELICS. NoV.mountains, in a manner astonishing, if not impossible, to Europeans.Vir. Darwin, who made a three days' excursion amongthe wildest parts of the mountains, was quite enthusiastic inhis account of the strength, activity, and above all, the excellentdisposition and good conduct of the two natives who werehis companions and guides.At the door of one house I saw the owner reading a bookattentively. It was the New Testament translated into his nativelanguage. His wife was rolling up some of the large greenleaves which they use as substitutes for plates ; and two merrylittle children had been running after me, singing, in hopes ofa present of some trifle. The superior expression of that man'scountenance, and his unaffected employment (for I came uponhim suddenly, and unperceived till the children spoke), madean impression upon my mind, which, I hope, will not be forgotten.In my way back, passing some tall palm trees, I asked anative to get me some cocoa-nuts. Putting a strip of bark betweenhis feet, he threw off his shirt, and jumped ' at' the tree,catching the trunk with his feet and hands at the same moment;then moving his hands alternately, and his feet by short jumps,the band of bark assisting their hold on the slender trunk, in afew seconds he was at the top of a tree seventy feet in height,quite straight and perpendicular, and tapering in size from afoot to six inches in diameter.Some curious relics of former times were found for me, whichhad long remained in dusty quiet ; among them were tortoiseshellmasks, and head pieces surmounted by feathers of thetropic bird ; also an apron, ingeniously, or rather laboriouslymade of small pieces of mother of pearl. So long was it sincethey had been used, that a native about thirty years of age didnot know what they were for: but from the signs and expressionsof the old man to whom they belonged, I think they formedpart of the dress of a priest, used when sacrificing a (perhapshuman) victim.* Two English sixpences also found their wayto me, bearing the date 1 T87 ; memorials of the ill-fated Bounty.• A whole dress may be seen at the British Museum, brought toEngland by Cook in 1771.1835. CHURCH CONGREGATIONS. 523News arrived that the queen intended to return to her headquartersat Papiete, and that she had ordered a present offruit and pigs to be prepared.22d. Sunday. Early this morning a party went with me toPapiete, and others went to Mr. Nottt's church, while thosewho could not go far from the ship attended Mr. Wilson, tohear as well as see the natives at divine service. At Mr.Pritchard's church we found an orderly, attentive, anddecently dressed congregation. I saw nothing " grotesque""nothing " ludicrous," nor anything which had a tendency todepress the spirits," or " disappoint one's expectations"*The church was quite full and many were sitting outside;I suppose six mundi-ed people were present besides children,who, like others of their happy age, required an occasionaltouch with the white wand of a most stern looking old beadle,to prevent their chattering to one another about the strangers,and their ' money .'-j-Mr. Pritchard's fluent delivery in the native language surprisedand pleased us much. The greater part of the nativeswere very attentive. Two were making notes upon paper, ofthe subject of his discourse. A few were careless, but only avery few ; and their eye-wanderings were caused chiefly bythe strangers in uniform. Where is the English congregationof five or six hundred persons, in which a captious observercould not occasionally detect inattention to the clergyman ?Hymns were sung with much propriety, and a very pleasingmusical effect. The language is so soft and so full of vowels,that the good voices and very correct ears of the natives succeedadmirably in hymns. After the service in the nativelanguage had ended, we repaired to the English chapel withMr. Pritchard, who performed divine service in the manner ofthe Independents. Occasional visitors from ships at the island,and the few European residents who are within reach,frequent this chapel.• I had read Kotzebue's voyage a few days previously,t All gold or silver is by them called ' money ;' the gold lace on a coat,an epaulette, a gold coin, or a dollar, is ' money.'524 RECREATION— HITOTE — POMARE. Nov.It was certainly better to suppress altogether, rather thanonly to restrain and alter their former licentious amusements,but it seemed to me that some kind of innocent recreation was:a!iuch wanted by these light-hearted islanders. There is avoid in the mind where a naturally thoughtless and volatiledisposition exists, which it is extremely difficult to fillwith serious thoughts of any duration. To such minds " aquiet reflecting day," (as my respected and much lamentedmessmate in the Thetis, the Rev. Henry Hall, used to termSunday), is, in a great measure, a vacant time of leisure, whichif not occupied by innocent thoughts which interest withoutdoing harm, is certain to be seized upon by evil imaginationsand bad passions.During the time we passed in the churches it was sufficientlyplain that there was no harshness usually shewn towards thechildren : for they clustered round their minister so closelywhen he moved about, that he was obliged to push them away,good naturedly, several times. From the manner of elderly,as well as young natives, I should conclude that " Privates"*as they called Mr. Pritchard, was a favourite.23d. With Mr. Henry (the son of the missionary) a wellknown chief, ' Hitote,' came on board to share our breakfast.Captain Beechey has introduced him in his work and describedhis character. Mr. Henry was born upon the island, and hadnever visited England, yet a more English countenance, ormore genuine English ideas, I have seldom met with in anypart of the world. From him I received some information, tomevery interesting, and to those for whom it was my duty tocollect nautical intelligence, I hope useful.-f- Afterwards Ihastened to Papiete to pay my respects to Queen Pomare. Iwas in time to see her arrive from Eimeo, sitting on the gunwaleof a whale-boat, loosely dressed in a dark kind of gown,without anything upon her head, hands, or feet, and withoutany kind of girdle or sash to confine her gown, which was fasHaving so few consonants in their language, obliges them to changemost of our names.t Mr. Henry's data were also used in adding to Krusenstern's chart.1835. ' AUDIENCE — REFLECTIONS. 525tenet only at the throat. There was no reception at landing :no attendance, no kind of outward ceremony showed that theQueen of the Isles ' had arrived at her home.Some time afterwards, when I heard that she was inclined togive an audience, I went to the royal cottage with Mr. Pritchard.A parcel of half-dressed merry looking damsels eyedus with an amusing mixture of shyness and curiosity. These,I concluded, were a part of the ' Queen's mob,' as our interpreterhad ignorantly or democratically called the royal attendants.Only a few men were about the house, one of whomwas the queen's foster-father (feeding father 'in the Otaheitanlanguage) and another her husband.Entering a small room, ' la-oran Pomare,' with a shake ofthe hand, was the salutation given by Mr. Pritchard, and bymyself, following his example. On the only three chairs inthe room we sat down, but the queen looked very uncomfortable,and certainly not at all dignified. I could not helppitying her, for it was evident she was expecting a lecture onthe subject of the Truro, and felt her utter helplessness : I wastherefore glad, after a few words of compliment, to see hermother, husband, and foster-father enter the room, thoughthey sat down upon clients or the floor.I delivered a letter from Commodore Mason, which sheasked Mr. Pritchard to interpret, and sent out to her secretary.A meeting of the chiefs, herself presiding, was proposedand decided to be held on the following day. Some conversationthen passed on other subjects, and we took our leave byshaking each individual by the hand. This is certainly preferableto pressing noses, but I was sorry to see that the missionarieshad attended but little to the outward demeanour, tothe manners, to the attendance, and to the dwelling of the sovereignof a people whose happiness and improvement wouldcertainly be increased by raising the character, and improvingthe condition of their ruler. While called a queen, Pomareought to be supported by some of those ceremonious distinctions,which have, in all ages and nations, accompanied thechief authority. That the missionaries should interfere harshly526 MISSIONARIES — MISSIONS. Novo:or sweepingly, would doubtless irritate ; but a beneficial influence,almost unnoticed except in its effects, might be exertedin these temporal, and seemingly trifling affairs, whichmight assist hereafter in a day of need.I have been told that the natives have been very ungratefulto the missionaries. Perhaps they are not all aware what adebt of gratitude they owe. Certainly, the better informedand the older inhabitants understand and appreciate the kindnessand the labours of their devoted teachers ; but whether theyounger or the lightly-disposed have, generally speaking, a kindlyfeeling towards them I doubt. More temporal enjoyments, andmore visible or tangible benefits are asked for by the youngerinhabitants, who are daily becoming more aware of the mannersand habits of civilized nations. Surely the queen, a youngand lively Avoman, is likely to compare her own habits andpersonal comforts, and the degrees of attention or deferenceshown to her, with those of foreigners, either resident in orvisiting Otaheite.Dispensing temporal benefits, with an evident desire to bettertheir condition in every way, excites the gratitude of ignorantminds, and often paves the way towards teaching them toacquire abstract ideas, and to wage war against many of thosethings which they would rather do than leave undone. Thereis a Roman Catholic mission at the Gambler Islands, amplyprovided with presents and property fit for the natives, and itis said that they are succeeding well. At Otaheite the missionarieswere afraid that the doctrines of the Roman churchwould obtain a greater influence, and agree better with thedisposition of the natives than the strict discipline in whichthey have hitherto been held. Unless preventive measures aretaken in Europe, religious strife and internal warfare mayagain be caused in these islands, even by those whose aim ispeace. Already there is a remarkable bitterness of feeling onthe subject, which is unlikely to diminish if the success of theRoman Catholic mission increases.But I have wandered away from Pomare — her small ill-furnishedroom and her awkwardly-contrived house, neither Eng-1835. OTAHEITAN CUSTOMS MEETING. 527wish nor Otaheitan. Before she became sovereign, she was knownby the name of Aimatta, which signifies ' eye-eater ;'* but Po-marehas since been adopted as the royal name. In affixing hersignature, 'Vahine' is added, which means ' female' — thus ' Po-mareVahine.' Her husband is a young, intelh gent man; buthe has no share in the government, being only king-consort.This man was the only native of the island, that I saw,whose nose was sharp and projecting. It is amusing to thinkthat they call a man ' long nose,' in this country, when theywish to wound his feelings deeply.During the first few days after a child is born, the motheror her attendants keep pressing the back of the infant's headwith one hand, and the forehead and nose with the other, tomake the head hia;h and the nose and brow flat. Children ofthe higher ranks undergo more compression, because they aremore carefully attended How the queen's husband escaped,or could be chosen by her with such a nose, I am at a loss todiscover.24th. With all the officers who could be spared from theduty of the ship, Mr. Darwin and I repaired early to Papiete.Mr. Wilson, Mr. Henry, and Hitote, were of the party. Arrivedat the hospitable abode of Mr. Pritchard, we waited untila messenger informed us of the queen's arrival at the appointedplace of meeting — the English chapel. From our position wehad just seen the royal escort — a very inferior assemblage. Itappeared that the chiefs and elderly people had walked to thechapel when our boats arrived, leaving only the youngerbranches of the community to accompany Pomare. The Englishchapel is a small, wooden structure, with a high, angularroof; it is about fifty feet in length and thirty feet wide ; nearthe eastern end is a pulpit, and at each corner a small pew-therest of the building is occupied by strong benches, extendingnearly from side to side ; latticed windows admit light andair ; the roof is thatched in a partly Otaheitan manner ; noneI need not remark upon the offering made to the king in the time ofhuman sacrifice.+ Mitchell, the native pilot, described this process to me minutely.528 DRESS — CHIEFS— ELOQUENCE. NoV.of the woodwork is painted, neither is there any decoration.Entering the chapel with my companions, I turned towardsthe principal pews, expecting to see Pomare there ; but no,she was sitting almost alone, at the other end of the building,looking very disconsolate. Natives sitting promiscuously onthe benches saluted us as we entered.: — order, or any kind offcH*m, there was none.The only visible difference between Pomare and her subjectswas her wearing a gay silk gown, tied however round thethroat, though entirely loose elsewhere ; being made and wornlike a loose smock-frock, its uncouth appearance excited morenotice from our eyes than the rich material. In her figure, hercountenance, or her manner, there was nothing prepossessing,or at all calculated to command the respect of foreigners. Ithought of Oberea,* and wished that it had been possible toretain a modified dress of the former kind. A light under-garmentadded to the dress of Oberea might have suited theclimate, satisfied decency, and pleased the eye, even of a painter.Disposed at first to criticise rather ill-naturedly — how soonour feelings altered, as we remarked the superior appearanceand indications of intellectual ability shown by the chieftains,and by very many of the natives of a lower class. Their manner,and animated though quiet tone of speaking, assisted thegood sense and apparent honesty of the principal men in elevatingour ideas of their talents, and of their wish to act correctly.Every reader of voyages knows that the chiefs of Otaheiteare large, fine-looking men. Their manner is easy, respectful,and to a certain degree dignified; indeed on the whole surprisinglygood. They speak with apparent ease, very much to theQueen of Otaheite in 1767. " Both men and women aj-e not onlydecently, but gracefully clothed, in a kind of white cloth, that is madeof the bark of a shrub, and very much resembles coarse China paper.Their dress consists of two pieces of this cloth : one of them, a holehaving been made in the middle to put the head through, hangs downfrom the shoulders to the mid leg before and behind; another piece,wliieh is between four and five yards long, and about one yard broad,they wrap round the body in a very easy manner." — Wallis's VoyageRound the World, I767.1835. CONDUCT Interpreter. 529purpose in few words, and in the most orderly, regular way. Notone individual interrupted another ; no one attempted to givehis opinions, or introduce a new subject, without asking permission; yet did the matters under discussion affect them ailin a very serious manner. Might not these half-enlightenedOtaheitans set an example to numbers whose habits and educationhave been, or ought to have been, so superior ?It had become customary to shake hands with the queen, aswell as with the chiefs. This compliment we were expected topay ; but it seemed difficult to manage, since Pomare occupieda large share of the space between two benches nearest tothe wall, and the next space was filled by natives. However,squeezing past her, one after another, shaking hands atthe most awkward moment, we countermarched into vacantplaces on the benches next in front of her. The principalchiefs, Utaame, Taati, Hitote, and others, sat near thequeen, whose advisers and speakers appeared to be Tali andher foster-father. It was left for me to break the silence andenter upon the business for which we had assembled. Desirousof explaining the motives of our visit, by means of an interpreterin whom the natives would place confidence, I toldMitchell the pilot to request that Queen Pomare would choosea person to act in that character. She named Mr. Pritchard. Iremarked, that his sacred office ought to raise him above theunpleasant disputes in which he might become involved as interpreter.The missionaries had approached, and were living inOtaheite, with the sole object of doing good to their fellowmen,but I was sent in a very different capacity. As an officerin the service of my king, I was either to do good or harm, asI might be ordered ; and it was necessary to distinguish betweenthose who were, and ought to be always their friends,and men whose duty might be unfriendly, if events shouldunfortunately disappoint the hopes of those interested in thewelfare of Otaheite. These expressions appeared to perplexthe queen, and cause serious discussions among the chiefs. Beforeany reply was made, I continued : " But if Mr. Pritchardwill undertake an office which may prove disagreeable, for theVOL. II. 2 M530 AFFAIR OF THE TllUKO. NoV.sake of giving your majesty satisfaction, by forwarding thebusiness for which this assembly was convened, it will notbecome me to object ; on the contrary, I shall esteem his ableassistance as of the most material consequence."The queen immediately replied, through the chieftain at herright hand, Taati, that she wished Mr. Pritchard to interpret.Removing to a position nearer the queen and chiefs (he hadbeen sitting at a distance), Mr. Pritchard expressed his entirereadiness to exert himself on any question which might affectthe good understanding and harmony that hitherto had existedbetween the natives of Otaheite and the British ; and he trustedthat those persons present who understood both languages,(Messrs. Wilson, Bicknell, Henry, and others,) would assist andcorrect his interpretations as often as they thought it necessary.Commodore Mason's letter to me, authorizing my proceedings,was then read — in English, by myself — and translated byMr. Pritchard. Next was read an agreement or bond, bywhich Queen Pomare had engaged to pay 2,853 dollars, or anequivalent, on or before the 1st day of September 1835, as anindemnification for the capture and robbery of the Truro atthe Low Islands.The queen was asked whether her promise had been fulfilled ?Taati answered, " Neither the money nor an equivalent hasyet been given."Why is this ?" I asked. " Has any unforeseen accident hinderedyour acting up to your intentions; or is it not to be paid ?"Utaame and Hitote spoke to Taati, who replied, " We didnot understand distinctly how and to whom payment was tobe made. It is our intention to pay ; and we now wish toremove all doubts, as to the manner of payment."I observed, that a clear and explicit agreement had beenentered into with Capt. Seymour ; if a doubt had arisen it mighthave been removed by reference to the parties concerned, or todisinterested persons ; but no reference of any kind had beenmade, and Mr. Bicknell, the person appointed to receive themoney, or an equivalent, lead applied to the queen, yet hadnot obtained an answer.i1835. PAAMUTO PIRACY. 531I then reminded Poniard of the solemn nature of her agreement; of the loss which her character, and that of her chiefs,would sustain ; and of the means England eventually mightadopt to recover the property so nefariously taken away fromBritish subjects. I said that I was on my way to England,where her conduct would become known ; and if harsh measuresshould, in consequence, be adopted, she must herselfexpect to bear the blame.These words seemed to produce a serious effect. Much argumentativediscussion occupied the more respectable natives aswell as the chiefs ; while the queen sat in silence.I must here remark, in explanation of the assuming or evenharsh tone of my conduct towards Pomare, at this meeting,that there was too much reason for believing that she hadabetted, if not in a great measure instigated, the piracy ofthe Paamuto people (or Low Islanders). For such conduct,however, her advisers were the most to blame. She was thenvery young ; and during those years in which mischief occurred,must have been guided less by her own will than bythe desires of her relations.I had been told that excuses would be made ; and that unlesssomething like harshness and threatening were employed,ill effects, instead of a beneficial result, would be caused by themeeting : for the natives, seeing that the case was not taken upin a serious manner, and that the captain of the ship of wardid not insist, would trouble themselves no farther after shehad sailed away ; and would laugh at those by whom the propertywas to be received.The ' Paamuto,' or Low Islands, where the piracies haveoccurred, in which she and her relations were supposed to havebeen concerned, were, and are still considered (though nominallygiven up by her), as under her authority and particularinfluence. Her father was a good friend to all the natives ofthose islands ; and the respect and esteem excited by his unusualconduct have continued to the present time, and shownthemselves in attachment to his daughter. So much hostilityhas in general influenced the natives of different islands, that2 M^532 GENEROSITY OF OTAHEITANS. NoV.to be well treated by a powerful chief, into whose hands a galeof wind, or warfare throws them, is a rare occurrence.The Paamuto Isles are rich in pearl oysters. Pomare, or herrelations, desired to monopolize the trade. Unjustifiable stepswere taken, actuated, it is said, by her or by these relations;and hence this affair.They soon decided to pay the debt at once. Thirty-six tonsof pearl oyster-shells, belonging to Pomare, and then lying atPapiete, were to form part of the equivalent ; the remainderwas to be collected among the queen's friends. Taati left hisplace near her, went into the midst of the assembly, andharangued the people in a forcible though humorous manner,in order to stimulate them to subscribe for the queen. Afterhe had done speaking, I requested Mr. Pritchard to statestrongly that the innocent natives of Otaheite ought not tosuffer for the misdeeds of the Low Islanders. The shellswhich had come from those ill-conducted people, might well begiven as part of the payment ; but the queen ought to procurethe rest from them, and not from her innocent and deservingsubjects. A document, expressing her intention to pay theremaining sum within a stated time, signed by herself and bytwo chiefs, with a certainty that the property would be obtainedfrom the Low Islanders, would be more satisfactory than immediatepayment, if effected by distressing her Otaheitansubjects, who were in no way to blame.Taati replied, " The honour of the queen is our honour. Wewill share her difficulties. Her friends prefer assisting her inclearing off this debt, to leaving her conduct exposed to censure.We have determined to unite in her cause, and endeavourto pay all before the departure of the man-of-war."It was easy to see that the other principal chiefs had nodoubt of the propriety of the demand ; and that they thoughtthe queen and her relations ought to bear the consequences oftheir own conduct. Taati, who is related to her, exerted himselffar more than Utaame, Hitote, or any of the others. This partof the business was then settled by their agreeing to givethe shells already collected, such sums of money as her friendsI1835. Arrangement Murderers. " 533should choose to contribute, and a document signed by twoprincipal chiefs, expressing the sum already collected and paid ;and their intention of forthwith collecting the remainder, andpaying it before a stipulated time. Difficulties about the present,as compared with the former value of the shells, werequickly ended by arbitration ; and their value estimated atfifty dollars per ton : the ready way in which this questionabout the value of the shells was settled, gave me a high ideaof the natives' wish to do right, rather than take advantage ofa doubtful point of law.I next had to remark, that the queen had given up the murderersof the master and mate of the Truro in a merely nominalmanner, and not in effect ; and that she must expect to receivea communication upon that subject by the next man-of-war.She asked me — whether I really thought they would berequired from her by the next man-of-war .'*I replied : " Those men were tried and condemned by thelaws of Otaheite. Your majesty, as sovereign, exercised yourright of pardoning them. I think that the British Governmentwill respect your right as queen of these islands ; andthat his Britannic Majesty will not insist upon those menbeing punished, or again tried for the same offence ; but thepropriety of your own conduct in pardoning such notoriousoffenders, is a very different affair. It will not tend to diminishthe effect of a report injurious to your character, which youare aware has been circulated''After a pause, I said, " I was desired to enquire into thecomplaints of British subjects and demand redress wherenecessary. No complaints had been made to me ; therefore Ibegged to congratulate her majesty on the regularity and goodconduct which had prevailed ; and thanked her, in the nameof my countrymen, for the kindness with which they had beentreated."I then reminded Pomare of the deep interest generally feltfor those highly deserving and devoted missionaries, whoseexertions, hazardous and difficult as they had been, and stillwere, had raised the natives of Otaheite to their present MISSIONARIES ADVICE. NoV.lightened and improved condition ; and that every reasonunited to demand for them the steady co-operation of both herand her chiefs. Finding that they Listened attentively to Mr.Pritchard's interpretation, which I was told was as good as itappeared to me fluent and effective, I requested permission tosay a few words more to the queen — to the effect that I hadheard much of her associating chiefly with the yovmg and inexperienced,almost to the exclusion of the older and trustworthycounsellors whom she had around her at this assembly. To berespected, either at home or abroad, it was indispensably necessaryfor her to avoid the society of inferior minds and dispositions; and to be very guarded in her own personal conduct.She ought to avoid taking advice from foreigners, whom sheknew not, and whose station was not such as might be aguarantee for their upright dealings : and she ought to guardcarefully against the specious appearances of adventurers whoseintentions, or real character, it was not possible for her todiscover readily. Such men could hardly fail to misinform heronmost subjects ; but especially on such as interested themselves; or about which they might entertain the prejudices andilliberal ideas which are so prevalent among ignorant or ill-disposedpeople. I tried to say these things kindly, as theadvice of a friend : Pomare thanked me, acknowledged thetruth of my remarks, and said she would bear them in mind.Turning to the chiefs, a few words passed, previous to Taatiasking me, in her name, " Whether they were right in allowinga foreigner to enlist Otaheitans to serve him as soldiers ; and inpermitting them and other men to be ti-gained, for warlike purposes,upon their islands"* My reply was, " If Otaheitansubjects, so trained, almost under the queen's eye, act hostilelyagainst the natives of any other island, will not those nativesdeem her culpable? To my limited view of the presentcase, it appears impolitic, and decidedly improper to do so."After a few words with Utaame and Hitote, Taati rose and gavenotice that no Otaheitan should enhst or be trained to serve asWith reference to the so-called Baron de Thierry.1835. Decree — MARE APPEAL.a soldier, in a foreign cause. By this decree de Thierry losthis enlisted troops, except a few Sew Zealanders, and whalingseamen.One of the seven judges, an intelligent, and, for an Otaheitan,a very well educated man, named ' Mare,' asked to speak to me.You mentioned, in the third place," said Mare, " that youwere desired to enquire into the complaints of British subjects,and demand redress, if necessary. You have stated that nocomplaint has been made, and you have given us credit forour conduct : allow me now to complain of the behaviour of oneof your countrymen, for which we have failed in obtainingredress." Here INIare detailed the following case of the ' Cecilia,'and said that no reply to their letter to the Britishgovernment, had yet been received. Mare then added, in atemperate though feeling manner, " does it not appear hard torequire our queen to pay so large a sum as 2,853 dollars out ofher small income ; while that which is due to her, 390 dollars,a mere trifle to Great Britain, has not obtained even an acknowledgmentfrom the British government ?"I ventured to assure Mare that some oversight, or mistake,must have occurred, and promised to try to procure an answerfor them, which, I felt assured, would be satisfactory.The letter on the subject of the Venilia, very literallytranslated, is as follows: it is, for many reasons, a curiousdocument.Our friend, the king of Britain, and all persons in officein your government, may you all be saved by the true God !The following is the petition of Pomare, of the governors,and of the chiefs of Tahiti.A whale-ship belonging to London, has been at Tahiti :Venilia"' is the name of the ship, ' Miner' is the name of thecaptain. This ship has disturbed the peace of the governmentof Queen Pomare the first. We consider this ship a disturberof the peace, because the captain has turned on shore thirteenof his men, against the will of the governor of this place, andother persons in office. The governor of this district madeknown the law clearly. The captain of the ship objected to536 • CASE OF THE Vanilla. NoV.the law, and said that he would not regard the law. We thenbecame more resolute : the governor said to the chiefs, ' Friends,chiefs of the land, we must have a meeting.' The chiefs assembledon the twenty-second day of December 1831. The governorordered a man to go for the captain of the ship. Whenhe had arrived on shore, the governor appointed a man to bespeaker for him. The speaker said to the captain of the ship,Friend, here are your men, take them, and put them on boardof your ship ; it is not agreeable to us that they should remainupon our land.' The captain said, ' I will not by any meansreceive them again: no, not on any account whatever!' Thegovernor again told his speaker to say, ' Take your men, andput them on board your ship, we shall enforce our laws.' Thecaptain strongly objected to this, saying, ' I will not, on anyaccount, again receive these bad men, these mutineers.' Wethen said, ' It is by no means agreeable to us for these men tolive on shore : if they are disturbers of the peace on board theship, they will disturb the peace on shore.' Captain Hill, whohas long been a captain belonging to Britain, spoke to the captainof the ship : this is what he said to him : ' It is not at allagreeable to the laws of Britain that you should discharge, orinany manner turn away your men in a foreign land.' Thisis another thing Captain Hill said, ' you should write a document,stating clearly the crime for which these men have beenturned on shore ; that the governor and chiefs may know howto act towards them, and that they may render you any assistance.'But this was not agreeable to the captain ; he wouldnot write a document. The governor then said to the captain,If you will not take your men on bodied again, give us themoney, as expressed in the law.' The captain said, ' I willnot give the money, neither will I again take the men : no,not on any terms whatever ; and if you attempt to put themon board the ship, I will resist, even unto death.' The governorthen said, ' We shall continue to be firm ; if you will not givethe money, according to the law, we shall put your men onboardthe ship, and should you die, your death will be deserved.'When the captain perceived that we were determined1835. MISCONDUCT OF MASTER. 537to enforce the law, he said, ' It is agreed ; I will give you themoney, three hundred and ninety dollars.'On the 24th of December the governor sent a person for themoney. The captain of the ship said, ' He had no money.'We then held a meeting : the governor's speaker said to thecaptain, ' Pay the money according to the agreement of the22d day of this month.' The captain said, ' I have nomoney.' The governor told him, ' If you will not pay themoney we will put your men on board the ship.'One Lawler said, ' Friends, is it agreeable to you that Ishould assist him ? I will pay the money to you, three hundredand ninety dollars ! I will give property into your hands :this is the kind of property ; such as may remain a long timeby the sea-side and not be perishable. In five months, shouldnot the money be paid, this property shall become your own.'Mr. Pritchard said that this was the custom among foreigners.We agreed to the proposal.On the 26th of December we went to Lawler's house to lookat the property, and see if it was suitable for the sum of money;and also to make some writings about this property. Whilethere, Lawler made known to us something new, which was,that we should sign our names to a paper, written by the captain,for him to show his owners. We did not agree to thisproposal, because we did not know the crime for which thesemen were turned on shore. We saw clearly that these twopersons were deceiving us, and that they would not pay themoney ; also that the captain would not again take his men ;but we did not attempt to put his men on board the ship, becauseanother English whaler had come to anchor. We toldthe captain that we should write a letter to the British government,that they might order this business to be investigated,and might afford us their assistance.This is the substance of what weave to say : — We entreatyou, the British Government, to help us in our troubles. Punishthis Captain Miner, and command the owners of the Venilia topay us three hundred and ninety dollars for thirteen of theirmen having been left on our land ; and also to send the wagese538 APPEAL TO British Government. NoV.of a native man who was employed to supply the whole crewwith bread-fruit while at anchor here. Let them send a goodmusket for this man, because the captain has not given him agood musket according to the agreement at the beginning.Captain Miner also gave much trouble to the pilot. He tookhis ship out himself: the pilot went after the ship to get hismoney, and also the money for Pomare, for anchorage. Hewould not give the pilot his share. After some time he gavethe pilot some cloth for his share.In asking this, we believe that our wish will be compliedwith. We have agreed to the wish of the British governmentin receiving the Pitcairn's people, and in giving them land.We wish to live in peace, and behave well to the British flag,which we consider our real friend, and special protection. Wealso wish that you would put in office a man like Captain Hi,and send him to Tahiti, as a representative of the king of GreatBritain, that he may assist us. If this should not be agreeableto you, we pray you to give authority to the reverend GeorgePritchard, the missionary at this station.This is the conclusion of what we have to say. Peace bewith you. May you be in a flourishing condition, and maythe reign of the beloved king of Britain be long ! Writtenat Tahiti on the sixth day of January, one thousand eight hundredand thirty-two.On behalf of Pomare, the queen.Signed by Apaapa, chief secretary.Ardea, district governor.Tepau, district governor.Tehoro, one of the seven supreme judges.Mare, a district judge, (since raised tobe a supreme judge."Addition : — " This man, Lawler,* is an Irishman : he hasThis Lawler was so remarkably good-looking a man, that the nativesused to say (literally translated) that " he was as beautiful as a glasstumbler." (Many years ago, when Wallis discovered the Society Islands,a drinking-glass excited so much notice, that ever since it has beenreferred to as one of the most beautiful of objects.)1835. Lawless CONSULS. .539been living at Tahiti about three months : he came from theSandwich Islands. Of his previous conduct we can say nothing.We much wish that a British ship of war would come frequentlyto Tahiti to take to their own lands these bad foreigners thattrouble lis. It is useless for us to depend upon the consul atthe Sandwich Islands. We have long known that we canobtain no assistance from him.*We wish to do our duty towards you Britons. You arepowerful and rich — but we are like weak children.On behalf of Pom are, the queen.Apaapa, chief secretary."Paofai (close to Papiete),Tahiti, 7th January 1832."This interesting letter needs no apology for its insertion atfull length. Besides explaining Mare's application, it helps togive an idea of the state of Otaheite ; and it appeals to ourbetter feelings in a persuasive manner.The British government has since appointed Mr. Pritchard to act asConsul for the Society and Friendly Islands.Note (a) referred to in page 507-That the electric agent (whether fire or fluid) goes upward from theearth to the atmosphere, as well as in the contrary direction, showingthat a mutual action takes place between air and land, many facts mightbe brought to prove : I will only mention two.On October 25th we had a very remarkable storm : the sky was all inflames.I employed part of the night in observing it, and had the pleasureof seeing three ascending thunderbolts ! They rose from the sea likean arrow; two of them in a perpendicular direction, and the third at anangle of about 75 degrees." — (De Lamanon, in the Voyage of La Peruse,vol. iii. pp. 431-2).While Hem. corvette Hind, was lying at anchor off Zante, in 1823,in twelve fathoms water, an electric shock came in through her hawse,along the chain-cable, by which she was riding. Two men, who were sittingon the cable, before the bitts, were knocked down — felt the effects ofthe shock about half an hour — but were not seriously hurt. A noise likethat of a gun startled every one on board ; yet there was neither smell,nor smoke, nor any other visible effect. The sky was heavily clouded over ;small rain was falling; and there was distant thunder occasionally, but novisible lightning. The cable was hanging slack, almost' up and down.' Iwitnessed this myself.CHAPTER XXIII.Continuation of the Meeting atPapiete — Questions — Explanation — Meetingends — Pilotage — jNIr. Wilson — Queen's Visit — Fireworks — SchoolIntelligence — Letters — Inhabitants — Dress — Conduct — Abolition ofSpirits — Defect in Character — Domestic Scene — Aura Island — Newtonat Bow Island — Pearl Oyster-shells — Divers— Steering — Queen'sLetter — Collection — Sail from Otaheite — AVhylootacke — Flight ofBirds — Navigators — Friendly — Feejee Islands — English Chief — Precautions— La Peruse,Reverting to the meeting at Papiete : — The queen's secretarynext asked to speak, and said that a law had been establishedin the island, prohibiting the keeping, as well as theuse or importation of any kind of spirits. In consequence ofthat law, the persons appointed to carry it into effect had desiredto destroy the contents of various casks and bottles ofspirits ; but the foreigners who owned the spirits objected,denying the right to interfere with private property. TheOtaheitan authorities did not persist, as they were told thatthe first man-of-war which might arrive would certainly takevengeance upon them if they meddled with private property.He wished to ask whether the Otaheitans ought to have persistedin enforcing their own laws ; and what I should havedone, had the law been enforced with a British subject, andhad he made application to me.My answer was, " Had the Otaheitans enforced their law, Icould in no way have objected. In England a contrabandarticle is seized by the proper officers, and is not treated asprivate property while forbidden by the law""Much satisfaction was evidently caused by this declaration :also, at a former part of the discussions, when a remonstrancewas made against Otaheitans paying the Truro debt, thegreater part of the assembly seemed to be much pleased.A respectable old man then stood up, and expressed his gratificationat finding that another of King William's men-of-warhad been sent — not to frighten them, or to force them to do asthey were told, without considering or inquiring into their own1835. EXPLANATION — MEETING ENDS. 541opinions or inclinations, but to make useful enquiries. Theyfeared the noisy guns which those ships carried, and had oftenexpected to see their island taken from them, and themselvesdriven off, or obliged in their old age to learn new ways ofliving.I said, " Rest assured that the ships of Great Britainnever will molest Otaheitans so long as they conduct themselvestowards British subjects as they wish to be treated by Britons.Great Britain has an extent of territory, far greater than issufficient for her wishes. Conquest is not her object. Thoseships, armed and full of men, which from time to time visityour island, are but a very few out of a great many which areemployed in visiting all parts of the world to which Britishcommerce has extended. Their object is to protect and defendthe subjects of Great Britain, and also take care that their conductis proper — not to do harm to, or in any way molest thosewho treat the British as they themselves would wish to betreated in return."I was much struck by the sensation which these opinionscaused amongst the elderly and the more respectable part ofthe assemblage. They seemed surprised, and so truly gratified,that I conclude their ideas of the intentions of foreigners towardsthem must have been very vague or entirely erroneous.The business for which we had assembled being over, Irequested Mr. Pritchard to remind the queen, that I had along voyage to perform ; and ought to depart from her territoriesdirectly she confided to me the promised document,relating to the affair of the Truro ; and I then asked the queenand principal chiefs to honour our little vessel by a visit on thefollowing evening, to see a few fireworks : to which they willinglyconsented : some trifling conversation then passed ; andthe meeting ended.Much more was said, during the time, than I have here detailed: my companions were as much astonished as myself atwitnessing such order, so much sensible reasoning, and so gooda delivery of their ideas ! I shall long remember that meetingat Otaheite, and consider it one of the most interesting sights542 GOOD FEELING PILOTAGE. NoV.I ever witnessed. To me it was a beautiful miniature view ofa nation emerging from heathen ignorance, and modestly settingforth their claims to be considered civilized and Christian.We afterwards dined with Mr. Pritchard, his family, andthe two chiefs, Utaanie and Taati. The behaviour of theseworthies was extremely good ; and it was very gratifying tohear so much said in their favour by those whose long residenceon the island had enabled them to form a correct judgment.What we heard and saw showed us that mutual feelings ofesteem existed between those respectable and influential oldchieftains and the missionary families.It was quite dark when we left Papiete to return, by manymiles among coral reefs, to the Beagle ; but our cat-eyed pilotundertook, to guide our three boats safely through intricatepassages among the reefs, between which I could hardly findmy way in broad daylight, even after having passed them severaltimes. The distance to the ship was about four miles ; and thenight so dark, that the boats were obliged almost to touch eachother to ensure safety ; yet they arrived on board unhurt, contraryto my expectation ; for my eyes could not detect anyreason for altering our course every few minutes, neither couldthose of any other person, except the pilot, James Mitchell.Had he made a mistake of even a few yards, among so manyintricate windings, our boats must have suffered (because thecoral rocks are very sharp and soon split a plank), though insuch smooth and shallow water, a wrong turning could havecaused inconvenience only to ourselves, for there was little or nodanger of more than a wetting.The observations at Matavai being completed, I was enabledto leave the place, and invited Hitote and Mr. Henry (who hadreturned with us) to pay another visit to Papiete in the Beagle,and meet the I'oyal party.25th. At daylight this morning, while the Beagle's crew wereunmooring and hoisting in the boats, I went to Mr. Wilson'sschool-house, then used also as a chapel — the old chapel havingbeen blown down by a violent gale of wind. Divine service(a hymn, a long extempore prayer, and another hymn) was1835. MR. WILSON Papists. 543performed. This is the established custom at all the missionarystations at Otaheite on Wednesday mornings : on other morningsone or two hours after daylight are employed in the schools.The congregation was numerous, and very attentive. I noticedthat all the principal men of the district, besides Hitote whocame from a distant part of the island, were present.Mr. Wilson's manner pleased me much ; it was the sincere,and naturally impressive manner of a kind-hearted, honestman, earnestly performing a sacred and paramount duty. Iwent to see the new chapel after the morning-service was ended ;but only the floor-timbers and the posts for the roof were thenfixed in their places. 'I've natives were irregular in theirwork, sometimes doing much, at others little, just as they feltdisposed. Being a voluntary work, they took their timeabout it.Mr. Darwin and I breakfasted with Mr. Wilson at hishouse : it happened that Mr. and Mrs. Henry were about tomake a journey to some distance ; that a favourite son wasundertaking a new and difficult mission at the Navigator'sIslands, and that we were both about to take leave of the piousteacher of the heathen : and for each he asked a blessing, inan extempore prayer of some length, the result of unaffected,genuine piety. A kinder, or less exceptionable prayer, so faras I could pretend to judge, than that unprepared one byMr. Wilson, I could not have wished to hear. That it wasunprepared I feel certain, because he had not expected us tobe present, and the manner in which our prospects were intermingledwith those of the others he mentioned, showed thatthere was no premeditation. There was no affected expression,or unusual tone : it was the sincere devout manner of apious plain-spoken man.When under sail we tried to approach the entrance ofPapiete Harbour, but baffling winds prevented our anchoringuntil three in the afternoon ; and then, anticipating the royalvisit, Ave tried to make such preparations as our little vesselcould accomplish. Dressing the ship with flags, and preparingto man yards, was all we were able to do : salute wecould not, on account of the chronometers.544 VISIT — FIREWORKS SONGS. NoV.We were told that the queen had walked to Papawa, distantabout two miles, to inspect a quantity of fruit, cocoa-nuts,pine-apples, &c. (which she had ordered to be collected as apresent to the man-of-war) : and, with our glasses, we saw theroyal party hastening along the beach, and in the midst of anumber of women, children, and men, the queen was observedadvancing at a quick walk. Soon afterwards, when it wassupposed she had rested and dressed, we sent the boats. Thechiefs were already on board. Mr. Pritchard undertook thetroublesome offices of interpreter and master of the ceremonies,and by his assistance we saw the whole party collected on theBeagle's upper deck, while the seamen manned yards, and weall gave the queen three cheers.A bad dinner, accepted after the four mile walk, in a mannerit did not deserve, — was succeeded by a few rockets, bluelights, and false fires, — the only fireworks we possessed. Luckilythe rockets were good and gave high satisfaction. Lyingin the middle of a bay, whose radius, supposing it semi-circular,may be half-a-niile, our ears were startled by a thrillingoutcry of delight echoing around the beach, as each successiverocket rushed into the sky and burst. This outcry from thenatives on shore, who were taken by surprise (the night beingvery dark) showed how much they enjoyed the sight. Ourvisitors on board, being told what would happen, only repeated' maitai,' ' maintain'* with earnestness. I much wishedthen to have had a few good fireworks of a more artificialcharacter. To any one about to visit distant, especially half-civilizedor savage nations, let me repeat a piece of advicegiven to me, but which from inadvertence I neglected to follow: " take a large stock of fireworks."Some presents to each of our guests helped to amuse themand keep up their cheerfulness. After tea I proposed hearinga few of the seamen's, songs, — as some of our crew were verygood singers, — not at the time thinking of their prejudicesagainst any singing except hymns. Mr. Pritchard had noword to interpret ' song' but ' himene ;' and Rule Britannia,Very good — beautiful.1835. Natives Reading; SCHOOL. 545with one or two other grave performances, passed ofF very m ell,but, to the perplexing of Mr. Pritchard and surprise of theOtaheitans, a merry comic song was struck up, which obligedMr. Pritchard to answer the queen's inquiries plainly, bysaying, " No, that was not a hymn," it was " sea singing."God save the King ' sounded more gravely, and suited better.We landed the party almost at their own doors, and if theywere half as well pleased as we were, our little preparationshad not been a waste of time and trouble. Their behaviouron board was extremely correct : their habits and manners perfectlyinoffensive. No doubt they are improving yearly, andthe example of the missionary families has an influence overthem, exceeding that of very differently disposed people bywhom they are too frequently visited.26th. At daylight this morning some of us visited theschool. As I had heard of ' compulsion ' and other absurdities,I went early to get there before Mr. Pritchard arrived,without having hinted at such an intention.About the large chapel or church, groups of elderly andold people were sitting by threes and fours in a place, helpingeach other to read the New Testament. While one read theothers listened, and, if able, corrected him. One man not lessthan fifty years of age, was learning to read, with spectacles.Some came in, others went out, just as they chose, for there wasnot any one even to watch them till Mr. Pritchard came : andduring about an hour after sunrise, every day, those people;,both women and men, thus instructed one another, previousto beginning their daily out-of-door labours.In the school-house I found a number of children, waitingfor their teacher, who soon arrived and save them their tasks.The greater part of them wrote sentences on slates from hisdictation, with ease and correctness. One sentence he gavethem was, ' the captain wishes you happiness,' which theywrote instantly, and some of their own accord added, ' andwe wish happiness to the captain.' The handwriting of many,indeed most of the elder girls and boys, was very good : andto verbal questions they replied readily. They seemed to bein good discipline, and yet a merrier or more cheerful lookingVOL. II. % N546 INTELLIGENCE Male's Letter. NoV.set of children I never saw. A hymn excellently, or, I oughtperhaps to say, prettily sung, ended their attendance.Returning by way of the church, I saw Hitote, his brother,and other chiefs, engaged in eager discussion. Mr. Pritchardand I went in : " You are just come in time," said they, "we aredisputing about the lightning conductors on board the Beagle,and cannot determine whether they end in the ship's hold, orwhether they go through her bottom, into the water"" Mr.Pritchard explained : a momentary pause ensued — each seemedtrying to understand the puzzling subject ; when a shrewd oldman, hitherto a quiet listener, remarked — " you white men arewonderfully clever, you know and do most things, I wish someof you (passing his hand over his chin in a drolly rueful manner)I wish some of you would tell us how to rid our faces ofthese troublesome beards !" (He had just been shaved).The rapidity with which intelligence is communicated amongsavage, or partially civilised nations, has often been remarked :but I do not remember meeting with an explanation, tillMr. Nottt told me it was passed verbally — from one to another— each man calling to his neighbour. No method couldbe speedier, where a population is numerous ; as at Otaheite orNew Zealand, when Cook was there.In the course of the morning I waited upon the queen toinform her that the Beagle was then going out of the port ; andthat I waited only for her commands, and the letter she had promised: upon which she sent for her secretary and the chiefs;when we left her for a time. Two of the persons who had beenon board our vessel the previous evening, sent me letters thismorning, which are so peculiar and interesting, in many pointsof view, that I here insert them.Translation of a letter from ' Mare,' one of the seven supremejudges of Otaheite; written in a round distinct hand, in hisown language, and directed to me.« Tahiti, Nov. 26, 1835.To you the officer of King William !May the peace of God be with you. This is what I haveto say to you, my dear friend. I praise you with grateful feelingsin my heart for your kindness to me, an insignificant man,1835. PAOFAl's LETTER INHABITANTS. satingiving to me a box and some other things besides. I andmy wife will feel grateful to you when we look at these things.This is another thing with which I feel pleased ; your havingshown me the many good things on board your ship ; and yourmen ; they have great excellence, and a good character.That you may be saved is the wish of your servant,Mare."A letter from Paofai, the brother of Hitote, directed toFitirai,' is similar.Dear Friend, • " Tahiti, Nov. 26, 1835.Peace be unto you and your family, in the name of God.These are my words to you. I feel very much gratified byyour great kindness in giving me a trunk, and several otherthings. For this cause I thank you with grateful feelings.My wife and family will also feel grateful to you. Dear friendsmay the peace of the Messiah, who is the King of Peace, bewith you. Amen. "Paofai."*Among the natives of Otaheite let us not overlook the sonsand daughters of the earlier missionaries. Those whom wehad the pleasure of seeing did credit to the country of theirparents ; to Otaheite ; and to those excellent persons who musthave taken such pains with their education. I presume not tospeak from what I have seen only, but from the correspondingaccounts of others, added to what I witnessed myself.I will now make a few general remarks, previous to quittingthe island. It did not appear to me that the men of Otaheite areseparated visibly into two classes, as some accounts had led usto expect. All of the higher class, whom we saw, or about whomwe could learn anything, certainly were large, but rather unwieldy: yet among the lower class there were numerous stouttall men, as tall as the chiefs, and more actively made. A fewwere of a middle size, and a very few, low in stature : but allwell-proportioned and muscular; though their muscles are nothard and knotty, like those of a hard-working white man ; theyThe original letter?, in the hand-writing of Mare and Paofai, are inmy possession.2n 2548 PROPORTIONS — ATTIRE. NoV.are rounded, and smooth. They stride along in an imposingmanner, occasionally recalling ideas of the giants of history.Although, generally speaking, they are taller than the Patagonians,they do not, to the eye, appear so large. This oculardeception must arise from the better proportion of the Otahei-tans. The native of Patagonia has a large, coarse lookinghead, with high cheek bones, and a 'mane-like' head of hair:his shoulders are high and square ; his chest very wide ; whileto heighten the effect of these traits, each of which gives onean idea of size, a great rough mantle, made of the woolly skinof the guanaco, thrown loosely round his shoulders, hangsalmost to his feet. But the Otaheitan head is singularly wellformed ; and, if phrenology is not altogether a delusion, fewmen are more capable of receiving instruction, or doing creditto their teachers, than these islanders, so often described, yetby no means enough known. Their hands, and more especiallytheir feet, have been said to be of the Papua form ; but theshape of the latter is owing, it appears to me, to their alwaysgoing barefooted : and I observed their hands particularly withoutbeing able to distinguish any peculiarity whatever in the form.The young men frequently wear a wreath of leaves, orflowers, round the head, which, though becoming, has rather aBacchanalian appearance. Some cut their hair short, othersshave the greater part of their head, but solely from caprice :not one could give me any reason beyond that which is impliedin " it is the fashion."It is seldom that one meets a native entirely naked ; I meannaked excepting the girdle which is always worn : gene-allythey have a gannet, or a piece of one, obtained from a whiteman. These remnants, often tattered, and, among the lowerclasses, always dirty, disfigure them much. Those whom Isaw, with only a native girdle, but whose bodies were tattowedin the old fashion, appeared to my eye much less naked thanthe yovmg men, not tattowed, and only half clothed. I shallnot forget the very unpleasant impression made upon my mind,at first landing, by seeing a number of females, and children,with a few men, half dressed in the scanty, dii'ty, and tattered1835. NATIVE CLOTHING CONDUCT. 549scraps of clothing, which they unfortunately prefer to theirnative dress. A woman, who has around her waist a substantialnative garment, which falls as low as the calf of the leg ;and over her shoulders, folding in front across the bosom, amantle, or cloak, of similar material — appears to the eye of astranger much more decently dressed than the hasty lover ofnovelty ; who seems proud of a dirty cotton gown, tied only atthe neck, and fluttering in the Avind. Their Sunday dresses,however, are clean and decent, though those of other days arecertainly much the contrary. An winder-garment alone need beadded to the women's former dress of native manufacture, tomake it answer every purpose. Why should not home ingenuity,and domestic industry be encouraged .''The moral conduct and character of these islanders haveundergone so much discussion ; so various have been the decisions,and so varying are the opinions of voyagers and residents,that I, for one, am satisfied by the conclusion, that the good andthe bad are mixed in Otaheite, much as they are in other partsof the world exposed to the contamination of unprincipledpeople. That the missionaries have done so much, in checkingand restraining depravity, is to me matter of serious reflection.But let us also remember, that the testimony of very trustworthywitnesses shews that there, even in earlier days, iniquitydid not search after those who sought not her abode ! *The Beagle's stay was too short to enable us to form anyCook says — " Great injustice has been done the women of Otaheite,and the Society Isles. The favours of married women, and also the unmarriedof the better sort are as difficult to be obtained here, as in anyother country whatever. I must, however, allow, that they are all completelyversed in the art of coquetry, and that vei-y few of them fix anybounds to their conversation. It is therefore no wonder that they haveobtained the character of libertines."In the excellent descriptions of Turnbull, we read: — "Much has beensaid as to the licentiousness and loose conduct of the women. It is butjustice to say, that I saw nothing of this. Their ideas of decency aredoubtless very different from ours; they must be judged therefore by avery different standard."550 PROHIBITION OF SI'IKITS. NoV.just conclusions. I witnessed no improprieties, neither did Isee any thing that would not have inclined me to suppose(had I read or heard nothing of them), that their habits are,in most ways, better than those of many civilized nations.The missionaries have succeeded in carrying attention to religion,and general morality, to a high pitch : may they continueto succeed, in future years, and become an example to larger,older, and nominally wiser nations.Is it not a striking fact, that the people of a whole countryhave solemnly refrained from drinking spirits : does not thisact alone entitle them to respect, and high consideration ? Sosincere are they on this subject, that, a short time since, whenthey heard that a small vessel, lying in their harbour, had onboarda cask of rum, which the master intended to sell tosome of the residents, they went off to the vessel, and destroyedthe obnoxious liquor.Upon enforcing their first law on this subject, every partof each house was searched. They were very minute intheir scrutiny, but overlooked a bottle of brandy, whichMr. Pritchard had kept in the house for medical purposes.After their search, when leaving him, he called them backand showed the bottle, saying for what purpose it had beenkept, Some said, ' keep it for that purpose ;' others said ' no,it is ' ava'* destroy it ! let us make no distinction, let usutterly discard the use of so baneful a liquor ! have we notother medicines, about whose use there can be no doubt ?""However, the milder party prevailed, and the brandy bottlewould have preserved its contents had not Mr. Pritchardpoured them on the ground before their eyes.-f-One horrible defect in the former character of the Otaheitanshas hardly been mentioned in the earlier writers. They wereOr cava, their word for intoxicating liquor of any kind.+ I was surprised, when I first arrived at Otaheite, by finding that noneof the natives who came on board would touch spirits ; and that theywould drink but very little wine. Afterwards, however, one chief wasnoticed who seemed differently disposed.1835. HAKSII USAGE OF Infirm. 551unkind, and utterly inattentive to the old and infirm : — theywere yet worse : they scrupled not to destroy their aged or sick,yes, even their parents, if disabled by age or by sickness.*Mr. Wilson assured me that in former times, Avon a personhad lingered in sickness, they would carry him to the waterside,under pretence of bathing him, dig a hole, and bury himalive ! Thus they ended the life of a young man who hadbeen servant to Mr. Wilson, until he sickened, and, by thenatives, was supposed to be dying. Mr. Wilson tried all hecould do, in the way of medical assistance, and had hopes ofhis recovery, when he suddenly disappeared : and not until along time afterwards could he ascertain the horrid cruelty ofwhich the natives had been guilty !That they do not even now pay that attention to infirm oldage which, in our estimation, is a sacred duty, may be inferredfrom the following anecdote. Mr. Stokes rambled intoa secluded spot near Matavai, where, surrounded by oldtrees, stood a small and tottering hut. On a filthy worn-outmat, lay a venerable looking old man, hardly covered by aragged cloth. His only friend, an aged hobbling dog, limpedto his side as if hoping that his example would excite some oneto show compassion to the old man, his master.The helpless state of this poor sufferer, whose legs wereswollen by elephantiasis to an unwieldy bulk, and his utterdestitution, induced Mr. Stokes to make immediate inquiries,and endeavour to get him relieved from some of his misery.It was ascertained that a daughter and son-in-law wereusually living with him, but the new 'manna' had engrossedtheir attention, and the poor father had been left to the careof his faithful though helpless dog !At Matavai the memory of the captain of H.M.S. ' Racoon,'known as the ' long captain,' also as ' Tapane matapo,' orCaptain blind eye,' is still cherished. The conduct of bothhim and the officers of the Racoon, seems to have highly delightedall classes. How pleasant it is to hear a countryman,From enquiries made among the missionaries and natives, I convincedmyself of this startling fact.552 Domestic Manners. NoV.especially of one's own cloth, spoken of in such terms offriendship and respect, and how much that pleasure is increasedAshen one reflects, that many years have elapsed since the conducttook place which caused these sensations.Mr. Stokes passed some nights in Otaheitan cottages. Hetold me that the natives, both men and women, are extremelyfond of their children, and are very kind to them. Not contentwith nursing and amusing them, they cram them as managersof poultry cause turkeys to be crammed, not exactly withpepper corns, or walnuts,* but with bananas and other nutritivefood. At each end of the houses he visited there was asmall fire, one lx;ing for the elder, the other for the youngerfolks ; this was in the evening, at their last meal time.Breadfruit, which had been previously roasted, and wildplantains brought from the mountains, were put to the fire tobe warmed. Meanwhile cocoa-nuts were opened, their milk waspoured into cups, made of empty nutshells, and handed aboutwith the nuts. Each person had a nut and a cup of the milk,orjuice.-f- Taro-root roasted was then served, together withthe bread-fruit and plantain, on leaves freshly gathered ; therewas also a piece of brownish yellow wood, like the rotten rootof a tree, hanging up in the hut, which the people sometimeseat; it is called Tl^ Grace was said (a duty never omitted),and a clean, comfortable meal enjoyed by the whole party.Afterwards the fires were put out, and a queer little woodenpipe passed round. The strongest tobacco is thought the best,and they like to swallow the smoke. Sometimes, instead oftobacco, they use an indigenous herb.Before sleeping the oldest man said prayers : one of theyoung men read a short portion of the New Testament, andthen a hymn was sung by the whole family. A lamp was keptThe very best things for fattening turkeys.t Cocoa-nut milk n~.akes an indelible black stain, and is sometimesused for dyeing.t The root of the Ti plant is sweet, like sugar cane of indifferent quaCity. Molasses has been made from it.1835. SNUFF PROVISIONS Truro. 553burning all night. A curious snufF was observed by Mr.Stokes, and from the method of using or taking it, I am inclinedto think it an old custom, not imported by the whitemen. A substance, not unlike rhubarb in its appearance, butof a very pleasant fragrance, was rubbed on a piece of shark'sskin, stretched on wood ; and much it appeared to please auold man, who valued this snuffs-stick so highly, that hewould not part with it.The Otaheitans are fond of going to sea, and take greatinterest in seeing new countries. Mr. Henry said there wasno difficulty in getting a crew of natives, for boats or smallvessels, provided that a promise was made to bring them backto their own island. From four to six yards of ordinarylinen, or cotton cloth, with good provisions, was accountedenough remuneration for the zealous services of an able-bodiedactive man, during one month.While we stayed at Otaheite we were supplied with excellentbeef, and passably good vegetables; the latter however happenedto be scarce. Most of the cattle belonged to the missionaries,who were trying to persuade the natives to rear them, and werebeginning to succeed, though the people are fonder of theirhorses, of which there are a good many on the island, but illkept and little understood.Mr. Stokes obtained another account of the murder of themaster and mate of the Truro, which says : " The master andmate of the Truro had left the northern end of Aura Island,intending to go to Otaheite ; the chief of the northern districthaving treated them very kindly, and told them to avoidthe south end of the island, because bad men lived there.The wind would not allow them to keep a sufficient offing ;and a small canoe, with only two men, approached their boatwith the apparent design of offering fruit for sale ; but whennear the boat they threw spears with such effect, that the whitemen were both killed"" I place more confidence in the formeraccount.The seizure of a ship at Bow Island (barque Newton, of554< SEIZURE OF THE NEWTON. NoV.Valparaiso, under Chilian colours, though owned by Britishsubjects), has by some persons been supposed to have beenexcited by Queen Pomare : but the following statement, fromMr. Middleton, who was pilot on board the ship at the time,gives a very different idea.The master of that vessel (named Clarke) had employedsome natives of Bow Island to dive for pearl oyster-shells onhis account ; he had agreed to pay them a certain quantity ofcloth, and to give them so much provision per month. Repeatedill-treatment, and a miserable supply of provisions (at one timeonly one cocoa-nut each day, without any thing else), inducedthe natives to think of deserting him ; yet they were unwillingto lose the reward of their labours, which had been very severe.One morning he had agreed to the pilot's earnest request thatthe natives should have more food, and had ordered a biscuita-piece for them ! Soon after the pilot, who was charged withthe care of the natives, had delivered the biscuits, the mastercame on deck, affected to deny his orders, snatched the biscuitsaway from each of them, and threw them overboard ! Sullen andfierce looks were exchanged ; and the pilot warned Mr. Clarkethat the natives would attack him, and take the vessel, if hedid not alter his harsh conduct : to which he replied, by defyinghalf a hundred of them !A few words from the pilot, in their own language, appeasedtheir resentment at the moment, and the broodingstorm passed over ; but in the course of that day, whileMiddleton was away getting shells, the master beat a chief.This was an unpardonable affront ; they took possession of thevessel ; bound all the white people ; and carried them on shore.What extraordinary mildness among savages !When the pilot returned with his cargo of shells, he sawnone of the crew ; and at first hesitated to approach. But thenatives seeing this, hailed him, saying, that they did not intendto hurt any one ; that they were his friends ; and had touchednone of his things. This he found true. His own cabin wasshut up — untouched ; though every other place in the ship had1835. PKAKL Wishing STEERING. 555been ransacked, and the furniture of the hull torn to pieces.They afterwards allowed the pilot to take the vessel to Otaheite,where she was sold by auction for the benefit of those who hadinsured her.Obtaining the pearl oyster-shell is well known to be a difficultand dangerous employment : though the divers at the Paamu-to Islands seldom go down deeper than four or five fathoms,they remain at the bottom from one to three minutes, sometimesbringing ten shells at one time to the surface ; andduring four or five hours they continue this extreme labour.After a long dive, blood gushes from the ears and nose ; andthe poor diver is quite blind during ten or twenty minutes. Hemay then be seen squatting on the reef, his head between hisknees, and his hands spread over his face — a pitiable object :yet for the small monthly pay of ten or twelve yards ofcalico, or coarse linen, do those hard-working natives enduresuch straining exertions !At some of the islands, a good hatchet or axe will purchaseas many shells as would fill a small canoe.In making their voyages from one island to another, thenatives steer by the stars, by the direction of the wind, andthe flight of birds ; but their ideas of distance are extremelyvague. Those who have seen a compass used in a boat esteemit highly. Middleton, who had made many voyages amongthe Low Islands, in whale-boats manned solely by natives,said that they always expressed astonishment at his predictingthe time at which they would arrive at their destination. Sometimesthey asked if he could see the land in the compass ; morethan once they exclaimed, " Ah, you white men ! you knowevery thing ! What simpletons we are, notwithstanding allour canoes !" The canoe occupies so much time and labour inconstructing, and is so essential to their every purpose, that afine one is to the natives of any of these islands what a three-deckeris to us.The queen's letter being finished, and sent to me by hermessenger, I will give the translation made for me on the spotby Mr. Pritchard.556 queen's letter — taking leave. Nov.« Tahiti, November 26, 1835.To the Captain of the ship of war :This is what I have to say to you, before you leave us,respecting the debt. We have 2,338 dollars, which we arenow taking to the person who is to receive this property, whois Mr. Bicknell. We are now collecting the remainder.Peace be with you,And with your king, William,(Signed) Pomare Vahine.(Witnessed by) Hitote and Taati."Taking leave of the queen was our next engagement. Atthe door of her house was a table, on which the loyal and kindheartednatives were depositing their dollars, and fractions ofdollars : to enable her to pay the debt. To me it was anaffecting and an unpleasing sight, — not the proofs of loyaltyand affection — Heaven forbid ! — but the reflection that thoseindividuals had in no way done wrong, and that their dollarshad been hardly earned and were highly prized. To show howlittle a metallic currency was then understood, I may mentionthat many individuals wished to subscribe fractions, who couldnot afford a whole dollar ; but they were prevented, at first, becausethe collector knew not how to reckon a fraction of adollar. Mr. Pritchard easily explained this, and then thesmaller coins, (rials, and two rial pieces,) were soon numerousupon the table. Frequently, while walking about the island,men had asked me to give them a dollar in exchange for itsvalue in small coin, which, to their surprise, I was alwaysglad to do, when I had dollars with me.About Pomare was rather a large assemblage of maids ofhonour, but their postures and appearance, as they sat aboutupon the floor, were not the most elegant. The contrast betweenour own neatly dressed, and well-mannered countrywomen,whom we had just left in the house of Mr. Pritchard,was rather striking as compared with these brown and oilyOtaheitans : butovir visit was not long, and we tried to make itagreeable. Returning by the beach, we talked for some time]835. SAIL — wTivr.onTACKE — r.riins. 557with Taati, Utaame, and others. Old Ua was there also, tothank me for some trifles sent to him by one of the queen'smaidens, who had attended her when on board the Beagle ;and I was glad to hear that the damsel had executed her commissionin a most punctual manner.*They expressed great anxiety about the arrival of anotherman-of-war, with, perhaps, harsher orders: and were verydesirous to know when I should arrive in England, and whenthey would hear from me. I endeavoured to satisfy them onthese points, before Mr. Darwin and I wished them farewell (inthe most earnest meaning of the word) and, after taking leave ofMr. Pritchard's family, embarked. Mare and Mr. Pritchardaccompanied us to the vessel, then under sail outside the reefs,wished us a great deal more happiness than most of us willprobably enjoy, and returned with Mr. Henry and the pilot intheir own boats. We made all sail, and soon lost sight of thisbeautiful island.Easterly winds swept us along a smooth sea for many days,after leaving Otaheite.-|- At daylight on the 3d of Decemberwe saw Whylootacke (or Wailutaki) a small group of isletsencircled by a coral reef, from four to eight miles in diameter*.The principal one is 360 feet high, and nearly four miles long.There was a native missionary upon it, educated at Otaheite.On the 11th a few white tern were seen near the ship, (in lat.28°. S. and long. 180°.) and as she was about 120 miles fromany land then known, this notice may help to show within whatEmits the sight of those birds may be considered to indicatethe vicinity of land. I am not at all surprised that the earlyvoyagers should have taken so much notice of the appearanceand flight of birds, when out of sight of land ; since in myvery short experience I have profited much by observing them,and am thence led to conclude that land, especially small islandsor reefs, has often been discovered in consequence of watchingShe was his grand-daughter.t We sailed with the land breeze, which at Otaheite is so regular thata ship might sail round the island (in successive nights) with the windalway's a-beani, and off the land !558 SOME BIRDS INDICATE LAND. NoV.particular kinds of birds, and noticing the direction in whichthey fly, of an evening, about sunset. Short winged birds,such as shags or boobies, seldom go a hundred miles from land,and generally return to their accustomed roosting place atnight ; and even those with longer wings which fly farther, donot habitually remain on the wing at night, though they areknown to do so sometimes, especially if attracted by a ship,on which, doubtless, they would perch if she were to remainmotionless, and her crew were to be quiet for a short time. Mistakesmay occur in consequence of floating carcases, trunks oftrees, wrecks of vessels, or drifting seaweed, all which attractbirds and afford them rest at night ; but, generally speaking,if there is land within fifty miles of a vessel, its existence willbe indicated, and the direction in which to look will be pointedout by birds. Decided oceanic fowl, such as albatrosses andall the petrel family, sleep upon the surface of their favouriteelement ; therefore the flight of that description of bird can beno guide whatever, except in the breeding season, when theyfrequent the vicinity of land.Until I became aware of these facts, the discovery of thealmost innumerable islands in the great ocean of Magalhaens,(erroneously, though now probably for ever called Pacific,)caused great perplexity in my mind. That Easter Island, forinstance, such a speck in the expanse, and so far from otherland, should have been — not only discovered — but repeatedlyvisited and successively peopled, by different parties of thehuman family, seemed extraordinary, but now, connectingthe numerous accounts related by voyagers of canoes drivenhundreds of miles away from their desired place, with thesefacts respecting birds, much of the mystery seems unravelled.Every one is well aware that uncivilized man is more attentiveto signs of weather, habits of animals, flight of the featheredtribe, and other visible objects, important to his very existence,than his educated brother, — who often diminishes the perceptivefaculties of the mind, while he strengthens the power ofreflection and combination.1835. NAVIGATORS — FRIENDLY— FEEJEE. 559Before arriving at New Zealand I will add a very briefremark or two about the Navigators, the Friendly, and theFeejee Islands. At the first mentioned, where De Angleand Lamanon were massacred, there is now a prosperousmission established by the exertions of the London MissionarySociety, and I hear that a large proportion of the islandersare no longer blood-thirsty savages. At the Friendly Islesmuch opposition had been encountered, chiefly in consequenceof former hostilities brought on by a runaway convict, whoexcited the natives to murder the first missionaries who wentthere : and the prejudices then caused are scarcely yet removed.Mariner's account of the Tonga, or Friendly Islands, is consideredby English residents at Otaheite, to be a very accurate one,*and is full of interesting information. I obtained a few noticesof the Feejee group from the owner of a schooner that was lostthere ; and as they are comparatively little known, my mitemay as well be contributed in this place to the general fund.The whole group of islands called Feejee, or Fidei, by Euro .means, but of which the native name is, I believe, Navis — isof very dangerous navigation : not only on account of coralreefs, scarcely hidden by a few feet of water, but because thenatives are ferocious and treacherous cannibals. My informant-f*said, that the master of his schooner J (who was long detaineda prisoner among them, his life being spared in hopes of obtaininga large ransom), was an unwilling participator in acannibal feast on some prisoners of war, taken in an attackon a neighbouring island. That they have an idea of the superiorityof white men may be inferred from a message sent previousto this battle, saying, " We shall kill and eat you all — wehave seven white men to fight for us !" Although many unfortunateseamen have fallen victims to the thoroughly savageFeejee Islanders, a few whites have not only escaped death,• Among a variety of very curious facts mentioned by Mariner, onemay be noticed here, because I shall have to refer to it in a future page.I mean the rat shooting practised by the chiefs as an amusement.t Mr. Green, of Valparaiso.{ ' The Terrible ;' Clark, master.560 CAUTIONS— Treachery. NoV.but have established themselves in some authority among thenatives. A man known by the name of Charles, was morerespected than almost any of their own chieftains, on accountof his extraordinary valour : and so highly was he consideredby all of them, that he was allowed to have a hundredwives.*No small vessel ought to venture near any of the Feejeeislands without being armed, and prepared to act defensively.Boarding netting, if she has them, should be triced up ; andno professions, or appearance of friendship, ought ever to putstrangers off their guard. In case of an unavoidable rupture,a chief, the highest in rank that can be secured, should, ifpossible, be made prisoner — by force if fair means fail ; and heshould be made to understand that his life depended upon theconduct of his countrymen. Of course no right-minded manwould act otherwise than to avoid or prevent any hostilitieswith ignorant savages, so long as he could do so without riskingthe lives of his own countrymen ; but he must rememberthat, in hand to hand fighting, a band of fierce savages, armedwith a variety of weapons, are more than a match for seamenunused, perhaps, to muskets, and equally awkward with pistolsor swords : however brave and determined they may be, ifdispersed, as usually happens, they are sure to be by far thegreatest sufferers. I here allude to those savages who are reallywarriors. At some islands, and other places, they are comparativelytimid, though seldom less treacherous.Remarking on the criticisms of such as have animadvertedon officers who found themselves obliged to takeharsh measures in self-defence — La Peruse, whose humanityand good sense not one individual among the nations whoregret his untimely loss, ever questioned, says, " I am, however,a thousand times more angry with the philosopherswho extol the savages, than with the savages themselves. Theunfortunate Lamanon, whom they massacred, told me the veryOnly chieftains of note are able to maintain many wives : very fewhad so large a number as that man : scarcely any had more.1835. CONDUCT — CANOES. 561evening before his death, that the Indians (meaning the nativesof the Navigator Islands) were worthier people than ourselves !Observing rigidly the orders I have received, I havealways treated them with the greatest mildness ; but I confessto you, that if 1 were to undertake another voyage of the samekind, I would demand different orders.A navigator, on quitting Europe, ought to consider thesavages as enemies, very weak indeed, and whom it would beungenerous to attack and barbarous to destroy, but whoseassaults he has a right to prevent when authorised to do so bywell-grounded suspicions"' — Voyage of La Peruse, vol. iii.p. 413.When a vessel approaches the Feejee Islands, numberlesscanoes put off, and soon surround her so closely, that unlessthe wind is pretty fresh, she is placed in no slight jeopardy.At such a time the principal chief ought to be invited on board ;and presents should be given to him, while he is made to understandthat it is necessary he should order the canoes to keepoff. His commands will be implicitly obeyed ; and while he ison board, and well treated, there will be less risk ; but he mustnot be relied on implicitly.Some of the canoes are very long, from sixty to eighty feet inlength : and when two such are fastened together, with a lightstructure erected upon them, the men who stand on theirraised deck are above the level of a small vessel's bulwark.*Heaps of stones form not only ballast but ammunition for these formidablecanoes. Indeed, among all savage nations, a stone held in thehand, or thrown, perhaps fi'om a sling, is a common, and by no means despicableweapon. These easily collected missiles, and the manner of usingthem, recal to mind the victory gained by the English fleet over that ofFrance, off Slays, on the 22d of June 1340 ; in which " though the battlewas fought on the sea, it could scarcely be called maritime ; for littledepended on the accidents of winds and waves, or on the skill of a commanderin availing himself of them. Piles of stones on the deck formed apart of the magazines. The archers of both nations used their crossbowsas if they had been on land. They employed grappling irons forboarding, and came to such close quarters as to exhibit a succession ofsingle combats." — Mackintosh, vol. i. p. 294.VOL. II. So562 TRADE ALLIGATOR HONES. DeC.OAt the time that Mr. Clark was a prisoner among them, amusket was considered to be a fair ransom for a white man ;and (perhaps fortunately for him) they had then an idea thatthe flesh of white men was not wholesome.They have many articles of trade, such as shells, tortoiseshell,coral, spermaceti, whales'" teeth, ' biche de mar,' mats ofexquisite workmanship, fruit, and provisions : among the latterare pigs and ' iguanas.' Excepting a great alligator, the Feejeemen never saw an animal on their island larger than a dog or apig. The monster just mentioned made its appearance on theisland Pau, the largest of the group, some years ago, to theextreme consternation of the natives, who thought it was asea-god. After destroying nine people, at different times, theenormous lizard"" as they called it, was caught by a strongnoose passed over the bough of a large tree, the other end ofthe rope being held at a distance by fourteen men, who layconcealed, while a daring old man offered himself as a bait toentice the brute to run into the snare.*Mr. ]mariner supposed that this alligator, or crocodile, hadmade its way from the East Indies ; a curious instance of themanner in which occasional migrations take place. On an islandin that neighbourhood, called Lotooma, Mariner heard of twoenormous bones, not at all like any human bones, nor resembling:those of a whale. The natives of the island have a traditionthat they belonged to a giant, who was killed in formerages by the united attack of all the populationsOn the 16tli of December indications of a westerly windappeared ; and for the next three days we were buffeted by ahard gale from south-west to south-east. This was the moreannoying on account of the chronometer measurement, becauseit was accompanied by a sudden change of temperature, which Ithought would alter their rates. During the twenty-four hoursprevious to this southerly gale commencing, we found the currentsetting northward, about a mile an hour; but after theA feat hardly surpassed by Mr. Watertown. — Mariner's Tonga Islands,vol. i. pp. 268, 269, 270, in Constable's Miscellany, vol. xiii.t Ibid. vol. i. p. 262.1835. New ZEALAND VIEW. sharpestpart of the gale was over, it set to the south-west, atabout the same rate.Both before and during these three days, I was struck by theprecise similarity of the clouds, sky, peculiarities of wind, andweather, to what we had been accustomed to meet with off'the coast of Patagonia : and I may here remark that, throughoutthe southern hemisphere, the weather, and the turn or successionof winds, as well as their nature and prognostications,areremarkably uniform.On the 19th we made the northern hills of New Zealand ;but tantalized still by adverse winds, all the next day was spentin beating to windward, and not till the 21st could we succeedin obtaining access to the Bay of Islands.We were all a good deal disappointed by the view. AfterOtaheite, the northern part of New Zealand had, to our eyes,a very ordinary appearance.2o2CHAPTER XXIV.New Zealand— Bay of Islands— Kororareka— Fences— Flag— Palliatives— Features — Tattoo — Population — Colour — Manner — War-canoes— Prospects — Mackintosh — Fern — Church — Resident — Vines—Village— Houses— Planks— Cooking— Church— Marae— First Mission— Settlers— Pomare — Marion— Cawa-Cawa— Meeting— ChiefsRats — Spirits — Wine — Nets — Burial — Divine Service — Singing-causesof Disturbances — Reflections and Suggestions — PolynesianInterests — Resources for Ships in the Pacific.Dec. 21. At daylight we were about four miles from CapeBrett, and nearly the same distance from Point Pococke ;while in the north-west the Capable islands showed themselvesindistinctly. A light easterly breeze enabled us to steer towardsthe Bay of Islands. — Few places are easier of accessthan this bay : excepting the Whale-rock, whose position iswell ascertained, there are no hidden dangers : and within theline of the heads, there is little or no current deserving notice :outside that line, the current generally sets to the south-eastabout a mile an hour.Compared with mountainous countries, the northern parts ofNew Zealand are not high ; but they cannot be described aslow land. Perhaps the expression, ' moderately high land,' mayconvey an idea of such as is more than two hundred, but lessthan twelve hundred feet above the level of the sea ; which arethe limits I have in view. In distant profile the land inclinestoo much to regular and convex outlines to be picturesque.It is only along the sea-coast that steep cliffs, and a more brokenboundary, cause enough variety to please the eye of a lover oflandscape. Approaching nearer, the interior of the country,varied by hill and valley, with an agreeable mixture of woodlandand cleared ground, makes a favourable impression uponthe mind, from the natural association of ideas of capability andcultivation ; but whether it pleases the eye, as a picture, mustdepend probably as much upon the kind of scenery latelyviewed, as upon preconceived ideas. With us the recent .BKETX KOKORAREKA TU'UNA. 565pressions caused by Otaheite, rendered the view of New Zealand,though novel, rather uninteresting.Cape Brett is a bold promontory, higher than any neighbouringland. When first seen from a distant offing, while noother land is in sight, it makes like a quoin-shaped island. Asthe sea around is free from danger, it is an excellent landfallfor shipping approaching this part of the coast. Detached from,but near the cape, is the rock, with a hole or archway throughit, named by Cook, ' Pierce Islet.'Point, or rather Cape Pococke, is a steep cliffy headland, ofa dark colour, rather picturesque in its appearance : near itthere is a conical rocky islet. Numerous islands, small andlarge, are scattered over the bay ; an expanse of water reallyabout ten miles square, though to the eye it appears muchsmaller, because so many islands intercept the view.Near the middle of the west side of the bay is the openingof Kororareka Harbour, a secure but shallow port ; betteradapted to merchant shipping than to the use of men-of-war.After passing Cape Pococke, and advancing about a mile,a small settlement appeared in the northern bight of the bay ;and the English look of the houses was very gratifying to us.This, I found, was Tipuna, or Rangihoua, the place wherethe first settlement of white men was made upon the shoresof New Zealand. On the farther side of Kororareka otherhouses were then seen — neat, and apparently comfortabledwellings, well situated under the Ice of the western hills,while close by, on our right hand, a curious line of flat-toppedblack rocks, a few feet only above the water, reminded us of theremains of a great mole.Within the line from Cape Pococke to Cape Brett there isnot more than thirty fathoms of water ; and every where, exceptingclose to the rocks, the bottom is soft and tenacious, sothat an anchor may be let go in any part. We saw small stragglingvillages of native huts in many places, and around each ofthem a substantial fence of palisade posts and rails. Thesefences, and the cultivated spots of groined which appear as youproceed up the bay, might give a more favourable idea of the566 Pencils— Flag — ANCHORAGE. DeC.native habits than they yet deserve ; for the fences are fortifications— defences against intruding men, not cattle.In a conspicuous solitary position, opposite to the entranceof Kororareka harbour, a single English house, without anotherbuilding within a mile of it, nor any protection exceptthat of a tall staff, on which waved the British Union-jack,presented a contrast to the fortified villages; and forciblyimpressed one's mind with a conviction of the great influencealready obtained over the formerly wild cannibals of NewZealand.The entrance to the harbour is narrow, even to the eye, butit is still more confined by shoal water. In entering or leavingit, a ship ought to keep close to Kororareka Point : afterrounding that point, at the distance of a cable's length, thesheltered part of the port is seen, looking like the mouth of anavigable river. On the western side, the native village of ,a straggling collection of low huts, strongly palisade;on the eastern, three or four English houses, the head-quartersof the missionaries ; on the rising ground, near the water, farup the harbour, several more houses and villages — gave anappearance of population and successful exertion as surprisingas satisfactory. Near a detached house of Europeanform, a large white ensign excited our curiosity; and we foundit was the flag of New Zealand ; differing only from the ensignof St. George in the upper ' canton"" next the staff, where,instead of a Union-jack, there is a red cross on a blue field ;each quarter of the blue field being ' pierced' by a white star.We anchored between Kororareka and Paihia (the missionarysettlement) : farther up the harbour were several whale-shipswhich had anchored there, I was told, in order to avoid thespirit-shops of Kororareka.From this anchorage the view on all sides is pleasing. Anappearance of fertility every where meets the eye ; but thereare no grand or very remarkable features. There is nothing inthe outward character of the country corresponding to theferocious sanguinary disposition of its aboriginal inhabitants.The British resident, some English settlers, and two of the1835. . MISTAKE — PAIHIA — NATIVES. 567native chiefs came on board during the afternoon ; and in theevening I made acquaintance with Mr. Baker, a missionaryresiding at Paihia. The resident's boat was manned by youngZealanders, whose smooth faces, cropped hair, Scotch caps, andjackets and trowsers, were much approved of (perhaps hypocritically),by a chief whose long war-canoe was well-mannedby athletic savages with half-naked figures, faces deeply-scarredrather than tattowed — and long curly hair.We were amused by finding that the Beagle had beenmistaken for a ship of the (so called) Baron de Thierry. Hersmall size; the number of boats; and her hoisting a whiteensign (thought to be that of New Zealand), so completelydeceived them all, that one boat only approached reluctantly,after we had anchored, to reconnoitre ; but as soon as it wasknown that the expected intruder had not arrived, visitorshastened on board. Had he made such an experiment, he wouldhardly have escaped with life, so inveterate and general wasthe feeling then existing against his sinister and absurd attempt.He would indeed have found himself in a nest of hornets.In walking about the missionary establishment at Paihia, Iwas disappointed by seeing the natives so dirty, and their hutslooking little better than piastres. Immediately round thedwellings of the missionaries I expected a better state of things ;but I was told, that their numerous and increasing; avocationsengrossed all their time ; and that the native population wereslow in adopting habits, or even ideas, of cleanliness.My first impression, upon seeing several New Zealanders intheir native dress and dirtiness was, that they were a race intermediatebetween the Otaheitans and Fuegians; and I afterwardsfound that Mr. Stokes and others saw many preciseresemblances to the Fuegians, while every one admitted theirlikeness to the Otaheitans. To me they all seem to be one andthe same race of men, altered by climate, habits, and food ; butdescended from the same original stock.Of a middle size, spare, but strong frame, and dark complexion,the New Zealauder's outward appearance is much inhis favour ; hardiness and activity, as may be expected, he568 Features — Tattoo War-DANCE. DeC.eminently possesses. The expression of his features indicatesenergy, quickness of apprehension, without much reflection ;and a high degree of daring. Ferocity is a striking trait in thecountenances of many among the older men, and it is increasedconsiderably by the savage style in which their faces are disfigured,or, as they think, ornamented by lines cut in the skinwith a blunt-edged iron tool, and stained black. These linesare certainly designed with as much taste, even elegance, ascould possibly be exerted in such disfiguring devices. Theexpression which, it appears, is anxiously desired, is that of ademon-warrior. All their old ideas seem to have had referenceto war. Well might the Spanish poet's description of the Arau-canons have been applied to the New Zealanders in their formercondition : —Venus y Amor qui no albanian parte,Solo donna el iracundo Marte!"The lines upon the face are not, however, arbitrary marks,invented or increased at the caprice of individuals, or the fancyof the operator who inflicts the torture ; they are heraldic ornaments,distinctions far more intelligible to the natives of NewZealand than our own armorial bearings are to many of us, inthese chivalric days. Young men have but few : slaves, bornin bondage, or taken young, have scarcely any marks ; but theolder men, especially the more distinguished chiefs, are socovered with them that the natural expression of face is almosthidden under an ornamented mask. One object of the tattooing,is to prevent change of features after middle age. Some ofthe women, whom the missionaries endeavoured to persuade notto follow this practice, said, " Let us have a few lines on ourlips, that they may not shrivel when we are old""Every one has heard of, and many people have seen thewar-dance. What exaggerated distortions of human featurescould be contrived more horrible than those they thendisplay ? What approach to demons could human beings makenearer than that which is made by the Zealanders when infuriating,maddening themselves for battle by their dance ofdeath !TTATraS OT ETNG- (jEOK£E soundtrs^tr ZEALiLHDE'R-i^ [£, tw ?/• >r s T fi W! Ill) I;" im S,Polished /by Henry ColWra, Oieal. MarnioiDiilh. aireei,lS3a.1835. HAIR — POPULATION— FEATURES. 66^The hair of a New Zealander is naturally luxuriant, thoughrather coarse ; its rough, free curliness in an unadorned, almostuntouched state, heightens that expression of untameable ferocitywhich is so repulsive in the older men, especially in those ofinferior degree. Many of the young women are good-looking ;and they dress their hair with some pains, and not a little oil.Although cannibalism and infanticide have ceased in thenorthern parts of New Zealand, the aboriginal race is decreasing.The natives say frequently, ' The country is not for us ; it isfor the white men !' and they often remark upon their lesseningnumbers. Change of habits, European diseases, spirits, and theemployment of many of their finest young men in whale-ships(an occupation which unhappily tends to their injury), combineto cause this diminution. Wearing more clothes (especiallythick blankets), exposes them to sudden colds, which often endfatally. We were surprised at seeing almost every native wrappedup in a thick blanket, perhaps even in two or three blankets,while we were wearing thin clothing.The countenances of some of the men (independent of thetattooing) are handsome, according to European ideas of linebeauty. Regular, well-defined, and high features are often seen ;but they are exceptions, rather than the usual characteristics.Generally speaking, the New Zealander has a retreating andnarrow forehead — rather wide, however, at the base ; a veryprominent brow ; deeply-sunk black eyes, small and ever restless; a small nose, rather hollow, in most cases, though occasionallystraight or even aquiline, with full nostrils ; the upperlip is short, but that and the lower are thick ; the mouth ratherwide ; white and much blunted teeth ; with a chin neither largenor small, but rather broad. Some have higher and betterheads, and a less marked expansion of brow, nostrils, and lips ;others, again, are the reverse : usually, their eyes are placedhorizontally ; but some are inclined, like those of the Chinese,though not remarkably ; indeed not so much so as those of aScotchman whom I met there. Among the women I noticed ageneral depression of the bridge of the nose, and a flat frontalregion.570 COLOUR MANNER PRIDE. DcC.Few engravings, or paintings, show the real expression, features,or even colour of the Polynesian tribes. They give us ahalf naked, perhaps tattowed* manor woman ; but the countenancealmost always proves the European habits of the artist.The features have a European cast, quite different from theoriginal, and the colouring is generally unlike ; especially iucoloured engravings.The general complexion of both women and men is a dark,coppery-brown ; but it varies from the lightest hue of copper toa rich mahogany or chocolate, and in some cases almost toblack. The natural colour of the skin is much altered bypaint, dirt, and exposure. Before closing this slight descriptionof the personal appearance of the Zealanders, I must allude tothe remarkable shape of their teeth. In a white man the enamelusually covers all the tooth, whether front or double ; but theteeth of a man of New Zealand are like those of the Fuegians,and at a first glance remind, one of those of a horse. Eitherthey are all worn down — canine, cutting-teeth, and grinders —to an uniform height, so that their interior texture is quiteexposed, or they are of a peculiar structures*The New Zealanders"" salutation has often been talked of asrubbing noses,' it is, in fact, touching, or crossing them ; forone person gently presses the bridge of his nose across that ofhis friend. Mr. Darwin informed me that when a woman expectsto be saluted by a person of consequence, in the ' nosepressing' manner, she sits down and makes a droll gruntingnoise, which is continued, at intervals, until the salute hasbeen given.The usual manner of the native is very inferior. Accustomedto a low, wretched dwelling, and to crouching in a canoe, hisAmoco is the native word for the tattoo marks.+ This apparent wearing away of the teeth is not found in the Zealandersalone. The Fuegians, Araucanians, and Society Islanders show itmore or less, and it is very remarkable among the natives of New Holland.1 have also seen some white men (Europeans) with similar teeth, but theywere all elderly ; whereas in some young savages I have noticed incisorsshaped rather like those of a horse.1835. WAR-CANOES — REFLECTIONS. 571habitual posture of rest is squatting on his hams, or upon theground, with his knees up to his chin ; hence, also, his Urbsare rather inferior in their shape. But arouse his spirit, sethim in motion, excite him to action, and the crouching, indolentbeing is suddenly changed into an active and animateddemoniac. The Zealander is extremely proud ; he will notendure the slightest insult. A blow, even in jest, must bereturned !Every one has seen or heard so much of their weapons andcanoes, that it is almost superfluous to speak of them ; yet, inexamining one of their larger canoes — seventy feet in length, fromthree to four in width, and about three in depth — I wasmuch interested by observing what trouble and pains hadbeen taken in building and trying to ornament this, to them,first-rate vessel of war. Her lower body was formed out of thetrunk of a single tree — the New Zealand kauri, or cowrie —the upper works by planks of the same wood ; the stem andstern, raised and projecting, like those of the gallies of old,were carved and hideously disfigured, rather than ornamented,by red, distorted faces with protruding tongues and glaringmother-of-pearl eyes. Much carving of an entirely differentand rather tasteful design* decorated the sides. Beneath thethwarts,' a wicker-work platform, extending from end to end,served to confine the ballast to its proper position, and toafford a place upon which the warriors could stand to use theirweapons. From forty to eighty men can embark in suchcanoes. But their day is gone ! In a few years, scarcely a war-canoewill be found in the northern district of New Zealand. judgingonly from description, the largest canoes ever seenby the oldest of the pi-sent generation, must have been nearlyninety feet in length ; formed out of one tree, with planksattached to the sides, about six or seven feet wide, and nearlyas much in depth. Several old men agreed, at different times,in this account ; but perhaps each of them was equally inclinedto magnify the past.Arabesque, like the ornaments at Otaheite.+ North of latitude 38° S.572 PROSPECTS — ANCIENT BllITONS. DeC.New Zealand much requires assistance from the strong buthumane arm of a powerful European government. Sensibletreaties should be entered into by the head of an over-awingEuropean force, and maintained by the show, not physicalaction, of that force until the natives see the wonderful effectsof a changed system. Finding that their pi-electors sought toameliorate their condition, and abolish all those practiceswhich hunger, revenge, and ignorance probably caused, andalone keep up ; that they neither made them slaves, nor tookaway land without fair purchase; and that they did no injuryto their country, or to them, except in self-defence — eventhen reluctantly — would give the natives satisfaction and confidence,and might, in a few years, make New Zealand a powerful,and very productive country. I say powerful, becauseits inhabitants are very numerous, and have in themselvesabundant energy, with moral, as well as physical materials;productive also, because the climate is favourable ; the soil veryrich; timber plentiful, and very superior; minerals are probablyplentiful; flax is a staple article; corn and vines are doingwell ; and sheep produce good wool.While our thoughts are directed to the natives of NewZealand, let us refer to what Sir James Mackintosh says of theformer savages of our own island.Bec. 54. — At the time of Caesar landing, the island ofGreat Britain was inhabited by a multitude of tribes, of whomthe Romans have preserved the names of more than forty.The number of such tribes living in a lawless independence, isalone a sufficient proof of their barbarism. Into the maritimeprovinces southward of the Thames, colonies probably recentfrom Belgic Gaul began to introduce tillage ; they retainedthe names of their parent tribes on the continent ; they far surpassedthe C'est in the arts and manners of civilized life. Theinhabitants of the interior appear to have been more rude andmore fierce than any neighbouring people. The greater partof them raised no corn; they subsisted on milk and flesh, andwere clothed in the skins of the beasts whom they destroyed forfood. They painted and punctured their bodies, that their»1835. KXTllACT FROM Mackintosh. 57Saspect might be more horrible in war. The use of carriages inwar is a singular instance of labour and skill among such apeople. Their domestic life was little above promiscuous intercourse.Societies of men, generally composed of the nearestrelations, had wives in common. The issue of this intercoursewere held to belong to the man (if such there should be) whoformed a separate and lasting connexion with their mother.Where that appropriation did not occur, no man is describedas answerable for the care of the children."Again, Sir James says —The Britons had a government rather occasional than constant,in which various political principles prevailed by turns.The power of eloquence, of valour, of experience, sometimes ofbeauty, over a multitude, for a time threw them into theappearance of a democracy. When their humour led them tofollow the council of their elders, the community seemed to bearistocratic. The necessities of war, and the popularity of afortunate commander, vested in him in times of peril a sort ofmonarchical power, limited by his own prudence, and the patienceof his followers, rather than by laws, or even customs.Punishment sprung from revenge : it was sometimes inflictedto avenge the wrong's of others. It is an abuse of terms tobestow the name of a free government on such a state ofsociety : men, in such circumstances, lived without restraint ;but they lived without security. Human nature, in that state,is capable of occasional flashes of the highest virtues. Mennot only scorn danger, and disregard privation, but even showrough sketches of ardent kindness, of faithful gratitude, of themost generous self-devotion. But the movements of their feelingsare too irregular to be foreseen. Ferocious anger may, inamoment, destroy the most tender affection. Savages have novirtues on which it is possible to rely."Speaking of missionaries, the same historian states, that —Our scanty information relating to the earliest period ofSaxon rule, leaves it as dark as it is horrible. But Christianitybrought with it some mitigation. Ad. 596. The arrival of571; Missionaries BONES — FF.RX. DoC.Augustine in Kent, with forty other missionaries, sent by Gregorythe Great to convert the Saxons, is described in picturesqueand affecting language by Bede, the venerable historianof the Anglo-saxon church. It cannot be doubted that theappearance of men who exposed themselves to a cruel death forthe sake of teaching truth, and inspiring benevolence, couldnot have been altogether without effect among the most faithlessand ruthless barbarians. Liberty of preaching what theyconscientiously believed to be Divine truth, was the only boonfor which they prayed."2;^d. On the little island of Paihia, where our instrumentswere landed for observations, the remains of half-burned humanbones were found : and as the dead are not burned in thiscountry, they must have been the remains of a former meal.It was difficult to decide upon the time which had elapsed sincethat feast was made, by the appearance of the bones. Theymight have been covered by earth for some time, and onlylately exposed ; or they might have been the remains of a verymodern feast, indulged in upon a little island to which it wasnot probable that a missionary, or any one who might giveinformation to him, could approach unperceived.We were much struck by the beautiful appearance of anevergreen tree, resembling an ilex, or a large myrtle, when seenfrom a distance ; whose bright red flowers, in large clusters,upon the dark green foliage, gave an effect which I longed tosee transferred to an English garden. This tree seemed to becommon. After landing, the fern attracted more notice thanany other vegetable production : every where in New Zealandthis useful plant is found. Why useful ? may be thought.Because it was one principal article of food, before the introductionof potatoes. Owing to its abundance, and to the edible,as well as tolerably nutritious, nature of its roots, no man canever starve in New Zealand who is able to gather fern : butthat it is not a pleasant food may be inferred from the fact thatno native eats fern-roots when he can get potatoes. Wherethe fern grows thickly, and high, the soil is known to be1835. WILLIAMS — CHURCH. 575rich : where it is small, and scarce, the land is not worth cultivating.*Mr. Williams, the elder, formerly a lieutenant in the navy,was absent on an exploring and negociating expedition to thesouthern parts of the island. I much regretted having missedseeing him, as he was considered the leading person amongthe missionary body in New Zealand ; and was said, by everyone,to be thoroughly devoted to the great cause, in which hewas one of the first, and most daring. I walked with Mr.Baker about the little village, or hamlet, of Paihia. A substantialstone building; I thought must be the church ; butwas a good deal disappointed at being shown a small lowedifice, as the place of worship ; and hearing that the largestone house was the printing establishment. This I did notlike ; for I thought of the effect produced on ignorant mindsby the magnificence of Roman Catholic churches. No doubteducation overcomes superstitious ideas and observances ; andthe devotion of an enlightened man is not increased or diminishedby the style, or by the decorations of a building : inhim probably no building made by hands would excite suchemotions as the starry temple of a cloudless sky. But oughthe, therefore, to despise, or think lightly of those outwardforms, and ceremonious observances, which influence ignorantpeople, who see without thinking ; and are too much guidedby that which makes a vivid impression. Would a little outwardshow do any harm among such ignorant human beingsas the savages of New Zealand ; or among Fuegians, and NewHollanders.? And may one not expect that an intelligentnative should notice that the ' House of God ' is in everyrespect inferior to the other houses which they see erected byChristians ?Paihia is a pretty spot. The harbour of Kororareka lies infront ; and an amphitheatre of verdant hills forms the background.But it must be hot during the summer, as it is in ahollow, facing the sun. A visit to Mr. J. Busby, the ' British• Humboldt mentions fern-roots being used for food near the OrigBRITISH RESIDE-NT VINES — KORORAREKA. DeC.Resident,' at his house (protected by the flag, as I have alreadymentioned) occupied Mr. Darwin and myself some time. Likemost of the missionary dwellings, it is a temporary boardedcottage, intended only for present purposes. Mr. Busby wastaking great pains with his garden ; and among other plantshe anticipated that vines would flourish. Those at Waiting(the name of his place) are favoured by climate, as well as bythe superintendence of a person who so thoroughly understandstheir culture. At a future day not only New Zealand, butVan Diemen's Land, and all New Holland, will acknowledgethe obligation conferred upon them by this gentleman, whomade a long and troublesome journey through France andSpain solely for the purpose of collecting vines for Australiahis adopted country.Mr. Busby's official occupations at New Zealand appeared+o me of a very neutral character. An isolated individual, nothaving even the authority of a magistrate, encircled bysavages, and by a most troublesome class of his own countrymen,I was not astonished at his anxiety to receive definiteinstructions, and substantial support ; or at the numerous complaintscontinually made by the English settlers.Afterwards we went to Kororareka. On a sandy level, narrowlybounded by a low range of hills, or rather rising grounds,stands the principal assemblage of houses in the island ; or asthe missionaries say, ' in the land'. I have said assemblage ofhouses, because it did not agree with my ideas of a town, avillage, a hamlet, or even an Indian encampment. Near thebeach were a few small cottages which had once been whitewashed.At the foot of the hills were two or three small housesof European build ; but the remaining space of ground appearedto be covered by palings, and pig-styes. The temporaryenclosures which are made in a market-place, for cattle,might give an idea of the appearance of these sadly wretcheddwelling places. The palings, or palisades, are intended to befortifications : they are high, sometimes eight or ten feet ; and,almost encircling the whole, a stronger palisade is fixed, but soinefficiently that either strength, an axe, or fire, would ensurer1835. HUTS— PORCHES PLANKS 577an entrance to Irresolute men. There is neither embankment norditch. Within the small square spaces, enclosed by the slighterpalings, are the huts of the natives : the angular, low thatchedroofs of which are scarcely set off from the ground by walls afoot or two in height. These roofs slope downwards, lengthwiseas well as sideways ; so that the front of the hut is thehighest part. The upper point of the roof may be eight feetfrom the ground; the space of ground occupied, about tensquare feet ; seldom more, indeed usually less. Besides the door,through which a man cannot pass excepting upon his handsand knees, there is neither window, nor aperture of any kind.The New Zealand ' order of architecture,' is marked by twowide planks placed edgeways in front, joined together at thetop by nails or pegs, and forming a wide angle, in which thespace is filled up, excepting a door-way two feet square, withmaterials similar to those of the walls and roof, namely wickerwork,or ' wattling,' covered by a thatching of broad flagleaves or rushes. The eaves of the roof project two or threefeet beyond the front ; so likewise do the side walls. In thissort of porch the family sit, eat, and, in the daytime, oftensleep. At night most of them huddle together, within what,in every respect, deserves the name of a sty : even a Fuegianwigwam is far preferable, for as that is frequently left vacantduring many successive weeks, heavy rains and a cold climateare antidotes to any particular accumulation of dirt. In a fineclimate, surrounded by beautiful trees and luxuriant herbage,can one account for human nature degrading itself so much asto live in such a den ? Is it not that the genuine, simple beautiesof Creation are understood, and enjoyed, only in proportion asman becomes more refined, and as he differs more from hisown species in what is falsely called a state of nature.I was inquisitive about the large planks, generally paintedred, which appeared in front of every house. The natives toldme that such boards had always been made by their ancestors,before tools of any metal were seen in the land : they werefrom twelve to twenty feet in length, about two feet in breadth,and two inches thick: and they seemed to have been 'dubbed*VOL. II. 9. V578 COOKING — CHURCH—KOnORARKKA. . DeC.down to a fair surface ; but I am inclined to think that thewood is of a kind that splits easily into plank, like the alerseof southern Chile.* Being the evening meal time, some women,and male slaves, were removing the cinders from holesin the earth, whence steam was issuing profusely, under ashed, near the house I was examining. The shed was a lightroof, upon upright poles, covering the cooking place — a fewsquare yards of cinder-covered ground. Out of each hole dirtylooking bunches of fish and leaves were raked with fingersand sticks. Hot stones were at the bottom of the hole, placedin the usual Polynesian and Chilote method. The fish hadbeen wrapped in the leaves, but taking it out of the ovenin such a manner had displaced the leaves, and substituteda coating of ashes and cinders. Potatoes, raked out of anotherhot hole, looked more eatable : but leaving the nativesto their dirty food, we walked to the new church. A slightlybuilt edifice of bricks, and light frame work, with an abundanceof bad glass windows, gave me the idea of a smallmethodist meeting-house, or an anabaptist chapel, rather thanan episcopal church. A good deal of money having been subscribedby residents, and visitors, specially for this church, itmight be wished that a portion of it had been employed inobtaining a better design, and better materials, as it stands inavery conspicuous situation. To place a church in a strongholdof iniquity, such as Kororareka, the resort of the worstdisposed inhabitants of New Zealand, native and foreign,was a daring experiment : yet notwithstanding the ill-will entertainedtowards the missionaries, by their ' spirit-selling ' countrymen; by native chiefs, whose pandering trade was yearly lessened; and by the evil disposed of every description, nomolestation had been offered, and not a plane of glass had beenbroken ! neither had the church service been performed in vainto inattentive hearers.Returning to the beach, we saw some of the fine canoes Ihave already mentioned : we then paid a formal visit toone of the chiefs ;. and for another, who was not at home, IKauri ? or some other pine ?1835. DIFFICULTIES OF Fins MISSION. MethoughtI could not do better tliaii leave a present : his wife,or rather one of his wives, was pointed out to us, as the sisterof the notorious Shunghi. ' Titre'' was the absent chiefsname. He was out in the country, with a hundred well-armedfollowers, cultivating, as we were told, his yam and potatogrounds. We next saw a burying place, or rather a placewhere the dead are exposed, upon a raised platform, to thewind and sun. Wrapped in cloth of the country, the bodiesare placed upon small square platforms of boards, whichare fixed upon single central posts, ten feet high. Busheswere growing, unmolested, in the enclosure (or ' Marae), nofoot entering to tread them down. Among these thickets Isaw several large boards standing upright like gravestones,some of which were painted red, and uncouthly carved. Returningto our boat, the chief whom we had visited presentedme with a garment of the country manufacture : his assumedhaughtiness was amusing, from being characteristic. Ourevening was passed in very interesting conversation with Mr.W. Williams, and Mr. Baker;* the former had just arrivedfrom Waimate, an agricultural settlement, lately establishedby the missionaries, in the interior.Of the difficulties encountered and surmounted by the firstmissionaries in New Zealand full accounts have been latelypublished : the little we then heard strongly excited our curiosity.Mr. Marten appeared to have been the originator, aswell as the main instrument, in forwarding the great work.On the 23d, I went with Mr. Baker to Tipuna, the placewhere the first missionaries, Mr. King and Mr. Kendal, establishedthemselves in 1813. Mr. King was absent, but I sawhis wife and son, who told me that he was travelling aboutamong the natives, and would not return for several days ; hewas on horseback, his son said, but quite alone. Mrs. Kingdescribed the former state of things which she had witnessedherself in strong terms ; she would not look back to those days• I learned that de Thierry was sometime resident in the King's-bench,and that his alleged purchase of land, in New Zealand, was atheme of ridicule among the aborigines.2 pa580 WARIPOAKA — VICIOUS SETTLERS. DeC.without shuddering. Being told in the evening, that " beforemorning their house would be in flames ;" and that " stoneswere heating for the oven in which they themselves were to becooked," was a quieting farewell, from a mob of angry natives,on more than one occasion. But Mr. King always founda trusty friend in a chief, whose name has been often noticed —Waripoaka.'' I met him near the house, in company with ayoung chief, whose sense of propriety was so delicate that hewould not appear before Mrs. King, because he was not dressedwell enough I' Waripoaka was satisfied with his own attire,and went with us. To my prejudiced eye, the dress of theyoung man, a mat, or mantle of the country, loosely wrappedaround a fine figure, appeared far more suitable than the long-tailedold coat, thread-bare pantaloons, and worn-out hat, whichutterly disguised and disfigured the old chief.Mr. King's son talked of his sheep, and I found that thoughnot more than eighteen or twenty, he was already a farmer,possessing land and a flock of sheep. Returning by a differentroute, we landed upon an island lately bought from the nativesby two persons who had been masters of whale-ships.This island, purchased for a trifling price, will become veryvaluable, as the trade to the Bay of Islands increases ; and Iregretted to see a spot of such future consequence in the handsof men, whose verbal attacks upon the missionaries, and illiberalaspersions of Mr. Busby's character, disgusted me so muchthat I had hardly patience to make the inquiries which werethe object of my visit ; or to wait while Mr. Baker told themof a plan which was in contemplation among the settlers, forthe prevention, or at least restriction, of the sale of spirits.Such men as these, strongly prejudiced, deaf to reason, andtoo often habitually vicious; run-away convicts, whose charactersmay be imagined ; and democratic seceders from regular government,cause the principal difficulties against which honest,upright settlers, and the whole missionary body, have to contend.One of the men, whose share in the property of the islandI have been regretting, was partly intoxicated while we werewith him ; but Waripoaka, who accompanied us, significantlywarned me of his state as I entered the house.i1835. POMARE Estuary. Sill24th. I went with Mr. Baker to a scattered village, calledCawa-cawa. Leaving the ship early, we followed the windingsof an estuary which forms Kororareka Harbour, until its shorescontracted it to the limits of a fresh-water river. Three goodhouses on the eastern shore, lately built by respectable Englishsettlers, attracted our notice in passing; and afterwards thePah'* of Pomare,-|- a well-known chief, appeared like a cattle-enclosureupon a hill. Pomare is the man who killed and ate apart of his female slave, when Mr. Earle was there ; he hasstill large possessions, and had larger, but has sold much forammunition, muskets, and spirits. His honourable office atthis time was that of supplying the numerous whale-shipswhich visited the harbour with his slaves ; and he found suchan employment of his female vassals answer better than thehorrible one well described by Mr. Earle. Dismal alternative !On board each of the ships we passed there were many ofthese women ; but before we notice the ' mote,' let us considerthe great ' beam,' — think of what our own seaports were intimesof war, and be charitable to the South Sea Islanders.Pomare was heard to say that his son would be a greaterman than himself: and the New Zealanders in general are impressedwith the idea that their sons will be better or greatermen, than themselves.The estuary, or arm of the sea, whose windings we werefollowing, forms an excellent harbour for ships not larger thanthird-class frigates ; or to speak in a more definite manner,for those which do not draw more than seventeen feet of water.On each side the land rises to five or six hundred feet, shelteringthe anchorage without occasioning those violent squallsalternating with calms, that are found under the lee of veryhigh land, over which strong wind is blowing. As far as Iknow, there are very hew shoals or banks in the wide spacewhich forms the inner harbour. A slight stream of current andOr Paa ; by Cook called Hippah.t This chief said that his father had adopted the name of ' Pomare,'because he had heard of a very distinguished warrior at Otaheite, whobore that appellation.5fi2 ' Marion'' — canoes — traffic. Dec.tide runs outwards during about seven hours, and the tide setsinwards about five, though with still less strength. At times,the outward stream may run about two knots in the narrowplaces. Mr. Mair's house and shipping-yard, Mr. Clendon''sestablishment, and the pleasantly-situated house and garden ofMr. Wright gave an English aspect to the eastern side of theharbour ; while boats passing and ships lying at anchor in anestuary, much resembling one in our own country, preventedthe frequent occurrence of a thought, that we were near theAntipodes ; and that on the western side of the harbour isthe ])h!ce where ' Marion' and so many of his crew were massacred,and afterwards eaten ! That horrid catastrophe is nowsaid to have been caused by mutual ignorance of language.The Frenchmen not understanding that the spot was tabooed,persisted in fishing there, and endeavoured to maintain theirintrusion by force.Canoes met and passed us as we proceeded. It was pleasantto witness the cordial greetings exchanged between most oftheir occupants and Mr. Baker. All these canoes were goingto Kororareka, to sell their cargoes of firewood, potatoes, yams,or pigs. Here and there, by the water-side, we saw a house, orrather hut, with a patch of cleared and cultivated ground, agreat pile of firewood, ready for sale, and perhaps a canoe closeby, which the native owners were loading with the marketableproduce of their land. When the estuary had diminished, andwe found ourselves in a fresh-water river, there was much resemblanceto parts of the river at Valdivia ; but the amount ofground under cultivation, and the number of huts scatteredover the face of the country and along the banks of the river,were less near Valdivia, exclusive of the town itself, than in thisso lately a cannibal country.Though on a small scale, the banks of this river are interestingand picturesque. On each side, the soil is extremely goodon the low grounds, and the hills are well clothed with wood ;they are not high, but approach the river rather closely insome places, so that the winding stream, spaces of level andpartially cultivated land, and woody heights, are agreeably1835. FLAX MKKTIXG — CHIEFS. 583mingled, and formed a rapidly varying view as we proceeded.Mr. Baker had been urged by the natives of Cawa-cawa tovisit them, and endeavour to settle a dispute which had arisenwith a neighbouring village, or rather tribe. He also wishedto gain more advocates for the abolition of spirits ; and Iwas glad to profit by the opportunity of seeing a little of thenatives and their habits, in a place said to be Christianized,and uncontaminated by the spirit sellers.A few of our own countrymen were employing themselves assawyers, on the banks of the river, near the village of Cawa-cana ; but neither their huts, their mode of living, nor theiroutward appearance, caused any feeling of good-will towardsthem on my part.Having ascended the stream, as far as the boat could go,which was about four miles from the salt-water, we landed, andwalked towards the village of Cawa-cawa, escorted by severalelderly and a mob of young natives. Our way led throughopen underwood, maize-grounds, and damp swampy soil, inwhich I saw plenty of the plant called ' flax,' supposed, a fewyears since, to be very valuable, and nov probably muchundervalued. Across a stream the natives seemed delighted tocarry us ; indeed, I may say once for all, that at this villagetheir whole behaviour was affable, friendly, and open, to adegree nearly approaching that of the merry Otaheitans.Under the shade of a large tree, the inhabitants of the widely-scatteredhuts soon assembled. For me they brought a chairout of a cottage ; but for themselves their native soil offered asufficient place of rest. In all positions, half-enveloped inblankets or coarse country matting, with their rough, curlyhair protecting their heads from the sun's rays, and almostshading their tattowed faces, about a hundred men, women,and children surrounded their apparently most welcome friendPayka,' as they called Mr. Baker. Many fine forms and mostexpressive countenances were there. Such heads, indeed I maysay, such a group for a painter ! I had sufficient leisure toadmire them ; for it is etiquette in New Zealand to sit in silence.584 DISPUTES Bats GAME. Lecturingsome minutes, previous to commencing any conversation.Engrossed by the fine, the grand heads of some of the oldwarriors, whose amply tattowed features had withstood theravages of time more successfully than their once dark hair,and by the graceful figures of the younger women, I was sorrywhen the ceremonial silence was ended. By turns the principalmen discussed with Mr. Baker (whose speaking appeared to beto the purpose, as well as fluent), the business for which theyhad assembled.I could understand few words used, but the gestures of thenatives were sufficiently expressive to give a general idea oftheir meaning. Mr. Baker's interpretation to me afterwards wasto this effect : — " A neighbouring tribe has encroached uponthe district which this tribe claim as hereditary property. Thesemen prove their right to it by bringing forward several oftheir elders, who have at various times killed and eaten ' rats'upon it."In other days, the war-club and the patoo-patoo — a sanguinarycontest to determine whose should be the land and whosebodies should fill the ovens — would have been the unfailingmode of decision. " What would Mr. Baker recommend themto do, now that they had become Christians .?"" was their question.He recommended arbitration, each party to choose awise man ; "■ and if the two wise men disagreed, they shouldrefer the question to the deliberation of the missionaries, attheir next general meeting. He also promised to visit the othertribe, enquire into the case, and exert himself for the sake ofboth parties, who were equally his friends, and whose interest,as well as duty, it was to remain at peace.By temporising, talking to each party, and inducing one tomeet the other half way, Mr. Baker had no doubt of amicablyarranging the affair.* Is it not extremely gratifying to find themissionaries thus appealed to, and acting as mediators andpeacemakers ?The singular reason for laying claim to this land, appears lessextraordinary when explained. Formerly there were no wildBefore the Beagle sailed it was settled.J 835. Territory I'UIICHASE OF I.AXD. 585quadrupeds, excepting rats, upon New Zealand : and while sodestitute of animal food, a rat was considered ' game '' by the natives; and no man would attempt to kill his neighbour's rats, orthose which were found on his territory, without intending, ordeclaiming war against him. Had not the rats, eaten by theolder men of Cawa-cawa, belonged to them, the lawful orunderstood owners of the rats would long since have made warupon the people of Cawa-cawa. Rats having been there killed,and war not having been consequently declared, were irresistiblearguments in the minds of those men, who never forgot,and who knew not how to forgive an injury.* Some of us arcapt to think modern game laws harsh inventions, and the resultof civilization. Yet if, in our own history, we look back sevenhundred years, we find that human lives were then forfeitedfor those of beasts of the chase : and if we look at thiscountry, which may be supposed two thousand years behindour own, in point of civilization, we find, that to kill a rat upona neighbours land, is an offence almost sufficient to cause ageneral war.The precise manner in which territory is divided amongthese savages surprised me not a little : I thought land wasbut slightly valued by them. Though sold to Europeans forwhat we consider trifles, the sale is, to them, matter of highimportance, in which every free man of the tribe ought to beconsulted. Uncleared land is supposed to belong to the tribe,collectively. Cultivated spots, and houses, are private property,but cannot be sold, or given away, out of the tribe,without the consent of the whole community. This division ofland among small tribes,-|- looks much like a comparatively lateappropriation of the country. To make a purchase of land inNew Zealand, in a manner which will ensure quiet and unquestionedpossession, it is necessary to assemble all the tribe ofIn Mariner's Tonga Islands a full description is driven of the mannerin which the Friendly Islanders shot rats : as an amusement.+ There are several varieties of the human race in New Zealand ;difl'erinjj from one another as much as the lightest olive-coloured Ota-heitan differs from the 'brown-black' New Hollander.586 SPIRITS — NOAH — WINE. Dec.owners, or as many as can come ; a few absentees, of little consequence,not being thought about. The goods intended to begiven, as an equivalent for the land, are then spread out forinspection ; and if the contracting parties agree, their word isgiven, and their marks are perhaps put to a deed which theycannot read,* but whose purport they are told. The goodsare forthwith carried away ; each man appropriates what hechooses, and it often happens that the chief men of the tribereceive the smallest portion of the purchase goods.One, among many objections alleged against the purchaseof land, said to have been made by de Thierry, was, that hecould not have bought land in New Zealand, while absent,because, in order to make a purchase valid, it is necessaryto buy from the tribe, not from individuals.Mr. Stokes was informed that when a tribe is utterly vanquished,the conqueror generously gives the survivors a grantof land, and even slaves. I do not see how to reconcile thisact of generosity with the blood-thirsty warfare which hasusually ended in indiscriminate slaughter, and cannibal feasts.Satisfied, for the time, on the principal subject : — the muchdesired abolition of the use and importation of ardent spirits,was discussed. An old man, named ' Noah"* spoke to thetribe ; and after alluding to the disgraceful and unfortunateevents, caused by drinking, which had happened to theirfriends, and to neighbouring tribes, since the white men hadintroduced the vice of intoxication, old Noah ended a shortbut eloquent harangue, by saying, " expel the liquid fire."Noah is a Christian : his name was his own choice, when baptized,some years ago. The principal men, eight in number,signed, or made marks upon the paper, which contained theresolutions agreed to by acclamation. Noah wrote his namein a distinct hand : each of the others made marks resemblinga small part of the tattowed lines upon their faces.One man imitated the mark upon the side of his nose ; anotherthat near his eye. Baked potatoes were afterwardsbrought to us; and a curious wine, of which I had notA few natives can now read and write.1835. NATIVES — CHURCH — Oxen. 587heard. It was dark coloured, and not unlike good elderberry-wine.It is made from the small currant-like fruit of ashrub, which the settlers call ' native vine ;' but the resemblanceto a vine is about as evident as that of a common elderberrybush. The fruit grows in clusters, much like smallelder berries in appearance, but it contains stony kernels, whichare said to be unwholesome, if not poisonous. Women collectthe juice by squeezing the bunches of fruit with their hands.I have heard that it is used after fermentation as well as in itspure juicy state, but some assert the contrary : it might thenassuredly cause intoxication ; I doubt, however, their oftenobtaining, or keeping, a sufficient quantity. It dyes the handsof the women and children who collect the juice, so deeply,that they cannot efface the stain for many days afterwards.Instead of rubbing, or rather pressing, noses, these peoplehave adopted the custom of shaking hands: everyone expectsto have a shake. Yet with all their asserted equality , and democraticideas, there must be a considerable distinction of rank,and difference of occupation, among them ; for I particularlynoticed that two chief persons of this tribe, who rather resembledthe higher class at Otaheite, had far less swarthy complexions,and less hardened extremities, than the others :one of them, considered by Mr. Baker to be the head of thetribe, was more like an Otaheitan ' Eri,' and less like the ordinaryNew Zealanders than any other native I saw, while attheir island. From the meeting place under the large tree, wewent to see a chapel which the natives were building, by theirown free will and labour ; and in our way we passed throughyam and potato grounds, so neatly kept, that no gardenerneed have hesitated to commend them.* The intended chapelwas a lightly framed building of wood, With a thatched roof.The natives seemed to be very proud of it, and were much gratifiedby our praises. Some large oxen, in a pen, were feedingon young branches, and leaves of trees, gathered for them by theCook speaks in strong terms of the neatness and regularity of theircultivated grounds.588 SICK NETS BURIAL. DeC.natives, which they appeared to relish as much as hay : theywere called ' booa-cow.''*At the door of a house, or rather in the porch (before described),I saw a woman reading : she was sick, Mr. Bakertold me, one of a long list of invalids, who frequently appliedto the missionaries for advice and medicine. I looked at her,book, it was the Gospel of St. Matthew, printed at Paihia, inthe New Zealand language. Now, certainly, there was neitherconstraint, nor any thing savouring of outward show, in thiswoman's occupation, for my seeing her was sudden, and quiteaccidental, arising from my going out of the usual path to lookat the oxen. Mr. Baker told me, that one of the most troublesome,though not the least gratifying duties, of the missionaries,was that of attempting to act as medical men. Noregularly educated practitioner having at that time establishedhimself in the land, every complaint was entrusted to thekind attention, and good will, but slight medical knowledgeof the missionaries. We saw several nets for fishingplaced in separate heaps, each upon a small platform, at thetop of a post eight or ten feet in height : in a similar manneryams and potatoes are preserved from the rotting influence ofthe damp earth. The nets are made with the split leaves of theflax "' plant, not merely with the fibres, and last for manyyears : both they and the food, thus exposed to the air, arethatched, like the houses, with the broad leaves of an iris-likerush, or flag, which grows abundantly by the river sides, andin marshy places. I was here informed, that after the bodiesof the dead (which are exposed to the air, on platforms similarto those I have just mentioned), are thoroughly dried, thebones are carried away, and deposited in a secret buryingplace.Seth. Being Christmas-day, several of our party attendedDivine service at Paihia, where Mr. Baker officiated. Veryfew natives were present ; but all the respectable part of theLiterally cow-pig. Before white men brought others, pigs were theonly domestic animals known in Polynesia besides dogs : — and when acow first appeared in a ship, she was called cow-book, or book-cow.1835. CHRISTMAS — SERVICE — Singing. 589English community had assembled. Instead of performing thewhole service first in one language, and afterwards in the other,as at Otaheite, the two entire services were mixed, and thewhole extended to such a length that had even the most eloquentdivine occupied the pulpit, his hearers could scarcelyhave helped feeling fatigued. Mr. Baker appeared to be morefluent in the language of New Zealand, than in his own, afortunate circumstance for the natives, though not for the Englishwho attend his church. In the mere glimpse which I hadof the missionary body at New Zealand, it appeared to me thatthey rather undervalued their white congregations. They say,We are sent to the heathen, it is to their improvement thatevery effort should be directed'" "This is true'" may bereplied ; " but does not the example of respectable settlers, orvisitors, assist the influence of missionaries'" Would not thenatives take notice if foreigners whom they see in the landrefused, generally speaking, to conform in their habits and conduct,to the principles so earnestly insisted upon by the missionaries.?But unless Divine service is performed in a mannerwhich will, at the very least, increase respect for it, andgive rise to no feelings of slight towards those who, from thenature of their highly responsible office, are expected to performit tolerably well — it does not seem likely that such as areonly sojourners in the land, will be seen at the church as oftenas might be desirable ; thus a part of their example, so beneficialto the great cause, will perhaps be lost.A very correct musical ear seems to be as general amongthe people here, as among those of Otaheite. The responses ofthirty natives, women and men, were made so simultaneously,and so perfectly in harmony, that I could no more distinguishthe different voices, than I could those of a number of good choristerssinging together. Their singing was equally melodious,yet neither I nor others were disposed to think it equal to thatof Otaheite.26th. Disputes between masters of whale ships and theircrews, and between both these classes and the New Zealanders,obliged me to meddle, though very reluctantly, in their affairs .590 MR. BUSBY MEASURES SCHEME. DeC.to show what anarchy has been caused in this country, by thepartial, half measures, which have been taken, I will try todescribe the state of things, at the Bay of Islands, as we foundthem.I will not attempt to give the slightest sketch of eventswhich had occurred anterior to the Beagle's visit, full andauthentic details being accessible in other publications ; fartherthan to say that the rumoured approach of de ThieiTy hadstimulated Mr. Busby (holding the undefined office of Britishresident) to take measures adverse to such foreign intruders,by issuing a public announcement,* and by calling togetherthe principal chiefs of tribes inhabiting the districts of NewZealand, north of the Thames, with a view of urging themto frame a sort of constitution-f- which should have a steadyinginfluence over their unwieldy democracy, and leave themless exposed to foreign intrusion.Thus much had been done bywords and on paper; thechiefs had departed, each to his perhaps distant home, and theefficiency of their authority, in a ' collective capacity' was yetto be discovered. No ' executive ' had been organized ; theformer authorities — each chief in his own territory — hesitatedto act as they had been accustomed, owing to a vague mystificationof ideas, and uncertainty as to what they really hadagreed upon, while the authority of Mr. Busby was absolutelynothing, not even that of a magistrate among his own countrymen; so of course he could have no power over the natives.To whom then were the daily squabbles of so mixed and turbulenta population, as that of the Bay of Islands and its vicinity,to be referred ?Late events had impressed the natives with such a highidea of King William's men-of-war, that even the little Beaglewas respected by them, and, in consequence, appeals were madeto me — by natives, by men of the United States of America,• Appendix, No. 35.t A copy of the constitution, or form of government, decided upon ata meeting of all the chiefs of the northern districts (excepting two orthree of minor consequence), is in the Appendix, No. 36.1835. CAUSES OF DISTURBANCE. 591and by British subjects ; but, not then aware of the peculiarityof Mr. Busby's position, I referred them to him, underthe idea that his office was of a consular nature, and thereforethat I ought not to act in these cases, excepting as his supporter.Finding him unwilling to take any steps of an activekind, not deeming himself authorised to do so : and the aggrievedparties still asking for assistance, I referred them tothe only real, though not nominal, authority, in the place,that of the missionaries. By the active assistance of Mr. Baker,the more serious quarrels were ended without bloodshed, andthose of a more trifling nature, in which the natives were notconcerned, were temporarily settled : but I doubt not that inafew days afterwards anarchy again prevailed.To give an idea of the nature of some of these quarrels,and of the serious consequences they might entail, I willdescribe briefly two or three cases which were referred to me.Pomare had been beaten while on board a whale ship, bysome of her crew. No New Zealander will submit to be struck,but thus to treat a chief is unpardonable. Burning with indignationhe maltreated the first Englishman whom he met onshore, and was concerting serious measures of revenge, whenthe master of the ship, and a number of his men, came to askfor assistance and protection.Again ; a chief, whose name I do not know, had been refusedadmittance on board a whale ship, where he had heardthat one of his female slaves was living. He did not wish toinjure her, or even take her away. His only motive, in askingadmittance, was to satisfy himself that she was there. Highlyaffronted at the refusal, he spoke to me, (as he said) previouslyto collecting his warriors and attacking the ship.Another case was unconnected with the natives but tendedto expose a fraudulent system, and to show the necessity ofarming British authorities, in distant parts of the world, witha definite degree of control over the licentious, or ill-disposedportion of their own countrymen, who, in those remoteregions, are disproportionably numerous, and now able to dopretty much what they please.592 Irregularities — Inquiry. DeC.A person who stated himself to be the master of an Englishwhaler, lying in the harbour, came on board the Beagle, accompaniedby a man said to be the third mate. The formercomplained of the mutinous state of his crew, who had illtreated this third mate, and then refused to work or obey anyorders. Inquiry on board the whaler, showed that the crewhad been ill-used, especially as to provisions : and that notonly the nominal master, but the chief as well as the secondmate were North Americans, (U.S.) The legal master, itappeared, was the so-called third mate, an Englishman. Hisname appeared in the ship's papers as master ; that of theperson who had been acting as master did not appear at all.But the acting master, who before me styled himself ' supercargo''produced a power of attorney from the owners of thevessel,* which appeared to authorise him to control the proceedingsof the vessel, as he thought proper; to displace themaster and appoint another person in his stead, and in everyway to act for the owners, as if he, the American, were soleowner. Nearly all the seamen were British subjects. Howfar his power of attorney might carry weight against the spiritand intent of the navigation laws, I had much doubt ; but asit appeared to me that the owners in such cases, ought toknow their own interest better than other persons could ; andthat in suiting their own interest they certainly would addtheir mite towards the general interest of their country ; and asthe supercargo had a circular letter from the Commander-in-chiefon the West-india and North American station, askingfor the assistance of any King's ship he might meet (with theview of encouraging the whale fishery out of Halifax) ; Irefrained from doing what my first impulse prompted — puttingan officer on board, and sending the ship to the nearest port(Sydney), in which correctly legal measures might be adopted,if necessary. Meanwhile as the British resident did not thinkhimself authorised to interfere, and disorder, with ' club-law,'were prevailing and likely to continue, in the Rose, I went onboard,accompanied by Lieutenant Sulivan and Mr. Bynoe.• The ' Rose ' of Halifax.1835. REFLECTIONS And SUC.GKSTIOKS. 593After examining the provisions and all the ship's papers, Ispoke to the crew (every man of whom wished to leave thevessel) and to the nominal master ; obtained an assurance, in theirhearing, that their future allowance of provisions should beunobjectionable, and, for the time, restored order. But I feltthat the calm was unlikely to last, and two days afterwardsfresh appeals were made, to which I could not attend, beingin the act of leaving the port.*The laws which regulate our merchant shipping, especiallysealers and whalers, do not appear to extend a sufficient influenceover the numerous vessels, which, with their often turbulentinmates, now range over the vast Pacific. For manyyears past. Great Britain and the United States have annuallysent hundreds of large whale ships into the Pacific : duringlate years, Sydney has sent forth her ships, amounting at presentin number to more than sixty, most of which are employedin whaling or trading in the Pacific : and be it rememberedthat their crews are not the most select seamen — the natureof many of them may easily be imagined — yet in all this immenseexpanse of ocean, little or no restraint except that ofmasters of vessels, on board their own ships, is imposed eitherupon Americans or British subjects ! There is the nominalauthority of a consul at the Sandwich, and Society Islands ;and occasionally a man-of-war is seen at the least uncivilizedplaces. But how inefficient is so widely separated, and sonominal a control ? When ships of war visit the less frequentedparts of the Pacific, they are too much in the dark, as to thestate of things, to be able to effect a tenth part of what mightbe done, in equal time, by a ship employed solely on that ocean.In so peculiar a portion of the world as Polynesia, it takes sometimeto learn what has been taking place : and what ship ofwar has stayed long enough for her captain to lose the sensationof inexperience — which must embarrass him if calledupon to decide and act, in cases where he really is about themost ignorant person (as regards the special case) of any one• Afterwards (at Sydney) I heard that the men had all left the vessel,and were living among the natives.VOL. II. 2 a594 Moral EFFECT OF FORCE. DeC.concerned with it ? In consequence of that ignorance, hemust inevitably be more or less guided by the advice of parties,of whose individual interest in the matter so short an acquaintancecannot give him a proper idea.A great deal of prudence, and good management, is requiredin the commander of a man-of-war, who has any business ofconsequence to transact with the natives of Polynesia, or whohas to deal with his own countrymen in that distant region.A single ship, assisted perhaps by tenders, might, if well commanded,do more good in a few years among the islands of thePacific, than can now easily be imagined. But then she mustbe stationary ; not that she should remain in one place — farfrom it — her wings should seldom rest ; I mean only that sheshould stay in the Pacific during three or four years. In thattime so much information might be gained, and so much diffusedamong the natives ; such a system of vigilant inspection mightbe established, and so much respect for, and confidence in theBritish nation, be secured — that our future intercourse withPolynesia would, for a length of time, be rendered easier andinfinitely more secure, as well as creditable.The few ships of war which have remained during anylength of time among the islands, have been occupied by exploringand surveying, to an extent that has interfered withthe earnest consideration of other matters. But in a ship, employedas I have described, a surveyor might be embarked,who would have ample opportunities of increasing our knowledgeof that ocean. And if a sensible man, whose natural abilityhad been improved by an education unattainable by sailors,could be tempted to bear the trials and losses of a long seavoyage, in a busily employed ship, how much might Scienceprofit by the labours of three or four such years .''Having thus entered freely into ideas which I have sooften dwelt upon that they are become familiar, I will ventureto suggest the kind of ship which would do most, in my humbleopinion, at the least ultimate expense consistent withefficiency. Moral influence over the minds of natives, as wellas over wanderers from our own or other countries, is a pair1835. POLYNESIAN INTEREST. 595may object, and that influence light be at once obtained bythe mere presence of a large ship.Compare the manner in which the natives of the marquessbehaved to the Tagus and Briton frigates, with their hostilityto vessels whose appearance did not overawe them. Anoutward show of overpowering force would often preventa struggle, and probably loss of life, which, however justifiable,cannot too anxiously be avoided. From what I haveseen and heard, I feel authorised to say that one ship of force,well-manned, and judiciously commanded, would effect morereal good in the Pacific than half a-dozen small vessels.Frigates have already been seen among some of the islandsof Polynesia, and heard of in the greater number. To send aship of a lower class to establish a general influence over thePolynesians, and our own wandering countrymen, as well asfor the purposes I have previously mentioned, would be totreat the business so lightly that, for the credit of our country,it would perhaps be better let alone ; particularly as a frigatedoes occasionally go from the South American station, and asloop from Australia, or the East-indies. No European orAmerican nation has now a duty to perform, or an interestto watch over, in the Pacific Ocean, equal to that of GreatBritain. The North Americans are increasing their connections,and consequently their influence, rapidly. Russia hasextended her arm over the Northern Pacific. France hassent her inquiring officers, and Roman Catholic missionaries*are sowing the seeds of differences, if not discord, among theislanders, in the Gambler Islands and elsewhere.Independent of expense, what are the principal local objectionsto employing a frigate in such duty .? In the first place,among the islands there would be risk of getting ashore, increasingwith the size of the ship :— in the second ; it mightbe difficult to obtain supplies, and in the event of losing sparsshe might be obliged to return ; perhaps to England: — in thethird ; to get ashore, in a ship drawing so much water, would• Sent out immediately after the first circulation of Captain Beechey'sinteresting work.2 Q 2596 Resources IN PACIFIC. DcC.be a much more serious affair than a similar accident happeningto a smaller vessel : and, by obliging her to return toEngland, or go to an East-indian dockyard, would upset allplans and expose Polynesia to greater irregularities and lesscontrol than ever, until new arrangements could be made.To the ' risk of getting ashore,' I answer : large ships arein general more efficiently officered and manned than smallones, and they are less likely to get into danger, because theyare consequently more carefully managed. The Pacific is,technically speaking, a ' deep water ' ocean : all its coral reefsare ' steep-toe"' Sand or mud banks are unknown, except nearthe shores of continents, and even there they are rare, unlesson the Japanese and Chinese shores. Small ships attempt tosail in intricate passages, and get ashore : — large vessels usewarps, or await very favourable opportunities, and are notrisked. Secondly: supplies may now be obtained in any quantityon the coast of South America, as well as in Australia ;and fresh provisions can be obtained by regular, reasonablepurchase, at the principal islands. New Zealand, NorfolkIsland, the north-west coast of America and other places, arestocked with the finest spars : and lastly : a large ship, wellprovided, has the resources of a small dock-yard within herself.An East-india trader of eight hundred tons, was hovedown by lier own crew, and the natives, at Otaheite. Cooklaid his ship ashore for repair in Endeavour River, on thenorth-east coast of New Holland ; where the rise and fall oftide is very great. Sydney is an excellent place for heavingdown and repairing a ship of any size. Guayaquil has a greatrise and fall of tide. Lima, or rather Callao, — and Coquimbo,are good places for a ship to refit in. But Sydney is superiorto all as a rendezvous, and any repairs may be effected there.Large ships are able to do all their own work, while smallvessels are frequently obliged to ask for the help of theirneighbours, when they get into difficulty, or want repairs.These considerations, however, should not prevent a frigatefrom having a good tender, for much risk would then be1835. ADVANTAGES OV A LARGE SHIP. 597avoided : and although the large ship might be repairing, theknowledge that she was in the Pacific* would be quite sufficient,if she had only established such a character as that which wasborne by many a British frigate during the last general war.Such a ship could detach efficient boats for surveying, or otherpurposes ; she could carry animals, seeds, plants, and poultry,to those islands which have none ; and by her countenance andprotection, she could assist and encourage the missionaries intheir all-important occupation.No accident need oblige her to quit that ocean. Many large shipsare built there, and never leave its waters.¥CHAPTER XXV.Waimate— Cultivation— Flax— Apteryx— Gardens— Missionaries— Farm—Barn — Mill— Grave of Shunghi— Horses— Kauri Pine— Keri-keriChildren— Waripoaka— La Favorite— Political condition— Relics-images,or Amulets — Mats — Leave New Zealand — Remarks — of Missionary exertion — Irregular Settlements— Trade — Residents and Consuls — Missionary EmbarrassmentsSociety's Lands— Discontent of Settlers— Purchase of Land — Influenceof Missionaries — Their sphere of action.28th. Accompanied by Mr. Baker, I set out to go to Waite,a settlement formed by the missionaries with the view ofintroducing agriculture and mechanical arts among the natives,in addition to the truths of the Gospel. Entering one of thenumerous creeks (Waiting) by which the north-eastern shoresof New Zealand are intersected, we went a little way in a boat,then landed and got on horseback.* Two natives, who hadbeen waiting with the horses, ran by their side during the restof the day with much ease, though we trotted or canteredrather fast. One of them even carried a bundle weighing aboutthirty pounds. The men did this by choice, for the sake ofriding back from Keri-keri, a place we were afterwards tovisit, and whence Mr. Baker and I would return by water.While running thus easily and cheerfully, by the side of ourhorses, they reminded me of inn at Madeira ; and still moreof the Maltese, whom they both resembled in feature, figure,and colour. To see fern every where, was a remarkablepeculiarity. In some places it grew thickly, and to the heightof a man, in others it was scantily scattered. It is said to beanindex to the quality of the soil, which is productive in proportionto the quantity of fern. After ascending the first lowhills, I was a little disappointed by the uniform and unpicturesqueappearance around me. A rather level or irregularlyundulating country, in which extensive plains were moreA few horses had been brought over from Sydney.1835. Country CULTIVATION. 599remarkable than hills — every where verdant, in many placeswooded, and intersected by numerous streams of waterpleased by its supposed capabilities, though not by the picturesquenessof its appearance. From seeing the remains offorest, or rather irregular-looking woods, in a variety of situations— at the summits of hills, as well as in the hollows ofvallies ; and from the prevalence of fern instead of grass, I wasled to think that the whole land had once been thickly wooded,but that the natives had cleared away the trees by burning.We passed by a native village, around which were manyacres of well cultivated ground, with maize and potatoes in athriving state. They were planted in little heaps of earth (likemole-hills), at exact distances, laid out by line. For plantingthe sweet potato (camera), a kind of yam (harp), or the latelyintroduced potato, a wooden stake is used as a substitute for aspade, in preparing the ground. The natives acknowledgethemselves much indebted to the white men for pigs and potatoes; but they speak angrily of the 'liquid fire' — and diseaseswhich they brought. One old native also made a shrewd remarkabout certain seven-barrelled guns sent among them by some ofour countrymen, even while others were preaching the gospelof peace, and trying to check their inclination to quarrel.Abundance of the flax plant was growing on the low moistground, and also on higher, apparently dry soil. I was toldthat the flax plant does not like a swamp, but thrives wherethe ground is rather moist. With leaves like those of an irisor large lily, whence the fibres are obtained which are ' called 'flax, this plant has always been of great consequence to thenatives. Those immense nets which are mentioned in thefaithfully descriptive accounts of Cook, are made with theleaves split into long narrow shreds, not scraped or peeled.For the manufacture of smaller cordage and thread, the leavesare scraped by a shell, which removes the upper or green partand leaves the strong white fibres, that run longitudinallyalong the under side. With these fibres, in less or greaternumbers, and twisted more or less, the New Zealand cordagehas been made, which was so much liked at its first FLAX-PLANT — CHAPEL. Dec.diction, but is now said to be of a quality very inferior to thatmade with European, or even Chilian, hemp. The principalobjection I have heard urged against the New Zealand rope is,that it does not endure frequent bending ; not being sufficientlytenacious if used where its pliability is much tried. In sailor'slanguage, ' it soon goes in the nip"" Perhaps this objectionmight be removed by a peculiar mode of treating the plant, orby another way of seasoning and preparing the fibres. Very finemats for clothing aire made with these fibres, which, when properlyprepared, are of a fine silky texture, extremely durable,and capable of withstanding a great deal of washing and wear.I have one by me which has been in constant use sixteen years,and frequently washed. This being the case with respect to themats, how does it happen that rope made by white men, of thevery same material, has not been found to answer .'' Surely,it can only be because the material has not been properlytreated by those who are, perhaps, little acquainted with itsnature, with the best season for cutting it, and with otherpeculiarities probably well known to the natives. Do not manyof our own handicraftsmen make a mystery of their art, and,in consequence, are not the secrets of most trades hidden tothose who have not learned them, and cannot read ?An open-sided house, or rather shed, standing apart fromthe little village, I was told was a chapel, which the natives hadlately built of their own accord, and without telling the missionariesof their intention : when it was completed theyapplied to Mr, Williams for a teacher.A very fine-looking native passed us, whose air and mannerof carrying his gun reminded me of an Albanian's. Every mannow carries a gun or musket, who, a few years since, wouldhave been armed with a war club, or patoopatoo, and a fieri.*So accessible is the country between Waimate and the Bayof Islands, that, except across a few small ravines, which requirelog bridges, a cart might travel easily; though there was at thistime no road ; water conveyance also is every where at hand, soOr scarce (>pea)).1835. APTERYX — Climate GARDENS. 601intersected is the land by arms of the sea. Fresh water, inrivers, brooks, and springs, is plentiful, and never fails.There is a rare and curious bird in New Zealand, which fewpersons have seen. It is shy, and seldom visible in the daytime: the natives are said to chase it by moonlight. It is ofthe bustard or emu kind, unable to fly, though provided withshort wings ; it is said to be more hairy than feathery, and aboutthe size of a small emu.*On rather a high plain, or very flat-topped hill, standsWaimate — the agricultural establishment of the Church MissionarySociety. After so long an absence from every similarsight, and in New Zealand, the sudden appearance ofthree English houses, surrounded by outhouses, gardens, andcultivated fields, was striking and delightful ; I looked at it asafragment of Old England, small indeed, but apparentlygenuine. About twenty acres of land, judging only by eye,seemed to be cultivated. Corn was in full ear, and looked well.The buildings showed at a distance to greater advantage thanon a nearer approach ; because they are built in the form ofgentlemen's cottages, but entirely of wood, and were then unfinished.There were also nice gardens, which had evidentlyprofited by much industrious care, and knowledge of gardening:my hasty survey was however stopped by the approach of aperson, whose appearance and manner showed that he was anessential actor in this English scene; and whose intelligent, kind,and truly respectable demeanor was of that description whichat once excites esteem and goodwill. This was Mr. Davis, thesuperintendant of the farming establishment. He told me thatMr. Wm. Williams (the brother of Henry Williams) and Mr.Clarke, were gone toHokianga, at the opposite side of the island,to attend the last hours of a young Wesleyan missionary.I have hitherto spoken of missionaries in general terms, as ifthey formed a distinct and undivided class. That as a bodythey ai-e distinct, in the scale of worldly divisions, is true ; theirself-devotion, their habits of life, peculiar education, and incestbird (Aptcryx Australis) has lately bien described by naturalists,therefore 1 say no more about it.602 missionary classes — farm. Dec,sant anxiety, attach them to a class, of which the good, andtherefore truly great Bishop Hebe was one of the leadingmembers. But of course they are separated, among themselves,by distinctions which are a natural result of more or less educationand of early habits.The Church Missionary Society have distinguished bythe term ' missionary' only those educated, well-informed menwho have taken holy orders, and they are styled ' reverend.'Those who are not in orders are termed ' catechists.' Withoutan idea of finding fault with the present conduct of any individualbelonging to either of those two classes, it has occurredto others as well as to me, that a third class might be addedadvantageously, that of ' visiting' or ' inspecting missionaries.'A clergyman of Hebe's character, embarked on board a man ofwar, might advise and assist those who are now too much onan equality to give free advice to one another, or readily to seethesmall defects from which no human beings or institutionsever can be free.Human nature, tried during a long course of years, has seldomsteered a uniformly steady course ; and may not slightdefects, if unnoticed, increase into real blemishes .'' Difficultieshave arisen "in New Zealand, as well as in other parts of thePacific, unnoticed by many people, because, till lately, theywere but little felt. These difficulties particularly interfere withthe missionaries, and if not remedied by timely measures, willlead to continual embarrassment.To return from this digression. Near the houses a numberof sheep were grazing : plenty of fowls, geese, and pigs ; somecattle and horses ; and several calves and colts, added to thecomfortable, farm-like appearance. We accompanied Mr. Davisinto his house for a few minutes, walked over the garden andfarm, looked at the farm-yard, barn, and mill, and returned todinner. The house was well constructed of wood ; and thoughunfinished had a remarkably clean and neat appearance. Thecompact manner in which the walls were boarded or wainscottedstruck me particularly, from being such a contrast to themanner in which a South American carpenter would have .HOUSE — BARN Water-wheel. constructeda house of similar size. A little room, used by Mr.Davis, pleased me much ; for, in addition to clever contrivancesand good carpentry, it contained a collection of excellent books,and a frame on which an unfinished plan of the Society's farmbore testimony to the nature of the in-door occupations of ourhost. I did not expect to see much indication of reading,certainly none of drawing, in a newly-built house, standing inthe midst of a tract of New Zealand, which two years previouslywas covered with fern.In the garden, European vegetables seemed to thrive, andthe farm-yard was quite English ; a large barn, built entirelyby natives, under Mr. Davis's direction ; a blacksmith's shop ;carts and farming implements, successively engaged our attention.In the barn, a surprising work for the New Zealanders,two natives were thrashing, and a winnowing machine wasattended by a third. The mill and mill-dam were well worthexamination, as good works of their kind, independent of theinterest occasioned by their locality. An embankment (madeentirely by natives) had changed the upper part of a smallvalley into a large pond ; and on the middle of the pond-head,or embankment, stood the mill.A powerful water-wheel, equal to the performance of farmore work than the mill required, seemed to be easily turnedby only a part of the stream admitted through the mill-damor sluice. In answer to a remark upon the surplus power, Mr.Davis said that the Society contemplated erecting a thrashingmachine, and that Mr. Coates* had encouraged him to anticipateits arrival. A thrashing-machine might be worked easily,in addition to the mill, and yet there would be power tospare.-f- When embanking the pond, an unfortunate accidentoccurred, which almost stopped the work : one of the natives,incautiously digging under an overhanging mass of earth, wassmothered by its sudden fall. Superstitious and easily excited,the natives abandoned their allotted tasks, and not without» Secretary to the Church Missionary Society.+ The Church Missionary Society have sent out the thrashing machine,and probably it is now in full operation.604 MILL — SHUNGHl's GRAVE. Dec.much difficulty could the missionaries induce them to resumetheir employment. When at last the mill was finished and infull operation, nothing could exceed the surprise and delight ofthe natives, especially those who had assisted in the work.They called it a ' ship of the land.' " Wonderful white men !"said they ; " fire, water, earth, and air are made to work forthem by their wisdom ; while we can only command the labourof our own bodies ! "Many natives have visited Sydney ; some have been roundthe world ; and, of course, their ideas and descriptions havebeen imparted to their countrymen ; but nothing, not eventhat, to a savage, awfully-mysterious object, a steam-vessel, hasyet effaced their early-formed opinion, that a large ship of waris the greatest wonder of the world.Returning from the mill, Mr. Davis showed me whereShunffhi was buried. No monumental mark indicates thetabooed place in which the remains of the slaughter-lovingcannibal Averse deposited ; a few dark-leaved trees and somethickly-growing fern alone point out the spot.While looking about, highly gratified by all we saw, we metMr. W. Williams, who had just returned from his attendanceupon the young Wesleyan before-mentioned. The sufferer hadbeen released from painful illness by death.A thriving young English oak, near Mr. Davis's house,augured well ; for where English oaks succeed, many otheruseful trees will certainly grow. Several younger saplings,just fit for transplanting, occupied a part of Mr. Williams'swell-stocked garden ; and these interested me more than all theother plants and trees in the garden taken together. Englishmenone now meets every where ; but a living, healthy, Englishoak was a sight too rare, near the Antipodes, to fail in excitingemotion.I was much struck by the harmony and apparent happinessof those families whose cheerful hospitality I was enjoying.An air of honesty, and that evident tranquillity of mind whichcan only be the result of a clear conscience, offered a forciblecontrast to the alleged gloom and selfishness of which some1835. MISSIONARY SPIRIT. 605missionaries have been accused by those whose society wasnot, perhaps, even tolerable to them, because of their vicioushabits and indulgences. It was also very gratifying to me tomark the lively interest taken by Mr. Williams, Mr. Davis,and Mr. Baker in every detail connected with the Fuegians,and our attempt to establish Richard Matthews in Tierra delFuego. Again and again they recurred to the subject, andasked for more information ; they would not hear of mycalling the attempt ' a failure"" " It was the first step"" saidthey, " and similar in its result to our first step in New Zealand.We failed at first ; but, by God's blessing upon humanexertions, we have at last succeeded far beyond our anticipations""Their anxiety about the South American aboriginesgenerally ; about the places where missionaries might have achance of doing good ; and about the state of the islands in thePacific Ocean, gave me a distinct idea of the prevalence of truemissionary spirit.In the minds of Mr. Williams and his brother I should haveexpected high and generalizing ideas, similar in a great degreeto those of the ' Apostle of the South"" — the ' heroic Martens""as he has been most deservedly styled ; but I was unpreparedto find all the members of this missionary body anxious tohear about, and talk of Fuegians and other distant tribes ofsavages, rather than to draw attention to themselves, to theirtroubles, and ultimate success, or to their own interests.At this interview it was fully decided that Richard Matthewsshould remain with his brother, a respectable young missionarymechanic, established at the northern end of the island, andlately married to Mr. Davis's daughter. Among many subjectsof conversation we discussed the dress of the natives ; andMr. Williams assented fully to the inconvenience of their presentawkward mode, and expressed an intention of trying tointroduce something like the poncho and ' philip'* dress ofSouth America. With sincere regret I took leave of the residentsat Waimate. Instead of hours, I could have passed daysThe philip is a kind of loose breeches.G06 Horses KAURI PINE. DcC.with them, had other duties allowed of following my own inclination.Riding across a valley close to Waimate, we passed someyoung horses of a good breed, though fitter for the saddle thanfor agricultural purposes. They were the produce of maresbrought from Sydney. A picturesque wooden bridge, whichhad been thrown across the stream at the bottom of the valley,reminded me strongly of one well-known in England ; andcaused that rush of associated ideas sure to follow an unexpectedmeeting with the semblance of an object familiar in other days.In a large wood I saw the noble cowrie (kauri) pine. Thetrunk of this gigantic offspring of New Zealand is in size andshape like an immense antique column. From the ground tothe lower branches, more than ninety feet have been measured; and around the trunk, at a yard from the ground,more than forty feet ; while thirty feet in circumference is notan uncommon size. But the upper portions are comparativelymeagre, and utterly devoid of any of the beauties so remarkablein our English oaks, cedars, and firs. The woods of NewZealand have rather a naked appearance ; for the branchesseem inclined to grow upwards instead of spreading, or feathering.Cantering along, across an open easy country, passable forwheel carriages, we soon approached Keri-keri. A deep ravine,into which a considerable stream falls over a precipice about ahundred feet in height, was pointed out to me as the limit ofan arm of the sea which penetrates from the Bay of Islands.The waterfall is rather picturesque. Passing on over roundedhills covered with fern, I almost started at a thoroughlyEnglish scene suddenly exposed. In the valley beneath, aquiet little village ; a church-like building of stone, with aclock on the tower ; an English cutter at anchor, with herensign flying, in the arm of the sea before-mentioned, close tothe village ; gardens full of flowers, surrounding the neatly-builtand white washed cottages ; cattle grazing about the surroundinghills ; and a whole school of little English children,hallooing and screaming to one another as they played in a1835. KERI-KERI — WHITE CHILDREN. GOTfield, quite transported me in imagination to the other side ofthe world. Recalled to the truth by our pedestrian companionsasking us to stop for them, I enquired of Mr. Baker how longthat respectable church had been built'' and was disappointed tohear that the fancied church was a store-house. A small, lowbuilding, which he pointed out, was the chapel — it lookedmuch more like a small school-house.I was glad to see that our native companions took pains todress themselves decently before they entered the village ; as,while running along the road, they had carried their clothes intheir hands ; but of their own accord they put them on as soonas the houses were seen.In the village of Keri-keri we found an English welcome,and an abundance of happy-looking, healthy children. Theirparents seemed to bear the Church missionary character, openintegrity, and the outward indications of a sincere wish to dothat which is right. It may seem absurd to speak thusdecidedly upon a hasty glance and first impression ; but thereis a talisman in a truly honest face, and a charm in the mannerof one who ' thinker no evil,' that to me is irresistible ; andI have never yet found cause to think lightly of ' ten minutessight''At about ten o'clock, Mr. Baker and I embarked in my boat,to return to Paihia. As we passed down a river-like arm ofthe sea by moonlight, but little idea of the country on eitherside could be formed. What I could distinguish was undulating,and rather low land. We were four hours on the water,though the boat moved fast with a fair wind.I was glad to learn from all quarters that the natives arevery fond of the white children. Mr. Davis told me, that hissons could engage the attention and assistance of natives a greatdeal more easily than he could himself. Speaking the nativelanguage more fluently may assist, the young people in theirintercourse ; but they are liked chiefly because born in theland, and because of the naturally kind disposition of theNew Zealanders. Many instances have proved that they arekind by nature, and that their feelings are keenly sensitive, as608 WARIPOAKA LA Favorite. Dwellas very strong. But there are opposing feelings, eachpowerful, in the same individuals ; and upon education, habit,and the accidents of moments, depend their development andthe ascendancy which either may obtain.On the following day (29th), Waripoaka visited the Beagle ;he was accompanied by a mixed assemblage of men, women,children, pigs, dogs, and fowls, all in one large canoe. His ownappearance, a spare figure and tattowed face, ill-dressed in ashabby old suit of European clothes ; and the disorderly groupin his train, formed an unfavourable outward contrast to thewarlike array of a heathen New Zealand chief. Waripoakaseemed to be very intelligent and unassuming ; perhaps hismanner to white men was too humble. It did not agree withpre-conceived ideas of an independent, haughty New Zealander,to see bows and awkward grimaces (intended for goodmanners) made by a man whose eye and aspect at once precludedthe idea of any approach to refined habits.During our stay at New Zealand we heard much of thezealous activity of the officers of ' La Favorite' — a Frenchsurveying ship — which had lately visited, and made a minuteplan of the Bay of Islands. They must have examined everycorner and ascended every hill, by the accounts we received ;but neither natives nor English settlers seemed able to comprehendthe principle which animated Captain La Place and theofficers of La Favorite to take so much trouble in a foreigncountry for no good to themselves alone. I was able to explainthis to some of them by instancing my own occupationon the shores of South America, and showing that nations actedupon grander principles than individuals. I was told thatM. La Place had likewise examined, with much care, a considerableextent of the eastern sea-coasts of the northern largeisland (Eaheinomawe, or Yahinomaui).The term Rangatira, Rangateeda, or Rangatida, has spreadamong all classes, excepting only the slaves, who are prisonerstaken in war or their descendants, Every free Zealander nowstyles himself rangatira.At Otaheite there is a very limited number of raatiras, as1835. POLITICAL CONDITION — RELICS. 609the secondary chiefs are there called ; and each of those sostyled is really a person possessing a considerable estate, andhaving influence over his neighbours. There can be little doubtthat originally the words were alike ; or rather there was butone word which expressed either ' freeman"' or ' privileged person;'' and that the first people of New Zealand were animatedby the spirit of equality and apparent liberty, which is seento prevail in most colonies. Is not this the natural spirit ofan association of adventurers, whose objects are similar, whoseorigin, individually, as to birth and place in the parental societydoes not differ much — if it does, the difference is unnoticedwhen not upheld by accidental circumstances — and whose propertyis very similar ?Democratic, essentially democratic, is the present politicalstate of the New Zealanders ; and one cannot help pitying theirshort-sightedness in exposing themselves to the caprice and dissensionsof the many who obtain temporary influence, and tothe wars, harsh slavery — for in the heathen districts the life ofa slave depends upon the caprice of his master — and dreadfulconsequences. But this shocking existence, so utterly repugnantto our ideas of happiness, excited and still excites theNew Zealander to animal enjoyments, and a sort of pleasureresulting from the gratification of his horrible propensitieswhich is almost incomprehensible to us, however intelligible itmay have been to our earlier ancestors. Do not let us entirelyforget the painted savages who opposed Caesar — or the sacrificesof the Druids !Some of the Zealanders have amulets and other similartrifles hung around their necks. Small uncouth images, muchlike the Burmese or Chinese 'josses,' formed out of a very hardstone ('jade'.?), are so highly prized by them that they are,generally speaking, very reluctant to part with any. I gotone from the daughter of Shunghi, but could not obtain asecond, though she had several. I was told that they valuethem as hereditary relics, as well as supposed charms.Many nations, even at the present day, put faith in relics,some more especially in such as have a word or words riponVOL. II. 9 R610 IDOLS OK AMULETS — MATS.them, which it is supposed the evil spirit would not like tosee or to hear, and therefore would avoid. Particular figuresand shapes also are considered to be disagreeable to the authorof evil and his agents.* Surely the New Zealanders must havetried thus to frighten Satan by their hideous images, and bythe uncouth, horrible faces which they delight in making. Thelittle images, or amulets of jade, are formed in a similar fashion JThese small idols, or talismans, seem to me to have been cutinto the rude likeness of an ape, or a ' ribbed-nosed baboon'-f-Yet, excepting the face, they resemble figures of Hindoo gods !What time and pains must have been bestowed in workingsuch hard pieces of stone, unless indeed, a method of actingupon them by fire or chemistry was known ; or that when firsttaken from the ground they were softer.;}:Besides the use which the natives make of the flax for clothing:by day, a mat, coarsely woven of its fibres, is tied at night, orwhile it rains, round the neck, and forms a sort of thatch, underwhich the owner squats upon his heels, and, at a little distance,looks very like a bee-hive. The rough tuft of coarse and curlyblack hair, which shows at the top of the conical roof, does notat all injure the resemblance ; and in this manner a great numberof the natives pass their nights, especially if there is theleast chance of a surprise or attack from an enemy. I was toldthat they sleep as well in this way as if they were lying down,but T doubt it much, and think that only a part of the wholenumber at any place, keep watch, or remain ready in this manner,while others sleep lying down, though frequently in the openair. A more watchful way of resting could not well be devised.30th. Unpleasant discussions, on the local discordances Ihave already mentioned, obliged me to delay sailing for somehours : but at last I escaped, happy to disentangle myselffrom a maze of disagreeable questions, in which it Alas notMoslem, in his edition of Cudworth's Intellectual System. — Enc)c.Brit.+ The mandril, of Buffon. Apes were worshipped in India.— Ibid.I It is still a matter of conjecture how the Peruvians worked in theyer hard stone of which some of their ornaments were made.1835. Departure REMARKS. fillmy proper business to interfere, though unavoidably I hadbecome involved in them. By evening we had gained a goodoffing, and profited by it in the night, during a strong gale ofwind from the eastward, with a lee current, setting to the northwest,about a knot an hour. When we sailed there was everyappearance of a gale coming on, but all our necessary operationswere completed, and to have stayed an hour longer inthat place would have been far worse than passing some hoursin a gale of wind at sea.That the few notices here given of a small part of NewZealand are scanty and quite insufficient for those who seekgeneral information, I am well aware : but the Beagle's staywas very short, and I have made it a principle in this narrativeto restrict myself to writing what I or my companionscollected on the spot : admitting a few quotations from otherauthorities, only where they seemed to illustrate or explain aparticular subject, without requiring much space. To thoseinterested about this important and rising country, I needhardly mention the volume of evidence taken before the Houseof Lords, as the latest, — and Cook's account as the earliest,as well as best sources of information.I will now endeavour to draw attention to a few of the difficultiesagainst which missionaries have to contend, while anxiouslylabouring in their holy cause among Polynesian, Australian,and European infidels. It may be supposed that populationand occasional intercourse had every where extended,even before the ever-memorable epoch, when the ' Victory ' wassteered by the daring Magalhaens across an unexplored ocean :but since that time, intercourse with Polynesia has so muchincreased, that the most interesting islanders — those of Ota-heine and the Sandwich Islands— are already more civilizedthan the natives of some of the Spanish settlements in America.The New Zealanders are improving ; so likewise are thenatives of many other islands, which have been visited by missionaries: but those islanders who have been altered only bythe visits of whalers, sealers, and purveyors for Chinese epicures,have in no way profited. On the contrary, they have2 R 2612 INTERCOURSE — CONVICTS MISCHIEF. i)cc.learned to show less respect to their own ordinances, and havebeen taught no others in stead. The most abandoned, profligatehabits and ideas, have been encouraged by the latterclasses of visitors. By their fire-arms, ammunition, and spirituousliquors, — exchanged every where for provisions, andfor the gratification of their animal inclinations, — lamentableeffects have been caused.Some men-of-war have allowed an unrestrained intercoursewith the natives, receiving them on board, and permittingthem to remain, as is still usual among the whalers. Othershave not admitted any on board, excepting visitors whowere formally received, and did not remain. Such, for example,as the Queens of the Sandwich Isles or Otaheite,with their attendants. But although in that respect men-of-warmay have to plead guilty, they are free from any chargeof exciting mutual hostility between neighbours; of takingany part in hostilities which were being carried on between rivaltribes at the times of their visits ; or of acting in any mannerwhich could be likely to lower Europeans in the estimationof the natives, or to excite a feeling of animosity againstwhite men in general.Stray, or rather escaped convicts, are the chief draw-back.Unrestrained by any religious, or even mere moral principle,those abandoned men have done vast injury, but have frequentlyfallen victims to the just indignation of the provokedislanders, whose hospitality they abused. Convicts are seldombrave, but usually unprincipled, designing, md cunning:; can one then wonder at the natives of some South Seaislands taking an aversion to white people, if their only acquaintancewith them has been through such characters, transportedto Australia for life, in consequence of felony : whohave again, perhaps, been banished from Australia to thedoubly penal settlement of ' Norfolk Island ;' and have thenceescaped to wander through those countries in which they havethe strongest hope of avoiding apprehension.It is little known, and difficult to estimate, how muchanarchy, tumult, and destruction of human life have been1835. EFFECTS OF MISSIONARY EXERTION. 613prevented by the presence and active exertions of missionaries,during the last twenty years, in which French, Russian, American,and English intercourse with the Pacific, has so muchincreased. Under the colours of the United States, and ofour own country, more than five hundred sail of vessels havebeen annually employed in the Pacific, during late years. Toobtain refreshments and supplies, such as I have mentioned,only those islands on which there are white or native missionaries,are considered safe for single merchant ships. Buteven while profiting by the influence of the missionaries, andassisted by them in their intercourse with the natives, menwho belong to those very ships hesitate not, in many instances(but not in all), to ridicule the means by which themissionary has gained his influence — to encourage immorality,and the use of ardent spirits, and to seek for faults in a system,as well as in the behaviour of individuals according to thatsystem, because it has a tendency to limit the indulgence andexpose the impropriety of their own unrestrained misconduct.If the opponents of missionaries could be prejudiced so far as toallow no other good character to have been earned by thosehardworking men, they can never deny them that of peacemakers.Many sailors have left their ships, and settled for life, uponvarious islands. Though generally immoral, some of thesemen have established a character among the islanders, so verydifferent from that of the convicts, that persons who understandthe native descriptions are seldom deceived in their estimationof a man who, they hear, has recently settled in any place.Some of these seamen have astonished the New Zealanders,and even men of the Feejee Islands, by hardy courage in warlikeenterprises. One, known by the name of Charles, hasbeen already mentioned as having distinguished himself somuch by his activity and daring in wars with other islanders,that he was treated as a chief of very high rank, and allowedto have a hundred wives : while the greatest chieftains hadfrom fifty to a hundred and fifty, according to their rank.There are now said to be upon the southern large island or614 SETTLEMENTS — Trade. DtC'middle island of New Zealand, settlements supposed to beformed by some two or three hundred abandoned characters,European, Australian, and American. These outcasts, ofwhom a proportion are convicts, have established a sort ofsystem amongst themselves, in order to regulate their intercoursewith the natives. I was told that they were living"with native women, and, at that time, cultivated the soil ;but, what will be the consequence of such a colony, if leftto their own devices in that distant corner of the world ?Yet, again, where could outcasts, whose state of exile (if theymay be supposed to have good feelings) would be as insupportableto themselves as pitiable in the minds of others —where could such unhappy wretches be placed more appropriatelythan at the Antipodes ? They should, however, be frequentlywatched, to check any approach to piratical preparations,as well as to give timely notice of such an intention.Settlements of a different character are elsewhere forming,and the establishments of individuals are increasing in NorthNew Zealand, at Otaheite, and in the Sandwich Islands. Betweenthese establishments, small vessels are always in motion :and not trifling is the trade in oil (cocoa-nut oil), arrow-root, andsugar, between Otaheite and Sydney : in flax, spars, potatoes,and whale-oil, between New Zealand and Sidney; in sandalwood,bicho-do-mar, nut-oil, pearl-oyster-shells, and curiosities(such as native arms, implements, and clothing) between otherislands, and Australia, Tasmania,* the East-indies, China, andSouth America.Thus surrounded by those who are engaged in a commerceannually increasing ; unavoidably involved in local dissensions ;referred to on all occasions as interpreters or as piece-makers ;and I may say, as the consular agents of white men of allnations ;f it argues very favourably for the missionaries thatthey have as yet upheld the character of their sacred office,though sneered at by nominal friends, censured by enemies,and always struggling against opposition. I have said thatat the Sandwich Islands there is a consul ; on those islands•* Van Dieim-n's Land. t At Otaheite and Ovi^yhee excepted.1835. residents — embarrassments. G15there are missionaries from the United States, but none fromEngland. At Otaheite, also, there is now consular authority.At New Zealand there are two officers, holding the indefinitestation of 'Resident.' One of these officers had a salary, butdenied having any authority to act as a consular agent, or evenas a magistrate. The other resident (who lived at Hokianga)was not in the receipt of any salary ; his appointment havingbeen given for the reasons stated in a letter from the ColonialSecretary at Sydney, dated 29th June 1835, of which a copyis inserted in the Appendix (No. 37), accompanied by extractsfrom an excellent letter addressed to Mr. Busby. (No. 38.)Upon reading these statements, it will not be difficult to forman idea of some of the embarrassments of a secular nature,which perplex the missionaries, after having overcome all theprimary dangers and difficulties of establishing themselvesin savage — even cannibal countries. Although they aire nowable to assist their own countrymen, who have eagerly profitedby their exertions, — settling in every direction upon thosevery lands to which access was obtained by their hardy,daring enthusiasm, and is preserved by the united effortsof the supporters of missionary societies, assisting and encouragingindividual exertion, — their own strength is failing !Embarrassments of many kinds are arising ; one, jealousy ofthat influence which has enabled even those who are jealousto approach the spot upon which they now stand, and opposethe missionary as he exerts himself to suppress licentious habitsand the use of ardent spirits. While assisting their earlysettlement, the missionaries were the best friends of thoseadventurers who sought a livelihood among the islands ofthe Pacific — in New Zealand especially. But when once established,ingratitude and utter want of reflection became tooprevalent among the worst sort of settlers, whose only occupationswere those of publicans and especial sinners. Thefew respectable settlers — men of character and property —such as Mr. Clinton and Mr. Mair at New Zealand, MrBicknell and Mr. Henry (junior) at Otaheite, have acted — Irejoice to say — in the most honourable and praiseworthy society's lands— discontent. Dec.ner. Their conduct deserves unanimous applause. To many itappears, that the respectable support and steady countenanceof these upholders of the real character of Britons have, in aquiet, unpretending manner, much assisted the progress of themissionaries, and the spread of incipient civilization whichmust accompany the sacred truths of the gospel. If a few suchmen had not appeared upon that side of the world, how lowmight the character of Englishmen have fallen there. A fewisolated missionaries would have been always opposed bynumerous reprobates.By such men as those who are jealous of the influence ofthe missionaries, an outcry has been raised against their " attemptsto monopolize the lands." Said those men, " Whyshould a missionary be allowed to purchase so much land as toprevent people who come afterwards from obtaining an eligiblepiece of ground near a frequented port ?" " Why shouldMr. be allowed to try to prevent Waripoaka and histj'ibe from selling me that piece of ground, because he thinksthat I shall sell spirits, or build a public-house ? Have not themissionaries already monopolized the best land in the finestsituations ?"In answer to this, lest the reader should think that the missionarieshave been covetous, and have taken undue advantageof their influence (gained, it ought to be remembered, at theimminent risk of life, and when no ordinary men dared to stopin the land), I will explain — that a large extent of land inNew Zealand was long ago purchased by the missionaries, onbehalf of the Church Missionary Society : and that many ofthe outcries supposed that land to be the private property ofindividuals. And I will ask for attention to the too little consideredfact, that these unjustly blamed individuals have (by-their engagements) divided that tie which once held them to acountry whose inestimable value can only be fully felt by thosewho have long been wanderers in other lands. New Zealand,or Otaheite, or a less known island, is now their home ; andthere are around them a host of little children whose smilinghealthy looks would interest even strangers in their behalf.1835. Purchase INFLUENCE. 617whose country is that adopted by their parents, and towhom every good father would anxiously desire to leave a sufficientmaintenance, such as his own honourable exertionscould procure. Shall the missionaries be debarred from providingin a proper manner for the future welfare of their ownchildren "^ If a missionary and a more recent settler are eachin treaty for a particular piece of ground, and the former obtainsit upon easier terms than the latter, is it not a naturalconsequence of the good-will entertained towards him by thenatives ; many of whom understand and appreciate hismotives, and are themselves very fond of the little white children,considering them as belonging to their country ? Themissionaries have bought land, as opportunities offered ; andthey, of course, from their residence upon the spot, havehad better opportunities than occasional visitors or late settlers.*- If anathemas, indulgences, or excommunications were invogue among British missionaries, one might have a suspicionof undue influence ; but as such engines of spiritual, or indeedtemporal power, have not, as yet, travelled out of the coralcircle of the Gambler islands, I think we need not impugn thecharacters of highly religious men, by puzzling ourselves tolearn how protestant ministers — unassisted by artifice, supportedby no temporal power, except that of public opinion,excited by their own good conduct — could have obtained sogreat an influence over tribes of New Zealanders, as to inducethem to part with their paternal lands upon terms which thenatives thought unfavourable, or less advantageous than thoseoffered by other persons.In opposition to such an idea as that of their eagerly graspingat territory, and using undue means to procure it, Iknow with certainty, that the Rev. Henry Williams, and hisbrother William, exerted all their real influence — that of advicespointing out the consequences which would result toAfter a purchase of land has been made by a settler (or immigrant, asthe colonists say), he is considered to be under the protection of the chiefof the tribe from whom the purchase was effected.618 Pine-forests. Dec.some tribes who were inclined to part hastily with extensivetracts of valuable pine forests. The real value of those treeswas explained to the natives; and they were shown distinctlyhow a careful management of such stores of spars would ensurea future property, and sufficient maintenance for the nativechildren who would otherwise be deprived of their birthright.Did this show a desire to monopolize ?But I must hasten to a conclusion of the subject. Whenauthorized agents of European or American governmentsassume active functions in New Zealand (where at present theyare little more than cyphers), I hope they will have the goodsense to ask for advice from the missionaries ; who, no doubt,willdulyreraember, that, however they mayhap been called uponto act during emergencies, the duties of their office are, or oughtto be, separated as much as possible from affairs of a secularnature. Neither in politics, nor in any kind of hostilities ordissensions, ought they to take a part, excepting as peacemakers,if an officer or authorized executive agent of governmentis within their reach.Among many omissions which I am obliged to make in the subsequentchapter, are the following: — On the 7th of January, while more thantwo hundred miles from any known land, we saw a boatswain-bird andtwo white tern. To those who are interested about the distances towhich birds fly from land, this remark may be worth notice : as somepersons say that tern never fly far.Mr.Chafl^ers obtained the jaw of a huge blue shark, at Hobart Town,which had been killed by the boat's crew of Mr. James Kelly's whalingvessel. The extreme length of the monster was thirty-seven feet. Itshaw is now in the United Service Museum.About Van Diemen's Land, the barometer ranged higher than I hadwitnessed in the southern hemisphere.CHAPTER XXVI.North Cape of New Zealand — Superstitions — Cook's great Lizard-traditions— Currents — Thermometer — Sydney — Dr. Darwin —Drought — Aqueduct — Position — Disadvantages — Ill-acquired wealthof Convicts, or Emancipate — Hobart Town — Advantages of VanDiemen's Land — King George Sound — Natives — Dance — KeelingIslands — Tides — Soundings — Coral formations — Malays — Fish —Weather — ]\Iauritiiis — Cape of Good Hope — St. Helena — AscensionBahia — Pernambuco — Cape Verde Islands — Azores — Arrive inEngland.On the last day of this year (1835) we passed the north capeof New Zealand, and steered for Port Jackson. It has beensaid that the New Zealanders entertain vague ideas aboutthe spirits of their dead hovering near this north cape. Ihad no opportunity of inquiring into this superstition, but asother authorities besides Cook mention it, no doubt there issome such belief among those who have not acquired differentnotions from foreigners To my mind it is interesting in twopoints of view ; one, as showing their belief in a future stateof existence ; and the other, as indicating the quarter whenceNew Zealand was first peopled ; for it appears to be an impressioncommon to many savage nations, that their souls should gotothe land of their ancestors. This is particularly remarkableamong the South American aborigines. It is not easy to imagineany motive for the New Zealanders supposing that spiritshover about the North Cape, in preference to any other promontoryof New Zealand, unless in connexion with the ideathat from the point nearest to the country whence those peopleformerly migrated, the souls of the deceased would, after atime perhaps, depart to their permanent abode.In taking leave of this interesting country I will refer toCook once more, for a curious notice, given in his third voyage,respecting great lizards in New Zealand, which have not,so far as I am aware, been lately described, or even met with.Taweiharooa' gave an account of snakes and lizards of an enormoussize ; " he describes the latter as being eight feet in length,620 LIZARDS TRADITIONS — CURRENTS. Jail.and as big round as a man's body. He said that they sometimesseize and devour men ; that they burrow in the ground ;and that they are killed by making fires at the mouths of theholes. We could not be mistaken as to the animal ; for, withhis own hand, he drew a very good representation of a lizardon a piece of paper ; as also of a snake, in order to show whathe meant"' — (Cook's third Voyage, chap. VII.) Perhaps thishuge kind of lizard has become extinct ; but it is possible thatit yet exists on the southern (or middle) island. In its burrowingwe are reminded of the great lizard, or iguana, of theGalapagos Islands; but the assertion that it sometimes seizesmen seems to refer to an alligator, or crocodile. Cook heardof it shortly after leaving Queen Charlotte Sound, from anative of the southern large island.* If such a reptile everexisted upon the northern island it must have been exterminatedby the earliest aboriginal settlers, as they have now notradition of any animals except dogs, pigs, rats, mice, and smalllizards. Pigs and dogs, say the natives, wei'e brought from thenorth, in canoes.On New Year's day, while in sight of the islets calledThree Kings, we passed through several tide ' races,' oneof which was lather ' heavy,' and would have been impassablefor a boat. These races moved towards the north whileAve could trace their progress. The temperature of the waterfell six degrees after passing through the principal one.Next day, at noon, we found that during the past twenty-fourhours we had been set as many miles southward (S.S.E.), andhence I am inclined to infer that we were influenced by regulartide-streams, rather than by currents setting always inone direction. To the succeeding day at noon (3d) we wereset only seven miles, by the water, and that due east. Afterwards,in our passage to Port Jackson, we had alternatelynortherly and south-easterly currents of about ten miles a day,and it was easy to tell which current we were in, by the temperatureof the sea : — while the stream set from the north, thewater thermometer showed about 7S°; but when the currentAt New Zealciiul the southern large island is usually called theMiddle Island.1836. PORT JACKSON — SYDNEY. 621was running from the southward, the temperature of the oceanafoot below, as well as at, the surface,* was only 67°. I oughtto have remarked elsewhere, if I have not already done so, thatthe thermometer may be used at sea to detect and trace currents; but little, if any, confidence can be placed in its indicationsas a guide to the approach of land. Icebergs mayindeed affect it, but they will affect the temperature of the airprobably sooner than that of the ocean.Near midnight, on the 11th, we saw the red, revolving lightof Sydney Light-house, and next day entered Port Jackson,and anchor-ed in Sydney Cove. Much as I had heard of theprogress and importance of this place, my astonishmentwas indeed great, when I saw a well-built city covering thecountry near the port. Not many days previously I hadbeen reading the account of Governor Phillip's voyage toBotany Bay in 1787-8, and little did I think that, in forty-eightyears from the first discovery of Port Jackson, a city,upon a large scale, could have arisen out of a wilderness sonear our antipodes. In the account just mentioned it is statedthat " from a piece of clay imported from Sydney Cove, Mr.Wedgwood caused a medallion to be modelled, representingHope, encouraging Art and Labour, under the influence ofPeace, to pursue the means of giving security and happiness;to the infant settlement. The following: lines, in allusion tothis medallion, were written by Dr. Darwin''Where Sydney Cove her lucid bosom swells,Courts her young' navies and the storm repels,Hif^h on a rock, amid the troubled air,Hope stood sublime, and wav'd her golden hair ;Calm'd with her rosy smile the tossing deep,And with sweet accents charm'd the winds to sleep ;To each wild plain, she stretch'd her snowy hand,High-waving wood, and sea-encircled strand.Hear me,' she cried, ' ye rising realms ! recordTime's opening scenes, and Truth's unerring word. —There shall broad streets their stately walls extend.The circus widen, and the crescent bend ;For no difference could be detected, under ordinary circumstances.622 DROUGHT — Aqueduct — POSITION Jan.There ray's from cities o'er the cultured land,Shall bright canals, and solid roads expand. —There the proud arch, Colossus-like, bestrideYon glittering streams, and bound the chasing tide ;Embellished villas crown the landscape scene,Farms wave with gold, and orchards blush between.—There shall tall spires, and dome-capt towers ascend,And piers and quays their massy structures blend;While with each breeze approaching vessels glide.And northern treasures dance on every tide!'Here ceased the nymph— tumultuous echoes roar.And Joy's loud voice was heard from shore to shore —Her graceful steps descending press'd the plain ;And Peace, and Art, and Labour, join'd her train."When I was at Sydney in 1836, all that was foretold in thisallegory had come to pass, with one exception only, that ofcanals. It was always a country comparatively dry ; and unfortunatelythe more wood is cleared away, the drier both climateand soil become, therefore it is unlikely that canals shouldever be made there. This want of fresh water is the onlydrawback to the future prosperity of this mushroom city ;which is now dependent upon a supply brought through ironpipes from a distance of several leagues. Mr. Busby, father ofthe resident at New Zealand, was the projector and executor ofthis aqueduct, but, — like many other really valuable things,his useful work as ably planned as it was perseveringly carriedon against uncommon difficulties, is but little appreciated,even by those who daily drink the pure water which itsupplies.It is difficult to believe that Sydney will continue to flourishin proportion to its rise. It has sprung into existence toosuddenly. Convicts have forced its growth, even as a hotbedforces plants, and premature decay may be expected fromsuch early maturity. Other rising colonies have advantages inpoint of situation and climate, which the country about Sydneydoes not possess ; and if ovir government establishmentshould be withdrawn, from that day the decline of the citywould commence, because its natural advantages are not sufficientto enable it to compete with other places in those regions,1836. DISADVANTAGES MONEY-marino. 623excepting while fostered by the presence of regularly paidgovernment officers, troops, and a large convict establishment.There must be great difficulty in bringing up a family wellin that country, in consequence of the demoralizing influenceof convict servants, to which almost all children must be moreor less exposed. Besides, literature is at a low ebb : mostpeople are anxious about active farming, or commercial pursuits,which leave little leisure for reflection, or for readingmore than those flatterers of the mind — daily newspapers andephemeral trash. It was quite remarkable to see how few booksellers'shops there were in Sydney, and what a low class ofbooks — with some exceptions — was to be found in them.These few exceptions were the works usually called ' standard''which some persons who buy books, for show as furniture,rather than for real use, think it necessary to purchase. Anotherevil in the social system of Sydney and its vicinity, is therancorous feeling which exists between the descendants of freesettlers and the children of convicts. Fatal, indeed, would itbe to the former, if the arm of power were removed ; for theirhigh principles and good feelings would be no match for thewiles and atrocities of such abandoned outcasts as are therecongregated, and almost rejoice in their iniquity. Moneyis gained by such people by any and every means, save thoseof honest industry. By selling spirits, frequently drugged —by theft — by receiving and selling stolen goods — by the wagesof iniquity — and by exorbitant usury — fortunes have beenamassed there in a few years which would make an honest man'shair stand on end. But do such men enjoy their wealth .'' Doesit benefit them or their children ? No. Their life is a miserablescene of anxiety, care, fear, and generally penuriousness ; theydie without a friend and without hope.The Beagle sailed from Sydney on the 30th, and anchoredoff" Hobart Town (or Horton) on the 5th of February. Thechange of scene was as striking as a view of Gibraltar orMadeira after leaving the Downs. Comparatively speaking,near Sydney all was light-coloured and level ; while in VanDiemen's Land we almost thought ourselves in another Tierra624 HOBART TOWN — KING George Sound. Jan.del Fuego. But this was only a first impression, on a blusteringwet day. Fields of ripe corn, dotted, as it were, about thehilly woodlands, told us that the climate must generally befavourable ; and the number of red brick cottages, thickly scatteredabout, though apparently at random, proved an extentof population incompatible with an unproductive place.During a few days"' stay in Sullivan Cove, the chief anchorage,we had opportunities of going to some distance into thecountry, and seeing things which led me to think that there isa more solid foundation for future prosperity in Van Diemen'sLand than can be found near Sydney. Natural advantagesare greater ; and likely to increase as the country is cleared andinhabited — because rain is now almost too plentiful, thoughcorn ripens well and is of excellent quality. As a convict colony,it of course partakes of the evils I have mentioned ; but it doesso in a far less degree, partly because the convicts sent therewere of a less profligate and more reclaimable class than thoselanded at Sydney, and partly because an excellent local governmentrestrained the licentious, and encouraged the moral to afar greater extent than was, or perhaps could be effected amongthe more numerous and dispersed population of Sydney andits environs.On the 17th, we sailed out of the picturesque Derwent, an armof the sea extending inland many miles beyond Hobart Town,and thence worked our way southward round the Land of VanDiemen. Wee then steered westward, or as much so as thecontrary winds would admit, until we made the land off" KingGeorge Sound on the 6th of March ; and a few hours afterwardsmoored in the principal anchorage, called Princess RoyalHarbour ; a wide but shallow place, with a very narrow entrance.The country round King George Sound has a dull,uniform aspect ; there are no mountains or rivers ;* few treesare visible ; white, sandy patches ; scrubby bushes ; bare massesof granite ; and a slightly undulating outline meet and disappointthe eye of a stranger.Unless a few brackish, indeed salt-water, brooks can be termedrivers.183G. Settlement — r.OCAL ATTRACTION. 6S5A few straggling houses, ill-placed in an exposed, cheerlesssituation, were seen by us as we entered the harbour ; and hadinclination been our guide, instead of duty, I certainly shouldhave felt much disposed to ' put the helm up,' and make allsail away from such an uninviting place.Next day, however, we found that appearances were worsethan the reality ; for behind a hill, which separates the harbourfrom the sound, a thick wood was discovered, where therewere many trees of considerable size ; and in the midst of thiswood I found Sir Richard Spencer's house, much resemblinga small but comfortable farm-house in England. This sort ofisolated residence has a charm for some minds ; but the loss ofsociety, the numerous privations, and the vastly retrograde stepnecessarily taken in civilized existence by emigrating to perfectlynew countries, are I think stronger objections to theplan than usually occur to persons who have not seen its consequencesin actual operation.At this time there were about thirty houses, or cottages,in the neighbourhood of the sound and harbour ; some hadsmall gardens ; but, generally speaking, there was no appearanceof agi-culture, excepting immediately around SirRichard's house, where a few fields had been cleared andcultivated in the midst of the wood.There is an extraordinary degree of local magnetic attractionabout this place. We could not ascertain the amount ofvariation with any degree of accuracy until our compasseswere placed upon a sandy beach of considerable extent, nearthe sea. Wherever there was stone (a kind of granite) near theinstruments, they were so much affected as to vary many degreesfrom the truth, and quite irregularly : those on board were notinfluenced, at least not more than a degree. We were also perplexedby the irregular and peculiar tides ; but as they arementioned elsewhere, I will refrain from farther remark onthem here.We had a good opportunity of seeing several of the aborigines; for not only were there unusual numbers of neighbouringnatives then about the settlement, but a strange tribe,VOL. II. 2 sQ^6 ABORIGINES Robbery DANCE. Mavcllcalled * Coconut had lately arrived from a distance, and as theresidents wished to conciliate them, a ' robbery ' was proposed,and Mf. Darwin ensured the compliance of all thesavages by providing an immense mess of boiled rice, withsugar, for their entertainment.About two hours after dark the affair began. Nearlyall the settlers, and their visitors, had assembled on a levelplace just outside the village, while the native men belongingto both tribes were painting, or rather daubing andspotting their soot-coloured bodies with a white pigment,as they clustered round blazing fires. When all was readythe fires burning brightly — the gloom at a little distanceintense, by contrast, and the spectators collected togethera heavy tramp shook the ground, and a hundred prancingdemon-like figures emerged from the darkness, brandishingtheir weapons, stamping together in exact accordance,and making hoarse guttural sounds at each exertion. It wasa fiendish sight, almost too disagreeable to be interesting.What pains savage man takes — in all parts of the world wherehe is found — to degrade his nature ; that beautiful combinationwhich is capable of so much intelligence and noble exertionwhen civilized and educated. While watching the vagariesof these performers, I could not but think of our imprudencein putting ourselves so completely into their power :about thirty unarmed men being intermixed with a hundredarmed natives. The dancers were all men ; a short kangaroo-skin"cloak was thrown about their hips, and white featherswere stuck round their heads : many were not painted, butthose who were had similar figures on their breasts ; some across, others something like a heart. Many had spears, and allhad the ' throwing-stick' ; and a kind of hatchet,* in a girdleround the waist. Much of the dancing was monotonousenough, after the first appearance, reminding me of personsworking in a treadmill ; but their imitation of snakes, and• This hatchet is made of two pieces of stone, joined together by alump of gum, almost as hard as the stone : it is used for notching trees,that the men may climb after opossums.1836. DOCTOR — DOG— Appearance. 627kangaroos, in a kind of hunting dance, was exceedingly goodand interesting. The whole exhibition lasted more than anhour, during most of which time upwards of a hundred savageswere exerting themselves in jumping and stamping as if theirlives depended on their energetic movements. There was a boywho appeared to be idiotic, or afflicted with a kind of fit ; butthe man who was holding him seemed to be quite unconcernedabout his convulsive efforts, saying, " by and bye he would beadoctor" (as I was told by a resident who understood the language),which reminded me of what Falkner says of the Patagonians.*After the robbery the natives collected roundthe house where the feast was preparing ; and it will not beeasy to forget the screams of delight that burst from oldand young as they looked in at the door and saw the tub inwhich their rice was smoking. Before the food was distributedthey were told to sit down, which they immediately did, in acircle round the house. They separated, of their own accord,into families, each little party lighting a small fire before them.Their behaviour, and patience, were very remarkable andpleasing. One family had a native dog, which in size, colour,and shape, was like a fox, excepting that the nose was notquite so sharp, nor the tail so bushy.Most of the aborigines had rather good countenances, andwell-formed heads, as compared with those about Sydney, orinVan Diemen's land. The lathy thinness of their persons,which seemed totally destitute of fat, and almost without flesh,is very remarkable. I have since seen some drawings of SouthAfrican aborigines, executed under the critical eye of DoctorAndrew Smith, by the correct hand of Mr. Charles Bell, whichare so like the natives who live near King George Sound incolour, as well as countenance, and extraordinary shape, thatthey might be taken for full-length portraits of the latterinstead of Africans.Many of these natives have features smaller and less markedthan are usual among savages ; but their foreheads are higherand more full : they are not tall, few exceeding five feet eightPage 163.2 s2628 BURIAL — FISH — FLINDERS, Marchinches in height : and the women are wretched objects. Someof the men had pieces of bone stuck through the cartilage ofthe nose, which, I heard, was to prevent their being killed byanother tribe, who were seeking to revenge the death of one oftheir own party. I was told also, that when any death occursin one tribe, the first individual of another that is encountered issacrificed by the bereaved party, if strong enough ; but I suspectmy informant confused revenge for manslaughter withthe strange story — that for every death in one tribe, howevercaused, a life must be taken from another. Should it be true,however, the scarcity of aboriginal population would have anexplanation in addition to those which various writers havegiven. These natives bury their dead in a short grave ; thebody being laid on its side, with the knees drawn up to the chin.During our stay at this place we caught plenty of fish,of twenty different kinds, with a seine ; yet with such anabundant supply close at hand, the settlers were living principallyon salt provisions.Before quitting King George Sound I must add my slighttestimony to the skill and accuracy with which Flinders laiddown and described those parts of New Holland and Van Die-mens'sLand that I have seen. His accounts also of wind,weather, climate, currents, and tides, are excellent ; and thereare other points of information in his large work, useful tomany, but especially to seamen, which would be well worthseparating from the technicalities among which they are almostlost in the present cumbersome volumes.March 13th. We sailed, and advanced towards Cape Leu-win,but it was the 18th before our little ship was sufficientlyfar westward of that promontory to steer for my next object,the Keeling Islands.From the 27th to the 30th we had a severe gale of wind,when near the situation of those remote isles, and on the 31stwere in much doubt whether they lay eastward or to thewest of us. There was most reason to induce me to steereastward — indeed I was about to give orders to that effectjust as the sun was setting, (no land being seen from the .KEELING ISLANDS TIDE-gage. 620head, though the horizon was clear) — when a number of gannetsflew past the ship towards the west. We steered directlyafter them, and early next morning (after making but littleway during a fine night) saw the Keehngs right ahead, aboutsixteen miles distant.A long but broken line of cocoa-palm trees, and a heavysurf breaking upon a low white beach, nowhere rising manyfeet above the foaming water, was all we could discern tillwithin five miles of the larger Keeling, (there are two distinctgroups) and then we made out a number of low islets, nowheremore than thirty feet above the sea, covered withpalm-trees, and encircling a large shallow lagoon.We picked our way into Port Refuge (the only harbour),passing cautiously between patches of coral rock, clearly visibleto an eye at the mast-head, and anchored in a safe, though notthe best berth. An Englishman (Mr. Leisk) came on board,and, guided by him, we moved into a small but secure coveclose to Direction Island.Many reasons had induced me to select this group of coralislets for such an examination as our time and means wouldadmit of; and, as the tides were to be an object of especialattention in a spot so favourably situated for observing them, atide-gage was immediately placed. Its construction was thennew, and, being found to answer, I will describe it briefly.Two poles were fixed upright, one on shore (above high watermark,and sheltered from wind), the other in the sea beyondthe surf at low water. A block was fastened to the top of eachpole, and a piece of well-stretched log-line 'rove' through them.*One end of the line was attached to a board that floated onthe water ; the other suspended a leaden weight, which traversedup and down the pole, on shore, as the float fell or rosewith the tide. Simple as this contrivance was, and useful as weshould have found it in many places where the surf or swellmade it difficult to measure tides at night, without using a boat,I never thought of it till after we left King George Sound.A very small metal chain would be better, because a line, howeverstretched, will shrink after being wetted by rain, and give out again asit dries.630 WEATHER — SOUNDINGS — ISLETS. AprilUntil the 12th every one was actively occupied ; our boatswere sent in all directions, though there was so much windalmost each day as materially to impede surveying. Soundingson the seaward sides of the islands could seldom be obtained; but two moderate days were eagerly taken advantageof to go round the whole group in a boat, and get the fewdeep soundings which are given in the plan.* The two principalislands (considering the whole southern group as oneisland,) lie north and south of each other, fifteen miles apart ;and as soundings were obtained two miles north of the largeisland, it may be inferred, I think, that the sea is not so deepbetween the two as it is in other directions. Only a mile fromthe southern extreme of the South Keeling, I could get nobottom with more than a thousand fathoms of line.The southern cluster of islets encircle a shallow lagoon, ofan oval form, about nine miles long, and six wide. The isletsare mere skeletons — little better than coral reefs, on whichbroken coral and dust have been driven by sea and wind tillenough has been accumulated to afford place and nourishmentfor thousands of cocoa-palms. The outer edges of the islandsare considerably higher than the inner, but nowhere exceedabout thirty feet above the mean level of the sea. The lagoonis shallow, almost filled with branching corals and coral sand.The small northern island is about a mile in diameter ; astrip of low coral land, almost surrounding a small lagoon,and thickly covered with cocoa-nut trees.These lonely islands (also called Cocos,) were discovered in1608-9 by Captain William Keeling, who was in the EastIndia Company's service, and held a commission from KingJames I.f Little or no notice was taken of them from thatThis plan of the Keeling Islands will be found in the third (Mr.Darwin's) volume.t Of these facts I was credibly informed, on the authority of the lateCaptain Horsburgh ; and presumptive evidence of their reality is affordedby the following extract from the work of a well-known historian.Extract from a Summary of Universal History', translated from theFrench of M. Anquetil, First Edition, page 50. London, 1800 —In the reign of Queen Elizabeth, a Venetian galley, deeply laden.1836. FIRST SETTLEMENT. 6^1time till 1823, when one Alexander Hare, a British subject,established himself and a small party of Malays, upon thewas driven on shore at the Isle of Wif,fht. The sight of the richesit contained excited a desire of attempting to open a trade with Turkeyswhich the merchandize of India was transported. The advantagesarising from this Turkish trade to the Eastern merchantsshewed that it might be rendered still more lucrative if it were carriedon by a direct route. In order that no measures of prudence whichseemed likely to ensure success to this grand enterprise might be omitted,the queen sent to explore the two routes already opened, that of theCape of Good Hope, by Captain Stephens, in 1582, and that of theStrait of Magellan, in 1587. From the reports which they made, it wasconceived impossible for England to appropriate to itself, by means ofsingle ships, a part of that commerce, to the prejudice of two nations,jealous, and well established ; and, that, while it employed all the exertionsof industry, it would be necessary also to show a respectableforce. These considerations, highly judicious, gave rise to the EastIndia Company, which sent out its first adventure with a capital of£74,000, and four ships equipped from that sum. In 1601 the companywas established under the auspices of the state, which granted it a charterof protection for a time limited.Lancaster, M'ho commanded this squadron, behaved like a privatemerchant, entered into a treaty of commerce with the King ot Ache,and found means to establish a small factory, but not without experiencingsome marks of displeasure from the Portuguese. He took onboarda considerable quantity of pepper and other spices. His successfulreturn encouraged the company to send out three ships under thecommand of Henry Middleton. The latter, however, began to assume ahigher tone than that of a plain merchant. He found the Dutch andPortuguese engaged in war ; not on their own account, as appeared, butas auxiliaries, the one of the King of Ternate, and the other of the Kingof Tore. It seemed most advantageous to Middleton at that period toespouse the part of the Portuguese. The Dutch were incensed, andthrew impediments in his way, which, however, did not prevent him fromreturning with a very rich cargo ; but the company sent out anothersquadron under Edward Michael Bourne, M'ho assumed with the Dutchthat air of superiority which his force authorized, and threatened openhostilities in case they interrupted the English commerce. To supportthese threats, William Keeling arrived, in 1608, with a body of regulartroops. The Dutch made no resistance, and even applied to the Englishto defend them against the inhabitants of Banda; but after this servicethey behaved with duplicity to their benefactors, and fettered their commerce: yet Keeling found means to return with a very rich cargo, and,what is remarkable, without the loss of a single man.6S2INHABITANTS TRADE — Slavery. AprilSouthern Keeling Island, which he thought a favourable placefor commerce, and for maintaining a seraglio of Malay women,whom he confined to one island, — almost to one house.In 18^6, or within a year of that time, Mr. J. C. Ross,some time master of a merchant ship, took up his abode onthe south-eastern islet of the group ; and in a very short timeHare's Malay slaves, aggrieved by his harsh treatment ofthem, especially by his taking away the women, and shuttingthem up on an island which the Malay men might not approach,deserted in a body, and claimed protection from Mr.Ross. Hare then left the Keelings, and about a year afterwardswas arrested in his lawless career by death, whileestablishing another harem at Batavia.From that time Mr. Ross and the Malays lived peaceably,collecting cocoa-nut oil, turtle, tortoise-shell, and biche domar; and occasionally sailing to the Mauritius, Singapore, orBatavia, to dispose of them, and buy necessaries with their produce.Another Englishman, Mr. C. Leisk, who had served asmate of Mr. Ross's ship, lived with him, and they both had wives(English) and children, the whole party residing togetherin a large house of Malay build — just such a structure asone sees represented upon old japanned work. At the time ofour visit Mr. Ross was absent on one of their trading excursions,and his deputy, Leisk, was left in charge of everything.By some strange misconception, not intentional act of injustice,Mr. Ross had refused to give Hare's slaves their freedom,for fear that the executors of that man should demand theirvalue from him ; but he paid them each two rupees a week, ingoods (at his own valuation), provided that they worked forhim, both men and women, as he thought proper. Mr. Leisktold me this, and said that " many of the Malays were verydiscontented, and wanted to leave the island*" " No wonder,"thought I, " for they are still slaves, and only less ill usedthan they were by the man who purchased them."These Malays were allowed to rear poultry, which theysometimes sold to shipping. They were also allowed to havethe produce of a certain number of cocoa-nut trees, andmight catch fish and turtle for their own use ; but the sale of1836. Curious CRAB — TURTLE-fishing. 633turtle to shipping, when they touched there, and the immensecrops of cocoa-nuts which are produced annually on all theislets of the group were monopolized by Mr. Ross for his soleadvantage. One daily task imposed upon the Malay womenwas to " husk"" a hundred nuts, collected for them by the men,who extract a gallon of oil from every ten.Another kind of oil, said to be very good, is deceived from thefat tail of a large land-crab, which feeds on cocoa-nuts. Abouta pint and a half may be obtained from one crab. The mannerin which these creatures — nearly the size of a large cray-fish —tap the nuts in order to get at their contents is curious. Numbersof windfall nuts, in a comparatively soft state, are alwaysto be fovmd lying about under the trees : a crab seizes one ofthese, and pegs away at the eyes (each nut has three eyes) withone of its claws, that is long and sharp, purposely, it wouldseem, until it opens a hole, through which the crab extractsthe juice, and some of the solid part.The manner of ascending tall palm-trees is similar to thatdescribed at Otaheite, and requires strength as well as agility :both which are also shown by these Malays in their chasesafter turtle among the shallows and coral ' thickets' of thelagoon, where they abound. A party of men go in a light boatand look for a fine turtle in some shallow place. Directly oneis seen, they give chase in the boat, endeavouring to keep it inashallow, and tolerably clear place, till it begins to be tiredby its exertions to escape ; then, watching a favourable moment,a man jumps out of the boat and seizes the turtle.Away it darts, with the man on its back grasping its neckuntil he can get an opportunity, by touching ground withhis feet, to turn it over, and secure his prize. Only the moreactive men can succeed well in this sort of fishing.Other unusual things were seen by us at this place, one ortwo of which I will mention. There are fish that live by feedingupon small branches of the coral, which grows in such profusionin the lagoon. One species of these fish is about two feetand a half long, of a beautiful green colour about the headand tail, with a hump on its head, and a bony kind of mouth,634 FISHING DOG — Corals. Aprilalmost like that of a turtle, within which are two rows of saw-liketeeth. — Mr. Stokes saw a dog, (bred on the island), catchthree such fish in the course of a few hours by chasing themin shallow water, springing after them, almost as a kangaroosprings on land. Sometimes one would take shelter under arock, when the dog would drive it out with his paw, and seizeit with his mouth as it bolted.Among the great variety of corals forming the walls aroundthe immediately visible basement, and the under-water forestsof the Keeling islands, there is more difference than betweena lily of the valley and a gnarled oak. Some are fragile anddelicate, of various colours, and just like vegetables to the eye,others are of a solid description, like petrified tropical plants ;but all these grow within the outer reef, and chiefly in thelagoons.*The wall, or outer reef, about which so much has been saidand thought, by able men, without their having arrived atany definite conclusion, is solid and rock-like, with a smoothsurface ; and where the surf is most violent, there the coralis fullest of animated matter. I was anxious to ascertain ifpossible, to what depth the living coral extended, but myefforts were almost in vain, on account of a surf always violent,and because the outer wall is so solid that I could not detachpieces from it lower down than five fathoms. Small anchors,hooks, grappling irons, and chains were all tried — and one afteranother broken by the swell almost as soon as we ' hove astrain' upon them with a ' purchase' in our largest boats.Judging however, from impressions made upon a large lead,the end of which was widened, and covered with tallowhardened with lime, and from such small fragments as wecould raise, I concluded that the coral was not alive at a depthexceeding seven fathoms below low water. But this subjecthas been, or will be, fully discussed by Mr. Darwin, thereforeI need say no more.One kind of coral, while alive, stings human flesh painfully whentouched by it. Another kind is so hard that it gives sparks when struckby steel.1836. ANIMALS — Fresh WATER. 635As if in speaking of these singular, though so small islands,where crabs eat cocoa-nuts, fish eat coral, dogs catch fish,men ride on turtle, and shells are dangerous man-traps,* —any thing more were necessary to ensure the voyager's beingtreated like the old woman's son who talked to her aboutflying-fish, — it must yet be said that the greater part of thesea-fowl roost on branches, and that many rats make theirnests at the top of high palm-trees.Except sea-fowl and the domestic creatures-]- which haveaccompanied man to the Keelings, there is no bird or animal ;but a kind of land-rail, which is numerous. Besides thepalm there are upon the largest islets other trees, particularlya kind of teak, and some less valuable wood, from whicha vessel was built.Fresh water is not scarce on the larger islets of the group,but it is only to be got by digging wells in the coral foundation,covered as it is by vegetation. In these wells, aboutsix feet deep, the water rises and falls as the tide of the oceanflows and ebbs ; which I believe to be the case at most othercoral islands where there is fresh water. It appears thatthe fresh water of heavy rains is held in the loose soil, (amixture of coral, sand, and decayed vegetable substances,) anddoes not mix with the salt water which surrounds it, except atthe edges of the land. The flowing tide pushes on every side,the mixed soil being very porous, and causes the fresh water torise : when the tide falls the fresh water sinks also, A spongefull of fresh water placed gently in a basin of salt water, willnot part with its contents for a length of time if left untouched.The water in the middle of the sponge will be found untaintedby salt for many days ; perhaps much longer, if tried.A word about the inhabitants, and I leave the Keelings.No material difference was detected by me between the Malayson these islands, and the natives of Otaheite or New Zealand.I do not mean to assert that there were not numbers of men• Cham gigantic. There is a large one in the United ServiceMuseum.t Rats and mice included ; which swarm on those islands.636 APPEARANCE OF NATIVES RELIGION. Aprilat each of those islands to whom I could not trace resemblances(setting individual features aside,) at the Keelings ; I merelysay that there was not one individual among the two hundredMalays I saw there whom I could have distinguished from aPolynesian Islander, had I seen him in the Pacific.Two boys attracted my notice particularly, because theircolour was of a brighter red* than that of any South Americanor Polynesian whom I had seen, and upon enquiry I foundthat these two boys were sons of Alexander Hare and aMalay woman.Excepting the two English families I have mentioned, allon the Keelings in ]836, were Mahometan. One of theirnumber officiated as priest ; but exclusive of an extreme disliketo pigs, they showed little outward attention to his injunctions.As no Christian minister had ever visited the place, and therewas no immediate prospect of one coming there, I was asked tobaptize the children of Mrs. Leisk. So unusual a demandoccasioned some scruples on my part, but at last I complied,and performed the appointed service in Mr. Ross's house ;where six children of various ages were christened in succession.This and other facts I have mentioned respecting thesesequestered islands shew the necessity that exists for some inspectinginfluence being exercised at every place where Britishsubjects are settled. A visit from a man of war, even onceonly in a year, is sufficient (merely in prospect) to keep badcharacters in tolerable check, and would make known at headquartersthe more urgent wants of the settlers.In observing the sun's meridian altitude at this place, thesextants were used, which I have adverted to before (p. 396),and the latitude deduced from their results only differed twoor three seconds from that obtained by stars, without using theadditional glass : I forgot to say, in speaking of the Galapagos,how useful those instruments were there ; enabling us to measurethe sun's meridian altitude in an artificial horizon whennearly eighty degrees high. I would not say this in favour ofBrighter by comparison ; their colour was that of copper in itsvery reddest state — without any tinge of yellow.1836. SEXTANT STORMS — SAIL. 637my own invention, if I did not feel certain that seamen will findit useful, and that somebody ought to tell them of it, for theirown sake. (These sextants were made by Worthington.)I was informed by the residents that between October andApril, they are occasionally visited by severe gales of wind, attimes almost hurricanes, so strong as to root up trees, strip theleaves off others, and unroof or blow down houses. Thesestorms begin between south-east and south, and when theyabate draw towards the west (by the south) there ending. Forthose who take interest in the course of storms I subjoin extractsfrom Mr. Ross's Journal given to me by Leisk.* Earthquakeshave been felt several times, I was told by Mr. Leisk,but I could get only one extract from the Journal whichmentioned a shock.-f-On the 12th we sailed, carrying a good sea-stock of cocoa-nuts,pigs, poultry, pumpkins, and turtle. Maize and sugarcanemight have been had, if wanted. We first went roundthe northern Keeling : — on this island, about a mile across andbut a few feet above the ocean, two English vessels have beenlost since 1825, and probably other ships met a similar fate" April 4th, 1835. Wind south, blowing very hard all daj-, with ahard cloudy sky. 5th. Blowing heavily from the same point ; with rain.6th. Wind S.E. still blowing heavily, with rain. 7th. Wind increasing, atmidnight the tops of many trees blown off; trees falling, and roofs ofhouses suffering, wind still S.E. At two a.m. on the 8th wind south;several houses laid flat ; excessive thunder and lightning, with torrents ofrain. About three a.m. the storm abating, and drawing to the west; atfour, moderate west wind. 9th. N.W. light breeze, clear weather ; wentwith a party (Mr. Ross, Leisk, &c.) to South-East Bay (inside SoutheastIsland), found the bay strewed with dead fish of all sorts and sizes,which we supposed to have been killed by the fresh water. Numbers oftrees blown down every where, and the earth cut through in many placesby the runs of rain-water." On the 26th of November 1835, a south-eastgale increased almost to a hurricane, causing similar effects, though lessin number, because it lasted only two hours, and then ended by shiftingto the westward, and moderating.t That notice says, " May 25, 1830, weather calm and sultry, light Nee.breeze : about 1-30 a.m. an earthquake, of a rocking description, was felt.It continued about three minutes, and made our wooden house reel andstrain considerably."638 CURRENT RETURN TO ENGLAND. April — Novthere in earlier years, when its existence was hardly known.We found the current setting towards the north-west, as Ihad been led to expect ; but, from what I could observe,during our stay, as well as from oral information, I am led tobelieve that the current only sets strongly during about thelast half of the flood tide, and the first half of the ebb ; andthat during the other six hours there is little or no current ;as is the case off Cape Horn, and in many other places.*Our passage to the Mauritius was slow, but in smooth water.Tropic birds, a few terns, and gannets were seen, at intervals,when passing the neighbourhood of the Chaos Islands, and atourapproach to the island Rodriguez. We anchored in PortLouis, at the Mauritius, on the 29th of April : sailed thenceon the 9th of May : passed near Madagascar — thence along theAfrican shore— and anchored in Simon's Bay, at the Cape ofGood Hope, on the 31st. From that well-known place wewent to St. Helena, Ascension, Bahia, Pernambuco, the CapeVerde Islands, and the Azores ; and anchored at Falmouth, onthe 2d of October, after an absence of four years and ninemonths from England.From Falmouth we went to Plymouth ; and thence, callingat Portsmouth, to the Thames. On the 28th our anchor waslet go at Greenwich ; and, after the chronometer rates Mereascertained, the Beagle dropped down to Woolwich, where shewas paid off on the 17th of November.Greenwich was the last station at which observations weremade ; and, singularly enough, Mr. Usborne and his companionscame on board as we anchored there. Independent ofthe gratification of meeting them again, after so wide a separation,it may be supposed how my mind was relieved by hissafe return from a very successful expedition, in which he hadsurveyed the whole coast of Peru, from Atacama to Guayaquil,without loss or accident. Although his own life wasseriously risked on two or three occasions, by shots fired undermisapprehension ; I must not omit to mention that hostilities• Varying from three parts, to one-quarter of a tide difference betweenthe time of low water and the beginning of flood stream.1836. 3MR. Osborne's Return — REFLECTIONS. 639were suspended for a whole day, at Arica, between the land-forcesand an attacking squadron, in order that Mr. Usbomemight carry on his operations. Throughout the survey of thePeruvian coast, the cordial assistance of Mr. Wilson, Charged'affaires at Lima, was found to be of paramount consequence.I would now speak of the steady support and unvaryinghelp which I received from the officers of the Beagle: butwhere all did so much, and all contributed so materially to thegatherings of the voyage, it is unnecessary to particularise,farther than by saying that Mr. Stokes's services hold thefirst place in my own estimation.In this long voyage, rather exceeding that of Vancouver,fatal disease was unknown, except in the lamented case ofthe purser, and in that mentioned at Rio de Janeiro ; neitherof which had the least reference to the particular service onwhich the Beagle was employed : and it is perhaps remarkable,that while the Beagle was in commission, between February1829 and November 1836, no serious illness, brought on orcontracted while on service, happened on board ; neither didany accident of consequence occur in the ship ; nor did anyman ever fall overboard during all that time.The freedom from illness must be attributed, under Providence,to active employment, good clothing, and wholesomefood,* in healthy, though sometimes disagreeable climates :and our immunity from accidents during exposure to a varietyof risks, especially in boats, I attribute, referring to visiblecauses, to the care, attention, and vigilance of the excellentofficers whose able assistance was not valued by me more thantheir sincere friendship.See Appendix, No. 48.t Excepting that mentioned in vol. i. p. 445.CHAPTER Xxvi.REMARKS ON THE EARLY MIGRATIONS OF THE HumanRACE.Having ended my narrative of the Beagle's voyage, I mightlay down the pen : but there are some reflections, arising out ofcircumstances witnessed by myself, and enquiries since maderespecting them, that I feel anxious to lay before those whotake interest in such subjects ; and who will detect fallacieswhich I, in a purblind search after truth, may have overlooked.A few of these reflections bear on the origin and migrationof the human race : and, deeply feeling the difficulty of thesubject, as well as my comparative ignorance and inability,I would beg that my remarks may be viewed solely as those ofa sailor who writes for the younger members of his professionnot as the scheme of a theorist.Before mentioning the particular facts which have fallenunder my own observation, and made most impression on meinconnexion with this subject, it may be well to defend myselffrom any imputation of indulging hastily formed or capriciousideas, by saying that from boyhood I have always taken interestin observing the various countenances, heads, shapes,sizes, colours, and other peculiarities of the human race ; especiallyof those varieties in which education has not masked themind, by teaching man to restrain or conceal his emotions. Theresult of this attention to outward tokens, occasionally retainedmore distinctly in my recollection by sketches, has been a convictionthat external form, especially of the head and features,is exceedingly dependent upon mind ; and that as the humanbeing is more or less educated, accustomed to better or worseIIMIGRATION OF MAN. 641habits, more or less obliged to think and act for himself ; sowill his external appearance vary for better or worse, and become,in a great degree, the index of his mental quality.This power of mind over matter exists in each individual,who besides may receive from his parents, outward peculiarities,and general inclinations, but in a modified degree : sincethe child partakes of the nature of both father and mother,(perhaps even, slightly, of that of a foster mother, if one isemployed). That such hereditary peculiarities are not to bequickly or easily altered, every one will admit ; but that theymay be gradually changed, and in a few generations altogetherobliterated, by pains being taken with successive children,many facts have been published which seem to proveincontrovertibly. This ought to give great encouragement tothe exertions of parents in educating their children,* sinceexterior expression, if not feature, as well as the infinitelymore important result, actual character, may depend so muchupon training the mind aright. Supposing this to be the case,it is not surprising to find savages so very different fromcivilized men in outward feature, as well as in mind ; or tosee them, where civilization has not been known, precisely inthe same condition now, as that in which we learn they wereseveral centuries ago.Some years since I read a long article in the " DictionnaireClassique"" under the head of " Homme'" which described agreat many distinct races of men — at least thirteen : and at thesame time I saw a map which professed to show the geographicaldistribution of those several distinct races. Almost thefirst spot which my eye rested on was Tierra del Fuego,coloured black, to indicate that its inhabitants were black ;and upon reference to the " Dictionnaire Classique " I foundNot in overburthening their tender minds with the contents of books,or over exciting them with a whirl of ideas calculated to rouse even thelistless spoiled child of fortune from his apathetic indifference — but inawholesome mixture of general education, bodily as well as mental,adapted to their years, and calculated to prepare them, in their respectivestations, for doing their duty happily to their Maker, and to theirfellow-men.VOL. II. 2 T642 EAin.Y MIGRATIONthat the Fuegians were there described as being black, like thenatives of Van Dieraen's Land. This mistake, so extraordinaryconsidering the numerous voyagers who have seen the nativesof Tierra del Fuego during the last three hundred years, stimulatedme to inquire further into the data upon which that divisionof the human family into separate 'races' was founded.The more I have sought, the more evidence has appeared todemonstrate the erroneous nature of such a view ; and the probability,nay certainty, that all men are of one blood.In the course of years spent in various quarters of the world,I have had opportunities of leisurely considering people fromall the principal countries. I have read much of what hasbeen written, during late years, on the subject of their resemblance,or difference ; and the conclusion to which I have beenobliged to come is — that there is far less difference between mostnations, or tribes (selecting any two for the comparison), thanexists between two individuals who might be chosen out ofeither one of those nations or tribes ; colour and hair aloneexcepted.In the city of Lima there are now at least twenty-three distinctvarieties of the human race, which are not only recognisedand well known in that capital, but have been carefully enumeratedand described by Stevenson, in the following table.All these varieties have arisen from the intermarriages of three,the Spaniard, the aboriginal Peruvian, and the negro : andamong their descendants almost any coloured skin, or kind ofhair, may be matched. It may be observed that although negroand white produce the sambo, which is a dark copper ; andalthough it may be inferred from the table that sambo and somelighter variety would produce a lighter shade of copper-colourthere is still the long black hair, and scarcity of beard,observed in most American aborigines, to be accounted for.This peculiarity, however, may be derived from white andnegro : and I think it would not be difficult to show thatevery variety of hair and colour might be produced from thesetwo originals only.OF THE Human RACE. 643Castes arising from the mixture of European, Indian, and Negro.Father.Mother.Child.Colour, &c.EuropeanEuropeanCreoleWhite.CreoleCreoleCreoleWhite.WhiteIndianMentis1 white, 1 Indian, fair.IndianWhiteMentis1 white, 1 Indian.WhiteMentisCreoleWhite, often very fair.MentisWhiteCreoleWhite, rather sallow.MentisMentisCreoleSallow, often light hair.WhiteNegroMulattoI white, ^ negro, oftenfair.NegroWhiteSamboA white, 1 negro, darkcopper.WhiteMule toQuartern1 white, |- negro, fair.MulattoWhiteMulatto1 white, 1 negro, tawny.WhiteQuarternQuinteron^ white, i negro, veryfair.QuarternWhiteQuartern§ white, 1 negro, tawny.WhiteQuinteronCreoleWhite, light eyes, fairhair.NegroIndianChina1 negro, A Indian, dark.IndianNegroChina1 negro, | Indian.NegroMulattoSambo^ negro, | white.MulattoNegroSambo^ negro, | white.NegroSamboSamboNegro Jg white.SamboNegroSambo^ negro, ^ white.NegroChinaSambo ChinaJ 5 negro, Jg Indian.ChinaNegroSambo ChinaJ negro, ^ Indian,NegroNegroNegroBlack.Colours are classed according to appearances : a child receivesmore of the colour of the father than of the mother.*• Stevenson's South America, vol i. p. 2Sfi.2 T 2EARLY MIGRATIONThat colour is not alone dependant upon, or caused by climate,however much it may be altered by exposure to sun andwind, or by seclusion, no person can doubt who has at allattended to the subject, and read the opinions of men who havemade it their study : but that its various hues may be derivedfrom intermarriage, without any change of climate, this tablegoes far to prove.*Having seen how all the varieties of colour may be producedfrom white, red, and black, we pause, because at fault,and so we should remain, did we rely on our own unassistedreason. But, turning to the Bible, we find in the history of thoseby whom the earth was peopled, after the flood, a curse pronouncedon Ham and his descendants ; and it is curious thatthe name Ham should mean " heat — brown — scorched," whilethat of Cush his son, means " black :" that Japheth should implyhandsome," and that Shem, from whose line our Saviour wasdescended, should mean " name — renown — he who is put orplaced." I cannot myself read this explanation of Cush, and thedenunciation " Cursed be Canaan — a servant of servants shall hebeunto his brethren," without believing that Cush was a negro,and that from the intermarriages of his descendants with thoseof Shem and Japheth, came hosts of mulatto, copper, or dark-colouredmen who peopled a great part of Asia, Polynesia,America, parts of Africa, and part of Australia. According tothis view the black descendants of Cush overspread part ofAfrica, Australia, and Van Diemen's Land, New Guinea, andportions of other islands : while white families, children ofJapheth and Shem, spread over Asia Minor, the Caucasiandistrict, great part of Northern Asia, and the whole of Europe.We read, in another place, that Abraham gave gifts to thesons of his concubines, and sent them away eastward fromCanaan, unto the east country : many years before this separation,Ishmael, the son of Hagar, an Egyptian slave belongingto Abraham, was established in the country next to theIt did not, however, satisfy me as to the production of a bright redcopper colour ; but of that I afterwards saw an excellent example at theKeeling Islands. See page 63C.OF THE HUMAN RACE. 645eastward of Canaan ; and as his descendants were " not to benumbered for multitude," it follows that those of some of thesons above mentioned must have migrated to a great distance.*It is likely that some of Abraham's bond-women were eitherblack or mulatto, being descendants of Ham ; perhaps of Cush :and it is hardly possible that Hagar should not have been dark,even black, considering her parentage ;•}• in which case Ishmaelwould have been copper-coloured, or mulattoes]: and some, if notall of Abraham's sons by concubines, would have been of thosecolours. If this be assuming too much, there can be nodoubt that in the next generation Esau, or Edom, was a redman, and that his descendants, the numerous Comites, orIdumeans, were also red : now as Esau married the daughter ofIshmael, we have, in this case, distinct evidence of the originof a race of red, or copper-coloured men. Had the commoncolour of the human race been at that time red, Esau's colourwould not have been remarked ; had it been black, Cush wouldhave been no distinctive appellation. It must then have beenoriginally fair, as no colours are mentioned in the Scripture,with reference to the human race, except fair, red, and black.A rapid increase of flocks and herds, as well as population ;a consequent diminution of vegetable food ; jealousies and disputesbetween the children of bond women and those of thefree, and the comparative indifference of fathers to the offspringof their slaves, must have stimulated migration in everydirection ; and, when once begun, no doubt the love of novelty,and desire of finding countries still better than those yetexplored, increased, and eventually perpetuated that passionfor wandering which we see to this day in the Arab, themigratory Malay, the roving Tartar, and the ever-restlessSouth American Indian.See Genesis, Chap. xiii. for evidence of the necessity there was toemigrate in those early times. t Herodotus, lib. ii.X The Arabs, next to the Jews the most marked people on earth, whohave preserved their genealogies in an unbroken line, assert that theyare descended from Ishmael; their colour is the same as that of theMalays, the Polynesian islanders, and the Americans.Easily iilGUATIONClimate, habits, and food operate to cause a considerablechange in the form and size, though their permanent effect onthe colour of the human race is slight. The effect of climate,considered alone, may be seen in the descendants of Englishfamilies settled in some parts of North America, in Australia,or Van Diemen's Land ; countries where neither habits norfood differ much from those of England. We see there thatour sturdy thick-set labourer's son becomes a tall lathy youth,though perhaps none of his family while in England exceededthe middle height : and not only does the form alter, but thegait and voice acquire peculiarities which mark the Americanborn, the Australian, or the Tasmanian. Exposure to cold,wet, and wind, together with but little walking exercise,shortens the legs, and increases the stoutness of body, as maybeseen in the Fuegian, the Esquimaux, and the Laplander,in fishermen, sailors, coachmen, and others ; but, activityon foot, warmth, and a fine climate, have contrary effects,which may be shown by the youth above mentioned, by theAfrican Negro, by the Indian, by the South Sea Islander, andothers. Habits require little notice, for we can hardly lookaround us without seeing many instances of faculties or formsaltered in one way or other, by exercise or the want of it, orby certain customs : porters, smiths, dancers, grooms, jockeys,are remarkable instances. That food is a material agent inaffecting the human form I think no one can doubt ; and whenall three combine to cause alterations, how considerable mustbe the change effected. That colour may be altered a littleby seclusion and particular diet, or by exposure to wind andsun, need not be remarked, except for the purpose of addingthat a change so caused is not permanent, or transmitted tochildren, like peculiarity of form. The Otaheitans used toshut themselves up for a month at a time, and eat only particularfood, in order to become fairer ; yet their descendantsare as dark at this day as their fathers were when Wallis firstdiscovered them in 1786.I will now endeavour to point out those lines of communicationacross the oceans which appear to me, ^as a seaman, theOF THE HUMAN Lace. 64-7hast likely to have been followed by the earliest wanderers.Of overland routes I say nothing, because where land extends,in the vicinity of water, there is no obstacle sufficient to preventthe migration of animals, as well as men ; neither need Inotice intervals of sea which can easily be crossed.Wandering eastward, from Asia Minor, roving tribesmay have begun to people Eastern Asia and the Indian Archipelago,while other parties were exploring Africa ; and whilethe sons of Japhet were advancing northward, and towardsthe west. A slight acquaintance with ancient history informsus at how early a period extensive commerce was carriedon by ships, — to Britain in the west, and to the Indian Archipelagoin the east ; before which time it is obvious that thoseextreme regions must have been tolerably well peopled : butit is not possible that they could have been so without theemployment of ships, boats, canoes, or rafts. The earliestexplorers of unknown lands must have been naturally enterprising,and habitually disposed to wander. Children broughtup under such instructors as their migratory parents, alwayseager to seek for new countries, would increase their rovinginclinations ; and as long as another region could be found,doubtless they would try to explore it, partly from a rulingpassion and habit, partly for the sake of procuring foodwith greater ease, and partly in consequence of feuds amongthemselves, which, in such a state of society, must end inthe defeat and expulsion, if not subjugation or destructionof the weaker party. Add to these motives, those which Imentioned in a previous page, consequent upon intermarriagebetween various castes or colours, the desire of independence,or the love of wealth,* and more than enough reasons appearto account for the early dispersion of the human race, providedthey possessed the means of migration.That in the early ages large trees were more abundant nearthe water side in many countries than they now are, appearsindisputable; but even as we see them in many uncivilizedthough inhabited countries, how numerous are huge trunks, outReal wealth — not money, its symbol and equivalent now.648 EARLY MIGRATIONof which canoes might be formed, with fire, with stones, andwith shells. Considering the abundance of trees once standingin places, perhaps easy of access, whence the hand of manmay have long since cleared them away, and the quantity ofanimal,* as well as vegetable food which may have aboundedwhere then there had been no arch-destroyer, — how easy,comparatively speaking, may it have been, in those early ages,to fell, hollow out, and launch great trunks of trees, which,secured two and two, and covered over, would form excellentvessels. Like the double canoes of modern Polynesians, theymight have carried a platform, above the reach of commonwaves, on which families and their provisions could voyagein security. Neither refined art nor any tool would have beenrequired in the construction : with fire to hollow and to divide,stones, shells, and bones would have sufficed for so simple awork, and thus enabled the least informed savages to make seaworthyand even burthensome vessels.Unlike some modern canoes, however, these primitive vesselswould have been capable of sailing only before the wind,or nearly so, and would therefore have been almost at the disposalof every breeze, when once at sea. Hence, in attemptingto follow their course, we must attentively consider prevailingwinds, and by no means omit to regard currents, of which thefirst sailors could have known nothing, and which must havecaused the mis-direction, if not loss, of many early adventurers.In alluding to easily constructed rafts, and double canoes, Ido not for an instant dream of excluding better vessels, whichno doubt, were soon constructed after men began to roam bysea-f- but I wish to show, so far as I am able, how readilymeans of transport were accessible to the first wanderers.For proofs of the extraordinarily rapid manner in which animalsmultiply when comparatively unmolested by man, we need only turn toSouth America.t The Piragua now used at Chloe, and by the savages of the HonosArchipelago, exactly resembles in every minute detail the Maseulahboat of Madras. Its ' sancho,' or wooden anchor with a stone in themiddle, is precisely like that used in Chinese and Japanese Junks :but doubtless these coincidences may be accidental.OF THE HUMAN Race. 649I must pause for a moment to explain why I consider theseexplorers as savages, although they were spoken of beforeas descendants of Abraham and his countrymen, who were civilized.Let us suppose, for illustration, that a party of menand women left Asia Minor in a civilized state. Before theyhad wandered far, no writing materials or clothes would haveremained (had they even possessed them), and their childrenwould have been taught only to provide for daily wants, food,and perhaps some substitute for clothes, such as skins. Theirgrand-children would have been in a still worse condition asto information or traces of civilization, and each succeedinggeneration would have fallen lower in the scale, until they becamesavages in the fullest sense of the word ; from which degradedcondition they would not rise a step by their own exertions; so long as they received no assistance, no glimmeringsof intelligence, from others who had branched off from themain trunk at a much later period, and had means of preservingmore knowledge. The degree of degradation would dependupon climate, disposition, description and quantity offood, recollection of origin and traditions, keeping up old observances,and intercourse with other families, tribes, or nations,among whom more traces of their common origin and descentmight have been preserved. Were a dozen men and womennow cast away upon unknown land — supposing that not oneof the party could read or write— that there was no substancewith which they could clothe themselves except the skins ofanimals — that the climate was variable — that they had neithertools nor arms — that the extent of habitable land admitted oftheir wandering — that it had no other human inhabitants, andthat it should be visited by none for the space of some hundredyears after the arrival of this party, — in what state wouldtheir descendants be found by the next adventurers who mightland on the shores of that country ?India, China, Mexico, Peru, regions separated from the centralseat of population, but advanced in civilization at theearliest period of their history with which we are acquainted,preserve traditional accounts of superior men who arrived650 EARLY MIGRATIONthere, and first began to improve the condition of their people,but we are not told whence those men came. No one, however,can read about those countries, as well as Tartary, Japan, andPolynesia, without being struck by the traces of Hebrew ceremoniesand rites, by the evidences of the worship of Baal, or byremains of Arkite observances, scattered through the morepopulous, if not through all the nations upon earth.That man could have been first created in an infant, or asavage state, appears to my apprehension impossible ; (for amoment taking a view of the case, unaided by Scripture ;) because— if an infant — who nursed, who fed, who protected himtill able to subsist alone ? and, if a savage, he would have beenutterly helpless. Destitute of the instinct possessed by brutes, —wth organs inexperienced (however perfect), and with a mindabsolutely vacant ; neither his eye, his ear, his hand, nor hisfoot would have been available, and after a few hours ofapathetic existence he must have perished. The only idea Ican reconcile to reason is that man was created perfect inbody, perfect in mind, and knowing by inspiration enoughfor the part he had to perform ; — such a being it would beworse than folly to call savage.Have we a shadow of ground for thinking that wild animalsor plants have improved since their creation ? Can any reasonableman believe that the first of a race, species, or kind,was the most inferior ? Then how for a moment could falsephilosophers, and those who have been led away by their writings,imagine that there were separate beginnings of savageraces, at different times, and in different places ? Yet I mayanswer this question myself; for until I had thought much onthe subject, and had seen nearly every variety of the humanrace, I had no reason to give in opposition to doubts excitedby such sceptical works, except a conviction that the Biblewas true, that in all ages men had erred, and that sooneror later the truth of every statement contained in that recordwould be proved.To return to the lines and means of communication : —Following the various routes of population into the IndianOF THE HUMAN Race. 651Archipelago, to Japan, to Kamscbatka, and to Australia,we are stopped by the vast Pacific— except at one point,Kamscbatka, and there, by the Aleutian isles, is an easy roadto America. Now it is not probable that intercourse shouldhave been begun by water, between various points on thoseextensive shores, (reaching from 60°, N. lat., to 40% S. lat),without numerous accidents happening, such as vessels, boats,canoes, or rafts being carried out of sight of land by storms ;when, io-ignorant how to steer as their crews must have been,they were driven before the wind till they reached some unknownland, or were engulfed in ocean.Many such vessels, out of the numbers which must havebeen tempest-tost among currents and dangers of every kindincident to navigation, may have failed in finding land beforetheir store of provision was consumed, and their crews reducedto the horrible necessity of feeding upon human flesh. Whenonce the natural antipathy to cannibalism was overcome, recurrenceto similar food would have been less revolting on otheroccasions ; especially if, excited by rage or animosity, and deprivedof animal food, men had accustomed themselves to anticipatesatisfying their hunger by the flesh of a miserable slave,or even of a late friend whom accident had estranged andturned into a blood-thirsty enem3^Looking; over a modern chart of the Pacific we see a multitudeof islands scattered, like stars over the sky, from the Indianarchipelago to Salas y Gomez ;* whence to Mas-a-fuera, onthe South American coast, the distance is not fourteen hundredmiles ; and to the main land itself, about eighteen hundred.It is possible that other islands may have existed,but we now find a comparatively short distance between EasterIsland and South America ; besides favouring circumstancesof wind and weather which lead me to believe that a line ofpopulation went in that direction. It is not impossible thatvessels should have crossed from New Zealand to South America,running always before the fresh westerly winds so prevalentsouthward of 38° ; neither is it at all unlikely, on theNear Easter Island.652 Early MIGRATIONcontrary it is highly probable, that Chinese or Japanese Junkswere driven to the Sandwich Islands ; perhaps across to theNorth American coast.Between the tropics in the Pacific an easterly trade wind isfound during more than half the year ; but it is not generallyknown (except by readers of voyages) that from November toMarch there is much west wind, rain, and occasional tempest,between the vicinity of the equator, and about fifteen degreessouth. This westerly monsoon, for such in fact it is, sometimesis steadily regular, and at others interrupted by calms,storms,* or heavy rains. The eastern limit to which itusually reaches is about 110° W. long., but there is reasonto suppose, that it extends at times, irregularly, to she GalapagosIslands, if not to the adjacent continent, when Guayaquilis suffering from heavy torrents of rain. While the sunis far south, this westerly monsoon extends to the tropic ofCapricorn, between the meridians of 150° E. and 120° W.longitude. At other times of the year the tropical regions ofthe Pacific are refreshed by pleasant easterly winds, varyingin moderate strength, and in their direction from the northwardor southward of east.Beyond the region of tropical or trade winds, an almost continualsuccession of westerly winds is found to prevail. In thosemiddle latitudes easterly winds sometimes blow ; but theiramount is not more than one-fifth that of the west winds,throughout the year.In the Southern Atlantic and Southern Indian ocean similarwinds prevail, between the parallels of 30° and 60°. Instancesin profusion may be found in narratives of voyages,where very small vessels, boats, or canoes, have made longpassages across an open ocean, or have passed months inignorance of their geographical situation, enduring the mostdreadful privations. In the event of a float, whether raft,canoe, or rudely constricted vessel, being carried out of sight• During these storms, which begin very suddenly, not only vesselsare driven out of their course, but birds, insects, and seeds are carriedto great distances.OF THE HUMAN RACE. 653of land by current or wind, or by both, and taken into asteady trade, or lasting westerly wind, it would be impossiblefor her to struggle against it for many days ; she must eventuallyrun before it as the last expedient, with the hope, oftenforlorn, of falling in with some land to leeward.When we reflect on the tedious coasting voyages undertakenformerly, even in historical times; and on the quantities ofprovision embarked for those long passages ; may we notinfer that the earliest explorers would take as much food withthem as their ,rafts or^vessels could carry ; and therefore, thatif driven out to sea, they were capable, in some instances atleast, of holding out for a considerable length of time withouthaving: recourse to the last alternative.If a vessel were drifted from Easter Island* by a northwestwind (occasional in July, August, or September,) sheAvould be carried towards the coast of Chile; she might bedrifted directly there, or she might be driven eastwardfor a time, and then, in consequence of wind changing,drifted towards the north ; so that it would be uncertainwhether Chile, Peru, the Galapagos Islands, Mexico, orthe wide ocean would receive the lost wanderers. It is alsopossible that a vessel may have been driven to South Americafrom the neighbourhood of New Zealand ; but this doesnot appear nearly so probable as the former conjecture. Thatthe Araucanians about Valdivia originally arrived in thatcountry by water, from the west, is I think indicated by whatis stated in page 400 of this volume.But while man was thus spreading eastward across the Pacific,are we to suppose that no vessel was ever blown off" thecoast of Africa, or that of Spain, and drifted by easterly windsacross the Atlantic ? How easy is the voyage, before a steadytrade wind, from the Canary or Cape Verde Islands to theWest Indies or Brazil ; from the west coast of Africa to theAt Easter Island in 1722, Rog-gewein found idolaters and fire-worshippers,and he says that one of the chief idols was called Dago.In 1774, people differently disposed, were found there by Cook ; theidols still remained, but no traces were observed of fire-worship.654> EARLY MIGRATIONeast coast of America. Tradition in Brazil says that sucharrivals took place there, and certainly there is a resemblancein some points between the Patagonians and what historystates of the Guanches.Let us now turn to the Negro population, descendants ofCash. Spreading to the south and west, they may have overrunextensive regions in Africa, but by no means to the exclusionof the mixed varieties of men, who also explored andcolonized that continent, chiefly towards the northern and centralregions. From the coast opposite Madagascar a party of negroesmight have embarked to cross the Mozambique Channel,or they might have been driven off by a storm while coastingalong near Alloa Bay, in which cases the current, always settingsouth-westward along that coast, would have hurried theminto the region of strong westerly winds, by which they musthave been carried, if their vessel and provisions held out, to thecoast of New Holland, or to Van Diemen's Land. Now it isworth notice that the men of the south-western quarter of Australiaare exceedingly like some of those who frequent thecountries near Alloa Bay — and that the native dances andsuperstitions are very similar ; Avhile the aborigines of Van-Diemen's Land, though of like colour, are shorter, stouter,and have coarser features ; differences which might be expectedto result from living in a wetter, winder, and colder climate.That other negroes arrived on the northern shores of Australia,brought there as slaves by red men, or making their escapefrom Asiatic masters, is probable : and from one or othersource, if not from each, the black men in Australia and VanDiemen's Land may have been derived. That red men musthave landed in Australia, we now know bv the notices of latetravellers, and their presence accounts for the colour observablein many of the so-called blacks, whose actual hue, whenwashed, is a deep brown — next to black, certainly, but with aperceptible red tinge. They are nearly the variety whichwould be produced by the intermarriage of a Negro and aChina (see table, page 643,) called Zambo-chino in Lima : butthere are gradations of colour, as might be expected, and THE HUMAN RACE. 655cities of hair ; some being more or less woolly, others frizzled,almost like that of a mulatto.*The occasional peculiarities of outward form, on which somuch stress has been laid, to the prejudice of the Hottentotsespecially, are considered by able anatomists whom I have consultedto be of no more real consequence than that existing inasix-fingered family. On their authority it may be shownthat such occasional deviations from ordinary conformation,which are sometimes continued in particular families, andtherefore might be found in a whole tribe who were originallybut one family, in no degree constitute distinct species.From theili we learn also that all varieties of the human race arealike in their anatomical structure, and that intermarriage betweenany two varieties whatever is productive of a prolificoffspring.Considerable stress has been laid on language as a means oftracing affinities or descents ; but with great deference for theOf the natives of Van Diemen's Land Cook remarks that their hairdiffered in texture from that of the natives of New South Wales, being"in Adventure Bay as woolly as that of any native of Guinea, while that ofthe aborigines of New South scales was naturally long and black, thoughcropped short. — Cook's Voyage, 1769-7^.Bligh says that the aborigines of Van Diemen's Land are black, andthat their hair, " which resembled the wool of the Cares," was separatedinto shreds, and powdered with red ochre. They were generally slender,tolerably well made, kept their shoulders back, and upon their prominentchests several had marks raised in the skin. — Bligh's Voyage — AdventureBay, 1788-1792.Flinders saw only one native of this country, but his appearance muchresembled that of the inhabitants of New South Wales. He had alsomarks raised upon the skin, and his face was blackened, and hair ruddled,as is sometimes practised by them. The hair was either croppedclose, or naturally short, but it had not the appearance of being woolly.In Marion's voyage a skirmish with the natives of Van Diemen sLand took place, after relating which, the writer says, " on enteringamong the trees they found a dying savage. This man was a little morethan five feet seven inches in height, (French measure). His breast wasmarked like those of the Mozambique Cares, and his skin appeared asblack ; but, on washing off the soot and dirt, his natural colour appearedto have a reddish tinge."656 MIGRATION OF MAN.learned men who have devoted so much time to following itsintricate traces, I would ask whether, when a language wasnot written, or in any manner fixed, it was not liable to varycontinually as fresh separations of families into tribes occurred;and whether therefore it is possible to do more than classifyunwritten languages, following some few traces of resemblancewhich may occasionally be marked, and detecting the root,though not the branch ? In such an interesting pursuit, however,every sign, even the faintest, is valuable ; — but only menof deep research and extensive learning can advantageouslypursue this method of inquiry into the migrations and earlyhistory of our race.I believe it will be found that the remarks I have venturedto make in the preceding pages, are by no means at variancewith most of their deductions ; and I much regret that ouropportunities of collecting words, and modes of expression,were not such as to enable me to add many to their collections.CHAPTER XXVIII.A VERY FEW REMARKS WITH Reference TO THEDelle.To account for offering a few remarks on a subject so importantand difficult as that of the Deluge, I beg to say thatreflections, arising out of facts witnessed during the Beadle'svoyage, have occasioned them ; and, as results of that expedition,it has appeared to me that they are neither irrelevant tothe narrative, nor likely to be altogether uninteresting to youngmen in the navy.I suffered much anxiety in former years from a dispositionto doubt, if not disbelieve, the inspired History writtenby Moses. I knew so little of that record, or of the intimatemanner in which the Old Testament is connected with theNew, that I fancied some events there related might be mythologicalor fabulous, while I sincerely believed the truth ofothers; a wavering between opinions, which could only beproductive of an unsettled, and therefore unhappy, state ofmind. Some young men, I am well aware, are in a similarcondition, while many others are content to set aside allreflection, and do as the world does; or rather, as those doamong whom they generally live. Natural affection and respectfor good parents, relations, and elders, never can lead ayoung man astray ; but there is, perhaps, no guide more fallibleor dangerous than the common custom of those inexperiencedpersons who associate together, chiefly for lack of fixedoccupation ; and whose principal object is to drive away self-examination,or prolonged thought, by a continual succession ofidle amusement, or vivid excitement.Wholesome and necessary as amusement and recreation are,both for mind and body, every one knows how insipid, evenpainful their excess becomes ; and external evidence shows butVOL. II. 2u"^^ A I'EW REMARKStoo plainly where the happiness, the blessings, and the comfortmen might enjoy, have by themselves been slighted, or destroyed,from forgetting the line between using, and abusing ;and by turning a deaf ear to the reflection that they are buttenants at will.'Much of my own uneasiness was caused by reading workswritten by men of Voltaire's school ; and by those of geologistswho contradict, by implication, if not in plain terms, theauthenticity of the Scriptures ; before I had any acquaintancewith the volume which they so incautiously impugn.For geology, as a useful branch of science,* I have as high arespect as for any other young branch of the tree of knowledge,which has yet to undergo the trial of experience ; andno doubt exists in my own breast that every such additionalbranch, if proved by time to be sound and healthy, will contributeits share of nourishment and vigour to the tree whichsprung from an immortal root. For men who, like myselfformerly, are willingly ignorant of the Bible, and doubt itsdive inspiration, I can only have one feeling— sincere sorrowedhave time, as well as inclination, to go far into bothsides of any question ; but truth can hardly be drawn out ofthe well unless some exertion be made, in examining eachargument, or in selecting a well-tried and experienced guide.It IS idle to say, as I have heard asserted, that such works asthose above-mentioned do little harm ; experience proves thecontrary ; of which I am made painfully aware, not only bymy own conscience, but by conversation with friends.While led away by sceptical ideas, and knowing extremelylittle of the Bible, one of my remarks to a friend, on crossing-vastplains composed of rolled stones bedded in diluvial detritussome hundred feet in depth, was " this could never have beeneffected by a forty days' flood"— an expression plainly indicativeof the turn of mind, and ignorance of Scripture. I was quitewilling to disbelieve what 1 thought to be the Mosaic account,upon the evidence of a hasty glance, though knowing next toBy u'liich word I mean 'Knowledge,' in its most comprehensivesignification.ON THE DEI.UGK. G59nothing of the record I doubted: — and I mention this particularly,because I have conversed with persons fond of geology,yet knowing no more of the Bible than I knew at that time.Thus much I feel it necessary to say, in accounting for myown approach to a subject in which all men feel deeply interested;and which has therefore been so well treated of, that theseremarks would be useless, were it not that they may reach theeyes of young sailors, vt^ho have not always access to works ofauthority.The Mosaic account of the Creation is so intimately connectedwith that of the Deluge that I must ask my youngreader (whom alone I presume to address on this subject) toturn to the first chapter of Genesis, and refer to a few verseswith me. We soon find a remarkable fact, which shows to mymind that the knowledge of Moses was super-human : hisdeclaration in an early age that light was created before the suiand moon, which must till then have appeared to be thesources of light. In the fourth verse it is stated that " Goddivided the light from the darkness." This may have beeneffected by a rotation of the earth on its axis, turning each sidein succession to the light ; otherwise, had the earth remainedstationary, light must have been destroyed to admit darkness,and there must have been repeated creations of light. Thelight was called day — " and the evening and the morning werethe first day." Of course there could have been no morningprevious to the creation of light ; and the first portion oftime, consonant to our present expressions, would have beenthat which elapsed between light and darkness, or evening.The length of a day being determined by the rotation of theearth on its axis ; turning round once, so as to make an eveningand a morning to each spot on the globe ; the time occupiedby that rotation is a natural object of interest. In the 12thverse it is said that grass, herbs, and trees, were broughtforth ; in the 14th and 16th, that lights were made to dividethe day from the night ; and that the greater light was to rulethe day. It is known that neither trees, herbs, nor grass canexist long without the light and heat of the sun, therefore the2u2660 A FEW REMARKSrotation of the earth between the third day, when vegetationwas produced, and the fourth, could not have been very different,in velocity, from its present rotation. Some men, of rareabilities, have thought that the " days" of creation were indefiniteperiods, notwithstanding the statement in verse 14, whichaffirms that the lights in the firmament of heaven were todivide the day from the night ; and to " be for signs, and forseasons, and for days, and years." In this one verse do we notsee that the day was less than a year (signs and seasons, daysand years) ; for had the day there meant been more than ayear would not the words have been differently placed, namelysigns and seasons, years and days ? Can we think that daymeans one space of time in the former part, and another spaceof time in the latter part of that one verse ? Another indicationthat the word day, used in the first chapter of Genesis,does not mean a period much, if at all, longer than our presentday, is — that it is spoken of as alternating with night. Althoughthe word day is used in other chapters of the Bible, even sosoon as the 4th verse of the 2d chapter of Genesis, to express aperiod, or space of time longer than our present day, the wordnight is never so applied. — hence, as the earth turns uniformlyon its axis, and, so far as we can reason from analogy,must have turned uniformly, while turning at all, the wordnight in the 5th verse interprets the length of a day.Some have laid stress upon the declaration that a thousandyears are with the Lord as one day : — but what is the context.'* * To lengthen the day to a thousand years, on accountof this and a similar expression, is not more reasonable than itwould be to reduce it to a night-watch. What is a watch inthe night when passed ^ — next to nothing : — so are a thousandyears with the Almighty. These considerations tend to showhow, without Chaldee or Hebrew learning, a man, with a commonEnglish education, may convince himself of a fact whichhas lately been so much controverted.-f*• " A thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday when it is past,and as a watch in the night." — Ps. xc. ver. 4.t I may, however, here remark to my young sailor friends, that theJews,ON THE DELUGE. 661Partly referring to such indefinite periods as we have beendiscussing, — and partly to reasoning unaided by revelation, —some geologists have said that there were successive creations,at intervals of vast duration. They have imagined an age inwhich only the ' so-called' lowest orders of animated creaturesexisted,* an age of fishes, an age of reptiles, an age of mammalia,and an age in which man appeared : statements whichhave obtained much attention. Fossil fishes and shell have been found in coal measures, and in subjacentformations : — how could this have happened if vegetables hadbeen produced first ; then swept away and converted into coal,and that afterwards the lower orders of animals had appeared ?We know that the fossil plants of the coal formations are similarin structure to vegetables now growing on the earth, whichcannot flourish without warmth, and the light of the sun.Vegetation was produced on the third day, the sun on thefourth. If the third day was an age, how was the vegetableworld nourished? But anomalies such as these appear to beendless in most geological theories : I will leave them for thepresent and continue my course.Jews, who perform their worship in Hebrew, and are naturally at least asmuch interested in the Old Testament as any people, use and prefer ourauthorised English translation.In classing one order of creatures above or below others, we mayperhaps consider them as they appear to our apprehension, in comparisonwith others, but we must beware of thinking them more or lessimperfect. Every creature is perfectly adapted to the condition andlocality for which it is designed, and absolutely perfect (speaking generally).Some that are intended to live in the dark ; or some that are toexist under pressure ; may at first sight appear to us imperfect; perhapsshapeless, unsightly objects : but, after examination into their naturalhistory, our hasty remark is succeeded by expressions of astonishmentat such wonderful arrangements of Providence as are shewn — even in themost shapeless sea slug.Multitudes of creatures exist now, especially in the sea, quite as apparentlyimperfect as those of the so called lowest order of animatedcreation, whose impressions are found in solid rocks. There may alsobe animals in deep waters that could not exist except under pressure.+ Rhine, Keith, Lyell, Sjc^A VKW llEMARKSIn the 16th verse it is said that " God made two greatlights ; the greater light to rule the day, the lesser light torule the night : the stars also ;" that is, he made the stars also.It is not stated here that the Almighty made all the starsat that time ; nor can I, after consulting very able men, findany passage of such an import. That all the stars dependantupon, or connected with, our solar system, namely, the planetsand their satellites, were then created, seems to be evident fromthe fact of their revolving round our sun ; but farther than this,it is not thought necessary (may we not presume) for man toknow ; therefore it is not revealed to us. In the ancient bookof Job, the creation of the world is thus alluded to. " Wholaid the corner stone thereof, when the morning stars sangtogether, and all the sons of God shouted for joy." * Butthe earth was finished, and vegetation produced, before thecreation of stars mentioned in Gen. i. 16; therefore, unlessthe ' corner-stone' alludes to man, it may be inferred thatthere were stars in existence besides those made on the fourthday. Of course, the ' singing of the stars' is a figurative expression; but as we do not meet with any similar metaphor inthe Bible, unconnected with some object that we know exists ;we may infer that stars existed when the allegorical, or mysticalcorner-stone was thus laid.-f-In verses 29 and 30, the food for man and beast is mentioned,and with reference to the Deluge this should be borne inmind. It may be said that the teeth of some animals are soformed as to be fit only for grazing, or browsing ; that beastsof prey have teeth adapted to tearing and gnawing ; and thatman requires meat ; but we must remember that dogs andwild beasts thrive upon a vegetable diet, and that some mennever touch meat, even in the present state of the world : very.lob. xxxviii. 6, 7.t Much must depend upon the limit attached to the meaning of theword Heaven in the 1st Chapter of Genesis, and Heavens in the 2nd ;viewed in connection with verses ], 6, 7, 8, 9, 14, 15, 17, and 20 ofChap, i.; 1, 4, of Chap, ii.; verses 5, 7, 10, 13 of 2 Peter iii.; and verymany other passages ; not omitting the Lord's prayer.OM THE DEHIGK. 663different probably from its condition before the flood, as maybeconcluded from the inferior duration of human Hfe.The 2d and 3d verses of chap. ii. recall to mind the wonderfulfact that the seventh day has been a marked division oftime from the earliest period of historical record.*It is now well known that all nations, and almost all tribesof the human race, preserve traditions of a great flood in whichnearly all men were destroyed :f and it is also established as afact, that nearly all parts of the earth, hitherto examined,bear witness to their having been at some time covered by theocean. Instead of ascribing these effects to the universaldeluge, many geologists say that the earth is in a continual,though gradual state of change ; that in consequence of thisgeneral mobility, places now far above the sea were once beneathit ; that districts, or countries, may have been inundatedin one quarter, and other regions elsewhere, but that an universaldeluge never could have happened. This is impliedplainly enough, if not asserted, in several geological works.In the Beagle's examination of the southern parts of SouthAmerica, I had opportunities of observing immense tracts ofland composed, solely, of fossil shells, bones, and an earthwhich looked like dried sandy mud : — extensive ranges ofcountry where no solid rock could be found, only rolled orshingle stones, embedded to a great depth in earth, exactly likethat described above ; — and a wide district, at least fifty milesacross, covered with lava of which the surface was nearlyhorizontal. (San Jose, San Julian, Santa Cruz.)I brought to England many specimens of these shells,which, although taken from within a few feet of the surface ofthe land, were found to have been pressed together, crushed,and penetrated by mud, in a manner that never could havebeen caused by the weight of earth then lying above them,because, though solid, it could neither have mashed the shells,nor worked into their inmost recesses. It seems evident to me• We find it ordained in Gen. ii. 3; alluded to by Noah, chap. viii.ver. 10, 12 ; and afterwards observed regularly, down to the present time.t. Sharon Turner, Harcourt, &c.664 A FEW REMARKSthat those shells have undergone enormous pressure beneathan ocean, when they were surrounded with mud.* But previousto such pressure, the shells must have grown naturallysomewhere-uncertainly not at the bottom of an ocean ; becausethey are shells of a comparatively delicate structure which areOn this subject, the pressure of an ocean, Mr. Lyell remarks,(Elements of Geology, ] 838, pp. 7, 8, 9.) " When sand and mud sink tothe bottom of a deep sea the particles are not pressed down by theenormous weight of the incumbent ocean ; for the water, which becomesmingled with the sand and mud, resists pressure with a force equal tothat of the column of fluid above." " Nevertheless if the materials ofa stratum remain in a yielding state, and do not set or solidity', they willbe gradually squeezed down by the weight of other materials successivelyheaped upon them, just as soft clay or loose sand on which a house isbuilt may give way. By such downward pressure particles of clay, sand,and marl may become packed into a smaller space, and be made to coheretogether permanently."But the action of heat at various depths is probably the most powerfulof all causes in hardening sedimentary strata."In reflecting upon these passages it appears to me that Mr. Lyell hassupposed what may not always take place in a deep sea, namely — thatsand and mud sink to the bottom.Whenever particles of sand and mud are at the bottom, they must belower than contiguous particles of water, or they could not be at thebottom ; therefore those particles of sand and mud have water above, whileresting upon some other substance below. Pressure there can be none,excepting of some earthy particles upon others, while the specific gravityof the sand and mud exceeds that of the displaced fluid. But, if thedepth of water be increased, and its specific gravity at the bottomaugmented, the sand and mud at the bottom must rise, if they do notcohere together, and to the surface on which they lie ; in which casethe increasing weight and density of water would tend to compress andmake them cohere still more.The smaller kinds of sea shells are very little heavier than sea water.This would prevent their being carried by the action of the sea to greatdepths, even if it were possible for them to be so rolled over rocks, sand,or mud, in which they would stick, or be buried, before they had beenmoved many miles from the place where they grew. These two considerationsmay help to account for the fact that seamen do not find impressionsof shells, on the ' arming' of the lead, when sounding in verydeep water, at a considerable distance from any shore where they grow.Sea-shells, 1 need hardly remark, grow only in comparatively shallowwater.ON THE DELUGE. 665usually found within a few feet of low water; some at leastof the number being identical with living species.If the square miles of solid land in which those myriads ofshells are now embedded, had been upheaved (as geologists say),either gradually, or rapidly, shells could not be found there intheir present confused and compressed state. Had the landsunk down many thousand feet with shells upon it, theymight have been covered with mud, and on being afterwardsupheaved again they would have appeared embedded regularlywhere they grew, in a matrix which, with the pressure of asuperincumbent ocean, might have flattened and penetratedthem : but they would not have been torn away from theirroots, rolled, broken, mashed, and mixed in endless confusion,similarly to those now in my possession.There is also another consideration : geologists who contendfor the central heat of the earth assert that substancessubjected to great pressure under the sea become altered:hence, in conformity with their theory, these shells could nothave been long buried under a deep ocean, and afterwardsraised in their pristine state. So little changed are these shells,except in form, that they appear as if they had been heapedwater. The specific gravity of oyster shell, when dead, is about twicethat of sea-water (2092,1028). Most other shells are much lighter, andbut few at all heavier than the jester.Before ending this note I must remark that the horizontal movementof water near the bottom, though gentle, may tend to press together andsmooth any loose sand, mud that sinks, lazy clay, or fragments of shells,before many of their particles travel far. Water in rapid motion isknown to hold sand as well as mud in suspension, but not shells, unlessthe current is very strong. To such a constant agitation of the sea,oscillating gently with each tide, we may perhaps ascribe the comparativelylevel and smoothened state of the bed of the ocean, whereit has hitherto been sounded. Excepting near irregular, rocky land,one finds, generally speaking, no ravines, no vallies, no abrupt transitionsin the bottom of the sea. For miles together there is an almost equalor gradually altering depth of water : and little similarity can be tracedbetween the contour of the bed of a sea and the neighbouring dry land,until you are near the shore, where the sea acts differently, and irregularbottom is as frequent as it is usually dangerous for shipping.666 A FEW REMARKStogether anil squeezed in mud within a few years from thepresent time.One remarkable place, easy of access, where any person caninspect these shelly remains, is Port San Julian. There, cliff's,from ten to a hundred feet high, are composed of nothing butsuch earth and fossils ; and as those dug from the very tops ofthe cliff's are just as much compressed as those at any otherpart, it follows that they were acted upon by an immenseweight not now existing. From this one simple fact may bededuced the conclusions — that Patagonia was once under thesea ; that the sea grew deeper over the land in a tumultuousmanner, rushing to and fro, tearing up and heaping togethershells which once grew regularly or in beds : that the depth ofwater afterwards became so great as to squeeze or mass theearth and shells together by its enormous pressure ; and thatafter being so forced down, the cohesion of the mass becamesufficient to resist the separating power of other waves, duringthe subsidence of that ocean which had overwhelmed the land.If it be shewn that Patagonia was under a deep sea, not inconsequenceof the land having sunk, but because of thewater having risen, it will follow as a necessary consequencethat every other portion of the globe must have been floodedto a nearly equal height, at the same time; since the tendencyto equilibrium in fluids would prevent any one partof an ocean from rising much above any other part, unlesssustained at a greater elevation by external force ; such as theattraction of the moon, or sun ; or a strong wind ; or momentumderived from their agency. Hence therefore, if Patagoniawas covered to a great depth, all the world was covered to agreat depth ; and from those shells alone my own mind isconvinced, (independent of the Scripture) that this earth hasundergone an universal deluge.The immense fields of lava, spoken of in a precedingpage (633), and which to an ordinary observer appear to behorizontal, are spread almost evenly over such an extent ofcountry, that the only probable conclusion seems to be, thatthe lava was ejected while a deep sea covered the earth, andON THE DELUGE. 667that tidal oscillations,* combined with immense pressure, spreadand smoothed it, while in a rapidly cooling though viscousstate, over the surface of the land.The vast quantity of shingle, or rounded stones of all sizes,may be accounted for in a manner unconnected with that ofwater acting upon a shore ; though doubtless a great proportionof the shingle we see has been rounded in that manner.Melted stone, thrown out of a volcano, and propelled throughwater with great velocity, might be rounded and cooled as shotare when dropped into water from a tower. In modern volcanoeswe observe that some matter is thrown into the air, whileother, and the greater quantity, runs over the edges of a crater,overflowing the adjacent tracts of land.Proceeding to the west coast of South America, we find thatnear Concepcion there are beds of marine shells at a great heightabove the level of the sea. These, say geologists, were onceunder the ocean, but, in consequence of the gradual upheavalof the land, are now far above it. They are closely compressedtogether, and some are broken, though of a very solidand durable nature ; and being near the surface of the land arecovered with only a thin stratum of earth. They are massedtogether in a manner totally different from any in. which theycould have grown, therefore the argument used in Patagoniais again applicable here. But in addition to this, there isanother fact deserving attention : namely, that there are similarbeds of similar shells, (identical with living species) about,or rather below the level of the present ocean, and at somedistance from it.-f-In crossing the Cordillera of the Andes Mr. Darwin foundpetrified trees, embedded in sandstone, six or seven thousandfeet above the level of the sea : and at twelve or thirteen thousandfeet above the sea-level he found fossil sea-shells, limestone,sandstone, and a conglomerate in which were pebbles ofthe " rock with shells"" Above the sandstone in which the petrifiedtrees were found, is " a great bed, apparently about onethousand feet thick, of black augitic lava; and over this thereSec remarks on tides in the Appendix. t Passes 421, 2, 3.A FEW Remarksare at least five grand alternations of such rocks, and aqueoussedimentary deposits, amounting in thickness to several thousandfeet"* These wonderful alternations of the consequencesof fire and flood, are, to me, indubitable proofs of that tremendouscatastrophe which alone could have caused them; — ofthat awful combination of water and volcanic agency which isshadowed forth to our minds by the expression " the fountainsof the great deep were broken up, and the windows of heavenwere opened."The upheaval of the island of Santa Maria has been quotedby geologists, from my statement'; and it will be interesting tolearn whether that island has remained at its new elevation, orwhether, like the shore at Talcahuano,-f- it has sunk downagain. If the coast in that neighbourhood has been graduallyrising, it is strange that old Penco Castle should still stand solow (p. 421).In Mr. Lyell's Elements of Geology, } he mentions Mr.Darwin having found, near Callao, " at the altitude of eighty-fivefeet above the sea, pieces of cotton thread, plaited rush, andthe head of a stalk of Indian corn, all of which had evidentlybeen imbedded with the shells" (marine). "At the same height onthe neighbouring mainland, he found other signs corroboratingthe opinion that the ancient bed of the sea had there also beenuplifted eighty-five feet, since the region was first peopled bythe Peruvian race." The neighbourhood of Lima has sufferedfrom immense waves caused by earthquakes, and the relics foundamong the shells may have been scattered by one of thosewaves. The bed of shells may have been disturbed by theearthquake and its consequences, the ground may have beenrent, and afterwards closed again, or the opening may havebeen filled up by loose earth and anything lying on it, as hastaken place at Concepcion. That the country near Callao, orLima, has not been upheaved, to any sensible amount, since thelast great earthquake, which was accompanied by a wave thatMr. Darwin's letters to Professor Henslow : printed for the CambridgePhilosophical Society — 1835.t See pages 420-1. | 1838, pp. 295-6.ON THE DELUGE. 669swept over and destroyed Callao, is evident from the presentposition of a pillar erected soon after that event to mark theplace to which the waves advanced inland.* This pillar nowstands so low, that waves, such as those which ruined Talca-guano,would inevitably reach its base ; again destroying thewhole of Callao, still situated on a flat, very few feet abovethe sea, near where old Callao stood.I have now mentioned the principal facts connected withthe Beagle's voyage, which I am desirous of noticing withreference to the Deluge. Want of space prevents my addingothers : I have hardly room left to lay before my young readerssome general considerations, arising partly out of these facts,which I hope may interest — perhaps be useful to them.When one thinks of the Deluge, questions arise, such aswhere did the water come from to make the flood ; and wheredid it go to after the many months it is said to have coveredthe earth ?''' To the first the simplest answer is " from theplace whence the earth and its oceans came :"" — the whole beinggreater than its part, it may be inferred that the source whichsupplied the whole could easily supply an inferior part : — and,to the second question, — " part turned into earth, by combinationwith metallic bases ; part absorbed by, and now heldin the earth ; and part evaporated."-|- We know nothing of thestate of the earth, or atmosphere surrounding it, before theFlood ; therefore it is idle and unphilosophical to reason onit, without a fact to rely on. We do not know whether itmoved in the same orbit ; or turned on its axis in a preciselysimilar manner ; — whether it had then huge masses of ice nearthe poles ; — or whether the moon was nearer to it, or farther off*.Believers in the Bible know, however, that the life of man wasvery much longer than it now is, a singular fact, which seemsto indicate some difference in atmosphere, or food, or in someother physical influence. It is not so probable that the constitutionof man was very different (because we see that humanpeculiarities are transmitted from father to son), as it is to supposethat there was a difference in the region where he existed.• In 1746.+ Electricity may have acted a prominent part in these changes.670 A FEW RemarksIt is easy to settle such speculations by the reflection — " It wasthe will of Him who is Almighty ;"" but as in most cases wesee that secondary causes are employed to work out His will,we may imagine that the extraordinary prolongation of man'sexistence was effected by such means.Connected with these questions respecting the additionalquantity of water is the reflection that the amount must havebeen very great. This may be placed in another light. Sir JohnHerschel says,* " On a globe of sixteen inches in diameter sucha mountain (five miles high) would be represented by a protuberanceof no more than one hundredth part of an inch,which is about the thickness of ordinary drawing paper. Nowas there is no entire continent, or even any very extensive tractof land, known, whose general elevation above the sea is anythinglike half this quantity, it follows, that if we would constructa correct model of our earth, with its seas, continents,and mountains, on a globe sixteen inches in diameter, the wholeof the land, with the exception of a few prominent points andridges, must be comprised on it within the thickness of thinwriting paper ; and the highest hills would be represented bythe smallest visible grains of sand"— Such being the case, acoat of varnish would represent the diluvial addition of water ;and how small an addition to the mass does it appear !Let us now refer briefly to the recorded account of theFlood.Without recapitulating dates and events, I will at once advertto the ark : — an immense vessel,-]- constructed of very durablewood, J and well stored with vegetable provision for all that itcontained. Some cavillers have objected to the heterogeneousmixture of animals embarked ; on the ground that they couldnot have been assembled ; and would have destroyed one another.We may reply : He who made, could surely manage. But,without direct miraculous interposition (though we should neverforget that man is a miracle, that this v^orld is a miracle, thatthe universe is a miracle), imagine the effect that would beproduced on the animal creation by the approach of such a warTreatise on Astronomy, Cabinet Cyclopedia, page 22.t Sharon Turner, Harcourt, Burnett, &c.+ Some of our English ships have lasted more than a century.ox THE DELUGE. GTlof elements. Do we not now find animals terrified by an earthquake— birds shunning the scene of violence, — dogs runningout of a town,* and rats forsaking a sinking ship ? What overcomingterror would possess the animated beings on an island,if it were found to be rapidly sinking while worse than tropicaltorrents, aggregated water-spouts, thunder and lightning,earthquakes and volcanic eruptions united to dismay, if not toparalyse, the stoutest human heart : yet such probably wouldbe but a faint similitude of the real deluge. Those who havethemselves witnessed the war of elements, in some regions ofour globe, are perhaps more able to conceive an idea, howeverinadequate, of such a time, than persons who have scarcelytravelled beyond Europe, or made more than ordinary seavoyages. Happily for man, hurricanes or typhoons occur butrai-ely : earthquakes, on a great scale ; their overwhelmingwaves ; and devastating eruptions of volcanoes, still less often.That the approach of a general calamity would have affectedanimals, what we now see leads us to infer, and that manywould have fled to the ark, is only in accordance with the wonderfulinstinct they are gifted with for self-preservation. Proudman would, in all probability, have despised the huge constructionof Noah, and laughed to scorn the idea that the mountainscould be covered, even when he saw the waters rising.Thither, in his moral blindness, he would have fled, with numbersof animals that were excluded from the ark, or did not gotoit ; for we do not see all animals, even of one kind, equallyinstinctive. As the creatures approached the ark, might itnot have been easy to admit some, perhaps the young and thesmall, while the old and the large were excluded .^-f" As we doConcepcion and Talcahuano, pp. 403, 5.t The small number of enormous animals that have existed since theDeluge, may be a consequence of this shutting out of all but a very few.We are not told how many creatures died in the ark ; some of those leastuseful to man may have gone : but, even if none died, the few that quittedthe ark could hardly have long withstood the rapid increase of enemies,unless their increase had been proportionably quick. Whether Job hadhimself seen, or only heard of, the leviathan and the behemoth, does notappear; but that these monsters were the megalosaurus and the igiiana-doit672 A FEW Remarksnot know what was the connection or partition of land, beforethe deluge; how the creatures were distributed ; or, what wasthe difference of climate between one region and another ; wecannot say that any particular kind could not have been nearthe ark because of crossing the sea, or having far to travel.There is abundant proof that animals have changed theirhabits, shape, coat, colour, or size, in consequence of migration,or transportation to different climates ; therefore we cannot tell,from what is now seen, what alterations have taken place sincetheir second dispersion.Many able men* have pointed out how water penetrating tometallic bases, may cause volcanic eruptions; how matterthrown up, and materials torn or washed off the earth may havecombined, mechanically as well as chemically ; how gases mayhave assisted the transformations : how creatures may havebeen instantaneously overwhelmed, or gradually entombed ;how lime may have been one among many powerful agents;how seeds, and spawn, and the germs of insects may have beenpreserved ; and why, among such multitudes of fossil remainsas we now find, only in a few places are there remains of manincontrovertibly fossil.-f-don there seems to be little doubt (Burnett, p. 67.) Excepting the serpentin Africa, which opposed the passage of Regulus and a Roman army,1 am not aware whether profane history mentions any well-authenticatedinstance of such enormous reptiles ; but I cannot look at our representationsof dragons, wyverns, griffins, &c. without thinking that, at least,tradition must have banded down the memory of some such monsters ;even if a stray one here and there did not actually live in the earlier historicalages : pterodactyles, plesiosauri, ichthyosauri, &c. are too like them,in general figure, to admit of this idea being treated as altogether chimerical.Tradition, no doubt exaggerated by imagination, may have handeddown the fact of such creatures having once existed : indeed the casualfinding of a skeleton might confirm reports, if not originate them.• Davy, Sharon Turner, Fairholme, Burnett, Granville Penn, Sumner,Young, Rhine, Lyell, Cockburn, &c.t These fossil remains of man are not only mixed with those of animals,or fish ; but in some cases they are buried at a distance beneath fossilbones of animals. — See Fairholme on the Mosaic Deluge, pp. 41 — 52 ;Miners's Chile, vol. i. p. 455, &c.ON THE DELUGE. 673Still there are some points but lightly touched, or unnoticed,by any person whose works bearing particularly on this subjectI have yet seen. One is the rapidity with which certainsubstances combine under water, and form stone ; such, forinstance,* as those used in Roman cement: — another is thepossibility of fragile substances, such as shells, small creatures,leaves, corallines, branches, &c., being enveloped in a muddymatrix, while floating at various depths, according to their specificgravities ; and the precipitation (chemically speaking) orconsolidation, or simple deposition of such cohering masses.-f-The similarity of coal to asphalte inclines one to suspectan identity of origin ; and that coal, in a fluid state, envelopedquantities of vegetable matter — was for some time agitated bythe continual tides and tidal currents of the diluvial ocean, andafterwards hardened by cooling, by pressure, or by chemicalchange ; if not by all three. We find the impressions of leaves,stems, and branches — and even large woody trunks embeddedin coal : but that the matrix, in which the leaves were envelopedand subjected to pressure, was not triturated vegetable matteris probable, because the casts of delicate vegetable substancesfound in it show few, if any, signs of friction or maceration.The impressions are as beautifully perfect as those of shellsin fossils where the shell itself has disappeared. Might we notas well say that limestone was formed out of decomposed orpulverised shells, as assert that coal was formed out of theluxuriant herbage, the ferns and the palms, of a former stateof the world ?Asphalte is at first buoyant; that trees and other vegetableproductions are so I need not remark; but coal sinks in water,and asphalte may be altered chemically so as to sink like coal.Experiments on the asphalte of the famous lake at Trinidadhave proved that there is so very close an analogy between thatsubstance and coal, that a gas, exactly resembling coal gas, and• Lyell, Elements of Geology, 1838, p. 75-6.t The simplest experiments with pulverised, or numerous minutesubstances in water, shew that they attract one another mutually, andthen cohere.VOL. II. 2 X674 A FEW REMARKSburning equally well ; a bituminous oil ; a substance like altar; and a residuum, similar to coke ; result from its distillation.Electricity may have been a powerful agent in crystallization; in the rapid deposition of strata ;* in the formation ofmineral veins ;-f" in earthquakes and volcanoes ; in the formationor decomposition of water ; and in other ways of which weareyet, and perhaps ever shall be, totally ignorant.Successive strata may have been rapidly deposited by tidaloscillations and currents, aiding chemical or mechanical combinations.The depth to which bodies would sink in an ocean severalmiles deep has not been proved, and there is reason to thinkthat it is much less than people generally imagine. An eminentman has said that a knowledge of " the depression of the bedof the ocean below the surface, overall its extent, is attainable(with whatever difficulty and however slowly) by direct sounding;''':|: and, in consequence of a conversation on this subjectwith him in 1836, he wrote to me, suggesting a mode whichmight be tried. I consulted with a friend as to the possibilityof success, and his letters taken in connection with the factsCrosse. + Fox. 'J Treatise on Astronomy, by Sir John Herschel — Cabinet Encyclopaedia— pag-e 154.§ " I return Sir John Herschel's letter on deep-sea sounding. Anythingfrom him is sure to be interesting and instructive; but there is acircumstance unnoticed in his communication which might obstruct thedescent of a sounding apparatus to very great depth.Mr. Perkins found that at a depth of only 3,000 feet, sea-water wascompressed 1-27th of its bulk at the surface. (Lib of Useful Knowledge,vol. 1. Art. Hydrostatics.) Hydrostatic pressure has usually been estimatedfrom depth alone, assuming that the density of the fluid was uniform; such, however, cannot be the case in an elastic fluid like water,for at great depths, being in a compressed state, it is more dense than atthe surface."In estimating the amount of hydrostatic pressure at great depths, weshould know the vertical height of the column and mean density of thefluid ; and since density increases with depth, by reason of superincumbentpressure, the water at great depths must be enormously compressed,and.ON THE DELUGE. 675related by Scores ;* with what has been found by those whohave sounded to great depths ; and with my own practical experiencein sounding — has induced me to think that man neverwill reach the lowest depths of the deepest oceans by any methodhis ingenuity may contrive; — because the water increases indensity with the depth, in a ratio perhaps more than arithmetical.Every seaman knows that in sounding at great depthsvery heavy leads must be used with ordinary lines, or verythin lines with ordinary leads ; the object being the same — thatof overcoming the augmenting buoyancy of the line by a weightunusually heavy. But line, such as is used for sounding, isnot buoyant at the surface of the sea ; a coil of it thrown overboardsinks directly. Then what is it that causes any weightattached to a sounding-line to sink slower and more slowly,and, consequently, in a very dense state. Let us now inquire howincreasingdensity (from compression alone) might affect an apparatus sent downby a weight, in order to reach the bottom, presuming that the solidscomposing the float and sinker were incompressible, and retained theirform and magnitude during the operation.Let beeswax be a float, and cast-iron a sinker, and let each, for illustration,be one cubic foot in dimensions. Let it be possible that at somedepth water may be compressed into one-fourth of its bulk at the surface,and still retain the properties of a fluid ; let it also be granted that asolid will swim if specifically lighter than the contiguous fluid, and sinkif heavier than an equal volume of the fluid. The specific gravity ofbees-wax is stated to be 964 ; that of cast iron, 7248 ; and that of seawaterat the surface, 1028 : hence the buoyancy of wax immersed in seawaterat the surface, may be called 64, and the tendency of cast-iron tosink, from the same surface, 6220. Deducting 64, we have 6156 as thewhole tendency of the mass (wax attached to iron) to sink from the surface.Let us now suppose that the machine has attained a depth wherethe water is compressed into a four-fold density, represented by 41 12 foracubic foot ; and we have 3148 for the tendency of the wax to float, butonly 3136 for the tendency of the iron to sink : and the inclination toascend rather than descend, might be represented by 12. Thus we seethat an apparatus may not be certain of arriving at the bottom of anocean : as in an opposite manner, a balloon may not reach the highestregions of the atmosphere. Either machine could only attain a positionwhere there would be no tendency either to descend or ascend.Plymouth, 24th Feb. 1837. " William \A'ai.kkr."• Scores's Arctic Regions.2x2A FEW REMARKSafter the first few hundred fathoms, the deeper it penetrates ; ifnot the increased resistance to sinking, found by the weightand line? " Friction, caused passing through the water"" Imay be told. Can that friction be compared with the augmentedtendency to sink that would be given by the continually increasingweight of line, if the water did not increase in density ?The pressure of the column of water over any weight, afterit has been sunk some hundred fathoms, is shown by the timeand exertion required to haul it up again. The operation ofsounding in very deep water, with any considerable weight,occupies several hours, and a great number of men. Thatwater is elastic has been proved by Canton's experiments as wellas others : but there are familiar illustrations of this fact visiblein ricochet shot, in ' ducks and drakes,' in the splashing ofwater, and in the rebounding of rain-drops from water. Beingelastic, and the lower strata being under enormous pressure, itfollows that those strata of water must be more dense than thebody above them. No one doubts that the lower regions ofthe atmosphere are denser than the higher ; yet air is but ararer and much more elastic fluid than water. That whichtakes place in air, to a great extent, may be expected to occurin a very diminished degree with water. If it were not so, whyshould stones be blown up, casks violently burst, or rockssuddenly torn asunder by the application of the principleusually described as the hydrostatic paradox .'' If the waterwere not highly compressed before the explosion takes place,would there not be a gradual yielding, a tearing asunder bydegrees, instead of a sudden and violent bursting.?The object of this digression is to show that although bodieswhich are not buoyant may sink to a considerable depth, itdoes not follow that they must sink to the bottom. Eachseparate thing may sink a certain distance, in proportion to itsspecific gravity, and there remain. The greatest depths even*reached by heavy weights, attached to lines, do not exceed amile and a-half; a small distance, probably, compared with thedepth of the diluvial flood.Although metals, stone, rock, or coal may have sunk deeply inON THE DELUGE. ()77the waters, other substances, such as earth, mud, bones, animaland human remains, &:c., may have been held at variousdepths until decomposed by water ; or combined and consolidatedby volcanic gases, or electric currents. In this mannerthe preservation of delicate corallines, shells, skeletons ofanimals, &c., may be accounted for. Suspended in water,surrounded by earth in a dissolved state, combined by chemicalagency, deposited on land, and consolidated by pressure,by volcanic or by latent heat, they may have become fossils."J'hick skinned animals may have floated longest, becausetheir hides would have buoyed them up for a greater lengthof time,* hence their remains should be found near, or uponthe surface of the ground, in some cases water worn, in othersuninjured, according as they had been strewed among shingle,or deposited in a yielding mass. That bones were not robedabout much among the stones in which they are found,-|- isevident from the fact that bones, if so rolled among them,would soon be ground to powder. It is clear that, howevermuch the bones may have been water-worn before depositionon land, both they, and the adjacent shingle, must have beendeposited there nearly about the same time.Tripoli stone, and other substances composed chiefly, if notentirely, of microscopic insects, may have been formed by theaccumulation and cohesion of myriads of such minute creatures,swept together off" the land, like swarms of locusts,aggregated by^the rolling of the Avaves, agglutinated, depositedon the land, and afterwards heavily compressed. Or they mayhave been insects bred in water; such as those which Mr,Darwin calculated to amount to " one hundred thousand in asquare inch of surface ;" while the sea was streaked with themfor a great distance. J Microscopic objects such as these mayhave been killed by some gas rising from a volcano beneath ;then drawn together by mutual attraction, rolled over andWhen * blown ' after putrefaction began.t Those, for instance, of Blancoo Bay, p. 112.I Darwin's Letters to Professor Henslow, printed for private distributionamong the members of the Cambridge Philosophical Society : in183.5.678 A ¥Kvr Remarksover, and landed among other recent compositions. In whatother way could such a mass of these animalcules be heapedtogether ?There are also effects of existing causes which authors haveonly mentioned by name, in reference to the Deluge, withoutexplaining that the effects alluded to would have beenenormously increased at that time ; — I mean the tides. — Inthe Appendix to this volume is a short statement of the mannerin which tides may act — upon the principles of the oceanoscillating in its bed ; and of tides being caused, partly bythe water being elevated by the moon and sun, partly by awestward momentum given to it by their attraction, and partlyby the oscillation caused by the return of the fluid after beingelevated. If this globe were covered with water to the heightof a few miles above the present level of the ocean, three moreparticular effects would take place : an enormous pressure uponthe previously existing ocean, and on all low land ; a diminishedgravity in the uppermost waters, resulting from theirremoval from the earth's centre ; and immense tides, in consequenceof the increased depth of the mass, the diminishedweight of the upper fluid, and the augmentation of themoon's attraction. As the waters increased on the earth, thetides would also increase, and vast waves would rush againstthe sides of the mountains, stripping off all lighter covering,and blowing up,* or tearing down, enormous masses of rock.Similar effects would take place as the diluvial ocean decreased,until it became bounded by its proper limits. Such oscillationsI conceive to be alluded to by the words " going and returning"!and ^y the expression, " they go up by the mountains ;they go down by the valleys C^ which exactly describes therushing of enormous waves against high land. When a wavestrikes against a rock, it dashes up every projection thatopposes it ; but — its impetus at an end — down the water runs• By the extraordinary power, or principle, called the hydrostaticparadox.f Gen. viii., V. 5, marginal translation.I Psalm civ. ver. 8.ON THE DELUGE. 679again through cavities and hollows : such, on a grand scale,would be the effect of a diluvial wave urged against a mountainside.In such a war of waters, earth, and fire ; a buoyant, closedvessel — without masts, rudder, or external ' hamper '' tohold wind, or catch a sea — might have floated uninjured ;and the fewer openings, of any description, in her cover, orsides, the better for her security. Seeing nothing of the conflictaround might have diminished the excessive terror which musthave been felt by those that were within, except the confidingChief. We do not find that the largest or highest ' swell 'injures a good ' sea-boat,' when in deep water, and far fromland : the foaming ' breakers ' alone destroy. But, after all, suchconjectures as these are vain , we cannot now know how farmiraculous interposition extended — how far secondary causeswere employed.The landing of the ark on a mountain of middle heightappears remarkable ; because the climate of the highest, onwhich we might naturally suppose the ark rested, did we notknow to the contrary, might have been insupportable duringthe time that Noah waited for the recess of the waters.* Reasoningfrom existing circumstances, the temperature of thesurface of the ocean would have been nearly that of the contiguousair : but after the waters had receded, high mountaintops would have gradually acquired their present frozen state.Here the reflection arises— when did icebergs begin to appear? Was not the climate equable and temperate all overthe world for some time after the Deluge, in consequence of theslow drying and warming of tropical regions, and gradual formationof ice near the poles ? Such a condition of climate wouldhave favoured the distribution of animals. Those who oppose» The Deluge began in the six hundredth year of Noah's life, inthe second month, and seventeenth day of the month (Gen. \y. 11), ; andNoah quitted the ark in the six hundred and first year, in the secondmonth, and twenty seventh day of the month (Gen. viii. 14), making aperiod of twelve months and ten days. Noah waited in the ark nearlyfive months after it grounded on Ararat.680 A FEW REMARKSthe idea that animals migrated to various quarters of the globe,surely do not reflect that the swallow, the Avild swan, the wildgoose, the wild horse, the Norway rat, and numerous othercreatures, now migrate periodically in search of food or a betterclimate. Similar instinct may have taught animals to wanderthen, till they reached the places suited to them;* and therethe same instinct would retain them. Want of proper food,or climate ; or the attacks of enemies,-f- may have destroyedstragglers who did not migrate ; therefore, when we find nokangaroos in Europe, it is no proof that kangaroos did notonce exist there. Elks are now found in North America — weknow they were formerly in Europe — is that race here now ?During the first few hundred years after the flood, extraordinarychanges may have taken place in the geography of theworld, in consequence of the drying and altering of variousportions ; also from the effects of volcanic eruptions and earthquakes,occasioned perhaps by electric action on newly-exposedland, as well as by other causes. Many places, now islands,may have been united to a continent for a considerable periodafter the deluge ; much land may have sunk down, much mayhave risen up, in various parts of the world. Such changes aresaid to be going on even now. though on a small scale (Lyell,Darwin, &c.) ; what may they not have been during the firstfew centuries after the flood ? Volcanic eruptions, such as thoseof the Galapagos, Andes, Etna, Auvergne, Indian Islands, &c.,were then perhaps in such activity as they have never shownsince.What the division in the earth was, in the days of Peleg,does not distinctly appear : but it could only have been aseparation from the true faith ; a partition of territory amongmen ; or some mighty convulsion, some rending or contraction,We see abundant evidence that either living creatures are adaptedto particular climates and localities, or that climates and localities areadapted to particular creatures ; which latter, it has been proved bymany authors, are altered by any material change of the former.t It should be remembered, that man was allowed to eat flesh afterthe flood. Gen. ix. ver. 3.ON The DELUGE. 681as it were, of the earth, which was so general as to have occasioneda marked and unqualified record, as of an event wellknown to all.Many philosophers think that the world has a central regionof surpassing heat, and that the greater part of the interior ofthe fflobe is in a state of incandescence, if not of fusion. Thatsmall portion which they call the crust of the earth is supposedto be the only cooled part ; and they differ merely as to thedegree of fluidity in the central region. I take it for granted thatthey have duly estimated the moon's tendency to cause tides inafluid mass, within her influence : — if there were no crust, ofcourse she would cause such an effect, but a well hardened case,we must suppose, can resist any such movement in the centralfluid mass. Upon the principle of the arch, it would be easierto imagine resistance to pressure from without than from within;but the case or crust of our globe must be so solid that itneither yields nor vibrates to an internal expansive force.This theory, however, is unsupported by any satisfactoryevidence. Men of character and attainments have advocatedit, although resting on conjecture : but when we look backalong the roll of history, and discover so few philosopherswho have not greatly erred, although famed in their day, itis natural to pause, and not acquiesce hastily in mere humanassertion unsubstantiated by proof. Boring the ground, orexamining the temperature of the bottom of a deep mine,affords no estimate for that of the central regions : — SirJohn Herschel says,* that " the deepest mine existing doesnot penetrate half a mile below the surface ; a scratch or pinholeduly representing it on the surface of such a globe, (sixteeninches in diameter), would be imperceptible without amagnifier." As our globe is about eight thousand miles indiameter, and external influence may be supposed to penetratesome distance, we can draw but unsatisfactory conclusions fromexperiments at depths not nearly so great even as that to which-* Treatise on Astronomy; Cabinet Encyclopaedia, p. 22, Art. 30»682 UEMAIIKS ON THE DELUGE.the ocean descends, and made chiefly in temperate or coldclimates.Having no pretension to more knowledge than any observantseaman may acquire in the course of a few years activeemployment afloat, it would be as vain as presumptuous inme, were I to offer any conjecture about the central mass ofthe earth. Perhaps, at a future day, when the nature ofaerolites ; the agency of electricity ; and of electric communicationthrough the superficial, if not through the interiorregions of the globe, are better known, other opinions, respectingthis wonderful world which we inhabit, may be formed byphilosophers.I have now fulfilled my intention of endeavouring to beuseful, in however small a degree, to young persons of myown profession. If the few remarks laid before them, inthis and the preceding chapter, at all increase their interest inthe subjects spoken of; and tend, even in the least, to warnthem against assenting hastily to new theories — while theyinduce a closer examination into the Record of truth — myobject in writing them will be fully attained.INDEX.Aborigines of South America — namesand peculiarities of divisions, 129,130 — territories, language, 131, 132numbers, 133 — Patagonians, size,colour, dress, height, huts, arms,horses, country, 1 33-137 — Fuegians,territories, the ' Yacana' tribe, theTekeenica,' appearance, dress, arms,huts, canoes, country, 137-141— theAlikhoolip,' finer race, wigwams,country, 140, 141 — ' Pecheray' tribe,141 — ' Huemul' tribe, partaking bothof Patagoniann and Fuegian habits,dogs, ' zapallos,' 141, 142— 'Honos'tribe, 142, 143 — further details of Patagonians,144-174— of Fuegians, 175-188 — Honos Indians, 189-197— atChloe, 380— Huilli-che, 380-384—near Valdivia, 398-401.Abrolhos, 63 — Massey's lead, 64 — anchorage,height, birds, turtle, fish,remarks on squalls near, 65, 66, 78,506.Aconcagua, height, 425, peradventure,schooner, purchased, 274 —story, 275- at Maldonado, 283-292at Port Desire, 316 — plans, 322 —at Port Louis, 331, 332— survey, atPort Famine, 358 — in CockburnChannel, 359 — enters Pacific withBeagle, at Chloe, 360 — Valparaiso,361 — sold, 361, 362.Aigle Rock, supposed, vainly soughtfor, 357-Alau island, old native there, 387.Alerse forests, 391.Alligator, at Feejee Islands, 062.Andes, Cordillera of the, 349, 35", 35*—drainage, 353, 354— view of, height,481 — fossils, 667.Andres San, Bay, 369, 370.Anegada Bay, Spanish ship wrecked in,287, 288 — sounded, survey, 289.Antonio San, Cape, coast near, 97.San, Port, 311.Araucanians, chief, hordes, 106 — noticeof, 149 — horsemanship, i6o^laws,164— Colipi, son, 431 — battle, Villa-grand,435, 436— curious story, Caciques,439-441 — country, cattle, cottages,442 — 'ranches,' 443 — dress,features, cloth, ornaments, 463, 464 —boys, oratory, 478.Arauco, 437 — ' Commandant,' 438 — Er-villa,caciques, Colocolo, story, electionof supreme chief, curious trial,Canonical, Indian attack, 439-442town again seen, 464.Argentina, grotesque group near, ' Co-mandate,'suspicions, 102, 103 —fortaleza,' ' gauchos,' inhabitants, advantages,104, 105 — alarm caused byBeagle, 112, 113.Arica, coast near, 482.Ariel rocks, vain search for, 119.Armadillo, four kinds, 107.Arrival in England, 638.Aura island, murders, 519.Ayres, Buenos, 94, index.Bahia, or San Salvador, currents beforereaching, scenery, present state, 60 —slavery, its evils, 61, 62 — city described,63 — survey, shoals, current,ship's course, 64, 78.Bahiass Dos, Cape, 305.Bank Yngles in River Plata, 92, 286.Barometer, 49, 83 — fall and changesbefore ' pampero,' 86, 91, in gale, 226—at Falklands, 244, 245— anomaly nearValdivia, 396 — before great earthquake,41 1, 412.Beagle at Falmouth, 2— paid off, 7 —re-commissioned 14, 17 — outfit, 18-22 — plan of voyage, 24-41 — detention,42 — course, 44, 45 — at SantaCruz, 48 — Cape Verde Islands, 51 —Fernando de Noronha, 59 — Bahia,60— passing Cape Frio, 66 — at Riode Janeiro, 73-81 — equipment described,82 — in River Plata, 85 —danger in Pamper in former voyage,87 — at IVIonte Video, 94 — Port Bel-grand,loi-io — Blancoo Bay, 111 —under Monte Hermoso, 112 — at BuenosAyres, Montevideo, 114 — SanBias, 1 16 — goes towards Tierra delFuego, weather, 117 — extraordinarywhite-coloured space of sea, 118 — offSanta Inez, 119 — in Good SuccessBay, passes Cape Horn, 122 — in St.Martin Cove, 124— off York-Minsterheights in heavy gale, 125— loses boat,126' — in Goreee Road, 127 — in Scotch-wellBay, under sail during bad nightbetween Wollaston and NavarinIslands, 223 — Packsaddle Bay, 224Good Success Bay, 225 — BerkeleySound, 227, 268— Johnson Cove, 270in gale off River Negro, 281— atMonte Video, Maldonado, 282— proceedings,283, 086 — at San BiasBanks, 286 — River Negro, PortBelgrano, 288 — sails with H.M.S.Snake, returns to Monte Video, 292strikes a rock in Port Desire, 317Port San Julian, 318-321 — passesFirst Narrow, 322 — at Woollyaa,323 — Port Louis, 327 — RiverSanta Cruz, 336— Cape Virgins, 357,358 — new route, 358 (note) — undersail in Cockburn Channel, 359 — Valparaiso,-361-san Carlos, 363 —among Honos Islands, 364-378 —San Carlos, 378 — soundings alongcoast of South Chile, 396— Valdivia,397 — Talcahuano, 40a — Valparaiso,4'9 — Concepcion, 421 — narrow escape,Maule, 424 — proceedings, 424-426— refit in Herradura Cove, 426,427 — Valparaiso, 428 — Callao, 482 —at Galapagos Islands, 484-505— atLow Islands, 506 — discovers islands,507, 508— Otaheite, or Tahiti, 508-557 — Navigators, Friendly, and Fee-seeIslands, 559-562— at New Zealand,563-619—' Three Kings' islets,620— Port Jackson, Sydney, 621 —Hobart Town, 623 — King GeorgeSound, 624— Keeling Island, 628 —Mauritius, Cape of Good Hope, St.Helena, Ascension, Bahia, CapeVerde and Azores Islands, arrives inEngland, 638.Beagle Channel, 218— tide, 219.Beauchesne Island, 327.Belgrano Port, 100, 101— fossils, animals,fish, 107 — climate, tides, pu-milestones,108 — Beagle there again.288.Bellacoco Rock examined, tides, refraction,318, 319.Berkeley Sound, 227— lights on hills,276 — revisited, 327— shallow soundingsthence to River Santa Cruz, 336.Birds, flight of, indicates direction ofland, 557, 558, 628.Blancoo Bay, shore between it and CapeCorrientes, without anchorage, tosca,99, 100.Blancoo Cape, tide-races, 303— coastnear, salinas, guanacoes, 304.Bias San, Bay, 116, 117— banks, 286,287 — Liebre and Paz there, Indians,296, 297.Boats, excursion to Woollyaa, 202-206—arrival there, 207— on westward exploration,pass Murray Narrow, canoes,Shingle Point, 215 — endangeredby fall of ice-cliff, 217 — enter Beaglechannel, difficulties, 218 — return toWoollyaa, 220 — in Ponsonby Sound,Button Island, 223 — yawl swamped,276 — up Chupat River, 307 — excursionup River Santa Cruz, 337-357whaleboat in Honos Archipelago,363, 364— boat exploration of ChloeArchipelago by Lieut. Sulivan andMr. Usborne, 364, 366, 378— northwardsby Mr. Stokes, 367— proceedings374, 375 — boat excursion (inINDEX.1829), 393-395 — expeditions underLieut. Sulivan, Mr. Chaffers and Mr.Mellersh at Galapagos, 485, 486, 489-497.Boroa Indians, liglitcoloured, origin,402 — further notices, 465.Brett Cape, 564, 565.Brightman Inlet, fish, 295.Brisbane, Mr. 270 — account of ruin ofPort Louis, 271 — murdered, 327, 328burial, character, shipwreck, 332-335-Butterflies, singular flight of, 117.Button Island, 223.Bynoe, Mr. Benjamin, 19, 21— skilland kindness, 77, 78 — accompaniesFuegians on shore, 127 — anecdotes,180, 181 — account of Indians nearGulf of Trinidad, 197, 198 — remarkson Easter Bay, large deserted canoesand wigwams, 199 — various notices,200 — at Woollyaa, 320— River SantaCruz, 337-356 — lands on JamesIsland, Galapagos, 497 — weather duringstay, 500.Calbuco, meaning of word, 377 — originof name, 387.Calbucanos, mode of life, 390— alerseplanks, artillery, 39 1 — loads, landslips,392.Callao, 482.Canaries Bay, wood, water, grass,Indian tombs, 305.Carlos, San, 363 — climate, 3B6.Carmen, Del, Nuestra Senior, Patagoniansnear, 145 — situation, houses,298 — fort, inhabitants, ' Estancia delRey,' settlers, Indians, 299 — anecdotes,300 — customs and manners,trade, coal, 301 — Paz and Liebrethere, 31 1 —wild fowl, hunting, Indianattack in 1783, 313, 314.American schooner, hired togo for Challenger's crew, 468 — metdismasted, 473 — sketch of cruise,474, 476.Carrasco, Don Eduardo, Hydrographerat Lima, renders material assistanceto Expedition, 484.Castro, 382 — climate, 386.Catharina, Santa, good harbour, inhabitants,83.Cattle, v/ild, hunt, at Falklands, 279-281.Cavahi Island discovered, 508.Cesaress, Los,' rumours of settlement,287 — Spaniards' visit and descriptionof it, 392, 393.Chaffers, Mr. 270— sails in Adventure,274 — at Gorriti, 284 — examines inletand river at Port Desire, 316, 317• — ascends River Santa Cruz, 337examines Hood Island, and otherplaces in Galapagos Islands, 485,497.Challenger, H.M.S. at Falklands, 328—search for murderers, 329, 331 —report of loss, 428 — confirmed, 429 —Blonde sails to assist, 430 — party goover land, 431 — ferry, estate, DonJuan Rivera, 432, 433 — Colcura, 434Villagran, Chivilingo, 436 — coal,Carampangue, 437 — Arauco, 437-442—country, Indians, 443 — Quiapo,444—bad travelling, 445, 446^Tucapel,Valdivia, 447, 448 — Leiibu, partyreach Challenger's crew, 449 — accountof wreck and subsequentevents,451-460 — party's return, Quiapo,Ulpu,' cattle, 461 — river, rancho,462 — Araucanians, 463, 464 — BoreasTubul River, 465— journey, 466,467 — Blonde, 469— goes to relieveChallenger's crew, 469— delays, mistake,470, 471— reach Leiibu, 472 —embarkation, 473 — Talcahuano, 475H.M.S. Conway receives crew andsails, 479— causes of wreck, 480.Chloe, inhabitants, 379— Indians, religion,380 — foreign settlers, kindness,barter, 381— fish, coal, towns, discovery,382 — population, decrease,mines, 383— early notices, name, pirates,Spaniards, 384 — Indians' regretof Spanish government, tithes,oppression, 385 — anecdote, tasks,patriots, climate, 386— good sites fordocks, tide-streams, 387 — Chilotevoyages, 392 — deserters. Padre Forests,expedition, 394—' vaqueano,'search, 395— meteoric appearances(note), 395— earthquake, 41 6.Chiut Island, strawberries, 387.Honos Indians, 130.142— boy on boardAdeona, cannibalism, hostilities, 189' Niqueaccas,' quickness, religiousideas, ceremony, 190— burial-places,INDEX.anecdote, 'cuba,' 191 — charm, sagacity,local knowledge, pilotage, 192,193 — mode of declaring war, honesty,anecdotes, 195, 196 — at Chloe, 380former numbers, 383.Honos Archipelago explored, 363-366notices, early voyages, 367-369 —further remarks, 374-377.Chupat River, discovered, 306 — described,Spaniards, cattle hunts, 307entrance, 308, 309, 353.Clive, Lieut., burial, 335.Clouds, remarks on, 65, 66, 50a — overlow land, 506, 507, 563.Cobija, 481.Cockburn Channel, bad weather. Beagleunder sail in, 359.Colcura, heights of, hamlet, 434, 435.Coliumo, 417, 424.Colorado River, wolf seen near, 251, 295,296 — communication with UnionBay, 296 — gale, ' replies,' 302.Concepcion, earthquake, preceding signs,402 — destruction of city, 403, 404 —situation, anecdotes, 405 — mutualassistance, 406 — waves, 413-417 —elevation and depression of land, 420fossil shells, 421-423 — coal, 424 —re-visited, re-building, houses, Peruvians,476, 477— country, 479.Conchali, smuggling, 426.Constitucion, vessel lent by Don FranciscoAguilar, goes with Mr. Usborne,283, 284.another vessel so named,lent by Don Francisco Vascular atCoquimbo, surveys coast, 427 — atCallao, usefulness, 482 — bought tosurvey coast of Peru, 4B3 — sails, 484—for proceedings see Sulivan, andUsborne).Conway, H. M. S., passing throughquantities of pumice-stone and ashes,108, 109— receives crew of H.M.S.Challenger, 479.Coquimbo, 427-479.Corcovado, volcano, 376, 394.Corrientes, Cape, rocks, 99 — reportedshoal, 292.Cruz, Santa, capital of TenerifFe, appearance,48.river, explored, 336 —estuary, banks, 'steppes,' cliffs, 337barrenness, animals, climate, 338 —mud-banks, tides, views, 339 — water,340 — change of scenery, cold, 341 —tracking, instruments, 342 — frost, ostrichesswimming, 343 — rapidity ofstream, smoke, Indian tracks, 344 —Indian Pass,' rapids, windings, quantitiesof shingle, 345 — heights, wastes,want of fuel, 346 — temperature of airand water, earth cliffs, progress, lavacliffs, 347 — lava district, ' BasaltGlen,' wild scene, 348 — mirage, driftwood,boat stove, Andes, 349 — guambirds of prey, bed of river,350 — views, weather, country, 351 —walking party, direction of river, 352velocity, trees, water, colour and temperature,drainage of Andes, sources,353 — Lake Viedma, or Caper, rivers,floods, 354 — level of river, bones, 355wild cats, return, mountains, rapiddescent, fish, 356.Currents near Bahia, 60, Abrolhos, 64near Cape Frio, 70, 71 — in Plata,93, 226 — from Tierra del Fuego andStaten Land to Falklands, 242, 243near Mocha, 419 — extraordinary,480— near Galapagos, 484, 486, 488,496 — and temperature, 505, 562 —Bay of Islands, 5613 — on passage fromNew Zealand to Port Jackson, temperatureof water, 621 — near NorthKeeling Island, 638.Cutfinger Cove, striking scenery, immensecanal, 202.Dangerous Archipelago (see Low Islands).Darwin, Mr. Charles, volunteers as naturalist,18, 19 — fossils near PointAlta, 106 — pumice-stones, 108 —accompanies party with Fuegians onshore, 127 — goes in westward exploration,215 — saves boats, 217 — at Mal-dorado,284 — plans, 286 — at Argentina,28S — River Negro, 312 — obtainsinteresting account of Indian attackon Carmen, 314 — search for freshwaterat Port San Julian, 320 —ascends Santa Cruz, 327 — goes awayat Chloe with Lieut. Sulivan, 364 —rejoins Beagle, 366 — excursions, 379-425 — lands on James Island, 497-500 — at Otaheite, 510-512 — noticesof natives, 522, 527, 543, 557— atNew Zealand, 570 — an'lval in England,638.INDEX.Darwin, Mount, Q15 — height, 216 —Sound, 217, 218.Deluge, remarks on facts with referenceto, 657-682.Deserts Islands, 386.Desire, Port, coast from, to ValdesCreek, examined by Paz and Liebre,282 — Indians' traces, wells full, 303inlet examined, 316 — river, rock,317,322.Desolation, Cape, 218.Diego San, Cape, breakers, 119, 120.Divide, Point, burning-tree, slate, rock,219.Dogs, Patagoniann, 151, 167, 174 — Fuegiandogs trained to catch birds whileroosting, 184 — bunting, 187 — fineanimals, taught to bring in food, birds,hunt fish, 187 — described, 201 — atKing George Sound, 627 — at KeelingIslands, fishing, 634.Douglas, Mr., engaged to collect information,363 — survey in boats, 364 —remarks on Huilli-che superstitions,388-390 — on Calbucanos, 390, 391 —Cliilotes, voyages, father's account ofLos Cesaress,' 392, 393.Earle, Mr. Augustus, engaged as artist,19, obliged to return to England, 20.Eight stones,' vain search for, 46.Elena, Santa, Port, 305.Equator, passages out and home, 3, 4 —absurd ceremonies in crossing, 57 —notice of by Kotzebue, 58.English Bank (see Banco Yngles).(San Carlos), nature ofbank, 378.Estevan, San, or Stephen's Port, distressedsailors, 370 — story, 371, 372Falklands, bad weather, 226 — aspect ofland, wrecks, 227 — position, number,asserted claims of various countries,228, 237 — Buenos Ayrean ' commandant'appointed, subsequent event-i,England re-asserts her sovereignty,H.M.S. Tyne and Clio re-hoist herflag, 238-240 — shores, violent ends,tides, remarkable currents, 241-243storms, 244 — seasons, temperature,245— harbours, 246— country, 247 —peat, animals, 248 — wild cattle, horses,foxes, 249-252 — changes and transportof animals, 253 — rabbits, whales,254 — fish, 2.35 — birds, brushwood.fuel, grass, 256— soil, potash, 257—increase of animals, 258 — vegetableproductions, trees, 259— plants, balsam,260 — rushes, improvements,colonizing, 261— suggestions, 263 —cattle, pilotage, 264, 265— ports, wool,266 — Vernet's establishment, 266-269— events there, 270— ruined settlement,271— lights, 276, 277— fossilbones, 277, 278 — wild-cattle hunts,279-281 — sad occurrences there, 327-335.Famine, Port, 321, 322.Feejee Islands (native name, Naval),dangerous navigation, natives, cannibalism,559 — white men among them,Charles,' cautions, treachery, dealingwith savages, 560, 561 — canoes,trade, alligator, bones, winds, 462.Hernandez, Juan, effects of great earthquake,Ulloa, volcanic appearance atthe summit of Yungue (note) 418.Fire, mountain forests on fire, give riseto reports of volcanoes, 203,204.First Narrow, tide, 321,322.Forastes, Padre, entices men to desert,393— search for them, 394, 395.Fossils in Port Belgrano, 107 — in SanSalvador Bay, 278 — near Tilly Road,304 — curious, near Concepcion, 421-423 — in Andes, 667.Foxes of Falkland Isles, apparent varieties,250 — remarks, 251 — changesproduced by food, climate, 252 — transport,253, 254 — fox called 'culpen' inAraucania (note) 450.Friendly, or Tonga Islands, missionaries,opposition, Mariner's account, 559.Frio, Cape. 67, 7° — currents, 71, 72.Fuegians, account of those broughthome, 1 — cannibalism, fate of oldwomen, feelings on seeing strangesights, 2 — ages, reasons for beingbrought to England, 4, 5, 6 — vaccinated,7 — ' Boat Memory,' catchessmall-pox, 8 — death, 9 — character,plan for educating others, 10 — journeyto London, anecdote, Waltham-stow,11 — kind treatment, improvement,at St. James's, 12, 13 — privatearrangements for their return, changedby Beagle's re-commission, 13, 14 —at Plymouth, 15 — presents, 16 — •Fuegia,' at Botafogo Bay with Englishfamily, 80 — natives seen nearINDEX.Cape Penas, remarks of those on board,pleasure at being near home, iig —meeting with large and fine mensis —remarks, paint, laughed at by ' York,'and 'Jemmy,' anecdotes, 121 — ' York-minster's'duplicity ; he. Jemmy, andFuegia leave Beagle for the shore,127, 128 — meet natives, remarks, 203friends. Jemmy learns his father'sdeath, conduct, language, 204 —York's' jealousy of Fuegia, Jemmy'sstories, 205 — Oens (or Coin) men,205, 206 — natives, scenery, 207 —arrival at WooUya, precautions, nativescome in numbers, 208 — meetingbetween Jemmy and his family,209 — his mortification, 210 — 'doctor,'211 — Jemmy, York, and Fuegiaestablished in wigwams, anecdotes,213, 214— change on boat's return,Jemmy plundered, 221 — sorrowfulremarks on his savage brethren,boats leave them, 222 — re-visit them,better hopes, another interview with,323 — Jemmy and family, 324 —York's treachery. Jemmy's story, 325improvement, gratitude, parting, 326,327.Fuegian tribes, general sketch of, 130,137-142 — features, 175— hair, diversityof appearance, form, colour, 176paint, caution, 177 — food, ' doctor,'wizard, 178 — elders, superstitiousideas, 179-181— death, burial, 181 —marriage, relationship, 182 — cannibalism,war, 183 — cooking, weapons,bird-catching, 1 84 — food, drink, occupations,185 — swimming, womendiving, illness, children, training, guam186 — anecdotes, fire,pyrites, 187 — language, 188 ~ atWooUya, 207-210 — astonishment atfire-arms, 211, 212 — large wigwam,215 — numerous at Woollyaa on boat'sreturn, 220 — troublesome conduct toMatthews and his companions, 221presents on leaving them, 222 —Yahoos,' 323— Opens-men, 325, 326—language, 358.Funchal Roads, 46.Galapagos, appearance, Chatham Island,haziness, surf, craters, current, 485ripplings, shores, iguanas, 486 —lava, terrapin, trees, Stephens Bay,rocks, birds, fish, 487 — tortoises, current,water, 488 — weather, turtle.shells, mangroves, 489 — CharlesIsland, volcanoes, heights, settlement,490, 491 — animals, vegetables,craters, Albemarle Island, formation,492, 493 — wild scene, lava cliffs,494 — Tagus Cove, anchor in crater,495 — extraordinary appearance, 496James' Island, settlers, oil, 497 —winds, weather, Chatham Island, anchorage,soil, 498 — Mac-gownshoal, Charles Island, salt, 499 —salt in crater, woods, AlbemarleIsland and other islets, 500, 501 —rains, moisture, 502 — birds' beaks,terrapin, 503, 504— migration, 505.Gales, 3, 51, 83, 91, 98, 112, 123, 124,125, 126, 225, 226, 243, 244, 281,289, 297, 302, 303, 306, 563 — atKeelings, 637.Galleys River, 353.Gauchos,' 2'76 — dress, appearance,278 — at Port Louis, murder, settlers,328-331.George, St., Bay, tide, 304.George, King, Sound, aspect of country,624 — settlement, local attraction,tides, 625 — natives, ' robbery,'626 — feast-day, dog, aborigines, 627burial, fish, 628.Glaciers, 215 — tints, icebergs, fall ofice cliff, 216 — effect on sea, dangerof boats, beauty of scenery, 217.Goreee Road, 127.Gorriti, ship refitting, 284 — absurdreports in consequence, 292, 293,Green Island, water, animals, 295,Gregory Bay, natives near, 168-173.Guaianeco Islands, wild potato, 200.Guanacoes, very large near Good SuccessBay, 122 — Fuegians' chase of,186, 187 — weight, 305 — near NewBay, 306 — near Santa Cruz, 338 —numbers, 349 — size, 350, 355.Hamond, Mr. Robert N., joins Beagle,115, 120, 127 — in Beagle Channel,215 — returns to England, 284.Harris, Mr. W. Snow, lightning conductorsof his invention, 18.Harris, Mr., pilots Beagle, 101— atArgentina, 102 — schooners hiredfrom him, goes as pilot in one, 110,111 — excellent conduct, 288 — anecdoteof, 311.I N D K X.Hellyer, Mr., drowned, 27a — burial,273.Herradura Cove, near Coquimbo.Hobart Town, or Horton, 624.Hog Island, 296.Honden Island, 506.Hope Harbour, Transport schoonerwrecked there, 273.Horcon Bay, 425.Huafo, position, cove near, 365, 366 —sheep, Indians, 377, 378.Huampelen, Mount, or Huamblin, 366.Huaytecas Islands, oysters, 375 — volcanoesseen from them, Indian names,meanings, 376, 376.Huemul, 144 (note).Huilli-che, 379 — religion, 380, 381 —migration, 384, 388 — superstitions,witchcraft, ' bruxos,' 388-390 — ' Juncos'and ' Rancos,' tribes near Valdivia,features, dress, feelings, curiouscustoms, traditions, Deluge, ' Chem,*Mina,' 400, 40 1 .Icebergs, notices of, probably taken forrocks in some instances, 118 — ice-cliffs,216, 217.Iguanas, at Galapagos, 486 — orange-coloured,495, 496.Inches Island, goats, 372.Inez, Santa, Cape, 1 1 9.Instructions, 22-42.Ipun Island ( Lions), 367, 375.Islands of. Bay, easy of access, Whalerock, 564, 565.Islay, white powder, 482.Jackson, Port, 621.Jago, St., Island. of, current near northpoint, 51.Jaguars, 97.Janeiro, Rio de, 72, 73— observations,74 — difference in meridian distances,75 — Beagle's measurement confirmed,78, 80, 82, 83.Jason Islands, tide-races near, 242.Javali, or Hog Island, 296.Johnson, Mr. C. R., joins Beagle, 20—in Adventure at Falklands, 281.Johnson Cove, French crew there, 268-275.VOL. II,Jose, San, Port, cattle hunts, 307—massacre of Spaniards, 308 — tides,desolation, wreck, 31 1— remarkableripplings near, 312.Julian, San, Port, bar, 319— search forwater, 320— settlement, former scenesthere, whaler, tides, 321 — swell, 322.Keeling Islands, birds' flight, appearanceof islets. Port Refuge, tide-gage,629 — soundings, reefs, discovery,630. 631 — inhabitants, slavery, trade,632 — curious crab, turtle chase, fisheating coral, 633 — fishing dog, coralformations, 634 — animals, water, natives,christening, observations, 635,636 — storms, 637.Kelp, 243 — indicates rocks, remarks,cautions, 246, 247.Krusenstern, Admiral, chart of LowIslands, 506.King, Capt. P. P., 1— promotion, 8 —letter, 23 — ice, 216 — notices of chloe,381, 382— alerse, 39°, 39', seeking,Mr. P. G., 12, 20, 21 — in Liebre,294— in Constitucion, 427— ElizabethBay, 494.Kings, Three,' islets, tide-races, 620,621.Kororareka Harbour, 565 — village, 566huts, 577 — cooking, church, 578estuary, 581.Leiibu River, 446 — encampment, 449,456-460, error, 470, 471— Bay, 473.Liebre, schooner, hired to assist survey,reasons, no, 111 — in RiverNegro, 286— discharged 288 — sketchof proceedings, 295-314.Lightning, conductors, 18 — effects onThetis, St. Elms's fire, 80, 81 —Heron corvette struck, 81 — sets fireto bushes, 304— curious notices, 539(note).Lights on hills, singular, 276 — conjecturesas to cause, 277.Lima, 484— inhabitants, 642.Lizard, at New Zealand, 619, 620.Look-out, Cape, 319.Louis, Port, 261— settlement, 266, 267destroyed, 268, 271 — murders, occurrences,327, 328 — search for murderers,329, 330 — new settlementbegun, Riveroo taken, 331.2 YINDEX.X^owIsJaiids, Dangerous Archipelago, orPaamuto Islands, 506, 507 — missionarylabour, natives, Chain Islanders,518.Low, Mr., 2, i2p, Anecdote 168 —opinions, notices of Patagoniann natives,boy on board, 169-174 — takesHonos boy on board Adeona, detailsof Honos tribe, 189-197 — potatoes,anecdote, 200— at Falkland Islands,273, 274 — cattle-shooting, 281 — narrowescape, 328 — engaged as pilot,331 — examines Honos Archipelago,363, 364, 367.Low, Port, 374 — fresh provisions, piraguas,wild potato, 375 — view, Meli-motu Mountain, 376.Macacu River, fever, malaria, causes,76, madeira,46.Magdalen Channel, fine scenery, 359,Magellan, Le, wrecked, 269 — crew'stransport, 373 — in Beagle, 281.Malaspina Cove, lightning, 304.Malays at Keeling Islands, 632, 637.Maldonado, pampero, 88 — village, 93,282, 284, 285— absurd reports, 293.Man, origin and migration of, 639-657.Mar-chiquito, salt lagoon, no openingto the sea, 97 — country near, hills,their usual direction, as well as thatof rivers and inlets between Plataand Cape Horn, 98 — immense herdof cattle, 99.Maria, a Patagoniann woman, 145, 146met again, 322.Maria, Santa, Island of, upheaval, 412,413— beds of dead shell-fish, 414 —depression of land, 420 — appearance,436.Martin, St., cove, cliffs, weather, 124.Martha, Santa, gales, 83— shores, 84.Massey's lead, 55, 64.Matavai Bay (see Otaheite).Matthews, Richard, goes as missionaryto Tierra del Fuego, 15, 16 — firstmeets savages, 122 — accompaniesFuegians from Beagle, 127 — anecdote,179 — steadiness, 205 — arrival atWoollyaa, 207.210 — established andleft in wigwam, 212, 213 — anxietyfor, safety, 220 — story, danger, 221re- embarks, 223— decides to remainwith his brother at New Zealand,605.Maule River, effects of great earthquakethere, 417- surf, village, bar,424— advantages, 425.May Harbour, cypress trees, otter, 375.Medanos Point, banks near, 97,Melt Port, 298.Mellersh, Mr, 19 — examines HoodIsland, 4B6 — Elizabeth Bay, 494-496.Mendoza, river near, 286, 287.Missionaries (Spanish), 373 — (Otaliei-tan) efforts of in Low Islands, 518 —(English) at Otaheite, 510 — anecdotes,514-517, 523, 524. 542, 544,545 — influence, 550 — on Navigatorsand Friendly Islands, 559 — at NewZealand, 567-575— difficulties of firstmission there, 579 — influence, 583-588 — distinctions, 601, 602 — properspirit, 604, 605 — obstacles at NewZealand, 611, 612 — effects of exertions,613, 614 — embarrassments, 615purchase of lands 616-618.Mocha Island, survey, earthquake, 402waves, 414 — incidents, 415 — survey,rocks, Indians, 419.Montes Tres, Cape, 369.Murray, Mr. Matthew, 4, 5, 11.Murray Narrow, passed by boats, 215-220.Musters, Mr. Charles, 20— death of, 76.Narborough Island, 365, 366 — excellentport, strawberries, produce, 374structure, tides, 375.Navigators Islands, murders, successof missionaries, 559.Negro River, 286, 287, 288 — ' freshes,'banks, produce, floods, plough, 298survey, bar, 302,303 — massacre ofSpaniards, 308 — Paz and Liebre detainedthere, 311 — floods, mouth andbar examined, 312 — wild fowl, 313.New Bay, 305— bad weather, soil, 306settlement, 308, 309.Noir Island, wigwams, 365.Noronha, de Fernando, 58 — surf, citadel,population, scenery, precautions,59.INDEX.Nottt, Mr., senior missionary at Ota-heine, translation of Bible, 517.Obstruction Sound, 198 — large canoesand vvig\vanis deserted, swan-traps,deer, 199.Oens, or Coin men, inroads, 205, 206at Woollyaa, 325, 326.Organ Mountains, 80, 8-2.Osorno, Mount, in eruption, 378 —height, form, 379.Ostriches near river Santa Cruz, 338 —swimming, 343.Otaheite, or Tahiti, view, 508 — scenery,Matavai Bay, canoes, natives, 509 —traffic, dress. Point Venus, 510 —chiefs, native houses, 511, 512 —curiosity, fair, theft, singing, 513 —taboo-marks, tombs, 'tito,' sugar-mill,514— Papiete, cottages, 515— natives,shells, Papawa, 516 — OtaheitanBible, weather, 517 — old ' Ua,' diseases,520, 521 — industry, anecdotes,curious relics, 522 — church, congregations,523 — recreations, children,Hitote,' 524— Queen Pomare— audience,524, 525 — customs, 527 —meeting with queen and chiefs, 527-542 — pilotage among coral reefs,542 — school-house, service, ' Hitote,'extempore prayer, 543 — songs, school,natives teaching each other, children,545 — discussion, intelligence of natives,communication of news, 'Mare's'letter, 546 — ' Paofai's' letter, childrenof early missionaries, classes of natives,547 — proportions, attire, moralconduct, 548, 549 — prohibition ofspirits, harsh usage of infirm, anecdotes,551— domestic manners, 552snuff, provisions-seizure of theNewton, 554 — Pearl fishing, steering,555 — Queen's letter, natives pay herdebts, taking leave, 557.Oven, the, singular spot described,water, 304.Paamutos (see Low Islands).Packsaddle Bay, 224.Paihia, missionary settlement in NewZealand, 566.Pampas, 85 — absence of trees, 93 —droughts, herds of cattle, fertility, 94on eastern coast, 97.Pamper, in River Plata, 85-89.Papiete (see Otaheite).Papudo, 426.Patagonians, general sketch of 129-137details, physiognomy, friendliness,size, wanderings, 145 — clothing, 146arms, ornaments, 147-149 — food,hunting, dogs, 150, 151— huts, ,152 — marriages, domesticstate, 153 — children, cradles, 154 — •health, sickness, 155 — funeral ceremonies,156-160— warfare, horsemanship,racing, cards, 160 — religiousideas, 161 — worship, 162— witchcraft,163 — sacred tree, government, caciques,164-166 — warfare, horses, 166,167 — moral restraints, 167 — anecdotes,traffic, 168— San Leon, partialityfor white men, subdivisions, 169—boy chief, ' Capitan Chups,' behaviour,170 — ' Chico,' Fuegians, tradewith them in slaves, 171 — counting,time, language, respect to age, cookery,172 — women, gratitude of boy,173— emigrations, 174— in GregoryBay, 322.Patch Cove, 372, 373.Paul, St., Rocks, or Penado de SanPedro, examined, multitudes of birds,sharks, 56— current, 57.Paz, schooner, reasons for hiring toextend survey, 109, no— refit, m,112 — off River Negro, 2B6 — discharged,288— sketch of proceedings,295-314.Peat at Falklands, 248, 256.Pembroke, Cape (Falklands), 226.Penas, Gulf of, wild potato, ' langue,'200.Penco, 420,— castle, 421— coal, 423-Peru, coast of, survey, 482.Pichidanque, 426.Plata River, entrance, width, depth,shoals, currents, pamperoes, 85-88effects on river, 89— level of river andocean, 91— fluctuations, Yngles Bank,92— tides, want of trees, 93, 94 — observationson, 115.Pococke, Cape, 565.Pomare, New Zealand, 5S1.Pomare's tomb, at Otaheite, 514-Pomare Vahine, Queen of Otaheite, 516—arrival at Papiete, dress, 524— ateyS1 N U K X.tenants. audience, reflections, 525,526 — consort, meeting, chapel, 527 —Queen's appearance, chiefs, 528 —conduct, interpreter, 529 — affair ofthe Truro, discussion, 530 — Paamu-to piracy, 531 — generosity of natives,532 — arrangements, murderers, 533missionaries, decree against enlistingfor foreigners, 535 — ' Mare' judge,appeal, case of Venilia, misconductof her captain, letter from Otahei-tans to British Government, 536,537 — smuggling, questions, chiefspleased, meeting ends, 541 — goodfeeling, 542 — Queen visits Beagle,fireworks, songs, 544 — conduct, 545,546 — letter, attendants, taking leave,556, 557-Ponsonby Sound, boats there, natives-curiousvolcanic effects, 223.Prayaa Port, anchor there, 51— beautyof country in interior, 52— fruit, population,53.Puma, 107 — mode of killing colts, 313large one shot, party followed byone, 357.Quiriquina Island, 406, 407, 409, 411.Rafts, easily constructed, 647 — nowused, 648.Ramirez, Diego, islands, 124.Rasa Point, stream of tide, 297.Refuge Port, Spanish chart, 373.Return to England, 638, 639.Roberts, Mr., engaged as Pilot for Liebreschooner, 110 — anecdote, 117 —satisfactory conduct, parted from, 288.Roussin, Baron, difference in measurementof meridian distance fromBahia to Rio, 75 — Beagle's measurementconfirmed, 78, 79.Rowlett Island, wild potatoes, 374.Rowlett, Mr., 19, 20 — remarks on countrynear Port Prayaa, 52, 53 — deathof, 360.Sanborombon Bay, 91 — sounded, 292.Santos, 84.Savage, not the primitive state of man,650.Scotchwell Harbour, (Ipun), 223, 374.Sebastian, San, Bay, bank, 322, 323.Shingle Point, 215.Ship Island, tide-stream, 305.Simon, Jean, cattle-hunt, 279, 280 —murdered by ' gauchos' at Port Louis,328.Simon's Bay, 638.Skyring Mount, 277.Snake, Hem. S., sailing, build, remarkson ships, 289-292.Socorro, Nuestra Flora del, island,364-366.Sounding, anecdote, 226— depths, 674,676.South Cape, Indian tomb, 305.Spencer Cape, 122, 123.Starve Island, 289,Staten Land, wigwams, 365.Stebbing, Mr. George James, engagedto attend to instruments, 19.Stewart Island, 218.Stewart, Mr., Puma-shooting, 357 — inboats at Chloe, 364 — in Constitution,427.Stokes, Mr. John Lort, 21 — takes commandof Paz schooner, 110 — and ofLiebre, 283 — survey, 286— returns toBeagle, 288 — account of proceedingsin Paz, 295-302 — survey of RiverNegro, 302 — at Port Desire, 303 —in Chupat, 306 — surveying, 307 —anecdote, 310 — occupations, 315 —remarks on Bella rocks, 318 — atPort San Julian, 319 — ascends RiverSanta Cruz, 337 — explores and surveyspart of Honos Archipelago inwhale-boat, 367, 374, 375— at Galapagos,493 — notices of terrapin, 503,504 — of Otaheitans, 551, 552 — ofNew Zealanders, 586.Success, Good, Bay, natives, 120 — fish,225.Sulivan, Lieut. B. James, appointed toBeagle, 14, 288, 336, goes with boatsto survey Chloe, .364-366 — returnsto Beagle at San Carlos, 378 — noticesof Indians, 385, 386, 387 — takescommand of ' Constitucion,' 427 — atCallao, 482 — goes with boat to examineGalapagos, 486, 497.Sv^'an Islands, meeting of tides 242.Sydney, light-house, town, 621 —drought, aqueduct, position, 622 —disadvantages, money making, 623.INDEX.Tahiti (see Otalieite).Cairo Island, discovered, 508.Talcaliuano, 402 — great earthquake,rise of sea, effects, 406, 407-dogs,shipping, 408 — anecdotes, motion ofsea, 409 — sub-marine explosions, fishkilled, 410— height of wave, contrasts,411 — Araucanian boys, 478.Taytao, or Taytaohaohuon Cape, rocks,372.Teneriffe, view of Peak, 47 — measurementsfrom thence, quarantine, 48.Thetis frigate, account of her loss, 66-70 — causes, 70,71.Tide in Plata, 89, 93— near Point Rubia,116— near Cape San Diego, 120in S.W. arm of Beagle Channel,219 — stream of tide near Falklands,226 — strength, direction, times,height, 241, 242 — off Point Rasa,297 — rise in St. George Bay, 304 —off Ship Island, and Cape DosBahiass, race near New Bay, 305 —Valdes Creek, 309 — terrific ' races'there, 310 — ripplings and races nearPort San Jose, 311, 312— in FirstNarrow, 321 — in Santa Cruz, 337,339 — velocity of river, 340, 344, 351—at Spun, May Harbour, 375— nearChloe, 387, 388— off ' Three Kings,"direction, temperature, 620.Token River, Indians, coast near, bar,402.Toriano, an Araucanian cacique, deathof, 106.Tosca, 99, 100.Topocalraa shoal, 425.Trinidad, Gulf of, natives, a fine race,feathers, paint, 197 — plank canoeswith oars, arms, 19B.Tubul River, 414.Tucu-tucu, the, 313.Tuyu, mud-bank, 292.Unicorn schooner, 273 — considerations,purchased, named Adventure,(see Adventure).Union Bay, 286, 287.Usborne, Mr. Alexander Burns, 20 —goes in ' Constitucion' to assist Mr.Stokes, 283 — returns to Beagle, 288,3i4> 315— goes away in boats, 364 —at San Carlos, 378 — takes commandof Carmen schooner to Leiibu river,meets Blonde, 469— bad weather, adventures,474 — escape, skill, 475 —takes command of another vesselcalled ' Constitucion,' plan of expedition,483 — receives kind assistance,484 — return to England, having completedhis survey, 638, 639.Valdes Creek, entrance, 98 — tides,shifting bar, dangers, 309,310.Valdivia, port, forts, rivers, ' Intendant,'secretary, 397 — town, aborigines,398-401 — convicts, 401 — greatearthquake, motion, 415 — shocks,416.Vallenar Road, 366, 369.Ventana Mount, mines, 105 — height,109, 295.Verde, Cape, Islands, observations onanchoring, gales, 51, 52 — exports, 53' orchilla' weed, vegetables, sicklyseason, 54 — dust, 55.Vemet, Louis, appointed ' comandante'at Falklands, proceedings, 238, 239,255 — settlement, 266 — delusion, 267ruined 268.Video, Monte, mutinous negroes, 95.Villagran, battle, Ercilla, 435, 436.Villarica mountain, height, 481.Villarino, 314.Virgins, Cape, 222, 357.Waimate, 598 — situation, appearance,corn, gardens, farm, 601 — cattle, poultry,houses, 602 — barn, water-wheel,604 — mill, Shunghi's grave, Englishoaks, missionary families, 604 — spirit,606— valley. Kauri pine, woods,606.Water, white, extraordinary space ofsea, supposed cause, 118.Weddell Bluff, 340.Whale-boat Sound, 218.Wickham, Lieut. John Clement, 14,21takes command of Paz and Liebre,111, 112, 116, 117 — examines Indiangraves, 168— cattle-hunt, 280-282—arrives to take command of Adventureat Gorriti, 284 — proceedingsin Liebre, 295 — remarks on coastnear Point Rasa, 297 — Rio Negro,INDEX.298"- Dei Carmen, 299— on Indiansand Spanish settlers, 300, 301 — inBlancoo Bay, River Negro, 302 — atPort Desire, 303 — discovers ChupatRiver, 306, 307 — in great danger, 310plans, 322 — meets Mr. Low, engageshim as pilot, at Port Louis,331 — sails again, 332 — in Port Famine,353, 360 — at Valparaiso, Santiago,361 — returns to Beagle, 362 —arrives in England, 638.Epigram, Rev. Joseph, kindness toFuegians, 10, 11.William, Port, (Falklands) 227— tides,242 — suggestions for a settlement,advantages, 261, 262 — accessibility,exports, 263.Whylootacke, or Wailutaki, 557.Williams, Corporal, drowned, 282, 302.Wilson, Rev. William, admits Fuegiansinto infant school at Waltham-stow,10 — kindness, ii, 12 — letter,1 4 — selects missionary go out withthem, 15, 16.Wilson, Belford Linton, effective assistance,4S4.Windhond Bay, 225.Wolf near Colorado River, 296.Wollaston Island, 225.Wood Mount, 319.WooUya, pleasant situation, natives, arrangements,208, 209 — wigwams andgardens made, natives assist, 210 —fair prospects, curiosity of natives,211,212 — boats depart, 214 — re- visited,220 — events during absence,221— missionary removed, difficulties,222— re-visited, pleasing scene, occurrences,224 — events there, 323-327.Zealand, New, 564— Kororareka, Ti-puna,565— natives' flag, 566 — Paisnatives, 568 — decrease of population,569— colour, salutation, manner,war canoes, 571 — prospects ofcountry, former savages of Britain,572,573 — bones, tree, fern, 574 —church, 575 — British Resident'shouse, vines, Kororaxeka, ,576 — huts,577 — cooking, church, burying-places,579 — anecdotes, Waripoaka, island,580 — Cawa-Cawa, Pomare, estuary,581— pleasing scenes, traffic, 582 —flax, meeting, chiefs, 583 — curiousdispute, rats, game, 584 — precise divisionof territory, purchase of land,585, 586 — spirits, ' Noah," nativevine, church, 586, 587— oxen, sick,preserving food from damp, nets,burial, 588— Christmas, Divine service,remarks, singing, 589 — state ofthe place, measures, 590 — causes ofdisturbance, 591, 59^— suggestions,influence of ships of war, 593 — Polynesianinterest, resources in Pacific,594. 597 — excursion to Waimate,Waiting Creek, running guides, activity,country, 599 — woods, nativevillage, agriculture, flax, manufacture,599 — chapel, fine-looking native,country easy of access, 600 — curiousbird, 601 — Waimate, 601-606 — valley,horses, bridge, woods, Keri-keriwaterfall, beautiful scene, C06 — Englishchildren, natives fond of them,607 — Waripoaka visits Beagle, ' LaFavorite,' Rangateedas, Cos — politicalcondition, relics, 609, 610 — departurefrom, 61 1 — remarks, 612, 613settlements, trade, 614, 615 — discontentof settlers, 6 16 — pine-forests,618 — North cape — singular superstition,great lizards, 619, 620.ADDENDA.In the eighth chapter of this volume, T have omitted to mention thatthere are meetings held among the Patagonians which might be termedcourts of justice !'One such meeting w as described to me by an eye-witness : — ' CapitanChico' presided at it, on horseback : he was the only person mounted.The older men of the tribe sat in a ring, upon the ground, as judges (orrather as a council, or as a jury). Within the circle were four prisoners,and twelve witnesses. The trial lasted a whole day : but my informantdid not see or hear the result.The same individual told me that the Patagonians often played at agame like hockey.These things, among others, call to mind Molina's account of theAraucanians, which some think much exaggerated. Disorganised, dispirited,and exceedingly diminished in numbers, the Araucanians, as wenow see them, are scarcely to be compared to those of Ercilla's poem,who are also described by many authors besides Molina.mm ^END OP VOL. II.LONDON:Printed by J. L. Cox and Sows, 75. Great Queen Street,Lincoln's-inn Fields.