POMPEIANA:TOPOGRAPHY,EDIFICES AND ORNAMENTSPOMPEII,THE RESULT OF EXCAVATIONS SINCE 1819.BY SIR WILLIAM GELL,M. A. F. R. S. & F. S. A.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. I.LONDON :JENNINGS AND CHAPLIN.MDCCCXXXir.LONDON:PRINTED BY THOMAS DAVISON, WIIITEFRIAliS.IiiLIST OF PLATES.I.III.IV.•-• V,^ •VI.-tvii.VIII.IX.'- X.-"XI.XII..-XIII.- XIV.XV,•-XVI.XVII.^ XVIII.XIX.XX.^ XXI.XXII.XXIII.-XXIV.-xxv.XXVI.Vol. I.PagePORTRAIT OF THE AUTHOR, opposite the Title-pageILLUSTRATED FRONTISPIECEGENERAL PLAN 1SIDE OF A CUBICULUM, IN THE HOUSE OF FUSCUS 3SIDE OF A CHAMBER, IN THE HOUSE OF FUSCUSWALL OF AN ATRIUM . . . 7DOOR OF A HOUSE . . .5PICTURE IN A HOUSE BEHIND THE PANTHEON 9STAIRS OF THE CRVPTO-PORTICUS OF EUMACHIA 14Vol. II.PageSTATUE OF EUMACHIAPEDESTALS IN THE FORUMALTAR OF JUPITERMARS AND VENUSGENERAL View OF THE PANTHEONWALL OF THE PANTHEONPENELOPE AND ULYSSESjETHRA and THESEUSTHALIACELL OF THE TEMPLE OF AUGUSTUSPLAN OF THE TEMPLE OF FORTUNETEMPLE OF FORTUNERESTORATION OF THE TEMPLE OF FORTUNEVIEW FROM THE ROOF OF THE THERM^iEPLAN OF THE THERMAEGENERAL VIEW OF THE THERMAESECTION OF THE TermsCOURT OF THE THERM.'E• Referred to in Vol. I. page 5, as No. VII.t Referred to in Vol. I. page 9, as No. VI.LIST OF PLATES.PlateXXVII. FRIGIDARIUMXXVIII. Notationy*XXlX. TEPIDARIUMXXX. VAULT OF THE TEPIDARIUMXXXI. CALDARIUM (OR Laconic)XXXII. SECTION OF THE CALDARIUM.- t XXXIII. FRIGIDARIUM AND PISCINA, IN THE WOMENBATHSXXXIV. WOMEN'S BATHSXXXV. PLAN OF THE HOUSE OF THE TRAGIC POETXXXVI. HOUSE OF THE TRAGIC POETi XXXVII. POET'S HOUSE RESTOREDXXXVIII. WINDOWS OF THE ATRIUMXXXIX. ACHILLES AND ArisesXL. FACSIMILE OF HEAD OF ACHILLES,. XLI. PELEUS AND THETISXLII. VENUS FISHINGXLIII. ARIADNEXLIV. POET READING-'XLV. MOSAIC PAVEMENTXLVI. SACRIFICE OF IPHIGENIAXLVII. SIDE OF THE CHAMBER OF LEDAxlviii. LEDA AND TYNDAREUSXLIX. THESEUS AND ARIADNEL. FOUNTAIN OF THE FULLONICALlC PICTURES IN THE FULLONICALII. ^yt.lU. FOUNTAIN OF SHELLSLIV. COMEDYLV. DWARF AND MONKEYLVI. GARDEN AND PORTICOLVII. PAINTING OF A PORTLVIII. PICTURELIX. PICTURE§LX. PLAN OF THE STREET OF THE MERCURIESLXI. STREET OF THE MERCURIESVol. I.PageVol. II.Pagell(j—118-\mReferred to in Vol. I. page 107, as No. XXIV.t The gladiatorial ticket mentioned in the reference to this plate in Vol. I. page 92, willbe found as a vignette at the end of Chapter XIII.X Numbered LII. in error.§ The number was accidentally omitted in the plate.LIST OF PLATES.Vol. I.Plate Page-^LXII, ATRIUM OF THE HOUSE OF CERES . . 181LXIII. PLAN AND ELEVATION OF THE HOUSE OF THEDIOSCURI .LXIV. PERISTYLE OF THE HOUSE OF THE DIOSCURILXV. VIEW OF THE COURT OF THE PISCINALXVI. JUPITERLXVII. PERSEUS AND ANDROMEDALXVIII. HYGEIA .LXIX. ACHILLES IN SCYROSlxx. WALL OF TABLINUM, IN THE HOUSE OF THEDIOSCURILxxi VICTORYLxxii PENELOPE .Lxxii INFANT ACHILLES BATHED IN THE STYXLXXIV. SATURN .LXXV. COMIC SCENELxvi. COMIC SCENE . . . .LXXVII. Phaedra AND HIPPOLYTUSLXXVIII. BACCHUS AND FAUNLXXIX. WALL AND DOOR OF CORINTHIAN PERISTYLELXXX. DRINKING SCENELxxxi WAGGON AND HORSES, IN THE LUPANARELXXXII. MARS AND VENUSLXXXIII. DREAM OF RHEALXXXIV. STAIRS FOR MOUNTING THE WALLSLXXXV. GATE OF ISISt LXXXVI. PAVEMENTS . 40LXXXVII. PAVEMENTS . . . .LXXXVIII. VIEW OF THE SITE OF POMPEIIVol. II.Page20-143-26.38-150-42-46-23-154 ■11-158-ICl -164 .faint. -The drawing for this subject was unfortunately lost on its way to the engraver,t Referred to in Vol. I. page 40, as No. LXXVIII.*»* These discrepancies between the letter-press and the plates escaped correction inconsequenceof the Editor not having had, in every instance, an opportunity of comparingthe illustration with the text, the drawings having been in the hands of a varietyof engravers while the work was at press.LIST OF VIGNETTES.VOL. I.No. 1,2,3.4,5,6,7.10,11.12,13,14,15,16.17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27*28,29,SO,VOL. ILPage ixxivTHE GETTY CasterCONTENTSVOL. I.Preface.Chap. I. General Plan Page 1II. Chalcidicum . . . . 13III. Forum . . . .27IV. Pantheon, or College of the Augustales . 46V. Temple of Fortune . 69VI. There . . 83VII. Women's Baths . . .131VIII. House of the Tragic Poet . . 142IX. Fullonica . . . .179X. House of the Fountain . . . 192byPREFACE.The favourable manner in which theformer part of this work was received by thePublic has been sufficiently demonstrated bythe extensive circulation and rapid sale oftwo editions, which seem to have found theirVOL. I. B11 PREFACE.way, not only to every part of Great Britain,but even to the Continent, where the collectionof Pompeiana has been noticed with approbationin many of the literary journals.That portion contained an account of almostevery thing worthy of notice, which had beenlaid open by the excavations till the periodof its publication; and the present is intended,not only to supply the omissions ofthe former work, but to describe those morerecent discoveries which are by no meansinferior in interest or singularity.Among; these, the excavation of the dial-circum,which took place soon after thepublication of the former work, laid openthe only example of that species of edificewhich has existed in modern times. Notlong afterwards, the great area of the Pantheonwas discovered, and the whole circuitof the Forum was perfectly cleared.PREFACE. IllThe excavations being continued, a widestreet occurred, beginning at the arch adjoiningthe back wall of the Temple of Jupiterin the Forum, and ending in a secondtriumphal arch, near which were found thebronze fragments of the equestrian statueit had once supported. On the right wasdiscovered a temple of Fortune, doubly interestingbecause founded by the illustriousfamily of the Tullii, and, about thecentre of the left side of the same street,an entrance was opened into an areawhich proved to belong to the publicbaths or Thermae of the city. Some ofthe apartments of this edifice yet remainedcovered by stone arches, which, having resistedthe pressure of the cinders and accumulatedearth, retained, in all their originalfreshness of colour, those beautifulornaments and fretted ceilings, of which sofew have resisted the lapse of eighteen centuries.B 2IV PREFACE.The discovery of the baths is perhapsof greater consequence than may at firstappear, for, notwithstanding the enormousruins of the Roman Thermae, their componentparts seem to have been little understood,and even variously named by the authorswho have undertaken their elucidation.At Pompeii, on the contrary, the absence ofXystus, Theatre, Palaestra, and an infinitenumber of other intricate divisions Whichrender the Thermae of the great Capital socomplicated and unintelligible, leaves a satisfactoryand defined idea of the use andmeaning of every other portion of the fabric.Previously to the discovery of the baths,the whole of a narrow alley behind the Chalkhad been cleared and a passageopened to the street running between theForum and the Thermae. From that alleya still smaller avenue ran between the Chalkand the building which is knownPREFACE.on the spot by the name of the Pantheon ;thus adding to the former map of Pompeiian entire square or island of public edificesand habitations, and forming, in itself, nomean acquisition to the antiquary. Thisexcavation was also remarkable for the discoveryof an ancient well of considerabledepth, and still retaining fifteen feet ofwater, which, from its situation, might possiblyhave been there before the destructionof the city.These various objects, with the house,named that of the Tragic Poet, situated oppositeto the northern side of the Thermae,cover a plot of ground advancing nearer tothe centre of Pompeii than any which hadformerly been cleared, and, in consequenceof a greater depth of superincumbent soil,they have, generally, been found in a betterstate of preservation. They form, altogether,the connexion of two portions of theVI PREFACE.plan of the city, which were scarcely unitedby the unfinished excavation of the Forumat the period of the former publication.The house of the Tragic Poet has exhibitedsuperior specimens of painting, while thesubject of ancient art itself is exciting moreof the public attention, and meeting withmerited though tardy admiration, throughthe zeal and industry of M. Ternate, who isengraving at Berlin a superb collection ofthe pictures of Herculaneum and Pompeiiunder the auspices of the King of Prussia.With such an accession of new materials,the Author of the present work has thoughtit advisable to lay them before the publicwithout delay, aware that time will incalculablydiminish the freshness of thoseobjects, which, when stripped of their externalcoats by the rains of winter or theburning suns of summer, lose by far thegreater portion of their interest and identity.PREFACE. VllAnother motive for the immediate publicationof whatever can be collected, is thegreat and increasing difficulty of obtainingpermission to draw and measure the newly-discoveredantiquities, by which a foreigneris reduced to snatch from eternal obliviononly such morsels as a favourable momentmay enable him to delineate. An astonishingnumber of interesting objects is annuallyand hourly destroyed by the actionof the weather upon substances and surfaceswhich have been once subjected to theoperation of heat and moisture ; and thisunavoidable decay is the more to be lamented,as strangers are seldom allowed todraw till the decomposition both of colourand substance has taken place to a great extent;while, even if they were delineated bya native artist, there are no engravers on thespot of sufficient skill to multiply the copies,nor a public sufficiently educated to encouragethe sale of them.Vlll PREFACE.An instance of the delay which takesplace in the native publications may be observedin the description of the Temple ofIsis, which, though discovered at so early aperiod, is only at this moment in the progressof illustration by the care of the CavaliereCarelli, whose elaborate account ofthat interesting relic, with drawings madeat the time of the excavation, is only nowin preparation ; while the monument itselfhas already lost the last vestiges ofthe beauty and freshness in which it firstappeared.It has often been noticed, during thewinter months, that the stucco which hadbeen observed perfect, during a first visit toany newly-discovered edifice, had entirelydisappeared on a second examination; sothat, no traces being left, many of the prettiestfancies of antiquity are irrecoverablylost; while the order continues to preventPREFACE. IXstrangers from drawing till three or fouryears have expired, and the objects becomedefaced. At the present moment, in theyear 1826, only those parts of Pompeii canbe drawn and measured with the consent ofthose immediately concerned, which havebeen discovered prior to the year 1823, orwhich, in other words, after the publicationof the former portion of this work, have littleor no novelty to recommend them. A foreignantiquary can only hope for bettertimes and a more liberal policy with regardto Pompeii ; at present, while a sort of patentexists, by which a very eminent architect andscene-painter possesses the exclusive privilegeof publishing antiquities, to which itdoes not appear that he has ever particularlyturned his attention, a stranger meets withalmost insurmountable difficulties, and nothingis known to the literary world of themost important discoveries. For a time,the gentlemanly feeling of those who wereX PREFACE.employed in the execution of this seemingmonopoly of antiquarian research, inducedthem to overlook some occasional violationsof the rigid order for exclusion from thelatest discoveries ; but, on a recent changein the department, the acting Superintendenthaving done the present work the honourto consider it as the principal means of conveyingto the public a faithful account ofthe latest discoveries of Pompeii, has madethe interdiction of it the subject of a particularinjunction; a circumstance very creditableto the work, but at the same timerendering its execution more difficult*.Not believing it possible that any order could emanate frompersons in high authority, which proclaimed a jealous or vindictivespirit, the writer mentioned the circumstance to theCavaliere Carelli, secretary of the Royal Academy. The secretary,with the members, immediately signed a petition statingthat, the Author being a member of the Academy, and one who, onall occasions, opened his portfolios and ]MSS. for the use of thosewho wanted information on subjects connected with Grecianart, they requested that some return might be made by permissionbeing granted him to visit the excavations at his pleasure, andthat, being infirm, he should be allowed to ride at Pompeii. ThisPREFACE. XIIn the course of the year 1825 three newworks appeared on Pompeii, of which that ofMr. Goldicutt, of London, seems to possess aconsiderable degree of splendour. One, undertakenby Captain de Gore, in folio, underthe patronage of the Emperor of Austria, iswritten in German, and was received withapprobation by his learned countrymen. Theother is by Signor Carlo Bonucci, the Neapolitanarchitect, now, in 1827, director ofthe new excavations at Herculaneum, andnephew of Signor Bonucci, formerly the expedition,passing through the hands of the Marchese Ruff, secretaryof state, was immediately and most graciously acceded to byhis Majesty, and the necessary orders were issued.It seemed, indeed, highly improbable that any thing ungenerousin principle could have been intended by the government,and the learned Cavaliere Arditi, who is at the head of the antiquariandepartment, had often interested himself in behalf ofthe Author so far as to have had his authority disputed by theunderling. It is right to show where the blame really attaches,and that low and ungenerous minds should be deprived of thepower of palming their own littleness upon the world as theedicts of their betters.Xll PREFACE.excellent and indefatigable director of the excavationsat Pompeii. This volume, whichhas been twice printed, is intended as apocket companion and guide to those whovisit the spot, and is both convenient as tosize, and replete with every informationwhich might be expected from the enthusiasm,talents, and opportunities of an authorwhose whole occupation is the study of Pompeii,where he became director in 1828. Itis to him that we are indebted for the communicationof what appears to be the justinterpretation of all those inscriptions atPompeii which have an accusative termination,and which have hitherto so much puzzledthe antiquary.The letters AED, which had been supposedto refer to the house, seem really tosignify the senile whose favour was invokedby the owner of the shop : an easy and satis-preface.Nulfactory interpretation, which leaves no furtherdoubt on the subject. As an examplethat of Paratus may be given :Pansam. Md. Paratus. rog.Paratus invokes Pansa the senile.The editors of the Museoo Borbonico havealso announced their intention of publishingan account of the recent discoveries at Pompeii,and will, doubtless, communicate manyparticulars which their official situation enablesthem only to collect. To these may beadded the magnificent map of M. Bent,on so large a scale that the details of everyhouse are represented, but not at present,February, 1827, containing the latest excavations.It may not be quite uninteresting to noticethe progress of the excavations, which,notwithstanding all that has been said on thesubject to the contrary, seem to have beenXIV PREFACE.as well conducted, and as steadily pursued,as times and circumstances have permitted.Since the return of the legitimate sovereign,more than half of the Forum has been cleared,the Senaculum or Temple of Jupiter, theChalcidicum, the Temple of Mercury, thePantheon, the Temple of Venus, that of Fortune,the Thermae, and innumerable privatehouses have been disinterred; and, thoughit be true that more labourers might havebeen employed, it is not less so that thework ought not to proceed, till the objectsalready explored are roofed and fortifiedagainst the weather. At present, considerableexpense attends the excavation, on accountof the greater depth of soil whichoccurs toward the centre of the city. Thepreservation of the vaults of the Thermaehas been a work of no trifling importance ;and both time and skill are necessary in theapplication of the means best calculated tohand down to posterity whatever can bePREFACE. XVsaved of these crumbling relics of antiquity.The merit of Signor Bonucci the elder hasbeen conspicuous on these occasions, and itis to be hoped that his successor may continuethe system. The director is assistedby an intendant, who is on the spot, and bythree overseers, who not only watch theworkmen, but sometimes show objects ofparticular interest to travellers. In additionto these, is a number of inferior custodeor guardians, whose chief duties consist inaccompanying visitors, or taking care ofsuch ruins as, being considered of more importance,are shut up from the vulgar bywayof protection from wanton injury, orthe inscription of names by which manybeautiful relics have suffered. It is usualfor travellers to bestow a trifle upon thecustode. Till human nature can be changed,this is the best way of rewarding civility,for the keepers of museums and cabinetswho are not permitted to take money, haveXVI PREFACE.been always observed to hurry the strangerthrough their respective departments, insteadof gratifying his curiosity.It has been the custom to honour thearrival of illustrious personages by excavatingin their presence some small portionof Pompeii; an enviable method ofshowing respect exclusively possessed bythe court of Naples. For these occasions,an order is given that the earth should beleft undisturbed to the depth of a foot ormore, in several of the rooms of a newly-discoveredhouse, and, on the day appointed,these are cleared out for the amusement ofthe guests. It is seldom a fruitless search,as the overseers are previously aware thatsome curiosities exist, though they know notprecisely what they may be. iVn exampleof the reports made by the overseers onsome of these occasions may suffice to givea general idea of the objects which arePREFACE. XVllusually brought to light in the excavationsof Pompeii.REPORT.*' On the fourth of November, 1823, wasfound, at the height of fourteen palms fromthe pavement, and in the street running fromthe Temple of Fortune toward the house ofPansa, the head of a Roman Emperor inbronze, not unlike Caligula. It was three-fourthsof a palm high. Soon after, a leg ofthe same was found, one palm three-fourthslong. On November 5th, was found a skeleton,with sixty-five coins of small silver, andtwo large medals in bronze. On November8th, was found the body of the Emperor'sequestrian statue. The right hand held thereins, and the left was in an attitude of command.On November 9th, the legs of thehorse were found, and some portions of thebody. The whole was about six palms one-fourthhigh. On the 10th of November, inVOL. I. cXVlll PREFACE.the third and fourth houses on the right ofthis street, were found several articles in thepresence of the English minister. Thesewere: a vase with a handle; an oil vesselwith a handle and cover; six coins of middlesize, and some ornaments of a door, allof bronze; ten lamps of terra cotta, one of acircular form, with an eagle in relievo; fivecups, two earthen pots, into which money-wasslipped through a hole, and preservedtill wanted ; and a number of bronze sockets,or umbilici, on which doors had turned. OnNovember 12th, was found, in the presence ofGeneral Baron Front, a statue four incheshigh, plated with silver; another silver statueof Fortune with the horn of abundance ;six coins, two of a large, and four of middlesize; a pater, the handles of which werecovered with silver ; the two hinges or socketsof a door ; a basin ; a lamp, with a handleand cover, for one light; other hinges of adoor ; three buckles for harness ; a glassPREFACE. Xixbottle with a handle ; a fluted tumbler ;eight circular vases of glass ; a little bottle,or lachrymatory, half melted; a Faun's headof marble; a cylindric piece of granite, andother objects."This may suffice as a specimen of theyet incalculable riches of Pompeii. Not aday passes without the discovery of somethingof greater or less importance; whilethe previous acquisition of at least twentygreat statues of marble, and four of bronze,not to mention a countless multitude ofsmaller figures and precious objects, promisesan ample harvest in future. It iscertainly surprising that so few skeletonshave yet been found in Pompeii; but, byestimating the number, l60, already discoveredat about an eighth of the whole,CD ^according to the proportion which the cityalready laid open bears to the area enclosedby the walls and supposed suburbs, we shallc 2XX PREFACE.find that nearly one thousand three hundredof the unfortunate inhabitants were destroyedby the fatal eruption ; a computation by nomeans insignificant to the population of acity scarcely two miles in circuit, and ofwhich so considerable a portion was occupiedby public buildings.It may be necessary to say a few wordson the subject of the present deviation fromthe order observed in the former part of thiswork, which was divided into dissertationstreating distinctly of temples, theatres, andprivate houses. As it is proposed to follow,if possible, the traces of the excavators, itwill be evident that every succeeding portionof the work must have had the sameendless distribution and division; and, inshort, that an essay on the Temples of Pompeiicould never have been completed tillthe entire city was disinterred ; and the sameobservation applies equally to every otherPREFACE. XXIspecies of building. If, therefore, any classificationof the edifices be desirable, thetask must unavoidably be left to some futureauthor who may be so fortunate as to havethe whole of the materials in his possession.The former work was considered as a whole,and, indeed, from the political convulsionswhich took place at the moment of collectingthe materials for it, it seemed probablethat some time might elapse before manyfresh documents could be produced. Atpresent the case is different ; whatever ispublished can only be regarded as a re-positor}^ of details which would otherwisehave perished long before the entire city ofPompeii could be explored. The excavations,though proceeding slowly, have laidopen other temples and other dwellings, withpublic edifices of a distinct character, sothat, perhaps, no order could be chosenbetter calculated to convej?^ an exact idea ofthe relative situations of the various objectsXXll PREFACE.than that which their topographical positionsuggests.Should it be thought that this volumecontains, at its commencement, an accountof objects either in some degree previouslyknown, or less interesting than might havebeen expected from the variety of new matterafforded by the excavations, it may beobserved, that it was necessary to insert themfor the purpose of uniting the former withthe present publication, which would havebeen defective while a hiatus was suffered toexist in a region so important as the Forum.In the year 1828, the restrictions with regardto drawing seem to have been removedwith respect to the Baths, the house of theTragic Poet, and some other discoveries ofthree or four years' standing, but they remainin force with regard to the excavationsof more recent date. In the mean time muchPREFACE. XXlllhas been removed, and much has perished ; sothat these ruins no longer retain the aspectwhich they originally presented. The superintendenceof the excavations has, however,been conferred on a more worthy person,and antiquaries may hope for the abolitionof exclusion. Excepting the outlines of afew of the paintings which have been publishedin the Museoo Borbonico, it may beobserved that nearly the whole of the objectsdetailed in this work might have passedaway without representation or record, hadnot the Author been on the spot, and thusbeen enabled to avail himself of every favourablemoment for acquiring the necessarymaterials for this work, which, shouldit be found to be less perfect than the formerportion, has nevertheless been attended withmore than tenfold difficulty in the execution.The views and pictures have been uniformlymade by the Author, as before, withXXIVPREFACE.the prism of Dr. Wollaston, and the drawingshave been compared with such copiesof the originals as have been published inthe Museoo Borbonico at Naples.[riP,.F. CaiaEex Sccif ■a Plan PI. 11-POMPEIANA.CHAPTER 1.GENERAL PLAN.The plan of the recent excavations inthe vicinity of the Forum is given for thepurpose of adding to the map of the city,published in the year 1821, a portion whichis requisite for the better connexion of thetwo original excavations of the theatres and2 POMPEIANA.the Gate of Naples. It will be observed,that the forms of the Chalcidicum, the Templeof ]mercury, and the adjoining edificewere known in the year 1819, when the generalplan given in the second edition of thePompeiana was published; but that a greatdeficiency then existed between the Chalkand the house of Pansa, where theexcavations had not been extensive. Sincethat period, the whole of the great streetconnecting the Forum with the theatres hasbeen cleared, and, as it was necessary toapply to it some name by which it might berecognized, it has received, among the custode,the name of Strada dei Mercanti. Itwould appear, by certain impediments, orstepping-stones, as well as two steps placedin this street toward the Forum, that carriageswere denied access, on this side, tothat place of public resort. The same difficultiesexist in the street issuing from thesouth end of the Forum, and in that on theWest; and, though the blocks which opposethe passage have been considered only asstepping-stones to be used in the rainy season,it seems clear, from their magnitude,POMPEIANA.that they also served to prohibit the passageof wheeled carriages. At the lower end ofthis street, and at the angle nearest the greattheatre, is a house, excavated in the presenceof the Emperor of Austria, on the portal ofwhich was visible the name of fuscus. Itcontains, at the entrance, a boar and houndsin mosaic, and within, among other rooms,two beautiful cabinets or boudoirs, openinginto the atrium, remarkable for the specimensthey after of the different styles ofpainting, one being decorated with compartmentshighly coloured with red and yellow,and the other with beautiful light tracery ona white ground. Both of these are representedin Plates III. and IV. At a spot inthis street, on the side opposite to the Chalkmay be observed three steps in thefootpath, at the bottom of which, close tothe wall of a house, a marble cone, endingin a sharp point, rises from the pavementto the height of about twelve inches. Thehouse or pier adjoining is built with largeand well-united blocks of stone, on one ofwhich are the evident vestiges of a nowalmost illegible Oscan inscription in two4 POMP EI AN A.lines, plastered and painted over with a sacrificeand an altar of Victory. As it seemsnot improbable that the ancient languages ofItaly will hereafter be better understood thanat present, it may be useful to give the lettersas they appear, or did appear, having beencarefully copied at many different periods.Oi n \(>l MN 1814,or l'f:inV>l I^ j \/ 1825.This pier exhibits the marks of having beenworn by frequent attrition at the height ofabout three feet from the pavement, but howused, or for what purpose the cone was intended,is yet an enigma. Mr. Wood, thewell-known editor of the last volume of theAntiquities of athens, having been requestedto examine the spot, discovered other instancesin the neighbourhood, of stones evidentlyworn in the same manner, which hewas disposed to attribute to the chaining ofslaves, or perhaps criminals, to the wall.The cone might have been the only point\"bv T.Scaixarett from a Sketchlrjr S:r"W^ GellJBngra-vcd try J-Hcns^ilIP ® m: F ■ IS ic icHubert Jeivm-ngs & William. Giiplm. 62. O^apside.POMPEIANA.on which the foot could rest, and may havebeen used to add to the cruelty of the punishment.The Cone, part of the Pier, and the Steps.Three houses, on the same side of the street,have received the names of the Beatrice,the Cinghiale, and the Grazie, from thesubjects found represented within their precincts.There is also a handsome and perfectdoorway of stone, a rare occurrence inPompeii, with many architectural mouldingswell suited to the purpose, in the same street,which probably belonged to some buildingof consequence. This door is represented,with the window above it, in Plate VII.Right of the entrance, is a monkey playingthe double pipes painted on the wall as asort of guardian to the place. The steppingstonesare here repeated in the pavement,and are shown in the View. Thisstreet is about twenty-eight feet wide, and6 POMPEIANA.the foot-pavements, generally, extend to thebreadth of six feet on each side, formed insome places of a species of hard plaster, ornamented,at intervals, with pieces of marble.The doors of several shops were found inthis street to have left perfect impressionson the hard volcanic deposition, by whichit is evident that the planks were united bylaying the edge of one over the next in succession,as they appear in a modern boat.A small alley, perhaps a vicus, ran to thehouses once known as the excavation of theRegina Carolina, now, from political motives,called the house of Adonis by the Directors,where is the beautiful picture of Perseusand Andromeda, formerly engraved.In an arched cellar, near this last-namedexcavation, were found, in the year 1826,the skeletons of two or more persons whohad taken refuge during the fatal catastropheof Pompeii, carrying with them fourgold rings, four silver spoons, a pair of earrings,and many coins both of gold and silver.The figures of the Twelve Gods, alsopublished, have given the modern name ofVicolo de' Dodici Dei to this passage. In aNPOMPEIANA. 7neighbouring house, once supposed by thecustocli to have been that of an apothecary,was a beautiful painting of Venus supporting;the wounded Adonis. His dogs lie athis feet, and a Cupid, with " purple pinions,'^armed with two spears, is bewailing the unfortunatehunter, in an attitude worthy ofCorrect-io himself.OctIn the same house are several tasteful decorations,and, among others, marine horsesoccupied in a variety of gambols. A boar-hunt,executed with much spirit, seems tohave given to the house the name by whichit is at present known, Casa del Cinghiale.The Plate No. V. is taken from the wallof an apartment in this quarter, and is givenprincipally on account of the practicabilityof its application to modern decoration. Itmight make a beautiful library, with a mirrorin the centre, vases arranged on the top,and maps to be drawn down from the frieze :books might occupy the space under the redcurtains, and archives, &c. the base.Behind the Chalcidicum runs a narrowstreet, beginning at a fountain in the Stradade' Mercanti. The high wall of the Crypto8 POMPEIANA.Porticos formed one side, and shops of athermopylae, a soap-boiler, and others, suchas Tertius, Syrticus and their patrons,named as usual in the accusative, c. suet-timCertum ET M. Lepidus Sabines,formed the other. The name of Follies, ofa great and consular family is found as proprietoror protector of a house in the vicinity.This alley, or vicus, contains little of importance,but this may be the place best suited tothe remarks it may suggest. The east side ofthe Chalcidicum presents a lofty wall ornamented,at intervals, with a species of Corinthianpilasters. On this may be observedthe inscription lolling ^d.; &c. but it isdifficult to imagine why the protection ofany castile could be requisite for a publicbuilding;.In a house on the right are some prettypanels, with fishes, birds, and sphinxes onblue, red, and black grounds. A very smallpassage runs to the left, between the Chalkand the Temple called that of Mercury,and leads to a house which occupiesthe space behind that Temple and the edificeusually termed the Curia. This house hasPOMPEIANA. 9another great entrance from a passage runningto the southern entry of the Pantheon,and having; a communication with the Curia,and, being of more consequence than any inthe vicinity, it may perhaps be considered asthe residence of the Chief of the College ofAugustales, who had the care of the buildingnow called the Pantheon, or, at least, asthe habitation of a public officer. At theentrance next the Pantheon is an anchorbetween two dolphins in mosaic, and on theright, on entering the Atrium, is, or was, thepicture Plate VI., which, however the coloursmay be changed to red bj^ time or heat,must be considered as an agreeable composition.The Atrium has two alae, in one ofwhich is an altar, and after passing theTablinum, where is a picture of Venus disarmingthe God of War, with Cupid carryingoff his sword and shield, we find a magnificentperistyle of seven columns by six,terminated by a wall, in which is an openingto the alley of the Chalcidicum. In the Hysare two cisterns or baths, and, atan angle, is a marble pedestal about fifteenVOL. I. D10 POMPEIANA.inches square and two feet in height, withtwo iron cramps for fastening the feet of thestatue or vase, and this inscription :Philippe. MELISSA. e7favstJlANVARlTS. PIRICATIRationis• IVCVNDVS. HOLCONIANTEROTISAVCTVS. HELVINTMPHODOTIjMinistry. AVG.IVSSVM. Lucretia Mania. Nt I. AIBIENISTA?. iT. V. IDL. EVMACHI. FVSCI. N. Herein. VERI. D. V.V. A. S.P.P.CN. Dominion. Camilla. ArrantCOS.From a comparison of the Fasti Consulatewith the list of Bishop Statius, it seems probablethat this inscription may be datedabout 32 years after Christ. Between thishouse and the Temple of Mercury is anarched kiln, said to have been used formaking lime. Directly opposite this gateof the Pantheon is the well, about 116 feetPOMPEIANA. 11deep, before mentioned, the water of whichis singularly cold and very slightly brackish.Behind this is a space supposed to be forsoap-boiling, all of which may, however,have appertained, with the lime, to someprocess of whitening or cleansing the garmentsof those who attended the supposedPantheon, or College of the Augustales.Pursuing' the street uniting that of theMercanti with that north of the Pantheon,to which the name of Frutti Secchi, or driedfruits, has now been given, nothing worthyof remark occurs except the house inscribedLolling .^D. on the left. In this is an obscenepicture, and in what appears to be anAtrium, paved with mosaic in the forms ofducks and fishes, an altar, orw^hat may haveserved for a kitchen. At the junction of thetwo streets, on a house at the angle inscribedM. HOLCONIVM and Priscus FELICEM.7ED.O.V.F., is a species of triple Phallus in terracotta of singular invention. Near this, inahouse, is the picture of a graceful youngBacchus expressing the juice of the grapeinto a vase placed on a column. A rand2POMPEIANA.pant Tiger or Lynx is expecting the liquor.On a pier is writtenTREBIVM. ^D. OVF.CVM. Mari. ROG.To return to the Street of the Merchants,and quitting the description of the generalplan, which will be resumed as often as isnecessary, the Chalcidicum deserves a particulardescription.POMPEIANA.CHAPTER II.CHALCIDICUM.Nearly opposite to the twelve Godsis a fountain with steps, which, by twoflights, lead to the interior of the ChalcisThe wall of the staircase is paintedin black panels, separated by red pilasters,which have produced a good effect, and14 POMPEIANA.which are represented in Plate VIII. Overthis entrance was a lintel, or architrave, ofmarble, with the inscription —EVMACHIA- L- F- Sacerdos PVBL- Nomine SVO. ETM. NVMISTRI. FRONTONIS. FILL CHALCIDICVM. Crystal.Porticos, Concordia. AVGVSTAE. Pietatis. SVA. Pecunia.FECIT. EADE3IQVE. DEDICAVIT.This inscription, or a great part of it, seemsto have been repeated on certain large blocksof marble, which have formed part of thearchitectural decoration of the Forum. Ithas been thought, in the present instance,to justify the application of the term Chalcisto the edifice in question, particularlyas the Crypto-porticos, or perhaps the Cryptand the Portico, remain to verify the supposition;and it seems, moreover, one of themost difficult problems of antiquity to discoverwhat was the meaning; of the word.Signor Becchi, a Florentine architect inthe Neapolitan service, has published a dissertationon the subject, and seems to havebeen of opinion that the area, surroundedby its open and closed porticos, was quitedistinct from the Chalcidicum, which hewould place in front, so as to form a sort of(k;$1"n^sHdH^^poPOMPEIANA. 15deep porch toward the Forum. By consultingthe plan, it may be observed thatthis porch, formed by sixteen pilasters, andpaved with white marble, is of more consequencethan the general line of portico surroundingthe Forum, being about 126 feet by39', and the fragments of the repeated inscriptionbefore mentioned lying near, but by nomeans opposite to the spot, seem, in somedegree, to confirm the hypothesis of SignerBecchi, which, in the absence of a better,has met with general support. The remainsof a marble pavement, and the evident tracesof iron or brass gates which closed the southend of this portico, show that it was appropriatedto some particular purpose. Moreover,at the south angle of the supposedcolonnade is a new pillar of marble, placedquite close to one of the old stone columnsof the Forum. It is so close to the oldcolumn that it could not be finished on thatside, proving that the old pillar was intendedto have been taken away, and that a newcolonnade was beginning to be erected.The plan is sufficiently clear to enable thereader to form his own judgment. Nothing,POMPEIANA.however, seems more difficult than to drawany precise conclusion from the hints whichthe ancients have left us of the use of aChalcidicum. Vitruvius says that, if possible,the Chalcidica should be placed atthe extremities of the Basilica. This wouldseem to imply a portico. He also says thatthe Chalcidica should have two ranges ofcolumns, the upper being one-fourth lessthan the lower. The pillars of the upperportico, in which it seems merchants transactedbusiness, stood upon a sort of plutusinstead of a balustrade, so that those whowere in the upper gallery were not easilyseen by those below. This would make theChalcidicum a sort of exchange. Ausonius,cited in Wilkins's Vitruvius, makes the Chalkthe same as TIlEPniA, or upperrooms, used as magazines. Moreover, thereseems to have been a sort of earth or plastercalled Chalcidica, used for the preservationof corn ; and, to add to the difficulty of forminga just idea on the subject, we find theword sometimes explained as a capsicum,or court of justice, a mint, baths, coenacu-lum, and a portico, invented at Chalcis inPOMPEIANA. 17Euboea. It is possible the edifice at Pompeiimay have served as a place of resortfor merchants, and might have had a courtof justice in the semicircle or tribunal whichfronts the great entrance from the Forum,where Signor Becchi supposes the statue ofthe Pieta Concordia to have been erectedin a niche. This statue was found near thespot. The head was wanting, and the robewas bordered with a gilded or red stripe,not unlike the Laticlave. It might havebeen the figure of a Roman empress. Thereseems no objection to the supposition thatthe Crypto-porticos might have served foraCoenaculum, having been connected withthe open portico by a door on each side andeleven windows, which could be opened orclosed according to the season, as their marblelintels sufficiently demonstrate. Thereexist also certain pedestals of white marbleon the spot, which seem to have served assupports to slabs or tables of the same material.The staircase on the right of thegrand entrance makes it probable that therewas either an upper colonnade or a terrace18 POMPEIANA.for walking round the Hypiie thrum, and asecond seems to have ascended from theporch or Chalcidicum to the roof of theCrypto-porticos. The folding-doors at thegreat entrance turned upon sockets or umbiliciof brass, and were secured by twobolts which were shot into holes jet visiblein the centre of the marble threshold, twelvefeet six inches wide. The court seems tohave been paved with white marble, of whichmaterial were also the steps and the forty-eightCorinthian columns of the peristyle,which is 157 feet in length and 13 feet 6inches in breadth ; and here also were foundcertain cisterns, evidently used for washing,which serve again to confuse any preconceivedideas of the uses of the building, particularlywhen combined with the dedicationof the statue of Eumachia by the Ful-lines,who must have been either the washersor dyers of Pompeii.The Hypae thrum, or court, was about 120feet long, by less than half that breadth.The columns were ranged on each side tothe number of eighteen. The two ends hadPOMPEIANA. 19only eight each. There was evidently a projectionfrom the portico in front of the tribune.The whole edifice, with the porchin the Forum, would be included in a qua-grandeof about 126 feet 8 inches in breadth,and double that length ; scarcely any thingbeing rectangular at Pompeii, a defect generallyprevailing throughout Italy at thepresent day. The porticos are about fifteenfeet seven inches wide, but almost all thecolumns had been excavated and removedby the ancients. Every part seems to havebeen well finished, and covered with thinplates of marble where such a decorationwas requisite ; but the earth appears to havebeen displaced and the edifice ransackedfor the purpose of carrying off these marblesin ancient times. It must have beenrepairing at the time of the eruption, as apiece of marble was found on the spot witha line drawn in charcoal to guide the chiselof the stone-cutter. The walls of the cryptare painted in large panels, alternately redand yellow, having in the centre of eachsome little figure or landscape. One, which^0 POMPEIANA.is now, or once existed, in the northern division,has been selected as the head-pieceor vignette to the present chapter, as presentinga pretty and picturesque group ofbuildings, and serving to give an idea of thebeautiful effects which must have been frequentlyproduced by the various combinationsof shrines, columns, and ornamentalpediments in the cities of Greece and Italy.Below these panels are smaller divisions,in which, on a black ground, are paintedflowers, not unlike the lily in form, but generallyof a red colour. It is not impossiblethat some sorts of flowers, and particularlybulbous roots, may have been lost in Italy,as we rarely find that invention has beensubstituted for reality in a department ofnature which affords such vast and pleasingvariety. Some are of opinion that the redflowers in question resemble the Guernseylily. They might be said to be more likethe Iris in form. There is no Crypt on theside near the Forum, and that on the oppositeend is somewhat narrower than those ofthe flanks. In the centre of this innermostPOMPEIANA. 21Crypt, which is there fifteen feet eight incheswide, exactly behind the semicircular tribunal,and close to the staircase before mentionedas ascending from the Via dei Mercanti,is a recess painted in green and redpanels, in the centre of which is the statueof Eumachia, the public priestess, and thefoundress of the Chalcidicum, the Crypt,and the Portico, not ungracefully executedin white marble. She is represented aboutfive feet four inches in height, and standson a pedestal about three feet from thepavement, on which is inscribed —EVMACHIAE • L • FSacer • PurlFVLLONES.Plate IX. gives a representation of the recessand the statue as they were first discoveredin the year 1820. The figure hasbeen carefully preserved by a modern roof,and still remains in a case on the spot. Thedoor which is seen painted on the wall inthis plate seems to have been intended tocorrespond with the door of the staircase22 POMPEIANA.opening to the Via del Mercanti. It isworthy of remark, because no real doorsremain. It is six feet wide, and ten and ahalf high, and is separated into three folds,with eight lines of division painted betweeneach. A ring; in the centre served to closeit. Doors seem to have been called Bivalves,when only formed of two folds, butbecame Valvatse, Volubiles, and Versatileswhen the number of folds increased greatly,which must have been the case when thewide openings of the Tablinum were to beclosed. The learned Cavaliere Carelli, inthe account of the Temple of Isis, purposesgiving an account of these varieties.Little more can be added to this very imperfectaccount of an edifice of a descriptionso equivocal. It is much to be doubtedwhether the seventeen pilasters, each aboutthree feet square, have any relation to theportico commonly called the Chalcidicum;and, were it not for the fine marble pavement,their defective construction wouldrather lead us to suppose them the onlyremains of a range of low arches on piersPOMPEIANA. 23which might have surrounded the Forum ofPompeii previously to the first earthquake,and which had been generally replaced byhandsome Doric colonnades before the finaldestruction of the city. The absence of theeighteenth pier, and the substitution of acolumn, one side of which is left rough, atthe junction of the street with the Forum,and which was absolutely necessary to thesupposed Chalcidicum, render it highly probablethat the piers rather belonged to an oldbuilding on the point of being removed, thanto a newly-constructed edifice. On the externalw all of the Crypt, in the Via deiMercanti, is a notice of a show of gladiators,such as seems to have been usually affixed tothe walls of public buildings on these occasions.A. SVETTII. CERIIiEDILIS. FAMILIA. Gladiatorial. PVGNABITPompeii. PR. K. JVNIAS. Vexation. ET. VELAERVNT.Which may bear this interpretation : " Thetroop of gladiators of Aulus Suetonius Cerius,24 POMPEIANA.the senile, will fight in Pompeii on the lastday of May. There will be a vexation, orchase of wild beasts, and shades to keep offthe heat of the sun will be extended overthe spectators." It seems that those whohad been exiles frequently gave such gamesfor the amusement of the populace.On the external wall of the Crypt is alsothe inscription —Sabines. ET. RVFVM. JE. D. R. PValentineCVM. DescentsSvo. ROG.It may seem extraordinary that these settles,so worthy of the republic, should protect aperson like this Valentine, who wrote di-scenes,instead of disceiitibus, at his owndoor.Perhaps the following inscription on thesame wall, or in the neighbourhood, may beinteresting, as tending to prove the opulenceof the city :C. CVSPIVM. PANSAM. JED.Artifices. A^NIVERSIROG.POMPEIANA. 25All the goldsmiths invoke Caius CassiusPansa, the aedile' On the wall of the Cryptof Eumachia are written at length the wordssiGLA. FAC. Facie., which have been usefulin determining the disputed meaning of thethree initials. The temple adjoining theChalcidicum on the north, with the bassorelievo representing a sacrifice in the centreof the area, in which some have imaginedthe features of Cicero were distinguishable,has, since the publication of the formerPompeiana, been supposed to have beenrather dedicated to Quirinus than Mercury,who seems to have had very little claimto it.The following inscription is copied fromthe work of the learned and indefatigableCavaliere Arditi, the truly respectable patriarchof Neapolitan antiquaries, who hasrestored it. He says it was found on a pedestalnear the entrance of this temple, andadduces it, very rationally, in support ofthe more recent appellation: — "RomulusMartin filius urbem Roman conduit et res:-navis anno 'plus minus quadraginta, issueVOL. I. EPOMPEIANA.Crone duce hostile et rage Caeninensiumintersect spolia optima Joxi Feretrio consecrated,recept usque in decorum numerusQuinine nomine appellate est a Romanist'POMPEIANA.CHAPTER III.On entering the Forum from the greatgate of the Chalcidicum, which opened inwardsand was fastened by two bolts intothe pavement, it will be observed that muchhas been effected since the publication ofthe plan in the year 1818.On the right of the Temple of Jupiter orE 228 POMPEIANA.Senaculum, or, as it has since been called,the ^^rarium, the whole space has beencleared, and a colonnade, consisting of anupper and lower range of elegant pillars ofthe Corinthian order, the bases of seventeenof which yet remain in their places, has beendiscovered. These columns are placed onplinths three inches in height and two feetfive inches square, upon which are circularbases eight inches high. The shafts, whichare in part corded, are about one foot eleveninches in diameter. The diameter of theupper range did not exceed one foot threeinches. The intercolumniation was aboutfive feet six, and, within the portico, wasa pedestal opposite to every pillar. Therestoration in the former Volume of is defective with regard to the tworanges here, and, probably, in other partsof the Forum. From this portico was thegreat entrance into the building commonlycalled the Pantheon, which will be hereafterdescribed, and from the upper portico it isvery probable that a connexion existed withthe gallery of the same building, seeminglyaccessible by no other means. The exitPOMPEIANA. 29from the Forum on this side was under aspecies of Triumphal Arch, exceeding itsfellow in dimensions, probably in order thatits greater distance from the Forum mighthave rendered them apparently equal whenviewed from the centre.The arch offered a passage twelve feeteight inches in breadth, and the piers werenearly of the same magnitude. Within thesehas been a receptacle for water and, possibly,some sort of fountain for renderingit useful. At the opposite extremity of theForum, two habitations have been excavatednear the house discovered by General Championduring the year 1826, but, exceptthe pavements, they appear to have beenanciently stripped of every species of decoration,and therefore have little to recommendthem to notice. M. Bent observesthat the four columns of the house of Championare placed upon the pavement, andthat, consequently, they may be consideredas having been subsequently erected, andoffer no argument in favour of columns inthe Cavsedium.The opposite side of the same street leadsPOMPEIANA.ing to the excavation of the Regina Carolinahas also been examined, but without bringingto light anything of importance. Onexamining in certain lights portions of thepainted wall under the colonnade of the Basilica,many inscriptions may be perceivedfaintly scratched with a sharp point by theidlers of Pompeii. Some of them have beenpublished, but without an acknowledgementto the Author, from whose portfolio theywere furnished. They are stated to be paintedon an outer wall to the east, but it will savetrouble to mention that they are to be foundon the inner or south side of the north wall.They are not remarkable for correctnesseither of style or sentiment, but among theleast exceptionable are the following.Nemo nisi Julius nisi qui amavit moliere.H. Caesar. tertio Germanic. Caesar iter.Amianthus. Epaphra. tertius lucan cum IdystoSecundus Nolan peat. NC. Leviticus.Non est ex albo Judex pate Aegyptio.EPwS. and AAE^JANAPOSPOMPEIANA. 31VIBIVS Secondsis painted in large letters. Again, scratchedwith a point are in another place,C. Pumidius Dipilus lieic fuitAd noiias octobreis. M. Tepid. Q. Caul. Cos.On the north wall also are,Lucrio et Salus hie furentDamas audPhoebusRescue. A. Prism nefariousSummit sibi casta Muthunium.Suavis linaria sitit roo vos et valde sitit.There is also a libel on the reputation of afemale named Cecilia :Cecilia a corpore lucrum fecit.Many others are to be read with difficulty,and without much improvement in moralsor orthography.The view, Plate X., of the lower part ofthe shafts of the columns which formed theperistyle of the Forum is calculated to givean idea of the present state of the ruins, and32 POMPEIANA.of the ornamented pedestals, which, whenthey supported their statues, must have addedso materially to the beauty and interest ofthe spot.These pedestals are decorated with aDoric frieze, and one yet retains its dedicatoryinscription.C. CVSPIO. C. F. PANSAEll. VIR. I. D. Quart. QVINQEX. D. D PEC PVBThey are all of white marble. In front ofthem, other pedestals, of more ancient dateand rude construction, may be observed,which were evidently intended to be replacedby the more elegant models whichwere erecting at the moment of the last fatalcatastrophe. Bonucci conjectures that thesepedestals sustained the statues of the Scauri,Cellini, Holconii, and other worthies ofPompeii.That species of bench or table which isseen in the recess behind the first columnon the right in Plate X. is remarkable forcontaining two measures used as the standards,probably, for grain in the market ofPOMPEIANA. 33Pompeii. The stone is a thick horizontalslab, pierced perpendicularly by two invertedcones truncated at the smaller end. Basketsor sacks were placed beneath, and a flatpiece of wood was held so as to prevent thegrain from running out at the bottom, till,the measure being full, the contents, on theremoval of the wood, fell into the recipient.The smaller may be about half the size ofthe larger. Bonucci mentions a stone, inthe Royal Museum at Naples, which containsmeasures of liquids as well as ofsolids, and with the names of the magistratesto authenticate them. Such publicmeasures were probably common to all thecities of antiquity. Travellers may observeone of these stones in a wall near the northgate of Fond, and another, with three differentmeasures, on the ground near thatof Naples.It may be necessary to observe that thegreat building on the west of the Forumcalled the House of the Dwarfs, and theTemple of Bacchus in the first work onPompeii, seem now to have acquired, POMPEIANA.verbally, the name of Venus and the Collegeof Venerei. Bonucci says an inscriptionwas found on the spot which would decidethe question, but he has not given it in theoriginal Latin. The general meaning is,that " Marcus Holconius Rufus, DuumvirJudge for the first time, and C. IgnatiusPossumus, Duumvir Judge for the secondtime, have bought, according to a decreeof the Decurions, the right to close thewindows, for the sum of three thousandsesterces, and they have also raised theprivate wall of the Incorporated College ofVenerei as his^h as the roof' These windows,it is probable, looked toward theForum.On quitting the Forum, by the openingnear a low door, which is that of a prison,may be observed the figure of a goat uponthe pier of a house where milk was sold ;and, near it, the picture of fighting gladiators,which has been roughly representedin the preceding work, is seen upon the wallof a house which, from its sign, and a swordwhich was found at its excavation, is nowPOMPEIANA. 35commonly called the school of fencing. Underthe goat is writtenM. CASELLIVMiED. DIF. FAC.FIDELIS. . . .The inscription under this is so ill writtenthat it is not without difficulty decipherable.It is like the celebrated inscription inthe Baths of Titus, except that Venus alone,of all the divinities of Pompeii, threatensrevenge to the transgressor. The Romaninscription runs thus:Duodecim Des et Diana et JoveOptimum Maximum habet iratosQuisquis &c.This of Pompeii is *' Abiat Tenere iratam qui hoc laeserit." It is unnecessaryto remark on the Latinity of thisinscription, in which the principal wordis written rather compiling than as itought to be. The protecting iedile is namedMarcellus. The practice of renderingsacred any spot, either by painting or inscription,appears to have been common ;and Perseus says, that two serpents painted36 POMPEIANA.upon a wall were supposed to sanctify thespot, and prevent the wilful accumulationof filth there, much as the cross or a pennyprint of the Madonna is vainly used inmodern Naples for the same purpose. Inthis curious painting the two personagesseem to be Tetraites and Prudent.Prudes. I. Xii. TETRAITES. L. X.This has most ingeniously been translatedin the Museoo Borbonico, and signifies " Prudentinvincible in the eighteenth combat.Tetraites, who fell in the tenth' This senseis obtained by calling the letter I " invictus"and the L "• lapsus." They are combatants,according to this author, calledMirmillones, as may be seen by the fish ontheir helmets. A herald separates the combatants,and gives a wand to the victor.Near this on a pier is —MARCELLVM. ET. CELSINVM. AED.NO Vice Carlo + ACThis street runs to the right, in the directionof the north entry of the Pantheon.To the west it is slightly curved, and, at aPiMaH—H^DroMPi:iANA. 37little distance from the Forum, may be seenan altar, probably consecrated to Jupiter,placed against the wall of a house uponthe raised footpath. It is represented inPlate XL, and is not without interest. Ithas been engraved by Masons, to whosework a copy of the original drawing waspresented by the author, but not acknowledgedin the text. The eagle alone, inthe painted tympanum, seems to indicateJupiter as the presiding deity. The remainsof a basso relievo in stucco are too muchmutilated to be traced with precision.On quitting the Forum, by the triumphalarch on the east side of the temple ofJupiter, the street, now called that of Fortunefrom the temple of the goddess, presentsitself, terminated at the extremitiesby triumphal arches, which, though nowsufficiently lofty, were probably still' moreelevated, as, before the excavation, theirpresent summits were on a level with thesoil of the vineyard. It is possible thestatues on that of the Forum were removedafter the destruction of the city, and probablethat those of the other arch were38 POMPEIANA.thrown down by the earthquake, as the fragmentswere found below.The street of Fortune is one of the mostspacious in Pompeii, being 26 palms wideand nearly 200 feet long. It is flanked byfootpaths on each side ; and, besides its terminationsin triumphal arches, the porticoof the temple of Fortune must have addedgreat dignity to its appearance. The firstpier on the right is decorated by a relievo,in terra cotta, of two men carrying wine,which was probably sold at the house. Atthis angle was an inscription with the nameof Samellius, in which the letters ID in thesecond line have been taken for the wordJudex.M. SAMELLIVMMILIVM. Maim. D. V. IDAurelius. Cives. Bonum. FACPAQVVIVM. D. V. I. DOClose to the pavement on this pier wasa remarkably spirited griffin, on a blackground, which has now disappeared. Thestreet running to the right from this end ofthe Forum has been called, on the spot, theStrada dei Frutti Secchi, from an inscribe39tion showing that dried fruits were sold in it.On the right we find a range of shops, infront of which ran a portico, or vestibule,with piers and columns. On one of thesepiers is the inscription —A. VETTIVM AEDSACCARJ. ROGshowing that even those who carried sackswere considered as a bodj^ or corporation,and stood in need of a patron. Nearlyopposite the entrance to the Thermae, whichoccupies the centre of this street on the lefthand, is a house on the right of more consequencethan the rest. It has received thename of the house of Bacchus, from a largepainting of the god yet existing on a wallopposite to the entry.Canals for the introduction of water arefound in the Atrium, which has been surroundedby a small trough, or parterre ofnatural flowers, the side of which next theeye is painted blue, to represent water onwhich boats are floating. The wall behindthis is painted with pillars, between whichrun balustrades of various forms, and upon40 POMPEIANA.these perch cranes and other birds, not badlypainted, with a background of reeds orplants, and the sky visible behind. Theeffect must have been pretty when the wholewas perfect. In the same house is the pictureof a male and female sitting at the baseof a pillar, attended by three Cupids. Inthe back ground is a tree, with mountainsin the distance. Nothing can exceed thegrace of these figures in the original, and,on that account, an outline of the picturehas been, among others, selected for thiswork. Vide Plate XII.In the same house is a pavement ofcoloured marbles, in the nature of the opusAlexandrine, which is pretty, and is thereforegiven at the end of this work, in PlateLXXVIII.At present (1827) the habitations on theright hand, or east side of the street of Fortune,have been little excavated, so that itis difficult to say what they may hereafterproduce.A small statue of Fortune, with a diademand crescent on her head, and a lotus, likeIsis, was found in this street. She was re-?Ia.La IXXT/:^^f3^^ E^ ^3E^3^E3flnnf,H ' — '.r.:-i ty Feuiier S(irs*.CPOINIPEIANA. 41presented at Smyrna with the Polar Star onher front. An oval ball, and a pair of goldenear-rings were also discovered, together witha silver ladle or spoon.Many of the pilasters had inscriptionswhich have been since defaced.On the second of these Lucius Popidiusthe iEdile was recorded as the protector ofthe house. On the third Caius CuspiusPansa.On the seventhSabines. PANSAM. AEDSVLIODVS. ROG.On the ninth isCASELLIVMAEDQ. NUMISIVMMAIViM. AED. ORPriscus.On the fifteenth we find Pansa again, whowas certainly among the most powerful ofthe patrons of Pompeii, and had a numerouslist of clients.This street seems to have been more thanusually productive in bronzes. Among otherthings a pretty Mercury upon a rock, threeinches high, the statue of a female nineVOL. I. F42 POMP EI AN A.inches high, another Mercury four incheshigh, and many bronze lamps and standswere excavated. Several vases, basins withhandles, one of which was formed by thewings of swans, paternal, bells, an inkstand,a strigil, elastic springs, a needle, hinges orcarbines, a lock, buckles for harness, anoval caldron, a mould for pastry, and asaucepan, contribute to our knowledge ofthe common utensils of the Ancients.Here have also been discovered no fewerthan two hundred and fifty little bottles ofcommon glass, forty-one bottles nine incheshigh, four decanters and many fluted tumblers,six tumblers eight inches high andonly two inches and two-fifths in diameter,with thirty cups of green glass, and fourplates six inches in diameter. Besides thesewere found several bottles formed of fourbulbs united, twenty-six tazze, and ten othercups. In marble was discovered a smalllaughing Faun, a disc of porphyry, and aweight, used in spinning by hand, of alabasterwith its ivory axis remaining. The list finisheswith a leaden weight, forty-nine commonpottery lamps with masks and animals.POMPEIANA. 43forty-five lamps with two lights, three tills,or boxes, with a slit, to keep money, and, inthese, thirteen coins of Titus, Vespasian, andDomitian. Seven glazed plates were also dugup, which are a great curiosity, and werefound packed in straw, but which the Authordid not see. Seventeen jars of terracotta, unvarnished, and seven dishes in thesame state, with a large pestle and mortar,complete the numerous list given in one ofthe reports.An account of scales, said to have beenfound about the time of the same excavation,appeared in print at Naples. Theywere of a species, according to the work,called '/^f^i^uyia, ffrarri^och trutinie Campania,(r<put^a)fjucc and aequipondium. The beam wasone palm and a third long. The weights werein the forms of an armed head, a goose'shead, &c. On the beam were numbers fromX to XX XX, and v was placed for divisionbetween two x', besides smaller fractions.The inscription wasIMP. Vest. AVG. IxT. IMP. AVG. F. VI. CEXACTA. IM. Capitaf244 POMPEIANA.Which has been translated, " In the ConsulateVIII. of Vespasian Emperor Augustus,and in the VI. of Titus Emperor and Sonof Augustus, Proved in the Capitol." Thisinscription is another confirmation of thecare which was taken to produce a strictuniformity in weights and measures throughoutthe empire, and the date correspondswith the year 77 of our aera, being only twoyears prior to the great eruption.A steelyard was found, also, with chainsand hooks and with numbers up to xxx.Common scales, with two cups, like those inmodern times, were found, but it is remarkablethat they are without that little projectingpoint above the beam which servesto mark more accurately the absence ofequipoise, and which, according to the dissertationhere quoted, was called hj theGreeks and Romans, zccmv, ligula, and examen.The skeleton of a Pompeian, who, apparently,for the sake of sixty coins, a smallplate, and a saucepan of silver, had remainedin his house till the street was already halffilled with volcanic matter, was found as if inPOMPEIANA.the act of escaping from his window. Twoothers were found in the same street, probablyarrested by the vapour emitted by thesulphureous mass.POMPEIANA.CHAPTER IV.PANTHEON, OR COLLEGE OF THE Augusta's,EXCAVATED IN THE YEARS1821, 1822.This edifice, which is called on the spotthe Pantheon, for no other reason than thattwelve pedestals were found in its centre, isone of which the use is the least evident ofany at Pompeii.POMPKIANA. 47'J'he plan, as may be seen by a referenceto the plate, is, as nearly as possible, similarto that of the building miscalled the Templeof Serapis at Pozzuoli, but which, by themore recent excavations, is proved to containthe baths or thermae of Puteoli, withtheir appropriate medicinal spring, nowcleared and applied to its original use.In each of these edifices we find an opencourt, with its colonnades and little chambers,and, in each, we have a circular orpolygonal tholos in the centre, correspondingwith that which Pausanias describes atEpidaurus as the place where patients waitedtill they could enter the bath.In each we find, exactly in the same relativesituation, a temple or building evidentlymore sacred than the porticos ; butthese coincidences only serve to prove, thatthe convenience of such a disposition ofthe apartments of public buildings was themotive for its frequent adoption in placesserving for the union of any great concourseof people.Signor Carlo Bonucci, in his workprinted at Naples in the year 1826", has48 POMPEIANA.called a part of this edifice the Temple ofAugustus, and considers the remainder asthe scene of the sacred banquet of the Augustales; and there seems no reason todoubt this theory, except the difficulty offinding so large a piece of ground, in thecentre of a city already built, for the erectionof such a fabric, and for such a purpose, atso late a period. Yet Vitruvius, cited bySignor Bonucci, gives such a situation forthe Temple of Augustus.The Augustales were highly honoured, aswe are informed by Vegetius, being chosenby Augustus, the founder of the order, tolead the troops in battle, and they seem tohave presided at the feasts and games calledAustralia, in honour of that deified emperor.Tacitus has given some accounts of theinstitution, and Gipsies has added almostevery thing else that was known of the Augustines,till the number us inscriptions at Pompeiiproved that they where of great consequencein that city, though neither theiroffice nor their antiquity is likely to conciliatethe respect of the moderns, or givePOMPKIANA. 49any interest to their history. They seem,by one inscription, to have been six in numberat Pompeii. It appears, however, thatthe Augustines were possessed of funds whichsupplied them with the means of feasting,and inviting their fellow-citizens to partakein the banquet, for which purpose the buildingnow called the Pantheon was so wellcalculated, that, whether belonging to aparticular order or the common propertyof all the inhabitants of Pompeii, it maybesafely considered as a place of feastingor carousal under the protection of somedeity, who, from his more elevated sacellum,was supposed to overlook and patronize thebanquet. That such was the destination ofthis edifice, and that it differed but little inits uses from that which the Greeks calledLesche, and the modern Italians a trattoriaand coffee-house, seems to be renderedmore probable by many of its internal decorations; while its proximity to the Forum,the chief resort of the inhabitants of thecity, would point out this situation as themost eligible for a place of conversation andrefreshment.50 POMPEIANA.Pausanias, in his account of Delphi,describes a building called Lesche, which,he says, was a place of meeting and conversationcommon in many of the more ancientcities of Greece, where, says Corporation,citing Cleanthes, the Lesche wassacred to Apollo. In that was a temple,as in this at Pompeii, and the walls werecovered with paintings, some of which representedthe very personages repeated onthe walls of our Pantheon.The Lesche of Lacedaemon was evencalled Poikilos or painted ; and as most ofthe smaller temples had little light, thesepictures must, like those of Pompeii, havebeen disposed on the walls of the portico orperilous.The Lesche of Delphi, among other historicalpaintings, had many Homeric subjects.Ulysses, Ariadne, Theseus, Penelope,Phaedra, Bacchus, and iEthra, were amongthe personages represented there, and we findmany of these on the walls of the Pompeianedifice, with other scenes taken from Italianhistory.It must be confessed that this coincidencePOM PEIyVN A. 51of ornament proves little more than that theplans and decorations of many public buildingswere not very dissimilar, as a portico,surrounding a court with a more sacred portionat one extremity, would be the characteristicof the greater number of them.That feasting, however, was the principalmotive for assembling in the porticosof Pompeii may be presumed from the subjectsof many of the smaller paintings. Thestreet which runs along the north side ofthe Pantheon from the Temple of Jupiter hasbeen called that of dried fruits, from the numberof figs, raisins, chestnuts, and plums, fruitsin glass vases, lentils, hempseed, and otherobjects of the same kind, found in the shops.Bread, scales, money, and moulds for pastrywere among the discoveries ; and a bronzestatue of Fame, of small size and fine work,with golden armlets.We find at the northern entrance, whichhas on a pilaster the name celsvm, andnear which was found a box containing anengraved stone set in a gold ring, with 41silver medals and 1036 brass coins, Cupidsemployed in making bread, or driving the52 POMPEIANA.ass, crowned with a wreath, that broughtthe flour. On the opposite side they areemployed in making garlands for the guests.On the wall at the southern entrance ispainted a hatchet for cutting the meat,while hams, boars' heads, fish, and otherviands compose the picture. In other placeswe find geese, turkeys, vases full of eggs,fowls and game ready plucked for roasting,oxen and sheep, dishes of fruit, and a cornucopiapoured out, with a variety of amphorafor holding wine, and every othersort of accessory for the banquet.To the evidence of the pictures may beadded that of a drain or sink near thetholos or dodecagon, in the centre of thecourt, which was found obstructed with bonesof fish and other indications of the remainsof articles of food. A general idea of thepresent state of the tholos, the court, andthe portico may be obtained by a referenceto Plate XIII.The grand entrance from the Forum isfrom the portico north of the hall of the Decurions,and has two doors, between whichstatue, perhaps of the emperor, has been^(DMFBII,> UiKopsiuc itpai 15.1830.POMPEIANA. 53placed under a pediment supported by twoCorinthian columns of marble not ten inchesin diameter, the capitals of which have theRoman eagles in the foliage, probably inhonour of the imperial portrait. It is possiblethat a small space open to the sky existedbetween these doors and the roof ofthe portico surrounding the Forum.These doors do not exactly correspondwith the centre of the interior portico, thoughthe reason for this defect is not apparent.Near this entrance ninety-three brass coinswere found at the excavation. On the leftof the entrance the wall, with its paintings,has been remarkably well preserved, and,when it was fresh, nothing could exceed thebeauty of the colouring, or the elegant effectproduced by the contrast of its many vividtints with the large black panels on whichthe principal pictures are painted. Thougha roof has been placed over it, no idea canbe now formed of the splendour of its appearanceat the moment of excavation.It is in vain that one of that sort of architecturalopenings between the black panelsis attempted to be given in Plate XIV.,54 POMPEIANA.the view of the entire wall only could presentany adequate idea of the beauty of thedecorations, and, in the size of this work, itwas impossible to crowd so many minuteobjects, with any degree of distinctness. Itis to be understood that the panels on eachside are of considerable extent, and that,in their centres, the beautiful paintings ofUlysses and Penelope, Plate XV., iEthraand Theseus, Plate XVI., and the Muse,Plate XVII., are placed. These panels are,at intervals, separated by various architecturalcompositions, through the openings ofwhich are seen other buildings. Along thewhole runs a sort of podium or base, generallyof a yellow colour and highly ornamented,in which are compartments withfigures, one of which, a female, has beenselected for the base in Plate XIV., with alyre, as more elegant than that which happensto be placed there in the original, whichis also much defaced. The drawing fromwhich this figure was reduced for the workwas made by M. Zahn, Architectural Painterto the Elector of Hesse Cassel, an indefatigableand exact artist, who will contributeTHE SEU S,LoixBcmSBcixxt Jennings & Vfilha'sn. Chart ; 'POMPEIANA. 55much to the embellishment of his nativecountry on his return, and who kindly permittedthe Author to copy and publish hispicture.The picture of Theseus regaining thesword of his father iEgeeus, by the adviceof his mother iEthra, who showed him therock under which the weapon lay concealed,has been selected for Plate XVI., and thatof Ulysses as a mendicant questioned byPenelope is given in Plate XV. That of aMuse, probably Thalia from the mask inher lap, also from the panels of this portico,has been chosen for Plate XVII.All subjects mentioned by poets or historianshave a value as conveying to oursenses the conception which the ancientsthemselves had formed of circumstances,with which they were more intimately connectedthan ourselves. The work of Million,aided by the treasures of Pompeii and Herculaneum,may probably, in time, enable usto produce editions of the classics illustratedby ancient art. It may be necessary to add,that none of these pictures have that strongeffect of light and shadow which is the chasPOMPEIAXA.racteristic of modern painting, and musthave been the invention of a nation whichlived more in the house than the Greeks andRomans. Though the pictures are shaded,it is only to a depth that might exist inthe open air. In Plate XV. Ulysses has ayellow robe or champs, under which hewears a white tunic. Penelope has a whiteveil and a violet-coloured robe, and, in herleft hand, the implements of spinning.The Penelope and Thalia have been publishedby Signor Nicolai, and ^Ethra bySignor Bonucci at Naples.That this edifice was intended for a greatnumber of people may be proved by the veryconsiderable depth of the porticos, beingtwenty-four feet on the western side, whichmust have been covered by timber, andsloped inwards to the court, where a broadchannel received the water from the roof.It is possible that the southern, western, andnorthern sides only had porticos, and thatthe eastern was left open toward the templeto admit light. The site of the twelve columnson the north and south, and thoseon the west, only eight in number, is veryPOMPEIANA. 57visible on the step which supported them.The step on the east may possibly have beenreplaced bj^ the excavators if found imperfect,which is asserted.On the south is a line of eleven chambers,of small dimensions, the twelfth divisionserving for an entrance, by severalsteps, from a narrow alley. Their size isabout ten feet by eight. Some are inclinedto imagine that these were the lodgings ofthe Augustales, who had the care of theplace, but they do not appear to admit ofprivacy, and these chambers have every appearanceof having served for separate repastsof small parties. They are all paintedin red panels. Several marbles were foundmarked with large Roman numerals, but,being only one foot asunder, they are toonear to each other to have served as numbersto the little apartments: XI. X. VIII.These fragments evidently formed part of asmall frieze and architrave.Above this range of cells, on the southside, has been a second story, as is evidentfrom the beams which supported the uppertimor, and the painted walls of the higherVOL. I. G58 PO:\[PEIANA.rooms. It is not easy to discover how theseapartments were approached, unless by anexternal staircase, no stairs being seen atpresent in the interior of the building, butit seems evident that a long and narrow gallery,supported on the piers which dividedthe cells, must have been the only methodof communication. This gallery was underthe portico, and must have resembled thatin a similar situation in the corridor of thetheatre commonly called the Soldiers' quarters.These upper rooms were probablycalled coenacula which, according to Festus,were accessible by stairs. " Coenaculadicuntur ad quae scabs ascending." Apuleiusmentions an upper coenaculum, bywhich he implies the common existence ofthe lower. In these rooms were low circulartables of fir or maple with three legs.On some occasions tables of great price wereused, made of citron wood, or covered withplates of silver, and having legs of ivory.Mention is also made of mensae monopolise,or tables with one foot ; and it is curious thatthe Greeks used no tablecloth like their descendantsat present, while the great .59mans indulged in draperies of wool or silkembroidered or striped with gold and purple.This, however, was not in fashion previouslyto the emperors. G nests brought theirown napkins to dinner at private houses; butas their slaves made it a common practiceto steal what they could wrap up in them onretiring, the host at length supplied napkinsto his friends. Guests came in white or gaydresses, the room was sprinkled with perfumes,they mounted by steps to a lofty triclinium,sometimes inlaid with ivory, bronze,and shells, or mother-of-pearl, and reposedon soft mattresses covered with costly drapery.Their hands and feet were newlywashed, and the latter sometimes fitted withslippers. Dinner was preceded by oysters,eggs, asparagus, lettuce, onions, figs, andmultum of wine mixed with honey to givean appetite. Such an extravagant banquetas must follow is the only one likely to beleft on record. In the coenacula of Pompeiithere was not space sufficient for those whowere not content to sit at the table with theirbacks to the wall. Ladies, indeed, alwayssat at table till the time of the Caesar ; andG 2GO POMPEIANA.the recumbent posture, derived through theGreeks from Asia, could only have beenadopted a little previously to that period.The open court is paved with a speciesof hard cement in which pebbles have beenset, and, in the centre of it, is placed a tho-losor dodecagonal building having no walls,but consisting, originally, merely in a roofsupported by twelve piers. It was pavedwith white marble, and, from the situationand substance of the piers, it seems probablethe roof consisted of light timbersmeeting in an apex in the centre, and withprojecting eaves. The roof of the tholos atPuteoli was supported by marble columns.The court being a parallelogram, andthe tholos of such a form that its anglesmight be inscribed in a circle, its distancefrom the lateral porticos was only four feet.In the centre may have been some sort of asupport to the roof, but no traces of it remain.The excavators related that a handholding a globe was found in this spot — certainlyit w as discovered in some part of thebuilding. Some have imagined a statue inthe centre.POMPEIANA. 61At the north-eastern angle of the courtis observed a singular projection from thewall of the building, which has been imagineda place for musicians or for distributingwines and liquors, and a sort of barfor the receipt of money. Its use is noteasily understood. Beyond this, and formingthe angle of the building, is an apartmentor enclosure about thirty-five feet inlength, and nearly of the same breadth, decoratedwith many now defaced paintingsand panels, and, among other subjects, thatof sea-horses touched with great spirit.Here is also a sacellum which has hadits statue and its altar ; and it does not seemimpossible that the means of cooking formen, or of offering burnt sacrifices to theGods, were afforded by elevated hearths setfound in this quarter. A Latin author saysCulinary prope temple grant in quibus tapesfuneral parabantur." There vere kitchensnear temples in which funereal repasts wereprepared. If that were the case, the placewas either open, or only partially coveredby a roof, so that the smoke might escape.The walls are decorated with sea-horses and62 rOMPElANA.griffins, dogs hunting stags, and a lionesshunting two bulls. The central picture isdefaced. Many Cupids appear on thesewalls, with and without wings, and a boy isseen feeding; an eagle.The centre of the eastern side was occupiedby the temple, while the other angle,in a space nearly corresponding with thatlast mentioned, presents objects the uses ofwhich it is equally difficult to ascertain. Asort of table here runs round three sides ofthe apartment, about three feet wade, at thedistance of about three feet from the northern,as much from the eastern, and nine from thesouthern wall, leaving an unoccupied spacein the centre of about thirty feet.The table is divided in the middle of theeastern side by a narrow passage, and in- ,lines from the walls toward the centre, whilea channel runs under it calculated to receivewhatever fell from its sloping surface.This channel runs through an apertureunder the table on the south side by whichthe water or blood was carried off. Had thistable or bench of the height of an ordinarytable sloped to the other side, it might cerevainly have been supposed, though too narrow,a sort of triclinium, or the elevationon which cushions or beds were laid for abanquet ; but, from the proximity of thewall, it is only on the south side that tablescould be placed, and the head must necessarilyhave been higher than the feet. Theother benches, or triclinia, would have beenuseless according to this theory, which mustconsequently be abandoned. It is thereforeprobable that the table has been usedfor cutting up the victims for the Gods, orfor carving different viands for the feast, orpossibly for both purposes, and the slopemight have been calculated for the betterexposition of whatever was sold or offered.The whole being coloured with red paintgives an air of probability to this conjecture.It is impossible, however, to observe thewhole without being strongly reminded ofthe tables of refreshments at a modern entertainment,which are often placed round threesides of the room, and afford, as these mayhave done at Pompeii, every species ofwarm and iced beverage, as well as a varietyPOM PET AN A.of viands and sweetmeats. It is perhaps notgenerally known that snow was used forcooling water by the ancients, much in thesame manner as among ourselves, and wassold in Rome as it is at present, as we learnfrom Pliny, Varro, and Suetonius. In thetime of Seneca snow from the mountainswas not only sold in ice-shops, but hawkedabout the streets of Rome. We have anaccount of snow preserved for summer usefifty years before the age of Alexander ; butthe Greeks, as Athenaeum says, often cooledtheir water by evaporation, keeping boys allnight employed in moistening jars for thatpurpose.The only remaining picture in this quarteris that of Acta Laurentian with Romulusand Remus. The introduction of that personagein this place was probably only incompliment to the emperor as the representativeof the Julian family. This space,if covered in part, must have had roofshanging from and supported by the wallson three sides, for the whole could noteasily have been protected from the weather.We now come to the temple which .65copies the central division on the easternside of the edifice. Plate XVIII. representsthis part of the building. It is approachedby a flight of steps, constructed inwhat may be termed the pronaos, and whichmay be best understood by reference to theplan.It is not impossible that this pronaosmay have been entered under a wide arch,rising from the antae, which return sufficientlyin front to admit of two Corinthianpilasters and a painted panel between themon each side, and were by these renderedcapable of supporting the weight.On the south wall of this pronaos ispainted a cedent figure which some havetaken for the emperor. It seems, however,a female with a sort of Bacchic thyrsus inone hand, and a dish of fruits in the other,neither of which attributes appears applicableeither to the emperor or the Geniusof Rome. Another figure may be Mars, orahero with a shield.It is to be supposed that the statue ofAugustus once stood on the pedestal at theextremity opposite the entrance, as one handPOMPEIANA.of a figure grasping a globe was found nearthe spot.A statue, supposed of Olivia, and one ofDruses, stood, at the time of the excavation,in the niches on the right and left ; twoother niches were not yet filled. The wholecell is about twenty feet in length.The walls were probably painted, butno traces of the colour remain.As a temple, the building had littlemerit either in regard to magnitude, architecture,or materials ; but the whole edifice,now vulgarly called the Pantheon, was ofconsiderable importance in a city like Pompeii,being at least 150 feet in length andabove 90 in width ; and, whether dedicatedto feasting in honour of the emperor, or tothe daily resort of the citizens, it affordsabundant proofs that, under one pretence oranother, it was appropriated to the pleasuresof the banquet.Opportunities and occasions were notwanting to render such a building necessary.Marcellus Donatus, who writes on thesubject, gives three principal causes for aPOMPEIANA. 67public coenatio. An epulum or visceral ata great funeral, a public sacrifice, or a feastin honour or commemoration of any fortunateevent.It is commonly imagined that the festivalsof the ancients were exclusively attendedby males. The Romans, however,certainly admitted females in festive meetings,but did not permit them the enjoymentof wine. Aulus Genius, lib. x. c. 23., saysthe Roman women were sometimes obligedto kiss their relations, that the latter mightdetect them if they had transgressed thislaw.The Greeks, however, did not admitfemales at feasts, except among near relations; but, on the other hand, they were notprohibited from a moderate use of the giftsof Bacchus.Bonucci says that near the great entranceof this building was found the fragmentof an inscription with these characters: —Amici . Augusta . SODALIAugusta. QPOMPEIANA.Had the whole of the inscription remained,it is probable the nature of the edifice, commonlycalled on the spot the Pantheon,would have been determined beyond dispute.POM PF, I ANA.CHAPTER V.TEMPLE OF FORTUNE.The Temple of Fortune may be consideredas one of the best examples of theRoman style now remaining, and is doubly interestingas being the erection of the Julianfamily, immortalized in the person of Cicero.70 POMPEIANA.It is observable that this edifice neitherstands exactly at right angles with the streetof Fortune, nor exactly in the line of thestreet running between the baths and thehouse of Pansa. The portico is turned alittle toward the Forum, and the front ofthe temple was so contrived that a part ofit might also be seen from the other street.It is highly probable that these circumstanceswere the result of design rather thanof chance. The Greeks seem to have preferredthe view of a magnificent building:from a corner, and there is scarcely a right-angledplan to be found in either ancient ormodern Italy.The Temple of Fortune is placed upona podium or stylobate, the height of whichprotects it from the contamination of thestreet, and which was necessary where noperilous existed. This consists of two members,the upper of which may be called aplutus or stylobate. The whole may beabout eight feet high, and is built with goodblocks of Traversing stone. By the plan,Plate XIX., and the view of the remains,Plate XX., it may be seen that the ascentPOMPEIANA. 71was by two entrances of three steps each,separated by a platform projecting betweenthem, on which stands a pedestal commonlysupposed to have supported a statue, butwhich was, in all probability, the altar onwhich blazed the incense and sacrifices ofthe votaries of the fickle goddess of Antrumand Preneste. Whether this was the customin all cases has been doubted ; but neithervictims, nor a great quantity of incense,could have been offered in any temple nothypaethral, without producing suffocation.The great circular altar may yet be tracedat the east front of the Parthenon, whichwas hypffithral; and at Pompeii the templesof Venus, Isis, and aesculapius offer abundantproof of the situation of the altars infront of the temples.The iron rails, which prevented the entranceof the profane, are yet visible infront of this platform, and were passed bytwo gates five palms four inches wide, placedon the lower platform after an ascent of foursteps. These steps are twice as wide asthe iron gates, and nine perpendicular barsformed the rails to the right and left of72 POMPEIANA.each entry. There were fifteen bars in therailing in front of the altar, and all seemwrenched and distorted, and broken by thefall of the entablature of the temple. Thesanctity of the place rendered unnecessaryany other protection, for even the cell hadno door.From the platform, which ran along thewhole width of the temple, a flight of eightsteps ascended to the columns of the portico,which were of white marble, and of theCorinthian order. The whole was covered,both on the exterior and interior, with thinslabs of the same material. The capitals ofthe columns are one foot eleven inches inheight ; those of the pilasters of what maybetermed the antae are two feet. Therewere probably four against the front of thecell, for three yet remain. There is yet a richblock cornice and mouldings with well-cutroses of white marble lying on the ground.The measures of the Temple of Fortuneare given in a work published at Naples thus :The podium ninety-two palms long bythirty-six broad. The palm here used isthat of ten English inches. The stylobatePOMPEIANA. 73is eighty-three pidms long by thirty-fivepalms nine inches. The height of the stylobateis six palms six inches.The pronaos is thirty-one palms wide bytwenty-nine long, according to the publishedaccount ; but there seems to be reason forsupposing that the columns in front did notstand quite close to the upper step. Fourcolumns were placed in front, and three inthe flanks, reckoning the angles twice.The central intercolumniation was twopalms wider than the other, and this is supposedto have been determined by the NeapolitanAuthor, from the position of the doorand four pilasters against the angles, or antae,and front wall of the cell, the capitals ofsome of which yet exist.The flanks of the cell were decoratedexternally with five pilasters. These measuringfrom centre to centre eight feet sixEnglish, seem the safest guide for determiningthe position and number of the columnsin the flanks of the portico.The cell is twenty six palms nine incheswide, by thirty-four palms ten inches long,according to Signor Becchi. On the out-vol.I. H74 POMPEIANA.side, the cell measures about thirty-three feeteight inches English in length ; and, thoughthose who have written on the subject haveimagined three columns, including those ofthe angles in the flanks of the portico, andDe Gore six, it is difficult to imagine howany number exceeding two could have correspondedwith the five pilasters.The great niche at the east end, in whichwere the shrine and statue of the Goddess, isseventeen palms wide, and the iEdicola itselfis ten palms wide.The shrine had an architectural canopy,of which the architrave is nine palms fiveinches long, and one palm two inches high,supported by two Corinthian pillars one palmthree inches in diameter, of which the capitals,one palm three inches high, remain,though the whole had evidently been excavatedby the ancients themselves in searchof treasure. On the marble architrave is theinscription.M. Tallies. M. F. D. V. I. D. TER. QVINQ. AVGVR. TR. MILA, POP. AEDEM, Fortunae. AVGVST. SOLO. ET. Pen. SVABy this we learn that the Goddess was namedFortuna Augusta, and that Marcus Nullius,POMPEIANA. 75elected by the people three times, erectedthe temple on his own ground, and at hisown expense.A small court, immediately under thesouth wall of the portico, was also the propertyof the same person, as is proved bythe inscription on a volcanic stone erectedclose to the podium of the temple.M. TVLLII. M. FAREA. PRIVATA.In this court seem to have been the lodgingsfor the priests, and their kitchen. Ahead of Bacchus, which supported a roundtable, was found here, with two cups, a mortar,and other utensils of bronze.Some have thought fit to dispute theidentity of this family of the Tullii with thatof the great orator, and to give, as a reason,the absence of the word Cicero in these inscriptionswhich Plutarch thought derivedfrom the cultivation of pulse in ancient times,as was the case with the agricultural namesof the families of Lentulus and Fabius.Others, however, thought that the oratorwas so named from a mole upon his nose inH 2POMPEIANAthe form of a vetch, in which case the nameof Cicero was not borne by his ancestors butpersonal. The Temple of Fortune owes somuch of its interest to the supposition thatthe family of Cicero was concerned in itserection, that it may be pleasing to see, bythe genealogy, how improbable must be acontrary opinion.INIarcus TulHus=FMarcus Tullius=f:HelviaLM. Nullius Cicero-theOrator, bornA.V.C. 647. beforeX'. 107.=Terentia. QuintusIA souILuciusILuciusIMarcusIt would appear, from this, highly probablethat the Temple of Fortune must have beenerected either by the great orator himself orhis son, particularly as it is not known thathis ancestors had property at Pompeii, andwe have four generations with the name ofMarcus, two of which are mentioned in theseinscriptions.In the Temple of Fortune was found astatue which many thought that of Cicerohimself. It was of the size of life, or aboutPOMPEIANA. 77six feet high. The hair, face, and eyes hadbeen painted, and the toga was of a purpletint. A female statue was also found, butthe face had been evidently cut off perpendicularly,that another face might be substituted,possibly to save expense on somefuneral ceremony. Her tunic had a bordereither of gold or of a red colour.On a basis of white marble, cylindricalhollowed, one foot two inches high, by aboutone foot five, and found at this temple, isinscribedGatherers. VETTISVAVIS. Caesar. PRIMEPOTHVS. NVMITORIEnters. LACVTVLANTMinis. PRIM. Fortin. AVG. Ives:M. Stay. RVFI. CN. Melissa. D. V. I. DP. SILIO. L. VOLVSIO. Saturn. COS.The Fasti Consulate give the name of c.siLivs to one of the Consuls in the year 13of the Christian aera, and that is probablythe date of the inscription.In the Area Privata, on the south side oftheTempleof Fortunate the vestiges of whatseem to have been the offices of the priests.At the end near the altar is a hole which78 POMPEIANA.may have served to facilitate the mystery ofresponses or oracles. Eusebius, in the fourthbook of his Preparation, cites a case in whichmention is made, before the Roman magistrates,of machines by which phantasmagoriaand oracular prestiges were played off, andthe shrine in the Temple of Fortune is sodisposed as to admit of such impostures.On another base belonging to the Templeof Fortune was found a second inscription.Taro. STATILIOTI. Papilio. Delian. COS.L. Statius. Fasts. PROSign. QUOD. E. LEGE. FortunaeAVGVSTAE. Minister. PONEREDefeat. Reference. Q. Pompeii. AmethystsQuaestor. BASIS. Vas. Armorial. DecrementPRO. Sign PoniesSeveral persons of the name of jElianuswere Consuls, but they are generally of aperiod later than the destruction of Pompeii.Statius Taurus is also a name not unfrequentin the list of Consuls, but it is noteasy to say which, if any one of them, ishere named.The mistakes minister for ministrorum,POMPEIANA. 79armorial and pomfret, are probably the faultsof the sculptor : if not, the marble must beof a later time, which seems difficult. It isnot a little strange that when a statue oughtto have been placed, a couple of bases couldserve in its stead if sculpture existed as anart at the time.In Plate XXI. is given a restoration ofthe Temple of Fortune, made upon a tracingfrom the original drawing as obtained by thecamera lucida. The end proposed, in all restorations,is to assist the unpractised spectatorin understanding the application of theconfused masses of architectural fragmentswhich he often sees, without comprehending.For this purpose the disjointed membersare reunited according to the known rulesof architecture, and no greater mistake caneasily occur than that of a diameter, moreor less, in the height of the columns, whichthe experience of every new discovery teachesus not to have been so invariable as somehave imagined.In the peristyle of a house excavated atHerculaneum in the year 1828 the Authorobserved columns of an order intended forCorinthian, the shafts of which are only four80 POMPEIANA.diameters and three-fourths in height, notgreatly different from those of the shortestexamples of Doric. They were so far apartthat beams of timber only were used as architraves,the whole of which remained perfect,though converted into charcoal by thetufa produced by the eruption.The columns of the ancients seem tohave been adapted to the building, and notthe building to the columns. In fact, theoutline of a Doric temple varied little fromone of the Corinthian order ; but the latteraiming at lightness, slighter columns wereused. The number was consequently increasedand the entablature diminished, butthe outline of the whole was the same. Thegigantic temples of antiquity could neverhave been constructed had the architectsadhered to the notion that the distance oftwo diameters and a half, called the style,for the intercolumniation was essential, forarchitraves could not have been procured.On the other hand, some of the smaller templescould not have been sufficiently accessiblewithout resorting to the areostyle, requiringfrequently architraves of timber, and,very often, that the architraves and friezePOMPEIANA. 81should be of one block, when of marble, inorder to resist the disposition to break whichmust arise from such long intervals betweenthe points of suspension.The arch supported a bronze equestrianstatue, supposed to be that of Caligula orTiberius, which has been already noticedin the preface. This was discovered in themonths of November and December, 1823,and beginning of 1824. The statue fromthe head to the horse was three feet high.The tail and hoof only of the horse were thenfound. The work was not of the first order.On a marble near it was found an inscriptionwhich would seem rather to prove thatAugustus was the Emperor represented.STO. CaesarParents. PATRIAE.BoJiucci, however, says this was found inthe temple. The capital and part of theshaft of a Doric pillar lying below the archmay have belonged to the ornaments of thearch itself; and the remains of water-pipesyet visible in the piers of the arch, with thevestiges of unfinished work in front, renderthe existence of fountains probable.The situation and present state of thisPOMPEIANA.edifice will be thoroughly comprehended bya reference to Plate XXII., which representsthe place as it appears from the roof of thenatatorium or piscina of the baths, the coneor dome of which forms a principal object inthe foreground, and which, from its construction,would evidently have resisted the attacksof time, had it not projected abovethe soil of the vineyard.POMPEIANA.CHAPTER VI.There EXCAVATED IN 1824.AxHENiEUs says, that, on a stone ormarble at the entrance of a bath, was an inscriptionwhich has been thus translated :Balnea Vina Venus corrumpunt corpora sanaCorpora sana daunt Balnea Vina Venus."The design and destination of no edificein the whole circuit of Pompeii is more84 POMPEIANA.clearly and certainly established than in thecase of the thermae or baths, occupying anirregular quadrilateral space lying to thenorth of the Forum. It is, nevertheless, notso easy to assign to every apartment its appropriateand classical name ; for, thoughmany treatises have been written on the subjectof the baths of the ancients, the modelsreferred to have been usually the stupendouspiles of Imperial Rome, where innumerablechambers and porticos, adapted to varioususes not necessarily connected with ablution,have extended the there to a degreewhich, admitting of no comparison, destroysany analogy with a building dedicated to asingle purpose.The Berlin edition of Vitruvius by Roder,and the English translation by Wilkins, haveboth exhibited the plan of certain Romanremains at Baden Weller in Germany, asthose nearest corresponding with the informationwe have received from Vitruviuson the subject of the thermae of the ancients,yet even these do not seem to agreeprecisely with the baths of Pompeii. Atthe Roman baths of Baden, according toPOMPEIANA. 8.5Wilkins, the exedra is at the entrance,from which a vestibule, having an elaeothecaon one side, and a heated stuff on the other,leads to a frigidarium, to which succeed atepidarium and a caldarium. A repetitionof this plan for the women's baths forms thewhole of the edifice, and all seems perfectlyintelligible.This is one of the few remains of therein which names can be assigned to the apartmentswith any degree of certainty. Alearned man, Andrews Bacchus, has collectedan immense mass of all that the ancientshave said on the subject; and, as they appearto have described, according to circumstancesand situations, such buildings aseach of them frequented, without referenceto any common example, so a more inextricableconfusion has perhaps never beenproduced than the whole of his most eruditedissertation. His facts have materiallyassisted the present account of the baths ofPompeii, and may be depended upon, thoughhis quotations are not always correct as tothe chapter and verse whence they wereprofessedly taken.POMPEIANA.Among others Celsus and Galen arecited, who, as physicians, directed their patientsin the order to be followed in the useof the baths ; but nothing as to the plan canbe gained from these doctors, as they differas much as the other authors ; Celsus recommendingto his patients first the tepidthen the caldarium, and lastly thefrigidarium ; while Galen prescribes firstthe hot air of the laconicum, then the lou-ironor warm water bath, and then the .The thermae of Pompeii may, perhaps,be best explained by comparison with thebaths of the Turks and other oriental nationswho, succeeding by conquest to theluxuries of the enervated Greeks and Romansof the Eastern Empire, seem, as wasmost natural, to have retained the institutionof the baths nearly in their original state.A bather in Turkey first enters a largeapartment of a low temperature, furnishedwith couches in recesses, where he undressesand leaves his clothes, attended by a personwho immediately furnishes him with anothercovering formed of long towels or Ts^/^^y^a,POMPEIANA. 87answering to the sublimer, and a rolled towelon the head, corresponding with the arduousof the Romans. This room seems, by itsuse, to correspond with the apodyterium ofthe ancients, which appears to have beenthe same as the frioidarium of smaller establishments.On other occasions the tepidarium andapodyterium are mentioned as the sameroom, and those who bathed are said to haveleft their clothes in this doubly-named apartment,which answers to the first chamber ofan oriental hamam, with the additional correspondenceof being equally the station ofpersons who kept the garments of the bathers,and who were responsible, on pain of death,both by the ancient and modern law, for anytheft committed.From the outer room of the Turkishbath the stranger is conducted through twoor more rooms, each increasing in warmth,to a hall, generally vaulted, and heated to adegree which would be disagreeable to a personin ordinary habiliments, but to which hesoon becomes reconciled, and which shortlyproduces a most profuse perspiration.88 POMPEIANA.This can be no other than the laconicumof the ancients, which was, like it, vaultedand filled with warm air from stoves and hotwater, and was called also caldarium, vaporand sanatorium.This was anciently, as at present, achamber under the pavement of which theheat of a furnace was introduced, whence itderived its appellation of h3^pocaustum.These are the principal divisions of aTurkish hamam, derived and continued fromthe Greeks and the Romans. The story ofthe taking of Alexandria by the Saracens,and the destruction of the library by theapplication of the volumes to the heating ofthe baths, is at least a proof that these institutionsdid not fall into disuse during thegeneral change of manners which then tookplace.To reason from analogy, and, at the sametime, to avail ourselves of the numerousthough perplexed accounts left us by theancients, seems the most probable methodof getting at the real uses of the Pompeianthermae.The grand entrance seems to have beeni ^POMPEIANA. 89that in the street of Fortune, so called, atpresent, from the temple of that Goddess.This is seen in the general view of thethermae, Plate XXIV., being the only entranceremaining perfect, near the centre ofthe street leading to the Forum.All or many of the rooms opening intothe street, on each side this entrance, seemto have been vaulted, thus contributing tothe support of the arches thrown over thelarger chambers in the interior.This entry or passage, marked 21 on theplan, vide Plate Xxii, opened into acourt, 20, about sixty feet long, bounded ontwo sides by a Doric portico, and on thethird by a crypt. Over the crypt was asecond story, where the doubtful indicationsof a chimney may be observed.At the opposite angle of the court wasanother exit, also marked 21, leading intoan alley which runs from the Forum to thehouse of Pansa.At this exit was the latina, 22, the usesof which are unequivocally visible.The spot marked 19, which is observablein Plate XXVI., and is singular on accountVOL. I. I90 rOMPElANTA.of a sort of pi'onaos with seats, is vaulted,and has been lighted at night by a lampso placed that its rays fell into the chamber15 on one side, and enlightened 19 on theother.The same contrivance existed in the recess14, where a lamp gave light also to theportico.Both these lamps were protected by circularconvex glasses, the fragments of whichwere found in the inner chambers at theirexcavation.As the baths of Pompeii were not ofconsequence sufficient to be furnished withevery sort of apartment like those of thecapital, we are to look for the vestibulumand the exedra, or a place which mightserve instead of them, near the entrance ofthe there. " In vestibule debere esseporticos ad perambulations his qui assentingressuri."That portico is undoubtedly the one inthe court ; and the exedra, so called fromthe g^^a;, or seats, where those who did notchoose to walk in the portico might repose,is represented by the bench which runs alongPOMPEIANA. 91the wall. Vitruvius mentions that, whilesome were bathing, others were generallywaiting to succeed them.In this court or vestibule was found asword vvith a leather sheath, and the box forthe quadrant, or money, which was paid byeach visiter. The quadrant was the fourthpart of the assis and the fourteenth part ofa denarius ; a sum so moderate that the heat-ins:of the baths could not have been defrayedwithout a crowd of bathers.The Poet remarks upon the trifling sumwith which a man made himself as happy asaking :Dum tu quadrants lavatumRex ibis." Horace, Sat. III.Juvenal says that youths under the age offourteen paid nothing. — Sat. II.The smallness of the sum, however, wasa great encouragement to bathers, who, accordingto Pliny, sometimes bathed seventimes in one day.It is exceedingly probable that the swordwas that of the keeper of the thermae, orbalneator, whose station, with his box ofI 292 POMPEIANA.money, must have been the aha of the portico,19. This room was not painted, andthe roof seems to have been blackened bythe smoke of the lamps.Those who had paid here might haveentered with some sort of ticket. Ticketsfor the theatre have been found at Pompeii,and have been engraved. One for theshow of gladiators is in the possession ofMr. Dwell at Rome. It is of bronze,and of the size represented at the foot ofPlate XXXIII.In this Doric portico persons waited foradmission to the thermae, which were not ofsufficient size to admit conveniently morethan twenty or thirty at once. Here, therefore,notices of shows, games, exhibitions,or sales, might conveniently be exposed tothe public. Accordingly on the south wallwas painted, in large letters,MainDedicated ""L^^^.fa''"^Rive . Miners . CN . Allen . NIGER or NICIOPassions . VELA . ERVNT.Vexation AthleticPOMPIUANA. 93The word poly in the centre of the letterO signified, in Latin as in Greek, " many'The passions were certain sprinklings ofwater perfumed with saffron, or other odours,with which the people were regaled in thetheatre ; and, as these produced what wascalled a nimbus, a cloud or a shower, theperfumed waters were probably dispersed indrops by means of pipes or spouts over theaudience.Another inscription mentions the samepractice :MER Vexation Athlete . . .. . E . Passions . VELA . ERVNTThe use of the word spassioiies for s^xirsiones,appeared common to these two inscriptionswhen they were fresh, and it is not impossiblethat such a provincialism might havebeen common in the country.From the court, those who intended tobathe passed, by a small corridor, into thechamber 17, which must be supposed tohave corresponded with the first room ofthe Turkish bath, where a stranger is undressed.94? POMPEIANA.Ill this corridor was found a great numberof lamps, perhaps more than five hundred,but above one thousand were discoveredin the whole circuit of the baths, ofwhich it is said the workmen were orderedto make a general destruction after the besthad been selected.These lamps were generally of commonterra cotta, and some of them had the impressionof the figures of the Graces, andothers of Hippocrates, of moderate execution.Athenaeum, B. XV., says that the lampsin baths were of brass, and distinguished bynames expressive of the number of burners,such as monomixi, dimixi, rimini, and ; but the authors who have writtenon the subject seem to speak always of buildingsand customs on a scale of magnificencetoo extravagant to guide us in the explanationof the Pompeian thermae.Some attention had been paid to the decorationof this passage, the ceiling beingcovered with stars.In the room 17, those who frequentedthe thermae for the purpose of bathing met,whether they entered by the portico, or fromI'OMPEIANA. 9-5either of the doors from the street on thenorth : and here was certainly the frigidin which many persons took oft" theirgarments, but more especially those who intendedto make use only of the natatio, orcold bath.To them, at least, this chamber served asthe spoliatorium, apodyterium, or apolyte-rum, so called from the A^o^yr;?^/a of theGreeks, signifying the place where the clotheswere left, and, accordingly, we may observe,on entering, certain holes in the wall, inwhich have either been inserted rafters orpegs for supporting shelves, or for hanginggarments.Pliny mentions that people first enteredinto the apodyterinm, or tepidarium, witha temperate air, and consigned their garmentsto caprarii, which were probably pegsso called from their likeness to horns.The chamber itself, which is spacious, isvaulted, and the arch springs from a projectingcornice covered with a richly colouredpainting of griffins and lyres.The ceiling appears to have consisted inpanels of white within red borders, and thePOMPEIANA.pavement of the common sort of white mosaic.The walls were painted yellow. Stonebenches occupy the greater part of the walls,with a step running below them, slightlyraised from the floor. A little apartmentat the north end may have been either alatina, or, if it had sufficient light, a ton-stringfor shaving, or it might possibly haveserved for keeping the unguents, strigils,towels, and other articles necessary for theaccommodation of visitors.It is probable that a window once existedat the north, like that now remainingat the south end ; but in no case could this,or any other room in the Pompeian thermae,answer to the description of the wide windowsof the frigidarium of the author, whosays, " Frigidarium locus ventis proflatusfenestris amplis''The yet remaining window admitted lightfrom the south, and is placed close underthe vault of the roof, and rather entrenching;upon it.It opens upon the cemented or plasterroof of the chamber 18, and was not onlyformed of glass, but of good plate glass.POMPEIANA. 97slightly ground on one side so as to preventthe curiosity of any person upon the roof.This glass was divided by cruciform bars ofcopper, and secured by what might be termedturning buttons of the same metal.Of this glass all the fragments remainedat the excavation, a circumstance whichappeared not a little curious to those whoimagined that its use was either unknown,or very rare, among the ancients, and didnot know that a window of the same kindhad been found in the baths of the villa ofDiomedes.Glass seems to have, at first, been broughtfrom Egypt, and to have in fact received itsname of vaXo^ from the Coptic. Crystal, tc^v-(TTaXXog, or the permanent ice of the ancients,originally designated the natural stone itself.It is said to have been little known in Romebefore 536, U.C., but this would give ampletime for its use at Pompeii long before itsdestruction.There are few subjects on which thelearned seem to have been so generally mistakenas that of the art of glass-making98 PO^lPEIANA.among the ancients, who seem to have beenfar more skilful than was at first imagined.Not to mention the description of a burningglass in the Tubes of Aristophanes, v. To.,the collection whicliMr. Dwell first formedand brought into notice at Rome by relishingthe fragments, is sufficient to prove thatspecimens of every known marble, and ofmany not now existing in cabinets, as wellas every sort of precious stone, were commonlyand most successfully imitated by theancients, who used these imitations in cupsand vases of every size and shape.In the time of Martial, about a centuryafter Christ, glass cups were common, exceptthe calices allasontes, which displayedchangeable or prismatic colours, and, asRoscius says, were procured in Egypt, andwere so rare that Adrian sending some toServants ordered that they should only beused on great occasions.The mjTrhine vases, however, which werein such request, seem at last to have been successfullytraced to China. Propertius callsthem Parthian, and it seems certain that thePOMPEIANA. 99porcelain of the east was called Mirrha diSmyrna to as late a date as 1555.The vast collection of bottles, glasses,and other utensils discovered at Pompeii issufficient to show that the ancients were wellacquainted with the art of glass-blowing inall its branches; but it is not the less truethat they sometimes used, much as we do,horn for lanterns, which Plautus terms Vulcanin a prison of horn ; and that windows,and Cicero says lanterns, were sometimesmade of linen instead of glass, as we seeoiled paper in modern times. The commonexpressions for these objects in Latin appearto be " Fenestrae volubiles, vel lines veris,vel speculation nitrates clause''In process of time glass became so muchthe fashion that whole chambers were linedwith it. The remains of such a room werediscovered in the year 1826, near Ficulneain the Roman territory ; and these are hintedat in a passage of the Roman naturalist.Non dubie vires fractures cameras, siprius id invented fuisse." In the time ofSeneca the chambers in thermae had wallscovered with glass and Thespian marble, the100 POMPEIANA.water issued from silver tubes, and the decorationswere mirrors.In the semicircular compartment containingthe window was a large basso relievoin stucco, of which the subject appeared tobe the destruction of the Titans by Jupiter,or, perhaps, bj^ Saturn, whose colossal headappeared in the centre. Bacchus was one ofthe great assistants of Jupiter in that combat;and the cup of Bacchus, or one of thesame shape, appears on the right, as if thrownat the Titan. The subject is at presentscarcely intelligible, having suffered muchin the reparation of the roof. Vide PlateXXVII.From the frigidarium a short passageopened into the street on the north, and alittle recess is observable in it, where, possibly,another person sat to receive the moneyof the bathers. The third passage communicatedwith the hypocaust or stoves, andthese again with the street.A door, uniform with that leading fromthe court, opened into apartment 18, inwhich was the natatio or natatorium, piscina,or cold bath. Some may be inclined.*!ttAii!.iiiu:i,!,jxLKA,i;;t^^POMPEIANA. 101to apply the term baptistery to this vaseinto which the bathers plunged. The wordpiscina is applied to the bath by the youngerPliny. It appears that Aovr^ov was the Greekappellation. That this was called baptiste-rumin the time of Pliny appears from thispassage, considering its connexion with thefrigidarium. " Inde apodyterium salinelaxum et hilaire except cella frigidaria inqua baptistery amplum atque opacum." —Pinus de Villa apud Thuscos.This is perfectly preserved, and nothingbut the water is wanting, which ancientlygushed from a copper pipe opposite the entrance,about four feet from the floor, andfell into the cistern, being supplied by pipesyet to be traced from the great reservoirnear the praetorium. This apartment is acircle enclosed by a square, in the angles ofwhich are four alcoves, called by the ancientschoose, a word derived from the Hebrew,and signifying repose. Some havegiven the name of schola to the platformround the bath on which visitors waited, butthere seems little doubt that the schola was102 POMPEIANA.generally a hemicycle connected with thatplatform.The diameter of the circle is eighteenfeet six inches. Round the whole runs awalk or ambulatory two feet four inches anda half wide. The piscina or vase itself istwelve feet ten inches in diameter, and hasaseat eleven inches wide surrounding atthe depth of ten inches below the lip, andtwo feet four from the bottom, allowing adepth of water equal to about three feet.There was a channel to get rid of the superfluouswater, and a low step at the bottomto assist in getting out of the water.The alcoves, or scholar, are five feet twoinches wide, by two feet half an inch deep.Their arches, which rise to the height of onefoot eight inches, spring from a point fivefeet six inches above the floor. Vide PlateXXVIII.The whole of the piscina, or natatio,with its seat or step, the pavement of thescholar and ambulatory, is of white marble,and in perfect preservation.The roof is a dome, or rather a cone, ofPOMPEIANA. 103which a small part of the summit is destroyed,having, in fact, risen above the accumulatedsoil of so many centuries. It appears to havebeen painted blue, and had an opening orwindow near the top, toward the south-west,possibly not glazed, as, being a cold bath,the increase of temperature was not required.The walls have been painted yellow, withcertain branches, here and there, of green.The walls of the alcoves were blue and theconcas or coves red, and the arches have apretty relieved border in stucco.About eight feet from the floor, a corniceruns round the whole, nearly eighteeninches high, coloured red, and adorned withstucco figures representing, in all appearance,the course on foot, on horseback, andin chariots.The spina, or, perhaps, the goal, is alsovisible ; and, though much ruined, the chasand the running horses with theirriders, have an air of life and verity whichseems to evince that they were at least copiedfrom sculptures of the most brilliant periodof the arts.It is, possibly, the Olympic hippodrome104 POMPEIANA.which is represented. An attempt to givean idea of the figures may be observed in theinternal frieze of the shrine in the frontispieceof this work.The men on foot seem to raise their armsas if they were athlete or boxers, and it iscurious that they either are far inferior tothe rest in spirit and design, or appear sofrom their more mutilated condition.The cistern, or bath, in this apartmentwas decidedly that termed piscina by Cicero,when, in writing to Quintus his brother, heobserves, " Latiorem piscinam voluissem ubij aetata brachia non offenderentur/' Thispassage is scarcely applicable to any vesselexcept one in which the whole body mightbe placed.The Piscina, called also natatio or natatorium,seems the only member of thebath which has not survived the revolutionof manners in the east, at least in cities, forthe cistern or vase yet exists in the neighbourhoodof many thermal waters, immersionbeing the only way of benefiting bythem.The natatorium of the baths of DiocesIonianwas 200 feet long, by half that width,the Aqua Inertia supplying copious streamsof water, which spouted forth in grottos artificiallycontrived.With the magnificence of the capital thepiscina of Pompeii cannot pretend to vie;but nothing can be more elegant, or moreaptly calculated for the purpose of bathingthan the chamber in question, of which aview is given in Plate XXVIII.It is to be supposed that many preferredthis species of bath to undergoing the perspirationof the thermal chamber ; and, asthe frigidarium alone could have producedno effect, so it must be understood that thenatatio was intended, when it is assertedthat, at one period, the cold bath was in thegreatest request. " Adeoque prevalent semperfrigid arum usus ut vix quidam alias bal-newsuterentur."It would seem possible that the vase, ornatatorium, either hot or cold, might sometimeshave had the name of solium, forthe word implies it. A solium is definedto be, among its other senses, " alveus inVOL. I. KPOMPEIANA.quern descendent lavaturi." This had aconnexion with the tepidarium, or apody-tertium, or spoliatorium, whether hot or cold.A doorway, the jambs of which are somewhatinclined, and prove that the folding-doors,which turned upon umbilici, or pivots,were calculated to shut by their own weight,conducted the visiter to the chamber 15,which was called either tepidarium, AAEI-IITHPION, apodyterium, elasothesium, orunctuarium ; for, in thermae of small dimensions,one chamber must have served formany of those purposes to which, in the imperialcity, separate apartments were allotted.It is therefore probable that, though thefrigidarium served as an apodyterium tothe cold bathers, those who took the warmbath undressed in the second chamber, 15,which was warmed, not only by a portablefire-place, or foculare, called by the Italiansbracciere, but by means of a suspended pavementheated by the distant fires of the stoveof the caldarium or laconicum. The temperaturedid not, probably, much exceed thatnecessary to impart an agreeable warmth, and^ ifM %POMPETANA. 107supply the want of the more cumbrous articlesof dress.In the tepidarium are three seats ofbronze, about six feet long and one broad.Their general form may be observed in theview, Plate XXIV., where the foculare isseen in its original position. This beautifulchamber was excavated in the autumn of1824, at which period the whole vault, orvery nearly the whole, was full of the commonpapillae. The seats are inscribed withthe name of the donor, Marcus NigidiusMacula, whose heraldic cognizance, if thatexpression were admissible, was a pun uponhis name, the legs of the seats being those ofa cow, whose head forms their upper ornament,and whose entire figure is the decorationof the foculare.The inscription runs thus : —M. NIGIDIVS. VACCVLA. P. SThe hearth, 16, is about seven feet long,and two feet six broad. It is, generally, ofbronze, and is ornamented by thirteen battlementedsummits and a lotus at the angles.K 2108 POMPEIANA.Within these is an iron lining, calculated toresist the heat of the embers; and the bottomis formed by bars of brass, on which are laidbricks supporting the pumice stones for thereception of the charcoal.By the view it will be seen that thisapartment was decorated in a manner suitableto its importance. The pavement ofwhite mosaic, with two small borders of black,the ceiling elegantly painted, the walls colouredwith crimson, and the cornice supportedby statues, all conspired to renderthis a beautiful and splendid place of relaxationfor the inhabitants of Pompeii.Signs ornate et jucundis pictures." —The section, Plate XXV., united with theplan, will assist in forming an idea of theconnexion of this room with the first andwith the third chambers ; and the suspendedfloor and hypocaust will be easily understood.Some have traced the invention ofsuspensurae, pensile, or suspended floors, tothe Sybarites, and some have imagined theyonly existed in private baths. Vitruvius directsthat the props to support these pave'^i J- ,'VfA^^ iPOMP EI AN A. 109ments should be two feet high, on whichtiles two feet lonsj should be laid for theplacing of the ornamental mosaic.In the view, Plate XXIX., which is copied,by permission, from a large drawingmade with the camera lucida by my friendM. Zahn, architectural painter to the Electorof Hesse Cassel, will be observed the curiousline of figures which are supported bya heavy projecting cornice, and themselvessustain an entablature from whence springsthe vault or roof.This cornice begins at four feet threeinches above the pavement, and is one foottwo inches and a half high, the abacus, whichis five inches and a half, included.Above this, the figures, with the entablature,rise to the height of three feet fiveinches more, and, above these, is the floweryCorinthian tracery.These figures are about two feet inheight, stand upon little square plinths ordies of three inches high, and hold theirarms in a posture fitted for assisting the headto bear the superimposed weight, much asthe giants in the temple of the Olympic110 POMPEIANA.Jupiter at Girgenti were ingeniously shownby Mr. Cockerel! to have done.They are of terra cotta, and stand withtheir backs placed against square pilastersprojecting one foot from the wall, and withan interval of one foot three inches and ahalf between each.Figures, used as supports to the musclesand corona, are mentioned by Vitruvius(Chap. X.) as architectural ornaments. Headds that the Romans called these tela-nones,and the Greeks atlantes. They havebeen called fawns on the spot, on accountof the hairy accoutrements of some of them ;but that was a dress common to all the divinitiesof remote antiquity. The word telamonseems to have, at length, been used forany sort of prop, and to have been derivedfrom the Greek word raXoLUy sustained, withoutany necessary reference to the strength ofthe hero.Hercules was also, in some manner, connectedwith the baths of the ancients ; andDion Chrysostom mentions a portion of athermo dedicated to him, possibly, however,as connected with the Palaestra ; but the usePOMPEIANA. Illof these figures in the baths of Pompeii, by-whatevername they may have been called,was evidently to ornament the separationsbetween a number of niches, or recesses, inwhich the garments of those who went intothe sanatorium, or inner apartment, to perspire,were laid up till their return.Pliny observes that the tepidarium wasLocum laxum et harem alienum a me-rideillustrates' He adds that the garmentsof bathers were left there.Six of the intervals are closed on theside nearest to the frigidarium, the reasonfor which is not apparent, though there wasstill a sufficient number vacant to have containedthe garments of the visitors.The heat in this chamber was a drywarmth produced by the hypocaust and thefoculare, and, consequently, an agreeableplace for perfuming, anointing, and all theother operations after the sudatory.The ancients had an astonishing numberof oils, soaps, and perfumes ; and their wash-ballsseem to have had the general name ofsmeomata, a word derived from the Greek.Among the oils are named the mendesium,112 POMPEIANA.megalium, metopium, amaracinum, cyprussurinam, nardinum, spicatum, andjasmine ; and Heliogabalus never bathedwithout oil of saffron or crocus, which wasthought most precious. We hear also ofnitre and aphronitrum in the baths. Tothese were added all kinds of odoriferouspowders, called diapasmata. The cyprianwas not only a perfume, but was supposedto put a stop to further perspiration, and itsname has been retained to the present daysPersons of lower condition sometimesused, instead of soap, meal of lupins, calledmomentum, which, with common meal, isyet used in the north of England ; while therich carried their own most precious unguentsto the thermae in phials of alabaster,gold, and glass, which were of such commonuse, both in ordinary life and at funerals,that they have very frequently been foundin modern times, when they acquired thename of laboratories, from a mistakennotion concerning their original destination.Pliny mentions that, in the apodyteriumor tepidarium, was the anaesthesia, or placefor anointing, called also in Latin uncto-Plate ODPCs.TjvStt'WG*!!. Kr^ca»«i*"B3nte4V^«°*°' Sears ftCVAl.'LT OF THE TF. PIDARIUM.i<rl>«TtJfnningsft'VfiQiam Chapbii.62.0ieap«He.SritemT3M 13830POMPEIANA. 113rum, where persons called, from their office,punctures were employed. It is to be supposedthat, in the great thermae of the capital,this uXstTT'/i^iov, or unctuarium, was aseparate chamber.A verse of Lucilius, quoted by Green inhis work " De Mastication Romanorum,''describes the operations which took placein this apartment :Scabor, suppellor, des qua mor, pumice, ornor^Explore, pingor "The third apartment, 12, for the use ofthose who frequented the hot baths, is enteredby a door opening from the tepidwhich closed by its own weight, and,it is probable, was generally shut, to preventthe admission of cold or less heatedair. Vitruvius says that the laconicum andsudatories ought to join the tepidarium ;and that, when these were separate rooms,they were entered by two doors from theapodyterium.This chamber, though perhaps not decoratedwith all the art displayed in thetepidarium, possibly because the constant114 POMP£IANi\.ascent of steam would have destroyed thecolours of the ceiling or vault, was, nevertheless,delicately ornamented with mouldingsof stucco, which have an elegant andbeautiful effect.The view of this chamber is given inPlate XXXI. It is taken from the warmbath, 13, and the alcove, with the labrum,14, form the principal objects.Not only is the pavement suspended inthe manner recommended by Vitruvius, butthe walls are so constructed that a columnof heated air encloses the apartment on allsides.This is not effected by flues, but by oneuniversal flue formed by a lining of bricks ortiles, strongly connected with the outer wall bycramps of iron, yet distant about four inchesfrom it, so as to leave a space by which thehot air might ascend from the furnace, andincrease, almost equally, the temperature ofthe whole room.Some parts of this casing having fallen,the whole of this admirable contrivance isnow apparent ; and the pavement having, insome places, been forced in, by the fall ofriTj^tS-^y^seicrSKSTt^ CPOMPEIANA. 115some part of the vault, the method of suspendingit was, at the period of the excavation,sufficiently visible.In the view, Plate XXXI., it will be observedthat scarcely any thing was placed insymmetry with the centre ; the circular windowin the alcove, with its ornamental dolphinsin stucco, being to the left, and thetwo side-windows in the vault being neitherequal in size nor situation.This may be accounted for, by supposingthat these holes were pierced in the vault, inplaces where fewer obstacles to the transmissionof light existed on the exteriorof the roof above. The walls are paintedyellow, with pilasters and cornice in red, andthe alcove is prettily decorated with colouredpanels or compartments, in relievo, generallypainted alternately in blue and red,and adorned with figures ill preserved, asmay be seen in the view.Vitruvius directs that, on account of thepenetrating vapour, the roof of the cal-dariusshould, if possible, be stone. Herecommends also certain precautions wherethat cannot be effected.1 l6 Pompeii A.The most striking object in the apartmentis the harum, 14, placed in the centreof the alcove which forms one extremity ofthe caldarium, as the hot water bath. Thisconsists in a vase or tazza of white marble,not less than eight feet in diameter, and, internally,not more than eight inches in depth.In the centre is a projection, or umbo, risingfrom the bottom, in the middle of which abrass tube has thrown up the water, which,judging from the customary process in anoriental bath, was probably cold, or as nearlyso as was judged expedient for pouring uponthe head of the bather before he quitted thisheated atmosphere.This is supposed in the East a necessarypractice ; but it must be understood thatthe water is by no means cold except bycomparison.It is not a little remarkable, that thiscircular basin of marble is placed on a massof volcanic stone of oval form, ^vhich, besidesbeing too bulky for the tazza, injuresits appearance by hiding a portion. It isnot impossible that certain cracks in themarble may have suggested the adoption ofPO^IPRIANA. 11?this precaution to prevent the increase ofthe evil.The harum was presented to the thermaeof Pompeii by a private individual, whosename, together with the value, is inscribedin letters of bronze yet remaining on the lipof the basin.CN. Melissa. CN. F.A PRO. M. Stain.M. F. RVFO. II. VIR. ITER. ID. LABRViM.EX. D. D EX. P. I. F. C. CONSTAT. HSP. CC.L.The position of this labrum seems, insome respects, to accord with the instructionsgiven by Vitruvius for the constructionof such a vase: — " Scholar autem labrorumita fieri oportet spacious ut cum prioressoccupaverint local circumspectantes reliquiaerecte stare posset." — Vit. 1. v. c. x. Hesays also — " Labrum sub lumina faciendumvidetur ne states circum suis umbras obscurestluce." Even this, as applied to ourlabrum, is not very intelligible.Andrews Bacchus, who has written andcollected much of what the ancients haveleft us on the subject of baths, says thatsome labra existed made of glass ; and he118 POMPEIANA.very sensibly concludes, that all the greattazza of Rome, like that at present on theQuirinal, were originally the labra of thepublic or private baths of the city. Fico-ron mentions libri in Rome of basalt, granite,porphyry, and alabaster, and observesthat many of these had a lion's head in thecentre. Mention is also made of the labrumin a private bath by Cicero, in a letterto his wife Dementia : — " Labrum si non estin balneo fac ut sit''The opening for the lamp, which has beenformerly noticed as giving light, on one side,to the Doric portico, and on the other to thecaldarium, is visible above the labrum, andhad, anciently, a convex glass to prevent theentrance of cold air from without.The view, Plate XXXI., which was takenwith the camera lucida, will give an idea ofthe proportions of the semicircular and chamber,which is thirty-seven feet long, by seventeenfeet four inches in breadth. Havingbeen taken from the hot bath at the northend, the first objects in the foreground arethe step and the brink by which the bathersentered it. The surbase, or plinth, is tenPOMPEIANA. 119inches high, and the wall is seven feet highup to the lowest cornice, which is, like thepilasters, painted red.From the pavement of the caldarium,which was of white tesserae, with two smallborders of black, bathers ascended by twosteps so as to sit down conveniently uponthe third or marble wall, one foot four inchesbroad, which formed the brink of the vaseor vat of hot water. Thence one step dividingthe whole depth of the cistern, notexceeding two feet and half an inch, permittedthem to immerse themselves b}^ degreesin the heated fluid. The whole lengthof the cistern is fifteen feet, and the breadthfour. About ten persons might have satupon the marble pavement, without inconvenience,at the same moment, immersed inthe hot water. It is evident, from the shallownessof this cistern, that persons musthave sat on the pavement in order to havebeen sufficiently immersed; and,accordinglj%the side next the north wall is constructedwith marble, sloping like the back of a chairin an angle well adapted to the support ofthe body in that position.]'2() POMPKIANA.Hot water entered this bath, 13, at oneof the angles, immediately from the caldron9, which boiled on the other side of the wall.There appears to have been a moveablestone in the pavement, near this cistern,possibly for permitting the entrance of acolumn of hot air on certain occasions.This chamber, from the water which musthave fallen upon the pavement, and the distillationcaused by the vapour from so greata quantity of heated liquid, must have alwaysbeen wet, and must have had an outlet, calledfusorium, to which the Poor inclined. Perhapsthe opening near the hot bath served, inpart, for this purpose. The floor was foundmuch damaged and broken in by the fall ofa part of the arch on its first discovery.The seats in this chamber were probablyof wood, as the whole must have been constantlyin a state of humid heat, which wouldhave corroded furniture of bronze like thoseof Macula in the tepidarium.In that portion of the vaulted roof yetremaining are no fewer than four openingsfor the admission of light, and the transmissionof hot air and vapour.POMPEIANA. 121These must have been glazed, or closedWith linen windows, called vela, for it wasprobably previous to that common use ofglass which evidently prevailed at Pompeii,that the brazen shields, or circular shutters,mentioned by Vitruvius as hanging by chains,for the purpose of opening and shutting thewindows of the laconicum or sudatory, werenecessary It appears, from that author, thatthese shields were lowered to open, or raisedto close, the circular openings in the roofof the laconicum. Over the kibrum is seenone of these circular windows.An author named Robortellius, in thecollection of Grievous and Gronovius, saj^sthat the openings in the roof of the baths ofPisa are yet visible, and are, some of them,six feet in diameter. In the Moorish bathsat Granada, in the palace of the Alhambra,a number of small orifices exist ; and, inTurkish baths, these holes are generally numerousand covered with convex glasses.It is evident that, when the vaults wereentire, none of these apartments could havebeen supplied with a cheerful light ; andVOL. I. L122 POMPEIANA.that, when the brazen shields were in use,the darkness must have increased with theincrease of temperature.In some instances, these shields seem tohave condensed the vapours, and causedthem to fall in showers; and this, which musthave followed of course, is mentioned tohave happened in the hemisphere of thelaconicum.It may be supposed that, in an establishmentso small as this at Pompeii, this innerroom, or caldarium, might unite in itselfmore than one of the numerous appellationsin use in the Roman capital.The caldarium seems to be the hot bath,the absolute vessel of hot water, the Xovr^ovor lavacrum ; but this was always close tothe laconicum. " Ex laconicum aditus incaldarium.'' The words, however, calcarious,vaporarium, sanatorium, and laconic,seem to have been often indiscriminatelyused, to say nothing of hypocau-stum, which, at Pompeii, applies equally tothe tepidarium, and signifies, in fact, anychamber heated by subterraneous flues. TheyPOMPEIANA. 123were, as it was said, first invented by the Sybarites,and, in private houses, were calledWilkins says that the laconicum is a circularstove ; and it certainly appears that itwas often circular and full of warm vapoursfrom stoves and hot water. A certain Origobserves that the laconicum was veryhot, yet exceedingly humid, which provesthat he alluded to a bath where the laconicand caldarium were united like thisat Pompeii. Under the pavement of thelaconicum was the furnus vTroy.ocva-rov.The laconicum, even in baths of greatdimensions, seems to have been often small,as many persons preferred producing theperspiration by exercise. For this purposesuch thermae were provided with all theadjuncts of paleestra, xysta, ephebium, co-lyceum,monasterium, spha^risterium, peristaltic,theatre, and other endless divisions,which augmented the imperial thermo: ofRome to the size of moderate towns, butwhich have no existence at Pompeii. Thepresence of so many of these apartments hasL 2124 POMPEIANA.been the cause of the difficulties which havearisen in comprehending the accounts of theancients.It was the custom, to perspire first, and,after the operation of the strigil, to resortto the warm-water bath. The strig^il is wellknown to have been a sort of concave andsickle-shaped scraper, made of bone, iron,copper, or silver, for cleansing the skinfrom the copious perspiration caused bj^ thelaconicum. It was by no means a veryagreeable operation, and Suetonius says Augustuswas a sufferer by its having been tooroughly used. Its place is now supplied, inaTurkish bath, by a sort of bag or gloveof camels' hair, which, without pain, peels oft'the perspiration in large flakes, and leavesthe skin in a most wonderfully luxurious stateof softness and polish. Persons of quality carriedwith them their own apparatus, whencePerseus, in Sat. V., saysI puer et struggles Crispin ad balnea defer."After the warm water, a cooler stream wasprobably poured on the head from the .125brush, and this was the preparation for encounteringthe lower temperature of the ,whence, after the use of unguents,it was thought safe to enter the frigidarium,and thence to pass into the open air.The there must have been of great advantageto the practice of medicine. Alexanderthe Great is said to have slept in thebath during a fever ; and certainly, whereperspiration was the object, such a plancould scarcely fail. They practised cupping,and bleeding with leeches also, in thelaconicum.The physicians of antiquity have writtenmuch on the subject of thermae and theireffects, without always rendering the subjectvery intelligible.Galen, Book X., says a bather shouldfirst go into the warm air, thence into thewarm water or Xovr^ov, thence into the cold.After this he should enter the tepidariumor apodyterium, where the scraping off ofthe perspiration should be performed, andwhere Celsus says persons were anointed.This is not very comprehensible; but CellPOMPEIANA.sus, Book I. c. IV., seems to have givenreal information, and that which is applicableto the Pompeian thermae, when he tellsus that people perspired a little in the tepidthence entered the caldarium orlaconicum, and retired in order through thehot, the tepid, and the cold apartments.Galen says that he who neglects the coldchamber, or cold water, is in danger fromopen pores on passing into the open air.This may serve to show that the tepidariumwas not the last chamber recommended byhim ; and it is not improbable that some, whowere ordered by the physician to pass " fromthe laconicum to the caldarium, and thenceto the apodyterium, from whence they areto use the solium frigidum,'' might, in thebaths of Pompeii, have plunged into the natatorium,18, as a termination of the process.Solum is defined to be either a vesselto wash in, or a hollow into which thosewho washed descended.In places not affording the conveniencefor immersion in the solium frigid, aspersionsof cold water, like a shower-bath.POMPEIANA. 127are recommended ; and this is, in fact, resortedto in the Turkish baths, where thenatatorium does not commonly exist.It is observable that those who bathe,or rather perspire, in the Turkish hamam,very rarely, if ever, take cold on returningto the open air. A disease depending onimpeded perspiration could indeed scarcelyexist where every thing like perspiration hadbeen previously so carefully removed.From the frigidarium, 17, a very narrowpassage ran to the furnace 9, upon whichwere placed caldrons to the number of three,one above another, and possibly, as maybegathered from an inspection of the ruins,placed in three columns of three caldronseach, so that the water in the uppermost orninth vase, nearest the cisterns 10 and 11,would be very nearly cold. One author hasobserved that, in some instances, in the pavementof the frigidarium was a hole throughwhich the furnarius, or fire-lighter, went to.the proprium, or furnace.Praetorium, proprium, ostium furni,fornax, all seem terms applicable to this128 POMPEIANA.part of the tierra, which was under thecare of persons called also fornacatores andfurnacatores. Vitruvius says, on the left ofthe hj^pocaust or fornax inferior were themale baths, and on the right those of thewomen, a position according with those ofPompeian. A Pompeian inscription, relatingto those who had the care of the fires, isgiven by Mazzocchi or Rossini —Secundum. AEDFVRNACATOR ROGIn the section of the baths, Plate XXV.,may be observed, on the right, the threevases placed one above the other over thefire.They were named, like the chambers, accordingto their situations, the lowest beingthe caldarium, the next the tepidarium, andthe last the frigidarium, though, probably,no water was absolutely cold in the wholebuilding:.The form and proportions of thesevases or caldrons are given in the section,Plate XXV., from the impression they havePOMPRIANA. 129very visibly left in the cement which fixedthem.The caldron immediately above theflames was of course boiling; and, on thewater being withdrawn for use, it was contrivedthat an equal portion should replaceit from the tepidarium, into which at thesame time the frigidarium was discharged.It does not seem improbable, from theappearance of the place, that there werethree columns of these caldrons at Pompeiidependent on a single fire ; and if so, theupper caldron of the column nearest thecistern, 10, contained water nearly cold, andhence that was probably derived which rosein the centre of the labriim, and must havehad a higher level.From one of these, or the cisterns adjoining,the circular bath, or natatorium,was also supplied, through tubes yet to betraced in the wall.We read of some of these vases, or cisterns,which were made of lead, and calledmiliaria; but these were, of course, far fromthe furnace, and were so named because ofPOMPEIANA.the thousand measures of water contained,or of the pounds of lead employed.In the section, only the chambers of themen, or one set of baths, are given, as theplate would either have been considerablylonger, or the objects would have been toomuch diminished.POMPEIANAATRIUMCHAPTER VII.WOMEN S BATHS.'/jiL^^mThe abuses of promiscuous bathing hadbecome so flagrant, that Spartans says Hadrianordered the separation of the sexes,which had, however, been done ineffectuallybefore. Eunuchs were appointed to attend inthe women's baths, as Lampridius observes ;132 POMPEIANA.and a Roman law makes the offence offorcibly entering the women's baths by aman capital. " Vir qui thermal ulteriusdiscrete violenter intrude pra3sump-sisset capite puniretur/'This is, of course, still retained in doubleforce in the East. At Athens the TurkishDistal of the Acropolis was, in the presentcentury, forced to fly, from the bare suspicionof having been in the baths at anhour dedicated to the women.Vitruvius, Book v., shows that the bathsof the two sexes were not, even in his time,the same, though, for the convenience of thestoves, they were contiguous.Uti calidaria muliebria viriliaque conjunct,et in iisdem regionibus sint collocata,sic enim efficiebatur uti vasari ex communis sit eorum.''The baths of Baden, cited by Wilkins inhis Vitruvius, were double; those of the femalesbeing an exact repetition of the men'sapartments. Without relying too much onthe information of Vitruvius, who says thatthe baths of the women were on the right ofthe furnace, it seems highly probable thatF ® M F.rrici-— ■?etm£rSears*CfFRIGIDARIUM & PICIISIA. IN THE WOMJITST's BATH:- ftVRIHain. Chant 62 Cn?POMPKIANA. 133the females of Pompeii, without waiting foran hour set apart, had baths consecrated totheir exclusive use ; and, if so, the chambersmarked in the plan 3, 4, and 5, seem thosebest adapted to their purposes.Bonucci, in his instructive work, has imaginedthese to have constituted the malethermal ; but only from a sentiment of moderngallantry which would assign to theladies the handsomer apartment ; whereas itwould appear, that a smaller and less airysuite of chambers would have been equallyconvenient for the women, who did not, likethe men, spend half their lives at the bath,but only frequented it for the purposes ofhealth or cleanliness.It might also be supposed that ladies ofrank had, as at Rome and at the villa ofDiomedes, in the suburb of Pompeii, theirown baths, so that females of consequencewere not seen at the public thermal ; but,be that as it may, we find in the little room,1, a place where either towels or clothes weredried or suspended. In the room 3, or ,we find a cold bath or sanatorium,2.134 POM PET AN A.In the next chamber, 4, is the tepid; and that marked 5 is the laconicum,with its caldarium or hot water, 7', and,below it, is a stove, 6, or hypocaust, forheating the whole. Near the entrance ispainted in red lettersM. C. V. VB. JED. OVF. COLEPIVSROG RicardoAll the rooms yet retain, in perfection, theirvaulted roofs.The first chamber is twenty-five feet long,Plate XXVII., by twelve feet nine inches.The view seems, at first sight, defective inperspective on the left ; but the room is, inone part, one foot six wider than the other.The piscina, or bath, is six feet eight wide infront, by seven feet four in breadth. The flooris in white mosaic, with a little border ofblack. The walls have been ornamented withyellow pilasters, on a blue or black ground.The light is, by no means, strong, but anotherwindow may have existed over the piscina tothe north. The tepid arum is about twenty feetlong and nearly square. The roof is vaulted.The floor is suspended, by way of compensate135tion for the absence of the focukire of bronze ;but the heat must have been moderated by thedistance. The walls are panelled in yellow,with red pilasters, and the light enters througha small window far from the ground.The laconicum has a fire-place, 6, on alower level, which, as the floor is ruined,may possibly have been lighted from within,and have been approached by two or threesteps. The Poor was either whole or in partsuspended. There was not, in this chamber,a sufficiency of light to have rendered it serviceableas a place of exercise, as some havesupposed.The whole is vaulted, and, perhaps, theremay have been a cistern or reservoir abovethe arch. A vase, or solium, or labrum, atthe north end of this chamber is much ruined,but may have served for hot or cold water,or any of the purposes to which such vesselswere applicable.The court or yard, 8, may have been theplace where wood was piled for burning ;and two rude pillars, yet standing, may havesupported a roof of tiles for keeping it dry.A flight of stairs ran hence to the roof of136 po:mpeiana.the baths, which retained, when discovered,their original covering of plaster or stucco.On the right of the entrance into thesewomen's baths, is a stone wall of good masonryand singular thickness.In the alley, or vicus, on the outside ofthis is the mark of a sort of gutter to directthe falling water either from the roof or thecistern.It is supposed that there was an archedor other connexion between the thermae andthe buildings on the other side of this vicus,opposite the house of Pansa.We have now given an account of thedifferent parts of the thermae, and endeavouredto apples to the remains the discordantand unintelligible accounts of the ancients,all the fragments of which have beencollected in the works re-edited by Grievousand Gronovius.The subject has unavoidably led to a protracteddissertation, for which the apologymust be the interesting, and hitherto unsuccessfullyattempted, adjustment of facts tolocalities.The public was informed, by a bell placedPOINIPEIANA. 137above the thermae, when the water was heated,and the baths open. When a certain hourwas passed, the fires were extinguished. Thehour for bathing, according to Pliny, waseight in winter, and nine in summer ; butthis must have frequently varied. JuliusCapitoline relates that, before the time ofAlexander Severus, the thermae were notopened before daylight, and were closed beforenight ; and Hadrian made a law, thatthose who bathed on account of any infirmityshould have the use of the public thermo?only till the eighth hour.The baths were closed, as are moderntheatres, on occasions of public mourning,according to Livy; and a very serious inconvenienceit must have been to a peoplewho thought themselves entitled to eat asecond dinner after perspiration, and seemto have passed the greater part of their livesat the thermae.As fashions changed, some physicians,according to Pliny, attacked the practice ofbathing. Thessaly, in the time of Neroand Charms, wrote against it ; but Telephus,the grammarian, says Galen, bathed twiceVOL. I. M138 Pomeraniamonth in winter, three times a month inspring, and four times a month in summer,and lived, in consequence, to the age of onehundred without disease.Baths, by which are understood preparedbaths, are mentioned in the East by the sacredwriters, and by Homer. Vegetius saj^s,however, that the senate formed the CampusMartins near theTiber, that, after exercising,the Roman youth might bathe: and, in 440U. C. we are told by Festus Pompous, andnot before, a piscina publica was constructedad Clivum Capitoline juxta Tiberius''But this only provided for the first and mostsimple part of the process. The names of theparts of the thermae were all Greek, and derived,with the invention, from that people.Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle talk of bathsas common ; and Hippocrates, about the timeof the Peloponnesian war, recommends theiruse. About the time of Augustus, baths wereinnumerable in Rome; and we see, by thesplendid work of Mr. Lyons, that even theRoman villas of England possessed them.In process of time, some of the baths inthe capital were found unnecessary AureliusPOMP EI AN A. 139shut np several. Heliogabalus, among othercaprices, bathed only once in some of thebaths and then destroyed them.They seem to have been used, more orless, in Europe till the wars of the Vandals,Goths, Huns, and Longobardi, after whichthe ruined thermae were frequently convertedinto churches.It is probable that the thermae often becamethe favourite resort of the vicious andthe profligate, and, as such, liable to theanimadversions and reprehension of thefathers of the church, whence the name ofbagnio has become synonymous with brothelin our own language. J. B. Cassius, whohas written a treatise " De Themis et Bal-newsveterum'' says, that, as Christianityprevailed, the taste for ablution diminished.It is curious that a superstition should haveprevailed according to which those who hadbeen baptized were supposed no longer tostand in need of washing. Cassius citesauthors who affirm that a whole nation, onthe confines of Armenia, was, by nature, stinking;and a patriarch of Constantinople refusedbaptism to some who sought it, not31 2140 POMPEIANA.from conscientious motives, but merely asan easy way of sweetening their persons.Fortunatus is cited, who talks of Jews christenedby St. Avitus in the year 579, who,from exhaling an unsavoury odour, became,by the operation of the ceremony, perfectlyambrosial.It is probable, however, that the thermaewere destroyed or neglected during the troublesof the middle ages ; but it is somewhatremarkable, that when the Spaniards attempted,by force, the conversion of theMoors of Granada, ]\Iarmol, p. 133, vol. i.declares, that, in the furtherance of this object,not only were they forbidden the useof their own language and dress by the emperorDon Carlos, but baths, either in publicor in private, were especially prohibitedto persons of every condition, and those whichexisted, even in private houses, were orderedto be destroyed.The head and tail pieces of this chapterrepresent the plans of two baths excavatedin the last century at Stable. There canbe little doubt that, on coming to the pavementof the natatorium encircling the .china, the workmen thought they had foundthe bottom, though the vase was yet filledwith earth. These pkms were in the possessionof Signor Carlo Bonucci in the year1827.These are supposed to have appertainedto some of the villas which occupied the siteof the deserted city of Stabile. A section ofthe laconicum of one of these thermae hasbeen preserved by La Vega, who was employedin the excavations, so exactly similarto that which is given in this work as the laconicumat Pompeii, that the publication ofit might have forestalled all the informationnow acquired by the recent discoveries.POMPEIANA.CHAP'J'ER VIII.HOUSE OF THE TRAGIC POET, DISCOVEREDAT THE CLOSE OF THE YEAR 1824.Of all the habitations of private individualsyet discovered at Pompeii, the house,to which the name of the Tragic Poet hasI>ravm 'hj^ic^ G^^E^ravadBj-WSehiaaJImgerIP©MF]SSJIRobert ZcTOao-ii tWiHiam Cha.pJm.62, Chc^side. JancX»*ia31.POMPKIANA. 143been given, has excited the most livelyinterest in the public mind; and this, notso much from its magnitude, which wouldscarcely place it among the houses of thericher citizens, but on account of the paintingsand mosaic with which it was decorated.A reference to the plan, Plate XXXV.,will explain the distribution of the apartmentsand their dimensions. If the tworooms, situated on each side of the vestibuleor entrance, were shops, the doors connectingthem with the same vestibule, contraryto the general custom, would seem to indicatethat the proprietor was concerned insome sort of trade. This species of chamberwas called apothecary by the Greeks, andtavern by the Romans; but, if the wideopenings toward the street be not certainindications of a shop, it does not seem impossiblethat the rooms might have beenoccupied by the servants of the family.On the pier left of the door was writtenin red characters —M. HOLCONIVM. .EDC. GAVIN I VMThis inscription, unfortunately, gives no144 POMPKIANA.information with regard to the proprietor ofthe house. The three following are scratchedwith a nail on the outer w all ; and the first,which is reversed in the original, seems tooffer a puzzle to the passenger:IVSTVSIVCVNDOI-I-I-IRMISKOS.The following letters are on the pier atthe angle of a house forming, with this ofthe poet, the entrance of the vicus of thefullonicae.7iinii>l-niA/|SAMEWmA learned Neapolitan has translated theEtruscan part of this inscription. He saysit signifies, " You shall hear a poem of Numerous''To one unskilled in the language,it appears to be the name of an owner ofthe house, and might be M. P. Cepius.The doors turned upon pivots in two umbiliciof bronze fixed into a marble threshold,the outer part of which rose about an inchabove the rest. This, with two door-postsPOMPEIANA. 145of wood, also fixed in holes in the marble,served to maintain the door in its positionwhen shut.On entering, the first object is a blackdog spotted with white, represented on thepavement in mosaic, collared and chained,and in the attitude of barking;. The collaris of red leather. Below the animal is inscribed,in very legible characters, caveCAN EM, a sentence, probably, not uncommonlyplaced at the entrance of Romanhouses, as we learn from a passage of PetroniusArbiter: — " Canis ingens catena sanctus,non longe ab ostiarii cella in parieteserat pectus, superque quadrate litter scriptumCAVE, CAVE Canes''Below the inscription may be observed ahole in the pavement for the reception ofthe rain water which might chance to enterfrom without, much in the same manner aswe find a similar orifice under the doors andwindows in modern Italy, where it is thoughteasier to lead the water out again into thestreet than to prevent it from entering at all.The dog seems to have been placed as asort of guardian of the porta antics, or frontPOMPEIANA,door. The passage entry, or vestibule, isabout six feet wide, and nearly thirty inlength; and a curtain, or door, may havebeen placed at the entry of the atrium. Statuescould not have existed in this vestibule,as they are said by Saint Augustine, DeCiv. Dei, B. IV. Cap. viii., to have done inRoman houses. He says that three godsguarded the doors : " Forculum furious, Car-deancarding, Lamenting rimini'' Theseprotectors of doors, hinges, and thresholdsmight have been painted on the wall; but, asyet, no traces of them have been observed inthe habitations of Pompeii.The atrium is about twenty-eight feet inlength by twenty, with its impluvium nearthe centre, under which was a cistern whencethe water might be drawn through a flutedhollow cylinder of marble.The floor is prettily paved with whitetesserae, spotted, at intervals, with black ; and,round the impluvium, is a well-executed interlacedpattern, also in black.The following inscription on a slab ofmarble is said to have been found in thisatrium on the 5th of March, in the yearPOMPEIANA. 1471825. There seems to have been nothingto afford room for a conjecture as to how itcame there. It might, perhaps, have beenthrown into an excavation which the ancientsthemselves seem to have made in this spot,or have fallen from an upper wall.L. CAECILIVS . FELIXQ. Follies . FELIXQ. Arrives . Heronsic pro pianist. Mint . AVGVSTEX DD JVSSVM. Pompous . MarcelVALERI FlaccidD . V . J . DA. Perennial iMERVLINIL. Belli LucretiaD.V.V . A . S . Pap.C. Caesar L. PAVLLOCOSSPerhaps, as the inscription does not seemto allude clearly to the owner of the house,its chief merit may consist in having beenengraved in the first year after the birth ofour Saviour, about 753 years after the building;of Rome, when Caius Julius Caesar andLucius iEmilius Paulus were consuls.On the left, on quitting the vestibule,yet remain the legs and part of the body148 POMPEIANA.of a beautiful Venus painted in tenura, ordistemper, upon the wall. The colouring isquite that of Titian, and the attitude notunlike that of the Venus dei Medici. Onehand is held up over the head, and supportsa light, undulating blue drapery. On theground is a dove and the mj rule branch, theemblems of the goddess. More of this exquisitepainting might, possibly, have beenpreserved by greater care in excavating,though the plaster, in many parts, adheredbut slightly to the wall.Still proceeding to the left, the first smallchamber is painted of a yellow colour withblack pilasters ; and, from this, a narrow staircaseascended to the upper story of the house.That an upper floor was usual at Pompeiimay be proved by the frequent staircases,and the remains of the painted walls of theupper rooms, above the holes for placingthe beams over the lower apartments ; whilethe slight construction of these walls rendersvery improbable the existence of any stillsuperior chambers, though Juvenal remarks.Sat. III., that the houses very commonlyfell with a tremendous crash. During thePOMPEIANA. 149excavation, the fragments of the mosaic pavementof the upper floor, with a head of Bacchus,were discovered in this house; and,what is curious, considering the evident indicationsof a previous examination of theprice, probably not long after the fatal eruption,several articles of value were found,which appeared to have fallen from above.This circumstance gave rise to the ideathat the house must have belonged to ajeweller, or rich goldsmith, and nothing yetobserved tends materially to invalidate theopinion ; for, except the mosaic, there is nothingpeculiarly devoted either to poetryor tragedy in the mansion. All the otherhouses of Pompeii were decorated with paintingsof mythological or heroic subjects, because,in fact, the poets and painters seldomsung or painted any other.The position of the house must have beeneasily ascertained by the survivors after thecatastrophe, from its proximity to the thermae,the arches of which, as well as the dome ofthe piscina, resisted the weight of the volcanicmatter ; and the riches of the proprietorwere naturally the incentives to the1.50 POMPEIANA.research which followed, and of which thevestiges were so apparent.The unfortunate proprietors were, probablyamong the victims of the eruption, forskulls, or the fragments of them, were foundon the spot; and a variety of trinkets wereconsidered as the indications of the toilet,or dressing-box, of the lady of the house.Among; these were remarked two necklacesof gold; a twisted gold cord; fourbracelets, one weighing, seven ounces, andformed into serpents; a child's necklace;two small bracelets; four ear-rings, and anengraved stone mounted in a large ring.Two coins, also of gold, were found.Forty-two silver coins, a bracciere forfire, and a variety of utensils of bronze andearthenware, formed part of the riches ofthis house, after the ancient excavators hadalready searched the place.In one of the adjoining houses of refreshment,the skeleton of an unhappy proprietorwas also discovered. He had, in vain, soughtshelter under a staircase of stone, where hewas probably suffocated. His treasure wasfound near, and consisted of rings of gold.POMPEIANA. 151with car-rings of the same metal, togetherwith about 140 coins of brass and silver.It has usually been agreed, that, in Romanhouses, the lower or ground floor wasappropriated to the master of the house, andto the more magnificent apartments, whilethe upper was occupied by the servants. InaGreek house, as we learn from the celebratedoration of Lysias, they were changeable;and, possibly, they were so in the habitationsof Pompeii, which are, With difficulty,reducible exactly to the rules givenby Vitruvius for the houses of either people.Euphiletes, the client of Lysias the celebratedorator, had a house consisting of twofloors; the lower usually occupied by themales of the family, and the upper servingas a gynecseum, or apartment for the womenand children. On some occasion, for theconvenience of nursing, the uses of the apartmentswere changed ; and Sostratus, a friendof Euphiletes, is mentioned particularly ashaving gone up stairs even to supper, thenurse and child being always below. Thewife slept, at night, with the husband above.One night, the nurse, having concealed in a152 POMPEIAXA.lower room the lover of the wife, pinchedthe child till its cries were heard by the parents.Euphiletes, surprised at the inhumanityof his wife, who at first seemed unwillingto attend to the child, ordered herto get up and go to its assistance ; but, observingthat, as she went out, she cautiouslyturned the key and locked him into hisroom, and having, on former occasions,heard the street-door open while she wasabsent, he suspected there might be somemystery in the business, though he had beenalways told that the noise was occasioned byhis wife going to a neighbour's for a light,as the lamp below had gone out, and thechild wanted help. Having found means toopen his door, Euphiletes went out, unperceived,in search of Sostratus, his friend,leaving the street-door ajar, that he mightre-enter at pleasure to detect the culprits,who were, accordingly, surprised by thebreaking open of their chamber.This description of facts seems such asmight have taken place in a house like thisat Pompeii ; and, from the absence of allprivacy during the days it seems scarcelyPOMPEIANA. 153credible that the apartment of the femalescould have been on the ground floor in thehouse of the Tragic Poet, or, perhaps, anyother in the city. When the porta antics,or great door, was opened, every one fromthe street could see nearly all that passed,except in the triclinium of Leda, which was,in its turn, completely exposed from the otherstreet on opening the porta poetica ; so thatthe females of the family could have had noretreat except, like Penelope, they inhabitedthe upper rooms of the house.It is very probable that the custom ofclosing the doors was also at least as unfrequentin ancient as in modern Italy. Thehouses, however, were so contrived, that thesun could generally shine through the com-pluvium into the atrium, or cavaedium, anadvantage not possessed by the houses ofthe present day, where the court is usuallydarkened and rendered damp by the heightof the surrounding buildings. This species ofconstruction must have rendered the housesof the ancients more habitable during thewinter whenever the sun was visible ; but,VOL. I. N154 POMPEIANA.notwithstanding all that maj be said or imaginedof the mildness of the climate, thewant of fire and of chimneys must have reducedthe ancient, as it does the moderninhabitants of Italy, to enduring, under additionalclothing. that state of discomfortand cold damp which is always producedwhenever the sky is overcast, between themonths of October and April.The climate of Pompeii is, however, particularlygenial during the winter; and, if thesun be visible, the situation is such as to mitigatethe severity of the season, Awhile theheat of summer is agreeably tempered bythe sea-breeze, which is almost periodical.From the angle of the atrium, near thatsort of cubiculum or chamber which containsthe staircase, nearly the whole of thehouse is visible, and that spot has accordinglybeen chosen for the view given inPlate XXXVI.The impluvium, with its border of mosaic,is seen in the foreground. On the rig-ht sideis the entrance into a small cubiculum. Onthe right of that door is the invaluable SisW.GeXi.pjLrijaved "by K.Mo;F © M F B E I.ACHILLES Aid BE-ISEIc?!fcldt7 rr^rrScra *C'POMPEIANA. looture of Achilles restoring; Briseis to the heralds,who were to re-conduct her to herfather.This is, perhaps, the most beautiful specimenof ancient painting which has beenpreserved to our times ; and it has been themeans of awakening the attention of artistsand of the public to the hitherto depreciatedmerit of the masters of antiquity. — Vide PlateXXXIX. The size of this painting is fourfeet wide by four feet two inches high.The scene seems to take place in the tentof Achilles, who sits in the centre. Patroclus,with his back toward the spectator, andwith a skin of deeper red, leads in, from theright, the lovely Briseis arrayed in a longand floating veil of apple-green. Her faceis beautiful; and, not to dwell on the archnessof her eye, it is evident that the voluptuouspouting of her ruby lip was imaginedby the painter as one of her most bewitchingattributes. Achilles presents thefair one to the heralds on the left; and hisattitude, his manly beauty, and the magnificentexpression of his countenance are inimitable.N 2156 POMPEIANA.The tent seems to be divided by a drapersabout breast-high, and of a sort of darkbluish-green, like the tent itself. Behindthis stand several warriors, the golden shieldof one of whom, whether intentionally or noton the part of the painter, forms a species ofglory round the head of the principal hero.It is, probably, the copy of one of themost celebrated pictures of antiquity.When first discovered, the colours werefresh, and the flesh, particularly, had thetransparency of Titian. It suffered muchand unavoidably during the excavation, andsomething from the means taken to preserveit, when a committee of persons qualified tojudge had decided that the wall on which itwas painted was not in a state to admit ofits removal with safety. At length, after anexposure of more than two years, it wasthought better to attempt to transport it tothe Studio at Naples, than to suffer it entirelyto disappear from the wall. It was,accordingly, removed, with success, in thesummer of the year 1826, and it is hopedthat some remains fit may exist for posterityThe painter has chosen the moment when%.FAC S IM F 1:.■RdbCTt JeitnmgB A- V-, TJwaiLDfCrnibe'liaSOPOMP EI AN A. 157the heralds, Talthybius and Eurybates, areput in possession of Briseis, to escort her tothe tent of Agamemnon, as described in thefirst book of the Iliad, and thus translatedby Pope :Patroclus now the unwilling beauty brought.She in soft sorrows and in pensive thoughtPass'd silent as the heralds held her hand.And oft look'd back, slow moving o'er the strand."The head of Achilles is so full of fire andanimation that an attempt has been madeto introduce a fac-simile of it in Plate XL.Though a fac-simile, as far as being tracedwith transparent paper from the original canrender it so, it gives but a very imperfectidea of the divinity which seems to animatethe hero of the painting.On the left of the door of the cubiculumis another picture, but, unhappily, so muchdefaced that even the subject, at first, seemeddoubtful ; but the picture of Briseis quicklysuggested the restoration of Chrysalis to herfather, also described in the first book of theIliad in these lines :*' Meanwhile Strides launch'd with numerous oarsA well-rigg'd ship for Chrysa's sacred shores :158 POMPEIANA.High on the deck was fair Chrysalis placed,And sage Ulysses with the conduct graced :Safe in her sides the hecatomb they stow'd,Then swiftly sailing cut the liquid road."What remains of it may be observed inPlate XXX VL, on the right, where, undera blue sky, is seen a female in long robes,whose hands are kissed by children, whilean elderly person looks on from the right,and, on the left, under a red portal, an armedman, with helmet and plume, is seen behindthe principal figure. The chief personageseems to be stepping on board a galley, and,without doubt, the picture represented Chrysalisreturning to her own country from theGrecian camp, while Ulysses and the heraldsare assisting at the embarkation; thoughsome have supposed it to have representedAndromache, with her infant son, going intoslavery after the destruction of Troy. Thedecay of the painting renders abortive anyspeculation on the subject of the execution,or even of the conception of the picture.To the left of this picture is the aha, aspecies of recess, possibly once furnishedwith seats ; but of which, either here, or inany other house, no vestige upon the colour-poiI'l-IANA. 159ino of the wall lias been observed, thoughfurniture could scarcely have been placedagainst a wall without leaving some traceon the painting.To the left of this is the faux, or passageto the inner court, scarcely more than threefeet in width, and always so near and sovisible from the tablinum, that nothing couldpass without being seen by the family.We next observe the tablinum itself, socalled from being closed with planks or shutters,and, beyond it, the inner court, with itsDoric columns, between which is seen a wallpainted as a blue sky; while, below it, thetops of trees are visible over the parapet, representingaltogether a scene in the countryor a pseudo-garden.In the aedicula, on the left, was probablyplaced the statue of a Faun or a Bacchus,which was found near the spot, carrying-fruitsand flowers. Between the columnsran some species of balustrade, as the holesfor fixing it inform us, rendering the area,or hypi^-'thrum, a sort of sanctuary, probablyplanted with choice flowers.To assist in forming an idea of the pleasesPOMPEIANA.ing effect produced by the houses of Pompeii,Plate XXXVII. has been introduced.It is traced upon the view No. 36, whichwas executed mechanically, and, therefore,cannot fail in correctness. The roof onlyhas been added, and that of the most simplekind, formed by a rectangular intersectionof beams. The ornaments are those whichremain on the spot, or are taken from othersin similar situations. The introduction ofdraperies, furniture, and the doors or shutters,called volubiles, might have renderedthe drawing more picturesque ; but evencurtains have been very sparingly adopted,in order to exclude as much as possible theintroduction of imaginary ornament. It maynot be amiss to add, when every thing is disputed,that the iron rods, on which curtains,or draperies, were suspended from column tocolumn, have lately, in the year 18^8, beendiscovered perfect in a new excavation atHerculaneum.The atrium boasted other pictures, ofwhich only fragments exist; but one, nearlyperfect, on the right of the entrance, remainsto be described. — Vide Plate XLI. SomePOMPEIANA.have supposed that this represented the returnof lIelentoMenekius,and have amused themselvesby discovering, in the countenances,expressions excited by that event. Somehave considered this painting as representingthe moment when Thetis complains toJupiter of the injustice done to Achilles ;and this seems the most rational idea, andone with which her countenance, and everyother circumstance correspond : but others,again, have imagined that they discovered inthe picture the marriage of Peleus and Thetis,and perceived, in the expression of the Nereid,the reluctance with which she is reportedto have consented to a mortal alliance.The heads and the drapery are fine,but the picture, altogether, is far inferior inbeauty to that of Achilles. Fate had fixedthat the son of Thetis should excel his father,in consequence of which the nymph was nolonger sought in marriage by the Gods, andwas compelled to marry Peleus, as the firstof mortals. The ring on her finger is remarkable,because rings were invented froma circumstance connected with Thetis. Thetradition relates that Jupiter, wishing to re-l6"2 POMPEIANA.lease Prometheus, who was bound to a rockfor a certain number of years, was preventedby his oath. Prometheus, however, havingshown how the difficulty with regard to theson of Thetis might be overcome, by her marriagewith a mortal, had merited restorationto divine favour. This could only be doneconsistently with the oath, by making a ringin which was set a piece of the rock of Caucasus,always to be worn by Prometheus,who thus remained, in a manner, perpetuallychained to the rock.Opposite to the painting of Achilles is asea-piece, which, though now almost unintelligible,might, at first, be recognised asthe flight of Daedalus, or rather the fall ofIcarus.A winged sea-god, on a dolphin, seems tobe assisting, with his trident, the unfortunateadventurer; and the execution of the piece,though less laboured than some of the otherpaintings, possesses a breadth which, probably,rendered it a beautiful picture when thecolours were fresh and brilliant. An idea ofit is given in the base of the Frontispiece. Asmall chamber, also on the left of the atrium,POMP EI AN A. 16'3is remarkable on account of its singularfrieze, upon which, on a white ground, isrepresented in colours the combat of theGreeks and Amazons. The figures aresketched with an incomparable freedom ofhand, which gives them every appearance oforiginality; though the subject was so oftenrepeated by the ancients, that, without enumeratingthe paintings on vases, and the frequentrecurrence of the Amazons at Rome,the author has observed the same scene represented,without much deviation, on variousmarbles both in Greece and Ionia. Thefrieze of the Athenian Temple of MinervaNike is well known in England ; that ofDiana Leucophryne, at Magnesia on theMeander, consisted of the same personages:the internal frieze of the Temple of Apolloat Bassa was, in part, composed of them;and a large fragment near Amyclae provesthat they constituted one of the principalornaments of a temple in that neighbourhood.The heroines of Pompeii differ, however,from those hitherto observed in Greece ;POM PEIANA.being mounted in chariots, and armed withbows, as well as with their peculiar battle-axesand shields. They are clothed in draperiesof blue, green, and purple, and arerepresented in strong, or perhaps rather extravagantaction; often pursuing the Greeks,but sometimes falling beneath their blows,while the victory seems, as set, doubtful. Inthe frieze of the frontispiece of this workmany of these figures are seen, which maysuffice for a general idea of the combat.An Amazon, whose horse is falling, and who,though wounded herself, yet retains her seat,is a masterpiece of attitude, however negligentlythe picture may be touched.In the same chamber is a picture, generallysupposed to have been obscene ; but itis either so much effaced, or was so carelesslyexecuted, that it may, possibly, have been intendedto represent a person supporting adead or fainting; female.It is singular that, in many cases, thougha picture be not ill preserved, and may be seenfrom the most convenient distance, a styleof painting has been adopted, which, thoughPOMPEIANA.16.calculated to decorate the wall, is by nomeans intelligible on a nearer approach.In a chamber, near the entrance of thechalcidicum, by the statue of Eumachia, isa picture in which, from a certain distance,a town, a tent, and something like a marriageceremony, might be perceived ; butwhich vanished into an assemblage of apparentlyunmeaning blots, so as to entirelyelude the skill of an artist who was endeavouringto copy it at the distance of threeor four feet.Another picture of the same kind is, orwas, visible in the chamber, of the Perseusand Andromeda. An entire farm-yard, withanimals, a fountain, and a beggar, seemedto invite the antiquary to a closer inspection,which only produced confusion and disappointment,and proved that the picture couldnot be copied except by a painter possessingthe skill and touch of the original artist.It is probable that those who were in thehabit of painting these unreal pictures hadthe art of producing them with great easeand expedition ; and that they served tol66 POMPEIANA.fill a compartment where greater detail wasjudged unnecessary*.In the chamber of the Amazons is also apainting of Europa and the Bull.These cubical are all about hvelve feetin height, and have been covered with sixsmall beams, on which were suspended thefloors of the upper chambers. The doorsappear, generally to have had two valves, asmay be seen by the sockets in the thresholdsThis art of representing the effect of a picture upon a wall,instead of imitating nature itself, is applied, with considerablesuccess, in the decoration of certain modern Italian habitations.The author has seen in the Palazzo Sannizzi, at Rieti, a roomof magnificent dimensions, on entering which a visiter imagineshimself in an apartment hung with green damask, and decoratedwith a profusion of splendid pictures. There are madonnas andHoly Families, landscapes, animals, and battle-pieces, which recal,at the moment, the names and works of the most distinguishedartists. A further examination, on a nearer approach, shows thatno one of the objects has any decided form or outline, or intelligiblesign. Not only does the whole collection consist inthe representation of pictures, but their seemingly gold framesare merely wooden mouldings roughly painted with ochre, mostscantily touched, here and there, in the prominent parts, withgilding to represent the effect of catching lights. Behind eachsham picture was nothing but the white wall, and the apparentlyrich silk hangings consist in a few narrow' stripes of the stuff betweenthe frames — yet the whole has a good effect.''!inj|,L!(liri;Ji-j^rs^'/ \rk^ %:^~F(D)MLF3SE1.POETS READING.,ide.Aml]S,:iffiO.POIMPKIANA. 167for two umbilici on which they turned, andtwo holes, in the centre, for bolts.From the atrium a narrow corridor, orfaux, communicated with the peristyle, orinner court, between which and the atriumwas also situated the chamber called thetablinum, which should occupy, accordingto Vitruvius, two-thirds of the width of theatrium. In this the wall on the left presentsa variety of singular and fanciful architecturalornaments, such as pillars with humanheads for capitals, sustaining capricious entablatures,not destitute of picturesque effect,an idea of which may be formed by observingthe frontispiece.On the right is a large picture, generallylittle esteemed, by connoisseurs, for its execution,but producing a good whole, and representedin Plate XLIV. of this work. Itis more particularly described in the accountof the engravings. The wall is adorned, also,with a variety of other ornaments, some ofwhich have been adopted in the frontispiece.Swans, goats, lions, and singularly capriciousarchitecture and variety of colour constitutehere, as throughout Pompeii, the fan-lesPOMPEIANA.ciful and lively decorations. The oppositewall is differently, yet not less fantasticallycovered with still more imaginary, but notinelegant, porticos and erections. A door,entering into a cubiculum, in which, amongother objects, we find a cock painted withthe caduceus of Mercury, supplies the placeof a picture. This tablinum might be imagineda dark chamber, and that it receivedonly a reflected light from the atrium andperistyle ; and, in the restoration, its propereffect has not, perhaps, been given ; butVitruvius explains the circumstance, clearlyshowing that the tablinum was to be higherthan the atrium, in order that the light mightenter through the windows above.The inner peristyle, enclosing a sort ofcourt, probably planted with flowers, andsometimes called a viridarium, consists ofDoric columns, standing upon a sort ofpodium, painted, like the lower part of thepillars, red. The capitals have a fancifulmoulding in the echinus, also coloured withthe same. In the garden a tortoise had beenkept, and the shell of the animal was foundon the spot.3i&^lllll|l|llllllllilllS!., ^^m•■iiilllllJt „=Bra-wn.'bj' Sir 'V. G*T1I A D N E.aigrireas-PrinteaTyrsnno- Seara*C?Loaaoii "Robert JeiatingB ft VEUiaxa Chaplin 62 Cheapsitk Juiyl 1430.POMPKI ANAAt the same time several frogs were discoveredin terra cotta, evidently hollowed soas to serve for spouts to the roof of the portico.The opposite wall was painted withtrees and sky. The tablinum had evidentlybeen closed on this side with doors or shutters,which were of the kind called volubiles,or with many folds, as they are now frequentlymade in England, but, on the sidenext the Atrium, if other means of shuttingup the apartment existed, than the use of acurtain, the shutters could only have beensupported by wood-Avork attached to thewall, as the threshold retains no sign of thehinges or fastenings.On the left of the peristyle are twocubical, one of which has been called thelibrary, from a circular painting with booksand the implements for writing, and of whichmore will be said at the close of this work.The other contains the picture of Ariadne,given in Plate XLIII. On the same side isalso a postern, or back entrance to the house,from a vicus, or alley, into which the windowsof the cubical opened.Near the column, at the angle on theVOL. I. o170 POiMPElANA.right, is a Cylinder of lead, into which, itappears, the rain from the roofs was conducted.Against the wall stood a little shrine, inor near which was found a small statue,which was thought to represent either ayoung Bacchus, or a faun. On the right ofthe faux, at the entrance, vere a kitchenand the latina, which usually are near together.The remainder of that side wasoccupied by the Chamber of Leda.The apartment which has acquired thename of the Chamber of Leda, from a paintingon one of its walls, is the largest, whichcan be called a room, in the house of theTragic Poet, being little short of twentyfeet square, and of considerable height. Ithas been painted in the most glaring shadesof red and yellow, and, in the centre of eachcompartment, there has been a picture ofconsiderable merit.One, almost defaced, contains a beautifulCupid, most gracefully leaning on the kneesof Venus, to whom Adonis seems to be addressing'himself.Another exhibits Ariadne sleeping on themargin of the sea, with that sort of glory SirW-GeQ.Priflted'by^ rennar Sears k C°.F © M F M I I.LEDA. A-ND T^nMDATtEUS.Robert Moorings sicilian Cb^IzD. 62 Chef^siclA Sep 1.1530.POMPEIANA. 171circling her head which can scarcely be intendedto represent a blue hat in many of thepaintings at Pompeii. The faithless Theseus,under the guidance of Minerva, who is visiblein the clouds, is, in the mean time, embarking,attended by his companions. Boththese paintings are much defaced, so that itis difficult to judge of their execution, butthe composition of this last has not muchmerit.The picture of Leda, Plate Xlvii, presentingher infant progeny to Tyndareus, isone of the most beautiful productions of ancientart, and is not only estimable for theelegance of its design and composition, but,as far as can be judged, it excels the generalityof other specimens in chastity and harmonyof colour. It has not made the impressionwhich its merit ought to have producedon the minds of those who are officiallyinterested in the discoveries at Pompeii, but,on the expression of that opinion on thesubject, it was pleasing to learn that Thor-waldenhad regarded this picture with thatadmiration which grace and nature mustever inspire in a real artist.o 2172 POMPEIANA.Mythologists have attributed to this princessnot only her daughters Timandra, Clytemnestra,and Philonoe, by her husbandTyndareus, King of Lacedaemon, but Castor,Pollux, and Helen, the offspring of Jupiter,produced from two eggs, one of theDioscuri and the wife of Menelaus havingbeen born in the same shell.This story has been differently related,and Helen has, by some, been supposed to bethechild of Jupiter and Nemesis confided tothe care of Leda ; but the Greek word for anegg, and that for an upper apartment, areso similar, that the circumstance seems to requirelittle further explanation. M. Selvaggiobserves that the Scholiast on Tetzel saysthat Jupiter caused Nemesis to lay three eggs,which, being placed in a larnax in the care ofLeda, produced Castor, Pollux, and Helen.The children, in allusion to the fable, arehere represented in their nest, which themother holds gracefully in one hand, whileshe caresses them with the other.A curious change often takes place inthe colours of these pictures, after they havebeen some time exposed to the air.PO.MPEIANA. 173M. Zahn, an artist of" merit, who copiedthis painting of Leda only a few days afterits discovery, states that the drapery of thatprincess was green lined with blue, and thatthe robe of Tyndareus was black lined withgreen. Behind Leda was an attendant in agreen garment ; the habit of the person withthe bow was yellow, and that of the last figureon the right hand green. It is difficult toreconcile this account with its appearanceabout a month afterwards, when the robe ofLeda was red, and that of Tyndareus purple,and both have remained so from that periodto the present hour.The landscape is much faded in the background.The red usually changes to black,and the wall, with the picture of Leda, had,in the course of a year's exposure, assumeda darker hue in consequence.The wall itself is given in Plate XXX VIL,and, if possible, as much of its gaudy andglaring colouring will be preserved as willsuffice to aftbrd a just idea of the decorationsof the apartment. The taste may seem extravagantin a small drawing, but is less sowhen seen on a larger scale.174- POMPEIANA.The openings represented in the wall,through which the transparent atmosphereand capricious architectural decorations arediscovered, have a pleasing and striking effect.In these we are presented with the roof, orceiling, and the opening of the impluvium;and, in the original,theyareof aside sufficientto leave no doubt as to the appearance fromthe atrium of this important feature, whichwas decorated, like the eaves of externalroofs, with its ornamental antefixes.The lower part of the wall was decoratedwith garlands, sea-horses, and other ornaments,on black panels. The floor of theroom is mosaic.This chamber of Leda is prettily pavedin mosaic, and is nineteen feet long byeighteen feet six inches wide. In its presentstate it is sufficiently lofty, and therecan be little doubt that it had, like the othertablinum, a row of small windows which admittedlight above the roof of the peristyle.It is impossible to conclude the accountof the house of the Tragic Poet withoutspeaking of the beautiful mosaic picture,Plate XLV., on the floor of the tablinum.POISJI'KIANA. 175It is the best and largest mosaic, deservingthe name of a picture, which has yetbeen discovered, and represents, on a blackground, an Ionic colonnade decorated withshields, festoons, and fillets, in front of whichan elderly person seated seems to superintendthe distribution of masks and dresses tothe performers of the theatre. Two youths,on the left, seem already provided with ascanty savage dress of goat-skins ; a person,near the centre, plays the double flute, whilehis habit is adjusted by an attendant behind;and another is pulling over the head ofa comedian a sort of shirt adapted to hischaracter. It is said that many of the Neapolitanacademicians believed that the storyof Apollo and Marshal was represented inthis mosaic, and that the vanquished musicianis suspended by the feet to the pillars.If that be the opinion of a numerous andrespectable society, it is right to mention it,though it does not seem warranted by thepicture. This mosaic is defective at theangle on the right, but is, nevertheless, invaluable.It has, probably, contributed not a little176 POMPEIANA.in giving to the house the name it bears,and, when it is taken in connexion with theother pictures of the poet reading, and theheroic and tragic subjects which are foundin all parts of the habitation, few will, perhaps,be disposed to cavil at so classical asupposition. Plate XXV., in the copy ofthe great work on Herculaneum by Piroli,represents the rehearsal of a play in a mannernot very different from this mosaic ; and,in another painting, the pedagogue is seenwhipping one of his scholars in a school witha similar portico, and, like it, adorned withgarlands.Bonucci, who had every opportunity ofobtaining information, gives a long list ofobjects found in the house of the poet.Some of them are too interesting to beomitted.Of gold, were found two necklaces andtwo bracelets, formed of two lines of semi-globes,which have since been imitated bythe goldsmiths and jewellers of Naples.Two armlets, formed like serpents, inmany convolutions, and a smaller one for achild.POMPEIANA. 177Four ear-rings, each of two pearls, hanging;as if from a balance.A ring of onyx with the head of a youth.Two coins, one of Nero and one of Titus.These objects seemed to have fallen fromthe dressing-case of a female who lived inthe upper story. They were not more thanfive feet below the soil.Thirty-nine silver coins, both consularand imperial; a mass of brass coins; twenty-sevencoins separate; saucepans and kitchenutensils of all sorts; a vase for oil; a bucket;a lamp for two lights, with the head and feetof a bull which hung from the ceiling of achamber; a little tripod; a candelabrum;screws belonging; to the furniture.Of iron, four hatchets; a hammer ; a tripod;a broken key; two hooks; two heelsfor boots, with holes for the nails ; locks,latches, and hinges.Of glass, four decanters and three globularbottles.Of terra cotta, fifty-six lamps and manyother articles ; among them a cup, with fineenamel or varnish. Six plates are said toPOMPEIANA.have been found in another place, with fineblue varnish.A head of Hermes of gallo antic; aquantity of corn ; many ropes carbonized ;a piece of soap, and three weights of lead.In a house not far distant were found, in themonth of November, 1826, vases with olivesstill swimming in oil. They retained theircolour, and the oil burnt well Also a vaseof caviare, or the eggs of tunny fish. Asheshad fallen into all, and formed a sort ofcrust, which had preserved the contents.POMPEIANACHAPTER IX.FULLONICA.The Fullonica is situated just behind theback wall of the house of the Poet, and hasadoor, like it, opening into the vicus, aswell as a great entrance from the street,which passes under the arch of Tiberius Caligulaor Augustus, near the Temple of FortsPOMPEIANA.tune. That street is now called the Streetof Mercury or of the Mercuries, from thenumber of paintings of that divinity whichit exhibits. Before we enter that street,however, it will be necessary to notice theprolongation of the Street of the Thermae,which passes along the north flank of theTemple of Fortune, and in which, at thepresent moment, February, 1829, the excavationsare continuing. It is very probablethat this street may be that branch of theVia Domitian which ran to Salerne, andleads to the gate commonly called that ofNola ; and the frequent and deep traces ofwheels at the point now excavating provethe street to have been a much-frequentedpassage through the city.Between the house of the Poet and thetriumphal arch, several rooms bear the appearanceof having served as places forrefreshment for those who used the baths.Beyond the arch, the first pier or terminationof a massive stone wall of great blockswas ornamented with a most interesting;painting of a galley with its equipage, nowdefaced, and, beyond this, is the entranceto a house now called by the names ofPOMPEIANA. 181Ceres and Bacchus, and of the Bacchanal,from paintings of these divinities in theAtrium. The painting of the galley hadfor some time, acquired the name of Casadel Navio^lio for the house.In the entrance, pretty groups of vasesare painted, one of which is given in PlateXII. On the right is a sort of recess, notobserved in other houses, where a slave orporter might have been stationed.The Atrium of this house of Ceres is sufficientlypreserved to show that, at least inthis house, this division of the dwelling aroseto the height of two ordinary stories beforeit was covered in by the roof. The tricliniumor tablinum, at the further extremity,which is not large, must have been singularlylofty in its proportions, if, indeed, it waslighted at all by windows which were abovethe tiles.It is so different in its effect from otherhouses of Pompeii, that a view of it has beenselected for Plate LXII., by which a correctidea of its present state may be obtained.In a little room, on the right of the atrium,were found, leaning against the wall, several182 POMPEIANA.iron fellies of large wheels, so exactly similarto those of modern construction, that thepaintings lately discovered were scarcelynecessary to convince us that, in the firstcentury of our aera, wheels were no longerof the antiquated form represented on vasesand marbles with four spokes, but, as nearlyas possible, resembled those now used inEurope.The House of Ceres was evidently thedwelling of a person of consequence, andis connected, by means of the passage, orfaux, on the right of the triclinium (VidePlan, Plate Lx), with what may have originallybeen another habitation, which mighthave been a new acquisition, as it was evidentlyundergoing a repair, and receivingfresh embellishments at the moment whenevery thing was interrupted by the final catastrophe.This second division of the houseconsists only of the remains of a portico, witha large central room and two small chambers,occupying one side of a square court, in thecentre of which is a fixed triclinium, or raisedbench of masonry, suited to the reception ofthree sofas or beds, with a table in the centre.STREET OF THE THERMAEDrawn. "by SirW^Gell. Eo^Pwred try'WSchriicininetr.FOMFHSScPART OF THE STREET OF THE MERCURIES AND THE ADJACENT HOUSES.I-ondDiLFaUishjea V Robert Jennings *"wn]isanQu5iliii. 6:i.Chesq)sid£.20?'.^jrillS30.POMPEIANA. 183The walls of this court or garden, or whateverit might have been, seem not to havebeen yet covered with plaster. The entranceis from the Street of Mercury.On the piers of the houses near that ofCeres and Bacchus, are found several inscriptions,opposite the northern flank ofthe Temple of Fortune.C. Lolling FVSCVMET. POPIDIVM. SecundumV. B. O. V. F.M. CERRINIVM. VAEIVM. R. D.AED. OR.This is in red characters. The proprietorseems to invoke the favour o. v. f. of C.Follies Fuscus and Popidius Secundus, goodmenv. b., and of M. Cerrinius Veins thestile, worthy of the Republic, or r. d.Another hasPANSAM. AED. ORAT POPIDIVMC. Calvinism. II. VIRSITTIViM. Magnum. ORM. G. M.JED.This street is much worn by carriagesbeyond the House of Ceres and the Templeof Fortune, and, from its direction, probablyfollows almost a direct line to the gate com-184 POMPEIANA.only called that of Nola, but which, perhaps,points more directly to Sarto, wherethe fine sources of the river must alwayshave collected a population.The arch which forms the entrance intothe street, now called Via dei Mercury, orthe Street of the Mercuries, from the manyrepetitions of the figures of Mercury or hisattributes, may be supposed, from the fragmentsof a column and a capital lying nearit, to have been ornamented with Doric columns,and fountains which threw up waterin jets, as may be imagined from the pipesyet distinguishable in the masonry. Thewhole was, of course, covered with marble,because every thing of the kind at Pompeiiwas decorated with that material. Near thearch was painted a fragment, supposed toimply Virum Amplissimum, &c.[n red isIn blackV. A. H. A.AED. O. V. F.HYPSAEVMQVINQ. D. R. P.C. IVLIVM. POLIBIVM. D. I. D.O. V. F.M. LVCRETIVM. PRO. . . .POMPEIANA. 185A person of the name of M. PlautusHypsaeus, who was consul in the year 125before our aera, was, possibly, the subject ofthis inscription. It is always an agreeablecircumstance to meet with a memorial ofany person known in history.The same name is repeated in anotherplace — L. Geranium Hypsaevm.In this street was an inscription of thePompeii or Fruit-sellers ; and it seems thatthere must have been a fraternity of almostevery trade or profession. Bonucci has collectedseveral of these, and of such as complimentedthe fidele or protector of theirshops.POSTUiMIUiM Problem. JED. Plotinus. ROG.FER TUNNUM.This incorrect inscription is a complimentfrom Plotinus, a seller of tunny, toPosthumous.Marcellus ^S^dilem Linaria et Plo-starchroo-ant ut caveat' — The Woodmen andCarmen invoke the favour of Marcellusthe stile.VOL. I. p186 POMPEIANA.*' M. Cerrinium JEd. Saliniensesrog/' —The Saltworks invoke the stile MarcusCerrinius.A. Veterum ^d. Saccarii rogj/' — ThePorters of Sacks invoke Aulus Vetus theTile.C. Cuspium Pansam JEd. Artifices universerog/' — The Corporation of Goldsmithsinvoke the senile C. Pansa.C. Jul. Polybius II. V. Muliones."—The Muleteers salute the Duumvir CaiusJulius Polybius.Pilicrepi faite." — Applaud ye whoplay at ball.Fornication Secundo iEd.'' — The Attendanton the Furnace invokes Secundusthe j$l.dile.Paquio Duumv. I. D. Veneris'' — TheVenerei salute the Judge Paulus the Duumvir.After an advertisement for a vexation arethe words " O Procurator felicitate'' Theseinscriptions are copied from Bonucci, whocollected them on the walls of divers edifices.There are also inscriptions of the " IsiaciUniverse."POMPEIANA. 187In this street was the following Oscan inscription: —in which the word mens seems clear, butthe remainder is nearly effaced.It is further curious to observe, that onthe great and antique stones which form thewall of the house of Bacchus and Ceres towardthis street, are to be tracedM . C . V . R . DORPD . R . P . SVA PIVM IVScut into the blocks. The writer was D. R.,worthy of the republic, but perhaps he haderected the wall at his own expense — PecuniaSua.Among others, is on the leftCASELLIVM. MARCELLVMAED. Optimo. Colleges.Near the arch,L. MARCELLVM .redALBVCn^MOVFP 2188 POM PET AN A.The o. V. i\, orate ut caveat, is in a species ofcipher.The street is among the widest yet openedin the city; and as two great roads passedthrough Pompeii, that called the Popidianato Nola, and that branch of the Via Domitianwhich ran through Nuceria, it is not improbablethat, by pursuing the excavation,the street of the Mercuries will be found tobe the Via Popidiana itself. This, however,is on the supposition that the gate of Isis,now commonly called that of Nola, did notlead to that city, which does not in fact liein that direction.About six or seven shops occur betweenthe arch of Caligula and the great entranceof the fuUonica. Vide the Plan, Plate LX.The court of the fullonica is forty-fivefeet long and twenty-two feet six incheswide. On each side were five piers insteadof columns, which may have been united byarchitraves or timbers, for none remain. Itseems, however, from several columns whichmust have fallen from above, that two rangesexisted. On the north side, between thepiers, is the beautiful marble mouth of aPOMI'EIANA. 189well, prettily ornamented with triglyphs. Inthe portico is lying a large circular vase, orjar, which has been broken across the centrehorizontally, and is so singularly and carefullysewed together with wire of metal, thatsuch vases must have borne a high price atPompeii, though of the most common redclay.There seems to have been a porterslodge, or something equivalent, at the entry.Vide Plan.The west end of the court is entirelyoccupied by four large square vessels correspondingin use to what we call coppers,but built of solid masonry and lined withstucco. They are above seven feet deep,and it required a little flight of steps toenable the fuller to look into them. Thewater seems to have passed from one intothe other in succession ; and the portico, onthe north side, retains the vestiges of six• or seven smaller basins, in which lighterarticles have been washed, or which containedthe different mixtures necessary forpreparing the cloth for receiving a new190 POMPEIANA.colour. The ancients seem to have dyedand cleansed their garments with great care,and to have used sulphur, and a variety ofother ingredients, with fuller's earth and lime,for that purpose. A jar of lime was foundin the fullonica of Pompeii.At the east end of the court was a fountain,exhibited in Plate L., one of the prettiestthings of the kind yet discovered, andshowing that the ancients had the art ofconstructing fountains in jets as we now possessit.On the pier, seen in that view on theleft, but the other side, are some curiousscenes relative to the fuller's art, and givenin Plates LI. and LII. The whole pier has,it seems, been removed to the Museum atNaples.There are, under the southern portico,several small rooms, seemingly appropriatedto the fullers themselves, and the use of thetrade.Among these, an oven, with a phallusover the mouth, is found in perfect preservation.The walls of the portico and thePOMPEIANA.apartments in general are painted in a waylittle different from those of the best housesof Pompeii ; and the trade of the owner wasprobably of so lucrative a nature, that hewas inferior to few of the citizens in wealth.Pompeii A^^ /.-^CHAPTER X.HOUSE OF THE FOUNTAIN.Adjoining the north wall of the ful-monicais a house, not particular from itsPOMPEIANA. 193dimensions, but adorned with a fountain ofso remarkable a structure, that the habitationwas distinguished, for some time, by noother name. There is, however, the nameof Holconius Priscus near the door, whowas, probably, the protector of the proprietor.An angle, in size nearly equal to onequarter of the whole quadrangle occupiedby this house, has been cut off so as to formasmall habitation, consisting only of twolittle rooms, an entrance, and a peristyle ofthree columns on each side, and uniting,by means of a narrow door, with the ful-monica.The columns are placed round a com-pluvium, at one extremity of which seem tohave been more than the usual inventionsfor water-works ; and certain dwarf walls areobserved, the uses of which are by no meansapparent. Vide Plan, Plate LX.The house of the fountain is approachedfrom the street of the Mercuries by a handsomeand lofty door; and the atrium is notless than fifty feet in length, by forty broad.This atrium has its aha on each side, re-194 PGMPEIANA.regularly disposed, with its tablinum in thecentre; and, beyond it, a portico with asmall court, the wall of which is painted torepresent a garden. In the tablinum is apretty painting of goats.The whole ground floor of the houseconsists of eleven rooms, without reckoningthe alae, the atrium, or the portico, and itseems to have been the property of a personof consideration.The ornaments, on the whole, do notdiffer much in style from those already mentioned.The inner portico has only threecolumns, and those of a degraded Corinthian ;nor are they at equal distances from whatmay be termed their antae. The fountainalso, though nearly in the middle of thegarden, which is not rectangular, is neitherplaced opposite an intercolumniation, noropposite the centre of the tablinum, so thatit must have lost much of its effect.Of the wall of the garden, more will besaid in the description of the view of it inPlate LIII.The colours and the plaster have longsince fallen.POMPEIANA. 195There was a private entrance throughthe faux, and a back passage from the vicusof the Tragic Poet. Near the faux was alsothe staircase for ascending to the upperfloor.In this house is the representation of acomic scene, given in Plate LIV.The fountain itself was, however, thegreat source of the modern celebrity of thishabitation, presenting, in fact, several circumstancescalculated to strike an observer.First its form, as will be seen by referenceto Plate Lii, is precisely that which everycitizen would erect as a fountain at the bottomof his garden, near the metropolis, inour own times, and such as may be seen, atthe present day, in the courts of most of thepalaces in Rome and throughout Italy, andproving that, the worse the taste, the betterchance it has of being handed down for imitationfrom generation to generation.Secondly, the materials are of a singulardescription, the whole being covered or incrustedwith a sort of mosaic, consisting ofvitrified tesserse of different colours, but in196 POMPEIANA.which blue predominates. These are sometimesarranged in not inelegant patterns,and the grand divisions, as well as theborders, are entirely formed by, and ornamentedwith, real sea-shells, neither calcinedby the heat of the eruption, nor changedby the lapse of so many centuries.It is so difficult to describe the exact natureof the shells, in a manner perfectly in-tellio^ible to those who have not studied themas a science, that they may be here representedby a wooden cut.It has been said that a boiler, or caldron,in this house, was so contrived thathot water could, if necessary, be conveyedto the cistern, or piscina, which advances infront of the fountain. We are exceedinglyapt to accuse the ancients of ignorance inPOMPEIANA. 197natural philosophy an imputation which theexcavations of Pompeii ahiiost every daycontradict. Pliny states that water in leadenpipes will rise to the height of the sourcewhence it is derived ; and, in the Sylvan ofStatius, it is clearly shown that the AquaMarcia passed the Anno in leaden pipes.But Vitruvius, B. VIII. c. 7, gives instructionsfor the conveyance of water intubes ; and Pliny, B. XXXI. c. 6, mentionsthe custom as common in his time. Thetwo fountains of Pompeii confirm the writtentestimony.Neither does it seem that the use ofshells, in the decorations of a fountain, isfirst noticed in the excavations of Pompeii,for Cicero, in his Foreign Villa, appears tohave employed them. A certain Philander,who wrote notes on Vitruvius, has this remarkablepassage : — " Quod veteres admis-currentincrustationibus, potassium gentiumpernicious quod nostra aetas imitator.Quod genus videtur in Villa Cicerone adForms interspersed purpura, peloridibus,caeterisque colchis."POMPEIANA.The pectoris was a species of shell-fish,about which the ancients themselves seem indoubt, as ostrea and echinus are both givenas synonymous interpretations.END or VOL. I.ILONDON:PRINTED RY THOMAS DAVISON, WHITEFHIAUS.