Pompey ANA:THETOPOGRAPHY.EDIFICES AND ORNAMENTSOPPOMPEII,THE RESULT OF EXCAVATIONS SINCE 1819.BY SIR WILLIAM GELL,Mea. F.R.S. & F.S.A.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. n.LONDON :JENNINGS AND CHAPLIN.MDCCCXXXn.LONDON:Printed BY THOMAS DAVISON, WHITEFRIARS.CONTENTSOKVOL. II.Chap. XI. House of the Second FountainXII House of the DioscuriXIII. House of the DioscuriDescription of the PlatesExplanation of the VignettesAppendix, No. I. . . .Appendix, No. II. .Page IPOMPEIANA.CHAPTER XLHOUSE OF THE SECOND FOUNTAIN.The house of the second fountain ofshells is fully equal in interest to the former,and, in some respects, superior. The entranceis from the street of the Mercuries,and the staircase ascends from the vestibule.VOL. II. B2 • POMPEIANA.There is a second entrance, from the samestreet, by which a person might arrive at thegarden, and the inmost recesses of the house,without passing through the atrium — rather apeculiar circumstance at Pompeii. There isalso a second staircase ; but the ornamentsof this second entry are, by no means, inferiorto the rest of the house, so as to renderit probable that it was the entry for thedomestics.The compluvium of the atrium is furnishedwith two mouths for cisterns, and,from one, the communication with the innerfountain, by means of leaden pipes, is visible,probably receiving the water after it had performedits part at the fountain. We havehere only one ala on the right, but, on theleft, is the faux, and, in the centre, a smalltablinum, the size of which is, however,amply compensated for by a deep innerportico of four columns placed on two sidesof a court or garden, at the further side ofwhich is a second fountain of vitreous mosaicand shells, in form, taste, and workmanship,very like that in the house adjoining.POMPEIANA. DIn a line with the tablinum are two otherapartments of the same size, one of whichwas probably the triclinium, and the otheran exedra or pinacotheca. There are only-twocubiculi in this court, and only three inthe atrium, the upper floor probably supplyingthe other necessary bedrooms.The step from the atrium to the tablesis faced with a remarkably pretty sculptureof leaves and flowers. The tricliniumis painted within in imitation of brickwork —a taste which continues to prevail in modernItaly.The other room is decorated with picturesof game and hunting, so that, if it betrue that the ornaments were analogous tothe uses of the chamber, these would bemore appropriate to the dining-room thanto the pinacotheca.Not only do the leaden pipes, but eventhe brass cocks, called epistomium and papillaby the ancients, remain in this houseof the second fountain. By these the waterwas permitted to play or stopped with thesame ease, and, in precisely the same 4 POMPEIANA.ner, as in the present stage of science andart.The walls of this court or garden presentus with three pictures of a species quitedifferent from any thing at Pompeii. Thegeneral effect may be learned from PlateLVI. ; but, as the pictures themselves aregiven in the three following plates, it is unnecessary,at present, to notice them moreparticularly.If the custode can be believed, therewas found, at the time of the excavation,on the left side of the brink of the fountain,the pretty sedent bronze figure now in themuseum at Naples. He had a basket, witha little bronze fish in it, on his left arm.Under his right was an outre, or skin fullof liquor, and the hand seemed as if hemight have held a fishing-rod of cane. Onthe little central column in the piscina stooda cupid holding a dove which spouted water.On the right brink was a marble caratsof the same size as the fisherman on theleft. Water seems also to have fallen froma mask in the centre of the schola or conOo^ o<ifePOMPEIANA. Ocave of the fountain. The whole mass ofthe fountain projects five feet seven inchesfrom the wall. It is seven feet wide infront, and the height, up to the eaves of thepediment, is seven feet seven inches.POMPEIANA.CHAPTER XII.HOUSE OF THE DIOSCURI.Having passed up the Via dei Mercury,beyond the lupanare and the fountain ofMercury at the smaller gate of the house ofthe second fountain, which is opposite to itanarrow vicus or alley on the right sepa-POMPEIANA. 7rates the line of houses, beginning at thearch of Caligula, from the most splendid ofall the habitations yet discovered at Pompeii,which has been named the House of theDioscuri, or Castor and Pollux, from twofigures representing those personages on thewalls.In the vicus, opposite to a little privateentrance to the lupanare, may be observedthe window of an upper chamber of thishouse, a very rare circumstance in theseremains.The walls of the house of the Dioscuriare, as may be seen in Plate LXI., paintedbelow in large red panels, and above representin plaster a slightly indented rustication.The red panels ought always to be well examined,on the first moment of their excavation,for inscriptions ; as, in one part ofthis wall, may be found curious Greek alphabetsof the imperial times, and, among manyother scratched inscriptions, may be distinguishedCampania. VICTORIA. VNA. CVM. NVCERINIS. Persistsand perhaps, with perseverance and the applicationof a wet sponge, something more8 POMPEIANA.of an historical fact or event might be recovered.The Plate LXI. gives a representationof this street, looking back from this houseof the Dioscuri, under the two triumphalarches, toward the forum ; and, though theupper story may be wanting throughout, itmust give a tolerable idea of what a streetin Pompeii might have been before theeruption. There are even certain mouldingswhich seem to indicate that the houseswere not, in some parts, higher than atpresent.The Plan which is given in Plate LX. ofthis part of the street will enable the readerto understand the view.The house of Ceres, the atrium of whichis given in Plate LXIL, occupies a verj?-large portion of the street on the left, andpresents to it only a door and a few verysmall upper windows.Of the house succeeding to that of Ceres,which has its vestibule, atrium, with its alainthe centre of one side, and four cubicalonly as yet excavated, there is little toremark.In the wall which follows the door are^ S■tPOMPEIANA. yfour small windows above ; and below arewritten, in large characters,Proselytes AVG. CIPARO.Nearer the door isM. HOLCONRISCVM AED OVF.AlsoM CVMMEMOR. ROGBesides these we findC. CASELLIVMJED. DV.Fand in another placeVARIVM^D OR. ROWe have alsoMarcellus.ED. ROGand it is not impossible that, amongst so muchbad and very equivocal writing, though incapitals, the three letters under C. Castellummay be intended, by a certain rounding of10 POMPEIANA.the D, to be taken either for Duumvir, orOrate ut caveat.Near the next door is writtenV. Ponto. iED F.and, on this account, the house is consideredto have been under the protection of theaedile Pompous, whose name is so illwritten. This house has its atrium and foursmall rooms now visible ; but the remainderwas not excavated in March, 1829- Stillascending the street, the following housewas protected by ilvellius Firms, and thatwas succeeded by the thermopolion or .On the house of Avellius is writtenAVELLIVM. FIRMVMAED. O.V.F. Sign. ESTCassia CVM. Nymphs. ROGThe name of Candia is very uncertain, butit would seem that he, with Nymphs, mightbe considered as proprietors of the dwelling.Of the lupanare — for so it appears a housemay fairly be called, which, under pretenceof being an ordinary wine-shop, or ,in front, has an inner chamber.M^i5MtillanaPOMPEIANA. 11painted with every species of indecency —nothing can be given except the plan, thewaggon, and a drinking-scene which is thesubject of White LXXX.The shop in front has the usual table,in the form of a right angle, covered withmarbles, and furnished with its jars. Onthe right is, remarkably well preserved, asort of little staircase, consisting of six diminutivesteps of marble, and serving to setout the numerous cups and glasses whichwere used by the customers — a method commonlypractised in the Neapolitan wine-housesand traitors at the present day.Under this is an arch, and in the recess is aserpent with a little altar painted.Behind the shop, on the right, is a verysmall anteroom, in which is painted thewaggon of the Thermopylae, with his horsesunharnessed, and his servants filling his amphorae,given in Plate LXXXI. There wasa door from this room into a court ; andwithin is a still smaller apartment, scarcelyeight feet square, the walls of which areornamented by wretched daubs, representingVenus fishing and several tiger-hunts.This room has a little window to the south12 POMPEIANA.with an iron grating, and, to the east, anotherwith two wooden bars.The door, on the left, from the shop,leads into the obscene chamber, which is ofsmall dimensions, and has a little posterndoor opening into the vicus of the house ofthe Dioscuri.In this chamber, two of the exterior pictureson one side are highly indecent. Inthe centre two men seem inviting eachother to drink, on the left is the picture ofa party playing at dice, and on the rightthe painting represented in Plate LXXX.There is, in the same room, anotherpainting of a waggon, the horses, and twoyouths filling the amphoree, very much resemblingthe former.The ancients entertained notions so differentfrom ourselves on the subject of delicacy,that it is not, perhaps, quite safe todecide on the nature of this habitation fromthe paintings it contains ; but it would be acurious speculation to discover whether, inPompeii, a thermopolium was generally understoodto be also a lupanare, or whetherthere is something peculiar in the house inquestion. Claudius, and after him a RomanPOMPEIANA.prefect called Amplius, tried in vain to repress,or rather to regulate, houses of thiskind, which proves that they were at onetime tolerated*.At a subsequent period, but while this work was in the press, a furtherexcavation was made in the house connected with this lupanare, bywhich it was discovered that other apartments, ornamented with better tasteand more careful execution, existed in the habitation.POMPEIANA.OCkJO vJOOo-oOO OOOOv^CHAPTER XIII.HOUSE OF THE DIOSCURI.The extent and apparent consequenceof the habitation commonly called that of theDioscuri, from the pictures of Castor andPollux in the vestibule, but which some havePOMPEIANA. 15imagined the house of the Roman quaestorof the city renders it an object of more thanordinary interest, and the observer is, consequently,disposed to hint that it has notbeen better preserved, and restored, as nearlyas possible, to its original state. This wouldhave cost but a trifling sum, and the lowerstory, which was the principal apartment,mio'ht have afforded an excellent idea ofRoman houses in general. The walls of thesecond story, or what is commonly called thefirst floor in a modern house, existed in someportions of the dwelling, but in so totteringa state that it was thought necessary to removethem, lest they should ruin the lowerpart in their fall. A projecting cornice ofstone ran in front toward the street of theMercuries, but it is not clear whether it wassituated between the two stories or on the topof the house, though some vestiges of ornament,yet visible on the wall, seem to renderthe former position probable. This cornice isremarkable for the lyres and dolphins roughlysculptured on the stone, not unlike that givenin Plate LXXV., painted white or yellowon a red ground, which yet remains.16 POMPEIANA.The first division of this house, which isseparated only by a narrow lane, or vicus,from the lupanare, has been, by some, takenfor the dwelling of the domestics, and, byothers, as the apartment of the females ofthe family, notwithstanding the bad reputationof the neighbouring' house.After passing the vestibule, or thyroreum,or divesting it of those Vitruvius names towhich a simple aditus, limen, or entranceseems to have so little claim, the short passage,by which the interior of the mansion isaccessible from the street, conducts us to theatrium of the first or most southern of thethree divisions of the house of the Dioscuri.The tuscanicum, cavaedium, or atrium, withits compluvium in the centre, presents littledifferent from what may be observed in thesame apartment of other habitations, exceptthat it occupies a much larger portion of thehouse, measuring forty Neapolitan palms bythirty-one. The whole is paved with opussigning, probably once polished, and having,in general, a reddish hue, from the poundedtiles, or pottery, of which, added to fragmentsof marble, it was composed.POMFEIANA. 17The room on the left of the entrance hasnothing which particularly marks the usewhich was made of it, but two on the righthave evidently served as kitchens, and retainthe traces of the hearth, the painted serpents,the window for the passage of the smoke, thedresser, and the gutter which communicateswith the cloaca. These rooms w ere providedwith little garrets, accessible by steps, probablythe bed-rooms of the cook and his attendant.The apartments marked A seem evidentlyto have been painted with as much careas the cubiculi or cellae familiarise of otherhouses. The walls are adorned with panels,separated by borders and architectural decorations,with figures and landscapes, amongwhich are representations of several ports,all of which are formed by moles constructedupon arches, or having numerous openings, aswas the custom both among the Greeks andthe Romans. The object of this method wasthe prevention of depositions, which, in time,might have filled up the port ; Eleusis, ,and Antrum affording yet existing specimensof the fact, besides a vast number ofVOL. TI. c18 POMPEIANA.picturesatHerculaneum and Pompeii. Manyhave supposed that the xenodochium, or hosefor the reception of strangers wasplaced in this division of the mansion, andthe Plan seems to render the opinion probable.Six strangers might have been lodgedin the chambers, or cubiculi, A A ; and thetuscanicum would have been common to allaswell as the little ala, or exedra, which isopposite to the entrance. The inner portion,however, of this same house seems evidentlyto have been devoted to the domestics ;and the court C, never surrounded with acolonnade, but retaining the gutters to collectthe droppings from the roof, seems ofa meaner construction than usual. F is awide entrance from a narrow lane, or vicus,into the area D, which was, very probably,the station for carriages and the stable. Somehave imagined this space to have been withouta roof, but little windows toward thecourt C, and toward the vicus, show that itwas roofed. The passage E E afforded a privateentrance to the third or most distanthouse without passing through any part ofPO^IPEIANA. 19the central division, which had no immediatecommunication with the street, and was consequentlythe inner apartment.This passage had at some period beenclosed by a rough wall at E. The whole ofthis division of the mansion was about onehundred and twenty-five palms long, by fiftywide. These palms are each ten inches anda half English. On the wall in the streetwere these inscriptions, which however donot seem to afford any certain informationas to the occupant of the dwelling :A. VETTIVM. FIRMVMAED. V. B. O. V.F. FELIX. Cepit.Alum Veterum Firman aedilem virum bonumorate ut caveat Felix ciipit. The otheris " Marcus Holconium Priscus aedilemdignum Rei publicae Fuscus fact."This portion of the dwelling communicateswith that in the centre by means of adoor G, with a step, on passing which aportico, I, appears, irregular in shape, andwith columns in consequence not placed atequal distances. The pillars are eight innumber, with as many semi-columns attachedto four angular antae, of a species best under220 POMPEIANA.stood by a reference to the Plan, Plate LXIII.These columns are one foot nine inches indiameter at the base, and one foot four atthe capital. They have no bases, and arefluted in the Doric form. The fluting isfilled up, and painted red to the height offour feet eight inches. The whole height ofthe shaft is nine feet eleven inches. The capitalsare imperfect, but what remains showsthat they followed no correct model of the Corinthianorder. One of the intercolumniationsis seven feet four inches wide. The whole porticois raised upon a step above the open courtH, and the step is fronted with red paint.A gutter, of the inconvenient width oftwo feet, runs round the court to catch therain-water. It is probable that the areawas entirely occupied with flowers, as earthwas found. The portico is generally abouteight feet nine inches wide : in front of thegreat triclinium, however, the breadth is tenfeet. The eastern side of the court is entirelyoccupied by a large and deep cistern, or piscinaK, measuring twenty-one palms byeighteen, in the centre of which a columnsupported a figure which ejected the water.iTiuCCXII^^U-'o'OSifz;•^.HUbJQCKcnL'sP-1fPOMPEIANA. 21This receptacle contained fish for the amusement,and perhaps sustenance, of the family.A smaller cistern, probably, contained waterfor drinking. The whole court measuresabout eighty palms by forty-seven ; and asno building the south or western sidescan ever have existed to exclude the actionof the sun, the whole must have constantlymaintained a gay and cheerful aspect, whilethe porticos afforded shade whenever it wasrequired. Perhaps nothing could be bettercontrived for the enjoyment of air and light.The decorations of this portico are suchas to convince us that the edifice was theresidence of some person of consequence,though it may be doubted whether Pompeiiwas a place of sufficient importance to havehad a quaestor, or even a pro quaestor, thoughthe former officer has been supposed theowner of the house of the Dioscuri.The great triclinium, which occupies thegreater part of the east side of this court,was no less than thirty-four palms long bytwenty-seven palms six inches wide, havinga very broad opening to the peristyle, closedby folding doors when required, as is POMPEIANA.nicest from the marble sockets in which theyturned.This chamber was covered with laminaeof rare marbles, which have been probablycarried off by the proprietors or others byexcavation.This triclinium, or exedra, had a largewindow opening upon the merula, whichmight also serve as a X3^stus, or place ofexercise, shaded in the summer by vines,and affording a view of the flower-gardenbeyond.This chamber might be esteemed thegreat banqueting-room, or hall of receptionto the house; and, by means of six openings,it had a free communication both withthe habitation of the slaves on one side, andthe apartments of ceremony on the other.It has been doubted whether an arch hasbeen applied instead of columns to the oppositeends of this peristyle; but it may alsobe questioned whether the double antae at theangles would have been capable of supportingthe weight of a construction so differentfrom the usual architecture of the ancientsin this species of portico.r €I 2."hcapsiflc: At'" ' '^'^'-POAJPEIANA. 23The decorations of this peristyle remainto be described, and certainly nothing hasyet been discovered at Pompeii which hasexceeded it in ornament and brilliancy ofcolouring. It will be necessary to refer tothe Plan, in order to understand the situationof the pictures.Entering this portico by the door G,from the tuscanicum or atrium of the hospitium,the first painting of consequence onthe right represents a youth naked, but witha cloak hanging on the left arm, which graspshis spear. With the right hand he holds thebridle of his horse, which is covered in partwith a green housing, or scarf, fringed withgold. This is marked No. 1 in the Plan.Beyond this, and upon the angular antison the left, is painted a dwarf leading anape, which is represented in Plate LV. ofthis work, but marked 2 in the Plan.On the other side of this antis is the pictureof Perseus and Andromeda, marked 3on the Plan, and given in Plate Lxvi. ofthis work.On the wall nearly opposite, No. 4 in thePlan, is the faun given in Plate LXXVIII.24 POMPEIANA.The view, Plate LXV., of this court andportico, was taken from the great tricliniummarked L.On the opposite pier is the picture ofMedea hesitating; as she meditates the murderof the two infants, Cerberus and Spheres,who are playing with the astragalus, while theaged tutor is looking on. This has greatmerit, but the author was unable to representit in outline to his satisfaction. Its siteis marked 5 on the Plan.On the same pier or antis. No. 6 marksthe site of the painting of Hygeia, PlateLXVIII.The figures 7 and 8 in the Plan are indicatedin Plate LXXVIII., where the portalM is shown in the centre, and the splendidand striking colouring of the walls of thisportico is attempted to be represented.In that Plate the capitals of the columnsare given as the lower part remains at present.The upper portion is supplied fromothers which remain in another habitation,but it is not affirmed that they were exactlyon the same model.The capitals of the half pillars nearesto3iP^WPOMPEIANA. 25the triclinium were as evidently formed ofacanthus leaves, as these were of less correctdesign.An architrave of a style suited to therest of the architecture has also been suppliedin Plate LXXVIII. for the purpose ofexplanation ; and the atrium, or peristyle, ofthe third division of this spacious habitationhas been restored only by the addition of aplain ceiling with lacunaria, that its effectmight be more easily understood. Everythingelse is shown in its present state, exceptthat no trace of a door or its carbines havingbeen found, a curtain has been substituted,such as ancient authors mention as a velumor separation, and of which an example haslately been discovered at Herculaneum.From the inspection of Plate LXV. anidea may be formed of the brilliant and gayeffect of the whole court and portico, whichmust have been the most striking and beautifulof the city. The painting and the panelsare, by no means, so suited to the portalM as to render it probable that this communicationwas originally intended by thearchitect. It has rather the appearance of26 • POMPEIANA.an opening made in the wall after the painting;was finished.On the third antis are the figures of ayoung Hymen with his torch, and a femalewith a palm-branch and garland. The painting:of the fourth cano-le has suffered muchO CDfrom time.Opposite the third antis is painted on thewall the magnificent figure of Jupiter, givenin Plate LXVI., marked 11 on the Plan, andthis concludes the examination of the seconddivision of the house.We now arrive at the third court or peristyle,NNN, entering by a recess or ala fromthe door M, from which to the columns isa space of sixteen feet. The columns aretwelve in number, one foot eight inches indiameter, and about twelve feet in height,half the shaft being coloured red, while theupper part is white and fluted. This customseems to have been adopted on accountof the injury to which the delicate fluting ofthe Doric order was liable, and the difficultyof preserving, in places of frequent passage,the cleanly appearance of the lower part ofthe columns. The whole entablature, lynnSrintedlrp-Peitner Seais3cC?XicndDHoJeaningsPOMPEIANA. 27sitting of architrave, frieze, and cornice, isabout three feet high. The architrave is dividedinto two faces, but is equal in widthto the frieze, instead of being much lower,as is usual in Roman Doric. The matchesare square, and the soma is decorated witha rough attempt at the lotus. The whole ofthis peristyle, exclusive of the recess, occupiesa space of about forty feet square, andthe open or hypaethral space in the centre isabout seventeen feet in each direction.The hypaethrum in this case served as acompluvium, receiving the water which fellfrom the roof, and transmitting it to a reservoirbelow, to which there is a marblemouth, or puteale, exhibiting the traces oflong use in the furrows worn b}^ the ropesby which the water was drawn up. This ispaved with a certain degree of symmetry, andis only of the usual depth of a few inches, sothat, when drj^, the inhabitants might walkacross it in any direction. When, on thecontrary, the fountain threw up the water inthe centre from a brazen tube, with a codeto stop it at pleasure, the reflection of theblue sky above, with the architecture and28 POMPEIANA.the statue on the brink, must have produceda scene ahiiost of enchantment, and havelighted up most agreeably with tremulousrays, the varied walls and lacunaria of thissplendid abode.The whole must have always presentedthe appearance of a palace destined to thepurposes of a fete or an assembly, as indeedmust the generality of the larger habitationsof Pompeii.The fountain issued from a sort of flowerin marble, on which frogs and lizards areseen disporting.This division of the building may answerto the Corinthian atrium of Vitruvius.It was paved with the usual opus signingbefore mentioned. The lower portion,or surbase, of the walls, was painted, as inother houses, with flowers and birds.The great entrance from the street ofthe Mercuries, whether called simply anaditus, or dignified with the name of vestibule,opened into this atrium.The figures of the Dioscuri, whose namesof Castor and Pollux have served for thepresent designation of the house, are paintedPOMPEIANA. 29at the places marked 17 and 18 on thePlan.The chamber marked P may be reasonablysupposed to have been the lodge of thejanitor, or porter. The place for a woodenstaircase, probably to a chamber above, isvisible, the height of the grand apartmentspermitting the division in the rooms of themenials into two stories.On the left of this entrance is a chamber,R, nearly one-half of which must have beenoccupied by the bed of its tenant, supposedto have been the atriensis, or servant whoseplace was one of trust and consequence inthe family.That part of the floor which supportedthe bed was raised a few inches above therest of the room. The walls are very tastefullyornamented in the style which hasbeen called arabesque, and there is a smallwindow towards the street.Near the great door to the street wasfound painted a Mercury running off with apurse ; and this has been adduced, amongother very unsatisfactory reasons, in supportof the opinion that the house was the desPOMPEIANA.repository of the government treasures. Thereare, however, many other Mercuries in thesame street, whence its modern appellationis derived.The onlyala attached, in its proper character,to this atrium or peristyle is markedT in the Plan. It has been surrounded bya bench, where the clerks or treasurers probablyreposed who administered in the receptionor disbursement of the moneys containedin the chests marked 23 and 24, oneof which forms the vignette at the head ofthis chapter.These chests were placed upon a baseof brickwork about a palm high, and coatedwith marble. The inside was lined withbrass, the outside was iron, and, between thetwo, was a plank of wood. The handles,locks, and ornaments were of bronze.These chests had lids, which, having holesin their centres, seem to have been shutdown upon a tall pillar of iron which protrudedfrom the centre of the base.A sort of lock was passed through anopening in the bar, which prevented theraising of the lid.POMPEIANA. 31The quantity of ornament and the methodof securing the contents are singular ;but a still more remarkable construction isobserved in the bottom of these chests, whichconsists in about eight parallel bars of iron.These bars are all hollow, but may possiblyhave once enclosed a piece of wood now decayed.It seems to be owing to this constructionthat the use of the chests has beendiscovered ; for it appeared that the ancientswho had survived the fatal eruption had endeavouredto carry off the treasure, and hadprobably succeeded, except where the coins,to a number not now known, had slippedbetween these bars. This would have beenno protection to the coins, had not the excavatorsbeen led into a trifling error, anddescended into the chamber O, behind thechest 23, so as to make it necessary for themto extract the money from the chest througha small hole, which, on perceiving theirmistake, they contrived to perforate in thewall.Some of those who were present assertthat forty or fifty gold and five silver coinswere seen at the recent excavation. It is32 POMPEIANA.certain that the chests were carried fromtheir positions to another house in fragments,and the public felt consoled for theloss of the medals by the dismissal of theperson who ought to have preserved them,and who was the avowed advocate of the exclusivesystem, by which too manj^ have beenprevented from noting and drawing the antiquitieswhile they were in a state of tolerablepreservation.In the largest of these cubiculi, celles domestica,or denarii, O, the number 19 marksthe site of a pretty picture of Narcissus, socalled because the two faces of a youth sittingupon a rock with hunting-spears in hishand, and of a Cupid which reposes upon hisshoulder, are reflected in a plash of water athis feet. He does not, however, appear toregard the image in the water at the moment.A female, also attended by a Cupid,sits near, with a vase in which to fetch waterfrom the fountain.At No. 20 on the Plan is a Bacchante,which does not require any particular description; and at 22 is another with a garland.POMPEIANA. 33No. 21, in the same chamber, is a beautifulfemale, or Diana, descending fromheaven, clad in a purple garment, to a young-hunter,who sits on a rock, with his spearsin his hand, in an attitude of repose, fromwhich he is just awakened : two gracefulnymphs stand in the back-ground, and adog seems to acknowledge, with fear, thepresence of the goddess.To the right of the entrance to thisperistyle. No. 16, is a figure of Fortune,in the centre of the red panel. She holdsthe rudder in one hand, and the horn ofabundance in the other. Her inner vest isyellow, and her outer robe of a light-bluetint.No. 15 is so graceful a figure of theyoung Bacchus, that nothing, except thealready frequent representations of that divinityin this work, has prevented it frombecoming the subject of a plate. He iscrowned with a luxuriant garland, and thelong rod in his hand is surmounted by thefoliage of the vine : with the other hand, heextends his inverted cup to a boy remarkablefor the row of points or VandykeVOL. TI. D34 POMPEIANA.which hang round his loins. On the otherside, the lynx is seen pulling, with the playfulnessof a dog, the long purple palliumwhich hangs from the arm of his master.On entering into the recess which connectsthis peristyle, N, with that of theother court, I, the figure of Saturn given inPlate LXXIV. is observed at the pointmarked 13. He has been selected because,though not graceful, the figures of Saturn arerare, and ancient authority for his appearanceis valuable. Virgil says —Vitisator curran servant sub imagine fallenSaturnusque senex."A modern author, Albrigi, de DecorumImagines, describes this picture as accuratelyas if he had seen it. " Saturn pingebaturut homo senex prolix barba, tecta capite,qui una manu scilicet dextra fallen tenebat.''The picture marked 12 is that of anApollo of very great elegance. An idea ofit is given in the compartment on the rightside of Plate LXXII., as a companion to agraceful female with a tripod on the left.At the spot marked 14 in the Plan is anDia-wn by Sir 7f GeH.^n^aved fiC^mUEd by Fane:; Sear a S: C°\) nip IE Z IL,SATURNl^adoz-Ttxrat J-riE^tf 5 !c 7. iHnm Chaji^iH. 52.ChMD3ide: A-oriiU83I.POMPEIANA. 35elegant female figure, holding in one bandabasket of flowers, and in the other the insigniaof her office as priestess — not unlikethe torches of the Eleusinian Ceres, but terminatingin three cups, or flowers, insteadof one. Her lower garment is of white,with light shades of a greenish tint ; and theupper is a sort of surplice, falling in simplefolds, shaded with the lightest purple.Over the door-way marked M is a pictureto which the eye is recalled at presentby a modern piece of curtain intended toconceal the subject. It is a satj^r, who,having been attracted by what he thought thecharms of a female, flies on discovering herandrogynous nature. It is much defaced.On each side have been landscapes ; onerepresenting Perseus combating the suitorsof Andromeda, and the other the flight ofEuropa with the bull, now no longer distinguishable.The last picture in this peristyle, worthyof mention, is numbered 40 on the Plan, andrepresents a Roman Victory as a female, withher wreath, her spear, and her shield, onwhich is inscribed, in large letters, S. C, theD 2o6 POMPEIANA.Senatus Consulted, or fiat of the ImperialCity.Near this painting may be seen in thePlan a seat, or, possibly, the site of anotherchest, made to correspond with that marked24.The whole of this peristyle was, of course,covered with a flat ceiling, probably ornamentedin compartments or lacunaria. This,again, was protected by a tiled roof inclinedto the hyptethrum, or compluvium S. Somehave imagined an upper stores, becausesmaller fragments of architecture have beenfound.The roof on the side nearest the tablesV must have been somewhat higherthan that on the other quarters, because theantae, as they may be termed, of the tablesexceed, by the whole height of theircapitals, the other Corinthian pilasters whichdecorate the projecting angles of the walls.This might, however, perhaps have beenavoided by placing the beams directly uponthose antae, while, in other parts, the heightof an architrave intervened between themand the pilasters.POMPEIANA. 37The little chamber O, near the number14 in the Plan, seems, evidently, to have beenused as a safe closet. The threshold is ofmarble, with the marks of the carbines, andthe door itself is small and low. It waslighted by a little window, which was placedhigh up in the wall. The holes for fixing theshelves remain. A strigil, and several smallvases of bronze and glass were found in it.The opposite chamber, near No. 13, wasalso a store-room, and had also a marblethreshold, in which the iron carbines remained.Dried figs, grain, nuts, and beanswere found here. The doors are not opposite,but contrived as much as possible toprevent the sight of the interior of thesestore-rooms from their respective entrances.The view in Plate LXIV. was taken fromthe door of the cubiculum R.Every object of note in this once-beautifulperistyle having thus been described,the tablinum V, occupying the centre of theinner side, presents itself, rich in coloursfancifully disposed.On the left, in the centre, was a painting,33, of the dispute between Agamemnon38 POMPEIANA.and Achilles, evidently resembling, in themanner of treating the subject, the picturealready given of it, in the former ,from the Temple of Venus. It ismuch defaced. On each side are dancingThe opposite wall, however, on the right,is most beautiful, and the best preservedamong the ruins of Pompeii. In the centreis the picture of Achilles, 32, detected amongthe females of the court of Lycomedes, Kingof Scyros, by Ulysses, who, in the disguiseof a merchant, offered jewels and arms forsale, while the natural impulse of Achillesdiscovers itself by the seizing of the shield,and the neglect of the ornaments. This pictureforms the subject of our Plate LXIX.It was imperfect when first excavated. Thepavement is white mosaic, with a slightborder of black. It is not easy to conceive,even with the assistance of the magnificentdraperies or aulaea, how a chamber for receptionlike this, open at each end, couldhave been rendered habitable in the winter,though nothing could be better calculatedfor the summer. It may be presumed thatViticLXiJC.^ F IEriated^FennjET StA, C H I L ].POMPEIANA. 39the triclinium, W, must have answered thepurpose during the cold or rainy season.The apartment was lofty, as recommendedby Vitruvius, and probably received a directlight from windows above the roofs ofthe two porticos. The walls yet remain,to a height exceeding those of any othertablinum yet found, and, in variety of subjectand vivacity of colour, nothing can excelthem.In the uppermost compartments are twoGenii, one male and the other female ; and,in the centre, is a Victory, Plate LXXI.,holding a globe in one hand, and, with theother, a trophy, of which more is said in thedescription of the plates.Below this is a narrow line of landscapes,34 and 35 in the Plan, in one of which is ascene much defaced, possibly taken from therecognition of Ulysses by his dog Argus.The other is represented in our PlateLXXII., or at least as much of it as is nowintelligible, the remainder being nothing butearth and sky, and defaced.This has been called Penelope; but theman who receives the cup is too young for40 POMPEIANA,Ulysses after his return from Troy, and noreason can be assigned for the extraordinaryseat of the female. The peaked Chinese hatis not uncommon at Pompeii. The colouringof all the paintings in this tablinum hasagreater variety of light and shade than isusually observed.On each side of Achilles, in Scyros, aredancing figures on blue panels, which havegreat merit and force of colouring ; andbelow, on a yellow ground, are cupids inchariots drawn by animals (See Vignette prefixedto Chap. XI.) and engaged in games.Below are several compartments in black, ornamentedwith figures, foliage, and a varietyof borders.On the whole, nothing yet found equalsthe beauty of this wall, presenting a superficiesof nearly twenty feet square, adornedwith every species of painting, and exhibitinga perfect epitome of every thing to befound in Pompeii.It was found impossible to reduce thewhole of this into the common dimensionsof the plates in this volume, so that a doubleplate. No. LXX., has been given, which,POMPEIANA. 41when coloured, represents accurately thegeneral appearance, and even the details ofthe work.After the tablinum, a triclinium, markedW in the Plan, is worthy of observation.This chamber has a large window opening-throughthe portico X into the garden, and,probably served, in cold seasons, not onlyfor an eating-room, but for reception, insteadof the tablinum. The pavement is ofwhite mosaic, and the walls are carefullypainted and ornamented.At 39 in the Plan is the female with a tripodrepresented on the left of Plate LXXII.Opposite to this is a singular marinebeing, in which the fanciful genius of thetimes combined the forms of the lobsterand the human figure. He is driving a seahorse,and followed by dolphins. In hishand he holds a shell, which serves for atrumpet, and classes the bearer among thefamily of Tritons.At 37 in the Plan is a beautiful sedentApollo, given in Vignette at the end ofChap. VI. ; and at 38 is a female seatedupon a marine deity, half man, half fish,carrying a shield, which has been thought'42 POMPEIANA.to represent Thetis carrying the arms toAchilles. In the centre, above No. 36, isthe picture of the bathing of the infantAchilles in the Styx by his mother. Thisis given in Plate LXXIII.Quitting this chamber, and entering intothe portico of the garden, a beautiful paintingis observed at 29 in the Plan, of Phaedra,the nurse, and Hippolytus. Euripides andother authors have given an account of thepassion of Phaedra for her son-in-la^Y, which,after combating for some time, she at lengthconfessed. The youth seems retiring inhorror, and the nurse is endeavouring to persuadehim to remain. The beautiful figureof the female and the whole picture are representedin Plate LXXVII.In the same part of the portico, or xystus,at No. 30, is a singular picture. A priestess,with a torch in one hand and a dish of fruitsin the other, is seen placed before a temple,or habitation, decorated with festoons ofverdure and torches. In front of her is analtar, the offerings upon which are pomegranates.Behind the dwelling is a man, inapeaked hat, fishing.The whole may allude, in no very occultinfpow6HHC<1^'mri-drjTp:W^1°HelyW^o<!H^':zi<lpHPOMPEIANA. 43manner, to the fruitfulness of the mistressof the house. The female with the torch andfruits may have some reference to Hymen,as well as the torches at the portico ; thealtar with the pomegranates may have areference to Juno Lucina ; and a phallicemblem on the left renders the rest of theinterpretation more probable.In this portico is a well, or. the mouth ofa cistern, of marble. The garden itself waslaid out in beds of flowers in long; rightlines. At the point marked 31 in the Planis a little shrine with an altar before it,seemingly dedicated to Bacchus.The wall is ornamented between theDoric columns with paintings representinga garden with trees, birds, fountains, piscinae,and alternate grass-plots, which whenseen from the atrium, or the tablinum, musthave produced a pretty effect.A narrow staircase, probably, led to theroof of the peristyle N. N. N. from the fauxU. If there were chambers in an upperstory, they might have been above the ala Tand the rooms O, which would not have requiredthe whole height of the tablinum.44 POMPEIANA.The chamber O, connected with the faux,has been thought a cubiculum. It has beenwell ornamented, and contains pictures ofAdonis, 27, and of the infant Bacchus receivinga bunch of grapes from Silenus,No. 26 on the Plan. A female, who hasthe care of the child, may be the aunt Vino,or one of the nymphs of Nysa.A third picture, representing Daphneovertaken by Apollo, has merit as the bestrepresentation yet seen of that fable. Thegod seems to regard his victim with compassion; and the laurel does not spring fromher uplifted hand, but rises behind her. Thisis marked 25 on the Plan. Some havecalled this Cephalic and Process.The large chamber 0, in which is thepicture 28, may be supposed to have beenused as the vernal triclinium of Vitruvius.It must, necessarily, have been a gloomyapartment, receiving no other light thanthat which entered by a single door into theportico.The picture 28 represents, as it is supposed,Meleager : if so, he may be returnedfrom the chase. A winged boy pours waterrjaf.e i^'^^v .'j-Ts."«r- cr- Sir V/ Cell .ilnjT-a-Tsd i PnntedlyPerjieT Scars S 'J^F CD M F 3E II,COM. - -.LondoiLRotiezt Jenmxigs i'Wdharo. Chaplin. 62. Ch£apside.ApEiLUB3i.POMPEIANA. 45into a basin, probably for his ablutions ; anda female standing near is scarcely dignifiedenough for an office superior to that of hishand-maiden, unless love has been the meansof reducing her to that condition. A fourthfigure, upon a rock above, regards the scene.This has been called also Adonis reposing.In the same room are many singularborders, two of which are given in PlatesLXXII. and LXXVII. ; and another picture,so much defaced that little more thanthe body of a bull, or heifer, is distinguishable.Under the garden portico are two pictures,marked in the Plan 41 and 42, of avery singular nature. These represent, inall probability, dramatic scenes familiar toevery body at the time they were painted.They are given in Plates LXXV. andLxvi.From the portico X, which was separatedfrom the garden by rails about fourfeet six inches high placed between thecolumns, a door opened to two apartments,Y and Z, the first of which was evidently46 POMPEIANA.the kitchen, with its adjuncts of sink, scullery,and cloaca, with a staircase to the loftabove, or to the top of the portico X.In the first room, Y, was a dresser, andthe walls have the usual paintings of serpents.Three little windows towards thevicus served to discharge the various fetidodours of the inner kitchen. The room Z,which has a window towards the garden, hasbeen considered as the cook's chamber, w witha sort of ante-room, in which the appearanceof shelves perhaps warrants the suppositionthat a store-room, or repository ofthe dinner apparatus, was its destination.On the whole, the magnificence of thetwo last divisions of this house leaves nothingto desire, except that simplicity of materialso productive of beauty and durability inthe marble monuments of Greece : yet itwould, perhaps, be unfair to judge, from presentappearances, of the effect which thebuildings of Pompeii might have producedwhile the colours remained in all their freshness,and the marble coatings yet adheredto the walls^.fmme^if-k fidcfesnPOMPEIANA. 47There being no indication of the owner'sname or profession, this house has beensupposed to have belonged to the treasurerof the city, and some have even called itthe herbarium.In the house beyond that of the Dioscuri,the vestiges of a considerable portico, but ofstrange architecture, are already disinterred.Doric glutinous and degraded Corinthian capitalsare among the details ; and the pillarsare, here and there, scratched \Yith singularcharacters. The ante fixes seem to have representedthe sun. If the house of the Dioscuribe without a name, here we have thatofM. CERRINIVM. VATIAMNeed. OF. ETNear this isRO. RomulusPrimuswith some unintelligible Greek. This is nowcalled the House of the Centaur from a pictureexcavated in the year 1830.48 POMPEIANA.On the opposite side of the street wefindM. CERRINIVM. VATIAM RVFVMAED. Dignum . REI. P. Tyranny DIG. REIFact CopiesSolis Seconds.On the other side of the same door isCERRINIVMiED OVF. Tyranny. ROG ROMVLVM. AEDCASSELLIVAI Marines ROG R\TVM.SAMELLIVM. AEDFanes . ROG.On that side of the street towards thefountain of Mercury', in the direction ofthe Forum, a most singular painting wasfound at the entrance of the house, close tothe vicus which unites the Street of the Mercuriesto the vicus of the Tragic Poet. Thepicture is now nearly defaced, and was sobefore the author had the means of copying,permission being, in fact, seldom givenwillingly till the paintings have perished ; butit may be described. Four or more persons,not very different from those who now attendburials at Naples, called mecca morte,POMPEIANA. 49seem to carry a bier, covered with a redcanopy supported by four pillars. On thisseems to be borne a dead body, near which,and also on the bier, seems a person whomakes an oration, with a dagger in his hand.At the feet of the corpse are two persons ofsmaller size, who are occupied, as the bierproceeds, in sawing a plank, as if to makethe coffin; but their position in a bier ismost singular. The corpse also seems tohave a nail or spike driven through its head,but this is by no means clearly distinguished ;and, on the angle of the pier, is seen Mercury,with his caduceus, conducting the soulto Hades. A serpent issues from a mysticchest at his feet, and completes this extraordinaryand hitherto inexplicable representation.The house called, from a picture, thatof the Centaur, adjoins that of the Dioscuri.It contains many paintings, and some subterraneousapartments under the garden.Beyond this, again, is a habitation on a magnificentscale, called (also from a painting)that of Meleager. The atrium has a beautifulmarble table in the centre. The houseVOL. II. EPOMPEIANA.is full of beautiful pictures— at present, September,1830, most jealously guarded fromforeign artists or amateurs. Beyond thisthe street runs to a tower in the walls ofthe city, and a postern once existed. SignorBonucci, in a recent note on the subject,observes that the street was walled upat the end near the ramparts in order torender the fortifications useless.DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.PLATE I.FRONTISPIECE,The frontispiece of this work is composedof an union of many architecturaland capricious ornaments, found in differentparts of Pompeii, collected and exhibited insuch a manner as to give an idea of severalobjects which could not be represented indetail.The winged figures, at the angles of thepediment, are taken from two, in a similarposition, in the Pantheon.The frieze in front represents, imperfectly,the combat of the Greeks with theAmazons, painted, with inimitable freedomof hand, in one of the cubiculi of the houseof the Tragic Poet.e252 DESCRIPTION OFThe internal frieze is ornamented withan equally inadequate copy of the frieze ofthe sanatorium of the thermae. The subjectis evidently a chariot race; and nothingcan exceed the spirit and freedom of theoriginals, though now impaired by time andhumidity. Under these, on the architrave,is the word Pumpaiinai, Pompeiana, in theOscan character, written from right to left,like the generality of archaic inscriptions.The name occurs twice in an inscriptionfound in the ruins, and seems appropriateto a work on the city.To the central architrave in front is appendeda basket of fruits, about half thesize of the original ear-ring which was foundin the excavations. The handle was formedof twisted gold wire, and a pearl was suspendedfrom each side. The basket was offiligree, and the fruits were of coral and ofpearls of different colours. Some of thefruits had been restored before it was seenby the author, where they had been foundcorroded. The whole formed one of themost elegant ornaments possible.The fantastic architecture in the back-thePLATES. 53ground is taken partly from the tricliniumof the house of the Tragic Poet, and partlyfrom other walls of the late excavations.The pavement is taken from the floor of ahouse. Two figures, one of which seemssitting on the low wall on the right, andthe other on the left, which may representPainting, have been lately found upon awall near the Street of Mercury, Ad. 1829-.The charioteers are taken from two differentparts of the Pantheon, and the fancifulpillars from a painting upon a panel.The figure of a syren, on the wall to theright, is from the house with the fountain ofshells; and the horse, with the human figureterminating in ornaments, on the oppositeside, is from the house of the Dioscuri.The atlantes represent two of those whichsupport the projecting cornice in the thermaein terra cotta, and the females are taken froma marble.The figures of Peace on the left and ofWar on the right are yet existing; in the tricliniumof the Tragic Poet; and the marinedeity, with his trident, upon the dolphin inthe centre, is from the painting of the Fallof Icarus in the same apartment.54 DESCRIPTIOX OFPLATE II.GENERAL PLAN.Plate II. represents the general plan ofthe later excavations near the Forum, andserves to unite the new discoveries withthose described on a former occasion, aswell as to exhibit the whole group or insulaof public buildings and habitations behindthe chalcidicum, the curia, and the Pantheon.The general plan of the thermae,with its situation relative to the Forum, iscomprehended, and the position of the houseof the Tragic Poet will be connected withwhat was formerly published by its juxtapositionwith the house of Pansa.The Temple of Fortune, and the streetextending to it from the Forum, with itscontinuation under a triumphal arch, werenew discoveries till the year 1827, as well asthe street of the thermae, which runs alongthe flank of the temple.The plans of the chalcidicum and thePantheon might have been given at large,but they occupy a sufficient space on thepresent plate to be clearly comprehended.THE PLATES. 00Of the baths, the Temple of Fortune, andthe house of the Poet, more particular detailsare given in other engravings.PLATE III.WALL or A CUBICULUM.This side of a small room, in the housewhich was excavated in the presence of theEmperor of Austria, and which, from an inscription,has been called the House of Fuscus,or of the Emperor Joseph the Second,is one of the most elegant, and the lightestin its effect, which has been found at Pompeii.The house might derive additional interestfrom a defaced inscription in large redcharacters upon the pilaster on the right ofthe great entrance, where the letters,/V1.TVUVM AAARCl'^AAH. inyet faintly perceptible on the blocks of stone,mio-ht favour the idea that it mioht have beenthe property of one of the Julian family.56 DESCRIPTION OFThe lightness and elegance of the paintingin this chamber render it exceedinglyeligible for modern decorations. In thecentre was a picture, said to have been ratherof an indelicate nature, which was removedto the museum. It may have beenthat called Sophonisba and Massinissa byVisconti. The room is extremely small, andseems to have been lighted by a small windowabove the door in the usual manner.PLATE IV.ANOTHER CLBICULUM.A second cubiculum, in the same house,has been selected as affording a specimen ofthe contrary style of decoration, being highlycharged with colour distributed in panels. Itmay be observed that this wall has been arrangedpurposely for the admission of a bed,which occupied the space of two panels onthe right, so as to leave the yellow portaland its two side compartments a perfectlyregular design, not interfering with the couch.It would be difficult to account for this seem-plateZ')TaAVTLby Sir Jellft lul ea'ty l Jlo^ AHeiminge .F M I ISIDE OiA CHAMBER3L HOUSE '!• i-USCUS.Loitdcax Jenidix^B ^-^ Chariliii- 62 crheai>sidc Ke"bruarvlia52.THE PLATES. 57ingle extraordinary disposition of the panelswithout considering; this circumstance. Thechamber is, like the other, singularly small,not exceeding eight feet in length, and calculatedonly for the purposes of a cubiculumor bedroom.The ornamental honeysuckle, or lotus,with its combinations, in the same plate, isfrom one of the later excavations, and maybefound applicable to the decoration ofmodern furniture.PLATE V.SIDE OF A ROOM.This design differs from that of the generalityof painted walls at Pompeii, and ishere given as an example of its species. Itwas discovered in the house containing thebeautiful picture of Venus and Adonis in thestreet called that of the Merchants, leadingfrom the theatre to the forum. The view,through an arch, of the sea, with a littleisland and ruins, and the iron balustrade,has a pretty effect.58 DESCRIPTION orThe borders which run along each sideof this plate are found on some of the wallsin the vicinity. It is to be remarked that,anion o; the great number of these bordersexamined by the author, both at Pompeiiand at Herculaneum, none were found tohave been executed by means of perforatedstamps of paper or other material, as maybeproved by the incorrectness of the design,it being rarely observed even that the oppositesides of the same flower are preciselysimilar.PLATE VI.PORTAL OF A HOUSE.Plate VI. represents the door of a house,apparently of some consequence, in theStreet of the Merchants. There are manyportals which seem to have been, in size andeffect, more imposing than this, but their architraves,being of timber, have disappeared,so that scarcely any other specimen remains.The mouldings seem such as might be consideredthose of the Ionic order, and thewhole is not without a certain air of solidityTHE PLATES. 59and pretension to architecture which mayrecommend it to imitation. The house hasnot yet been laid open, but probably it wasa mansion of the first class.A monkey playing on the double pipesseems painted on the right as guardian ofthe entry. A staircase probably ascendedfrom the portal to the upper rooms, and asmall window may be observed which admittedthe light.In the fore-ground maybe remarked someof those great blocks, or stepping-stones,which seem to have served, among otheruses, for the prevention of carriages in thestreet. The carts of the excavators are enabledto pass by means of heaps of earthforming two inclined planes of ascent anddescent.PLATE VILPICTURE.This picture existed in a house behind thechalcidicum and the temple called of MercuryGo DESCRIPTIOX OFor Romulus. Some have thought it the habitationof the chief of the Apostles, beingthe Pantheon, or, as it is now called,the Temple of Augustus. The colours, whichare at present subdued by a predominanttint of red, must have been changed by heator moisture, like almost every other pictureat Pompeii. The composition is agreeable ;and the porticos running far out into thesea are, in all probability, representationsof scenes really existing in Italy at the timewhen the painting was executed. It wouldbe difficult for a painter to invent objectswhich had no prototype whatever ; and theremains of piers in the sea, along the wholecoast of Naples, probably point out thesituations of many such colonnades, thoughtravellers usually account for their existenceby the supposition that the sea hasencroached upon the shore. The house goesby the name of the House of Venus andMars, or the Marriage of Hercules. Uponthe pedestal with the long inscription was aleaden vase, according to florio.THE PLATES. 6lPLATE Vii.ASCENT TO THE PORTICO OF EUMACIIIA.The side walls of the steps representedin Plate VIII. are chiefly remarkable fortheir colouring in black panels, which, beingin a situation exposed to a strong light, havea singular and beautiful effect.In modern times it would be thoughtpreposterous to employ so much dark colourin decoration, yet, in the present instance,it seems by no means misapplied, nor, whentreated in this manner, devoid of brilliancy.PLATE IX.STATUE OF EUMACHIA.The statue of Eumachia, as may be seenby a reference to the General Plan, wasplaced in one of the most obscure parts ofthe cryptoporticus connected with the chalkand was erected in her honour by62 DESCRIPTION OFthe fullness or dyers of the city of Pompeii,as the inscription on the pedestal informsus.The statue itself is of white marble, and,if not of the first order in point of execution,is by no means wanting in that grace anddignity which characterise the antique.On the right is observed the entrance tothe staircase represented in the foregoingplate, and, on the left, is a painted doorfolding in three leaves or valves, whichmust have corresponded with that of thereal opening to the stairs.The place may be stated rather a recessthan a niche ; and the statue, being found onthe spot, becomes an object of peculiar interestand importance.PLATE X.PILLARS AND PEDESTALS IN THE FORUM.Each column of the Forum seems to havehad a pedestal advanced in its front, surmountedwith the statue, and recording theTIT E PLATES. 63name of some magistrate or worthy of Pompeii.These pedestals, of which eight yetremain in their original positions, have, insome instances, been the means of preservingentire the white marble pavement on whichthey are placed.The frieze of the nearest pedestal, withits triglyphs and ornamented metres, hasbeen thrown down, and its front has disappeared.On the second is the inscriptiongiven in the text.Over the central column is seen part ofa staircase, and the holes for the beams ofthe upper floor. Behind the first column,on the left, is a recess, with the stone containing;the legal measures used in the market.Behind that, on the left, is seen aCorinthian pilaster of the Temple of Venus,sometimes called, on its first discovery, theHouse of the Dwarfs and the Temple ofBacchus, from some paintings which it contains.In the second and the fourth inter-calumniatorsmay be observed the architravesof the Doric colonnade, the ends ofwhich were cut in an angle of forty-five fromthe horizon, so as to render unnecessary the64 DESCRIPTION OFuse of architraves reaching from pillar topillar.This method has been adopted with successin some of the new custom-houses atNaples. The whole of this entablature isnearly five feet high, and has the holes forlarge beams within. Above seems to havebeen a second order of Ionic columns. TheCanonico lorio says, that the inscription ofone of those stones containing measures,seen in this view, is now in the Museum.A. Clods. A.F. Flaccid. NARCAEVS. N. F. AurelianCalends.D. V. I. D. MENSVRAS. EXAEQVANDAS. EX. DEC. Dear.PLATE XI.ALTAR OF JUPITER.The subject of this plate may yet betraced on the wall of a house situated in astreet leading from the north end of theForum toward the habitation of a peasantnamed Vitiello, above the tavern. Similaraltars are seen in other parts of the city, butTHE PLATES.none so perfectly preserved as this when firstdiscovered. The basso relievo seems to haverepresented a sacrifice ; but, being of stucco,no more was visible, on the day of the excavation,than is here represented : at presentscarcely any vestige of the figures remains.The eagle above seems to indicate Jupiteras the deity worshipped at this spot by thosewho passed the altar. Certain divinities bythe road side seem, however, to have beentermed Vales Dii. Nearly opposite this,saj^s the Canonico lorio, was found the onlyGreek inscription of consequence at Pompeii,in a house where there was a pedestalof Egyptian stone.TAIOC lOYAIOC H<t>AlCTIC'jNOCYIOC H4>AlCTiU)N IEPATEYCACTOY nOAlTEYMATOC TtON <f>PYrtON ANE0HKE Ia (DPYriONL K Z KAICAP° <l>APMOY' CEBACTHThe letters, though not of a very goodtime, are yet among the best and clearest atPompeii. Yarmouth seems to remind usof the Egyptian month of that name. Thewhole appear quite foreign to Pompeii.VOL. II. F66 DESCRIPTION OFPLATE XII.PICTURE.This picture is in a house in the Streetof the Temple of Fortune, nearly oppositethe great entrance into the court of thethermal. The habitation is usually knownby the name of the House of Bacchus, socalled from a large picture of the god uponone of the walls.The subject, if it may be judged by thespear in the hand of the female and theattendant cupids, is that of Mars and Venus,whose face, nevertheless, is by no meansbeautiful. It is possible that, during thatperiod of the universal decline of pagansuperstition which preceded the introductionof Christianity, the portraits of private personsmioht sometimes be introduced in theirown houses among the allegorical deities,as had long been the custom among sovereigns.P iiiiilllil!llllllllllliiMllirjlJl(jJ|J:Ri/^1 ^'nn^TlS11||Pl^¥M)^p^i!i'^^V ' ,11^'^ ''If*' ' I,IIlllllllllilielllCiilEiai.!!& ^J-d?!.^: •^ ;<:j^^cw^^-;<»Si!^-^-i!2st~^.«4«-*« «*^ ^^wK'-i-^^^jJiCUv^IEr^rgjgaAEanaedbyPgmig Sean & C*?F © M 3P B S I:i/rj?^5.s A:^3-r> ■VKiO'TTS.Robert Rennes 5- "'A^ham- CSailm c 2. Ojtatside September "0830THE PLATES. 6?PLATE XIII.PANTHEON.This plate represents the general view ofthe court of the College of the Augustines,so commonly called the Pantheon that astranger would find it by no other name.The drawing is taken from the extremitynearest to the Forum. The indications ofthe bases of the columns are visible on thepavement, but none of the shafts now remain.The twelve piers, or square pilasters, whichprobably supported a dome or roof in thecentre of the hypee thrum, but which someimagine to have been pedestals for the statuesof twelve gods, are distinguishable. Theopposite side of the quadrangle is occupiedby a temple or sacellum in the centre, with anapartment on each side, of which descriptionsare given in this work. In the temple wereniches for statues. It is probable that therewere no pillars on that side of the courtnearest to the cell, the front of which wouldF 268 DESCRIPTION OFhave been impaired, and its light diminishedby a colonnade in that position.Among the reasons for supposing this tohave been a building belonging to the Augustalesis an inscription on an outer wall —. . . . amici Augusta sodali Augusta . . . ."PLATE XIV.PAINTED PORTICO.This plate, which, from its small dimensions,is not capable of containing a sufficientbreadth of the black panels on eachside to give its full value to the perspectivehere represented, may, nevertheless, conveysome idea of the beautiful effect producedby the paintings on the walls of this portico.In the centre of these larsje black divisionsare placed the pictures of which the outlineswill be given, and to which the contrast ofcolour almost imparts the appearance ofbeing seen through a window in the wall.The sky seems to have been left nearly white.t=) %THE PLATES.but the architecture in the back-ground istinted with the aerial purple of distance.Over the portico, seen on the left throughthe arch, a merula, or trellis-work of vines,such as occurs in modern Italy, is visible.On the right may be seen the manner inwhich the ancients sometimes applied theDoric order to the upper story of a privatedwelling. The figure approaching throughthe opening may have been that of thepainter himself.The little pediments of the shrines oneach side are exceedingly graceful ; and thetwo pictures with boats, though scarcely distinguishableon so small a scale, were, whenfirst discovered, clear and perfect.The figure with the lyre in the lowercompartment is not positively that whichoccupies that situation ; but, being moregraceful than that which happens to fill thisplace, has been selected from among manynow existing in the portico.70 DESCRIPTION orPLATE XV.ULYSSES AND PENELOPE.It is of consequence to preserve everythingwhich can conveys to us the conceptionswhich the ancients themselves formed on thesubjects connected with poetry and history,before dress and manners had undergone thatcomplete change which took place soon afterthe general introduction of Christianity. Bycollecting the materials which Pompeii andHerculaneum have already furnished andmay hereafter supply, we shall probably, erelong,have the means of forming editions ofthe writers of antiquity, and decorating ourclassical and mythological dictionaries withfigures and illustrations which the ancientsthemselves might have approved, but whichhave hitherto been attempted in vain. Thispicture refers to the nineteenth book ofthe Odyssey, where Penelope is representedas inquiring of the supposed mendicantstranger for tidings of Ulysses. Penelopeis clothed in a violet-coloured tunic andnaeJCT.Tdl-ni. \. -; Z i- \" v" err; i 1 .Fni^ra-.''?d "br H.ilLseaTHE PLATES. 71a white mantle, or, perhaps, a species ofveil. She holds the materials for spinningin her hand. Ulysses has a white tunicand a yellow champs, or a pallium. Theattendant, Eurynome, is also represented.The size of the picture is about three feetby two feet six. The total absence ofaffectation in this, and indeed almost everyeffort of ancient art, is one of its distinguishingcharacteristics.PLATE XVI.THESEUS AND ^THRA*.Plate XVI. is a picture in the Pantheon,from the wall of that portico which mightwell have been called thePoikilos of Pompeii.This picture has usually been called that of Theseus andjethro, but Signor Gibby, the Roman Professor of Archaeology,was persuaded, from the first, that the supposed rock in the backgroundwas intended to represent a cloud. In fact, the rainhaving at length washed away some of the stains and dirt whichadhered to the picture, the female was found to be decorated witha small pair of horns, almost concealed by her hair. In the year1829 was found in another house a second painting, in which theattitudes of the figures were similar, and the horns more visible,72 Description OFThe subject seems to have been takenfrom the story of Theseus, at the momentwhen he recovers his father's sword by raisingenormous stone under which it had beenconcealed. His mother .Ethra sits near,and seems explaining the circumstances toTheseus, whose force had thus been provedaccording; to the order of his father. Theseusis dressed in two tunics, one of which, fastenedwith a fibbia on the shoulder, is white,and the other purple. ^Ethra is dressed in arobe of yellow colour.The ground of this painting has beenleft white, thus producing a striking contrastwith the broad panel of black which surroundsit. This picture has suffered so muchfrom exposure, that perhaps little of itsbeauty can now be traced, A. D. 1829.To fill up the plate a coloured border isand in addition, the male had the wings of Mercury at his feet,so as to leave little doubt that both the pictures are intended torepresent mercury, when sent by Jupiter to restore lo to liberty,after having slain Argus with the sword which he holds in hishand. The rock is so undefined in either of the paintings, thatit is impossible to decide whether it be a dense substance, oronly the cloud in which the Thunderer sometimes visited hisfavourite.rate XV 11.T H ^T.THE PLATES. 73introduced above, and, below, is a pavementof very fanciful figures in black and whitemarble.PLATE XVII.THALIA.This plate, with the two preceding, hasbeen en o raved for the work called the MuseBorbonico, at Naples ; but as that production,owing to its treating of many subjectstogether, has but a very limited saleon the spot, and is quite unknown in thenorth of Europe, it may have its value, theMuses being precisely those who are liableto suffer most under the hands of a modernartist.The Muse Thalia is here representedsitting with a species of golden tiara on herhead. Her garment is yellow. She holds apedum, or hooked stick, in her hand, andhas a mask and wreath on her lap. A drumor tympanum, also appertaining to tragicexhibitions, is near ; and a graceful female,possibly a sister muse, leans upon the backof her chair.74 DESCRIPTION OFPLATE XVIII.TEMPLE OF AUGUSTUS.Plate XVIII. represents the front ofthe Temple of Augustus, which formed the(Treat ornament of the court of the Collegeof Augustales, commonly called thePantheon. There is a sort of pronaos, inwhich there is a flight of five marble stepsascending to the platform of the cell. Howthis was covered, except by long timbers,does not appear.On the right, on a black ground, is asedent fio-ure which mig-ht have been takenfor a personification of the majesty of Rome ;but it has a dish of fruit in one hand, and asort of Bacchic rod in the other. Near it isa Mars, with his spear and shield.The interior of the cell has probablybeen covered with a thin coating of marble,which had disappeared before the modernexcavations were made. That sort of sneeringwith rare marbles must have always excitedthe avidity of the survivors after thefatal catastrophe. The slabs also would bemm mm mIilif<1THE PLATES. 75easily detacliecl and transported ; and, accordingly,there are few instances of theirremaining, except in sufficient quantity toprove their former existence.Possibly the niche at the end might havecontained a statue of Augustus, with theglobe in his hand, as fragments of such astatue have been found. In a niche on theleft is said to have been a statue of Olivia,and, on the right, one of Tiberius, both ofwhich have been preserved.On the left is an area, which may havebeen, in some measure, applied to culinarypurposes.PLATE XIX.PLAN OF THE. TEMPLE OF FORTUNE.This plate gives the plan of the Templeof Fortune at Pompeii.There are some remarkable circumstancesto be observed, for the pillars of the portico,having left no traces of their situation onthe pavement, have been placed only to correspondwith the lateral pilasters. Such anarrangement, however, does not suit the76 DESCRIPTION OFcolumns in front, which might have agreedbetter with three pillars in the flanks, providedthey were priced close to the upperstep. Even then other inconveniences wouldhave arisen.Several of the capitals of white marble,with the capitals of the antae, remain, andassist in the determination of the diameters,for the shafts no long-er exist.The iron rails closing up one half ofthe access by the lower flight of stairs aresingular.IPLATE XX.VIEW OF THE TEMPLE OF FORTUNE.The view of the Temple of Fortune, inits present state, seems scarcely intelligiblewithout the following plate. The steps, theiron railing, and the altar in the low er partof the front are distinguishable. On theplatform of the portico, the yet existingcapitals of the antae and columns point outthe site of the front and lateral pillars.On the left of the cell, on entering, maybeseen the niche of a statue. The wholeTHE PLATES. 77must have been cased with marble. Manyof the trees have been cut down, in the progressof the excavation, since this view wastaken. On the stone pier, on the right ofthe arch, was painted a galley, larger and ingreater detail than any yet seen, but it waseffaced by the rain before the author waspermitted to draw it. The triumphal archopens into the street now called that ofMercury ; and the window-like holes in itafford a sight of water-pipes of which theuse is not apparent.PLATE XXI.RESTORATION OF THE TEMPLE OF FORTUNE,This restoration of the Temple of Fortuneand the triumphal arch seemed necessaryto give an idea of the original featuresof the place, now so disfigured as to bealmost unintelligible to an uninformed spectator.The altars on which sacrifices were offeredcould never have been placed withinthose temples of the ancients which were nothypa?thral ; and many proofs might be brought78 DESCRIPTION OFto show that even those of hypaethral templeswere placed at some distance in front, likethe great altar before the eastern portico ofthe Parthenon at Athens.The triumphal arch supported an equestrianstatue of bronze, thought to be that ofTiberius, or Caligula, the fragments of whichwere found below.The fountains probably existed, becausethe remains of water-pipes are still found inthe masonry of the arch, though it is not easyto ascertain the exact manner in which theywere employed, but it is to be remarked thatthe arch fronting this at the entrance of theForum had also its fountain or reservoir ofwater.The actual appearance of this spot havingbeen first drawn with the camera lucida, theobjects have been restored upon that drawing,in order to render intelligible its ancientaspect to those who are in need of suchassistance, without the possibility of erringwidely from the truth.Above the arch is placed the inscriptionAugust Caesar parents patriae'' whichwas on marble, and which, lorio says, waspositively found near the spot.THE Plates. 79PLATE XXII.VIEW FROM THE ROOF OF THE Terms.This view has little to recommend it aspicturesque, but it gives, more perspicuously,the portico of the Temple of Fortune, andexhibits, in the clearest manner, the externalappearance of the dome, or cone, which waserected over the circular piscina, or sanatorium,of the baths, the inside view of whichis given in Plate XXVIII.This dome probably terminated in a point,which, projecting above the soil, had beendestroyed by time and the labours of agriculturenot long after the great eruption.The window may have been of glass, andprobably ground on one side, so as to preventthe gratification of idle curiosity. Theinterior seems to have been painted blue orblack. The circular top here shown musthave always been known to the labourer,but, being full of earth, it was probably consideredas nothing more than an old cistern.The wall on the right, in the fore-ground,positively arose to the outer surface of the80 DESCRIPTION OFsoil ; and its summit remained after the excavation,covered with the vegetable productionswhich a very thin lap-er of earthpermitted to grow upon it, as here represented.The window seen on the right, behindthe cone, is that of the frigidarium, whichwas glazed in four divisions fastened by acopper bar in the form of a cross.PLATE XXIII.PLAN OF THE Terms.The plan of the baths, though on a smallscale, will suffice to give a clear idea of theonly perfect thermae existing, without the additions,which would render it unintelligible.The apartments which face two of the streetsand a part of the third may have been shopsor dwellings, totally unconnected with theuses of the thermae.The border is composed of fourteen differentpatterns or subjects, useful to carvers,gilders, and ornamental painters, and allfound on the walls of Pompeii.rkMXxm.PLAN OF THE Terms.m^^.Dnnca "b7 Sir 'w: GelL3P©MFIEEE.Sobett Jnmmg! A'TCDiim dunlin. 62. Outside. Jto^l" If !1The PLATF-S. 81PLATE XXIV.GENERAL VIEW OF THE TITERMyE.This view represents the whole excavationof the insult of the thermae, from thelittle street or vicus on the right, oppositethe door of the house of Pansa, to the anglenear the arch of Caligula or of Augustus,and the Temple of Fortune, and, from thence,to the triumphal arch at the entrance of theForum. The arch of Caligula only interceptsa very unimportant portion toward the right.The view was taken before the excavationof the house called that of Ceres wascompleted, from the vineyard above thatdwelling. In the distance is seen the highmountain of St. Angelo behind Castell aMare. The three arches of the thermae occupythe centre. That on the left is the ,the next the tepidarium, and thethird the caldarium or laconicum. The partwhich appears on the right of the arch ofCaligula is that which perhaps was dedicatedto females. About halfway down theVOL. II. G82 DESCRIPTIOX OFstreet, toward the arch of the Forum, is thedoor of entrance to the court of the thermae.PLATE XXV.SECTION OF THE Terms.This section is given immediately afterthe view to render it more intelligible.It is to be understood that the archeswere not, in ancient times, visible fromwithout, but are now exposed b}^ the fallof a considerable part of the vaults on thenorth.The dome or cone of the natatio is seenrestored above the frigidarium on the left.The tepidarium seems to have beenwarmed only by the large ocular given byMacula, having his symbol, the cow, ofbronze, in the centre.The caldarium, with its orifices or ventsfor the escape of vapour, is the arch on theright, and its pavement is suspended in sucha manner that the heated air from the furnaceis enabled to warm it in every part.TH F, PLATES. 83A black line, rising from this liypocaust, representsa cavity in the masonry by whichthe lateral walls of the chamber are heated.To the right of this is the furnace, and,above it, was a brazen caldron, the form ofwhich mioht be learned from the bed ofmortar which had enclosed it.This caldron was called also the cal-darius,that above it the tepidarium, andthe uppermost the frigidarium ; and theywere so contrived, by means of somethingof the nature of a syphon, that, when thewater of the lowest was drawn off for thebath, an equal quantity descended simultaneouslyfrom the second to the lowest caldron,and from the uppermost to the second,while the reservoir discharged itself into thefrigidarium.The remainder of the building theright would have been only a repetition ofthe foregoing description, and is thereforeomitted, as its insertion would have toomuch diminished the size of each portion ofthe section.From the form in which the cement remainsin which the brazen caldrons wereG 284 DESCRIPTION OFembedded, there can be little doubt thatthey were placed in the manner here represented.There may, however, have beenmore than one set of these vases, and, possibly,there might have been three, placedone behind the other, where the ruin issomewhat confused. One of these sets ofvases might have been appropriated to theuses of the labrum.PLATE XXVI.COURT OF THE There.The court of the baths seems to be theonly substitute at Pompeii for those numerousappendages of porticos and placesof exercise which are said to have belongedto the magnificent thermae of great cities.Under the porticos, which consisted of Doriccolumns one foot six inches in diameteron two sides, with arches on the third, thosewho came to bathe might wait till their turnfor admission arrived. There is a recess in thecentre, in which it is supposed the guardiani[[iiiiiiiiniiiiiiiimiiiiiiii[iiiM;^^^m-"'^iiiuiuiiililllliilliiilliilillliDllilllniilulliilllilllo (v;-1d^feoTHE PLATES. 85of the thernitie delivered tickets of entrance ;and as this cell was at the back of the ,it is not impossible that he wasenabled to observe, through the opening inthe wall, when there was room for a newvisiter.An inscription or advertisement, paintedon the wall, proves that this was a place ofgeneral resort ; and the fourth wall, whichwas whitened and without a portico, mightpossibly be what was called an album forpublic notices of sales, games, and scenicexhibitions.PLATE XXVII.FRKilDAllIUM.Plate XXVII. is a view of the frioida-orum of the thermae.Some part of the vaulted roof remains,and shows that it was ornamented with yellowpanels bordered with red.The door on the left is the entrance fromthe court. That on the right shows a partof the circular natatio, and one of the scholar86 DESCRIPTION OFor recesses. The window is not in the centreof the vault, nor is any thing very exactlysymmetrical. The cornice is painted withgriffins and lyres, now nearly effaced. Thehole under the window was for the lamp.Several holes in the wall on the left werefilled by small rafters which supported shelves,on which were arranged the clothes of thevisitors, or the towels of the establishment.The door on the right, half seen, opens intothe tepidarium. It is not a little curiousthat the species of Titan on the right, underthe window, seems to be using a vase of theshape usually assigned to Bacchus insteadof a shield, as that god himself is said tohave done, according to a Greek authornamed Aristides. KyA<| awn aa-'Tri^og. A ku-lixwas a cup with two handles, for the authorfound one at Athens with the nameupon it — " This is the kulix of," &c.PLATE XXVIII.Notation.The natatio is circular, and its roof adome or cone. It may have been paintedTHE PLATES. 87blue above, but its present hue is nearlyblack. Of the schola, or recesses, two arehere shown, coloured blue with red alcoves.The walls were yellow, and in the centre,between the two recesses, a brazen spoutthrew the water into the piscina or cistern,across the ambulatory which, like the vase,was covered with white marble.Below the dome is a frieze, painted redand ornamented with what are now only thevestiges of bassi relieve in stucco, representinghorse, chariot, and foot races. It is theonly tolerably perfect natatio at presentknown to exist.PLATE XXIX.TEPIDARIUM.Plate XXIX. gives by far the most finishedapartment of the there, and somepart of its roof was, when found, in tolerablepreservation, and had a beautiful effect. Onthe pavement, and in the centre, stands thebronze fcculare given by M. Nicidius DESCRIPTION OFCela, as appears by the cow, though therebe no inscription, as there is upon the threeseats of the same metal of bronze.The recesses between the atlantes whichsustain the upper cornice were probablyused for the garments of the bathers. Thedefect in the angle on the left is occasionedby an awkwardness in the plan of one ofthe scholar in the natatio, which interfereswith it.The window here is not in the centre,but was probably closed with glass like theothers, and with cross bars of brass. Thehole for the lamp was so contrived as to givelight both to this apartment and to the stationwhich is supposed to have been that ofthe bath-keeper in the court.The superior decoration of this chamberwas probably owing to the greater resortof visitors, it being only heated to a genialtemperature.The door on the right leads to the laconicum.THE PLATES. 89PLATE XXX.CEILING OF THE TEPIDARIUM.The vault of the tepidarium, being theonly one of any consequence remaining atPompeii, may be thought worthy of preservationby means of this plate, for it willprobably soon fall, and no memorial of itmay remain.A description of it seems unnecessary inthis place.PLATE XXXI.Laconic.The laconicum or caldarium, correspondingwith the stuff of modern Italy, does notequal the gorgeous display of the tepidthough the schola, if that term be applicableto the semicircular termination, hasnot been neglected in point of ornament.90 DESCRIPTION OFThe alcove has been highly decorated,but, from the total absence of symmetry inthe compartments, they seem to have beentaken from some other building and placedhere. Neither the circular vent for the vapour,which was here abundant, nor thequadrangular holes in the vault, are regular.The hole for the lamp, which was glazedwith a curved glass like that of a watch, admittedlight both toward the caldarium andto the portico of the court.The labrum* at the farther end wouldprobably have had a more elegant supportthan the block now existing had not a flawin the marble rendered so wide a basementnecessaryThe figure in front shows the height ofthe cistern of the hot-bath above the the history of the Fratelli Arvali by Alluring we find aninscription referring to objects so exactly similar to those foundin the laconicum and tepidarium at Pompeii, that it is worthnotice.Alia. P. F. QA^ARTILLA. BALIXE^■ M'ISn^LIEBRE A SOLO SVA PEC. ExtractEADEM LAPIDE MarioORNAVIT LABRViM AEXE\\MFOCVLO SEDES POSVIT.N pO,?sTHE PLATES. 91ment of the chamber. Over the door of thecaldariimi were nails by which a curtain wassuspended.PLATE XXXII.SECTION OF THE Laconic.This section of the laconicum requiresbut little explanation.It gives the vase of the warm-bath on theright, the labrum on the left, and the hypocaustbelow the pavement, leaving scarcelyany thing more to be learned on the subjectof the laconicum or caldarium of the ancients.PLATE XXXIII.FRIGIDARIUM AND PISCINA.In this plate, XXXIII, is represented achamber with its roof entire, which is supposed,according to the reasons given in thiswork, to be the therm ee of the women.92 DESCRIPTION OFThe darkness here observable perhapsmay lead us to suppose that the other apartmentswere by no means well lighted whenthe roofs were perfect.A figure is represented as in the piscina,or natatio, to show its existence.The bench on the left, which appears somuch out of true perspective, is really soplaced on the spot.The wall on the left is exceedinglymassive, the reason for which does not seemsufficiently explained, unless it were for thesupport of the arch on this outer side, which,on the inner, was buttressed by the otherarched roofs of the thermae. There was alsoa reservoir of water above the vault, theweight of which might require additionalsupport.Below, to fill up the plate, are representedthe two sides of a ticket of entrance*.This was for a show of gladiators. It hasbeen conjectured that the like existed inthere, but with another device.See vignette at the end of Chapter XIII.Til E Impairs. 93PLATE XXXIV.EXTERIOR OF WOMEN's BATHS.Plate XXXIV. represents the highestexternal portion of the thermae from thenorth-west angle.On the rio'ht the vicus is seen which terminatesat an entry of the Forum. On theleft the last edifice is the Temple of Fortune.The door on the extreme left is thatof the house of the Tragic Poet.The two pilasters or buttresses on theright, under an arch in the thick wall ofthe women's baths, have between them theevident traces of a fall of water, which isconjectured to have been the outlet for thesuperfluity of the reservoir above. This alleyseems to have been arched over at this end,and the arch is thought to have served as acommunication with other reservoirs of waterof which the vestiges are visible. No conjecturehas yet reasonably accounted for theappearance of a heavy arch which, springsDESCRIPTION oring from the angle, appears to have beenthrown over the wide street of the baths onthe left, nor is there a vestige of any pier onthe other side to support it.The nearest door was that of the women'sbaths, before which projected a little apartmentor vestibule, with a shelf for the layingup of the clean linen for the bathers,and, probably, the station of the keeper orbalneator.A white-washed tablet at this door has aninscription. The entrance, by a passage tothe frigidarium, from this street, is by thelast door, except one, to the right. Therewere other baths, both of salt and freshwater,at Pompeii ; and the Canonico loriogives the inscription of one of them from theMusaeum.THERMAEM. Crash. FRVGIAqua. MARINA. ET. BAL.Aqua. DVLCI. lANVARIVS. L.Hot, salt, and fresh-water baths," &c.':ATHE I'LATRS. 9-5PLATE XXXV.PLAN OF THE HOUSE OF THE TRAGIC POET.This house, which, when first discovered,was one of the most complete at Pompeii,has, like every thing in the city, scarcely asingle right angle, or any thing perfectlysymmetrical. Instead of an apology for incorrectness,an excuse would be necessaryfor not liavino- noted the irregularities of thebuilder with scrupulous accuracy.The eight fanciful ornaments which formthe border of this plate were copied at differenttimes, and from many parts of theexcavated ruins.PLATE XxxviHOUSE OF THE POET.The view of the Tragic Poet's house wastaken soon after its discovery at a momentwhen certain shades of drapery had beenQ6 description ofplaced to protect the painting of Achillesfrom the effects of the sun.The house had excited so much interestat the time it was discovered, that the wallswere quickly tiled, as here represented, topreserve them from the weather, so that theircovering must be considered not only asmodern, but as calculated, by its effect, toproduce a conviction that the water from theroof fell into the tablinum of the house.The remedy for this idea will be found inthe following plate.PLATE XXXVII.poet's house restored.This restoration is calculated to affordan idea of the pleasing effect which evena moderately sized house, arranged in themanner of the ancients, is capable of producing.Nothing' has been changed from the originaldrawing, Plate XXXVI. , the lineshaving been traced from it by means of a^ ^THE PLATES. 97pane of glass. The roof only has beenadded, which must have existed, and, probably, in a much more complicated and ornamentedform than that here represented.The pendent ornaments are taken from apicture at Herculaneum. The light also hasbeen thrown from the contrary side, whichhas contributed to the apparent change ofthe picture; and the sombre shades, contrastedwith the partial lights of the implu-virum and the peristyle, produce an effectscarcely credible by those who have onlyseen the habitation exposed to the glare ofsunshine.The light is admitted into the nearestdivision of this atrium or cavaedium througha quadrangular hole in the roof, which inclinedtoward the centre, and seems to havebeen called coma^dium, as the opening itselfwas styled compluvium, and the recipient ofthe water in the pavement below the implu-virum. Nevertheless these terms seem tohave often been confounded, for Plautusmentions the seeing into an impluvium fromanother house, and Terence also says, "peraliens regular," and " per impluvium,''VOL. II. H98 DESCRIPTION OFshowing they must have intended to speakof the opening when they use the word ,and consequently the recipientshould be termed the compluvium. Thecompluvium of the cavaedium should be, accordingto Vitruvius, not larger than a thirdpart of the atrium, nor less than a fourth.This, however, was still less, and the housemust therefore have been somewhat darkerthan usual.The tablinum seems, to our eyes, toomuch exposed for comfort ; but it was socalled because it could be shut up withshutters : " quod e tables componeretur."There always seems a difficulty betweenthe terms atrium and cavaedium, and betweenexedra and tablinum ; but the tableswas next to the atrium — " Tablinumproxime trio locus fuit." Festus. — Whenit is said that, in going from the atriumto the cavaedium, it was necessary to passthrough the tablinum, such description cannotapply to houses like those of Pompeii,unless the cavaedium and peristyle were thesame ; but Vitruvius, who is not always clear,must have spoken of houses different fromTHE PLATES. 99those of Pompeii. Professor Gibby says,however, that those of Rome had the samesort of atrium ; for that below the foundationsof Adrian's temple of Venus and Romewere found, in 1828, the remains of an ancienthouse exactly similar to those of Pompeii,and with the compluvium distinctly visible.Many persons are inclined to think thatthe draperies and splendid ceilings, withwhich a restoration of this kind mioht bedecorated, would want the support of ancientauthorities ; but veils or shades against sun,wind, and rain were used between columnsand called Cilicia, and the rods for themremain at Herculaneum. Pliny sa5^s, " La-quartaquae nunc et in privates dominusauro teguntur." Festus cites Cato saying,Villae expolitae maxims opere citron atquebore atque pavements panics stand." —Seneca says the ceilings of ceensenia wereversatile or changeable, and that a man waspoor who had not glazed windows. Tertulliantalks of Tyrian curtains and hyacinthineveils, and so much gold was at onetime expended on the ceilings, that an edictto prohibit the use of it was published.H 2100 DESCRIPTION OFPLATE XXXVIII.WINDOWS OF Cubical.Much has been said, and more has beendoubted, on the subject of the windows of theancients. It was not probable that houses,and especially cubiculi, could have existedwithout the means of excluding the cold, yet,at the same time, admitting light. Even inmodern times, however, except in the dwelling'sof the great, the lighting; of a house inItaly or Greece, on a rainy or windy day, isvery imperfect, in consequence of the scarcityof glass, or its late introduction as an articleof common use. The villa of Arius Diomedesis said to have had a window thepanes of which were divided by lead, justas we find them in old houses in England.The thermae had the same divisions of brass,but these windows of the Tragic Poet of Pompeiiare the only examples at present existingof the manner of opening and shutting.The accounts remaining of the scarcity orabundance of glass among the ancients areTHE PLATES. 101very contradictory. Viscus accuses Firmsof luxury for having windows of glass in thetime of aurelian. Caligula, when givingaudience to Philo, a rich Jew of Alexandria,is stated to have attended to nothing butnew-glazing his windows, so that the imperialpalace must have been glazed longbefore to have required renewing.In this view two of the iron cramps remainby which wooden frames were fixed tothe wall, and in those frames the window,either of glass, linen, or wood, moved backwardsand forwards. If the slider was merelya shutter, which it appears to have been, itwas probably not without a small hole in thecentre, square or circular, glazed or coveredwith linen, or even open to admit a smallportion of light.These windows are six feet six inchesabove the foot pavement, so as not to admitthe gaze of passengers. The foot pavementitself is here one foot seven inches higherthan the street or vicus, which is pavedwith polygons, of which a quarry was foundby the lion. W. Strangers not far fromTorre dell' Annunziata.102 DESCRIPTION OFThe vicus, without the footpaths, whichare each about three feet nine inches wide,measures only seven feet six inches in breadth.These alleys could never have been narrower,according to the old Roman law.Vii latitude endo porrectum octo pedesestod, endo amfractom sedecim." Thewidth of the streets must be eight feet wherestraight, but sixteen where they turned.The houses on each side of these narrowstreets were justly called Vicinage : — " Vicinagequi in vico sunt."The windows are only one foot eleveninches wide, and not three in height. Withinthe chambers the opening measured onlytwo feet six inches, and there was perhapssome appearance of an internal casementwhich opened inwards. The red panels arefour feet seven inches in height. On thesethe children have frequently drawn rudefigures with a pin or a nail, and have sometimeswritten sentences not more delicatethan the figures, as boys are apt to do inour own times. The word ivcvndo occurstwice among the names. The windows openinto what is called the library, and two otherTHE PLATES. 103cells or cubiculi of the Tragic Poet. Theopening on the left is that which leads tothe peristyle of the same house, and theparty wall divides the Poet from the housecalled the Pullonica.PLATE XXXIX.THE DEPARTURE OF Arises.The painting of Achilles and Arises, ofwhich the outlines are attempted to be givenin Plate XXXIX., might, when first discovered,be considered as the finest specimenof the ancient art of painting whichhad come down to us, and was, probably,the faint resemblance of some celebratedpicture by one of the great masters ofGreece. It was impossible to describe theatrium of the Poet without dwelling on thisbeautiful production, so that it needs no furtherdescription. The traveller will look invain for this treasure in the spot it once occupied,as it is removed, after having undergonethe inclemency of two or three seasons,104 DESCRIPTIOX OFto the Museum at Naples. Had the house,which might have been covered in at a smallexpense, been restored, we might have hada lower floor at least, nearly as perfect as itexisted before the fatal eruption. The subjectof a restoration has indeed often beenthought of by the directors, and the academicianshave even met to consult on thesubject. Unfortunately one insists upon itthat the atrium was covered, while anotherdeclares that no roof whatever existed : thevoice of authority which might decide isnot always either interested in or learnedupon the subject, and the House of Pansa,which had been selected, is now in a stateof irretrievable decay : that of the Poet hasfollowed it ; and the mansion called that ofthe Dioscuri, which, for a trifle, might havebeen restored to its original splendour, ishastening to a state of nakedness and desolation.So much description of this picture isgiven in the text, that more is unnecessary.The candelabra, represented as if behindthe picture, is in the Museum.THE PLATES. 105PLATE XL.ACHILLES.Plate XL. is an attempt to give a facsimileof the head of Achilles, traced ontransparent paper upon the original. Thehead of Arises, which was also beautiful,had unfortunately suffered from the fall of abeam intended to preserve it.The extreme vivacity dignity, and beautyof the head of Achilles are but faintly expressedin this engraving, and all thosefaults seem exaggerated which the skill ofthe artist and the colouring of the originalconcealed. One of the eyes, in particular,is larger than the other ; and there may beother defects, which totally disappear whenobserved with the entire painting, leavingthe impression of the finest youthful head inexistence.The picture is four feet two inches highby four feet wide. This may be a properplace for stating that the author cannot DESCRIPTION OFsome, in attempting to preserve a memorialand record of these paintings, to imaginethat any thing more than a faint idea ofthem can be furnished to the reader. Anartist of the first skill would find it a difficulttask to preserve in scanty outlines the tracesof the force or expression of the originalwhere there is often no outline at all, itbeing[ shaded off till the forms become indistinct.Indeed, where it can be done, nothingis so difficult as to trace an outlinefrom the originals, even on the most transparentpaper. At an immense expense only,and on a large scale, could any idea be furnishedof the touch and style of the paintersof antiquity. Many are also incorrect as todrawing, jet the additions of shade and colourdiminish the defect which, in outline,becomes glaring. Those, however, who v/ishto study the grouping and composition of theancients, will here find great assistance, andhistory and poetry may be illustrated uponauthority instead of from fancy. There is, nodoubt, a certain degree of sameness even inthe coloured originals — a defect which mustTHE PLATES. 107be more visible in outline. The Romans onlycopied themselves and the Greeks; thereforethey had not that range over all airesand all situations which is open to modernart. The Greeks, who only depicted themselves,and an occasional Persian or Amazon,were still more confined as to models.The shading of a modern picture is generallyartificially contrived by a light let inby a small window, or even a small hole inashutter purposely closed, and which producesan effect rarely observed in nature.The ancients, on the contrary, seem to havepreferred the light of day for their works,and one curious advantage is gained byit. The pictures of the ancients produce apleasing effect when only surrounded by asimple line of red, while the very best ofmodern paintings is very much indebted tothe carver and gilder for its gorgeous andburnished frame, without which its beautiesare so much diminished that it almost ceasesto be a decoration to an apartment.108 DESCRIPTION OFPLATE XLI.PELEUS AMD THETIS.This picture, Plate XLI., is nearly ofthe same size as that of Achilles. A degreeof reluctance may certainly be perceivedin the air of the female, and the wingedgenius seems to be urging her to give herright hand, while she suffers the left only tobe taken.Peleus had been formerly married to Antigone,the daughter of Duration, in Pythia,after his tlioht from iEmna ; and it does notseem impossible that the three children belowhim might be the offspring of that marriage,and that the female represents Polydora, themother of Mnestheus, who expelled Theseusfrom Attica. Some have said that Thetiswas the daughter of Lycomedes, King ofScyros, and that all her children, exceptAchilles, died young.There is a landscape in the back-ground,but of no peculiar character.The marine group, which is placed aboveriau-xi.n.V z.: Chgapcidg Jalt- 2.350THE PLATES. 109this picture to fill up the White, is taken fromthe house now called of the Dioscuri, fromcertain pictures of Castor and Pollux in theentrance, and perhaps presents, for the firsttime, the union of the lobster with the humanform in the person of a sea-god.PLATE XLII.VENUS.Venus is represented, in Plate XLII.,from one of the cubiculi in the house of theTragic Poet. Some have imagined thatCupid was painted as having caught severalfish, but that he had, in the mean time, beencaught by the goddess ; though that doesnot seem exactly to have been the intentionof the painter. It has even been pretendedthat the mountain seen in the distance isVesuvius ; but the Vesuvius of Pompeiitimes must have been a flat and very truncatedcone, with a wide depression in thecentre, almost filled up at present by a newcone, the origin of which can be traced only110 DESCRIPTION OFto the eruption which destroyed Pompeii.It is surprising how little notice of so neara mountain as Vesuvius is to be found inthis city. At Capua two curious inscriptionswere discovered, which seem to point outthe two summits, one being the Monte diSomma of the present day.lOVIlOVI 0. MVESWIOSVMMANOSACEXSVPERANTISSIMO.D. DBy these it seems proved that the mountainwas sacred to Jupiter. A third may beadded, which may have reference to Vesuvius,and is from Herculaneum, accompanyingthe picture of a snake windinground an altar.GeniusHVIVS LOCIMONTIS.The goddess is graceful and natural inthe original. The position of the left handis one which was a great favourite with theancients, and is often repeated. Her mantleis yellow.THE PLATES. IllThe fantastic marine animals above andbelow tins picture are taken from panelsgenerally black, and forming the lowestornaments of many of the apartments atPompeii.PLATE Xlii.ARIADNE.Ariadne is seen, in Plate Xlii, justawaking after the fatal sleep during whichTheseus had deserted her. The ship of herungrateful paramour is seen in the distance.The subject was much admired by the ancients,and the figure of Ariadne is full ofgrace. The sea is represented of a deep-bluecolour which contrasts well with thefigures, and the sky almost mixes with thehorizon. The right hand of Ariadne is hereinthe favourite position of the painter. Herhair is, as usual, auburn, and her robe is rose-colourvery prettily shaded. Xenophon, inthe Banquet of Socrates, insinuates that Bacchusand Ariadne were favourite subjects112 DESCRIPTION OFfor eating-rooms. In this house we accordinglyfind a repetition in the chamber ofLeda, as exhibited in Plate XLIX.Below are two borders offering certainvariations, though not very dissimilar in taste.Above is seen the only picture of the wholedetail of the roof and compluvium of theancients which has ever been seen by theauthor. It occurs in the house of the TragicPoet ; and though the facts seem to havebeen perfectly comprehended before, yet itis of consequence, as well as exceedinglysatisfactory, to be able to cite an authorityon the subject.PLATE XLIV.POET READING.It is impossible to see the Poet readingto two personages who at first sight appearto be male and female, without rememberingthe circumstance of Virgil reciting that partof his poem to the emperor and Octavia,which first produced tears, and at the wordsTHE PLATES. 113Tu Marcellus eris" threw her into a swoon,from which she recovered to present a sumequal to 2000 of our pounds sterling to thepoet whose verse had done so much tow artsimmortalizing the memory of her son.On a closer examination, however, it mustbe acknowledged that an emperor, in thetime of Virgil, would not probably have appearedso little covered, nor would the Poet,whose skin is of a deep red hue, have beenin the same predicament, in the presence ofthe empress.Moreover, the nearer sedent figure is sodecidedly of an androgynous nature, whilethe middle-aojed female has all the marks ofordinary humanity that Augustus and Octaviacan scarcely be the persons represented.The dark colour of the Poet seems to haveinduced many persons to imagine that hemust be a slave ; but, admitting this, we arestill in the dark as to the subject of thepicture.The locality resembles a modern theatre,with three persons in the pit, and four othersin the boxes, one of whom, on the right, hasVOL. II. I114 DESCRIPTION OFthat sort of blue glory which seems, in thepaintings of Pompeii, to be the attribute ofdivinity, or, at least, of heroic personages.The female, it is true, seems agitated, andis pointing as if to command the repetitionof some passage. The history certainly mentionsthat after the words " O nate" Octaviaburst into tears ; and there is perhaps nothingbut the dress, or rather the absence of it, thatshould prevent us from considering Virgilas the hero of the piece, or, at least, that thestory may have been similar.If the house really belonged to a poet, itmight have been some triumph of his ownwhich was here portrayed ; yet a god withthe blue glory and bow and a Muse wouldscarcely have descended in the times of ImperialRome, their visits to this earth havinglong been suspended. An elderly figure onthe left, and another, with a crutch, seempersonages of this world; and perhaps, whenthe picture becomes more known, some onewill hit upon the explanation.Above the picture is the cock with thecaduceus, and other ornaments from theTHE Mates. 115same house. The border with harpies isperhaps the only ancient authority for theform of those beings yet found.The ornament below the picture is fromone of the older excavations.The strong" resemblance between some ofthe figures in this painting to those in thecelebrated picture from Herculaneum, takenfrom the Iphigenia in Taurus of Euripides,ought to be remarked. There is, perhaps,suthcient reason for thinking they refer tothe same subject.PLATE XLV.MOSAIC.The ground of this beautiful mosaic pictureis black, the dresses are in general white,and the personages of a natural colour.So much has been said of the subject inthe description of the house, where it formedthe central compartment in the pavement ofthe tablinum, that it is needless to add morethan that it represents the actors dressingI 2116 DESCRIPTION OFfor a scenic representation. It has beentaken from the floor, and is preserved in theStudio at Naples.The mosaic vases, twisted column, andlittle figures seem to have nothing to do withthe scene below, but served merely to fillup the square compartment in the pavementof the tablinum.Above and below the mosaics are placed,to fill up the Plate, tablets or panels of thosecurious fish and marine monsters which areso common at Pompeii.PLATE XLVI.SACRIFICE OF IPHIGENIA.Plate XLVI. represents the sacrifice ofIphigenia at Aulis. Chalcas had alreadytaken the fatal knife, and was going to immolatethe virgin, when Diana, appeasedby the submission of Agamemnon, substituteda hind in the place of the innocentvictim. The goddess and the animal areseen in the clouds.<)THE Plates. 117In the original, the hard features ofChalcas are well imagined. Many artistshave complained that the feet of Iphigeniaare not seen, but they might have been concealedby the male figure, and the ancientsseem seldom to have represented the limbswhich were not absolutely necessary.Timanthes, of Sicyon, was highly applaudedfor having painted a picture of thissubject with the countenance of Agamemnonhidden, the expression being beyond the artof painting. He lived in the time of Philipof Macedon ; but it appears that Polygnotusof Thasos, who lived in the fifth centurybefore Christ, had also painted the samesubject, and Euripides had imagined it, withthe same circumstances as those representedin the temple at Delphi by Timanthes. Itis very satisfactory to have an ancient representationof any subject the meaning ofwhich admits of so little dispute.Iphigenia has a yellow drapery, and thetwo persons who are holding her have mantlesof a violet colour. Chalcas has a purpledress, and over it, tied round the waist, ayellow drapery.118 DESCRIPTION OFAgamemnon has a long cloak of a dark-bluetint ; but, notwithstanding the frequentuse of purple in the picture, the generaleffect produced by the whole is red, theskin, the hair, and almost every thing in-clinging; to that colour.The picture is invaluable, and was ingood preservation; but either that the subjectis not agreeable, or from some othermotive, it is one of the least pleasing of thepaintings at Pompeii.The oven of the fuUonica is immediatelybehind this picture, and it must be presumedthat the heat must have penetrated the wall,but the colours do not seem to have suffered.PLATE XL VII.SIDE OF THE CHAMBER OF LEDA.This Plate, No. Xlvi, is given for thepurpose of conveying an idea of the mostgaudy and glaring style of Pompeii decorations.The chamber is, notwithstandingthis display of colouring, by no means so^:■rF.■.Ta'bySir^^'•■'-n^raysd. "W Hlf- )Kcs .JE 2 EIIAMBFrnau.'d VFomcr ScmOia^^. 62. Chide. Stay. 2.1631.THE PLATES. 119cheerful as many others of a more sombreaspect. The two openings produce a goodeffect, and, besides two circular canopiessupported on wooden pillars, two impluviiare observed, which have been detailed, ona larger scale, in a former Plate. Of thepicture of Leda a separate Plate will begiven.PLATE XL VIII.LEDA AND TYNDAREUS.The picture of Leda and Tj^ndareus,given in Plate Xlvii, was, when first discovered,one of the most beautiful specimensof ancient art. The composition, thetone of colouring, and the harmony of all itsparts, rendered it, perhaps, a more agreeablepicture than that of Achilles.According to its present appearance, thedrapery of Tyndareus is of deep blue, linedwith green ; that of Leda is rose-coloured,that of the attendant behind her green, as isthat of another person near the pillar ; thatof the person with the bow is yellow, and of120 DESCRIPTION OFthe figure behind him dark-coloured, or perhapsgreen.The robe of Leda was, at one time, greenlined with blue, and the robe of Tyndareuswas black ; but even the red changes toblack, and the red to yellow, according to itsexposure to rain, sun, or damp. The threechildren sitting in their nest, and the motherplaying with them as with birds, is a novelconceit, and has a pretty effect. Tyndareusdoes not regard them with more than a complacentlook. The mountains in the distanceend somewhat abruptly behind the squarepier in the centre.The Plate is filled up, above and below,with the specimen of the city wall, as preservedin a mosaic pavement at Pompeii.That this species of tower, wall, battlements,and gate was not very different from somewhich then existed may be presumed. Indeedparts of the walls of Rome are not verydissimilar. The pavement is in the housecalled that of the AVild Boar, or Cinghiale.j-^yar/ir-. '■>■ ^ 't .O ovn fv::TiTick Relates. 121PLATE XLIX.ARIADNE.The adventures of Ariadne formed a favouritesubject with ancient artists. Wchave before seen her abandoned by Theseus,and when he was already at sea. Here wehave her absolutely asleep upon a mattress,and with an azure glory round her head;while Theseus, guided by Minerva, who appearsin the air as an excuse for his perfidy,is actually getting on board his vessel. Thegoddess, though behind a mountain at somedistance, is represented of an awful size;which was either a manner of showing: herdivinity, or was a defect in the painter'sidea of perspective. The picture is not ingood preservation, so that several of the objectsare by no means clear; nor does eitherthe composition or the execution reflect greatcredit on the painter.Above the picture of Theseus quittingAriadne is given in this Plate a scene probablyrepresenting a temple, before which122 DESCRIPTION orpersons are going to sacrifice upon an altar.Below is a number of singular figures, foundupon certain columns in a peristyle near thehouse called that of the Dioscuri. They muchresemble the sigla which are supposed to betheprivate marks of the scribes who copiedthe Herculanean manuscripts.PLATE L.FULLONICA.The fullonica, though a place of considerablesize, has, except the cisterns forwashing and dyeing, little that is worthy ofremark. Plate L. represents a fountain, atan angle in the court of this edifice, differentfrom those yet observed either in the streetsor private houses. It is placed between twosquare piers, and consists in an elegantlyshaped tazza, supported by a fluted pedestallike those commonly used for ancient circulartables, and is of white marble. From thepiers two projections are seen, painted redand ornamented with plants and birds. Theserate LI.Fy IE I E.PI'^TUET- '■■C A .Printed cv yr-n-afrx, ;S-olsfirt Jenmn^M fc~VS31iaan Cli(niilia. C:^. ':li>-apfaa4^,May ^.l&.n.THE PLATES. 123projections serve to conceal certain pipeswhich spouted water into the basin. Thefigure upon the pilaster, too small to beclearly represented in this view, is of Venus.On the other pilaster is a river god. On theother side of one of these piers were twocurious pictures, representing parts of theprocess which was carried on in the fullonica.PLATES LI. AND LII.PICTURES IN THE FULLONICA.Plate LI. represents one of the fullnessat work upon his cloth, which he is busilyscrubbing with some sort of brush.Below, an elderly person examines apiece of stuff, which has been either washedor dyed by a youth who has brought it forapprobation. Behind, or on the right, isseen another man of the establishment, whobrings a sort of frame, such as is commonlyused in warm baths at the present time, witha pot or pan of hot coals to place under it,124 DESCRIPTION OFon which to spread garments or cloth to bedried. The owl is, probably, the picture ofsome favourite bird which really existed inthe family.Plate LII. exhibits four persons employedin the fullonica, placed in four niches, andeach at work in his tub, washing the linenor cloths, or preparing them for dyeing, ifnot treading them into the colouring-liquidtill they shall be saturated. Three are boys,probably under the superintendence of theperson of larger stature. These pictureswere thought so curious that they were carriedto the museum at Naples not long afterthese copies were made.It appears that the last operation in thefullonica was that of pressing. Accordinglyupon the wall, near the fountain, is representeda press consisting of two uprighttimbers, united by another below and afourth above. From the upper horizontalbeam two perpendicular screws are made toact upon a thick board laid upon severalpieces of cloth below. The screws are turnedby horizontal pins or levers, which are runTHE PLATES. 125through them. Even this is ornamentedabove with three little festoons of draperyPLATE LIII.GREAT FOUNTAIN.In Plate LIII. is exhibited the garden,pseudo-garden or painted wall, and part ofthe inner portico of a dwelling, which, onaccount of the fountain here also represented,caused a greater sensation at Naplesthan any previous discovery had created.The house was found in the month of June,1820, and the excavation terminated in October.The arch or alcove of the fountain is, onthe spot, termed the grotto, and that is thename by which, at present, it may be found.The high wall was, at the time of its excavation,perfect; and this drawing is, probably,now the only record of its existence,the author having; been fortunate enough tocopy it before the painting fell. Had it126 DESCRIPTION OFgone no higher than the first row of panelsof alternate yellow and blue, the effect wouldhave been ver" pleasing ; but the upper lineof pictures, one of which seemed to haverepresented a boar-hunt, destroyed the illusion.In the panels were several birdspainted with great spirit, some of whichsere killing reptiles, and a curious collectionof garden rails of several forms, whichare here represented.The fountain itself is a great curiosity,though not quite an object of taste, beingnothing more in its form than what is commonin the court-yard of every house inRome. It is, however, incrusted with mosaicof a blue colour and vitreous substance,and the borders are formed of real shellsfrom the sea-shore, which seem, almost miraculously,to have been preserved in theiroriginal freshness. It was found impossibleto represent these, or to give all the detailsof the ornaments, which are not unsightly,on so small a scale.Two large masks are seen, one on eachside of the fountain, and from their being hoi-thePLATES. 127low, some have thought that they containedlights at night to produce a striking effect.The water ran down a little cascade of fivemarble steps, and formed a sort of piscina.Upon the pillar, with a hole for the passageof a tube, must have been a tazza, the waterfrom which fell into the piscina.PLATE LIV.COMIC SCENE.Plate LIV. probably represents a scenein some well-known and popular comedy,though there seems nothing so characteristicas to enable us, at this distance of time, topoint out exactly to what it alludes. Theprincipal actor in the mask would seem tobe what the Italians now call a buffo.This is in the house of the Fountain ofShells.128 DESCRIPTION OFPLATE LV.SCENE.Plate LV. may represent a scene, or itmight be simply the portrait of a really existingdwarf leading a monkey. The animalis dressed ; but there is little worthy of remark,except that it would seem as if theancients possessed every thing as well asourselves. This picture is in the house ofthe Dioscuri.PLATE LVI.GARDEN AND PORTICO.The inner court, or garden, of the houseof the second or little fountain, is here represented;but as it is impossible for astranger to understand what he sees whenon the spot, because the area, which ought tobe left open, has now been new-roofed, andthe portico, which should have been covered,THE PLATES. 129is left open, by a strange perversity of judgment,the author has taken the liberty ofputting a ceiling to the colonnade, by wayof explaining its original state. All the restis precisely as it now remains, in the year1829, even to the marble table which wasfound on the spot.The fissure sitting; on the fountain is thatof a fisherman, of bronze, found here, and notat the last described fountain of shells, forthe accounts of the Custode differ : it is nowin the Museum.A cupid of bronze, carrying a goose inhis arms, stood upon the pillar in the centreof the piscina, and spouted water.On the nearest brink of the piscina wasa Caryattis, or rather a Venus Proserpine,according to the dissertation of Gerard, and,near it, was a sleeping fisherman with hisbaskets and a vase — and these tw o last wereof marble. A mask in the centre of thecurve seems also to have thrown out water.It is pretended that Agrippa first made fountainsat Rome. The bronze fisherman onthe left brink of the fountain is now in theVOL. II. K130 DESCRIPTION OFMuseum at Naples, and the bronze has acquireda very curious and beautiful patina,different from that usually observed. It isprobable that he held a cane by way offishing-rod in his hand. He sits upon a rockalso of bronze.PLATE LVII.PAINTING OF A PORT.Plate LVII. represents a picture remainingon the south wall of the garden of thehouse of the second fountain, which wouldbe better distinguished from the first as theHouse of the Landscapes. The subject seemsto be a sea-port, with its mole, boats, temples,villas and other buildings. The moleis constructed with arches, a circumstanceonly lately noticed, and that by a Neapolitanarchitect, Signor Fazio, as the methodby which the ancients, both Greek and Roman,endeavoured to counteract the naturaltendency of artificial ports to fill up by adeposit of sand or earth. It appears, that.pojicstPMw<^mPr^feTHE PLATES. 131along the coast of Italy, there runs a currenttoward the south-west, and that there isscarcely any coast without some prevailingstream, carrying with it a proportion of sand,mud, or sediment.On ancient medals, arches are often observedas forming; the curved moles of Romanports ; and it seems that the Greeks werewell aware of the theory of leaving aperturesin their marine constructions, as theyappear in the mole at Eleusis very evidently,and may be traced in that of Delos, andother islands of the Archipelago.The arches were left for the exit of allthe depositions brought in by the current;and it being calculated that only the surfaceto the depth of a few feet was materiallyagitated by even the most violent tempests,it was found that by certain flood-gates hangingfrom the piers, a sufficient calm was producedto insure the safety of vessels withinthe mole.In this picture the sails of boats areseen above the wall on the right. Themole, probably, was defensible, and had asort of parapet and terrace on the top. Thek2132 DESCRIPTION OFbuildings are such as must have existed atthe time, and we find none of that strange,tall Chinese architecture which abounds onthe panels of all the houses of Pompeii, andwhich, in fact, could scarcely have existedin reality.The figures are of that strange, undefinednature which gives the appearance of humanbeings, but which present no detail, and, ingeneral, cannot be copied. The horizon is, asusual, very high in the picture, and the blueof the sea, and that of the sky, are only slightlydifferent. It is by no means improbable thatthe whole may be a portrait of some place onthe coast.PLATE LVIII.PICTURE.Plate LVIII. is that picture which is seennearest to the spectator on the right side ofthe fountain in Plate LVI. It is, in shape,much like the last, but, as its angular formabove was of no consequence, it is repressl^^THE PLATES. 133seated flat, in order to bring it within thelimits of the plate.We have here a farm or country house,with its usual accompaniments of domesticanimals, and the yoke for the oxen on theleft.That species of tree or palm, which growsout of the opening of a shed, is peculiar tothis picture.The figures are more defined than usual,and seem as if they must have been intendedto represent some known event in history, orinprivate life. The return of the shepherdof King Polybius to his wife Periboea, afterfinding the infant Oedipus suspended to thetree on Mount Citha3ron, might possibly beintended.PLATE LIX.PAINTING.This picture, Plate LIX., is on the leftside of the fountain exhibited in Plate Lelandis of the same shape upon the wall asthat of Plate Evil134 DESCRIPTION OFThe lofty building near the centre is unlikeany thing, either in shape or style, knownin Italy or Greece ; but it might be perhapsintended for a fire-temple of the Persians,and the personages near it may represent theattendants. The man fishing from a rockis a common subject, and is very confusedin the original, but, on the left, is a personwith as regularly shaped a hat as can befound in our own times, as if even that werenot a modern invention. Below are certainsigla which need explanation.PLATE LX.PLAN OF THE STREET OF THE MERCURIES.The plan of the Street of Mercury, orrather of the Street of the Mercuries, fromthe many figures of that deity representedin it, forms the principal feature of the planPlate LX. The object, in giving it of thissize, was that of showing all the new discoveriesin sufficient detail, without givinga separate plate for each subject.I31 . 7 T^K \ '^ (i • u^ . >y ^ f"- ^ ■ -f ^ "^Tji^ravtdfrFnnted I-Pctltjt Sett *I? e' s^ :p 3S 3THE PLATES. 135The house of Ceres, the arch of Caligula,the houses of refreshment opposite the baths,the house of the Tragic Poet, and the wholeinsula, or group of dwellings, including thefullonica, and the two houses with the fountains,are here represented. On the oppositeside of the street, the houses of Sirius,Pompous, and the Lupanare are given,and the plan terminates at the vicus, oralley, which runs at the end of the gardenof Pansa, and which the Custode, at present,call the " vicoletto dei Mercury." The generalappearance of the street is rectilinear,but, upon measuring it, nothing will be foundabsolutely symmetrical, and scarcely any twowalls parallel.PLATE LXI.STREET OF THE MERCURIES.Plate LXI. is a view of the Street of theMercuries, taken a little above the door ofthe atrium of the house of the Dioscuri,which is the first on the left hand. The wall136 DESCRIPTION OFis finely coloured in large red panels, and,on the right of the door, is a fracture in thestucco which, perhaps, deprives us of thename of the owner, or the use of the building.The houses on the right are not setexcavated, but, on one of the piers previousto the fountain of Mercury, is that most curiouspicture of the funereal procession be-aforementioned.Near the fountain of Mercuryis the lesser door of the hospitium ofthe house of the little fountain ; beyond it,the great door of the same house ; furtheron, that of the first fountain, and still moredistant, the entrance of the fullonica.At the end of the street is the arch whichwe have called that of Caligula, and the distantarch at the entrance of the forum isseen beyond.The street is more than thirty-two feetwide, with its foot-pavement on each side,and must have been the handsomest quarterof Pompeii. Many skeletons were foundhere, but at the height of twelve feet abovethe pavement.THE PLATES. 13?PLATE LXILHOUSE OF CERES.The adrian or cavaedium of the house ofCeres, discovered in the years 1825 and 1827,is shown in Plate LXIL The walls wereeither originally higher than those of otherhouses at Pompeii, or they have been betterpreserved ; and the apartment here representedmust have had the effect of a hall oftwo stories.The paintings on the panels consist of aCeres, with her ears of corn, her poppies,and her torch ; also a sedent Bacchus,crowned with ivy, with the lynx at his feet,and the cup in his hand. Here are, moreover,a genius, carrying a figure of abundance,a Jupiter on his throne, and a geniuswith a lyre, to decorate the walls. The abundance,and the other flying figures, with thelyre, are the subjects of the two vignettes,11 and 12.The fountain which is here shown in thefore ground was one of the first which was138 DESCRIPTION OFdiscovered with its ornaments of vitreousmosaic in good preservation. Under it,is seen a marble which covered the mouthof a reservoir of water, collected from theimpluvium. The slab on the top was ofAfrican marble and broken. The ornamentsconsist in a river-god, masks and griffins.The walls, when first discovered, werecovered with brilliant colours, and muchmore might have been traced, with regard tothe details of the ornaments, than is here represented; but the fact is, that, by a varietyof petty intrigues, strangers are preventedfrom drawing these objects till they are eitherdefaced, or irrevocably destroyed, and it isonly by the despatch supplied by the cameralucida that any memorial of them can beobtained. These walls of the atrium, beinghigher than the rest, are already in a totteringstate, and, possibly, this plate may soonbecome the only record of their existence.There was in this house a painting calledZephyr and Flora, now removed to themusaeum. It has been much celebratedunder many names, and is given in thiswork as plate LXXXIII.THE PLATES. 139The house is one of those which hadbeen examined by its owners, or others, notlong after the destruction of the city.PLATE LXIII.PLAN OF THE HOUSE OF THE DIOSCURI.The plan and elevation of the house ofthe Dioscuri, in Plate LXIII., will be intelligiblewithout description. The plate istaken from one published at Naples, by authority,instead of from a plan made purposelyfor this work under all the difficultiesof prohibition.Little light is thrown on the subject ofthe difficulties which exist, with regard tothe disposition of Roman houses, by eventhis new and more extended plan. Manywould call the three courts by the names ofcavaedium, atrium, and peristyle; but if thefourth court, another peristyle, belongs tothe same house, as it possibly may, anothername would still be wanting.The great door led through a vestibule or140 DESCRIPTION OFprothyrum, up an inclined plane into theperistyle. To the right, is a little chamberwith the traces of stoves for cooking. Thereis the vestige of a wooden staircase against thewall, which led into a sort of gallery or balconynear the ceiling of the room, and where,perhaps, the cook slept, for servants are saidto have slept near theistic, where were placedthe cella ostiarii. A very small cubiculum,on the left, seems also to have been a servant'sroom. " Servi atrienses janitor etcanes."In this kitchen the smoke midst haveescaped by a little window yet existing. Notrace of a chimney is visible, yet it seems impossiblebut that there must have been one.Chimneys certainly existed in Greece,for not only does a scholiast speak of tubes,and canals for smoke, but Aristophanes, inVespis, mentions a person who, being imprisonediri a house, escaped, or tried toescape, by the chimney. Appian says, on oneoccasion, that some tried to escape throughchimneys. " In fumariis et summit regulusse absconding." The testimony of Horaceand of Juvenal, who talk of smoky houses.THE PLATES. 141*' fumosos" and " lachrymal iron sinefnmo" seems to make it probable that thepeople suffered from the want of them, andVitruvius gives no account of such an invention.They not only burned, in thebetter apartments, a more expensive sort ofwood, which, from emitting no smoke, wascalled acapna and amurca, according toMartial, but, from a carpet found spreadon a mosaic pavement, upon which stooda bracciero or ocular, with the charcoalin it, in a room at Pompeii, it is evidentthat the inhabitants used the same processfor heating; their chambers as the modernsof the same country, previous to the introductionof chimneys by our countrymen.The modern Greeks, on the contrary, havefires and chimneys in their rooms. It is,however, certain that, in a shop, and in achamber of the Temple of Isis, chimneysmay be found at Pompeii. Chimneys existed,also, at all times in the kitchens ofthe south of Italy.Round the peristyle are, as usual, manycubiculi or cella, so called a celaJido, as wellas dormitories.142 DESCRIPTION OFThe tablinum seems to be the principalroom in this and all the other houses, butthere are no traces of statues in any yetfound. The tablinum of this house is theonly one which remains of its original height,as may be seen in the view. It is perfectlycomprehensible therefore that windows, oranopening, might have given light to thatroom above the tiles of the peristyle. Vitruviusdirects that the height of a roomshould be so much greater than we at firstthink necessary, on that account ; and asthe rule "altitude ostia octave parte latitudessuper" cannot apply to the door,it, possibly, refers to the opening of thetablinum.The room nearest the tablinum musthave been a triclinium or coenaculum, butneither there, nor in any other room undercover at Pompeii, has a table for dinner,constructed of masonry, been found, so thatthey must have been made of wood.The staircase in the faux, the rails whichfence off the garden from the inner portico,and the aedicula, with its statue, have allbeen seen in other houses. The exedra ofTHE PLATES. 143the court of the piscina is a fine and spaciousapartment, and would answer to the descriptionof an aula furnished with seats.The division of the house nearest to thevicus of the lupanare seems to have been ofless consequence, and divided into a greaternumber of small chambers or cubiculi.On the whole, none of these houses seemto agree precisely with what we know frombooks either of a Roman or a Greek habitation.Julius Minutolus, whose work, *' DeBonorum partibus," forms part of the collectionof Grievous and Gronovius, fairlystates his inability, after much study, to explaintheir construction. " Qua in re menonpuget fateri laborasse diu et haesisse.''PLATE LXIV.PERISTYLE OF THE HOUSE OF THE DIOSCURI.The view of the peristyle of the house ofthe Dioscuri, in Plate LXIV., is one of themost splendid in Pompeii, and, at first sight,without restoration, it seemed to eclipse all144 DESCRIPTIOX OFthat had yet been found. The walls remainto a height little short of the original elevationof the lower story, as may be seen fromthe Corinthian capitals of the pilasters atthe angles. We have already given the dimensionsof the columns, and some otherparts. In the centre of the compluviumwas a jet of water, with a brass mouthpiece.The water must, by reflection, haveincreased the light, and rendered more visiblethe ornaments and ceiling of the portico.On the right, under the painting ofthe satyr, is a door through which part of thecourt of the piscina is seen.Near the centre is the tablinum. Thepilasters, on each side of it, had Corinthiancapitals, and these w-ere higher than theDoric portico in front of them.The tablinum contains beautiful pictures,and the wall, on one side, shows how loftythese rooms were built that they might receivelight from the windows above the peristyle.To the right of this is a triclinium. To theleft the faux opens into the inner porticowhich surrounds the garden. The wall, onthe other side of the garden, with half DoricTHE PLATES. 145columns, and painted with trees, fountains,arbours, and birds, is seen through the .It will be observed that this house mighthave been repaired ; and the temptation wasso great, that, considering how much was expendedin putting up awkward sheds andpan-tiles, it is astonishing how the desire ofseeing an ancient house in something; likeits ancient condition could have been resisted.One of the chests containing themysterious treasure, which seems to havedisappeared, stood immediately on the lefthand of the faux.PLATE LXV.COURT OF THE PISCINA.Plate LXV. represents the central courtof the Dioscuri, which may be termed thecourt of the piscina. The spectator standsin the exedra; and the opening of that apartmentbeing so large, with the piscina so nearVOL. II. L146 DESCRIPTION OFas to subtend a large angle, the open skj^ andthe reflection from the water must have renderedit one of the most cheerful rooms atPompeii.The picture of Perseus and Andromedaon the left, which is most beautiful, and thatof Medea on the right, have a good effect.The court, altogether, is very spacious, andnot without an air of grandeur; and the wallsare brilliant in colours, and decorated withwell-executed paintings.PLATE LXVI.JUPITER.Plate LXVI. gives the representation ofa picture of Jupiter painted on the wall ofthe portico. There is an air of ease, yet combinedwith thought and majesty, about thisfigure, rarely surpassed, which ^\i\\ rendereven this record of its existence pleasing andinteresting to lovers of the arts. It is nowquickly disappearing from the wall.riaifLr-.nn.Tiff J ^'^ f^' yfe^1 f\-\\V^\z;^m>^\nv^v/? ^ra;'-,. L.-/ irF © M F E E IH Y G- E I A.ni«psiae.B!taajy 11832 .THE PLATES. 147PLATE LXVII.PERSEUS AND ANDROMEDA.Plate LXVII. is a painting of Perseusand andromeda, which, for composition andtrue Greek style, exceeds almost every thingat Pompeii. Perseus has the air of the idealfigures of heroic times, and the head, attitude,and execution of Andromeda are notto be matched in grace.PLATE LXVIII.HYGEIA.Plate LXVIII. is a figure of Hygeia,painted on the wall. This is one of the divinitiesnecessary for the completion of ourpantheons and illustrations of antiquity.L 2148 DESCRIPTION orPLATE LXIX.ACHILLES IN SCYROS.Plate LXIX. represents Ulysses and hisfriend detecting Achilles among the maidensof the court of King Lycomedes of Scyros,whither he had been sent to evade the searchwhich was likely to be made for him. Thestory is well known, and the eagerness ofthe young prince to possess himself of thearms which were placed before him, bywhich he was recognised, is ably told inthis picture, which is in the tablinum of thethird portion of the house of the Dioscuri.The painting, though in colours, has at presentthe appearance of having been first executedin shades of red, afterwards touchedwith transparent tints, through which thered is almost always visible.THE PLATES. 14.9PLATE LXX.WALL OF THE TABLINUM IN THE HOUSE OFTHE DIOSCURI.This is the wall of all others the best preservedat Pompeii, and will be better understoodby inspection than by any description.It may serve as an epitome of the whole artof decoration in Pompeii, both for varietyof colour, the disposition of the compartments,and the assemblage of objects. Architecture,flowers, figures of men and animals,genii, cupids, and landscapes, are all to befound in this painting.PLATE LXXI.VICTORY.Plate LXXI. is a figure of Victory, differingso materially from every thing of thekind as to be worthy of preservation. Itseems not impossible that the genius ofRome may be intended, as the globe in her150 DESCRIPTIOX OFhand might signify. Had the painter possessedless talent and more knowledge, thisglobe might have been rendered interestingby a representation of the ocean and thecontinents ; but a few indistinct touches areall a good painter would condescend to leaveus. The trophy in the left hand shows thegoddess to be of Roman, and not of Grecianinvention. There is in the house of theDioscuri another figure of Victory, with herusual flying drapery, and with S C on hershield.PLATE LXXII.PENELOPE.This has been called Penelope givingwine to Ulysses in the character of a beggar.The dog, who does not however seem to recognisehis master, has been brought as aproof that such was the subject. The faceof the man seems far too j^oung for that ofUlysses, but the painter may have flatteredhis subject. The Priestess, the apollo, andthe two borders, are from the house of theDioscuri.THE PLATES. 151PLATE LXXIII.ACHILLES BATHED IN THE STYX.This Plate, LXXIII., represents Achillesbathed in the Styx, and has every appearanceof having: been taken from something;of a superior cast. It is always agreeableto possess an ancient painting of subjectsrecorded in history or poetry. Above areornaments from the house of the Dioscuri,and below is the border of a pavement.PLATE LXXIV.SATURN.This figure is painted upon a red panel.The figures of Saturn are rare. The proofsthat Saturn is the divinity here represented,will be found in the description of the Corinthianatrium of the Dioscuri. The bordersare from other parts of the house.152 DESCRIPTION OFPLATE LXXV.COMIC SCENE.This scene probably represents the witchesof some barbarous nation, as introduced uponthe stage. There was a tribe of Scythiannamed Hippopodes, to which we maj conjecturethese personages belong.One holds a small mummy in her hand,which might seem to have a reference to theEgyptian colony of Colchis; butColchoswasa part of Sarmatia, which might easily in avague account be confounded with Scythiaby Dionysius Perseveres. The borders arefrom the house of the Dioscuri.PLATE Lxvi.COMIC SCENE.The words comic scene seem to apply toany species of drama. So many of the ancientcomedies and tragedies are lost, that^lateLXXVlLra'-n rit i:Engaged SrTaatMJ>j FemcrSeea** CF tt Ir 7P IE 2 E oPH^DEA AND HIPPOLYTUSLondon. Sober Jenny * TiViiMan: a^pjir 6;! na?3i)sidc Apse L 183LTHE PLATES. 153conjecture is useless as to the subject of thepresent scenic representation. The colouringof the woman's face, which is strongly-tingedwith green, might be intended to representthe effect of horror at some perpetratedcrime. The shepherds of Polybiusand Jocasta are perhaps the personages intended;but this is a mere conjecture. TheOedipus Tyrannous of Sophocles might becited on the subject.PLATE LXXVII.Phaedra AND HIPPOLYTUS.Phaedra, the wife of Theseus, fell in lovewith Hippolytus, the son of Theseus by Hippolyta,and after a vain attempt to subdueher passion, is represented in this picture asdeclaring it. Hippolytus rejecting her addresses,the nurse or confidant is seen endeavouringto persuade and pacify him.Nothing can exceed the grace of Phaedra,or the masterly touches by which the foldsof her drapery are expressed in the originalpainting.154 DESCRIPTION OFPLATE LXXVIII.BACCHUS AND A FAUNThis may represent Sylvanus and Cypresses,or a faun in the act of supplicatingBacchus. The attitudes are graceful.PLATE LXXIX.WALL AND DOOR OF THE CORINTHIANPERISTYLE.This Plate exhibits one of the mostsplendidly decorated walls of the house ofthe Dioscuri. The curtain is added becausethere is no trace of a door in the openingbetween the two courts, and the ceiling ofthe atrium is restored, since there can beno doubt on the subject, for the better comprehendingof the original effect. The pillarsin front are even now covered with apaltry roof, which has been somewhat improvedin this Plate, in the style of theperiod when Pompeii was destroyed.jTHE PLATES. 155PLATE LXXX.DRINKING-SCENE.This scene, Plate LXXX., which is found,in exceedingly bad company, in an inner roomof the lupanare, is, though superior in styleto the profanations of the art by which it issurrounded, but moderate in execution. Thepicture itself is nevertheless valuable, beingthe only one yet discovered in which a commontable, with a party sitting round it, isrepresented. On the left, a figure in a dressof dark green seems of superior rank to therest of the company whose hoods are likethose of the capotes of the modern Italiansailors and fishermen.It is curious that, at so late a period,horns seem to have been used instead ofdrinking-cups, notwithstanding the multiplicityof glasses and cups which aboundedin Pompeii, and the inconvenience arising,as may be observed in this Plate, from thewant of a foot.Horns were used for cups in very ancient156 DESCRIPTION OFtimes, as may be learned from several of theGreek scholiast. Bacchus was called cornerfrom this circumstance, according tothe scholiast on Nicander. The Silent werethe nurses of the horned Bacchus. Horns,says the scholiast on Homer, Iliad, 0. v. 189-were used previously to the invention ofcups. Nonnus says, " He held in his lefthand a horn filled with delicious wine''It would appear that the ancients, duringtheir feasts and ceremonies, the representationsof which have come down to our times,studied and practised what was best suitedfor show and conducive to elegance, but thattheir common usages and every-day customswere not very widely different from those ofthe moderns in the same country.Nearly opposite this house were found,at an elevation of more than twelve feetabove the pavement of the street, eight orten skeletons, with a gold chain, four goldcoins, two gold rings, twenty-six silver medals,a candelabra, and other utensils inTHE PLATES. 15?brass and earthenware. These persons musthave been smothered by the vapour whilesearching for objects of value among theruins already half buried.The learned Dr. Panofka, of Berlin, whovisited Pompeii in the month of April, 1829,saw another chamber of the lupanare excavated,and reports that the paintings areof a much higher order, both in subject andexecution. On one side is a female with alyre, and opposite is Anchises with a boy,supposed to be aeneas. A third wall hasUlysses and Penelope, like that in the Pantheon; and the fourth has Paris and Helen.Paris is sitting in the posture of the Paris ofMr. Hawkins's beautiful bronze, and Hectoris near, chiding him for not returning to thebattle : a beautiful Homeric subject, whichwould be a great ornament to this work.In the border are given ten different specimensof ornamental borders from Pompeii.158 DESCRIPTION OFPLATE LXXXI.WAGGON AND HORSES.Plate LXXXI. represents a painting in alittle anteroom, or passage, of the lupanare.It is but a slovenly daub in the original, butshows that the ancients not only had waggons,but that they were, at least, as wellcontrived and as neatly made as any now inuse. There is even an opening to permitthe wheel to pass in turning, and the wholeis well painted with a blue body and yellowwheels. The enormous skin in which thewine is contained in the body of the waggonis probably new. The dresses of the twoattendants are simple and graceful.The drawing was obtained by Dr. Henderson,the elegant author of the dissertationon the wines of the ancients, who obliginglycommunicated it to the author.There is another of the same subject, andnearly a repetition of this, in the obscenechamber of the lupanare ; and they both,in all probability, represented the actual&31^ 'iO•i^^:^^^^"'^'^'^ ' '^"^^j^/nraim'bjrSir'WGellF © M IP E I ZMAR S J^tTT) VIl-mU' m T ^XTVlpf-T j-rvnintf j; ^Tffmiarm rKupltn fig nh»jp«a3», A-|irn,nftai .THE PLATES. 1.59waggon, horses, and servants of the proprietorof the house, who seems to have soldwine contained in leaden vases in the frontshop, or thermopolion. The borders are allfrom Herculaneum, and certainly differ fromthose of Pompeii, without much improvingupon them. The two horses' heads are selectedby way of affording, to those who arecurious on such subjects, an opportunity ofseeing how bridles were put on in Romantimes.PLATE LXXXII.MARS AND VENUS.Plate LXXXII. is another, but moregraceful, example of those paintings usuallycalled Mars and Venus. It was among thelatest discoveries, and consequently the difficultyof obtaining a copy of it was great,owing to the jealousy with which it wasguarded.DESCRIPTION OFPLATE LXXXIII.DREAM OF RHEA.Plate LXXXIII. is a picture which, probably,was taken from the house of Ceres,but was removed before the author saw it.It then went under the name of Flora andZephyr; and, as usually happens when sofew are really possessed of good taste, this,which is, in fact, one of the worst compositionsof the ancients, has been more admired,and has been the subject of morepraise and more dissertations, than any thingat Pompeii.It represents, according to one, Peleusupon a rock having caught the unwillingThetis asleep. Her nymphs are near, andLove invites him to seize this favourableopportunity for pressing his suit.According to another, Rhea Sylvia, thepriestess of Vesta, is asleep. Near her is alittle winged genius of somnolence. Above,Morpheus ejects from a horn the sleepydraught. Mars, guided by two cupids, Taw-n b?' Sir GillKr^avt'd k ftintcdbyFerincr .rears &C°Itndca-Robcn. Jenam^s & 'Mlltam Ciar^-n 67. Chcaoside A^jnl 1 183;t/JAATHE PLATES. helpersin the air, and the birth of Romulus isthe consequence of his visit.The Academy are said to have pronouncedthe picture to represent Bacchusand Ariadne.It has also been called the marriage ofMorpheus by some, and the Graces byothers.M. Raoul Roulette, in a newly publishedwork on Pompeii, has, lastly, given a largeplate in folio of this composition.The scene he pronounces to be the LucasMartin : the guardian nymph is Pasithea, thewife of Hypnos. The wings of the maledivinity in the air are black, and those onhis head are the symbol of dreams. Mars isthe descending god.Whatever may be the subject, neitherthe figures nor the grouping have any merit.The male is devoid of grace, and is exceedinglyclumsy, while the sleeping femaleis absolutely ugly.VOL. TI. Ml62 DESCRIPTION OFPLATE LXXXIV.INSIDE OF WALLS.This plate, LXXXIV., of the inside ofthe walls, would have been given in theformer series of Pompeiana, had it beenready in time.It is taken between the gate of Herculaneumand the nearest tower in the wall,not far from the back of the house of theVestal, which is seen on the left. It is tobe observed that the trees are on the otherside of the wall, and even beyond a ditch, ifa ditch ever existed. A grand flight of stepsgave an opportunity for a large body of soldiersto ascend together to the parapet, incaseof sudden attack from without. Theblocks in the wall are marked with a numberof curious characters, or sigla, which,whether Oscan or not, are not understood.At the temple of Apollo Didymaeus, nearMiletus, the blocks used in the constructionof the edifice are, in many cases, marked inasimilar manner. They could scarcely beTHE PLATES. 1 6'3numbers, by way of adjusting the juxtapositionof the stones, but might be a sort ofanagram recording the name of the personwho contributed the block to the generaldefence. They are of a very remote time,if we ny judge from the appearance ofthe masonry.PLATE LXXXV.GATE OF ISIS.Plate LXXXV. shows the appearanceof the inner side of the gate of Isis, commonlycalled that of Nola, but which it is more probableopened toward Sarno and Teglanum,for we can scarcely suppose that the sourcesof the Sarno would not have attracted apopulation at a very early period. The inscriptionin Oscan, purporting that Propriisor Popidius dedicated it to Isis, has beenengraved in the former series.The mass is fine and imposing, and thegate altogether infinitely more majestic thanthat of Herculaneum. The soil on the outsidedoes not seem sufficiently deep, unlessu 2164 DESCRIPTION OFthe paved road descends rapidly, to permitus to hope for so ample a treasure of sepulchresas at the Herculanean entrance of thetown ; but much would probably be discovered,as this was certainly an outlet ofgreat consequence. Within the walls, aswill be seen in the view, the soil, both vegetableand volcanic, lies to a great depth.PLATE LXXXVI.PAVEMENTS.Plate LXXXVI. represents several specimensof pavements, which have no particularmerit, except some new meanders,or mathematical figures, which are prettyand intricate.PLATE LxxxviPAVEMENTS.This plate, Lxxxvi, is like the other,and gives, what was wanting to the work,Plate LxxxviTHE PLATES.an idea of the style in which the mosaicor tesselated pavements are disposed. Themarble pavement is pretty, but it is not easyto discover by what rule the colours weredistributed.PLATE LXXXVIII.SITE OF POMPEII.This plate, LXXXVIII., is one whichshows, in a more distinct manner than anyyet published, the whole hill of Pompeii,with the neighbouring country, from Torredella Nunziata and Vesuvius on the left, tothe mountains of Palma on the right. Thegulf, with the rock of Hercules or Reviling,and, near it, the mouth of the river Sarno,may be seen. The river may be traced to thebridge ; and the village of Scafati, also onthe Sarno, is seen, on the right, under Palma.From Scafati a line of trees marks the presentroad to Pompeii from Nocera, and the amphitheatreis seen at the beginning of theancient city. Some few traces of the l66 DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.cautions may be distinguished on the eminence,and it afterwards descends to thewest, near the street of the Tombs. Thetheory of water running from Vesuvius upthe eminence of Pompeii is here proved tobe untenable.Bosco Real is seen extending belowMonte di Somma, the right top of Vesuvius.It is said to contain 10,000 souls. A streamof lava flowed, not long ago, into the middleof the village. Torre della Nunziata is seenbeyond Reviling, and above it Bosco êtreCase, near which, on the left, is one of thoseminor cones which sent forth a copiousstream of lava in the last century. A littleto the right of the amphitheatre may beseen a tower on a distant hill, not far fromNola. Beyond is the lofty range of theApennines.EXPLANATION OF THE VIGNETTES.VIGNETTE 1.Vignette 1 represents two figures foundon the wall of the portico of the Augustales,commonly called the Pantheon.The lower figure evidently representsPainting, for she has her pallette in the lefthand, and, in the right, is holding a speciesof recipient in the form of a candelabrum,into Which a Genius or a Muse is dropping afresh colour, possibly alluding to the paintingof this very poikilos, or painted portico,at Pompeii, which was probably consideredas the perfection of the art.VIGNETTE 2.Vignette 2 is in the house of the TragicPoet, and forms a pretty group of buildings,though the perspective is incorrect.16"8 EXPLANATION thesehabitations might perhaps serve toimprove the picturesque beauty of those detachedhouses and dwellings which are oftenfound, with three windows in front and threestories high, deforming our parks and ornamentalgrounds.VIGNETTE 3.Vignette 3 once existed, executed instucco, upon a stone in the temple of Venusin the forum. The idea that Love driveseven mules, the most obstinate of animals,is pretty.The irregularity of the stone and thenegligence of symmetry in the executionwere all faults in the original. It exists nolonger on the spot.VIGNETTE 4.This vignette, No. 4, is picturesque, butit is not easy to explain the uses of the twowalls with their gates on the right.THE VIGNETTES. l69Gardens and parks would be prettilyornamented with such buildings.The borders are from several walls atPompeii, and contain 12 subjects useful toarchitects, carvers and gilders, and makersof ornamental furniture.VIGNETTE 0.Vignette 5 records an architectural groupnow, or lately, existing on the walls of thechalcidicum or portico of Eumachia. Theancients must have possessed beautiful thingsof this kind, and nothing appears more picturesquethan a confusion of temples andcolumns of this species of architecture.VIGNETTE 6.Vignette 6 is from a wall at Pompeii,where innumerable dancing or flying figuresdecorate the centres of almost every panel.They are generally painted on a black ordark-red ground which gives them more effect.EXPLANATION OFVIGNETTE 7.Vignette 7 is possibly the representationof a little shop or rustic place of refreshmenton the road-side in the country. Thereis a broad basement on which the temptationsto stop might be exposed, a shade toshelter them from the sun, a sort of kiosk orsummer-house on the top for air and repose,and possibly the host at the entrance to welcomethe traveller.VIGNETTE 8.Vignette 8 represents the statue or shrineof some deity who presided over the mountains,and to whom the piety of the rusticshad erected it, as we see those of saints insolitary and picturesque situations in Italyat present. The indistinctness with whichall the figures are treated does not permitus to pronounce whether the statue may beof Bacchus, Diana, or a fawn ; but a shepherdis offering; a garland and flowers at thealtar, and a goatherd is looking on. UnderTHE VIGNETTES. Illthe statue is a broad table or shelf for thereception of more offerings.VIGNETTE 9.Vignette 9 represents one of those villaswith which doubtless the whole coast of Italy,and more particularly the shores of Forgive,Baiae, and the gulf of Naples, were decorated.These villas may be traced by theirsubmarine foundations on the rocks of ,and at Mole di Greta, where the remainsof buildings, absolutely in the waterlike the portico on the left, are consideredby travellers as indications of encroachmentsof the sea. Nothing; could have been moredelightful than these marine villas during;the heats of summer. The nearer buildingis evidently a temple, to which the circulartower is attached, and on which votive ordecorative festoons or draperies are hung.VIGNETTE 10.Vignette 10 is, probably, another of thelittle shrines situated on the coast, where172 EXPLANATION OFshipwrecked sailors, having escaped from thewaves, dedicated their drenched garments, ormade other offerings. Perhaps the indistinctfigure in front may be a person who has justgained the land, and, in the shrine, appearsa priest with arms expanded as if to receivehim. Behind seem the houses of the attendants,enclosed by a wall.VIGNETTE 11.Vignette 11 is a group of two very gracefulfigures from a wall at Pompeii. TheGenius of Music, perhaps, is portrayed inone of the figures.VIGNETTE 12.Vignette 12 is another group from thehouse of Ceres. In a modern way of treatingthe subject, the Genius of Plenty mightbe intended.THE VIGNETTES. 173VIGNETTE 13.Vignette 13 is a pretty group of housesfrom a wall in the house of the greater fountainof shells. The errors of perspective areconspicuous, but the place is picturesque,and, probably, had its prototype in somepart or other of the coast.VIGNETTE 14.Vignette 14 is a sedent Apollo Citharoe-dus, quite different in position from anythingyet given. It is from one of the latestexcavations, and is exceedingly graceful.VIGNETTES 15 and 16.These vignettes have already been describedin the chapter to which they belongas the plans of baths in the ancient villas ofStable. Their chief use is the illustrationof the baths of Pompeii ; and they are EXPLANATION OFselves curious, as the only published memorialof their existence.VIGNETTE 17.Vignette 17 is a mosaic pavement in theprothyrum or vestibule of the house of theTragic Poet.The subject wants little explanation. Thedog has a red collar, and is confined by achain and hook.The threshold of the door is here represented,in order to give an idea of the holesin which the door itself turned, and thewooden sides were fixed. In the body ofthe work a sufficient explanation is given ofthe custom of placing a dog at the entrance.VIGNETTE 18.Vignette 18 represents a very gracefulfigure of Phryxus crossing the Hellespont,which was a favourite subject with the ancients.THE VIGNETTES. 175There is another, with an azure glory onhis head, in the Pantheon. The figure ofHelle in the water would have extendedthis picture too much for a vignette, and is,in the original, not intended as a principalobject, nor much detailed ; it is thereforeomitted.VIGNETTE 19.Vignette 19 is a female Bacchante, andof a description not unfrequently found atPompeii. She has more drapery, or of aheavier species, than is usually represented,and is not without grace.VIGNETTE 20.Vignette 20 is a Bacchus at the crossingof two streets in quadrilles, upon a pier exposedat all times to the weather. Nothingcan exceed the elegance of the original,which it is vain to attempt to imitate.176 EXPLANATION OFVIGNETTE 21.Vignette 21 is a group of houses andtemples which, not to speak of the perspective,which is faulty, presents a most agreeableassemblage of buildings placed on theside of a hill, so as to give the idea of theeffect produced by the architecture of thetimes in commanding situations. Supposingthe great temple on the summit to be thatof the principal deity of the spot, we mayimagine the dwellings of the priests, the ,and the shrines of other divinities tobe passed in the way. At Delphi MinervaPropylsea, at Eleusis Diana Propylaea, andmany other such examples, exist. This subjectis painted on a yellow panel in the hospitiumof the house of the lesser fountainof shells. These smaller temples or shrineswere sometimes erected in consequence of avow made in a moment of fear and difficulty,and were probably to be met with in greatnumbers. The well-known inscription onthe tomb of Scipio records his dedication ofTHE VIGNETTES. 177a temple to the winds or tempests. Pius,uplifting his hands to heaven, in the samemanner vowed a temple to Bellona. Theform was " Bellona, si hodie nobis victoriantuis, last ego templum tibi voveo."VIGNETTE 22.Vignette 22 is the fountain of Mercuryso called, as will be seen, from the head ofthe god and the caduceus. It is formed ofthe common dark-coloured volcanic stone.The figure of Mercury, here represented asrunning away with a bag of stolen goodsand a purse, though rather rudely paintedupon an opposite wall, with a figure of Fortunenear it, seemed worth preserving, andhas been accordingly placed at the fountain.Near this, five skeletons were found, two palmsabove the pavement, with four bracelets, fourgold rings, a coin of Vespasian, and sixty-threesilver with twenty-eight copper medals.VOL. II. xExplanation OFVIGNETTE 23.Vignette 23 represents one of severalchariots drawn by different animals, whichdecorate the walls of the tablinum of theperishable of the Dioscuri. The original wasupon a yellow ground, and was traced bythe author on transparent paper on the spot,but, owing to the uncertainty of the outline,he was incapable of giving it the grace possessedby the painting, or imparting thatlife Which the animal figures of Pompeii invariablyexhibit.VIGNETTE 24.Vignette 24 exhibits a dance performedby a male faun and a female Bacchante. Theears and the shaggy covering denote thesylvan nature of the former, and his rightfoot displays that sort of rustic movementwhich is common to the wild inhabitants ofall countries, ancient and modern.THE VIGNETTES. 179VIGNETTE 25.Vignette 25 is a group of Bacchanaliandancers, male and female. The elegance ofthe figures justifies their introduction as thehead-piece of the chapter.VIGNETTE 26.Vignette 26 is another dancing group,in which there is nothing particular to observe.VIGNETTE 27.Vignette 27 is a money-chest, particularlydescribed in Vol. II. p. 30. ♦VIGNETTE 28.Vignette 28 represents the two sides ofa bronze ticket for the show of gladiators.N 2180 Explanation OFVIGNETTE 29.Vignette 29, though not existing in anyoneplace as a painting at Pompeii, maynevertheless be considered antique, as it consistsof a union of all the usual implementsof writing collected from a great number ofancient paintings in the two ruined cities,and some from the chamber supposed tohave been the library of the tragic poet ofPompeii. This idea arose from the impressionthat every painting was appropriate tothe chamber in which it was found.On the left is a circular wooden or metalcase, with a lid, containing six books orvolumes rolled up and labelled, each accordingto its contents, so as to be easily distinguished.Below this lies a stylus and apentagonal inkstand, not unlike those nowin common use. The ink was called sacramentumand sacramentum scriptorium, andthe inkstand atramentarium, and even .In the centre lies a pen madeof a reed, and thence called calamus.THE VIGNETTES. 181Ink seems to have been made with charcoal,but sometimes also with sepia: " Sepialymph." Perseus, Sat. iii That author describesan idle boy, who excuses himselffrom writing because the sepia is too thick,and, on its being diluted with water, becauseit was then too pale. It seems to havebeen of such a nature, without a mordent,that a punic sponge, according to Martial,washed out the writing ; and some haveconjectured that certain sorts of paper werecovered with a species of whitewash to renderthis operation more easy, and make thepaper serviceable a second time. This wouldbe more readily performed when the writingwas upon ivory, or libri elephantine, mentionedalso by Martial. This expunging ofwriting; was so common, that a friend ofAugustus asking him how his tragedy ofAjax was proceeding, was told by the emperor,who was tired of writing and had destroyedhis work, that " apace sum insponging incubuisse." Suetonius, who relatesthis story, adds one of Caligula, whichshows that the ink of the ancients was easilyobliterated, for he says that the emperor182 EXPLANATION OFforced those who had written any thingagainst him to lick it out with their tongues.Next to the case of books, the vignettehas the tabella or tabula joined together aswith hinges, and sometimes, perhaps always,covered with wax. Another sort is hungup above this, where the stylus serves as apin to hang it up against the wall. A sortof thick book of tablets, open, lies to theright of the last. In the centre are seensingle volumes in cases, one of which isopen on the left and the other shut. Onthe right are seen four volumes, lying insuch a manner as to want no explanation,two of which have their titles, one attachedto the papyrus itself, and the other fromthe umbilicus, or cinder of wood in itscentre.Tablets were sometimes made of finewood polished, but those in common usewere of box, and the wax, from frequent use,became discoloured and dirty.Vulgar buxom sordid cera fuit."Propertius.Though many wrote in >vax, " facilitateVIGNETTES. 183defend," as Quintilian says, paper was socommon that pepper, frankincense, and otherarticles are mentioned as wrapped up inuseless manuscripts, as tliej^ are now in acountry shop.With regard to a stylus, it was prohibitedat certain periods, as a penknife is in modernItaly, on account of its affording a readymeans of revenge to an angry possessor. Itwas called stylus or graphic. With astylus Cassius struck Caesar. Suetonius says,also, that Caligula caused an obnoxious senatorto be massacred with one; and that,in the reign of Claudius, women and pueripr^etextati had been searched for styles intheir graphiariiie thecae, or pen-cases. Itseems that wax, tablets, codex, liber, folio,membrane, charta, and papyrus were not, incommon conversation, clearly distinguishedin the Augustan age, when writing becamein frequent and ordinary use. We find thenames of many sorts of paper correspondingwith our foolscap, elephant, and other sizes,with their measures and the directions fortheir manufacture.184 Explanation OFThere was the heretics or sacra, theaugusta, the living, the amphitheatre, thelamia, the attica, the regia, and the macro-column,and common waste paper, or am-phonetic.The quantity must have been very muchlike what would be found in a great city ofour own times ; and Pliny left one hundredand sixty volumes, opisthographos et minusscriptor, or written very minutelyon both sides, to his nephew.MSS. of papyrus were capable of resistingthe attacks of time and worms longerthan we might imagine. The papers of Tiberiusand Caius Gracchus were kept byPompous Secundus, Vates,and were nearly200 years old when seen by Pliny. Thesame author says he had often seen the monument,or books of Cicero, Virgil, andAugustus. Galen, speaking of MSS. ofHippocrates, considers 300 years as a vastantiquity. St. Jerome mentions that, in 100years, the libraries of Origen and Pamphlet,at Caesarea, were already nearly worn out andcorrupted; but the Bishop of St. David'sTHE VIGNETTES. 185assigns to the Alexandrine MS. in the BritishMuseum an antiquity of 1300 or 1400years. This, however, is probably one ofthose in Membranes.VIGNETTE 30.Vignette 30 is the altar of aesculapius, arelic producing a better effect than the somuch celebrated and so often imitated tombof Scipio, at Rome. On that account it hasbeen selected as the last vignette in thiswork, as it has never been much noticed.APPENDIX.No. I.SUPPOSED LIBRARY.This chamber, which is entered from the portico of theinner court or peristyle of the house of the Tragic Poet, andlies on the left of it, is nearly of the same dimensions as thoseopening into the atrium and the tabUnum.If books had been as numerous in the first century afterChrist as they have become since the invention of printing,188 APPENDIX.the supposed library of the Tragic Poet of Pompeii wouldhave been but little calculated to contain an extensive collection,but when, from the difficulty of multiplying thecopies, books were scarce and valuable, an inestimable treasuremight have occupied only an inconsiderable space.In fact, the Herculanean manuscripts were found in a suburbanvilla in the year 175S, in a room of very small dimensions,which, it is imagined, had once a vaulted roof, tothe strength of which has been attributed the preservationof those precious papyri. Some others are said also to havebeen found in a corridor or portico of the same habitation,which opened into the garden, but whether this had a vaultedroof or not cannot now be known, and that circumstanceseems at least very doubtful in the instance of the library.Winckelman relates that 800 manuscripts were found, butfrom the statement of the accurate Canonico lorio, whothoroughly examined the subject, and published the resultin the year 1825, it appears that 1756 were rescued fromthe ruins, without reckoning a considerable number whichwere destroyed by the workmen, who imagined that the volumeswhere of no more value than fragments of charcoal,and actually called the place in which they were found thebottega del Carbon aro.The papyri were found, according to lorio, ranged inpresses or shelves round the sides of the room to about theheight of a man, while, in the centre of the floor, stood aspecies of insulated rectangular column of books frontingevery way, not much unlike those which are frequentlyfound, of a circular form, in the drawing-rooms of ladies inEngland.The papyri found in the country house near Herculaneum,according to the Canonico lorio, from whose essaythe whole of this information is obtained, were found in asmall chamber paved with mosaic, and had been arrangedin presses round the walls, or in a pier in the centre.Appendix. 189The wood all crumbled when exposed to the air, and theworkmen only began to suspect the papyri were not onioncharcoal when they observed the regularity of their disposition,and that one, which broke into two parts, had lettersupon it. It must be remembered that the excavation wascarried on in a deep underground passage without the advantageof daylight. It appears that some had stood in anerect, and others in a horizontal position, and they were accordinglycrushed in both directions. None were foundwith two umbilici, and many were without any, as they arepresented in several ancient paintings.Instead of binding, a long sip of unwritten paper on theoutside served to protect the book within. Many werefound which were illegible from having originally beenwritten with pale ink. Some appeared to have been belowthe others, and to have been formed by the humidity intoa hard and almost petrified substance. These were consideredas quite hopeless, having become a well united massscarcely to be penetrated by a needle. Others had a degreeof durability equal to plumbago, and might have been usedas chalks. The papyri are only written on one side, exceptin a single instance, where the roll was not sufficiently long.Some were absolutely powder, and when the dust was blownaway, the writing disappeared, so that the Canonico loriocalls them the ghosts of papyri. It appears that the LatinMSS. are more difficult to unroll than the Greek, so that,of 2366 columns and fragments already opened, only 40 areLatin.The length of the Greek papyri varies from eight totwelve inches. A Latin roll, besides being much thicker,often extends to sixteen. In both languages the columnsor pages of writing formed compartments placed at a rightangle with the length of the roll.The papyri of the ancients were formed by pasting avariety of shreds together at right angles to each other, so190 APPENDIX.that what may be called the grain of one would be opposedin its disposition to tear longitudinally by the cross fibres ofthe other. It is easy to conceive that when the damp ofsome centuries has thoroughly penetrated the whole mass ofa volume, a fresh difficulty arises in the unrolling, as whatwas originally a coating, only used to add substance to thepaper, may now peel off for the operator instead of the inscribedface. Sir Humphrey Davy, who employed himself ashort time in observing the effects of a new process for unrollingthe papyri, seemed to think they were not carbonized,and that the colour and substance produced by time resultedsolely from humidity. That gentleman did not efface thecharacters by his process, as has been asserted on the spot ;but, on the contrary, in the presence of the author, who wasemployed to copy the fragments, frequently added much tothe brilliancy of letters scarcely discernible.Some of the manuscripts have been opened with so muchdifficulty that it was found absolutely necessary to destroythe visible column, after having most carefully copied it, inorder to arrive at the next ; and the care, the patience, andthe peculiar talent necessary in the process are such, thatthose only who see it, and are aware of what has been done,can judge of the merit of those who are employed, and whoare often accused of negligence and apathy by the passingtraveller.Of the papyri, 371 were entire ; 61 were nearly perfect ;161 wanted about one third of each roll.Of fragments, 1324 were found ; and, of those whichhad only the exterior perfect, 474 were discovered, butthese had been cut half through, longitudinally, in order todiscover their contents, their respective centres having beencarefully preserved for a future opportunity.Three hundred and thirty-two volumes have been alreadytried, and, of 542 taken from the shelves for the purpose ofunrolling, 210 are well and neatly done : 127 are in a greatAPPENDIX. 191measure finished, and 205 remain in the presses at theMuseum, which are considered as hopeless. Of some MSS.the title only is as yet known, which was written in a largercharacter.A person named Papira, in the year 1786, endeavouredto open three of the MSS. Sir Humphrey Davy is said tohave had twenty placed at his disposal. Twenty were sentto England, among which were several of those petrifiedand useless. Mr. Sickle destroyed some of these in theattempt to open them. Mr. Halter, who was sent by HisRoyal Highness the Prince of Wales in the year 1800 toNaples, is said to have tried 195 fragments of the papyri,and to have been five years employed in unrolling them.Whether these or any of them have appeared in the collectionof Herculanean MSS. published at Oxford in the year1824, the absence of preface to the work leaves us in ignorance.The Treatise of Nicodemus de Vitiis, one of ananonymous author De Ira, another of Nicodemus de Vitiisatque Opposites Virtutis, and Demerits de Pietatis, arethere given in lithographic fac-simile. These are all foundin the Neapolitan list as if existing at present at Naples.The English work is to be continued, and the second volumehas already appeared.Seven papyri have been sent to France.Among; the works now known to exist in this singularcollection are the following, both in Greek and Latin, thenames of which are copied from the interesting account ofthe Canonico lorio, the author of this work not holdinghimself responsible for the orthography, which seems oftenerroneous.Demerits — de geometric — de pietatis.In Pollen difficulties.Epicure — de natura, lib. ii. xx.Coloris in Lysidem Platonic.Polystrati de temerario contempt. Nov interpreting.192 APPENDIX.Pliilodemi — de religione — de morbus — de Epicure —de morte, lib. iv. De vitiis, lib. i. De vitiis atque oppositesvirtutis eorumque subjects et objects, lib. viii. Devitiis — de musica — de conversation — de Omer — de ira —de di vitiis — de pietatis — de eo quod agendum est — decausa atque alias rebus tractatus memorable. De morbusac vitiis, opus ex libro Tennis contracted, seu de iceniliberate. De pietatis. De rhetorica, lib. i. Derhetoricaa,lib. iv. pars 1. De rhetoricaa, lib. iv. pars 2. De rhetoricaa.De rhetoricaa commentaries — De rhetoricaa — De Phenomenaatque signs. De philosophies — De gratia.Carnisci — amicable. Now interpreting.Crisippi de providential, lib. ii. Now interpreting.Epicure de natura. Now interpreting.Anonymi de ira. Now interpreting.This catalogue will suffice to give an idea of the libraryof the Epicurean philosopher of Herculaneum, for such heappears to have been. Among others now under examination,a papyrus on the subject of mythology calls Agamemnona personification of wether, Achilles of the Sun, Helenof the earth, and Hector of Luna. The lucubrations of theauthor may be curious, but not such as will afford muchknowledge or instruction.It is not impossible that some of these papyri may beoriginal works, as no two are written in precisely the samecharacter. Certain ciphers have been observed, whichmay have been the marks of the amanuensis at the conclusionof some MSS.There is a suspicion that, in one of the papyri, havebeen observed not only contractions but accents ; but this,which would certainly prove a treasure to critics and philologists,is probably an imaginary discovery, and contractionsseem impracticable, even in the most corrupt species ofwriting, with detached capitals. It must be confessed thatin the cabinet, arbitrarily or fancifully called the library.APPENDIX. 193at Pompeii, nothing of the kind was particularly observedat the excavation ; but, as nothing else was found, it ishighly probable that every thing had been removed beforethe eruption, or was excavated afterwards, of which the interruptionof the strata is a proof.The ceiling of the chamber was evidently upheld by sixsmall beams or rafters, and these supported the floor of theroom above. Papyri have very frequently been found, as itis said, at Pompeii, but they either adhered strongly to thesoil, of which they formed a part, or the nature of the materialin Which they were imbedded was such as to have totallydestroyed their texture, and reduced them, like allthat was formed of vegetable matter, to a substance littlemore tenacious than powdered charcoal. The chamber isdecorated on all sides with pictures, but, as these are not ofsufficient consequence to have prevented the arrangement ofshelves, it might yet have been the repository of books piledin a central column ; besides which it opens to the east, accordingto the recommendation of Vitruvius, as librarieshaving another exposure were considered liable to damp,and to the consequent ravages of moths.The public possesses so little information on the subjectof the papyri already discovered, that a short account ofwhat has been done or attempted with those of Herculaneumcannot fail to be acceptable.The chamber in question seems to derive its claim to thehonours of the Bibliotheca merely from a small picture stillretaining the fragment of a book or roll, on which maybedistinguished two or three Greek characters. It is,however, so mutilated, that it would not alone have answeredthe purpose of showing even the principal forms ofthe ancient papyri. On this account, a selection from a varietyof ancient paintings is exhibited in the vignette, wherenothing of importance is omitted. It is needless to remarkVOL. II. OAPPENDIX.on the names which have been given by the Cicerone to certainapartments at Pompeii on account of the pictures ordecorations on the walls. They are often purely capricious,but they serve to distinguish them from each other.APPENDIX. 195No. II.This work hail, in part, been ah-lady despatched toEngland, when a publication by the learned Canonico lorio,called " Plan de Ponies, et lleniarques sur ses Edifices,"appeared. There are many things which, from the constantpractice of transporting them to Naples the moment theyare found, leave no traces of their existence on the spot.The Canonico, being employed in the museum, and havingevery opportunity of obtaining exact information, has givensome details of which the author was previously ignorant.The following remarks are derived chiefly from that source.In the street of the tombs was foundEX AVCTORITATEIMP. CaesarVespasian. AVG.Local. Public. A. PrivatesPossess. T. SVEDIVS. CLEMENSTribunes. CAVSIS Comitis. ETMensis. Facts. REIPublican. POxMPEIANORVMRESTITVIT.Close to the gate of Herculaneum is a sort of niche,which some have taken for a sentry-box : the reports of theexcavations of 17C3 say that, at the extremity, in a smallerniche six palms high, Alas originally a statue, or an urn.The inscription was —M. CERRINIVSRESTITVTVSAustralis. LOCO. D.D.D.There was also before it a stone altar with the same inscription.O 2196 APPENDIX.In the street between the Temple of Fortune and theForum was found, together with 215 little unguentaria,commonly called laboratories, a lamp for twenty-fourlights in the shape of a ship, a coin of Otho, and a pair ofsteel scissors, also a cogged wheel, which must have belongedto some species of machine.The Temple of Jupiter, discovered in 1817 and 1818,and which has since passed by so many names, although,probably, by none more correct than that which it first received,contained many objects, some of which were foundin the vaults underneath, some in the pronaos and cell, andothers around it, as if prepared for re-erection after the firstearthquake.Many fingers of bronze were discovered, together with abust fastened to the wall, a group representing an old manin a Phrygian cap taking a child by the hand, half a foothigh ; a woman carrying her infant, supposed, like theother, to be an Ex Vote ; further a hand, a finger, and partof a foot, in marble ; two feet with sandals ; an arm, andmany other colossal fragments. A torso, also of good workand of great size, was found with a statue sketched on itsback, and intended to have been cut out of it. There were,besides, other fragments of drapery and a statue, the figureof a female and this inscription :SP. TVRRANIVS. L. F. SP. N. L. PROX. FAB.Proclus. CELLIAN\^SPRAIF. Far. II. PRAIF. CVRATORVM. ALFEITiberius. PRAIF. PRO. PR. I. DIN. VRBE. LatinoPATER. Paratus. Populi. Parentis. FOEDERISEX. LIBRIS. Sibylline. PERCVTIENDI. CVM. P. RSACRORVM. Principium. P. R. QVIRIT. DominiqueLatin. Oval Apud. Parentis. COLVNTVR. FLAxAIDials. FLAM. MART. Saliva Praise. AVGVR. PONTPRAIF. COHORT. GAITVL. TR. MIL. LEG. X.LOG. D. D. D./APPENDIX. 197This inscription, which speaks of such ancient historyand events connected with the earliest times of Rome, andthe Sibyhne oracles, is of some importance. Besides allthese curiosities, there was a colossal head of Jupiter,whence the temple was named.A column was found to have fallen upon an unhappyPompeii, and to have divided his body in the middle.Near this were another skeleton, a bronze helmet, a pater,a plate, a long pin, and seventeen coins of silver.In the vaults were Corinthian capitals, with many architecturalfragments, some not belonging to the temple, and acolossal hand with gilded ears of corn.Whatever has a date is always interesting. In theTemple of Venus, on a marble pedestal, was inscribedInvents. Dental. Nap.FELIX. Melissa. FA VST.NYMPHODOTVS. HELVI.Operates. CAESIAEMVSMIN. AVG. D. D. IVSSVM. HOLCONI. Cell. L. AELITVBER. D. D. D.C. Virgil. SALINATORIS. GN. Lucretia.Decent. V. A. S. P. P.C. ASINIO. C. Artistic. CONS.In the portico of Eumachia, or the chalcidicum, a secondstatue was found, with a cornucopia. Time robes werebordered with a pattern in gold: the figure was much mutilated.Upon a Hermes, without the head, was writtenC. Norman AVG. FeliciaSolicit SVBVRBANISecondary EX. D. D.MAG. PAGI LOC. D.\}198 APPENDIX.Near the entrance was found, according to lorio,M. Lucretius. RVFVSLegalityIVSSVM. Allen. LVCCI. LibelM. STLABORI. FrontIT. VIR. I. D. QVINQQ. Pompey. MaculaM. Fuming. SILVAD. V. V. A. S. PP.C. Calvin. CawCOS.In the street called Dei Merchants, and the house calledDel Cinghiale, is the pavement with the representations ofwalls given in Plate XL VIII,The house of the Graces, in the same street, is called byDe Gore the Pharmacy, because five surgical instruments,four cases with others of the same nature, pincers, and moreparticularly one called by lorio the '- speculum matrices,"were found there. The last seems likely to prove of utilityin parturition, and lorio says a foreigner has published itincorrectly. He forgot to add, that probably the strangerwas prevented from drawing it, as they have yet to learn atNaples, that the only use or glory in the possession of theseantiquities and curiosities would consist in the promulgationof them to the world.The portico, sometimes called the school, near theTemple of Isis, and the reservoir of water at the theatre,also called the saloon, and the tribunal, and by Bonuccithe Curia Ithaca, contained, according to the reports presentedat its excavation in 1797, the statue of a nakedyouth, which had fallen from the pedestal, supposed to bethepulpit. On a marble near it was found an inscription,making it probable that Marcus Lucretius DecidesAPPENDIX. 199was the person represented. An inscription given by lorioprobably belongs to this person.M. Lucretius. DecideRVFVS. IT VIR. Tir QVINQPontiff. TRIB. MIL.A. Populo Prae. FAB.M. Decisive. PILONIVSRVFVS. Deposit.In consequence of this, lorio says, that the supposed pulpit,notwithstanding its steps, was only a pedestal withan altar before it.The great Oscan inscription, which it appears was foundIiere, according to lorio, has been explained by the learnedCavaliers CareUi, secretary of the Royal Academy at Naples,who is not only highly endowed with knowledge himself,but is ready to forward the studies of his acquaintance.He has favoured the author, in conversation, with a generalidea of the sense of the inscription, which, however, he willgive in detail in his own work on the Temple of Isis.^ 3 TTFJSVan;iWVilUl-5!a5l3>!200 APPENDIX.Melius, Acliranus, &c. gave this portico and dedicatedit to Isis. The inscription implies that it was to be usedin feasting, which at once settles the question as to the destinationof the colonnade. It is quite astonishing that themodern Neapolitans still use the r for the d, as in this inscriptionRefer for DEDiT. Thus they say madonna forMadonna, &c. ; but we must not forestal the work of theCavaliers Corelli.Since the publication of the first series of Pompeiana,the discoveries in hieroglyphics, begun by Dr. Young in1814, and so ably pursued by M. Champollion in 1822,have enabled us to pronounce that the hieroglyphical tabletfound in the Temple of Isis had nothing whatever to dowith that divinity, and was, probably, only placed there asamysterious and outlandish object, coming from the countryof the goddess. It is, in fact, an Egyptian calcareous stone,and has been sawn off from a thicker block, as may be seenby the remaining hieroglyphics on the side. On the topthirteen deities are seen reverencing: the god Noun. Theinscription begins thus: " A public Commemoration of thePriest of Horus, Lord of the Region of Heb, Priest of theGods, and Priest of the Benefactors of the upper and lowerRegions," &c. &c. ; and contains, though it is full of anabstruse and unintelligible history of the gods and theregions they governed, nothing whatever relating to Isis orher temple at Pompeii, and consequently nothing of interestto the present work.The Temple of aesculapius seems now to be changingits name for that of Priapus. Winkelman called two statuesfound there by the names of Aesculapius and Hygeia.Ronucci (says lorio) calls these, which are seven and eightpalms high, Jupiter and Juno. A bust of Minerva wasfound there. In a tray were found the sacred utensils : atoneend of the tray was the bust of an infant. This templewas excavated in 1766 and in 1798. In all this there seemsto be no reason for dedicating the temple to Priapus.APPENDIX. 201The reports on the theatre, and the great portico nearit, make the number of skeletons found there sixty-three, aproportion so much exceeding that of other quarters ofPompeii that it is thought to have been the station of troops,who on no account were permitted to quit their post.It is extremely probable that there was a gate somewherein this direction, particularly as the traces of a numberof tombs were found near the little tavern on the jrreatroad below Pompeii. It is by no means impossible, thateither the street which runs between the Basilica and theTemple of Venus, or that which contains the altar of Jupiter,may have terminated in a gate near the modern house ofVitellio. The quantity of earth thrown out from the excavationsrenders it difficult to acquire the exact knowledgeof this portion of the fortifications.Much has been said of the encroachments of the soilupon the sea near Pompeii, and the author would have subjoineda map, if he had not found that at present it wouldhave been too conjectural to have been satisfactory. IfLa Vega had dug wells for the purpose of examining thesoil, as he did at Resina, more might have been known ;but, at present, it cannot be well ascertained how near thesea approached the walls of Pompeii.There is, however, a church called the Madonna delleGrazie, where the territory of Nuceria came down to thesea, for two buildings were excavated which stood on theconfines of the Nucerians and Stable, and they were probablynear the coast. One of these buildings was a littletemple, and the other had two altars, possibly of the twopeople concerned — one Station, the other Nucerian. Abroken inscription hadD. D.M. Cassius. DaphnisDVO. Dental. NVCERIAE. ETVETVSTAM. AEDEM. Gen. StairLABANTIBUS. MARMORIB. VentaPROVIDE. RESTITVIT.202 APPENDIX.This is a fair proof that the Nucerian territory reachedto this spot. A little below the church is the natural bankdown to the ancient shore, the modern line of coast beingthree times more distant. This line of elevations runs inlandin the direction of Scafati, and, after a short space,must have turned north toward Pompeii. There was,however, always a marsh, or Pompeii palus, at the mouthof the river Sarno, for Columella, De Agro. cult, says,Queen dulcis Pompeii palus viclna salinas." Here also theSalinienses, who invoked M. Cerrinius in the inscription,worked. Not far from the amphitheatre of Pompeii is aplace called Valle Diruta, and here seems to have terminatedthe natural resins of the ground on the right bank ofthe Sarno. Without this supposition, Pliny the youngercould scarcely have said, " Stairs erat diremptus (a Vesuvius)sin medio;" and " Stairs a Pompeii dirimerentur sinmedio nam seisin circulates curvatisque litoribus mareinfundebatur." In its present state no sea exists betweenthe site of Stable and Pompeii, scarcely indeed, as ourgeneral view, Plate LXXXVIII., shows, between Castel aMare and Pompeii.The quantity of matter thrown out by the volcano seemsto have been quite sufficient to have filled up a shallow bayat so short a distance from the focus of eruption, as may beproved by the ancient tombs behind the Studio at Naples,which seem to have been buried by the same catastrophe,under at least ten feet of hard and soft tufa and papillae.It is said that, in digging in the plain, the hard marinesand soon appears ; and, in short, the probability seems thatthe Sarno originally entered the sea not far from the ValleDiruta and the road between the amphitheatre and Scafati,where was the port of Pompeii and where the magazines ofNola and Acerra, were situated ; the Sarno receiving andtransmitting their goods, as Strabo observes. Some haveeven derived the name of Pompeii from JTEMna^ matter;but though the author has not the means of examining the'ijo■Q <cAPPENDIX. 203passage, he is persuaded that Demosthenes shows a pompeiito have been a magazine of corn, and that Pollux, in Onomast.lib. ix. C. 5, says, Ylspi-cjy icara da\aTTU)y jiepwv ttjq TroXtwgwas a pompeii, citing Demosthenes in Portioned. Thename, behig a phu-al, has been thought by some to havereferred to the city and citadel, and Masons imagined theancient temple by the theatre was the acropolis. Nothing,however, has the slightest resemblance to an acropolis, inthat part or any other as yet discovered.Of the gates of the town it seems not impossible thatsome may have been hastily named ; for, supposing the ancientgulf to have extended nearly to the great road toScafati, that which is called the gate of Stadia could haveopened only to the marina and the salt-works ; the gatenear the amphitheatre would have been that of Nuceria ;that now called the gate of Nola would have opened to Sarnoand Teglanum, supposed to have been at Palma; and thatcalled the Vesuvian would have been more opposite the cityof Nola. It is probable that all these roads were flankedwith the tombs of the patricians of Pompeii, and that,when-ever the earth is sufficiently deep, they may yet remainin perfection. The interior of the gate of Nola, which, fromthe uncertainty before mentioned, would be better namedthe gate of Isis, not having been given in the first seriesof Ponipeiana, and being one of the most striking featuresof the fortifications, is here represented in Plate LXXXV.The preceding plate shows the method of mounting uponthe wall and the interior of the rampart, when nearly perfect,and leaves, it is hoped, little to be desired on the subjectof the circuit. The theory of Lippi, who maintained,in a work written with the purpose of proving that Pompeiihad not suffered from the mountain fires, but only frominundation, seems to have been much disputed. OurPlate LXXXVIII. is given to explain, as well as can bedone from such a distance, the real circumstances of the site204 APPENDIX.of Pompeii. In it the whole eminence of the city will be seen,terminating at the amphitheatre on one side, and sinking onthe west towards Vesuvius and La Torre. A little right ofthe amphitheatre is seen a tower upon a distant hill, not farfrom Nola. Palma is on the hill to the right, and, under it,Scafati, to which a long line of trees points out the roadfrom the amphitheatre, so that the supposed depth of theancient gulf may be traced. The idea that a stream ofwater ever flowed from Vesuvius charged with volcanicmatter sufficient to bury Pompeii, must be erroneous, asthe ground rises again near Bosco lleale, at a place calledCivitas, forming part of the eminence of Pompeii. Thiseminence is formed by the termination of a bed of veryancient lava upon which Pompeii was built; and lava, previouslyto its course being arrested by cooling, often risesinto knolls as in this case, which does not happen to water ;but the knoll once formed of lava, a city planted on itssummit cannot suffer from water pursuing the same course.A sight of the view which was taken by the camera lucida,and therefore is not liable to the defect of exaggeratingthe heights, will be sufficient to show the impossibility ofso copious a deluge having taken place without attractingthe notice of historians, and particularly of Pliny, who waspresent. That water, percolating through the mass, forms,in time, a rock of tufa of more or less consistency is wellknown, and this would account for all that is observed atPompeii. It was long supposed, from the hard nature ofthe rock at Herculaneum, that the city was buried bylava, and the obscurity of the subterraneous passages hadprevented the discovery of the truth. Now, however, inthe year 1828, one of the houses of that unfortunate cityhas been laid open to the sun, and the whole mass of hardrock is found to be nothing more than hard tufa, whichthe natives on the spot, nevertheless, call lava. It is fair tostate, however, that this mass has reduced all the timberAPPENDIX. 205•vvitli which it was in contact to the state of common charcoaland with all its properties. Every beam was foundperfect as to shape, and in its proper position, and one hasbeen left for inspection, forming the architrave between twopillars, supported by the tufa.Naturalists will account for this in the manner best suitedto the latest discoveries in science, but, at first sight, it isnot easy to account for the carbonization of large timbersby means of ashes falling in small powder, and afterwardsbecoming consolidated by water, still less for such an effectproduced by water, either hot or cold. A certain degree ofheat, and the exclusion of air, with the pressure on the spot,would, however, produce the effect, and, perhaps, we areignorant of the intense heat to which the ashes, or thewater, might have been exposed, in the bowels of the mountainunder a pressure of which we can form no idea.It has been often wondered how water was supplied tothe numerous aqueducts which are found even in the highestparts of Pompeii. The question does not appear to the authorto be one of great difficulty, for the calcareous mountainsbehind Sarno and Palma furnish beautiful and copioussources throughout their whole extent. The modern watercourse,which some say exhibits traces of the ancient opusreticulated, is certainly too low for any but the parts of thecity on the Marina, but the great rapidity of its current showsthat a much higher level might have been preserved. Therecan be no doubt, however, that, setting aside the threebeautiful springs at the town of Sarno, a third to the northof them exists, and there was an aqueduct which conveyedthe water, from the neighbourhood of Palma and Sarno,over the plain, and, by the Ponte Rossi at Naples, to Pau-filippo,and that another branch ran to Dumas and Baiae,and all the volcanic parts of the country, and the Caw. corelliwill probably give an account of it. Some of the archesof the aqueduct may be seen not far from Palma, and the206 APPENDIX.place is called Arch from the ruined arches. This is at amuch higher level than Sarno, and hence a branch ranacross the plain toward Vesuvius and Pompeii, which willprobably be discovered, at a future period, entering the citynear the gate called that of Vesuvius, at the highest part ofPompeii. The Canonico lorio, whose work is just arrived atRome, where these concluding observations are penned, haspreserved a remarkable passage, written, in the year 1560,by Antonio Letting, who had passed four years in examiningthe subject of the sources near Palma and Sarno, for thepurpose of forming the modern aqueduct. Speaking of theaqueducts at Arch and Vorticella, he says a branch ran tothe ancient town of Pompeii on a height opposite the townof Torre della Nunziata " et in detto loch ne apparentmulti vestigia." He even says that the ancient aqueductsmight be repaired.lorio informs us also that the Abate Cataldo lanelli(a person certainly of great learning) is preparing to provethat the following Oscan inscription records the bringing ofthe water of the Sarno by one of the magistrates to Pompeii.)33i-Hfi(X v<iQ vita ^"PirqThis has been formerly translated with another sense. Itwill be seen that the first word seems to be formed out ofex and hue, and that Sarinu, in the beginning of the thirdline, may have reference to the Sarno, though an idea existsthat another place called Seriuo was in the vicinity.APPENDIX. 207The house of Julia FcHcc, which was situated not farfrom the amphitheatre, and nearly between that buildingand the gate opening toward Nuceria, was opened in theyear 1755, and soon after closed again. Bonucci has givena description of it from the reports made at the time, and itseems to have been of such consequence that it ought not tobe omitted. " The form was square, with a portico on threesides ; that in front had pilasters of marble, the others wereof brick. The wall of the front portico had niches, in whichwere hollow statues to contain water." In a chamber wasfound a shrine, now in the Museum. In this were picturesof Isis, Osiris, Hygeia, Anubis, painted, and several talismans,With a Priapus and Hippocrates. In the centre stooda bronze tripod upon three satyrs. Upon a wall of thehouse was this advertisement. " On the estate of JuliaFelix, daughter of Spurious, is to be hired, between the 6thand Sth of August, a bath, a venereal, and 900 shops withparole (porticos shaded with verdure), and upper apartmentsfor five following years. He who exercises in hishouse the profession of Pander will not be permitted tobecome tenant."^>THE END.LONDON